Array Fort Simpson, B.C.  June 3rd 1875    My dear Mother,   I have another chance of writing you, but I may not be able to write very much.  I suppose by the time you receive this you will be about settling down for another year.  I trust you may be comfortable and happy wherever you are.  Let me know, please, all the details of your arrangements.  I was rather disappointed at not receiving more letters by this str.  There was only one - that from Susie.  I think mine of March must have been delayed somewhere as she evidently had not seen it.  I had hoped too, to have had the things I sent for for baby by this time.  I trust they may come by next boat as I want to get her short clothes made.  It is trimmed with bias pieces - piped with white - and looks very pretty indeed.  Baby is very well and such a merry, bright, little pet.  She wakes in the morning with a laugh and a crow - and all day is full of fun.  We have taken another young girl into the house - she was without home or friends to care for her.  It is a great care & anxiety to have these girls.  We cannot trust to their truthfulness or honesty altogether but this seems the only way to help them.  We had quite a ceremony about two weeks ago at the laying of the foundation of the church.  A bottle containing various articles was deposited in a cedar block - Mrs. Morrison & the writer being honored in laying it.   Four days last week and two this my husband was off with a lot of men about eight miles getting out the last of the timber required for the church.  He went himself so as to hurry things on.  I very much dislike having Thomas away, of course, but while it is necessary I try to take it cheerfully.  He will have now to be at home, I think, steadily until the church is finished.  The teachers in the college sent baby a very pretty little silver mug by the last str.  My very best thanks to Auntie for that handsome dress.   I send by mail a small box, containing some moss and shells which you will please make over to Auntie, with my love - also two napkin rings - one for you & one for my father.  They were made out of silver coin by a Hydah Indian who was visiting here.  Putting the letters on was something new to him & he did not succeed so well with it but many of the Indians work very beautifully in silver & gold making bracelets, ear-rings &c.  Please accept these with our sincerest affection.  I will try to answer Auntie's letter very soon. Give my love to all enquiring friends and pray for us. Love to Georgie & my father and yourself from Thomas, Jessie and,    Your affectionate daughter    Emma    P.S.  I am very glad indeed to hear that you are knitting some socks for baby.  I wear no cotton myself so she will need none.  But perhaps you will not have much time in which case please just b[u]y some & charge to me.     E.