Array 2631 First Ave West Vancouver July 3/20 suite unit Dear Grace Just a line to let you know we are all well and getting on very comfortably.  Helen and Harold do everything possible for me.  Could not be more thoughtful & considerate.  Everything was in (?) when I got here - the room so dainty and supplied with everything.  I have the room opening onto the balcony and the view there clear days and nights is magnificent.  You in your travels will see nothing finer.  I slept well the first night remembering there was infinitely better care over you than I could give by lying awake - or in any other way.  My breakfast came upstairs and I felt a good deal better all Friday, and in the evening went up to the house and got the mail and a few other things - Harold with me.  Outside the door I found a scrap of a card with three names on it - Mrs. Tate, Mrs. C. Spencer & Miss A. Spencer - so we missed some visitors I would have liked very much to see.  Perhaps I can get Jessie to call up & find if Mrs. Tate is still here and make some arrangement to see her.  I am to go over to Jessie's Monday afternoon if I can - not to stay but to meet the lady missionaries at tea.  Last night I slept well until near 4 A.M. when I purposely said good by to sleep and started in just at the stroke of four with the six doses as pre-arranged.  All went well and at 6.30 I was through and at liberty to sleep again.  Incidently [sic] I saw dawn break over the water & the sun rise from behind the hills.  At ten I had the dose that was to follow, and stayed in bed till middle of afternoon.  Have just finished a good dinner and expect to be quite myself again now, hope to get to church tomorrow A.M.  I hope you have got on well, been able to sleep and not too tired.  I shall look for some word from you Monday.  Do not be discouraged if things are not just what you have expected.  And it will be good when we all get home again.  Baby is merry as ever and brown as a nut.  Love to Mrs M.  I am re-mailing a letter to her.  Love, dear, as ever from Mother I enclose a note from Summerland.  I think you told me to open it, so I did.  If the house is so small you probably would not have been very comfortable there anyway.  I hope you like it where you are or can find some better place.  I question if you spend more time in the open than I have here - it is so pleasant on the verandahs.  Baby has not been very well the last two days - indigestion I think, but she seems on the mend today.  Let me know in good time before your money runs out and I will see to sending more.  I am re-mailing two letters for Miss. Metcalf.  And tell her please that the other day Mrs. Hardy saw me at the house and sent Margaret over with the twenty dollars.  If she would like me to deposit it she might tell me where and the number of her account, or I can send it to her if she wishes or keep it till she is back.  Annie Browne is expected here some time in August.  She does not intend to return to B.C. for some time but to nurse either in Toronto or New York.  With much love and hoping for a letter Monday as ever affectionately Mother