Array Fort Simpson, B.C.   July 30th 1877    My dear Mother,   We have been now some time without a mail.  There is not much to bring the steamer up just now -   but we hope she many be here within a week or two.   We have had on the whole a fine summer, with some, as it seems to us, very warm weather - though   I suppose you would think nothing of such weather at home.  Our garden is increasingly a source of   pleasure to us - to be sure it is not yet very productive but it promises well.  It is very prettily   laid out with nice graveled walks, and as many trees set out as we thought well to have in this damp   climate.  We give a good deal of attention to flowers.  Pink daisies, such as grow in England, have been   the glory of the garden all summer.  We have a great many of them and they are very fine.  We have had   also or have now - narcissus daffodils, wall flowers, violets, nemophila, mignonettes and roses - while   quite a number of plants from seed are near flowering now.  We set out this spring a number of rose   bushes and some other shrubs and several pieces of ivy which grows well in this country.  Thomas is all   the time making some improvements on the place.  The last is a trellis work fence to separate the garden   from the wood yard behind.  Before that he was busy constructing the necessary accommodations of a barn  -yard.  The yard is not stocked yet except by the cow which is the sole occupant but we expect chickens   & perhaps one of those useful if not genteel domestic animals, a pig.  Wild berries are very plentiful   this summer.  We use a great many with cream & sugar and there are some huckle-berries that I think   would be nice potted.  I intend to try some though the berries here are mostly of inferior quality.    They grow in abundance all around us.  We never walk down to the village without stopping to pick a few   for Jessie.  The children are well.  Baby has four teeth and is a fine fat girl and very lively.  Jessie   seems every day to grow more interesting.  She enters into everything with keen enjoyment and nothing   escapes her.  If wood is being carried in she must have some sticks tied to her back.  When the girls   carry in the hay she goes along with a little bundle across her shoulder.  She sweeps and dusts and   helps (?) with the "puddinses" and the butter &c., while she reads & writes & sings and tends her baby   as I do Gracie. She is very good-tempered too, and most affectionate.  In fine weather the children are   out a great deal - generally within our own enclosure - baby in her carriage while Jessie plays about.    Baby has four teeth and has never had a restless night yet.    Aug 9th.  The Otter came in day before yesterday, bringing two letters from you.  We were glad to know   that you and my father were well - but you must be lonely!  Do not feel anxious, dear Mother, about me,   in any way.  Really with the one exception of a want of much society, I am very comfortably situated.  A   young man has come up to take the work at Naas, this new mission which Mr. Crosby has talked so much   about.  We are feeling most anxious about this place.  There will be many difficulties to be overcome   though perhaps not more than there have been here.  I trust all the friends of these Missions will   prayerfully remember this new undertaking.     Friends in Victoria sent up a great deal of fruit by this steamer - apples, pears, plums,   cherries.  I have put up a good deal.   Thank you, dear Mother, for being so faithful a correspondent.  It is a comfort to be sure at   least of a letter from you.  I think Thomas has written to Papa.  Kind regards to all inquiring friends.    With warmest love from us both to my father & yourself,   Believe me as ever    Your affectionate daughter     Emma