Array Fort Simpson, B.C.  Sept. 25th 1877    My dear Mother,   Our mail came this morning - the only letter from home was one from Annie - and the last mail    brought none at all from home.  I think surely you must have written and the letter missed.  Annie's was    of quite recent date and all seemed well when she wrote.  Our mails will soon close now for the season -    we may have but one more - perhaps two.  We are all well, though Mr. Crosby is suffering slightly from a    cold.  We have had some very stormy weather lately and Mr. Crosby has been twice to Naas since I wrote you last.  He was exposed also to a drenching rain during a whole night and parts of two days in getting    some lumber up from the mill about five miles away.  This was for the buildings necessary to be put up    at Naas - a small house for the missionary and a school-house - and Thomas studies economy in every way    - for he has no sources from which to draw for these expenses except the local subscriptions which are    not likely to amount to much, and his own means.  However he feels confident that all will come out    right.  Thomas and Mr. Green feel encouraged about this work.  There are already signs of good work    among the people.   It is likely Thomas will be away a good deal this fall.  Our flower garden has done very well    this year.  The cold weather has found it all in bloom for our summer is short and we do not expect much    more from it, but it has been great pleasure to us already.   The children are growing fast.  Jessie is a great little prattler, while Gracie is just health &    happiness.  She begins now to climb up by the chairs, and tries to talk - indeed she can say a few    words.  I still nurse her at night but feed her during the day.  We have now three girls.  Our family is    always large.  It seems as though we could not help it but I pride myself upon being an economical    house-keeper.  However it takes a good deal to provide for so many.  We have been laying in a large    quantity of cranberries, of which Thomas is very fond and which grow in great abundance all around us.     With what fruit has been sent me and what I have put up myself, we shall be well supplied, I think, this    winter.   Our people are coming back now from there summer's fishing, and our house which is comparatively    quiet during the summer begins to be thronged again - always some one coming on one errand or another.     We are far from being quiet, I assure you. I hope the next mail may bring letters from you all.    26th  This str. brought a large box of clothing - chiefly children's things from the ladies of    Moodyville, a village in the lower part of the province.  There are many things which will be more    useful to the children many of whom are very poorly clad.  However this is more from carelessness and    ignorance than poverty - and the children are very hard - that is those who are strong enough to survive    the exposure of their infancy, but many of the little children die from inherited disease and want of    care.  Still there has been, lately, I think great improvement in the way they care for their children.     They are anxious enough to have them and keep them.  If an orphan is left there is always some one ready    to adopt it.   I try to keep our children comfortable.  They do not need much finery but I mind that they have    neat warm well-fitting clothes.  I have just made Jessie a dress out of that old purple merino wrapper I    made before I left home from your dress, which has done me excellent service.  I have stitched it with    white and have a dress for Gracie also cut from the same.  We have been rather poorly off for fresh meat    this summer.  There has been very little venison brought in but now we have in the house a whole sheep    which was sent from Victoria, a present, two ducks & two fine geese.  So we alternate between a feast    and comparative famine.  We have had word from Naas today.  Mr. Green sends encouraging reports.  He is    a very good young man, I think, and I think, is likely to get on well.  He is very fond of the children.     He and Jessie are the best of friends.  I shall perhaps not have an answer to this letter this fall but    you will remember us as always.      Thomas joins me in most affectionate regards to my father and yourself, and ,    Believe me, dear Mother,     Your loving daughter      Emma