Array W.F. College  Hamilton, Sept. 24th  1873    My dear Mother,   You will think it strange or Susie may perhaps that I have not written you promptly on this interesting occasion but there were so many things I wanted to say when I did write - so it appeared to me that I thought it best to wait till I had time to say them all.  I do not know that there is anything very particular either but I did not want to write in a hurry and forget anything.  I have not very much time now, after all, but I will postpone no further.  I promised Miss Robertson to go to the John H. service this evening and it is not very far from the time.  Well to begin, I wish Susie very much joy with her daughter - and trust she - the baby - may do honor to the illustrious family to which she is so favored as to belong - and especially I hope Susie is getting on well.  Let me know as soon as possible, please, how she is, and things are generally.  I want to hear from you soon, too, for another reason - of course I did not allow myself to be deceived by George's hint at twins - but Miss Ambrose firmly maintains that it must be there were two arrivals and as an oyster supper depends on it I am anxious to know the truth as soon as I can.  Miss A. says she requires a certificate signed by the nurse and doctor, but perhaps your word of honor would be enough.  I want some oysters very much only if I should have to give them I would be in no hurry.  I suppose Papa is back by this time so I need say nothing of his visit to Hamilton.  Annie and Harry H. came up by boat on Monday, and spent the afternoon and night here - leaving the next morning for London.  Annie took dinner with me and they both were in college for tea and then we went to hear Newman Hall in the evening.  It rained very heavily but the lecture rewarded us for braving it.  Annie and Harry were well and in good spirits.  They return tomorrow, spend tomorrow night in Hamilton, and take the boat for Cobourg Friday morning.   I was to have spent tomorrow evening at Mrs. Stephenson's but I cannot now.  I called there the other day.  Miss Baldwin of Ottawa is visiting them.  It was to see her chiefly I went.  I heard from Eliza lately - they were well.   My valise turned up all right so I am no longer in destitution. Papa was saying that Auntie had offered to take you to board.  Would you like that?  I suppose you could not go anywhere else now in Barrie if you wished to do so, and I dare say you would be very comfortable.  I am sure you must wish yourself settled somewhere, and Papa even more.  Could you not arrange things there and then go back to Lefroy if necessary?  It would be very nice for Susie to have you so near and I am certain Auntie would glory in having you with her.  You have plenty to occupy you now I doubt not. The children will depend chiefly upon you, I suppose.  How do they take to the little stranger?  [Hamilton]  I would write to Susie tonight but I really have not time.  Give her my best love and the same to all.  Write just as soon as you can, dear Mother, to,   Your affectionate daughter,    Emma