Array We leave Monday morning likely between seven and eight to catch the western train in Chicago.  My thoughts are with you both.  Love to my dear father.  E.<br><br>    Waukegan May 9th 1874<br>    My dear Mother,   It is rather late but I write a few lines.  You and father will be looking for some word from us     and then I want to write for my own satisfaction also.  I do trust you are feeling happy and cheerful as many, many times I have thought of you both and hoped and prayed that you might be kept in peace.  Our way hitherto has been prosperous.  We have much - very much - to be thankful for.  Mrs. Sandford met us   at the station in H. and we went with her for dinner.  Mr. S. was away then down to the college.  Every   one was so kind and very cheery that it was not at all so trying as we had thought.  Ever so many of   them came to the depot with us.  Mrs. S. gave me a doz. silver tea spoons, the last of my many gifts.    We came on to Ingersoll Thursday evening - it was late when we reached our destination and the next day was a busy one.  I was sorry we could not have more time there.  Then we took the train for Chicago - and came through, reaching Waukegan this morning about eleven.  Uncle & aunt came to meet us - they are very kind.  We had a row on the pond this evening.  Mr. C. preaches tomorrow morning.  The minister met us at this station with uncle.  Do not feel anxious Mother dear about me.  I have been kept in such quiet trust that the excitement & fatigue have not affected me.  much & I feel really quite well.  Love to Auntie & Sallie and believe me dear Mother of the fondest affection of,   Your daughter.    Emma Sunday night  May 18th    My Dear Mrs. Douse, Emma says I may write a word on the back of her letter.  We have so far had a very happy and prosperous journey.  And my dear Emma has been so happy and well amidst it all that I feel God has truly been with us to sustain us.  We had a very happy day today.  Uncle and all have made it so pleasant for us.  I preached twice today and God was with us.  We leave for the West tomorrow morning (D.V.), and will write you again soon.  Love to Father and Aunt & Sally & all.   Yours affectionately    T. Crosby