Array Fort Simpson, B.C.  Oct. 30th 1876    My dear Mother,   We are preparing now for what we expect to be our last mail for this year, so you need not   expect another letter until about February next.  But I know we shall not be absent from your thoughts   and prayers during that time and the same kind Providence that has cared for us hitherto will watch over   us still.   I suppose you and my father are preparing for winter.  Is your house a warm one?  And don't you   find it troublesome sometimes to look after all that housekeeping requires?  I think you ought to have   some one to help you. When I wrote last Thomas was away.  He returned sooner than I expected - the steamer having   remained a day longer than usual at Wrangle, he was able to return by her.  I was very glad of this for   travelling so far as that (160 miles) by canoe at this season of the year is not pleasant nor always   safe.   Our little ones continue well.  Baby is thriving wonderfully - and is such a sleeper.  She   hardly has her eyes open half an hour in the day except when I give her her bath.  She sleeps very   soundly at night too.  Jessie has had a slight cold for a few days but it is leaving her I think now.    She is the life of the house, full of play and mimicking every thing she sees.  Miss Knott seems quite   content and thoroughly at home.  I find it very pleasant having some one with me.  She is good company,   and I think we shall get along well.   After the Otter had gone last time I was pretty busy putting away fruit.  We got a lot of   [pears] up and a few plums - though the time for plums passed while the str. was so long in Victoria.  I   pickled a few [pears] and also a little cauliflower I got from the Fort garden.  We are having plenty of   good vegetables from the garden at the Fort now.  Our church is, I may say, completed at last.  All that   remains to be done is the painting of the seats.  The ceiling and walls are varnished, the lower part of   the walls being also stained brown.  The altar & pulpit platform are covered with a kind of Chinese   matting that is very pretty & the step outside the rail covered with green baize.  The aisles and space   round the altar are covered with Indian mats made to fit - the work of the women of the village.  The   pulpit and altar are nicely stained & varnished.  Lamp stands are set up and altogether we have a   spacious and neatly finished church - and the expense of this summers work has been kept far below the   estimate made by the architect in Victoria.     The Indians are delighted with it and are to have an opportunity of expressing their feelings   tomorrow in another subscription.  The opening services are to be in the course of about a week -   perhaps next Sunday.  We are hoping Mr. Russ will be up by the Otter - I mean to have the baby baptized   at that time.   One of our girls is to be married in about a week, to a very promising young man.  We are going   to give the wedding feast which will likely include thirty or forty people.  This is the girl who came   to us first.  I am rather sorry to lose her.  She is a good nurse though not a very good worker, but of   course it is best for girls to be married, Indian girls more especially.   Thomas has not yet been able to finish the house - but I expect it will be done as soon as the   Otter has come and gone.    Nov 1st  Our mail came in yesterday morning bringing a letter from you.  I was glad to know you were   well.  Tell Jessie Peard I am sure those things she sent will please some of the children.     Mr. Russ failed to get here which was quite a disappointment, however Mr. Crosby will open the   church himself next Sunday.  Last evening he had a meeting to solicit subscriptions, and already near   four hundred dollars have been given which will likely be increased some.  Thomas thinks about going   away next weeks to the Naas river, some sixty miles, where he has long promised to visit.  Yesterday we   had a visit from the Missionary who has been assisting at Metlahkatla and his wife.  They had come here   to take the str. for Queen Charlotte's Is. where they are about to establish a new mission.  It was much   against their own wishes that they kept aloof so long.  They are earnest Christian people, I am sure.  I   cannot but regret that we were denied so long intercourse which might have been such a pleasure &   benefit.  They have two little ones - the elder two years old and they are going where they will have   only an Indian house or such as they can put up themselves for the approaching winter. Our sympathies   went with them strongly.   I know you will think of us during the long silence of the winter - and so shall we of you.     Thomas joins me in kindest love to yourself and my father.    Pray for us.    Your loving daughter     Emma