Array Fort Simpson  April 30th 1878    My dear Mother,   We were very glad indeed to receive your kind letters by this last mail.  Really you are all so   kind, I feel that I do not deserve one tithe of the sympathy I get.  Compared to the lives of many   engaged in similar work our path is easy and pleasant.   There is a great deal I should like to say to you, but I fear I can only write a short letter.    The steamer is just in the harbor on her return trip and how long she may stay I do not know.  Thomas   has written to Papa, so I need not touch upon business.  Many thanks for the five dollars.  I value it   the more coming from you.  Please give our kindest love to Mrs. Cooney and thanks for her timely and   generous contribution.  It is always a comfort to us to know we have the sympathy of good people.  I   think I told you that the contributions towards church repairs raised here is sufficient to cover the   outlay - so there is no debt and the Committee are asked for nothing for that purpose.  However there is   still painting to be done, and a new school house is much needed.  I do not think we shall be likely to   get into debt.  Thomas has the faculty of making a little go a long way, and, of course, in many   particulars our expenses are light.     I have been pretty busy lately.  Mr. Russ from Victoria has been with us near four weeks.  He   and Mr. Crosby went to Naas together and brought Mr. Green back with them so we have had in all eleven   in family.  We have enjoyed Mr. Russ' visit very much.  He is about returning with his family to Ontario   and expects to be at the Toronto conference so you will likely see him there.  He will be able to give   you much information about our position and work.  Should you meet his wife I am sure you would be   pleased with her.  She is a sweet and most excellent woman.  The children are both suffering from colds   and Gracie seems to feel hers a good deal.  I think her teething tried her a good deal, though she was   sick but little at the time.  However when the weather becomes settled and they can be out more, I think   it will be better for them.  Jessie is a very active child, sewing, washing, sweeping, writing &c.  She   must always be busy. Gracie is serene and affectionate, and when well very good tempered.  I should   like so much to have their photographs again.  Gracie especially has changed so much lately.  She has   such a wealth of little bright curls.   Dear Mother, I am sorry to know that you are not very well often - you must find it trying to be   alone at such times.  I do hope you and Papa will do all you can to make yourselves comfortable.  With   kindest love to you both.   Believe me, dear Mother,    Your most affectionate ,     Emma