Array 1200 Barclay St. Vancouver Aug. 7/20<br> Dear Grace<br> Another warm day!  I fancy we have felt the heat here almost as much as you have, though of course the thermometer has not been so high.  However we have every opportunity to keep as cool as possible so have nothing to complain of.  Everything is very dry, and we have about given up looking for rain, which however will no doubt come in abundance in time.  We are all well at both houses and getting on comfortably.  Bob and Auntie & I go out to Helen's for dinner this evening.  Annie Brown is to be here Wednesday evening & we are to take her to Helen's for a visit Thursday as they expect to get off on this motor trip Saturday.  It has been suggested that we - that is Auntie & I & perhaps Bob should take Annie up to Sechelt on Friday just for the day to visit Jessie.  We would have several hours there.  However Jessie may have some other plan.  She & Marian are having a good time there.  Wednesday afternoon Bob Auntie & I had a pleasant trip on Mr Schooley's yacht.  I think I told you the Missionary Society are thinking of buying the yacht, and Capt. Oliver was trying it.  Mr & Mrs S. were on board of course, also Dr & Mrs White and a niece of the latter, and Mr Freeman and daughter Helen.  We went up Howe Sound and called at Gibson's Landing and also at another Landing near there where we found the Sipprel family & others camped.  We all enjoyed it and it was after eleven when we got home.  So we are having a gay enough time.  When do you & Miss M. take the trip round the Lake?  Do not be alarmed if you do not hear from me just on time.  I may forget sometimes just how long it is since I have written.  Monday I go to Dr Graham to have my eyes tested for new glasses.  My old ones are giving out.  Now I must close and take a bath before lunch.  The fire will probably be out & no hot water afterwards.  The time is short now.  We shall soon be planning for the home going.  With much love as ever, dear, from Mother <br> Hope you got the money all right.  