Array 1200 Barclay St. Vancouver <br> July 14/20 <br> Dear Grace <br> You will see I am at Barclay St.  Grace Bollert with Florence & Helen brought me over this forenoon.  Helen insists I must go back to them before you come home.  Perhaps I may if you stay away very long.  My stay there (?) did me good and they are so kind.  Your letter did not reach me till Monday morning - had probably been in the P.O. from Saturday.  Baby was pleased with her card - it gives a very picture indeed.  I was glad myself to see something of your surroundings.  I hope you will be able to stay at Kelowna as long as you wish.  Perhaps some arrangement can be made.  Summerland I suppose is out of the question now.  I think I told you Marian had her tonsils removed last Thursday.  Jessie was with her in the Hospital all the time and Marian stood it very bravely.  Friday they brought her home, but she is still in bed and far from well.  However we are hoping she may soon be better.  She is able to amuse herself in various ways and of course Jessie is the attentive nurse she always is.  Baby Helen was not very well the last few days, but seemed quite herself yesterday.  Last week we had such very warm weather which was somewhat trying but since then it has been much cooler with heavy rain Sunday and yesterday - of which I was very glad.  Our lawn & garden were quite parched.  I watered the boxes but could not do much more.  There are lots of berries of which I hope Helen will make use. I am enclosing herewith a P.O. order for fifty dollars which will relieve present necessities.  Will remember you again in good time.  I am glad you get plenty of milk.  I wanted this morning to run over & see Mrs. Hardie but was afraid to take the time.  Will try some day when I am in Kitsilano again.  I shall want the mail very little  (?).  I am glad you wrote here.  My love to Miss Metcalf - hope she has heard from her sister.  Maybe (?) you get all your mail(?).  I enjoyed your good long letter.  With much love as ever dearie <br> Mother  