Array Fort Simpson, B.C.  March 3rd 1875    My dear Mother,   I do not suppose you will be expecting to hear from me quite so soon again - but now the boat is likely to come at least once a month regularly.  So many are coming up to the mines north of us.  We got our mail yesterday sent on by canoe from a point below and tomorrow we expect the str. to call here on her way back to Victoria.  A letter from Annie of Dec. 23rd was the only one from home.  I hope by next str. we shall have answers to our last.   Our baby is doing finely.  She is really quite plump now and seems very healthy.  I do not know that she has ever had the least cold though we have had her out in cold, rain, wind & fog - but of course we keep her well protected. No baby could sleep better at night than she does - and during the day also she sleeps a good deal - and every day she grows brighter and sweeter & dearer.  An Indian girl at Metlakatla made & sent her a very pretty little blue & white hood - as nice a one as I could have got anywhere - but it will not fit her long.  I am feeling very well too - as well as ever I did.  I find my time pretty well occupied though.  My husband insists upon my going out nearly every day - but I have not been at church yet.  The church is too cold to take baby there, and I cannot leave her.  We still call her Jessie.  There is a possibility of Dr. Wood's being here in the summer.  If we could depend on that we would wait and have her baptized then, but it is so doubtful that as Mr. Pollard says he will be up by next boat we may have the ceremony then.  I should like to hear from you all first if we could.  The teacher jogs along.  I don't want to be uncharitable, but he is a negative sort of man and what positive there is about him is not of the most agreeable kind.  No great acquisition to Fort Simpson society - but fortunately he is quiet.   I do not know that I answered your last letter very fully.  I had so little time after I rec. it.  You ask if we were warm & had dry wood.  We had plenty of wood, some dry, some not dry and kept up such fires sometimes as would terrify Auntie.  Then the house is quite comfortable and the weather never as cold as you have it sometimes at home.  There is no fear of our being cold or suffering any domestic discomfort of that kind as long as my husband is able-bodied - he would go to the woods & chop trees himself first.  No, I never knew anyone that knew better how to make things cosy and comfortable than your son-in-law does, and he is always willing to help me.  I often think I ought not to let him do so much as he does.  He is the best nurse in the house.   Now, I must close.  Love to Auntie - why does she not write to me? - and to Sallie - and all - and with best love to my father & yourself.   I am, dear Mother    Your affectionate daughter,     Emma 