Array Please forward to Lefroy then to Barrie.    All ok at Cobourg.    Fort Simpson  Feb. 14th 1878    My dear Mother,   It is time now that I began another letter to you, for the str. may be here any day.  How many   letters have passed between us.  You are a good, faithful correspondent - indeed, I prize your letters   highly, dear Mother.   We have all been well during the winter.  Gracie was poorly for a week or two, from her   teething, I suppose, but is very well now.  She has most of her teeth, now, and has been walking since   Christmas.  She promises to talk also much earlier than Jessie did.  She eats little else than bread and   butter and milk.  Jessie is growing fast.  She goes out a good deal with her father which is a great   pleasure to her.  She takes a lively interest in all that goes on, and likes much to sweep & dust, wash   and iron herself, with her own toy appliances.  Christmas day she was made glad with a new doll in a   little cradle, furnished with all necessaries, and a box of dolls clothes, besides a picture book and   other little things.  Gracie got a rattle and presents of money from her father and Miss Knott.  Jessie   gave some picture cards and pictures away to the members of the family.  Miss Knott gave me a picture frame in which she placed that photo I have of you and my father together.  It stands upon the sitting   room mantel shelf.   We had Mr. Morrison, also Alfred & Kate our interpreter for dinner with us.  We got a quarter of   beef a few days before Christmas, from a place about forty miles away - so we fared very well, with a   plum pudding also.  We have done very well this winter for meat.  It is more scarce just now than it has   been, but we have some canned in the house.  The Indians celebrated Christmas about as usual - the   carols were good.  We had a tree for the children, and all seemed to pass pleasantly. The winter has   been a remarkably mild one.  Thomas has been gardening today.  I hope no severe weather will come now,   or I fear our flowers will suffer.  The daisies have been in bloom all winter, and everything is   starting now.  I must not forget to tell you too that we have had celery in the garden all winter, which   we have found a very good thing.  Thomas has made one visit to Naas, where the work seems to be going on   well, since I wrote you.  The Missionary there seems to be an excellent young man, well adapted to his   position.  Last Sunday Thomas spent at a place some forty miles away where there are a number of Indians   now staying.  These people had sent an urgent request that he would visit and help them.  Another   village about fifteen miles away, in Alaska, he visited two weeks ago.  The people there desire a school   and Thomas means, if possible, to send them a native teacher.    Feb 22nd  A young man and his wife left two days ago for the Kit-a-mat village where Thomas visited last   fall.  Thus you see there is need for native or other agents at many places about us.  This young man is   to carry on a school and the services - and of course Mr. Crosby will visit there when he can.  For the   support of these agents Thomas is personally responsible, and although he never allows them to expect   more than is just a comfortable living according to their own ways still it counts up.  The Naas work   has been a good deal of expense in this way.  Do not think I regret this.  The wants of the people are   so urgent - it would, I am sure, be criminal delay to refuse to supply them until the expense might be   provided for.  Many opportunities would thus be lost and whatever we have, we believe, cannot be better   spent than in this way.  Still I hope these out-posts may receive some support from the Society.  Our   own expenses are, of course, likely to be more now than they have been.  The stock of household articles   we began with are beginning to show some wear and tear.  Even my clothes are growing less plentiful   though they hold out wonderfully.  But we feel no anxiety on this score.   I think my last letter was written soon after the accident to our church.  The people worked   with a will and in about three weeks the church was ready for use again.  The subscriptions given here   were also sufficient to cover the outlay. We are still annoyed a good deal by our neighbours at the   other Mission - but I do not care to talk about this particularly.  Our own people appear to be steadily   improving and the work is extending to other tribes, for which we ought to be thankful.    March 4th - We were rejoiced to receive our mail two days ago.  We had expected it much sooner.  I am   glad to hear you had so pleasant a Christmas - look out for us to join you some time.  But really I   often think I should be almost afraid to take Jessie home.  She is such an impressible little thing I   fear the excitement would be too much for her.  Her book pleased her very much.  I am sure she thinks   Grandmamma a wonderful person.  She wants very much to thank you for all you have done for her.  The   parcel containing the dress and three pairs stockings came safely.  I see you have not given up knitting   yet.  Many thanks for these things which will all be most useful.  We received a lot of fresh meat,   fresh vegetables, and apples from Victoria sent by friends.   The Indians are about starting for their oolachan fishery and we shall likely soon have some of   those most delicious little fish.   As to the Insurance policy, Thomas will be glad to have it attended to.  If any further written   application to the office is necessary or any writing to empower Papa to do the business let me know and   Thomas will send it.  I fear I shall not be able to write to all the girls - not very fully at all   events - so, if it is not too much trouble, please send this round.  Our love to you all.  O how I   should like to see all those children - the cousins of whom Jessie is never tired of hearing.  I   received letters from Annie & Susie by this mail.  I hope Eliza is well.  I received a letter from her   by a mail we received just before Christmas brought by an American str.   With warmest love from us all to yourself and my father,    Believe me, dear Mother,      Yours as ever,      Emma