Array 2631 First Ave West Vancouver July 6/20 Dear Grace We got your card from Sicamous and I was so pleased today to have the letter from Kelowna - to know that you had reached the end of your journey and found needed comforts awaiting you.  I addressed a letter to the Hotel, Kelowna, Saturday evening, which should have reached there yesterday.  If you have not got it you had better enquire at the Hotel.  I did not think you would be leaving the Hotel quite so soon.  At the same time I re-addressed one for Miss Metcalf.  I hope you got them all right.  This I will send to the general delivery.  Well, Grace you will be glad to know I am ever so much better - that pain that troubled me is almost entirely gone.  I sleep well with the door open onto the balcony and the last thing I see at night and the first in the morning is that perfectly entrancing view of English Bay & surroundings Helen & Harold have been the best of nurses.  I am kept busy now trying to persuade them I really do not need any special attention any longer.  The Hot water comes up regularly and until this morning when I insisted on getting up, my breakfast also.  Yesterday I went over to Jessie's before lunch - (took the Davie car).  She had a "tea" served out on the verandah in the afternoon - some fifteen or more present, including Mrs. Howie, her three daughters & granddaughter.  Everything was arranged on the verandah when I got there, and Marian at once informed me there was to be punch in a new cut glass bowl, ice cream &c.  It was a very nice affair - I quite enjoyed it and Harold came up for me on his way from the office to see me safe home.  Harold and I went to church Sunday evening.  The minister was enquiring after you.  I was up at the house this morning, watering the verandah boxes & had quite a little talk with Mrs. Bullock from the end of her verandah, and heard her without difficulty, so my hearing is no worse.  There is a letter for you I will remail to Kelowna.  Look out for it.  Love to Miss Metcalf.  I hope you both will have a really good time.  Much love, dear Grace, as ever from Mother <br> The price of the tickets & the money Harold gave you were both included in the $135.00