Array 1200 Barclay St.  Vancouver Aug 24/20 <br> Dear Grace<br> One week more and this month will be gone and you will perhaps be home again or at least on the way.  This may be the last of the summer's letters, unless you are delayed.  Be sure to let me know just when to expect you.  Of course you will not want me to meet you at the station - Bob & Jessie will not probably be home till after that, and Harold and family who left for Alta Lake Monday morning do not expect to be back till Wednesday evening, so there may be no one to meet you, but you know the way home and I can at least have the house open for you, and I hope you may be as glad to be home as I shall be to have you there.  Harold urged that Auntie and I go with them to Alta Lake which probably you know is on the way to Lilooet, but I could not "see my way".  I shall be glad when they are all home again.  Auntie and I have a quiet time but not too quick.  Sunday eve were at Helen's for supper.  They took us out and brought us back in the motor.  Baby Helen had a fine time in Victoria - greatly enjoyed sleeping in a "big bed." As well as the motoring &c.  They took Emma and the children round with them to several places.  I hope they may enjoy Alta Lake.  There has been quite a change in the weather - Last night considerable rain fell & today has been quite cool with prospect of more rain.  You will probably feel the change a good deal when you get here, so provide accordingly.  As to fruit if you are getting good peaches it would be nice to have a case for Helen.  Would it be worth while having a box of apples?  Of course the early apples do not keep long, but we could distribute some.  Fruit is very dear here, and we have not started to put up our winter supply.  Well, dear, I trust you are enjoying your last few days at Kelowna.  I feel as thought I would like to see the place myself some time.  But after all "there is no place like home." With much love dearie as ever Mother <br> Love to Miss M. and take good care of each other.