Array Fort Simpson B.C.  March 10th 1880    My dear Mother,   After long waiting we find that the steamer passed up north yesterday but for some reason our mail is not to hand.  The str. did not call in here, but usually in this case our mail is put off at some point below and comes on by canoe.  The str. will be in on her way down, I suppose, likely tomorrow, but the time she may lie here will be too short to allow of much writing.  And yet I feel as though I cannot write until I hear from you and know how it has been with you all during the long time that we have heard nothing.  The str. is late in coming and I have felt very anxious for letters.  I trust I shall find that all has been well.  We have had much comfort during the winter.  Our children grow dearer to us and more interesting every day.  Of course we miss our little Polly - the memory of her grows more and more tender and precious, but we have so many, many blessings left we cannot but be thankful.   We have had an unusually cold winter such as has not been known for many years.  During the early part of the season Jessie and Gracie were both very delicate, they could not bear the slightest exposure, and we felt very anxious about that, but lately they have improved wonderfully, and now that the weather has moderated and they get out every day they seem as well as ever I saw them.  We have a very comfortable, cheerful home.  The want of associates for the children we begin to feel some, for we cannot allow them to associate with the children of the village, but I supply the lack as well as I can by telling stories, and furnishing employment & amusement for them, and of course being so nearly of the same age they are company for each other - and company for me too.  When their father is away, especially, I do not know what I should do without the children.  Thomas has made several trips during the winter, and cold and stormy as the weather has been, a special Providence has seemed to give him prosperous winds and rapid transit.  A little more than two weeks ago he left for a place about fifty miles away - with a large canoe and twenty people, a stiff breeze and a missionary spirit, and before we were looking for him at all was back to report a most blessed time among those whom he had gone to visit. It is wonderful how the people - the very best among them - rally round Mr. Crosby in these trips, which, especially in winter weather, mean hard work, and possibly great exposure and peril, but they seem to catch the spirit, and always return better Christians for their sacrifice.   We have had twelve girls under our care all winter so our "Home" may be said to be in fair operation.  One was married a few weeks ago, but a little girl from another village, a heathen village, has since come to us to make up the number.  Quite a family to look after it is not?  We are seventeen souls in all, including the young man who has charge of the school.     March 11th - The Steamer came in this afternoon with the mail which had been detained on board by an oversight.  I was glad to hear from you all but sorry to know that you were so poorly.  You must find it trying, I am sure, but I trust patience and strength are given you day by day.  I wish much that I could do something for your comfort, but, you know, dear Mother, we remember you and pray for you.  Jessie has a little book mark that she wants to send you.  She thinks a great deal of "Grandmamma" and talks so much about seeing you all.  She is very fond of working little bits of cardboard.  I mark the letters or figures for her and she can follow them very correctly.  This was made when she was just five years old.   My father's letter is to hand and I was pleased indeed to read it, and to know that he was so well and happy.  Many thanks for the Globe & Mail and other matters attended to.  I received also a parcel containing two polka jackets & two comforters, also a small parcel with a pair of stockings, all of which I take to be from your kind thoughtfulness.  Thanks again.  I received letters from Eliza, Annie, Susie and Auntie, two pretty little valentines which pleased Jessie & Gracie much, and also the World and a splendid number of the "Graphic."  I shall be quite unable to reply to these letters by this mail, so I will ask you, if you think it worth while, to send this to the girls, and I will try to write to them all by next mail.   We were much surprised and pleased to find that a lady teacher had come up on this str.  I am much pleased with her appearance and manner and I trust she may find a happy home with us, and be useful among the people.  She expresses regret that she did not see you before she came away, but she was hurried having to prepare on short notice to come out with Rev. E. Robson.  I am sorry to hear that Matt continues so poorly.  Thomas and the children join me in kindest love to you all.  Believe me, dear Mother,   Your very affectionate daughter    Emma Send on to Annie, all well Susie Bookmark "Hope on