Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	1	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	Speech	to	the	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	March	28,	2017,	11:30	a.m.	Four	Seasons	Hotel,	Vancouver	Santa	J.	Ono		 	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	2	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	Good	afternoon	and	thank	you	everyone.	It’s	an	honour	to	be	with	you	today.	I’d	like	to	begin	by	acknowledging	that	we	are	gathered	on	the	the	traditional,	ancestral,	and	unceded	territory	of	the	Coast	Salish	people,	the	Musqueam,	the	Squamish	and	the	Tsleil	Waututh.	I	would	also	like	to	acknowledge	and	thank	our	sponsors,	the	Sauder	School	of	Business,	the	Robert	H.	Lee	Graduate	School	of	Business	and	Boyden.	I	am	delighted	and	honoured	by	the	opportunity	to	speak	to	the	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	for	the	first	time	as	president	of	UBC.	It	is	a	long-standing	tradition	for	UBC	presidents	to	address	the	board	of	trade	and	many	in	the	room	today	will	have	heard	my	esteemed	predecessors	address	the	Board	of	Trade.	It	is	my	pleasure	to	stand	here	today	to	continue	that	tradition.	There	is	so	much	opportunity	–	at	UBC,	in	Vancouver,	in	B.C.	and	in	Canada.	And	given	our	collective	capacity	and	influence,	there	is	so	much	that	we	can	do,	together,	that	will	produce	benefits	for	our	province	and	country.	I’d	like	talk	about	two	things	today.	First,	I’d	like	to	introduce	myself	and	tell	you	about	why	I	came	to	UBC	–	not	because	I	like	talking	about	myself	but	because	I	think	the	reasons	why	I	decided	to	come	to	UBC	tell	a	story	about	where	UBC	is	headed	–	what	it	has	to	offer	today	and	what	I	am	confident	it	will	become.	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	3	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono		Second,	and	this	is	closely	related,	I’d	like	to	talk	about	innovation.	This	is	a	hugely	important	component	of	my	job	as	UBC	President.	But	it	also	comes	as	part	of	a	mandate	from	Premier	Christy	Clark,	who	has	asked	me	to	serve	as	chief	advisor	on	the	new	BC	Innovation	Network.	Again,	this	points	to	the	opportunities	and,	I	think,	responsibilities	that	we	all	have	to	work	together	to	help	B.C.	achieve	its	potential.	But	first:	why	did	I	come	to	Vancouver?	Well,	you	need	only	look	at	the	real	estate	prices	to	understand	that	a	lot	of	people	want	to	come	here.	It’s	a	spectacular	city.	Although	I	have	some	serious	questions	about	Vancouver’s	reputation.	For	example,	when	I	was	thinking	about	coming,	I	was	told	that	Vancouver	is	warm	–	and	that	Vancouverites	are	not.	People	said	I	would	enjoy	the	no-snow	winters,	but	that,	as	a	U.S.	transplant,	I	might	find	that	Vancouverites	have	a	sort	of	British	reserve	that	can	make	them	seem	chilly.	This	is	all	wrong.	I	don’t	think	we	have	to	talk	about	the	rumor	of	warm	weather.	I’d	really	rather	not.	Enough	to	say	that	I	had	the	wrong	wardrobe	for	winter	2017.	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	4	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono		But	when	it	comes	to	the	warmth	of	Vancouver’s	people,	I	have	been	overwhelmed.	I	have	been	blown	away	by	how	warmly	the	Vancouver	community	has	reached	out	to	me,	and	I	am	incredibly	grateful.	Vancouver	is	also	welcoming	in	another,	extremely	important	way.	You	may	know	that	I	was	born	here,	in	1962.	My	family	had	moved	from	Japan	to	the	United	States	in	1959,	and	when	my	father’s	U.S.	Green	Card	timed	out,	Canada	opened	its	doors.	Vancouver	provided	a	safe	and	welcoming	home	at	a	critical	time.	It	turned	out	that	other	opportunities	drew	my	father	back	to	the	States.	After	teaching	for	a	year	in	the	math	department	at	UBC,	he	moved	to	the	University	of	Pennsylvania	and,	ultimately,	to	Johns	Hopkins	in	Baltimore.	That’s	where	I	grew	up.	But	Canada’s	openness	is,	once	again,	not	just	a	matter	of	pride	but	a	competitive	advantage.	That	became	obvious	to	me	on	November	9th,	when,	in	the	aftermath	of	the	US	election,	so	many	Americans	enquired	about	coming	to	Canada.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	5	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	The	phenomenon	grew	even	more	in	January,	when	the	Trump	Administration	introduced	its	first	attempt	to	ban	travelers	from	seven	majority	Muslim	countries.	I	got	a	surprising	number	of	direct	emails,	not	just	from	people	I	knew	in	the	U.S.,	but	from	others	who	were	afraid	that,	if	blocked	from	entering	the	United	States,	they	would	not	be	able	to	finish	their	education.	This	is	real.	Our	applications	from	international	students	have	risen	by	25	percent	this	year.	They’re	coming	from	people	who	might	previously	have	preferred	to	study	in	the	U.K.,	but	are	worried	about	England	distancing	itself	from	the	European	Union.	They’re	coming	from	undergraduate	and	graduate	students	who	are	feeling	uncomfortable,	or	unsafe,	in	the	United	States.	And	the	applications	are	not	limited	to	students.	We’ve	also	seen	a	steady	increase	in	the	number	of	inquiries	from	top	notch	post-docs	and	would-be	UBC	faculty.	You	may	have	heard,	too,	how	prominent	this	was	as	a	topic	of	conversation	at	the	recent	BC	Tech	Summit.	Aside	from	increasing	our	ability	to	compete	for	great	talent	at	UBC,	there	is	also	a	potential	to	open	new	high-tech	operations	in	Vancouver	or	to	expand	existing	offices,	because	we	can	welcome	and	embrace	top	talent	from	around	the	world.	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	6	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	As	I	say,	this	is	a	competitive	advantage	and	one	that	could	have	lasting	impact.	That	said;	I,	personally,	didn’t	come	to	Vancouver	because	I	felt	insecure	or	unhappy	in	the	U.S.	The	University	of	Cincinnati,	where	I	was	president,	is	a	fantastic	institution.		But	UBC	is	something	else.	Where	UCincinnati	is	ranked	among	the	top	300-or-so	universities	in	the	world,	UBC	is	in	the	top	three	dozen.	If	you	look	only	at	public	universities	–	which	is	a	fairer	comparison	–	UBC	is	in	the	top	25.	That’s	not	a	vain	boast.	It’s	an	actual	measurement	of	how	well	this	institution	compares	when	it	comes	to	things	like	innovative	capacity.	It’s	what	prospective	students,	faculty	–	and	philanthropic	supporters	–	look	at	when	they	are	trying	to	choose	a	university.	It’s	important.	That’s	not	to	imply	that	UBC	chases	rankings.	Rather,	we	concentrate	on	excellence.	Then,	as	the	impact	of	our	research	reverberates,	locally	and	globally,	and	as	300,000	UBC	alumni	make	their	influence	felt	around	the	world,	UBC’s	reputation	improves	yet	further	–	and	with	that,	we	increase	our	capacity	to	do	even	more.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	7	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	So,	even	aside	from	the	temptation	of	returning	to	this	beautiful	city,	the	opportunity	at	UBC	was	such	that	I	just	couldn’t	resist.	And	now,	here	I	stand	as	the	15th	president	of	the	University	of	British	Columbia.	It’s	an	interesting	role.	Being	a	university	president	is	a	little	like	being	an	orchestra	conductor.	You	get	to	stand	at	the	front.	You	get	to	wear	the	bowtie.	But	no	amount	of	arm-waving	will	call	forth	success	if	you	don’t	have	a	brilliant	ensemble	that	is	working	well	–	together.	UBC’s	orchestra	–	to	continue	the	metaphor	–	is	comprised	of	brilliant	faculty	members,	students,	staff	and	alumni.		The	graduates	of	UBC	excel	in	practically	every	field	of	human	endeavor.	Three	graduates	have	served	as	Prime	Minister	of	Canada	-	including	the	incumbent	Justin	Trudeau.	Seven	members	of	the	UBC	faculty	have	won	the	Nobel	prize.	Well	over	200	current	members	of	the	faculty	are	members	of	academies	such	as	the	Royal	Society,	Royal	Society	of	Canada,	the	US	National	Academies	and	the	American	Academy	of	Arts	&	Sciences.	70	graduates	have	been	awarded	the	Rhodes	Scholarship	and	65	graduates	have	won	an	Olympic	medal.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	8	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	A	significant	amount	of	credit	for	the	quality	of	the	UBC	ensemble	must	go	to	my	predecessors.	I	live	today	in	a	house	named	for	the	remarkable	Norman	Mackenzie,	who	was	the	UBC	president	when	my	father	taught	here	in	the	1960s.	I	have	to	say,	for	a	middle	child	who	worked	hard	to	meet	the	high	expectations	of	a	demanding	parent,	that’s	a	sweet	feeling.	Consider,	as	well,	the	more	recent	presidents.	I	stand	on	the	shoulders	of	the	late	David	Strangway,	who	is	widely	credited	with	lifting	UBC	from	being	a	good	regional	institution	in	the	1980s	into	a	great	international	one	by	the	late	1990s.	It’s	no	secret	that	we	all	owe	a	debt	of	gratitude	to	the	redoubtable	Martha	Piper,	who	picked	up	the	pace	of	Strangway’s	transformative	work	and	who	stepped	back	in	last	year	to	settle	and	refocus	the	university	at	a	turbulent	time.	I	admire	–	and	am	instructed	by	–	the	passion,	ambition	and	innovative	spirit	of	Arvind	Gupta.		And,	returning	to	the	international	recognition	of	UBC’s	excellence,	you	may	have	heard	that	Cambridge	University	in	England	has	chosen	Stephen	Toope	to	assume	its	presidential	duties	as	its	346th	Vice-Chancellor.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	9	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	Add	to	the	mix	UBC’s	earlier	presidents,	from	Frank	Wesbrook	to	George	Pedersen,	and	you	have	humbling	list	of	talented	leaders;	I	am	deeply	honoured	to	follow	in	their	footsteps	–	to	help	move	UBC	from	excellence	to	eminence.	One	area	in	which	we	have	achieved	excellence	is	innovation.	Innovation	is	both	vital	and,	at	this	point,	a	little	opaque.	“Innovative,”	as	an	adjective	is	like	“sustainable”.	It’s	one	of	those	words	that	people	use	to	mean	so	many	things	that	it	stops	meaning	anything	at	all.	In	some	ways	“innovative”	has	become	a	synonym	for	“better.”	Yet,	there	is	much	more	to	it	than	that.	In	aspirational	terms,	I	think	of	innovation	as	the	never-ending	exchange	between	the	realities	of	today	and	the	potential	of	tomorrow.	But	it’s	worth	digging	deeper	into	the	definition.	The	Organization	for	Economic	Cooperation	and	Development	–	the	OECD	–	defines	innovation	as	“the	implementation	of	a	new	or	significantly	improved	product	or	process,	a	new	marketing	method,	or	a	new	organizational	method	in	business	practices,	workplace	organization	or	external	relations.”		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	10	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	Simply	put,	Innovation	is	the	implementation	of	something	that	is	new	or	significantly	improved.	There	are	two	critical	elements	here.	The	first	–	the	one	we	probably	think	of	most	often	–	is	the	new	idea:	the	breakthrough	that	might,	one	day,	give	rise	to	a	world-changing	technology	or	a	transformative	new	social	policy.		This	is	the	aspect	of	innovation	people	often	think	about	first	when	they	contemplate	the	role	of	universities.	UBC	is	an	enormous	generator	of	new	ideas	and	knowledge.		Our	annual	research	budget	is	now	more	than	$600	million.	And	a	significant	portion	of	that	funding	rightly	goes	into	fundamental	research,	into	pure	academic	inquiry	–where	we	build	our	basic	understanding	of	the	world	and	the	universe	around	us.	There	is	still	much	to	discover,	and	so	many	opportunities	for	new	ideas	that	could	change	the	world.	Consider,	for	example,	the	work	of	the	Stewart	Blusson	Quantum	Matter	Institute,	where	some	of	the	world’s	foremost	researchers	–	people	like	Andrea	Damascelli	and	Sarah	Burke	–	are	pursuing	an	understanding	of	how	matter	behaves	at	the	most	fundamental	levels,	and	which	may	one	day	yield	discoveries	with	applications	in	electronics	and	information	technology,	in	sustainable	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	11	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	energy,	in	the	automotive	industry	–	even	in	the	health	care	sector.	Or	perhaps	there	are	revolutionary	applications	that	we	have	not	yet	even	imagined.	But	innovation	requires	more	than	new	knowledge	or	a	good	idea.	If	the	new	thing	in	question	is	a	product	or	service,	you	have	to	get	it	to	market.	If	it’s	a	new	method,	you	have	to	get	it	into	practice.	So,	at	its	simplest,	innovation	is	conception-plus-connection.	Of	course,	any	time	you	hear	someone	say,	“at	its	simplest,”	a	little	warning	bell	should	go	off	in	your	head,	because	they	are	probably	talking	about	something	that	isn’t	simple	at	all.	That’s	certainly	the	case	here.	Innovation	has	enemies.	One	is	inertia.	Innovation	is,	necessarily,	disruptive.	The	very	notion	of	a	great	new	product	implies	that	a	lesser	old	product	is	already	in	use.	It’s	why	Joseph	Schumpeter	refered	to	innovation	as	“creative	destruction.”	It	threatens	the	status	quo.	So,	well-established	market	forces	can	be	expected	to	resist.	I	don’t	want	to	say	that	nobody	likes	change,	but	the	people	who	like	it	least	are	often	the	ones	who	are,	today,	in	the	most	powerful	positions.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	12	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	Another	obstacle	to	innovation	is	caution.	No	engineer	wants	to	be	responsible	for	an	innovative	highway	design	that	almost	works.	And	who	wants	to	be	lying	in	the	operating	suite,	drifting	into	unconsciousness,	when	the	surgeon	says,	“Hey,	I’m	thinking	about	trying	something	new!”	…?	People	are	also	cautious	with	their	money,	whether	they	are	investors	or	purchasers.	And	Canadian	investors	have	a	particular	reputation	in	this	regard.	So,	I’m	not	here	today	to	tell	you	that	I	have	the	innovation	riddle	solved.	Premier	Clark	has	asked	the	B.C.	Innovation	Network	to	come	up	with	some	strategies	to	attract	and	retain	talent,	to	encourage	innovative	research,	and	to	ensure	our	students,	young	and	old,	are	well	prepared	to	advance	their	careers	in	a	complex	and	rapidly	evolving	world.	I	hope	we	may	also	conceive	and	implement	some	policy	recommendations	that	address	the	obstacles	–	that	we	may,	ourselves,	innovate.	But	without	prejudging	the	BC	Innovation	Network’s	path,	I	have	a	couple	of	comments	about	the	role	of	UBC	in	the	innovation	ecosystem.	UBC	is	already	deeply	committed	to	both	conception	and	connection.	To	begin,	I	would	argue	that	UBC	is	one	of	B.C.’s	foremost	sources	of	new	ideas.	You	could	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	13	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	look	into	any	part	of	B.C.’s	economy	and	society	and	identify	a	benefit	derived	directly	from	an	innovation	that	originated	at	UBC.	In	health	care,	think	about	AIDS	or	prostate	cancer	research,	brain	health	or	any	number	of	biotechnology	advances.	In	architecture,	think	about	the	works	of	Bing	Thom.	In	mining,	our	engineers	and	our	methods	are	in	demand	around	the	world.	In	computer	science,	the	“(dot)CA”	domain	was	created	by	UBC’s	Computing	Facilities	manager	John	Demco	in	1987	–	two	years	BEFORE	the	emergence	of	the	World	Wide	Web.	Think	about	the	influence	of	UBC	researchers	and	UBC	alumni	in	Law,	in	Psychology,	in	Social	Work,	in	Aboriginal	Studies	–	in	Arts	and	Culture.	In	Environmental	Studies,	the	very	notion	of	an	ecological	footprint	was	conceived	at	UBC	by	Bill	Rees	and	Mathis	Wakernagel.	UBC	is	a	hothouse	for	conception.	But	we	also	connect.	First,	of	course,	we	connect	with	students.	We	don’t	just	instill	knowledge	in	our	students,	we	nurture	skills	and	inspiration.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	14	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	And	they	connect	with	one	another	and	beyond	the	university.	They	carry	newfound	capacities	into	the	community.	I	could	ask	you	to	imagine	the	impact	of	more	than	a	century	of	UBC	grads	in	Vancouver	and	now	Kelowna	–	but	it	would	be	impossible,	in	2017,	to	imagine	either	community	without	the	benefits	of	our	two	campuses.	UBC	connects,	as	well,	to	B.C.’s	other	great	institutions	of	higher	education.	For	example,	we	collaborate	directly	with	the	University	of	Victoria	and	the	University	of	Northern	British	Columbia	in	our	distributed	medical	program,	training	doctors	in	every	part	of	the	province.	We	also	have	connections	with	BCIT,	Simon	Fraser,	Kwantlen	and	other	institutions,	including	BC’s	outstanding	community	colleges,	so	our	programs	are	complementary	and	our	students	can	move	freely	among	institutions,	depending	on	what	mix	of	practical	and	theoretical	knowledge	they	want	or	need.	No	institution	in	North	America	is	better	connected	internationally;	Times	Higher	Education	places	UBC	12th	in	the	world	among	all	universities,	based	on	our	international	reputation,	the	extent	of	our	international	research	collaboration,	the	proportion	of	international	students	and	the	diversity	of	our	students,	faculty	and	staff.	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	15	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono		We	also	enjoy	some	increasingly	powerful	connections	closer	to	home.	As	you	may	have	heard,	we	recently	established	the	Cascadia	Urban	Analytics	Cooperative	with	the	University	of	Washington	in	Seattle,	on	the	strength	of	a	$1-million	gift	from	Microsoft.	We	already	have	extensive	links	to	UW,	but	this	will	be	the	largest	industry-funded	research	partnership	between	our	two	universities,	bringing	faculty,	students	and	community	stakeholders	together	to	solve	problems	in	everything	from	traffic	to	homelessness.	I’m	excited	about	this.	UBC	and	UW	are	natural	partners,	close	and	complementary.	Our	combined	research	spending	is	over	$2	billion.	I’m	also	excited	about	the	Microsoft	connection.	When	the	Cascadia	cooperative	was	announced,	Microsoft	President	Brad	Smith	said	he	saw	the	investment	as	a	catalyst	for	broader	and	more	sustainable	efforts	to	connect	our	two	institutions.	This	mirrors	the	increasing	Microsoft	investment	in	Vancouver	as	an	important	part	of	what	Smith	calls	its	“string	of	pearls”	–	Microsoft’s	highly	creative	West	Coast	offices	stretching	from	here,	south	to	San	Francisco.	Bearing	in	mind	that,	Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	16	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	between	the	Gates	Foundation	and	the	company	itself,	Microsoft	has	been	the	source	of	more	than	$1.3	billion	in	gifts	to	the	University	of	Washington	over	the	past	two	decades.	Needless	to	say	we’re	delighted	to	be	part	of	the	mix.	To	be	clear,	though,	UBC	has	earned	its	place.	Consider	another	research	investment	that	we	announced	this	month:	the	$2-million	Scotiabank	Cybersecurity	and	Risk	Analytics	Initiative.	As	in	so	many	other	fields,	we	have	the	expertise.	And	with	cyberhacking	becoming	an	unnerving	feature	in	so	much	of	our	lives,	this	particular	expertise	was	never	so	urgently	needed.	Taken	together,	you	have	an	example	of	UBC,	in	collaboration	with	post-secondary	partners	at	every	level	and	around	the	world,	translating	ideas	into	action	–	nurturing	(and	recruiting)	highly	qualified	people	and	working	with	the	private	and	social	sectors	to	transform	ideas	into	action.	UBC’s	University	Industry	Liaison	Office,	the	first	of	its	kind	in	Canada	when	it	was	created	in	1984,	now	partners	with	industry,	government	and	non-profit	partners	on	more	than	2,000	projects	a	year	and	has	supported	the	founding	of	190	spin-off	companies	that,	together,	have	generated	more	than	$11	billion	in	sales.		Greater	Vancouver	Board	of	Trade	 	 March	28,	2017	17	Notes	for	UBC	President	and	Vice-Chancellor	Santa	Ono	It	is	no	accident,	then,	that	the	high-tech	industry	in	B.C.	now	employs	more	people	than	all	the	resource	industries	combined.	One	of	the	other	obstacles	to	innovation	that	I	didn’t	mention	earlier	is	competition.	According	to	a	recent	Bloomberg	analysis,	Canada	currently	ranks	20th	among	the	world’s	most	innovative	economies,	down	from	19th	last	year.	Canada	is	a	small,	incredibly	well-educated,	resourceful	and	probably	underfinanced	player	in	a	global	competition	that	we	will	not	win	by	standing	around.	We	need	to	leverage	our	creative	capacity	and	our	connections,	whether	it	means	consciously	developing	industry	clusters	or	building	longer-distance	links	to	the	best	and	brightest	the	world	over.		Let	me	say,	in	all	of	those	task,	UBC	can	compete	and	in	so	doing,	help	British	Columbia	and	Canada	compete	and	succeed.	In	closing,	I’d	like	to	once	more	say	how	honoured	I	am	to	be	here	and	how	excited	I	am	about	what	we	will	do	together	–	for	UBC,	Vancouver,	British	Columbia,	Canada,	and	the	world.	Thank	you.	