 0"%  CAREERS  APRIL  Vancouver Status of Women      2029W. Fourth Ave.     736- 3746-"7-8       Volume IV   No. 32  Serials Division    73-s305  Main Library  University of B.C.  Vancouver 8,   B.C.  rites of spring  To any child with a rudimentary knowledge of zoology, the Easter Bunny  distributing eggs is bound to be a  bit puzzling.  Sunday School can  teach that the egg is symbolic of the  stone that was rolled away from the  tomb of Ghrist, but that does not  explain that rabbit standing there  with his basket of coloured eggs.  (At times he wears a bow-tie I believe.) Like the reason for many of  the strange side events of Christian  holidays, this one has its roots in  the early Church practice of superimposing Christian religious ceremonies on popular pagan festivals.  The purpose was to make the transition  from pagan gods to Christian God less  jolting for the masses.  So our word  Easter comes from the Anglo-Saxon  goddess of Spring, Eostre or Ostara,  whose festival was celebrated on the  Sunday after the first full moon on  or following March 21.  Eostre*s  consort was a rabbit - gods and  goddesses seemed to have very liberal  attitudes regarding sex and anyway  willing suspension of disbelief is a  prime requirement for the adherents  of any religious ideology.  Both the  egg and the rabbit are fertility symbols, hence the Easter Bunny, egg  hunts, egg rollings and gifts of  coloured eggs that were once very  serious rituals to promote fertility  at the season of renewal of life  (both animal and vegetable) and  which have now become games for  children.  Many Germanic and Slavic countries  also follow the old custom of  Schmeckostern or "Easter smacks" in  which the men strike women with newly  sprouted willow, birch, cherry or  grape vine branches, in order that  the new life inherent in the green  branch be bestowed on the females.  In gratitude the women give their  beaters eggs dyed red.  It is  amazing how many fertility rites involved the beating of women.  Fortunately, this custom does not seem to  be as popular as it once was, at least,  not from the female point of view.  Every ancient culture, whose livelihood depended upon agriculture, had  ceremonies which petitioned gods and  goddesses to favour their land and  people with fruitfulness.  In many  areas, not yet a part of the mainstream of modern civilization, these  ceremonies are still practised.  Most  common are the dances and offerings  to gods in hope of bringing the life-  giving rain needed for crops.  The  Zuni Indians of the New Mexico desert  believe that rain increases the production of both their gardens and  their women.  It is probable that Greek drama originated with the ancient festival in  honour of Dionysus, god of fecundity,  when the participants donned goatskins and masks to impersonate the  god.  During the festival an enormous,  exaggerated phallus was carried by  phallophoroi ("phallus bearers") and  the celebrants would become so  exhilerated by the dancing, imbibing  of the ceremonial wine and the general  religious fervour that they would  shout out highly erotic and physically detailed suggestions to anyone  they encountered.  The explanation  was that by reference to the organs  and actions of procreation, the fertility of the community would be  increased.  Often the comments included unlikely, sexual deformities  and afflictions so that evil spirits  would be deceived and go elsewhere.  It would be interesting to see if a  judge in Eyebrow Saskatchewan would  condone a showing of Deep Throat in  hopes that it would encourage a bumper  wheat crop.  I don't think there  exists the same respect for religious  drama in rural Canada that there  apparently did in the country villages  of ancient Greece.  An interesting explanation for the  degraded position that women occupied  in the ancient Israelite society  involves a fertility cult.  It was believed that the sexual union of the  god and goddess of fertility was  responsible for the renewal of life  every year.  A cult grew up in which  the worshipers shared in the divine  life force by imitating the god and  engaging in intercourse with sacred  prostitutes, representatives of the  goddess.  This cult became so popular (all year round) that it threatened the Hebrew religious establishment.  A curse was uttered on both  man and woman, but because woman (that  evil temptress) was responsible for  encouraging man to try to rise to the  level of a god, she lost her right to  her position as man's partner and was  relegated to an inferior status.  However many societies have believed  that the sexual participation of  humans encourages the fruitfulness of  their crops.  Among the Pepile Indians  of Central America, it is considered  a religious duty to have sexual intercourse before planting the seeds upon  which their food supply depends.  In  parts of Java, husbands and wives  make love in their fields at night  to ensure a good crop.  But an Indian  tribe of Peru stage the most dramatic  demonstration of this belief.  In  December when the alligator pears,  their principle crop, begin to ripen,  the men and boys refrain from sexual  contact and fast for five days.  Then they assemble naked in the  orchard and run from there to a distant spot, violating any woman that  they meet on the way.  This is supposed to ensure a good harvest - of  babies as well as alligator pears it  is imagined.  In most societies where husbands and  wives were encouraged to promote crop  growth, it was believed that illicit  love acts such as adultry and incest  interfered with fertility and would  actually blight the crops.  It is  recorded that the land of Thebes  suffered from blight, pestilence and  sterility both of women and cattle,  under Oedipus who unwittingly wedded  his mother.  The Third Century Celtic  kingdom of Munster endured failure of  crops and other misfortunes for three  generations because a king had committed incest with his sister.  It  would certainly make you pause and  think.  But if you were legally married you  were not only in a favourable position  to influence the year's food supply,  but you were expected to prove your own  fertility....repeatedly....continuously  .'Äû..endlessly.  A Chinese proverb  states, "Birth is a woman's career."  And women were, and still are in most  societies, expected to devote themselves  wholeheartedly to this career.  The  Zuni Indians pray for happy blessed  "who are with child,  Garrying one child on the back,  Holding another on a cradle board,  Leading one by the hand,  With yet another going before."  The Hindu philosopher Manu referred  to woman as the field and man as the  grain.  The wife carried the seed and  provided it with a place to grow. The  history of woman throughout the ages  has been a history of "being sown"  and "bearing fruit" until exhausted  and unable to produce any longer.  Royalty and commoner alike, her value  has been her ability to carry and  deliver and care for her husband's  children.  But there are children and children!  The very foundation stone of the  patriarchal system is that a man have  sons to ensure his immortality.  In  fact, to refer to the Hindu teachings  again, being born a girl was penalty  for some sin committed in a previous  incarnation.  Failure to produce boy  children has often been used as  grounds for divorce or the taking of  a second wife or concubine.  Notice  that while the blame for the lack of  boy children was placed on the wife,  the birth of a son was usually ascribed to the virility of the husband.  A nice little double play - sort of  the Catch 22 of the baby business.  Shameful enough to be the producers  of mere girls - but to be barrenl  In many societies a barren wife could  be returned to her parents - would  you keep defective goods?  Temples  and churches around the world have  always been filled with women praying  that they will conceive so that they  might fulfill their purpose in lite.  For "a woman is born to marry" -  still today there is a stigma attached  to being an unmarried woman and it is  virtually impossible to convince anyone that it is by choice.  And the  purpose of marriage is procreation.  There is not a marriage ceremony in  the world that does not incorporate  some type of symbolism referring to  this purpose.  The accompaniment of  the bride by a small child, the  breaking of a wine glass or other  object to facilitate consummation,  the sprinkling of fruit or grain  (eg. rice) over a newly wedded couple  to ensure fruitfulness and the untying  of knots or laces to ease future  childbirth all reassert the biological  nature of marriage.  For all today's modern talk about  "togetherness" and ''companionship"  and "common interests", it is a rare  childless couple, and especially the  wife, who is not subjected to family  and social pressure to produce offspring.  And this automatic linking  of woman and child pervades every  aspect of a female's life from the  toys she is given to play with, to  the educational guidance she receives,  'to the questions she is subjected to  on job applications.  It is doubtful  that many women are still praying to  Eostre for fertility but modern  woman is turning desperately to the  new god Science, to help her control  her fertility and so make it possible  for  her to take control of her own  life.  No longer to be a vessel  through which the mainstream of  society passes, but to enter the  mainstream herself.  Jo Lazenby  volunteers  Orientation meetings are now every  2nd and 4th Wednesday at 8:00 p.m.  at the office; April 10th, 24th,  May 8th, 22nd, etc.  All members are  invited to attend these meetings.  They provide a brief, informal introduction to Status of Women Volunteer activities.  April 10th, we invite women to attend  with their men (husbands, etc.) to  discuss women's and men's liberation  together.  It should be fun.  April 24th, Kate Braid, a member who  has recently returned from Cuba, will  show slides and discuss the progress  of the women's movement in Cuba.  Fund-Raising  Because we are faced with the possibility of having no money to continue operating our office, we are  seriously trying to form a fund-  raising committee which will investigate sources of funds.  If anyone  has ideas, time or energy call  Pamela at the office and volunteer to  help!  736 - 3746  We still need help staffing the office  on Mondays and Wednesdays. Drop in  or call ini  Ask for Pam at the  office.  Editorial Committee:  Kathy Sopko,  Dianne Ryals, Carol Gordon, Monica  Mui-, Jo Lazenby, Viviane Hotz,  Trish French, Margie Colclough,  Eloah Giacomelli  Contributors:  Karen Richardson,  Bobbie Patrick  Graphics;  Kathy Sopko  Submissions;  The Newsletter welcomes  submissions from members and will consider those from non-members.  All submission's, including letters to the  editorial committee, must be accompanied  by the writer's name and address.  Pseudonyms will be used where requested.  The Newsletter is published monthly by  the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its  objective is. to provide an open channel  of communication between the members of  the organization and to promote understanding about the changing position- of  women in society.  The Newsletter is  dedicated to a philosophy consistent  with the women's movement.  Publication Date;  The first week of  each month.  Copy Deadline;  The 15th of the previous  month.  Registration;. The Newsletter is provided  as a service to members of VSW in good  standing.  Membership is acquired by an  annual donation.  In determining your  donation we ask you to balance your own  financial position and the' fact that the  Newsletter costs approximately $ 3.00 a  . year per person to print and mail.  Publishing costs require that membership  donations be prepaid and up to date.  Other donations to meet publishing costs  gratefully received.  Cost per single  issue;  25C  Where necessary, the editorial committee  will edit for brevity, clarity and  taste.  Correspondence;  Send to:  The Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver 9, B.C.  Telephone:  736-3746 HE COURT GIVETH  and the Court taketh away  Kathy Sopkc  The article is based on an interview with Nancy Conrod, member of  the working committee on Matrimonial Property. The opinions expressed are not necessarily those  of Ms. Conrod.  BACKGROUND  The Family Law Commission is a  five-person committee operating  under the auspices of the Attorney General and the Minister of  Human Resources.  The Commission  was formed to investigate and to  recommend reforms in the areas of  Family and Children's Law.  Sub-committees also have formed  to investigate specific areas  such as:  Alimony and maintenance,  property, children, and  the Family Court Pilot Project.  Justice Tom Berger (Judge of the  Supreme Court) heads the commission composed of vice-chairperson, Judge Ross Colver (County  Court, Penticton), Mish Vadasz  (social worker), Rita MacDonald  (child care worker), and Dr.  Sydney Segal (pediatrician).  The finest work produced by the  Commission to date has come from  the committee on matrimonial  property.  (Excerpts from their  working paper will follow this  article)  FAMILY GOURT  PILOT PROJEGT  The most immediate results of  the commission will be seen in  the Family Court pilot project.  Legislation intended to set up the  Family Court pilot project has already had its first reading.  If  the legislation passes, projects  will operate in the Surrey, Delta,  and Richmond areas.  The project would simplify the  court process and make it uni- -  form throughout the province.  At present, family law actions  are divided between the two  courts.  Supreme Court handles  only divorce settlements  only divorce and its attendant  settlements.  Family Court deals  with separation agreements, maintenance, child support - all the  legal needs that arise prior to  a divorce.  Family Court has  also recently been authorized  to enforce Supreme Court support  orders and to deal with custody  cases.  Under the new legislation both  courts will be housed in the  same building and will use the  same registry.  There will be  one place to go, one form to file  for all actions on family law, and  one place to file your action.  However, simplification of the legal  processes alone is not sufficient to  ease people's fears about going to  court.  No attempt has been made to  consult with a good industrial architect about the layout of the building or about the use of informational  signs to minimize confusion.  No consideration has been given to gra ics  to relieve the institutional feeling  of the court. Yet, these suggestions  have been made many times.  Berger  wants the court to be informal, but  he believes that this can be achieved  if the judge dispenses with his robes  and sits at a low desk.  REPRESENTATION  Under the present family court system  women receive very poor representation.  In Vancouver a woman has no  choice but to use the court counsel  provided by the court.  The provision  of legal assistance is a measure intended to protect the woman.  But  court counsel is generally so overworked that he or she can scarcely  skim the clients file before court  convenes.  If a woman can affor to  retain her own lawyer, the lawyer is  not permitted to represent her in  court.  (This is not the case in Victoria.)  The male party in family  court is, therfore, at a definite advantage because of his ability to  retain private legal counsel. Yet,  the law is unfair to him too.  Even  if he is in a financial bind, he is  not offerend the services of court  counsel.  The logical anser lies in  providing a sufficient number of  competent lawyers attached to the  court and permitting either party  to avail him/herself of the service if necessary.  Instead, court counsel has been  abolished and replaced by the  family court advocate.  The advocate will advise social work  staff on legal matters and perhaps dispense advice to those  who come to court.  But, the  advocate will not represent  them.  (He will represent children in cases where the judge  decides that the child needs a  representative.)  Now both parties must retain  their own lawyers even to obtain a maintenance order.  The  lower middle class gets it in  the ear again.  People who don't  qualify for legal aid and can't  afford a lawyer are left in the  lurch.  Most family court cases  drag on with people appearing  in court three and four times  a year. Not only do they lose  pay and incur childcare expenses, they now face high legal  fees.  Even those who can afford to retain a lawyer anticipate problems.  Lawyers hate to go to family  court.  It is time consuming,  low prestige work.  And if put- s  ting Family Court in the same  building as Supreme Court in  creases its prestige, then it  could also increase legal fees.  Legal Aid thinks it can interest  more lawyers in handling Family  Court cases by raising the tariff  paid to legal aid attorneys.  They would then allow people in  slightly higher income brackets  to qualify for the service.  Clearly the only people who profit from the new advocate arrangement are lawyers.  In short, what  Family Court is giving to wives  and children with one hand, it is  taking away with the other hand  clutching at legal fees.  SUPPORT SERVICES  The proposed family court counsellor  currently operates in Vancouver under the name of probation officer.  The new title will eliminate the  coorectio- al idea associated with  the old name.  The position will  provide counselling service in all  family courts throughout the province.  Many courts like Port Moody  presently have no staff.  People  receive no advice (lega, social, or  otherwise) through these courts.  The pilot project committee has proposed no significant changes.  It  eliminates court counsel, extends  counselling services, and demystifies application processes, but  the essence of the court remains  the same. Most of the thirty members of the social support services  committee were court employees who  didn't envision new approaches to  taking people through the court  process.  The pilot project committee consulted with lawyers,  social workers, and feminists.  The only group not consulted were  the people who had actually used  family court.  Which brings us  to the question of public hearings.  Berger opposes public hearings on  the basis that they are vast circuses which contribute no useful  information.  He preferes informal  discussions.  Commissioners decide  who is competent to comment on  family law and invite them to do  so.  Other input is limited to  those who know that the commission  exists and how to contact the commissioners.  To quote Gene Errington, "Public  hearings and formal briefs that  become public documents are absolute necessities". The public  must know what people are pressuring for. At present if our  recommendations are dismissed  we have no way to know that 15  other groups aren't asking for  the same changes.  Jean Assimakos of the Support  Services Committee suggested  that a team of counsellors be attached to the court.  Paralegal and social workers would  do all the initial interviewing to determine the area in which  a person needs and wants assistance.  One of the counsellor's functions  would entail referring people to  follow-up counselling.  Although  current legislation calls for  people to be reffered to outside co  counsellors where appropriate, it  is rarely done.  The majority of  referrals go to marriage counsellors  (e.g., Family Services).  Reconciliations are not always commendable  nor are they always effected.  People  need counselling to help them adjust  to new living situations and to deal  with the guiit and hostility that is  often aroused while going through  the legal processes.  A law reform commission that addresses itself only to legal and  administrative reforms is bound  to fail.  The commission must  also recognize that the experts  upon whom it calls for advice  bring to their suggestions and  conclusions all their years of  s ocietal conditioning and personal prejudices.  There is no  such thing as a purely legal  problem or a purely legal solution.  At present, Family Court is nothing  more than a sophisticated and cruel  collection agency.  In its pilot  project the commission has done  nothing to change its basic concept.  NOTE:  Just before going to press  we were informed that public hearings will be held.  They have not  been widely advertised.  Hopefully,  the decisions have not been made  prior hearings.  WOMEN AT THE TOP:  DENISE MONCION  When Denise Moncion assumed her  new duties last fall she became the  ninth women to penetrate one of  the most enviable of male strongholds - the government's senior  executive (SX) category, a group of  approximately 800 officers.  Miss Moncion's new job carries  the ponderous title "Group Chief in  the Social and Manpower Division  of the Program Branch of the  Treasury Board Secretariat". If the  title is imposing so are the position's responsibilities. These involve  analysing and assessing departmental expenditure plans, using the  government's general objectives as c  guide to future spending.  Commenting on her new job the  Hull native says, "Its real challenge  derives from involvement with the  revision and possible reorientation  of major programs such as the  social services review now being  conducted by the Department of  National Health and Welfare."  Prior to joining the Public  Service in 1969 Miss Moncion  served as Dean of Women at the  University of Ottawa. Before taking  on this challenge she worked for  Montreal hospitals and child care  agencies as a social worker.  In her first government job she  was a community services consultant in the Department of National  Health and Welfare. This involved  her in the government's funding of  day-care centres across the country,  an experience which she found  fascinating. At the time of her most  recent appointment she was an  officer in the Manpower Division of  the Treasury isoara s secretariat's  Personal Policy Branch. Here the  employment of women was one of  her principal concerns. In this  connection she co-chaired an  interdepartmental committee with  the Public Service Commission's  Office of Equal Opportunities for  Women examining the progress of  the government's various status of  women committees.  Miss Moncion's job, like other  government positions she has held,  frequently involves supervising the  work of men. This doesn't create  problems for her, however. As she  says, "The person who works well  works well. Whether that person is  a man or a woman doesn't make  any difference."  EXCERPTS FROM THE FIRST  WORKING PAPER OF THE  WORKING GROUP ON  MATRIMONIAL PROPERTY  home-  maker  THE FAMILY AS AN ECONOMIC UNIT:'  AN ANALYSIS:  The assumptions bein made are that  only certain kinds of labours are  worthy of recognition in law and  these do not include "Housework",  further that in her role as "wife"  the woman's contribution is essentially non-economic.  Our purpose here is to offer a view  of the functions of home and family  and of the homemaker which specifically contradicts the common view  that the contribution of the home-  makers work is to home and family  alone, and that she makes no contribution to the earning capacity of  those whose earnings provide the  principle financial support of the  home.  Many other practices in our society,  such as lower rates of pay for women  in the labour force, are predicated  on the assumption that men play the  part of wage-earners vis a_ vis women  as homemakers and that the wages of  men must provide for "themselves  and their families", whereas the  wages of women need not.  The family...makes contributions of  real significance to society... some  essentially not capable of evaluation.  ...the home can be described as  that social unit which maintains  the capacity, of ..those-a-t, work, or :, p.  Among low income groups the managerial aspect of the homemaker's  work is a crucial economic function which makes all the difference  between the survival of the family  and its disintegration...In many  instances it will pay her to stay  on welfare even when higher wages  are available simply because  careful mnagement takes time and  she will lose more by foregoing  that than she gains in earnings.  This is how it (Homemaking) has been  described by one authority in the  field.  "Management may be defined as the  admnistration of the household resources to promote the aims of  the household.  The resources are  the time, energy, skills, and capacities of the members of the  of the household as well as the  money make, capital funds, and  economic goals under its control.  It is the aim of management to put into effect the  standard of living of the  group."  One American economist suggests that  the managerial skill of the average  homemaker is equal to the functions  of an indepedent entrepreneur operating a small multi-functional and  fairly complex business.  The managerial aspects of home-  making are not readily visible  and normally ignored...Home-  making is not considered an  occupation. Homemakers are specifically' excluded from the  Canada Department of Labour's  definition of the labour force:  Some estimates have placed it  (homemaking) as high as 99.07  hours per week during the "peak"  years...Moreover, a 24 hour on  :all stipulation is attached to  the job..There are no set vacations, no set hours or days off,  and no pay.  ...it the homemaker does have a job  outside the home, it is very rare  indeed that she relinquishes her  general managerial responsibilities  »s homemaker. Meeting these obligations ordinarilyinvolves a continuous subordination of the personal interests and wishes of the  homemaker to the responsibilities  of her work.  The earner earns by virtue of his  or her contribution to an organization, whether his Own or owned  by others.  ...His wage and his business assets  are therefore, in part, earned by  the homemaker,whose work both directly supports his occupational  functioning and relieves him of  preoccupations and responsibilities which would interfere with  hi.s .capacity, to earn. . .•■.,-.   ,..., View From My Window  Progress just never seems to come  swiftly enough.  But when women continue to be presented in school materials and by the  mass media almost exclusively in the  traditional sex-stereotyped roles...  when job and salary discrimination  continues to exist...when abortion  laws remain archaic and day care  insufficient...There's good reason  to feel impatient.  Women do comprise more than 507<> of  the population of Canada and share  equally with men the responsibility  of improving the conditions of  society.  Yet, the degree of disparity and prejudice that exists against  them, in this "civilized" 20th century society, is appalling.  'Where are the women so desperately  needed in politics...how many in 1974  are holding managerial and executive  positions in business,- politics and  education...where are the men in the  elementary school classrooms and those  demanding leave of absence from jobs  in order to do their share in child-  rearing. ..Tokenism and exceptions just  don't count when the great picture is  so'.bleak.  Small victories can satisfy only momentarily, when our feelings of anger,  frustration and futility run as deeply  as they do towards a society that has  dished out such a heavy dose of dis-*  crimination against its women.  I often wonder what keeps us going.  In the back of our minds I suspect we  are all hoping for some grandiose  change in society to occur "any day  now" to make us all feel that every  ounce of energy exerted so far was  worth it.  But as we find the road getting longer  and harder, I think we're going to  have to face up to the realization  that the change we hope for is most  assuredly not going to occur overnight.  And, that once and tor all we're going  to have to destroy that old 'prince in  shining armour' myth that promised  that someone else would come along and  fight our battles and deliver our happiness.  We're going to have to fight for those  changes ourselves and realize that  governments aren't prince charmings  either, nor should we expect them to  be.  When we remember that we are working  to change deep-rooted cultural values  which have existed in our society  probably throughout the history of  western civilization, I think we're  going to have to set up some realistic and immediate goals rather than  hope to tackle the whole of civilization at once.  I think it's the only  realistic way to prevent our feelings  of futility from wearing us down.  to be the constant reminder of the  numerous small victories that is going  to have to act as our source of  strength.  I think I am beginning to understand  now why the suffragettes returned to  their homes after having won the vote  for women.  After such a miserable  battle, which required as much stamina  and guts as they could muster up, any  so-called victory after that would  have seemed miniscule in comparison.  I wish it were just a residue of winter  blues that's got me feeling particularly pessimistic and that summer and  spring would bring strength and optimism.  But I suspect it's not pessimism I'm experiencing but disillusionment and a taste of reality.  Grace Maclnnis MP exhibited a similar  tone in a recent speech she made at a  Status of Women Conference at Simon  Fraser University.  As far forward as we are pushing, she  said, there are those who are determined to push us back to the middle  Ms. Maclnnis tells people of the latter category, "You've got every-right  to your viewpoint and I have every  right to mine but you have no right  to impose your viewpoint on me."  She also painfully reminded us at the  March 16, BCTF sponsored conference  that as modern and clean and all new  our institutional buildings are, that  house our children and teachers for  "educational" purposes, what goes on  behind those."seemingly advanced  building walls," is still the pushing  of ideas and wisdom that worked yesterday as well as an attempting to  fit people into old molds.  She cited the use of a manual used by  counsellors in the Toronto public  schools which is entitled, "Becoming  Men and Women." The booklet pushes  the "old worn out values."  C.   Gordon  And  since  the road _i_s  a very  long  and  hard one,   I  suppose  it's  going  to have Gftacd   MacInneA   at  i.C.T.F. Con^e-Tie.nct  She reminded us of how years ago we  used to feel sorry for the "poor  Chinese women'* who had to submit to  feet binding and that we thought it  cruel.  But...  "Material like this is head binding  of the worst kind," she added.  Ms. Maclnnis also said that as hard  as we are working to open the doors  for women in non-traditional jobs,  most women still don't think in  these terms and they feel that only  the middle class can afford the luxury to choose.  So, we step back a bit, sigh and wonder.  How much can we realistically  expect of ourselves?  Reminding ourselves of how hard and  long Grace Maclnnis has worked for  change, and how Rosemary Brown MLA  continues to press on and on, gives  us strength and courage.  Hearing of  the recent appointment of Pauline  Jewett to the presidency of SFU gives  us hope.  It also helps to remember the strength  we have gained and continue to gain  from the women we work with and with  whom we share so many common feelings.  tfe also gain so much from reading of  women in history who courageously  stepped out of the stereotyped roles  they were so heavily pressured to conform to and who fought as individuals  and in groups against heavy prejudice  and discrimination to change laws and  to break into professions previously  dominated by men.  And there's a feeling of contentment  that comes in finding men that have  somehow been able to resist the socialization process which tried so hard  to make them into domineering male  chauvinists.  Such a well structured society won't  change to where we'd like it to be  today nor tomorrow, but then how  would we, who were also brought up  with such deeply ingrained cultural  values, be able to adapt that quickly  if it did?  So there's a great deal of work to be  done individually and in groups.  And are we at the point where we can  say along with Ms. Maclnnis, "There's  only one person I believe in depending  upon and that's myself."  Let's get on with it then.  Ms. Maclnnis, in quoting Rosemary  Brown, expressed just how deeply a  commitment we must make.  "Until all women have made it no  women have made it."  We can endure because we must endure  and must continue to give all of our  energies and ideas to the process of  change.  Just knowing that we've progressed  , as far as we have as individuals and  '*as a movement ie of great comfort. books  Marxism and Feminism by Charnie  Tuettel, published by The Women's  Press, Ste. 305, 280 Bloor Street  W. , Toronto.  Price $ 1.00 - with  a 407o discount to groups of five  or more.  Charnie Guettel is a Marxist and  makes clear very early in this little book her view that all forms of  oppression, including that of sex,  will not be overcome until capitalism is eliminated.  She finds fault  with many traditional and contemporary feminist reformist movements  and theories because they have their  origins in ideas and attitudes which  ignore or pay only scant attention to  what to her are the very basic material conditions of life.  She doesn't  see improvements being effected to  any great extent, or history changing,  through the ideas of a few outstanding  individuals.  Nor does she see politics  as a form of power relations between  individuals.  This sort of thing is  the liberal, bourgeois approach.  Her  view is that our manner of thinking  is determined by the work we do or  are kept from doing, and that meaningful changes come about through  people's action - masses of people -  in creating new environments through  work and new social relations through  revolution - though not necessarily  violent revolution.  Capitalism is the villain.  Even  though within its context some advances have occurred - the vote, for  example, and formal equality before  the law - little has been accomplished in the way of inroads against  exploitation or the development of  women's creative potential.  I'd like  to insert a quotation here because it  really sums up her basic argument.  "The main contradiction is not  between men and women but between the forces of production -  people's labour power, machines,  materials etc. - and the property relations of production -  the ownership of almost everything by a few capitalists who  produce only for profit......  Capitalism tries to use reproduction, sexuality, and masculine/feminine socialization of  children in such a way as to  make us more exploitable, not to  satisfy human needs.  Herein lies  the special Oppression of women  as women, as well as of women as  workers."  Much of the book is devoted to a survey of writers on women's position in  society, going back to John Stuart  Mill, Engels, the Suffragists, and up  to de Beauvoir, Millet, Juliet Mitchell,  Shulamith Firestone, and the radical  feminist movement generally.  Guettel  finds Engel valuable for his class  analysis of oppression, starting from  production relations, but though he  speaks of the patriarchal family and  male dominance, he doesn't really have  much to say that is relevant to the  sexism that is of such concern to  many women in the current stage of  capitalist-imperialism.  As for the others, mainly the radical  feminists, Guettel finds some valuable  insights here and there, but, in general, she rejects their theories as  inadequate because they don't set  forth, or even suggest, any kind of  collective strategy allied with the  working class struggle.  In writings on a theory of patriarchy,  de Beauvoir, for example, speaks of  "the imperialism of the human consciousness" which Guettel won't buy  because, as she says, it sounds like  a concept of innate aggression.  Nor  will she accept Millet's view that  "....the arena of sexual revolution  is within the human consciousness  even more pre-eminently than it is  within human institutions....and  that so deeply imbedded is patriarchy  that the character structure it  creates in both sexes is perhaps even  more a habit of mind and a way of life  than a political system."  Guettel  says you don't transmit contents of  consciousness and habits of mind from  generation to generation as innate  phenomena and you don't enforce them  through psychological pressures.  "They are products of a propertied  social order which is preserved by a  class-based state." Millet, she says,  is too casual about class relations.  The same lack is found in Firestone,  who, while proclaiming herself an  historical materialist, suggests  that the sexual dualism ultimately  has a biological base and that  feminist revolutionaries must strive  to eliminate not just male privilege  but sex distinction itself, so that  genital differences don't matter.  She speaks of the option of artificial reproduction and looks to small  groups, rather than the biological  mother, to take care of a shortened  period of dependence by the child.  But, again, Guellet says she still  doesn't provide us with a way of  combining women's struggle with the  present class struggle.  Guellet's battle with radical feminism  is that it concentrates too much on  the negative and too little on the  positive.  There is all this concern  with women's position of weakness,  their isolation as housekeepers,  wives, and mothers, and so on, but  not enough with their status as  workers or potential workers in satisfying, properly-paid social production.  For much the same reason she's  opposed to the movement for state  pay for wives and mothers because  their work is really still unproductive consumption and efforts in this  direction merely intensify the pattern of woman as a reproducer and  cut her off from developing other  notentials.  Women are in a bind as far as getting  equal work is concerned because of  the inescapable "wifery" and motherhood demands made on them by their  husbands aryi children, who in turn  make the demands because of the system.  The situation continues because  girl children are conditioned through  education and other pressures to assume  the roles their mothers played. Guettal  says maternity has to be socialized,  with parenthood fully shared, if women  are to achieve equal work in practice,  and this can only come about through  socialism, with the workers owning  the means o/ production.  It would be  too unprofitable for capitalism.  In the meantime, as part of working  towards the goal of emancipation, a  strategy of three priorities is suggested.  "Struggling at the workplace  and in the trade unions for equal pay  for work of equal value; organizing  the unorganized; and a mass movement  to tax the corporations for universal  state daycare, democratically controlled." Guettel says daycare should be  as much a right as public education.  Abortion, birth control, combatting  sexism in the media etc. are important but she sees what she calls  direct confrontation on work and  child care as the key to emancipation.  It will take a lot of organized  work.  As she says, sometimes with  men, sometimes not.  B.P.  research collective  The Women's Research Collective, a  group funded by a L.I.P. grant and  sponsored by the Women's Action Group  and the Women's Office, both located  at the University of British Columbia,  is conducting a research project entitled "Student Choices at UBC."  The members of this recently formed  collective have been involved with  UBC:  two of the women are former  graduate students, one a former staff  member, and another, a former lecturer.  The Collective is doing a survey of  UBC students to determine attitudes  and other factors influencing their  academic and career choices.  It is  conducting 100 in-depth interviews  with UBC women students, and it has  distributed 1,500 questionnaires to  both male and female students.  The  aim of both the interviews and the  questionnaires is to find out about  career expectations; students' attitudes towards fields of studies,  both traditional and non-traditional,  chosen by women; the influence of  personal relationships on academic  and career choices; the classroom  atmosphere; areas for change in the  university; the status of women on  UBC campus.  One of the goals of this research  project is the publication at the  end of the summer of a pamphlet  documenting the findings.in those  areas.  The pamphlets, which the  Collective believes will greatly V  The FEMINIST PRESS has just published  a new work by Barbara Ehrenreich and  Deirdre English, author-activists in  the women's health movement, entitled  COMPLAINTS AND DISORDERS: THE SEXUAL  POLITICS OF SICKNESS.  This 96-page  (illustrated) pamphlet is sequel to  their underground best-seller,  WITCHES, MIDWIVES AND NURSES: A HISTORY OF WOMEN HEALERS and second in  the Glass Mountain series about  sexism.  In "WITCHES" Ehrenreich and English  offered a capsule introduction to the  history of women healers, focusing on  the takeover of medicine by male professionals in nineteenth century  America.  Their new booklet,  COMPLAINTS AND DISORDERS, documents  the contribution of that male regime  of "regular doctors" (i.e., AMA members) to what was to become a tradition of American sexism in medicine  before and after the turn of the  century (ca. 1865-1920).  Citing vivid historical examples,  the authors analyze the bio-medical  rationale used by doctors to justify  wholesale sex discrimination throughout our culture in education, in  jobs and in public life.  (Ultimately,  all justifications for sex discrimination rest on biological arguments, so  the history of medical prejudice holds  a special significance for feminists  today.)  The patterns of this  prejudice are painfully apparent in  accounts of the numerous medical  "treatments" perpetrated upon women  through the decades: thousands of  instances of totally redundant ovariotomies (to cure simple "cussedness,"  suicidal tendencies or dysmenorrhea);  hysterectomies, mastectomies and  clitorectomies (as an antidote to  masturbation); the application of  leeches to the cervix (to stimulate  menstruation); and, equally sinister,  '"the rest cure" enforced total  passivity, a sort of surrogate pregnancy (prescribed to discourage  intellectual activity and "nervous  disorders").  However, not all women were discriminated against in the same fashion:  the  decisive factor was class.  While  upper-class "ladies" were deemed  chronically "sick" (and thus fainting  became fashionable), working-class  women were considered "sickening"   insidious bearers of deadly disease  to the upper classes.  Ehrenreich and  English explore this alarming class  discrimination by the health delivery  system in the light of the present-  day movement for "self-help."  "What Do Those Women Want?"  How "sick" or well are American  women today?  According to the  authors, it's-impossible for women to  say in a sexist society, for whatever  women say can be, and is, held against  them.  There is no way for us to come  to terms with our own bodies,  in whatever female "subcultures"  we may attempt to create,  because, when you come right  down to it, our bodies are not  the issue.  Biology is not the  issue.....We could debate endlessly, for example, about  whether premenstrual tension is  "real" or psychosomatic, whether  the last months or pregnancy are  invigorating or debilitating.  But the real question is: who  decides the consequences?  What is it, exactly, that women want  from the medical health system today?  Is it simply a matter of "more services" when every one of them,  evidently, implies the risk of additional insult?  According to the authors, feminists  today want more than "more": "we  want a new style, and we" want a new  substance of medical practice as it  relates to women."  "Control Over Our Bodies"  Is Not Enough   Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre  English developed both COMPLAINTS AND  DISORDERS and WITCHES, MIDWIVES AND  NURSES in the course of their teaching  about women and health at the College  at Old Westbury, State University of  New York.  There, in conversations  with colleagues, they realized that  "the health system hadn't simply  'caught' a case of sexism from society  at large,  it was itself an important institutional source of sexist  ideology in our sexist society."  The answer for women, they think, is  not simply "control over our own  bodies," but control over all the  institutions that now define women's  options.  WITCHES, MIDWIVES AND NURSES (which  jretails for $ 1.25) is also available  from The Feminist Press at Box 334,  Old Westbury, N.Y. 11568.  formed  benefit women students, wiii be distributed to high school students and  students entering the university.  Anyone interested in further details  about this project should contact  Fran Isaacs, Charlene Glasser, Mary  Kasper or Eloah F. Giacomelli,  Women's Research Collective, Room 230,  Student Union Building, University of  British Columbia, or phone them,  228-2Q82*    :......_■ ■.:_■..;..■  film group  Last year a group of women organized  an international film festival called  "Women and Film" which toured 18  centres across Canada.  One of the main criticisms of last  year's festival was that it left out  many smaller towns in rural areas.  This year there is a new programme.  Each province is to organize its own  project (with support from the national committee) with a van to travel to  numerous centres throughout the  region.  In B.C. we are expanding the original  women and film focus to also include  slide presentations, video, printed  information and still photographs  submitted by people throughout the  province.  We would like the tour to include a  children's series (films', puppets) a  school series (career options, drug  usage, etc.) a women's series,  (women and the law, health, blue collar jobs, unions, day care, alternate  lifestyles, etc.) and an entertainment  series (feature length films, theatre,  etc.)  We have divided B.C. into six geographical areas Lower Mainland,  Vancouver Island and the Sunshine  Coast, the Kootenays, the Okanagan  and Southern interior, the Northern  interior and the Northeast, and the  Northwest.  The van is not intended  for urban people, so there must be as  much decentralisation as possible.  There is likely to be one salary per  area available.  We plan to organize the tour (forming  contacts, p.r., production, pre-tour  travel, selecting materials for van,  etc.) throughout the spring and summer, and will commence the tour in  the fall.  After the tour, a resource  office in Vancouver, to serve as a  lending library for materials in the  van, will be established.  For this to happen we need helpI  NOW!  The help that we need is:  a) Letters of support saying that the  van would be of use to your community Cfor use in fund raising)  b) (Separate from the support letter)  a description of yourselves, your  group and coming events sponsored  by your group.  c) Ideas/suggestions/criticisms/for  and of the van idea.  Also please  indicate if any local facilities,  materials, money, productions  (videotapes, local art exhibitions,  etc.) could be made available for  the tour.  Please send letters to:  Mo Simpson, 2426 West 6th, Vane.  Thank you for your help.  Hope to see  you soon. Architect  I am an architect.  I got my Masters  degree at the Swiss Federal Institute  of Technology in 1972.  The school has  a very rigid programme - the 5\  years  are prescribed step by step - the first  year putting a lot of emphasis on math,  physics, descriptive geometry, mechanics (structural engineering) along with  the "staples"; design, construction  systems, detailing and drafting. There  is a tough exam at the end of the year,  an average of 607. fail.  (You can  repeat the whole exam once), the 2nd  year which drops math, physics and D.G.  and substitutes it with basic mechanical  and electrical engineering, history of  art, more advanced structural engineering and design stressing circulation  systems, housing and smaller scale  public building also ends with an exam,  the third year consists of a choice  between planning and design, but in  either case the emphasis is on planning.  The fourth year stresses more specialization in the projects, lots of law,  a choice between more history of art,  acoustics, contracting and supervising  (which I took) and special studies in  structural engineering.  The final  exam for a Masters degree and registration takes approximately h  year,  including a thesis project.  Before  signing up for the exam you have to  have worked in an office for one year.  WHY ARCHITECTURE?  really choose a specialisation later.  I also felt then, that with my experience and knowledge, I could add  something to architecture, especially  housing and planning, and I wanted  at least to give it a try.  DIFFICULTIES  Graduating from the school preceding  university I had the worst math marks  of the year.  I had never bothered to  sit down and study something really  thoroughly since humanities and languages came easily to me and I had got  by in school on this ability.  I came  to believe math was nothing for me but  I did not want to study languages  either since I knew I could study them  on my own.  I went into geography/  geology which interested me very much,  but which I found quite restricting  after a while.  I felt that my personal  development had come to a standstill  because geology was not sufficiently  creative or involving and that only my  intellectual education continued.  Having then just had an architect student boyfriend I had seen the wide  range of possibilities and fascinating  work architecture could offer and  decided to accept the challenge and  become one myself.  I promptly failed,  the first exam since I had not the  vaguest idea how to really make an  effort.  The second time I shut myself  away from the outer world.  I finally  got the message and passed - from  there onward things improved steadily.  EXPECTATION FROM ARCHITECTURE STUDIES  First of all I expected to discipline  myself, to learn how to make an effort,  to solve a problem, to meet a big  challenge and hopefully succeed,  finding out my potential.  I also  hoped to find a balance between the  traditional humanistic education I had  received so far and the technical,  scientific and social challenges and  theories of my century.  I wanted the  broadest basis possible to be able to  There were clearly two kinds of  difficulties:  a) the ones originating  from my own upbringing and character  b) the ones originating in the fact  that there are only about 10% women  students at the SFIT.  As for (a) my father never discriminated against me.  He took it for  granted I would study at university  and make my own living. He taught  me boxing, dancing and ancient greek  when I was six.  My mother was much  more conservative and wanted me to  become something reasonable like a  teacher or interpreter - although it  was through her working we actually  had enough to live on at times.  I  was in charge of the household,  :ooking, shopping, cleaning etc. This  Later became my n^ajor hang-up - I  tended to look at architecture too  pragmatically.  I overdid it (usually  the men were not practical enough  3ut it is easier to come from that  2nd) - it was hard for me to develop  spaces for the sake of sypace and to  dream up pure structures.  I still  start from the practical side, and  try to develop the spaces from there. .  (b)  Being a woman at the SFIT was  rather tough - there are still not  enough fellow students and professors  who are able to treat you as a human  being interested in architecture -  the rest are divided into: "what-  are-you-doing-here?" - "go-and-get-  married-get children-and-help-your-  husband's-career", and "What-about-  tonight-Sweetie?"  In the first group project I was the  only woman of the team and faced  varying behaviour patterns; one fellow student was perfectly great to  work with, the others were subject  to their prejudices.  I then formed an all-woman team -  although we did not escape the usual  group friction we did manage to avoid  the difficulties that usually occur  in mixed groups:  discrimination,  overestimation and the frequently  occuring inferiority feelings.  We  .women got to the point of judging  ourselves by male standards.  This  has the danger that one over-reacts  later - which helps neither the  women or the men.  As a woman I also found it quite  hard even to ask for the most simple  and natural help from men students -  afraid that one might think I profit  from my sex - which led sometimes to  rather paranoic reactions.  EXPECTATIONS FOR THE FUTURE  well mixed or even all woman team in  order to develop an architecture which  would be great and socially significant.  "Female" architecture has still  to be defined but it certainly does  not mean kitchen and curtains.  I wish there would be more women arcn-  itects.  Looking for a job is quite  an experience.  I sometimes felt I  would turn schizophrenic because you  aever know whether you are hired for  your looks, your rarity value or even  for your qualifications.  If you get  turned down you ask yourself exactly  the same questions!  I have to admit  that I get treated at my present job  more fairly than I ever could hope  for.  There is no reason why women  should not become engineers, physicists and architects.  Society has  prejudices and this makes becoming  an architect a damned fight instead  of just a fight - and it will remain  so for me and the few other female  architects until women become more  self confident and proud and curious  and I long for the day when people,  men and women, won't raise their  eyebrows questioningly, laughingly,  or admiringly, when I confess I am  an architect ('no, not an interior  designer, I design big buildings')  and as generations of lonely women  architects have done before me, I  hope the day will come soon.  I hope, to keep learning and in a more  relaxed way, and I also hope to overcome the rest of my inferiority complex.  I'd like to form a fairly  Women of all ages need access to good  career counselling.  Instead, many  are herded into unchallenging jobs  to meet the needs of the labour market.  Sometimes they are trained  for jobs in which there are a surplus of skilled employees. KINESIS  would like to point out that career  options do exist.  By sharing experiences we can minimize the years of floudering undirected through universities and the  work force.  What jobs do exist? What education  and work experiences are required  to fill them? We need answers from  women who are happy in their work  situation.  If you are not shy  about writing, please submit an  article.  If not, send us details  about your job, how you acquired  it, and its effects on your personal life. We'll put it into  article form.  Help us to get in  touch with anyone else who has an  experience to share.  You'll also enable women in jobs  similar to yours to compare notes  on rates of pay and attitudes of  co-workers and management toward  women in their particular field.  This is a personal point of view-type  article since I don't have any overall wisdom to lay on you on the subject.  It reflects my own biases which  come from having been out of school  only one year and being an optimist.  First off, what is architecture?  Basically it involves figuring out  what a building ought to be like and  then putting down on paper how to  build it.  There are a lot of different steps involved in doing this, so  especially for large building projects, specialists in different steps  have arisen.  There are programmers  who figure out what types of activities are to go on in the building  and what space they need.  There are  designers who figure out the spatial  configuration these functions need.  There are specification writers,  draftsmen, and interior designers.  You can get into all of these from  general architecture.  As an architect  you can specialize in technical aspects of a building such as mechanical, electrical, structural soils or  hydrology, but the real nitty gritty  stuff is usually up to engineers.  Planning is different from architecture in that it is concerned more  with general patterns and systems in  a human settlement than with the individual buildings.  Specialists have  arisen in planning as well: sometimes  along the lines of subject matter -  land use, transportation systems,  housing, historic preservation, open  space; and sometimes along the lines  of scale - neighbourhood, district,  city, regional, national.  In between these two  urban design. I real  a satisfactory defini  although it is the fi  have the most interes  started out as a cone  looked only at large  physical, non-design  city while architects  individual building,  at the relationships  is a field called  ly haven't found  tion for this yet  eld in which I  Basically it  ern that planners  scale non-  aspects of the  saw only the  Who was to look  between buildings'  The way I got into this field was  fairly simple.  I decided I wanted to  try it about age fourteen.  I graduated from high school and enrolled in  arts at UBC.  After three years in  arts I applied to and was accepted by  the TJBC School of Architecture. (Their  present system requires a full degree  in Arts, Science or Engineering before  entrance to the School of Architecture).  I spent three years (plus a  year out in between second and third  years) in the school and graduated  a year ago with a B. Arch.  Every school of architecture has its  own philosophical approach to the  subject and therefore curriculums,  entrance requirements, etc. vary.  Some take a student straight from  high school and put him through five  years of rigorous, prescribed training.  UBC, under director Henry  Elder, has chosen to take students  who already have some expertise in a  field and some degree of maturity.  To quote Henry:  "What matters is what is brought  into architecture.  It is not a  discipline of its own.  The  diversity of types that come into this school means that what  comes out of the school is  equally diverse.  The students  have become agile of mind and  creative, with the courage to  face the future."  Every year the new students at the  school set a new pace for themselves.  My years there were on the tail end  of a very theoretical, anti-design  cycle, and the students there now are  much more interested in the "nuts and  bolts" of architecture than my class  was.  This type of change can come  about mainly because of the flexible  curriculum in which students can  choose which courses they take, and  also can choose when they want to  take them.  Courses in other faculties (planning, landscaping, commerce, geography) are also available.  I, for instance, managed to  specialize more in planning and urban  design than architecture.  This flexibility coupled with the  short length of course (three years  as opposed to the usual five or six)  means that the school does not produce a uniform product - a fact of  considerable annoyance to the local  professional association, the Architectural Institute of B.C.  (A graduate architect must spend a minimum  of two years working and then take a  written and oral exam to become a member of the AIBC.  Only then is she a  full fledged professionally and legally  responsible, certified grade A-l  architect with the privilege of hanging out a shingle and starting business for herself.)  The AIBC, as might  be expected, is still trying to cope  with the split of the profession in  to specialities.  Architecture and planning are still  mostly men's fields, but more women  are entering the schools all the  time.  The hassles at UBC were minimal for a number of reasons.  First,  the school actively encouraged women  from an early date.  Secondly the  students had usually been through  three or four years of university with  women in their classes before entering  the school.  Thirdly, architects are  generally rather kinky, and tend to  be more tolerant than, say, engineers  or commerce students.  Hassles in the  job world may be more serious since  many firms have a lot of older-guys  working for them who have never seen  a woman architect before.  The people  in the office I work for are young  and there are no serious problems.  Snide comments are not unheard of,  but they usually come from rather  insecure guys who still, whether  they know it or not, cannot relate  to a woman unless she's wearing an  apron or a low cut dress.  - Patricia French  Planner IO  Monica Mui  FROM A FEMINIST VIEWPOINT ■  movo  CRIES AND WHISPERS  This is a "heavy" movie.  I'm not  quite sure whether it's heavy because it's another Bergman movie  or because of the contents of this  particular Bergman movie.  It gives  an in-depth study of the characters  of four women: three sisters, one  of whom is dying, and their maid.  The coldness of the two sisters who  live reflects the inability to communicate feelings that is common  not only between sisters but also  between women to women, women to  men and men to men.  Knowing that  this exists is one thing but seeing it  dramatized with such sharp contrasts  between the characters and the setting is so subtle and effective.  THE WAY WE WERE  This movie has been reviewed and  reviewed and reviewed.  The general  consensus seems to be that it is a  "believable 'Love Story'" —not a  lot of schmaltz but the sad ending  was still there.  The character  played by Barbara Streisand was interesting.  She was an outspoken,  stubborn cause-fighter.  It would  be too easy to stick a women's li-  berationist label on her.  That  would be a mistake.  Those character traits do not make her a feminist.  Besides there were other  facets of her character that would  have qualified her as being very  unliberated.  Still, the movie was  centred on the relationship between  a man and a woman.  For that theme  this movie might be worth seeing  and it did have many good moments.  AMERICAN GRAFFITI  My niece once asked me if the definition of nostalgia was "that you  immediately get sick?".  Well this  movie was a nostalgic look at the  early sixties.  If you got sick, it  would have been from laughter, especially if you remember those times  of bee-bop music, backcombed hair,  and cruising along the main drag.  I noticed that the girls were just  as aggressive as the boys.  They  were out there cruising along with  the boys and all generally having a  swell time. True, their aggression  was aimed at getting a man but per- i  haps now in the seventies, this aggression could include getting a  place for themselves that is not dependent on their men. But cooling  that, it sure was a neato movie.  SERPICO  What can a feminist review of a  story about policemen say? Arghi!  I won't bother to mention the lack  of policewomen represented since the  movie is about the trials and tribulations of "an honest cop".  The  movie depicts the majority of policemen as being on-the-take, varying from small time mooching to big  time kickbacks from narcotics.  It's  a movie that is intended to show the  tough world of men but neglects to  show that women also live in this  same world.  However I would hesitate to write off this movie on  those grounds.  It is an excellent  film and based on a true story.  Whether is is an accurate or inaccurate portrait of policemen is  questionable.  A TOUCH OF CLASS  As a comedy, this is one of the few  good ones to have surfaced for a  long time.  The best part is that  finally here is a movie showing a  liberated woman who is not a man-  hating, castrating female but a  person with emotions and needs like  any other human being.  A recent  divorcee, she has a relationship  with a man that is meant to be purely sexual.  Complications arise when  their affair takes an unintentional  turn—they find themselves falling  in love with eachother.  That is not  to ignore the other complications  that are inevitable, especially when  one of the lovers happens to be married.  It is from these that this  movie gets some of its best comic  moments.  However, for those who  cannot enjoy a comedy for comedy's  sake, one can be nitpicky and accuse the man of not being quite as  liberated as the woman.  Personally,  with this particular movie,who cares  THE EXORCIST  Yes, this movie is everything you  heard it is: gruesome, frightening,  repulsive, horrifying, etcetera.  It would be of interest to those  who have read the book to see how  the horrors described could be reproduced visually.  Otherwise, if  you want to line up and pay to have  your stomach turned, feel free.  I  have just one question.  If the  story is based on a true account of  the possession of a young boy, why  did the author/producer change the  possessed child in his story to a  girl?  I wonder If it might be because a young girl is supposedly  more fragile and therefore makes a  more effective tool to demonstrate  possession (if you believe in possession) at, its most sensational  best(worst?).  THE STING  A wonderfully delightful movie.  Loved it!—not just because it was  funny but also because the women  were just as crooked as the men.  None of this moralizing, whimpering  woman-inrthe-background business.  Here we had a madam who not only ran  one of the best houses in town but  who also did herself justice as  being no ordinairy pickpocket. Then  too there was the female gunman  (gunwoman?) carrying one of the  meanest looking guns I've ever seen.  She, of course, got hers in the end.  The whole story was a lark, a big  con game.  Everybody but everybody  was shady. A thoroughly entertaining movie.  Wells 1962-3: Being a College  Freshette Is No Bowl of Cherries  That year in the frozen finger lakes  Bedroom of Cornell  Continuation of prep school  I recoiled from two family deaths  Lodged in the joyless rattle of my  cactus heart  Naked innocence torn  As a cherry from downy thighs  As a nipple from ripe breast.  I was alone.  Numb, suspended in formaldahyde  Submerged, acting in a play of  manners  Distant, singing "Adoramus Te"  in cynical choral voice.  My soul was packed  northern.ice  That I could  breathe  and  feel  and  love  once more.  protective  To Henry Miller  Out of the dark foam light was born  Multiplying pleasures tenfold.  The hole deepens and life begins  Greenhouse, alluvial mud/fertile flood.  Darkness embraced the shaft of light  Setting off a thousand hot sparks  Radiant white fills gladsome black  Buds of life, flowerettes of joy  The Womb; a womb  is NOT  an empty  dull  cunt!  We have some copies of the Western  Conference/Opportunities for Women -  Employment, Education, Training and  Counselling available which we would  like to offer to interested women.  They may be obtained at a cost of  $ 1.00 for mailing and handling from  The Daytime Program  Centre for Continuing Education  University of British Columbia  Vancouver  We have received word that women in  Oakalla prison are in desperate need  of books.  They have no library at  all.  Please contact the Status of  Women (736-3746) if you have any  books, on any subject, to donate or  drop them in to our office,  drop  There is a group of men and women  beginning to form a community credit  union which would provide lower interest rates and loans to projects not  considered viable by banks.  They are  looking for more women who would be  interested in learning about finances.  . If .interested- call Mel Tobias 684-9590. new child cane   rules cause dismay  For the past four months, the Child  Care Federation has been busy organizing.  At the general meeting on  February 24, the Federation ratified  its constitution.  Giving the keynote  address for the afternoon, Barb Cochran  reiterated the purpose of the organization: "Through the experiences of  repeated frustration encountered....  trying to find, set up or operate child  care facilities in this province the  idea of a Child Care Federation emerged.  We feel that our most important job is  to identify and take issue with immediate and long term problems facing  child care in this province, and to  set about finding solutions to them..."  Because of the limited resources available, the Federation will be concerned  with simplifying the present procedures  for creating child care facilities  rather than lending a direct hand to  the organizations going through the  frustrating process itself.  It is  hoped that by attacking the problem  at its core, the present obstacles  can eventually be eliminated.  Meanwhile, the entire child care set  up in the province is facing a crisis.  This centres around the new child care  regulations written by the Community  Care Facilities Licensing Board in  Victoria.  This board is composed  only of Civil Servants with no rep  resentatives of the consumers, of the  proposed facilities.  Thus the board  has total control of child care regulations in the province.  A second  hazard is the problem of the regulations being determined by the Department of Health and the funding being  provided by the Department of Human  Resources.  This puts child care in  the situation of having to meet  Health's requirements without sufficient funding from Human Resources.  Dr. A. Larssen, Chairman of the Licensing Board, has stated he is willing to meet with delegates of groups  to discuss the proposed regulations.  However, the Federation would prefer  to have public hearings since they  fear the private audiences will only  serve to point out the variety of  needs in this area and fragment support for the much heeded legislation.  Some of the areas of the proposed legislation that may cause problems are  the following:*  5(2) Out of School  (iii) A licensee shall assure that...  (c) there are never less than two  competent people over the age of majority in the facility whenever there  are children present.  (This would  close facilities too small to support  the wages of two workers).  5(5) Group Day Care  (ii)...The age span of the children  in any one group shall not exceed  thirty-six months, and each group  shall be provided with a separate  indoor activity area and outdoor play  area. (At least two problems exist  here.  One would be siblings of one  and four years of age would have to  go to two different centres and their  parents belong to two different  societies.  Another is a pre-school  child, if he begins attending at the  age of one, would have to change  facilities before he goes to school.)  Anyone wishing to learn more about or  to join the new organization, or  those wishing to sign a petition calling for public hearings on child  care regulations, call the Federation  at 255-9336, or contact them at their  office, 1108 Commercial Drive,  Vancouver 6.  D.E.  * The views expressed herein are not  necessarily those of VSW or the  Child Care Federation.  media action  The Media Action group meets on  Tuesdays biweekly at 7:30.  The  next meeting will be held April 9  more people and ads are needed.  The Media Action group is comprised  of Status of Women members who want to  do something about sexist advertising.  We plan to focus attention on one ad  in each newsletter.  WE NEED YOUR HELP!  When you see an example of advertising  offensive to women, please send it to  us or write to the company concerned.  Here is a form letter you might wish  to use as a guide:  Dear:  I find this advertisement highly offensive -and demeaning to women.  In  my view women also have a right to  some dignity in our society in spite  of the heavy pressures that exist which  treat women as mindless or sexual objects to be exploited.  P.S. If appropriate, threaten to boycott their product.  We suggest that you send copies of your  letters to:  Kathleen Ruff, Director  Human Rights Act  Department of Labour  3rd Floor, International House  880 Douglas Street, Victoria  V8W 2B7  THE   OFFENDER  CLIP S SEND .  Robert C. Marvin  Executive Secretary  Advertising Standards Council  1240 Bay Street, Suite 302  Toronto, Ontario  M5R 2A7  Doris Hoisery Mills Ltd.  7471 Leonard Da Vinci  Montreal, P.Q. H2A 2P3  Dear Mr. Hasen:  I object to this degrading ad because  it treats women as sex objects. Since  women are the principle buyers of your  product and hence the targets of your  advertising pitch I suggest you reexamine your outdated approach. Until  you do this, I will not buy your product.  Signed ia  Women's Studies  the neglected perspective  Beginning last September 1973, a group  of credited courses in Women's Studies  was made available to students at the  University of British Columbia.  Laura Hall, a student at UBC and a  member of the Women's Office Collective there, has recently interviewed  Dr. Helga Jacobson and Dr. Annette  Kolodny and students taking the  course. (Ed.'s note)  The Women's Studies Course at UBC  AN INTERVIEW WITH DR. HELGA JACOBSON,  DR. ANNETTE KOLODNY AND STUDENTS  Does a course which offers a framework for asking about and understanding the situation and experiences of  51% of the world's population need to  be justified as a legitimate enterprise?  If the course is to become part of the  university curriculum, the answer to  this question is 'yes'.  Dr. Helga Jacobson of the Anthropology-Sociology department at UBC and  one of four faculty members teaching  the Women's Studies course says "the  argument for Women's Studies as a  legitimate area of study in its own  right must be seen in the context of  the arguments presented against it."  In establishing the Women's Studies  course at $BC one argument often presented it was that within disciplines  women are automatically included  because the concern is with 'people'.  "All disciplines claim to talk about  'people', but they haven't attended  to the situation of women," says  Jacobson.  "What we want to establish  is a basis for understanding and  interpreting the roles and experiences  of women in their own right, which  will lead to a full understanding of  the worlds of both men and women."  Dr. Annette Kolodny, also involved in  teaching the interdisciplinary course,  feels that "most disciplines have so  long ignored women."  She says, "we were daring to teach an  area that was already assumed to be  taught, and which a lot of people  thought wasn't a legitimate area of  study.  Obviously, these statements,  are contradictory but that didn't  stop people from raising them simultaneously."  Both students and faculty involved  in the Women's Studies course feel  that the interdisciplinary framework  is essential to gain a full understanding of women's situation.  Dr. Jacobson says, "the interests  one can create around Women's Studies  automatically cuts across disciplines.  The understanding of different issues  and problems will emerge through the  perspectives of the disciplines in  combination rather than separately."  Students of the Women in Literature  seminar feel that "the university  curriculum is set up to channel  students into disciplines.  In this  course we're getting a much wider  perspective, and learning that we have  to be prepared to look at situations  with a wide open mind."  Dr. Kolodny feels that "the separate  disciplines have outlived their usefulness.  The important questions  being asked now, involve the mastery  of multiple methodologies.  We must  no longer box our faculties into  narrow disciplines, nor do we dare  foist upon our students the illusion  that the separate disciplines are  sacrosanct and have nothing to offer  one another."  The Women's Studies course is not  unique in its interdisciplinary  structure, nor are the problems  involved in its operation.  As an interdisciplinary course the  faculty involved in organizing and  teaching have to be 'released' each  year by their respective departments.  Each department involved must be  'willing to allow' the particular  member of the department to devote  his or her time to a course outside  of the department.  "The university needs to create a  more adequate situation to allow  interdisciplinary courses to take  place," says Jacobson.  "Problems of  getting 'release time' and problems  of budgeting associated with that  have to be dealt with in a more  systematic way."  At the present time only four disciplines are involved in the interdisciplinary framework of the course.  Those disciplines are Anthropology,  English, Psychology, and Sociology.  It is hoped that in the future additional disciplines will be included. *  Whether or note the course will expand  is very dependent on budgeting.  Dr. Kolodny would like to see the  course expanded to a degree granting  programme offering upper and lower  level courses.  This would require  more faculty.  "The government wants more efficient  use of university facilities," says  Dr. Kolodny.  "If by 'efficient' they  mean courses that attract students  and make use of faculty talent, then  we're what they're looking for.  We 'ñ†  are intellectually valuable.  We train  students in kinds of thinking that  will make them better and more aware  citizens. We are an innovative programme making use of multiple disciplinary approaches and training our  students in methods of problem solving  which will help them to deal with  problems and issues in contemporary  Canada."  The students' in the Women in Literature seminar are quick to reaffirm  the need for expansion of the course.  "The idea is to establish a Women's  Studies programme.  All over North  America Ph.Ds are offered in Women's  Studies and here we are with one  piddley course."  "This course has been by far the best  course I've ever taken."  "We now know the kinds of questions  to ask in order to gain a full understanding of a situation.  In this  course you know you're discussing  things that are important to you."  -  Laura Hall  no. shore women  An improvement in the status of women  requires a great many changes in attitudes toward women at work, women  in public life and women in the home.  This change can only come about if  every woman makes a personal effort  to change the attitudes of those  around her at home, at work, and in  the community.  Aims For Women  AIMS for Women is to be a service  offered to all women on the North  Shore but predominantly for pre-  college age women.  It is designed  to encourage young women to consider  fields not traditionally thought of  as being available to women.  AIMS  for Women would act as a catalyst  in arranging one-to-one meetings  between young women and women already  In the summer of 1973, steps were  taken to establish on the North*Shore  a centre for information and studies  related to women. Capilano College  acted as a catalyst for programmes  in the Fall and Spring terms.  Initially, two women's studies series  were offered:  Women: An Exploration  (Phase 1) (Fall 1973 and Spring 1974)  and Women: An Exploration (Phase 11)  (Spring 1974).  These programmes  take the form of ten and fifteen  weekly lectures followed by discussions and seminars and are centred  around topics of high current interest to women, such as women in business, politics, art and the media,  family court, personal evolution,  native women, motherhood, corporate  capitalism and the historical and  sociological aspects of the status  of women.  successful in particular occupations.  For example, a high school student  interested in engineering as a career  would be given the opportunity to  meet a woman engineer, obtain realistic and practical career advice,  information regarding possible discrimination against women entering  this field or job discrimination  within the field, and ways of coping  wich such discrimination.  Such a  meeting could give encouragement and  support to a young woman who may feel  she is fighting an\uphill battle (at  home, at school and in society) in  trying to enter a traditionally male  dominated sphere.  For further information contact Margaret Roy at 2573  Shelley Road, North Vancouver,  Telephone - 929-3629. PROVINCE OF BRITISH COLUMBIA  "SOCIETIES ACT"  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  Constitution  1. The name of the Society is Vancouver Status of Women.  2. The objects of the Society are:  a) To form a non-profit, nonpartisan, educational organization.  b) To promote action on the Report  of the Royal Commission on the  Status of Women in Canada.  c) To foster public knowledge of  the rights and status of women  in Canada.  d) To facilitate communication  between individuals and groups  concerned about the status of  women.  3. The operations of the Society are  to be chiefly carried on in the  City of Vancouver, Province of  British Columbia.  By-Laws  Preamble  Vancouver Status of Women (formerly  known as "Status of Women Council")  is.an organization founded in February, 1971, as the result of a conference of concerned citizens on the  Report of the Royal Commission on the  Status of Women.  Article 1 - Policies  The policies of this Society shall  be:  1. To formulate public opinion through  open discussion.  2. To co-operate with local and  national organizations in advancing  the interests of women.  3. To foster the initiation and development of organizations with  policies and objects similar to  those of the Society; and provide  liaison between the said organizations, including the Society.  Article 11 - Membership  Section 1 - Classes of Membership  a) INDIVIDUAL MEMBERSHIP  Individual membership shall be  limited to interested persons,  18 years of age or over, and shall  be made by application.  b) ASSOCIATE MEMBERSHIP  Corporate Associations may apply  for associate membership which  shall have voice, but be without  vote.  c) SUSTAINING MEMBERSHIP  Individuals over the age of 18 may  apply for sustaining membership by  paying a fee to be established in  the standing rules.  Section 11 - Membership Dues  a) The fee or dues payable by members  shall be fixed in the standing  rules.  b) Dues shall be payable annually.  Section 111 - Termination  Membership may be terminated:  a) For non-payment of dues, without  any action of the Society.  b) By written resignation.  c) For unauthorized or disruptive  conduct.  Such termination must  be confirmed by a two-thirds vote  taken at a regular meeting at  which a quorum is present.  No  member shall be expelled without  first being notified in writing  of the charge or charges of complaint against her and without  having first been given an opportunity to be heard by the members  at such meeting.  Ten working days  written notice from the Board of  Directors, forwarded by registered  mail, specifying the time and  place set for the meeting to consider the charge or charges, accompanied by a written specification  thereof, shall be considered as  offering such member sufficient  opportunity to present her defence.  If the member shall not appear at  the meeting, the members present  at such meeting shall, nevertheless, consider and dispose of the  charge or charges.  Article 111  Revenue for the operation of the  Society shall be derived from:  a) Dues paid by individual members  and associate members.  b) Public and private contributions.  c) Fund raising projects.  Section 11 - Signing Officers  Signing officers shall be the Treasurer with the President or Vice-  President or Secretary or elected  officer designated by the Board of '  Directors.  Section 111 - Fiscal Year.  The fiscal year shall be June 1st to  May 31st.  Article IV - Officers and Their  Election  Section 1 - Elected Officers  Elected officers shall be: President,  Vice-President, Secretary, Treasurer,  Ombudswoman, Public Relations Officer.  Newsletter Officer, Nominations Officer, Membership Co-ordinator, six  Members-at-large.  Section 11 - Qualifications  All officers shall:  a) Be active individual members in  good standing for at least six  months.  b) Be nominated for office.  c) In the case of the President and  Vice-President, have served at  least one term as an officer of  the Society.  Section 111 - Nominations  Ninety days prior to the annual general meeting a Nominating Committee  shall be formed composed of three  members; one of such members shall be  the previously elected Nominations  Officer, and the other two members  shall be elected by majority vote at.  13  a regular members' meeting held at  this time.  All three shall hold office until the annual general meeting.  The Nominating Committee shall:  a) Invite suggestions for any office  from individual members in good  standing.  b) Prepare a list of one or more candidates for each office, for presentation at the annual general  meeting.  c) Determine the eligibility of members nominated.  Nominations may be made in either of  the following manners:  a) By the Nominating Committee.  b) From the floor at the general  meeting immediately prior to the  annual general meeting.  Only members nominated shall be  eligible for election and those members shall have given their consent  to nominations.  Vacancies occuring during a term of  office shall be filled by special  election as outlined in Article IV,  Section Vll, and following submission  of names of eligible nominees to the  Nominations Officer.  Section IV - Election  a) Election of officers shall be held  at the annual meeting.  b) Elections shall be by ballot  except where there is but one nominee for any office, at which  time the vote may be viva voce.  c) All officers shall receive a majority of the votes cast.  In the  event any ballot does not show a  majority, further balloting shall  proceed dropping the nominee  having the least number of votes  on each succeeding ballot until  some nominee shall receive a  .majority.  Section V - Term of Office  An officer shall hold office for one  year or until the successor takes  office; or until removed by resignation, death or by a two-thirds vote  at a regular meeting at which a  quorum is present.  The same procedure relating to expulsion of a member shall be applied to the removal  of an officer.  Section VI - Limitation  An officer may serve two consecutive  terms in any one office and shall not  be eligible for re-election to that  same office until two terms have  elapsed.  Section Vll - Vacancies  A vacancy in office shall be filled  by a special election at the meeting  following notice of the vacancy; with  the exception of a vacancy in the  office of the President, in which  case the Vice-President shall automatically become President and the  Vice-Presidency shall become vacant.  Article V - Appointed Officers  Section 1 - Parliamentary Procedure  Where there are questions regarding  the By-laws of the Society,, the Board  of Directors shall seek appropriate  advice. 14  Article VI  Board of Directors  Section 1 - Composition  The Board of Directors shall be composed of the elected officers, and  the immediate past President as ex.  officio member, unless she is elected  to another office.  Section 11 - Authority  a) The Board of Directors shall have  authority to conduct the affairs of  the Society in accordance with its  By-laws and Standing rules.  b) No member shall make public statements of policy or take political  or social action on behalf of the  Society except by the express en-  dor satioh of a majority of the members of the Board of Directors.  c) The Board of Directors shall be en-  powered to employ from time to time,  technical, clerical, administrative  and other assistants, and to pay  them such amounts as the Board of  Directors may determine.  d) The Board of Directors shall have  authority to act on all matters  subject to ratification at a general meeting.  e) The Board of Directors shall be  enpowered to expel from meetings of  the Board, by majority vote, any  non-Board member, for disruptive  conduct.  Section 111 - Secretary  The Secretary shall:  a) Be responsible for the preparation  and custody of minutes of proceedings of meetings of the Society  and of the Directors.  b) Conduct general correspondence of  the Society where necessary.  c) Maintain a file.  Section IV - Treasurer  The Treasurer shall:  Section 111 - Meet:  ¬±ng_s  a) Meetings shall be held monthly or  upon call of one-quarter of the  Board of Directors.  b) Meetings shall be open to Society  members only, and non-Board members  shall have neither voice nor vote.  Section IV - Quorum  A quorum of the Board of Directors  shall be one-half of the Board.  Article Vll  Duties of Elected  Officers  Section 1 - President  The President shall:  a) Preside at all meetings of the  Society.  b) Be ex. officio member of all committees except the Nominating  Committee.  c) Be responsible for maintaining  liaison between the Society's  office and the Board of Directors.  d) Be responsible for provincial and  national affairs.  e) Be a spokeswoman for the Society.  f) Act upon consultation and approval  of the Board of Directors.  Section 11 - Vice-President  The Vice-President shall:  a) Preside at all meetings in the absence of the President and shall  assume responsibility for the administration of the Society at  the discretion of the Board of  Directors.  b) Be responsible for programmes at  the regular members' meetings.  a) Keep an accurate record of all  funds.  b) Make disbursements upon authorization of the Society.  c) Give a financial report upon request.  d) Submit books for audit at close of  term of office.  Section V - Ombudswoman  The Ombudswoman shall:  a) Work towards eliminating inequalities present in society affecting  women.  b) Work towards gaining redress in  cases of individual grievances.  c) Promote education of women as to  their rights.  d) Respect the privacy of individuals  regarding their grievances.  e) Keep statistics of complaints and  their resolutions for use of the  Society at its discretion.  Section VI - Public. Relations Officer  The Public Relations Officer shall:  a) Be responsible for press releases  and press conferences.  b) Be responsible for publicising  the services of the Society and  events of the Society which are  open to the public.  c) Maintain a file.  Section Vll - Newsletter Officer  The Newsletter Officer shall:  a) Coordinate information from the  Society and other women's groups.  b) Work with a committee to write and  prepare for printing the newsletter.  c) Maintain a file.  Section Vlll - Nominations Officer  The Nominations Officer shall:  a) Be the chairwoman of the Nominating Committee formed pursuant to  Article IV, Section III.  Section IX - Membership Coordinator  The Membership Coordinator shall:  a) Be responsible for or assist in  establishing and maintaining contact with individual members of  the Society.  b) Be responsible for or assist in  coordinating volunteer activities,  promoting orientation meetings and  other interest groups.  c) Act as a liaison between individual members and the Board of  .Directors.-    d) Maintain a file of membership  activities.  Section X - Members-at-large  Members-at-large shall:  a) Assist other officers in their  duties where necessary.  b) Assume the duties of other officers  temporarily, where necessary, un-  tul such time as an election may  be held.  c) Take responsibility, where necessary, for duties or projects not  included in the existing offices  of the Board.  Article VIII - Members' Meetings  Section I - Meet!  ngs  There shall be a minimum of one regular meeting held each year, and that  shall be the annual meeting to be held  during the month of June.  Regular meetings may be postponed by  a two-thirds vote of the Board of  Directors.  Special meetings may be called by  the President or by written request  of 20 individual members.  Meetings shall be open to non-members.  Section II - Quorum  A quorum for the transaction of business shall be twenty (2Q) individual  members.  Section III - Voting  No individual member may vote at any  meeting of the Society unless she  has been a member for a period of not  less than sixty days prior to the date  of the meeting.  Article IX - Parliamentary Authority  Section I - Parliamentary Authority  Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised  and Robert's Parliamentary Law shall  apply to all questions of procedure  not specified in these By-laws.  Article X - Amendments  Section I - Amendments  These By-laws may be amended by  Extraordinary Resolution at any regular business meeting by a two-thirds  vote of individual members present  and in good standing, provided previous notice has been submitted in  writing, and read at the previous  meeting.  Article XI - Custody and Use of the  Seal  Section I - Seal Adopted  The Board of Directors may adopt a  seal which shall be the common seal  of the Society.  Section II - Seal: Custody and Use  The common seal of the Society shall  be under -the custody of the Secretary  and shall not be affixed to any documents except in the presence of the  President and the Secretary or any  other officer authorized by resolution of the Board of Directors. r5  Article XII - Exercise of Borrowing  Powers  Section I - Borrowing  The Board of Directors may from time  to time borrow money in any manner  and without limit to amount on the  credit of the Society and in such  amounts as they may think proper;  and may cause to be executed mortgages and pledges of the real and  personal property and rights of the  Society and may cause to be signed  bills, notes, contracts and other  evidence of securities for money  borrowed or to be borrowed, such  moneys to be borrowed from any person, firm or corporation or bank, on  such terms as the lender may be willing to advance the same: provided  that debentures shall not be issued  without the sanction of an extraordinary resolution of the Society.  Article XIII - Preparation and Custody of Minutes of  Proceedings of Meetings  of the Society and of  the Directors, and Othe  Books and Records of  the Society  Section I - Books and Records  The Board of Directors shall see that  all necessary books and records of  the Society required by the By-laws  of the Society or by any applicable  statute or law are regularly and properly kept.  Article XIV  Time and Place at Which  Books and Records of  the Society may be Inspected by Members  Inspection of Books by  Members  The accounts and books of the Society  or any of them shall be open to the  inspection of members.  The Board of  Directors must be notified of the intent of any member or members to inspect the. accounts or books at least  two weeks in advance.  Article XV - Arbitration of Disputes  Section I - Arbitration of Disputes  Any dispute arising out of the affairs  of the Society between any members  thereof or between a member, or any  person aggrieved who has for not more  "than six months ceased to be a member,  or any person claiming through such  member or person aggrieved or claiming under the By-laws, and the Society  or an officer thereof, shall be  decided by arbitration under the pro-.  visions of the Arbitration Act.  Article XVI - Gender and Number  Section I - Gender and Number  Wherever the singular or feminine  pronoun is used in these By-laws, the  same shall be construed as meaning  the plural or masculine, or a body  or a group where the context or  intent of these By-laws so require.  For 2 but of 3  no room  Transition House continues its good  work after three months of successful operation.  The house is staffed  by dedicated, competent women with  two staff on each 8 hour shift for  24 hours, 7 days a week.  The average stay of women and children at  the house has been two weeks with  the maximum length of stay allowed  being four weeks.  The house is constantly being filled to capacity  with people referred by the Children's Aid Society, Crisis Centre.  Familv Court, the police and others.  The Tra"sition House Advisory Board  are now looking into the possibility  of another house in the Vancouver  area as for every family accomodated  in Transition House, there are two  turned away.  These facts emphasize  the need for this type of accomodation in Vancouver and keeps us  striving to obtain more houses.  With the elections of Community  Resource Boards throughout Vancouver we must make them aware of  this particular problem and have  them investigate the need for a  Trnasition House in their community.  Volunteer help is much needed and  appreciated by the staff of Transition House so anyone interested  please phone Pam Smith at the  Status of Women office (736-3746).  Janice Booth  The insert in the March Kinesis is  fabulous.  It's great to see all the  bits and pieces put together like  that and made comprehendable. "I  would like that in every copy so  its always available to new members,  etc.  The transition page would also have  been extremely useful to me and is i  good idea but since I got my papei  today it's too late for me to make  much use of the opportunities.  However the idea is great.  - Barbara James  Our apologies to the reader who complained that their March Newsletters  were late. Unfortunately our editor  and two committee members left us  with regret for full time jobs early  in February.  We published 1 week late rather than  sacrifice quality.  Printing costs  are high - why should we waste money  to print useless fillers.  As you know, KINESIS is produced by  volunteer labour.  If you are concerned about receiving your copy on  time, why not help us by contributing  articles or by assisting in the time  consuming processes of assembly and  mailing.  nominations  now  Nominations for all positions on the  Vancouver Status of Women executive  are now being solicited by the nominating committee.  Please phone or write your nominations  to the office before May 1.  It is not  necessary to secure the approval of  the person you would like to nominate  as this will be looked after by the  nominating committee.  A list of positions is contained in  the revised constitution in this issue  of Kinesis.  - Joan Wallace  Chairman  Nominations Committee  Allison McAteer, of Yellowknife, who  attended our Western Conference on  Employment Opportunities, was recently  elected to the municipal council in  Yellowknife - the first woman in the  Northwest Territories to win election  to a municipal government.  FAMILY  FESTIVAL  During the week of April 22-28, the Family  Services Centres are sponsoring activities  of interest to anyone "who is, has been,  or hopes to be a husband, wife, father,  mother, son or daughter."  Most of the activities are free and deal  with a variety of aspects of family life  and are being held conveniently at several locations throughout the city.  In  brief, the topics are:  REFLECTIONS ON FATHERING, an informal  talk and group discussion reflecting  personal experience of several fathers.  FILM FESTIVAL AND OPEN HOUSE at the  Family Services Centre, never before shown  in Vancouver, films on family matters.  THE MARRIAGE-GO-ROUND, or how to be  married without serious injury.  The main  emphasis will be on positive communication  in marriage.  FAMILY NIGHT AND POT LUCK SUPPER,Activi-  ties and entertainment for the entire  family.  SEXUALITY-CARING AND SHARING, Drs. Beryl  and Avinoam Chernick.  The Chernicks will  lecture and give demonstrations of their  co-therapy team for counseling people with  marital and sexual problems.  ($2.00 admission charge.)  BICYCLE SUNDAY IN STANLEY PARK,  with a contribution by Family Services  Centre.  For more information call the Family  Services Centres - 731-4951. apni  April 16 - GENERAL MEETING  FILMS  7:30PM - YWCA  April 17 - NEWSLETTER DEADLINE  April 24  EXECUTIVE MEETING  7:30PM - office  MEDIA ACTION GROUP  7:30 PM - office  ORIENTATION MEETING  8:00PM - office  April 30 - NEWSLETTER MEETING  7:30PM - office  May 1 - DEADLINE FOR NOMINATIONS  the sculptures-  M«nd«. The Mende are the most important tribe of  Sierra Leone, which they entered only about four centuries ago; they speak a Mande-Fu language of the Mande  group. Their best-known art forms are the well-known  bundu masks of the Sande, or women's initiation society,  and the wooden figures called minsereh—of which this  is an exceptionally tall and beautiful example, collected  by T.J. Alldridge before 1900—; these are used by the  Yassi, a society devoted to the art of magical healing, and  are supposed to convey the will of the spirits with the  help of shamanistic priestesses.  Wood.   H. 117,5 cm.   British Museum, London  GENERAL MEETINGS are held on the third  Tuesday of each month at 7:30 pm in the  Board Room of the YWCA, 580 Burrard St.,  Vancouver.  This months meeting will  take place on April 16. We will be the  Meeting  films to include members and women filmmakers.  In addition Joan Wallace, member  of the National Action Commitee on the  Status of Women, will bring us up to  date on that groups recent activities.  first people in Vancouver to show the new  film series on "Working Mothers".  The  films were produced by Kathleen Shannon  a part of the Challenge for Change Programme. We plan a discussion on the