 sj  APRIL 1997 Peace in Guatemala... pg8 CMPA$2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Tues Apr 2 and  Mon May 5 at our new office, 309-877  E. Hastings St. Production for the May  issue is from Apr 16-22. All women  welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism,classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  wendy lee kenward, Agnes Huang,  Sook C. Kong, Rachel Rosen  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Rachel Rosen, Judy Miller, Caitlin  Byrne, Fatima Jaffer, Andrea Imada,  Jehn Starr, Wendy Frost, Faith Jones,  Winnifred Tovey, Dana Putnam,  Leanne Keltie, Meh Najak, Doroth;  Elias, Catherine Munn, Cei  Zeleke, Eileen Kage, Jenniff  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaff(  Production Cc-ordinator: Swee Sim Tan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Angela McDougali of Batten  Women's Support Services at the  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index,  member of the Canadian Ms  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #  News  Aboriginal women launch court case 3  by Agnes Huang  BCTF passes anti-homophobia resolution 4  by Smita Patil  Commemorating the Vernon massacre 5  by Fatima Jaffer  No! to APEC launches campaign 5    Jane Gottfriedson and Sharon Mclvor.  Features  Women and the peace process in Guatemala   by Sandra Moran as told to Carmen Miranda  The Canadian government sells women short 12  by Sunera Thobani  Centrespread  IWD '97 in Vancouver 9  photo essay by Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Jehn Starr, Michelle  Sylliboy and Swee Sim Tan  Arts  National day of action against arts cutbacks 14  by Leanne Johnson  Review of Bringing It Home 15  by Cathy Stonehouse  Critiquing The People vs. Larry Flynt 16  by Karen Sawatsky  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters   by Anne Webb, Caitlin Byrne and Andrea Imada  Whafs News 7     Sunera Thobanj  compiled by Andrea Imada and Rachel Rosen  Bulletin Board 17  compiled by Anne Webb and Caitlin Byrne  L  Don't forget Kfnesfsand the Vancouver  Status of Women have moved. Our new  address is:  Suite 309-877 East Hastings Street  Vancouver, BC   V6A 3Y1  Our telephone and fax numbers  will remain the same:  Kinesis; (604) 255-5499  VSW public line: (604) 255-5511  Fax: (604) 255-5511  Bringing it Home April is springtime in the women's  movement in a very special way. It's not  just about the daffodils and looking at the  ground beneath our feet (look, no snow!);  it's also a time when many of us renew our  commitment to bringing us closer to a feminist vision of the world we want to live in.  April is a time when there always seems to  be new projects springing up in every corner of the women's movement, when we  always seem to meet new women and make  new connections with issues, movements,  strategies, peoples.  Perhaps, this is because April follows  International Women Day. IWD is a time  when we look around at the ground on  more than a physical sense. It becomes  clearer than ever that our local organizing  meshes with what women are doing  nationally...no, internationally. That line  "Think globally, act locally" may sound  hokey but it rings truer at this time of the  year.  For example, in Vancouver, the Feminist Networking Group is seeing a comeback. Women from some of the 65 women's organizations in the Lower Mainland  have been attending the monthly meetings  to share information, strategize and take  action. Top on their list this spring is the  upcoming federal election and developing  a feminist action plan to ensure women's  voices are heard. (The latest rumour has it  that the election will happen on June 9th.)  What's exciting this year is the creative  burst of energy coming from women in the  group. Women are very clear that it is a  waste of time to merely focus on convincing politicians—who rarely live up to their  promises—or the mainstream media—who  increasingly trivialize our issues. The last  meeting saw an incredible flow of ideas on  how to share the expertise of the women's  movement with women in their homes, in  neighbourhood houses, in schools, in malls,  on the streets. Remember the old kitchen  table that women used to sit around and  share ideas? It's coming back-on the back  of a truck that will make the rounds come  election time. Imagine, a truckload of  women equipped with the unique knowledge that comes with working with women  as well as pamphlets explaining feminist  positions on different election issues showing up at your community fair, the big sale  at the mall, at Vaisakhi (a Sikh festival)! This  is just one example of the kind of plans this  group has for mobilizing women around  the election.  Also new in Vancouver is an initiative  that will bring Vancouver's feminist groups  together to talk about joint fundraising  strategies. Word has it the sky's the limit  on the kind of projects a group like this  might take on. Think feminist  telemarketing, think of a feminist  telethon...better still, think of San Francisco's Women's Building. Now imagine this  happening on Commercial Drive...Bernard  Avenue in Kelowna...Cornwall Street in  Regina...the corner of Bloor and Yonge in  Toronto...in Yeoville in Johannesburg  ...Petaling Jaya in Kuala Lumpur. Hey, any-  thing's possible.  There are so many projects to speak of.  There's an unprecedented Anti-racism  gathering happening in Vancouver in mid-  April to look at the various stages of anti-  racism work being done in women's organizations locally. We'll be drawing on  work we know is happening elsewhere,  nationally, in the US, in Europe, in the  south.  We heard Angela Davis was just in Toronto with-some heavy inspirational mes->  sages. We also heard she was a bit inconsistent, challenging sexism one minute,  then saying some pretty nationalistic things  the next. Still, it seems this was a much  needed boost to the Toronto feminist scene.  There's lots, lots more going at all levels, in all towns, cities, nations. Oh yeah,  we cannot forget April 4th, 1996, when a  woman and her family were brutally murdered because they would not accept violence against women. We cannot forget that  the cops fucked up, and nine people died  because of it. We're referring to the Vernon  massacre, of course [see page 5], but it goes  beyond Vernon.  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed  their subscriptions or donated to Vancouver Staus of Women in March.  Charlene Brisson * Shauna  Butterwick * Patricia Charter * Valerie  Embree * Sidney Foran * Mary Frey *  Julia Goulden * Hugh Herbison * Jim &  Christie Lee * Bonnie Klein * Sandra  Moe * Catherine Russell * Hospital Employees' Union  A special thanks to our donors who  give every month. Monthly donations assist VSW in establishing a reliable funding  base to carry out our programs, services  and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Wendy Baker * Nancy Duff * Jody  Gordon * Erin Graham * Barbara  Karmazyn * Barbara Lebrasseur *Lolani  Maar *Elizabeth Whynot  Thanks to the following lawyers or law  firms who gave their support to VSW or  who joined our Lawyer Referral list.  Tara Britnell * Claudia Fuchs *  Margaret A. Johnson * Mary Ann  MacKenzie * Karen F. Nordlinger & Associates * Shelly Tratch * Marney  Stevenson  April 4th joins December 6th as yet  another day that brings home, in a powerful way, what every woman potentially or  actually has to live with in daily life. It's a  day when we renew our commitment to  fighting for, no, not zero tolerance...zero  violence. We urge women to organize in  their own communities around "Vernon."  Because the killer and those murdered were  SouthAsian doesn't make this an "ethnic"  issue as the mainstream media would have  us believe, it's clearly an issue of violence  against women and stands next to the Montreal massacre as an example of how far  men will go to keep women down.  This reminds us of a call we had today  from a woman who was enraged by the  incredibly callousness of our justice system  when it comes to violence against women.  She had just heard that the BC Court of  Appeal had upheld the four-year sentence  of a man who had stabbed his wife 46 times  and dumped her body.  A vigil in Vancouver is being held on  April 4th to commemorate the lives of  women who have been murdered by partners or ex-partners, [see page 5 for details.]  We hate to end on this note, so we'll  remind you that there's lots of organizing  going on. It's springtime. Let's get those  creative juices going. Make sure you're part  of the local feminist organizing in your area.  And remember: "Act globally, think locally." Happy April showers. Looking forward to May flowers. See you next month.  It's the strangest feeling, working in  near empty offices as we produce the last  issue of Kinesis to be published out of our  off-Commercial Drive offices. The furniture  and resources atKznesrs/the Vancouver Status of Women are nearly all gone, packed  away by amazing womanpower [see ad,  page 4] over several weekends in March. It's  been distracting and trauma tic...and is why  this issue of Kinesis is four pages thinner  than usual.  About all that's left in the near empty  rooms and hallways of the VSW/Kinesis is  the photocopier, a couple of computers, a  production table or two, overflowing  boxes—found to contain the indispensible  blue pencils and Xacto knives needed for  Kinesis production—and...memories galore!  Editors past and present have paced  the hallways of these offices; production  coordinators have constructed hundreds of  Kinder-egg toys and displayed them on the  window sills; countless volunteers have  made this space their home and pored over  typos in the shaggy-carpeted lounge; and  many many more women have used the  crowded VSW resource centre over the  years. It's a sad feeling to let all that go and  move on.  But Kinesis means "movement," as we  have always touted, and that sometimes  includes physical movement. So we move,  slowly but surely, letting go of the old, moving in with the new.  While we are still in our old space,  we'd like to say thank you to all the women  who have worked on Kinesis and at VSW  in this space. We'd also like to welcome  you—new and old volunteers, staff and  friends—to visit our new space and make  it your own: carve a niche, make your mark,  admire our paint job, whatever! The Kinesis Editorial Board wants to ensure Kinesis  will always be a comfortable, accessible  home to women committed to helping produce news-about-women-that's-not-in-the-  dailies!  If you can't come by soon, VSW /Kinesis' formal welcome to our space will be on  Thursday, June 5th. We'll be throwing the  party of the year—an open-house  barbeque—from 2-8 pm. The address is  309-877 East Hastings Street (between  Campbell and Hawks.] Hope to see you  there!!  Meanwhile, back at the (empty)  ranch...we got a few things wrong in our  lippy, zippy intros of new editorial board  members so to set the record straight: Sook  C. Kong is doing her interdisciplinary  dissertion at UVic off-campus...and that's  why we have managed to hold her captive  (almost literally) on the Editorial Board.  Welcome again, Sook. Great to have you on  board!  Also new to Kinesis are the graphic/  drawing abilities of production volunteer  Catherine Munn. Catherine is the wiz behind the fabulous springtime surprise on  the back cover this issue. We hope Kinesis  can showcase more of her zippy talent in  upcoming issues. Thanks Catherine.  Thanks also to new production volunteer Jennifer Scott for helping produce Kinesis under such sparse [furniture wise],  zippy circumstances. Welcome and thanks  to new Kinesis writers/voices this issue:  Sandra Moran and Karen Sawatzky.  If you'd like to be a part of production  next issue, you're welcome to come on by  to our new offices—imagine walls in shades  of salmon, peach, teal and mango!—for our  next Story Meeting on Tuesday, April 2nd  at 7 pm. If you miss that one, the next will  be held on Monday, May 5th at 7 pm. If  you're interested in being able to tell zippy  tales of zippy production-of-Kwesz's times  to your friends, fans and families (and  guess which room has the mango walls?!),  call Agnes at 255-5499 for the volunteer  schedules.  Oh, and did we tell you about our luscious lime green bathroom, painted especially to keep Kinesis volunteers awake on  those late-late press nights?! Check it out!  (Until you do, we might keep going on and  on and on about our new offices!)  Have a great month and enjoy the issue. We'll be back, 24-pages-strong next  month. News  Aboriginal women and matrimonial properties:  Fighting for fairness  by Agnes Huang  "We can't seem to get the government's  attention without a writ in our back  pocket," says Jane Gottfriedson, president  of the BC Native Women's Society  (BCNWS). Gottsfriedson made that comment on March 19th at a press conference  in Vancouver announcing a federal court  action against the minister of Indian Affairs  for discrimination against women over the  issue of the division of matrimonial properties.  The court challenge, launched jointly  by the BCNWS, Gottfriedson of the Lower  Similkameen band and Theressa Nahanee  of the Squamish band, argues that the  equality rights of Aboriginal women, as  well as their right to life, liberty and the  security of the person, are being violated  by provisions in the Indian Act which deny  women living on reserves access to matrimonial properties upon the breakdown of  their marriages.  Currently, married women living on  reserve who divorce from their husbands  cannot get a share in the matrimonial home  (or the land it is on), or an order for "exclusive possession" of the matrimonial home  which would enable them to stay in the  home until their children are grown.  The BCNWS says the federal government is discriminating against Aboriginal  women living on reserve on the basis of sex,  ancestry race, marital status and /or place  of origin because men and other women  (non-Aboriginal women and Aboriginal  women living off-reserve) are not subject  to those same provisions. All other women  fall under provincial legislation, which allows them to claim half of the matrimonial  properties and apply for "exclusive possession" when they divorce from their  spouses.  Sharon Mclvor, a lawyer and member  of the BCNWS, says that most Aboriginal  women who marry Aboriginal men and  live on reserve move to the home communities of their husbands. This means that if  their marriage breaks down, the women are  left with no protection and few rights.  "Because many married women leave  their reserves to go to their husband's reserves when they get married, they often  have to leave the community they have  lived for many years with their husband  and children when their marriages break  up," says Viola Thomas, president of the  United Native Nations, an organization  that represents off-reserve Aboriginal people in BC. She adds that "[the Indian Act]  has forced our cultures to not always act in  ways that value or pay homage to Aboriginal women."  The BCNWS says it has conducted a  study showing that, on certain reserves, at  least 80 percent of the land held through a  Certificate of Possession is registered in the  man's name only. The BCNWS says the  clauses in the Indian Act ensure that even  fewer Aboriginal women have access to on-  reserve homes and land.  Mclvor says that Aboriginal women in  BC decided to pursue a court case because  they had tried all other avenues to address  this issue, but to no avail. Jane Gottfriedson  adds that Aboriginal  women have been asking  the government to remedy  the discrimination against  women in the Indian Act  and have even helped by  drafting amendments to  the legislation for them.  However, Ron Irwin, the  Minister of Indian Affairs,  has refused to accept  amendments on the issue of  matrimonial properties put  to him by the BCNWS.  During the press conference, when Mclvor was  asked why the Minister of  Indian Affairs would not  accept the BCNWS's  amendments, she replied:  "Ron Irwin listens to the  people with the most  power, and Aboriginal  women don't have power."  The BCNWS says it has  never even gotten a response from Irwin acknowledging or explaining  his decison not to include  its amendments in proposed changes to the Indian  Act.  As part of its court case, the BCNWS  is also challenging the federal government  participation in the First Nations Land  Managament Agreement (the Framework  Agreement.) The agreement, known as Bill  C-75, was introduced into the House of  Commons last December.  According to the federal government,  "the bill will enable the 14 participating  First Nations to opt out of the land management sections of the Indian Act and to  establish their own regimes to manage their  lands and resources." The 14 First Nations  are: Westbank, Musqueam, Lheit-Lit'en,  N'Quatqua and Squamish in British Columbia; Siksika inAlberta; Muskoday and  Cowessess in Saskatchewan; Opaskwayak  Cree in Manitoba; and Nipissing,  Mississaugas of Seugog Island, Chippewas  of Georgina Island and Chippewas of  Mnjikaning in Ontario.  The BCNWS says by engaging in the  land management agreement with the  bands, the federal government is off-loading its fiduciary responsibility under the  Indian Act to all Aboriginal people, and in  particular to Aboriginal women. In their  statement of claim, BCNWS says that the  failure of the federal government to include  into the Framework Agreement a requirement that bands "develop a process with  respect to the occupancy and division of  the matrimonial property on reserves on  matrimonial breakdown" is a continuation  of the government's unfair and inequitable treatment of Aboriginal women.  "At the end of the day, not only will  Canada no longer have a responsibility to  administer First Nations land, but also  those people who administer the lands will  have the ability to expropriate lands from  individuals and families," says UNN's  Jane Gottfriedson (centre) and Sharon Mclvor (right) of the B.C. Native Women's  Society, with Leonie Rivers from the Aboriginal Women's Council.  Thomas. "When you don't have a land  base, you can't talk about issues of sovereignty, nationhood and having treaty negotiations with Canada."  Thomas adds that band Chiefs and  Council will have the full authority over  the allocation of properties on reserve, and  "we know how democratically elected  Chiefs are."  The BCNWS says it had asked the federal government for a hearing during the  consultations on the land management  agreement, but the government did not respond to the Society's request until several  months later and when there was only one  day left of hearings. "The high handed way  the government treated its consultation  process-we understand they have had virtually no input from Aboriginal women's  groups-reflects their generally dismissive  attitude to Aboriginal women," says  Gottsfriedson.  The BCNWS is asking the federal court  to rule in its favour and halt the passing of  Framework Agreement. However, given  that scenario is unlikely, Mclvor says the  BCNWS would be happy if its court challenge would stall the passing of Bill C-75  until at least the federal election. Then, she  says, there is more hope that Aboriginal  women can pressure the government to  make amendments to the legislation before  it is re-introduced into parliament.  In terms of response of Aboriginal people to their court challenge, Sharon Mclvor  says that people at the community level are  very supportive of BCNWS's action, but  that organizations, including the Native  Women's Association of Canada, are not  supportive.  The leader of the Assembly of First  Nations (AFN), Ovide Mercredi, says he  and other national Chiefs do not support  BCNWS's demand for amendments to the  Indian Act, adding that they are not in  agreement with provincial legislation being applied to reserves. And the Union of  BC Indian Chiefs says it supports BCNWS's  position to a certain degree. In a letter read  out at the press conference, Saul Terry states  that the UBCIC supports the issue of fairer  treatment of Aboriginal women in the matrimonial properties issue, but also does not  agree that tinkering with the Indian Act is  the way to resolve the matter.  Viola Thomas says a good opportunity  will arise in July to lobby Aboriginal leaders for their support of the BCNWS's position when the AFN holds their annual assembly in Vancouver. "We should take direct action because all the national Chiefs  will be here," says Thomas.  The BCNWS is asking women who have  had a bad deal with the matrimonial property  and transfer of property issues to send in their  stories to be included as affidavits in their court  case. (Women can submit stories anonymously.) Send stories to the BCNWS's lawyer  barbara findlay, Dahl findlay Connors, #620-  1033 Davie St, Vancouver, BC, V6E lM7;fax:  (604) 687-7686. For more information about  BCNWS's case, call barbara findlay toll free:  1-888-442-9529.  Agnes Huang is a Chinese feminist activist  working in community media. She spoke at the  BCNWS press conference on behalf of the Vancouver Status of Women.  APRIL 1997 News  Homophobia in BC schools:  Teachers approve resolution  _ by Smita Patil  "Two, four, six, eight; how do you  know your kids are straight?!" was among  many chants by over 150 demonstrators  outside the BC Teacher's Federation annual  general meeting in downtown Vancouver  on a cold Sunday morning in March [see  photos]. The demonstrators—mostly gay  and lesbian youth, parents of gays and lesbians, and feminist, anti-racist and gay and  lesbian rights activists—were rallying in  support of a resolution that 700 delegates  to the BCTF AGM were to vote on: a resolution to form a panel to "create a program  to eliminate homophobia and heterosexism  within the BC public school system."  Protestors were given cards on which  to write out their stories of harassment, isolation and abuse experienced at BC high  schools as lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered youth. The cards were  handed to teachers breaking for lunch as  they left the hotel where the AGM was being held. Most teachers were sympathetic  to the message, seeming to agree that homophobia and heterosexism in schools are endangering youth. However, rally speakers  asked demonstrators to stay vigilant and  not take the teachers' support for granted,  reminding them that in February, the  Coquitlam [a Vancouver suburb] school  board unanimously rejected a motion to  study disCTimination against gay and lesbian students in their district.  Among the speakers, most of them  were the youth who had organized the  demonstration. One young speaker, Carol  Wagner, told the crowd "The suicide rate  for queer youth is exceptionally high. Like  racism and sexism, the way to stop [homophobia] is through education." Others told  personal stories of gay bashings, name calling, low self-esteem and dropping out of  high school. There were also a sizeable  number of parents of gays and lesbians and  older people in the crowd.  Barbara findlay, a lesbian feminist activist and lawyer, said, "Speaking as an  oldster in this crowd, it is really, really moving for me to see the adults who are out in  support of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and  transgendered youth. Us guys who are over  40 and 50 and 60 have for too long ignored  the young ones and we are finally facing  our responsibilities and passing on our joy."  The day after the demonstration, after  an hour of debate, the resolution passed by  an overwhelming majority. The BCTF has  defined heterosexism as "the assumption  that everyone is heterosexual and that being heterosexual is inherently better or  more moral than being lesbian, gay or bisexual." Most encouraging are reports from  within the convention that, of the 700 teachers at the AGM, no more than 25 hands  were counted opposing the resolution.  The Youth Services of the Gay and Lesbian Centre in  Vancouver circulated a fact sheet at the demonstration from  which we excerpted the following:  • According to a study by the University of Calgary, over  60 percent of attempted suicides are by lesbian, gay, bisexual  or transgendered youth, who are 14 times more likely to attempt suicide than heterosexual youth.  • The McCreary Foundation estimates that 25-40 percent of homeless youth living in the West End, Granville and  Downtown Eastside areas of Vancouver are lesbian or gay.  • Twenty-eight percent of lesbian and gay youth do not  finish high school, primarily due to diminished self-esteem,  harassment and lack of visible role models.  • Lesbian and gay youth are at high risk for alcohol, drugs  or other chemical dependancies, and of contracting HIV/AIDS.  It's official: Kinesisand the Vancouver Status of Women have moved!  Painting the office teal, peach, salmon, mango... Standing: Mary Logan, Nancy Pang, Erin  Graham and Audrey Johnson. Kneeling: Agnes Huang, Raven Courtenay, Melina Udy and  Jehn Starr. Photo by Fatima Jaffer.  KINESIS  And we wouldn't have been able to do it without all the incredible help—packing, painting, moving, cleaning, unpacking, driving  around—from the following people:  Shannon e. Ash * Balbi Basran Kalia * Charlene Brisson * Heather  Commodore * Pat Currie * Deepa * Marlene del Hoyo * Erin Graham  * Mary Henderson * Agnes Huang * Alex Hudson * Fatima Jaffer *  Audrey Johnson * Jennifer Johnstone * Sook C. Kong * Leanne  Keltie * Alice Kendall * Xochital Leal * Diane Leclaire * Mary Logan  * Jane Loop * Andy Marshall * Albrecht Meyer * Rachel Malloy *  Melanie Nicols King * June Pang * Nancy Pang * Amrit Pannun *  Nancy Pollak * Sayuri * Michelle Sylliboy * Jehn Starr * Swee Sim  Tan * Melina Udy * Cathy Vigneron * Celeste Wincapaw  Thank you to all who lent VSW their time, resources and energy to make this move possible. We could not have done it without  you.  ©    ©    ©  Many thanks also to the local businesses that made donations  to us of building materials, supplies, paint and labour. Your support  was critical in ensuring we'd be able to move into our new space.  Ashley House Decorating * Coast Decorating A Paint Supplies *  The Handi-Babes * Home Depot —Terminal Avenue store * Manufacturers Outlet Limited  ©    ©    ©  VSW and Kines/swiW be having an open house on Thursday, June  5th from 2-8pm. Please come by and check out our snazzy new office at #309-877 E. Hastings St. (with its luscious lime green bathroom) and join us for a BBQ on our back (and front) balconies. See  you there. News  The Vernon massacre:  A year after "the  worst outcome"  by Fatima Jaffer  A man walked into his estranged wife's  home and shot her and the eight members  of her family who had stood by her when  she left him. He also wounded her grandmother and a six-year-old niece. Later that  day, he shot himself.  In the days following the killing spree,  the mainstream media and seemingly much  of Canadian society explained the massacre, the second largest in Canadian history,  less as an act of violence against women  and more as a result of cultural influences—  such as arranged marriage—because the  killer and his targets were SouthAsian.  Shortly after, the Vancouver Coalition  of South Asian Women Against Violence  came together to put the media's racist assumptions to rest. Together with feminist  organizations such as the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC),  Vancouver Status of Women, WAVAW  (Women Against Violence Against Women)  Rape Crisis Centre and the Philippine  Women Centre, the Coalition firmly placed  the massacre as an act of male violence  against women [see Kinesis, May 1996.]  One year later, the scenario is being  repeated. To commemorate the anniversary  of the Vernon massacre, which took place  on April 4th, mainstream media plan to  highlight "cultural tendencies"that could  "lead" to violence. Meanwhile across the  country, Canadians and many women's  organizations seem to have forgotten about  the Vernon massacre. The Coalition has  regrouped to take leadership in the Vancouver women's movement to jointly counter  the media's racist assumptions and remind  people about the pervasiveness of violence  against women in Canada. More importantly, women's organizations want to highlight the fact that not much has changed in  a year. The Vernon massacre could happen  again today.  The Coalition met in mid-March to discuss the likeliness of another "Vernon." The  women at the meeting—South Asian  women from various women's and immigrant organizations—examined the summary of a Coroner's inquest on the roles of  police and other agencies in the Vernon  massacre. The Coalition also looked at resulting changes to the BC Attorney General's Policy on Violence in Intimate Relationships (AG's Policy). [Ed. note: The AG's  Policy sets out procedures to direct police and  the justice system in BC on how to respond in  cases of violence against women by their partners.]  The Coalition's primary conclusion is  that Canadians should not be allowed to  forget those who were killed in Vernon nor  why. "The Ghakal family was killed because male violence against women is pervasive in Canada and will be as long as it  is not recognized as an issue of male power  in Canadian society," says Prem Gill, a Coalition member. To this end, a commemorative event—much along the lines of the vigil  held across Canada on December 6th to  remember the 14 women killed in the Montreal massacre—will be held on April 4th  every year across this country "until there  is an end to male violence against women,"  says Gill.  The Coalition also plans to highlight  the fact that the Vernon massacre happened  despite the fact that the RCMP in Vernon  could possibly have prevented it. The Coroner's inquest into the murders found that  the RCMP knew what the killer, Mark  Chahal, was capable of, did not follow their  own policies and procedures to stop him  They also ignored letters in their files from  Chahal's estranged wife, Rajwar Ghakal,  who had repeatedly complained to Vernon  police of his harassment and threats. The  police excused their inaction by saying they  had been afraid of provoking Chahal into  committing violence, and did not want to  interfere with "cultural" influences. That is  also why, according to RCMP officers, the  RCMP gave Chahal a permit to buy a gun,  despite knowing Rajwar Ghakal's complaints and fears.  "How could the police have caused  anything worse than what happened?  Chahal shot nine people, including Rajwar.  What worse outcome were police trying to  prevent?" savs Kulbir Johal, another Coalition member.  Shortly after the Vernon massacre, the  mainstream media learned that Rajwar  Ghakal was not the only one to find her  compaints being ignored by Vernon RCMP  Sharon Velisek came forward and told how  she had filed repeated complaints with  Vernon RCMP about her former boyfriend,  Larry Scott, who was stalking and harassing her. Scott eventually shot Velisek twice,  then killed himself. Velisek survived the  shooting.  Velisek's charges, coupled with the  Coalition's demands for a public inquiry,  prompted the BC Attorney General to call  coroner's inquests into inaction by Vernon  RCMP. [The Coalition demanded a public inquiry because an inquiry can lay criminal  charges where it finds negligence; coroner's  inquests can only make broad recommendations  to the Attorney General.]  Last October, the Coroner's inquest  into the Vernon massacre came up with 29  recommendations, mostly involving improving police response and firearm regulations [see Kinesis, Nov. 1996.] The final report of the inquest stands several volumes  thick and costs about $200, more than most  women's organizations can afford to pay.  Some of the recommendations were incorporated into the AG's Policy.  Yasmin Jiwani of FREDA (Feminist  Research, Education, Development and  Action Centre) says that a summary to the  inquest report, available free, gives a pretty  good idea of the full proceedings of the inquest, and it is not necessarily good news  for women.  "It's written very much from the perspective of a man, from Mark Chahal's perspective, going into emotional justifications  for why he might have committed this  crime—describing him as 'sad and lonely',"  says Jiwani, who is also a Coalition mem-  "Continuing the Resistance to Imperialist Globalization"  About 65 people showed up at the Kalayaan Centre in Vancouver on  March 20th for a press conference held by the NO! To APEC Coalition to  announce further actions in its campaign against APEC (the Asia  Pacific Economic Cooperation) and the Canadian government's hosting  of the APEC Leaders' Summit in Vancouver this November.The Coalition says it will host an international People's Conference Against  Imperialist Globalization to counter the APEC Leaders'Summit, as well  as continue to organize and educate people against APEC.  Among the press conference speakers was Luningning Alcuitas-  Imperial, who participated in a similar anti-imperialism conference in  the Philippines, where last year's Leaders' Summit was held. She said  the People's Conference and the People's Caravan (a march of more  than 10,000 people to the site of the Leaders' Summit) were of great  historical significance. "For the first time, there was organized and  systematic resistance to APEC on the basis of anti-imperialist unity."  Supporters of NO! To APEC say that rather than trying to "reform"  APEC, they are resolved to "junk APEC, NAFTA, the European Union  and the WTO."  To join the NO! To APEC coalition or to find out more about its anti-  imperialism campaigns, call 215-1103.  Photo: Billie Moon of Environmental Youth Alliance and Elsie Pang of  No! to APEC (left) talk with Native Youth Movement's Traci Humchitt  ber. "In comparison, there is almost nothing sympathetic to Rajwar Ghakal, nothing  about women's organizations, about feminist shelters, rape crisis lines, and so on."  The inquest also raised questions about  the unevenness in the implementation of  the AG's policies by the RCMP. Jiwani  points out that discrepancies could partly  be due to the fact that municipal police  (such as in Vancouver) are directly under  theAG's jurisdiction and are therefore more  likely to follow the Policy, while the RCMP  (such as in Vernon) are under federal jurisdiction and only under contract to theAG's  office.  A key controversy raised by the inquest and by women's groups is the AG's  policy of mandatory arrest. This means  that, even if a woman does not want to lay  criminal charges against her abuser, once  the police have been called in, they are compelled to lay charges on behalf of the  woman and must arrest the man.  Following the Coalition's advocacy on  this issue in the Vernon and Velisek cases,  FREDA launched a study, endorsed by the  Coalition, to evaluate the effectiveness of  the mandatory arrest policy. FREDA has  already elicited several responses across BC  from women working within rape crisis  centres, transition houses, shelters and other  violence against women organizations.  Early results indicate that mandatory  arrest is being implemented unevenly  across the province and is being conducted  in a "gender neutral" way, where a woman  is often arrested if she strikes back in self-  defence. FREDA is also hearing from  women that mandatory arrest only works  where women are offered secondary supports, such as transition houses, safe shelters, emergency aid, counselling, and police follow-up.  "We've found that mandatory arrest,  in some cases, is causing women to stay  silent and to remain in violent relationships  because there is nothing in place to ensure  men who are released from jails don't come  back and avenge themselves on the  women," says Jiwani. She adds that there  is often no place women can go because the  shelters have waiting lists and "more than  likely, women have little choice but to be  economically dependent on their male partners."  Jiwani and other Coalition members  say it is more critical than ever to raise  awareness of how endemic violence against  women is and to support feminist advocacy. "[So many in society still think] there  are justifications for why Mark Chahal  killed his wife and those who supported  her leaving him. It all comes back to being  an issue of fighting for women's equality,"  says Jiwani.  The Coalition is launching a series of  campaigns, including a press conference to  release the findings of the FREDA study in  early April, sponsored by the member  groups of the Coalition and NAC-BC's  Anti-Violence Committee. As well, a public vigil will be held on Thursday, April 4th  in Vancouver at the main branch of the  Public Library (Robson at Homer) at 7 pm.  For more information on the vigil, other  Coalition activities or for a speakers list of Coalition members for your vigil or commemorative event, call the South Asian Women's Centre at 325-6637; WAVAW at 255-6228 or  FREDA at 291-5197.  Fatima Jaffer is a regular writer for Kinesis,  works at the South Asian Women's Centre and  is a member of the Coalition of South Asian  Women Against Violence.  APRIL 1997 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Anne Webb, Andrea  Imada and Caitlin Byrne   Anti-racism work in  women's organizations  The Vancouver Status of Women is  hosting a two-part series—Looking Within  to Reach Out—to address anti-racism work  in women's organizations in the Lower  Mainland.  For the first part of the series, on April  12th and 13th, VSW invites women of colour and Aboriginal women to participate  in a gathering to assess and build on anti-  racism work that has been taking place in  the women's movement since the late  1980s. The purpose of the two-day gathering is to provide Aboriginal women and  women of colour with an opportunity to  come together to talk about, review, analyze  and celebrate different anti-racism strategies, policies and experiences.  The gathering will include plenaries on  anti-racism versus multiculturalism, and  on ways for Aboriginal women and women  of colour to come together and support  each others' struggles.  As well, there will be workshops on  the issues of: employment policies; why  women of colour organize as women of colour; challenges for Aboriginal women  speaking out in the workplace; women's  research and appropriation of voice; the  agendas shaping the structures of women's  organizations; and the impact of racism in  the delivery of services.  A key outcome of the gathering will be  the production of a document evaluating  anti-racism strategies and policies in women's organizations in the Lower Mainland,  and presenting recommendations for  changes and action. The document will be  circulated to women's organizations for  discussion and implementation. A follow-  up gathering, open to all staff and volunteers with women's organizations, will be  held in June to allow women's organizations an opportunity to further explore and  discuss anti-racism work in the women's  movement and the contents of the document.  The Anti-Racism Gathering is free to  aboriginal women and women of colour  working in or volunteering with women's  organizations. Lunch will be provided both  days. On-site child care will be available.  The venue is wheelchair accessible. Also,  some arrangements can be made to meet  women's special needs.  Registration deadline is April 7. For  more information about the Anti-racism  Gathering and Looking Within to Reach Out,  contact Ema Oropeza at the Vancouver Status of Women, (604) 255-6554.  Voices From the  Backyard  Voices From the Backyard is a one-day  writing workshop for women to be held on  Sunday, April 6 from 10:00am to 4:30pm at  the Vancouver Status of Women's new office (309-877 E. Hastings St). Many women  think they can't write, but everyone has a  story to tell. Voices is a workshop for  women who have stories to tell about living and /or working in Grandview Woodland and don't know how to get them onto  paper.  The workshop is sponsored by Our  Own Backyard, a community mapping  project which is working with community  groups and individuals in the Commercial  Drive neighborhood. The project is inviting people who live and/or work in the  community to share what they value about  our neighborhood, using a variety of forms.  Voices From the Backyard will help  women who live or work in the Commercial Drive area to tell the stories they think  are important about this neighborhood.  Workshop participants should arrive with  ideas, photos, objects, children's drawings,  or anything that reminds them of their lives  in Grandview Woodland. During the day,  participants will use easy and fun techniques to shape these ideas into text, and  will leave with a finished story ready for  inclusion with Our Own Backyard's other  collected materials.  The workshop leader is Faith Jones, a  widely published journalist, essayist and  short fiction writer. She has lived in  Grandview Woodland for 14 years. The cost  of the workshop is free.  To register, call 254-9276. Childcare cost  reimbursements are available.  VCN committed to public internet access  How many times has someone said to  you, "are you online?" or "have you got  email?" Well, the Vancouver Community-  Net (VCN, formerly FreeNet) can help  women interested in getting hooked up to  e-mail and to the internet.  The VCN is non-profit and community  oriented, providing users with a community-based alternative to commercial  internet service providers. It is committed  to providing public access to the internet,  especially to organizations, community  groups and individuals who do not have  the resources to access the fast lanes of the  information highway. Users support the  VCN with memberships and donations  rather than paying for access.  The VCN supports over 70 Public Access Service Sites (PASS) in libraries and  community centres in Greater Vancouver.  It provides online help and helpPAGES at  PASS locations and phone-in help to get  people started, as well as cheap manuals  to help members learn. The network also  works with institutions, colleges, libraries  and other partners to provide access to students, job seekers, library users and others.  First time user introductions are held every  Monday at 11 am. Membership rates range  from $15 for people on low incomes to $40  for families.  The VCN is currently seeking 10 to 15  volunteers for its community outreach and  training departments to work with community groups interested in getting online and  to conduct basic internet introductory  workshops about the VCN, email and the  internet.  For more information about the Vancouver CommunityNet or to volunteers, call  Katherine at (604) 257-3811, or drop by the  VCN office at 411 Dunsmuir St.  Challenging the equality  myth  "A painful reality check," is how  Nancy Riche, Canadian Labour Congress  (CLC) vice president, describes the Report  on Women's Work just released by the CLC  The 100-page report shows that the vast majority of women remain stuck in low-paying jobs with little hope of advancement.  Job losses in manufacturing and cutbacks  in public sectors have been replace by so-  called "growth" in part-time, temporary,  contract, domestic and home-based work.  The report challenges the myth that  equality for women has been attained in the  work force. It is full of useful observations  and statistics about the state of women's  work, such as:  • only 20 percent of women have full-  time, full-year jobs that pay more than  $30,000 per year, compared to 40 percent  of men;  • women account for less than 20 percent of those in the top ten paying jobs, but  they represent more than 70 percent in the  lowest-paying j obs;  • in less than 20 years, the number of  women part-time workers has increased by  200 percent; over 15 years the number of  women working more than one job increased by 372 percent.  "Still, women's fighting spirits are very  much alive," according to Riche. "This report and the Women's March Against Poverty (last May) showed that women across  the country want to work with women in  the labour movement for a change." Women  and Work provides a detailed approach for  taking on the challenges posed by current  restructuring. It unabashedly calls on unions to act now to embrace new strategies  for these times.  The report is available at no charge  from the CLC.  To receive more information on the report  or the report itself, contact the CLC's Women  and Human Rights Department: 2841 Riverside Dr, Ottawa, Ontario, Kl V 8X7; tel: (613)  521-3400 ext. 259/262; fax: (613) 521-3113.  Sexual assault handbook  revised and updated  A new edition of Sexual Assault has  been released by the Montreal Health Press.  This handbook is unique, as it provides  guidance on dealing with sexual assault as  a private and personal experience, and examines the social context in which it occurs.  The Montreal Health Press is a women's  collective which has been producing quality books of health and sexualtiy for over  25 years.  In the new edition, statistics have been  completely updated and changes to the  criminal code as it pertains to sexual assault  are included. In the 1997 edition, sections  on partner assault, dating violence and  abuse of people with disabilities have been  extensively revised, and information on  pregnancy and STDs resulting from an assault has been updated. The new edition  also includes an in-depth examination of  the social effects of sexual assault in relation to racism, warfare, gender relations  and the marginalization of people with disabilities.  The handbook, first published in 1978,  is a clearly written, well-illustrated, highly  accessible resource available in both English and French (L'agression sexuelle.) According to the Women's Health Clinic in  Winnipeg, "No other resource offers the  combination of personal and practical information, an understanding of why sexual  assault happens and ways to work for positive change."  Single copies of Sexual Assault and  L'agression sexuelle are available for $4 a single copy, or at discounted rate for bulk orders.  To obtain copies of this handbook and information on the other books on health and  sexuality produced by the Montreal Health  Press/Les Presses de la Sante de Montreal,  write to Montreal Health Press Inc, PO Box  1000, Station Place du Pare, Montreal, Quebec  H2W 2N1. Tel: (514) 282-1171. Fax: (514)  282-0262. E-mail: mhpmontreal@msn.com.  Web site: http://www.worldsfinest.com/mhp.  UN women's resources  online  Three United Nations women's organizations marked International Women's Day  by launching sites on the information  superhighway under a gateway named  Women Watch. WomenWatch can be found  at http://www.un.org/womenwatch,  through email at womenwatch@un.org, or  via a gopher, gopher://gopher.un.org.  Once at the site, users can access the United  Nations Development Fund for Women  (UNIFEM), the Division for the Advancement of Women (DAW) and the International Research and Training Institute for  the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW).  The site hopes to provide a forum for  global women's issues following on 1995's  Fourth World Conference on Women, as  well as an information source for the UN's  work on women.  Women, Ink, UN distributors of books  about women and development, has also  announced its web site at http://  www.womenink.org.  Kinesis  We hear you're moving!  Best of luck in your new location.  We'll miss you on the Drive.  Vancouver Photo  1523 Commercial Drive  253-7501 What's News  compiled by Andrea Imada and  Rachel Rosen  Turkish women fight  fundamentalist laws  "We are women; we are strong; we are  against Sharia [Islamic legal code]." These  were the words of over 8,000 women who  gathered in the streets of Ankara, Turkey's  capital, on February 15 to protest plans by  Turkish Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan  to increase the role of Islamic law in the nation.  Women's organizations in Turkey accuse the premier and his Welfare Party of  trying to end official secularism and erode  women's rights by imposing parts of this  Islamic code onto the daily lives of women.  At the protest, many of the women carried  posters of Kemal Ataturk, the founder of  secular modern Turkey, who allowed  women the vote in the 1920s.  Tansu Ciller, the leader of the conservative True Path Party and Turkey's first  woman premier, was also criticized by the  women at the rally for supporting the new  sexist proposals. "We are here, where is  Tansu Ciller?" the protestors shouted, challenging her decision to side with prime  minister Erbakan and her role in supporting the marginalization of Turkish women.  If the government does increase the  role of Islamic law in public life, there are  fears that secular forces in the military and  the judicial wing of the government will  stage a coup. A military overthrow of the  government would not improve women's  lives in Turkey, say the protesters.  Women workers win  class action suit  Over 200 women employees of Publix  Super Market Inc. in Florida have won  $81.5 million in a class action suit they filed  against their employers. The women had  initially filed discrimination complaints  with the Equal Employment Opportunity  Commission (EEOC). Later, a few of the  women followed up this action by launching a civil suit against Publix. As publicity  of their case grew, more women became  involved in the lawsuit. In 1995, the EECC  joined the women in their class action suit  against the company.  In their lawsuit, the women claimed  they were unfairly denied promotion. The  suit covers 150,000 current and former  women employees from 1991 until the  present. The EEOC has complaints against  Publix in its files dating back to 1986.  Because the settlement for the class  action suit was made out of court, Publix  can still say that "there has never been...nor  will there be in the future, any pattern or  practice" of discrimination. However,  Publix did agree to internal changes which  the EEOC felt should improve the promotion prospects of women employees.  The EEOC has been involved with  other successful cases recently: a settlement  between Black employees and Texaco Inc,  and between older employees and the military contractor Lockheed-Martin. As well,  the EEOC has filed a lawsuit on behalf of  women assembly line workers who are  employees of Mitsubishi.  Yukon women's groups  call for justice  Women's groups and other residents  in the Yukon are outraged at a recent sentence given to a Yukon man for strangling  his wife. On January 17, a jury found Ralph  Klassen not guilty of second degree murder, for which he was originally charged,  but guilty of the lesser offence of manslaughter. He was sentenced to just five  years imprisonment for strangling his estranged wife, Susan Klassen, to death on  November 2, 1995 at her home in Lake  Lebarge.  Since the sentencing, friends and family of Susan Klassen have initiated letter  writing campaigns and protest rallies challenging Justice Minister Allan Rock to reverse the decision. As well, organizers are  calling on the minister to change the  "provocation defense," used in the Klassen  case, which allows that "a man's jealousy  about his partner or anger in any way reduces his responsibility for a crime of violence against his partner." In their letter to  Rock, feminists in the Yukon say, "the  provocation defence as it is currently used  ... inappropriately and unjustly changes the  focus of the criminal trial from the behaviour of the accused and his intention to  murder to the behaviour of the victim who  from then on is identified as the one responsible for the accused's violence."  The letter writing campaign resulted  in the Crown Attorney's office reversing its  initial decision to not appeal the sentencing. Meanwhile women's organizations  continue to demand: that amendments be  made to the defense of provocation; the enactment of a new offence of "wife slaughter" with a minimum sentence; consistent  national standards; and sentencing that fits  the crime.  To call on Rock to make the proposed  changes to the Criminal Code, send letters to  the Honourable Allan Rock, Minister of Justice, House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario,  K1A 0A6.  Lesbian mom denied  custody  A Florida judge has been accused of  violating the judicial canon prohibited bias  based on sexual orientation, gender, race,  religion, national origin, disability, and  class. Judge Joseph Q. Tarbuck gained notoriety in August 1995 when he awarded  custody of an 11-year old girl to her father  because her mother was a lesbian...even  though her father had been convicted of  killing his first wife.  Tarbuck said his decision was based  partly on his feeling that the child "should  be given the opportunity ...to live in a non-  lesbian world." (The young girl lived in a  household with her mother, Mary Ward,  her mother's partner, her older sister who  is also a lesbian and her sister's partner.)  The complaint against the judge is being filed by Allan H. Terl, a retired lawyer  and gay rights advocate. [Mary Ward died  last January of unrelated circumstances, so an  appeal of the custody decision is irrelevant.]  Federal government  stalls review  The Canadian federal government says  it does not know what action it will take  even after a federal review recommended  that five incarcerated women who had  killed their abusive partners or guardians  should be released.  The recommendations were submitted  to Solicitor General Herb Gray and Justice  Minister Allan Rock by Judge Lynn  Ratushny of the Ontario Court in February.  The establishment of a special review  headed by Ratushny came after several  years of pressure from women's groups  after a landmark 1990 Supreme Court of  Canada ruling recognizing "battered women's syndrome" as a legal defense for  women accused of killing their abusive  male partners.  Initially, the federal government expected that only a dozen or so women  would apply to have their cases re-considered, but since the announcement of the  review, 98 women have asked Ratushny to  review their cases.  Of the 55 cases she did review,  Ratushny recommended that six women's  cases be reopened. In her report, the judge  stated that two women acted in self defense  and should have been acquitted, three others were actually guilty of manslaughter as  they were provoked by the abusive men,  and a sixth woman should get an appeal  based on whether she should have been  convicted of first degree murder.  Government officials have still not decided whether to act on Ratushny's recommendations or not.  The National Association of Women  and the Law is concerned that the women  will not be released before a federal election. "We've always been in disagreement  [with] the government kowtowing to the  crime agenda," said the Association  spokesperson Louise Shaughnessy "In  these cases, these women are not a threat  to the community and there's a big difference between talking about somebody like  them and somebody like [serial killer]  Clifford Olson."  The federal government has currently  formed a committee to look at the review's  recommendations.  Residency requirement  in BC lifted  Following an agreement by the federal  government to transfer tens of millions of  dollars to the provincial coffers, the BC  government finally lifted its notorious  three-month residency requirement for  welfare eligibility.  On March 6, Prime Minister Jean  Chretien announced the federal government will be giving BC approximately $60  million over the next three years to cope  with the costs of settling new immigrants.  In return, BC has agreed to drop its residency requirement and its $47 million lawsuit against the federal government.  When the BC government set up the  residency requirement, then social services  minister, Joy MacPhail, claimed that it was  needed because of cuts by the federal government in transfer payments to the provinces. She also claimed slashing of welfare  rates in other provinces was forcing people to move to BC.  Many women's and anti-poverty  groups have said the residency requirement violated mobility rights under the  Constitution and Canada Assistance Plan  (CAP). Women leaving abusive situations  were particularly at risk. Women's and anti-  poverty groups also say the residency requirement's alleged savings, were a "savings" gained on the backs of people on  welfare and non-profit support agencies.  (BC Premier Glen Clark says that BC had  been saving $15 million a year because of  the requirement.)  Protecting equality  rights  Many organizations have been granted  intervenor status in the Winnipeg Family  Services v. the Queen case at the Supreme  Court of Canada—a case considered critical in upholding women's reproductive  rights.The court is anticipated to convene  in June.  Last August, Winnipeg Family Services obtained a court order to force a pregnant Aboriginal woman into treatment for  solvent abuse. The order for compulsory  treatment was overturned by the Manitoba  Court of Appeal/See Kinesis, October 1996].  Now, although the woman has already  given birth to the baby, the case has been  appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.  The status of a foetus as a "person"  emerged as a key issue in the case and has  ensured the participation of groups opposed to a woman's right to reproductive  choice.  Among the intervenors opposed to  compulsory treatment are the Women's  Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF),  and a coalition which includes the Women's Health Centre in Winnipeg, the Native  Women's Transition Centre, the Metis  Women's Association and the Manitoba  Association of Rights and Liberties.  LEAF'S position is that treatment orders infringe on women's equality rights  under the Charter and have a "disproportionately severe impact on women who already endure aggravated discrimination  due to stigmatization and disadvantage by  reason of their race, religion, poverty, disability and/or Aboriginal origin."  The Winnipeg Women's Health Clinic  says the Manitoba-based coalition opposes  mandatory treatment and will focus their  court intervention on "the government's  obligation to provide appropriate and effective supports, services and resources to  ensure the health and well being of pregnant women and their foetuses."  [Sources for What's News include: The Optimist, Sojourner, Ms. Magazine, The Militant, LEAFlet, the Globe and Mail, the Vancouver Sun, and the Women's Health Clinic  in Winnipeg]. Andrea Imada and Rachel Rosen  are regular contributors to Kinesis.  In,  Are you an    11 lUStratOl*?  \%  contribute your skills to  Kinesis  255-5499 Feature  Women and the peace process in Guatemala:  The time has come  by Sandra Moran as told to Carmen  Miranda   On December 29,1996, the Guatemalan government and army and the URNG  (Guatemala National Revolutionary Union) signed a series of peace accords, signalling the end to more than 30 years of civil  war. The process towards peace in Guatemala started more than a decade ago; formal negotiations on the accords began in  1991. Most people in Guatemala had no  participation at the peace negotiation table  until 1994 when the Assembly of Civilian  Society (ASC) was formed to facilitate input from the civilian population. Within  ASC, a number of sectors, including a  women's sector, were set up to bring forward specific proposals of concern to the  various segments of society to the negotiating table.  Sandra Moran is a member of Nuestra  Voz, a Vancouver-based organization working in support of women in Guatemala. She  currently lives and is working in the gender and women's program with CIEP, a  research and popular education centre, facilitating workshops for students, unions  and Mayan women. For the past three  years, Moran has been involved with the  women's sector of ASC.  Carmen Miranda recently had the opportunity to speak with Moran about women and  the peace process in Guatemala while Moran  was in Vancouver for a short speaking tour.  Miranda is also a member of Nuestra Voz.  Carmen Miranda: What is the meaning  of the peace in Guatamala?  Sandra Moran: For us, peace is a process that we can build, that can result in social justice in Guatemala. The peace accords  are just the basis for change. The challenge  for us is to get the accords implemented, to  try and force a building of a different kind  of government and a different distribution  of resources in Guatemala. We are trying  to fight for changes that are for the good of  the majority of the people, not just a few.  Miranda: Can you explain the role  women have been playing in this process?  Moran: Women have been participating in all the struggles in Guatemala [for  decades,] but women's organizations  started to actively mobilize about 12 years  ago. Since 1988, many different women's  organizations have been trying to propose  changes [to improve the situation of  women in Guatemala] and work for those  changes.  In 1994 when the Assembly of Civil  Society (ASC) was formed, women from  different organizations asked for the formation of a women's sector as one of the 14  sectors making up the ASC. Since then, we  have discussed the socioeconomic problems of women and tried to propose resolutions for these problems. We then pulled  together a position paper [on women's issues] that was discussed with the other sectors of the Assembly.  The women's sector made a number  of proposals in each of the five theme areas  of discussion: the right of displaced people to go back to Guatemala; the rights of  indigenous people; the socio-economic and  land reforms; the strengthening of civil  power and the role of the army in Guatemalan society; and the Truth Commission.  Those five areas form the main accords of  the peace process.  Under each theme, we raised specific  issues about women. With the signing of  the peace accords, we now have new tools  to use to change laws and attitudes which  discriminate against women. The women's  sector was successful in gaining recognition of the work women do for the good of  the whole society.  Miranda: How have women been  working as a movement in Guatemala?  Moran: The important part of the  movement has been the women's sector of  the ASC. The women's sector was formed  by 45 different organizations. Right now, it  is made up of 27 groups. Some of the organizations left because of the tasks we  were doing—putting together proposals,  lobbying the peace negotiations table, and  trying to engage in political discussions.  Many women's organizations don't want  to do that kind of work because they are  trying to resolve the problems women have  at a grassroots level. Many don't have  enough time to do the local work, and also  do the broader political work.  The women's sector is just one part of  the women's movement in Guatemala. We  also have a network of organizations that  work against violence against women, a  network of organizations working on  changing laws, and another network which  is following up on the Beijing conference  (the 4th World Conference on Women held  in September 1995.) These networks form  the women's movement, along with other  organizations that are not part of any network but which are women's organizations  working to improve the lives of women.  Now that the peace process is beginning, the mechanisms are there to ensure  the implementation of the accords and, particularly, the parts of the accords that address women's issues. We now have ways  to define how those parts are going to be  implemented, who is going to do it, when  it's going to happen, how it's going to include our participation, and how we can  ensure the money set aside for implementation is used appropriately.  To do all of this work, we are forming  a women's forum, with participants from  the women's movement and the government. We need to organize the women's  forum between now and April 15~within  the 90 days set aside for the first phase of  the implementation. Then from April 15  until the end of this year, we will define a  schedule of implementation of those parts  of the accords that talk about women. And  then in 1998, we will start implementing  the accords. We will plan from 1998 until  the year 2000, and then from the year 2000  to 2005.  The task and challenge is for us in the  women's movement to work together for  the implementation of the accords. It is a  challenge because we are a society that has  been divided. It's a challenge because all  of us don't have the skills needed to work  at the level of talking with the government  and trying to implement things. And it's a  challenge, too, because a lot of us don't  Sandra Moran (far right) facilitating a workshop with Nuevo  Amanecer (New Dawn), a women's group in Villa Lobos, Guatemala  work together on a permanent basis, only  time to time.  I hope the implementation of the accords will give us women the opportunity  to at least start changing our situation in  society. That is going to be the point we can  all share, and from there I hope we can  work together.  Miranda: What is the impact of the lesbian movement in Guatemala?  Moran: The gay and lesbian movement  in Guatemala is new. For the last three  years, there has been an organization called  Oasis that has been talking to people about  AIDS. It's mainly a group for men.  We women decided to form an organization that we felt we belonged to. That  happened last January. The organization is  called Mujeres Somos (We are Women.) It's  the first lesbian organization in Guatemala  and it's still really small.  Right now, Mujeres Somos has representatives in the women's sector, and last  year, on November 25-the international  day of action against violence against  women-the organization held a forum  called, "The invisibility of lesbians is also  violence against women." It was the first  public presentation for the group. It was  held especially as a presentation for the  women's movement to try and open discussion about lesbianism. That discussion  wasn't present at the peace negotiation table because many of us who are lesbians  didn't feel it was the right time. We were  discussing a lot of other issues.  Now we hope it's time because we are  at a moment where we are redefining our  country, our country's laws, and our country's way of seeing life. It's time for us to  talk openly, or at least try to, because there's  still fear [in speaking out as a lesbian.] I feel  there are more and more possibilities to  discuss the issues of lesbians and gay men,  and to try to break all the barriers and taboos in society [around homosexuality.]  That is also part of the process of building  peace in Guatemala.  Miranda: What do you think is the role  of the solidarity now with the peace process in place?  Moran: Solidarity has been really useful for us, supporting our struggles in all  kind of ways. My feeling is that solidarity  is still important and needed, not just for  us to feel we have more support, but to help  to rebuild the country. Coming out of a war,  we have a lot of needs, but we also have a  lot of ideas. We need people with new skills,  with different ideas and resources that they  can share with us.  We also need to make links between  the south and north. Links that can help us  resolve some of the problems we all face  because of the globalization of the economy  and the structural adjustment programs.  Links that can help us to find our way to  connect the struggles. I think for Nuestra  Voz, the work we have been trying to do  for the past three years is to link communities in Canada with communities in Guatemala. Because we are here in Vancouver  and also in Guatamala, we can do that kind  of bridge building.  I hope the solidarity movement is going to continue helping us, helping women,  and helping the gay and lesbian movement,  the indigenous movement, and all the different struggles. We still need help in terms  of new skills and resources, and people  who can go down to Guatemala and work  for a few months or people who can come  here and be trained. We need concrete  things that can help us rebuild the country.  Miranda: Is there anything else you  would like to add?  Moran: Yes, I would like to finish by  saying that we women are willing, and  have the commitment, to continue working in the society and in every kind of organization we can for the implementation  of the accords. We believe that this is the  moment we have to start changing the society. If we don't do it now, it's going to be  difficult to do at another moment. We are  trying to organize ourselves and find the  best ways to work for change and to ensure women's participation at the grasroots  level, the local and regional levels, and at  the national level in the political parties.  There's one political party, the new  Guatemala Democratic Front (FDNG,)  where women have been guaranteed 30  percent participation in all the structures  of the party. It's just a beginning because  the FDNG is the only party which has  agreed to ensuring women's participation  in the political process. We hope women  from other countries can share their own  experiences with us and help us continue  that work. We can also share with other  women how we have done the work and  how we will keep doing that work, and all  the dreams we still have.  APRIL 1997 Feature  International Women's Day in Vancouver:  66  *  Women moving  forward together"  by Agnes Huang  A lot of things could have rained on  this year's International Women's Day parade in Vancouver—like the rain (which  weather forecasters predicted lots of) or the  anti-choice protesters (who came out to  crash the celebration). The rain didn't show  —it was a beautiful, cool, almost-Spring  day. And the anti-choicers did show up, but  there weren't enough of them to dampen  the spirit and strength of the more than 1000  women, men and children who came out  to celebrate feminist struggles everywhere.  Organizing for this year's Vancouver  IWD March 8th rally and march involved  the largest number of women ever—more  than 40 individual women and women's  organizations sat on the ad-hoc planning  committee. Part of the reason for the increase in participation was the resolve to  ensure attempted anti-choice sabotage of  IWD Vancouver would not succeed. But  perhaps the biggest reason for the large and  consistent turnout of women at organizing  meetings was an even stronger resolve to  actively confront the backlash against feminism and the women's movement and to  press forward the particular issues of their  communities. (Almost all of the women  returned to the evaluation meeting following IWD to re-affirm their commitment to  organizing future IWD activities.)  The result of such a large and dynamic  organizing committee meant a packed  schedule of almost 40 speakers and performers. Throughout the day (before and  after the march,) women addressed  a multitude of issues — violence  against women, the failure of the  provincial NDP government improve the situation of women, the  protection of women's choice, the  growing poverty of women and  children, the need to confront fundamentalism in all its forms, and  building support for women in Afghanistan and East Timor.  The theme of this year's march  was "Women moving forward together." The theme was chosen to  acknowledge the critical need for  women to work together to end the  oppressions, in all their forms, otherwise, women cannot move forward. Over the course of many  meetings, IWD committee members established a collective vision—a vision which includes the  end of capitalism, poverty, violence,  heterosexism, and so on. One of the  more hotly debated issues concerned abortion and women's right  to make decisions about their own  reproductive processes. It was reiterated that the autonomy of women  cannot be compromised and that  the right to safe abortion is fundamental to the freedom of women.  Since last year's IWD, a  number of anti-choice protesters  have continually tried to disrupt IWD organizing and harass women and women's  organizations who support a pro-choice,  feminist stance. On the day of this year's  IWD event, about a dozen anti-choicers  took up a position next to the speakers' area  at the Vancouver Public Library about an  hour before the rally was even to begin.  Some tried to preach to women; others displayed their anti-choice signs and jockeyed  with pro-choice women for visible placard  positioning.  Every time the anti-choice protesters  tried to engage in confrontational actions,  pro-choice women would peacefully respond by singing: "My body's nobody's  body but mine..." From almost all of the  IWD participants, a very clear message was  sent out: women (and "not the church, not  the state,") have the right to control our  bodies, [see cover photo]  After over an hour of speeches, performances and rallying chants, the exuberant and boisterous crowd were anxious to  continued on next page... International Women's Day in Vancouver:  Continued from previous page  hit the streets. The crowd moved through  the downtown core of the city, following a  contingent of Aboriginal women, who led  the march drumming and displaying their  newly created Aboriginal Women's Flag  [see page 9.] Following the march, the crowd  reassembled inside the public library for an  information fair—with tables full of stuff  from various women's and community organizations—and more speeches and performances.  The march and rally at the public library were not the only IWD events on  March 8th. Other IWD events included several activities at the Kalayaan Centre,  hosted by the Philippine Women Centre,  Nuestra Voz, the Grassroots Women's Discussion Group and other women of colour  groups. The groups hosted a creative grassroots strategies session to get women thinking about ways to challenge imperialist globalization.  About 40 women, mostly women of  colour, joined quilting and theatre workshop, and many more came out for the  evening potluck gathering.  In the evening, a number of dances,  fundraising benefits and comedic performances were held at varioous venues around  the city to cap off the March 8th day of celebrations. For many of us in Vancouver,  they were able to get a good dose of feminist IWD events this year.  «CE l.gSftoB  !^?_. "  and  ts^Ess^  the pr°-  choice  oundU^)  ]%^m&  m  R*'iaaeSSfrancouverR'  Committee 0TMn'ShelteraT"WD  /  m  m  ^  Tl+Sl    s°ngweavers I", ,$?°rk' (Lefl>TMe Sapphic  'songs  j/Mmm  W"  fa-Vf-*  S*~  -"fao-  mm  "Women united will never be defeated!"  TY\e  90NNeV  o^e<  &&  kcefl  '1  I  fTMS-^m  m.  mm.  w o m  I MPt R i A LIST  ^LODALli ATlOf  .IPPMEi  mm®  lENTER Feature  Feature  The Canadian government and the imperialist economic agenda:  Undermining women glob ally  by Sunera Thobani  To celebrate International Women's Day,  Sunera Thobani gave a special talk on March  5th to over 200 people crammed into a lecture  hall at Simon Fraser University Harbour Centre Campus in Vancouver, BC. Thobani, the  Ruth Wynn Woodward Endowed Chair of  Women's Studies at SFU, spoke on the topic,  "Selling women short: How the Canadian government is undermining women globally,"  addressing the role of the Canadian government  in the continued oppression and exploitation  of women in Canada and around the world.  Thobani is the past-president of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women, and a longtime activist in the women's and anti-racism movements.  Below, Kinesis presents excerpts from her  speech.  Global restructuring is really intensifying the relations of exploitation that have  tied the north and the south together. In the  1970s, the debt crisis escalated in the countries of the south, and many were trapped  in a cycle in which new loans had to be acquired to service old debts. The effects of  Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs)  [economic programs imposed on countries of  the south by the International Monetary Fund  and the World Bank] are devastating, and  they have been well-documented by  women. [These effects] were the main focus of discussions that took place at the  NGO Women's Forum in Beijing (in September 1995). Beijing gave women from the  north an opportunity to look at the experiences of restructuring. For the  majority of women globally,  SAPs are resulting in the destruction of women's livelihoods, and, in many cases,  women's lives.  Canada's approach to both  national and global issues is  from a free market ideology  based on the notion that the private sector should be leading  economic growth—economic  growth is then equated with development. Of course, the question women from the south are  asking is, "development for  whom?" If you leave it up to the  free market and the private sector, what happens to the rights  women have fought a very long  time for?  Canada's approach also  focuses on making Canadian  businesses more "competitive"  [internationally and] at home.  Canada plays an important role  in maintaining the international  order which protects international financial institutions, ensuring the north-south power structure remains as it is.  North-south relations have been fundamentally structured through the process  of colonization and imperialism, and globalization is, in effect, strengthening those  exploitative and unequal relations. The  popular perception around SAPs, and the  development model underlying them, are  exemplified by an article which appeared  in the Vancouver Sun today. The title of the  article was "How To Share Our Wealth With  the Planet's Poor." The writer, a Quebec  politician, diplomat and entrepreneur, says  development is a code word for our efforts  to encourage third world countries to become more like "us." Development projects  encourage them to adopt our democratic  political institutions, legal systems, fiscal  policies, our market economies, our respect  for human rights and our social values. He  further says, the purpose of development  is partly altruistic: what could be more decent than sharing the secrets of our success  with less fortunate countries? This seems  to be the popular perception: that Canada  is the Boy Scouts of the international community, that we play the role of  peacekeeper, and that we really want other  countries to follow the same path to development.  Of course, the "success" of countries  like Canada lies in the history of colonization, in appropriating land and resources  from the First Nations. This success is  founded on a global system, based on a  profit-driven economic model which benefits from internal exploitations based on  class, race, gender, and the extremely unequal relationship between countries of the  north and the south.  This—what I would call, a bloodstained path to development—is not an option for peoples who have been colonized,  and who have been integrated into the global system where the global system is de-  SuneraThobani speaking at a plenary on the  "Rise of Conservatism" during the NGO  Women's Forum  pendent on their underdevelopment and  continued exploitation. This development  model just doesn't hold true. It was never  true that the "unique values and institutions" promoted by Canada were the  source of wealth and prosperity for the development of countries in the north. Consequently, this model is even less true for  the countries of the south.  In the women's movement, we have  talked about the feminization of poverty.  The feminization of poverty is not an adequate analysis [for examining the effects  of globalization and the development  model;] it has to be broadened. What came  out of conferences like the one in Beijing is  an understanding of the increasing  racialization of poverty.  Women are working harder and longer,  and getting poorer in the process. This reality was echoed in country after country.  Inequalities between countries are great,  but there are also inequalities among people in the same country. The status of  women may vary in different countries, but  the one thing that is common everywhere  is that there is not one country where  women have equal access to resources, an  equal role in decision making or sharing  power—this is true right across the globe.  The "success" of  countries like Canada  lies in the history of  colonization, in appropriating land and  resources from the  First Nations.  Gita Sen and Karen Grown from the  Development Alternatives for Women in a  New Era (DAWN), a network of women in  the south, say the most uniform conclusion  from the international women's decade research shows, with few exceptions, that  women's relative access to economic resources, incomes and employment has  worsened. Our burdens of work have increased, and our relative and even absolute  health, nutritional and educational status  has declined.  Most of us are probably familiar with  the United Nation's 1980 statistics that say:  women make up half of the world's population, do two-thirds of the world's work  hours, get one-fifth of the world's income,  and own one percent of the world's property. This is a 1980 statistic. Since then, SAPs  have created greater polarization between  the situations of men and women.  In Canada, the debt and deficit have  been used by our federal government to  destroy social programs. Who benefits from  this? There are people who have become  extremely rich from the debt and the deficit.  Canada, as a member of the G-7 [the  group of seven most industrialized countries], is deeply implicated in the imposition of SAPs on countries of the south. For  example, when SAPs were imposed in  Zambia, food subsidies were cut back and  prices rose dramatically, and riots occurred  against this. (These riots are being called  IMF riots.) The Zambian government tried  to get out of the SAPs, but northern countries, including Canada, made Zambia  agree to accept the IMF's terms as a condi  tion to receiving foreign aid. Canada was  also successful in lobbying to get a vice  president of the Bank of Canada to serve  as a governor of the Bank of Zambia. This  is the level of complicity on which Canada  continues to work.  One thing that was very evident at the  Beijing conference, and that has become  much more visible in Canada recently, is  the concern around human rights violations, particularly the record of certain governments. SAPs are creating the conditions  for increased repression and increased barbarism and human rights violations, and  the Canadian government is right in the  middle of implementing these policies.  You cannot take food away from people, dispossess them of their lands, their  livelihoods and communities, force misery  and poverty onto them, and expect them  to continue living with it. People will fight  back and they are fighting back, and  women are at the forefront of these fights.  A current example is the Busan gold  mine in Indonesia. We all have seen the  spectacle of Canadian corporations fighting to control that mine, being forced into  partnership with US corporations who  want to control the mine in partnership  with a very reactionary regime in Indonesia.  When 60 percent of the largest gold  mine is going to be in the hands of American corporations, you cannot expect people in Indonesia not to fight back. And  when people fight back, reactionary governments are responding by intensifying  terror and violence to put down these  movements.  I use Indonesia as an example, not because I want to suggest that it's the only  country where human rights violations are  occurring. If you look at Canada's record  at home, we can hardly call Canada a champion of human rights. Year after year, the  human rights commission cites the violation of the rights of Aboriginal people's as  the worst human rights violations in the  country. The Canadian government does  not have a sterling record.  What can we say about what the Canadian government does to women here in  Canada? We've seen the dismantling of  social programs and the welfare state. The  welfare state is something feminists have  criticized for having limited effectiveness  in dealing with women's poverty. However,  social programs unquestionably represent  a significant step forward for many women.  What we've seen particularly escalating in  the last three years is the implementation  of policies which have greatly eroded the  gains women in Canada have made.  The Canadian government is also increasing restrictions on immigration and  citizenship in this country. In the 1995 federal budget, [federal finance minister] Paul  Martin reintroduced the head tax on immigrants (a $975 landing fee.) Now, the federal government is trying to build support  for its position on what it calls "passport  babies." There is a panic being created  around passport babies, and the Canadian  government is now proposing to amend the  Citizenship Act so children born in Canada  will not automatically become citizens. It  will depend on where their parents were  born and where their grandparents were  born. The government says it's basing immigration policy on what [immigration  minister Lucienne Robillard] calls  misperceptions and myths that exist in society. The Liberal government had promised to set the number of immigrants allowed into the country at 300,000. Yet, the  minister announced just two months ago  that they were only going to allow 200,000.  Robillard said this was necessary because  there's a real concern among "Canadians"  that Canada is accepting too many immigrants. Although she claims to recognize  that these are myths and misperceptions,  she nevertheless says those sentiments are  strong enough on which to base government policy.  The Canadian government is part of  creating an international situation where  poverty is increasing, where people's livelihoods are being destroyed, where people  are being dispossessed of their land and  their resources, and where migration has  become an inevitable and integral part of  this phase of globalization. The way the  Canadian government is responding is by  putting more restrictions on immigration  and actually taking away rights immigrants  and refugees have been able to win in this  country.  We also see a similar pattern in destroying democracy in Canada. In the 1995  budget, the Canadian government introduced the Canada Health and Social Transfer (CHST), which essentially meant the end  of social assistance, because those rights  NAC organized a demo against the G-7 nations at the NGO Women's Forum  government's current global and national  priorities. In November, the Asia Pacific  Economic Cooperation (APEC) leaders  summit is taking place here in Vancouver.  APEC is a grouping of 18 countries in the  Asia Pacific region, and its main objective  is to abolish barriers to trade and investment, and to further trade liberalization in  this region. APEC has not turned into a  trade agreement like NAFTA, but there are  countries that would want to push it in that  direction.  At the moment, APEC operates  through meetings of national leaders and  government ministers. It operates through  resolutions which are "voluntarily"  adopted by governments at these meetings.  What's interesting for women is that a business forum has been created to advise the  The women's movement needs to  become more radical, more militant,  and Beijing was a place where you  could see the coming together and  the vibrancy of international networking and organizing in the women's  movement.  had been contained in the Canada Assistance Plan (CAP). [CAP sets out five national  standards related to access to welfare. The Liberals did away with all but one of those guarantees of rights.] Without any public debate,  the federal government went ahead and  made these changes, effectively destroying  one of the most important programs in this  country.  In short, the Canadian government is  implementing policies which will increase  inequalities, increase racism, sexism, homophobia, and poor bashing, ensuring that  poor people will become more and more  targeted as social programs are destroyed.  November is going to be a very significant month, and I think it's important during International Women's Week to make  the connections between the Canadian  leaders on APEC. The APEC grouping relies heavily on research and input from  business officials and from an academic organization called Pacific Economic Organization Conference. Another significant  driving force behind APEC is the "eminent  persons" group, which is made up of  prominent academics, financiers and business people.  In the way it is being formulated right  now, APEC is not accountable to parliament; there has been no public debate.  When Jean Chretien went to the Philippines  for the last APEC summit (in November  1996,) his official designation was as the  "leader of the Canadian economy."  The impact of APEC on women will  be the same as SAPs. APEC will benefit  those who have power, but for those who  do not, their survival will become even  tougher, poverty will increase. The environmental devastation, the large numbers of  people being displaced, and the migration  and growth of refugees, are almost guaranteed to increase through the kind of  model the APEC grouping is pushing.  The Canadian government has already  made itself clear on its position on human  rights issues: they remain off the APEC  agenda. This was stated by Raymond Chan,  Secretary of State for Asia Pacific, who says  the government decided to keep human  rights issues off the agenda because "some  issues like human rights and social development might impede the progress on economic and trade issues." The message: human rights are dispensable.  APEC has not received the same kind  of attention in terms of [anti-APEC] organizing that the free trade agreement or  NAFTA had. The women's movement  needs to become more radical, more militant, and Beijing was a place where you  could see the coming together and the vibrancy of international networking and  organizing in the women's movement. The  networks we have been building since then  are going to serve us well in fighting against  the APEC agenda.  As we look at the negative impacts the  current phase of globalization is having on  the rights and lives of women, I think the  important question to ask, particularly on  IWD, is "what can we do?" IWD has always  been a day for a call to action. Beijing also  showed us the real necessity to transform  north-south relationships between women's movements and to actively reject participating in the pattern of relating where  women from the north feel we have all the  answers, that we can go in and teach  women from the south about feminism,  about how to liberate themselves.  Although these notions were challenged at the previous UN conference in  Nairobi (in 1985,) there was a split around  these issues. In Beijing, however, there was  a real recognition that women from the  south have been organizing [against globalization] for a long time.  The debt and the deficit crisis is something new that has been used here in  Canada to erode the gains women have  made. Women in the south have been fight  ing against the debt crisis for a long time;  this is something that women in the north  need to learn about.  I think what's really important for the  women's movement to realize today is that  our organizing is attempting to make democracy real. It has not been real. Even the  limited form of democracy that has been  available to some women is being radically  transformed today.  The challenges we face inside the  women's movement are great because we  are having to deal with issues of racism,  with the marginalization of women with  disabilities, with the issue of sexual orientation, with issues of class—these are issues  which women's movements, women's organizations everywhere are having to  struggle with. Some women's movements  and women's organizations are struggling  successfully; some not quite so successfully.  It's really only inside the women's  movement that you can see these struggles  being fought out. I think it's very important to recognize that the women's movement is going to become a bankrupt movement unless it is able to come to terms with  the issues that divide us. The women's  movement will not be able to effectively  confront the challenges women are facing  as a result of the current phase of globalization. Consequently, transformation of the  women's movement is not a choice; it's not  something that some women should support out of the goodness of their hearts because they want to share power. It is absolutely necessary because the issues the  women's movement is dealing with, both  in Canada and globally, represent the fundamental questions we're dealing with as  a larger society.  For IWD, I think transformation is the  most important thing we're trying to do  inside our movement. But we need to transform it while meeting the challenges globalization is making us face. I must say I  feel optimistic. Beijing certainly created a  lot of optimism among the women who  were there. What we need to do now is to  ensure the vision that existed at the Beijing  conference is realized. There is no way it is  going to be realized except through the  mobilizing of the women's movement.  12  APRIL 1997  APRIL 1997 Arts  Funding the arts in Canada:  Cuts killing  culture  by Leanne Johnson  There is no fat in arts funding (or meat  or bone for that matter). Yet all levels of  government continue to wield the axe, and  the situation is getting critical. This year has  seen some of the worst cuts to funding in  Canada's history. Once a world class funding agency, the Canada Council [a national  arts funding agency], enters its 40th anniversary with a $15 million dollar budget  cut. (Its funding has been reduced to 1988  levels.) By the time you read this, the CBC  (radio and television) will have just instituted its latest budget cuts. In response to  cuts to the National Film Board (NFB) and  Telefilm Canada, the Independent Film and  Video Alliance/Alliance De La Video et Du  Cinema Independent (IFVA/AVCI) has  called for a National Day of Action Against  Arts Cutbacks.  Across Canada, an alliance of arts and  cultural organizations have been coordinating actions in order to protest these cuts and  future cuts. From this activity, the Cultural  Emergency Coalition was formed by interested art groups and individuals. Arts activities in a number of cities are being  planned for the April 26th Day of Action.  The Coalition hopes to raise awareness of  arts cutbacks and plans to make arts funding an election issue. If enough voices are  raised in protest, funding cuts may be forestalled. It has happened in the past. In 1985,  a national protest against arts and cultural  funding cutbacks helped to stave off some  of the proposed cuts. Since this time, arts  and cultural funding has been cut by 40 percent. It seems the time is right for another  national protest.  Many Canadians do not realize the  implications of all these funding cuts.  Emerging artists venturing into mainstream projects still often need training or  funding to get projects off the ground. The  latest round of Canada Council cuts will  result in cuts to exploration grants [for  projects by emerging artists], which will  seriously limit opportunities for emerging  artists. We need to ensure access for these  voices now so we will have them in the  future. Decades of uneven funding damage the evolution of our cultural voice and  our cultural identity. New artists are  trained, then disappear when sources of  funding dry up.  Hardest hit in this economic climate is  the independent art and cultural sector.  This sector cannot rely on corporate sponsorship to fill funding gaps, nor should we  want it to. Corporate funding creates its  own problems when it comes to artistic  expression, especially expression of voices  outside the mainstream culture. Traditionally lesbophobic, homophobic and xenophobic, corporate funding is no friend to  the voices of those outside the dominant  culture. These voices need to be heard and  have traditionally been served well through  art.  A case in point...the NFB Film Lab in  Vancouver was shut down over a year ago.  Up until then, that lab had provided services to hundreds of independent filmmakers. According to the general survey, approximately 90 percent of independent film  makers used the NFB's program. The experience of Vancouver-based lesbian filmmaker, writer, and one of the organizers of  the National Day of Action, Marusya  Bociurkiw, reveals how unstable funding  for those speaking outside of the margins  is, and how easily these voices could be lost.  Bociurkiw's film was about to go to the lab  for film services when the cuts were made.  Forced to go to mainstream broadcast venues, she says that trying to obtain production space and equipment was a slow and  frustrating process. She received letters  from broadcasters saying her work was too  depressing and critical of Canadian history.  In other words, corporate censorship.  Many Canadians perceive arts funding  as a luxury that should be jettisoned as soon  In 1985, a national'  protest against arts and    ^k  cultural funding cutbacks ^^  helped to stave off some of f  the proposed cuts. Since this  time, arts and cultural fund- <--  ^ i  ing has been cut by 40      ^  percent. It seems the time  is right for another  national protest.   .  as hard times hit  Mainstream media  contributed to this complacency towards arts funding.  Most of the media calls  Bociurkiw has received for the  April 26 event are around the question of how arts and culture funding  can compete with funding of social  services and Medicare. This approach creates a false "either or" situation, says  Bociurkiw. Deficit arguments against arts  funding are unfair. Arts funding has never  been more than one percent of the federal  budget and according to the Cultural Emergency Coalition, Canadian arts funding is  the lowest per capita among countries of  the north. Arts funding is not a luxury; it is  a responsibility we hold for future generations of Canadians to hear our voices and  to add theirs to the Canadian cultural identity.  After years of donating their work and  time to support activist groups, artists are  becoming activists themselves. On April 26,  artists and interested parties will bring together a diverse range of talent in support  of this day of action. Vancouver will have  a parade (starting at noon from the Vancouver Art Gallery); Regina has organized  a prairie-  wide postcard  campaign; Kamloops  (BC) will host a night of protest readings; Ottawa is holding a  press conference at the Canadian Conference on the Arts; Toronto will have street  performances at Queen's Park; St. John is  having a party; and Halifax will protest outside of MP Mary Clancy's home.  The organizers of action are asking for  all supporters of Canadian art and culture  to come out and support arts funding before it's too late.  To add your voice to the voices of others, contact your local IFVA/AVCI or the  national office in Montreal at (514)522-8240  or email ©cam.org. For more details about  the action in Vancouver, call Marusya  Bociurkiw at 875-1054.  Leanne Johnson is a Vancouver-based writer  who hates statistics or anything to do with  numbers, but likes to surround herself with  friends who do.  APRIL MADNESS 5  APRIL MADNESS S/  Be A Star At Kinesis  Your horoscope shows  your personal qualities  make you a perfect volunteer for Kinesis.  T Aries: Have big visions.  Q Libra: Good at handling  Work in circulation—and  stressful situations.  visualize Kinesis on every  Deadlines don't faze you.  newsstand in the country!  1) Scorpio: Outer calm, inner  ft Taurus: Stubborn.  passion.  As a newswriter, you won't give  Makes a fair and discriminating  up until you've gotten that all-  reviewer.  important quote.  ^Sagittarius: Restless and  II Gemini: See all sides of the  optimistic.  issue.  You won't be satisfied until  The most important quality in a  you've thought up the perfect  reporter (but tends to slow down  headline.  the collective process).  V3 Capricorn: Steady and reliable.  ©Cancer: Creative.  Experience the glow of moral  You'll really care what colour is  superiority that comes from being  on the cover each month.  a regular Kinesis contributor.  cflLeo: Love to be in the limelight.  *w Aquarius: Eccentric.  See your name in Kinesisl  You think you're eccentric? Try  working at Kinesis.  TOVirgo: Detail-oriented.  Proof-reading your forte.  KPisces: Flexible.  You can do it all—writing editing,  proofreading and production!  Call 255-5499 to find out how to volunteer at Kinesis. /feirWtf/Bringing it home;  Personalized feminism  by Cathy Stonehouse  BRINGING IT HOME:  Women talk about their lives  Edited by Brenda Lea Brown  Arsenal Pulp Press  Vancouver, BC, 1996  Bringing It Home is described by its  back cover blurb as "a collection of intensely personal essays by women... on the  role of feminism in their lives". In the  book's introduction, editor Brenda Lea  Brown presents as her starting point a desire to "hear from women who are not regular spokespeople for feminism", to produce  a book "through which [women] can discover interconnectedness...and even call it  feminism."  Brown describes feminism as an "impenetrable monolith" that consists of a  "faceless body of censorious women" berating her for not being oppressed enough.  It is not surprising, therefore, that the majority of the book's contributors match all  or part of Brown's demographic profile—  white, middle-class, heterosexual mothers,  members of the "baby boom" generation.  Set against this dominant perspective, essays by women such as Joan Meister, who  discusses her experience as a disabled  woman and activist, and Fay Blaney, who  describes her journey toward feminism as  a First Nations woman growing up through  poverty and abuse, appear unnaturally isolated, and the small minority of essays by  lesbians and women of colour reflects a  tokenism that Brown, as editor, chooses not  to address.  Given, therefore, that this book is a  collection of "personal" writings, the life  experiences of its contributors necessarily  dictate much of the content, as well as the  overall analysis and point of view. The collection consists of 24 essays by 25 different  women (two women write in collaboration)  that discuss everything from voluntary  childlessness to women in science and  sport. Despite Brown's implication that her  chosen contributors are "ordinary" (non-  feminist?) women, many of the writers included here either are or have been outstanding Canadian feminists and pioneers  in their fields. Consequently, the book also  presents a herstory of Canadian feminist  activism and infrastructure which cuts  across the individualizing framework of  "personal," or separate, life stories. Scientist Ursula Franklin writes a moving and  powerful letter to an aspiring feminist scientist: "don't check your feminism at the  laboratory door...you will depend for your  sanity on an ongoing rootedness in the  women's community." Raminder Dosanjh  describes her struggles and triumphs in  establishing the India Mahila Association,  "the first South Asian Women's organization of its kind in Canada." Meg Hickling  and Jerilynn Prior describe their battles to  overturn damaging medicalized stereotypes of women—Hickling as a sexual  health educator and Prior as a researcher  into sport and women's reproductive potential. Lyndsay Green and Dorothy and  Suzanne Todd Henault describe their experiences as feminist filmmakers, addressing some of the ironies inherent in the demise of certain feminist organisations—for  example, the National Film Board's Studio  D—when coupled with the rise of the corporate career woman: "Margaret Thatcher  was always an embarrassment, but when  carbon copies of the Iron Maiden take over  your own institution, it's devastating."  For many of the contributors, an  early desire to become "liberated" leads  them toward parenting while simultaneously pursuing a career. For others, the  need to survive economically while raising  children is more of a necessity than a choice.  Balancing competing demands of work and  family, community and self emerges as one  of the major conflicts in women's lives.  Rachel Farahbakhsh, a Baha'i mother and  peace campaigner, decides, like many  women, to combine her responsibilities and  work from home. "My favourite question  asked was, 'Is your office still open?' as the  callers would be subjected to the sound of  the washing machine, or dishwasher, or  supper cooking."  Filmmaker Green, another self-employed mother, writes "I am able... to have  a career, raise two children, keep my marriage intact, and maintain some connections with family and friends only by forming partnerships with others." These "partnerships" are in fact with her husband,  business partner and housekeeper/nanny.  The choices that Green's position in society brings contrast markedly with Fay  Blaney's isolation as a mother of two struggling with scars left by poverty and abuse,  battling racism in the women's movement  while simultaneously healing herself: "I am  spread too thin. I am drowning. The only  thing that saves me is the drive to prevent  this suffering from happening to my children."  Throughout the entire book, issues of  choice, personal autonomy and freedom sit  uneasily beside a recognition of the very  real limitations imposed on many women's  lives. Many contributors provide a welcome implicit critique of the insanity of  "having it all," and the ultimate inadequacy  of Western, capitalist notions of personal  freedom that reject community and the reality of interdependence. At one end,  Cynthia Minden experiences autonomy  through voluntary childlessness, while Val  Paape discovers through meditation and  the experience of breast cancer that "one  could be totally dependent physically and  economically and still be self-reliant in  one's own mind and being." Larissa Lai  chronicles her awakening to racism in the  women's movement, and her desire to  strengthen community and a lesbian notion  of family, despite her awareness that "the  sisterhood of feminism is a strange one because it offers the illusion of safe spaces  when in reality there are none," and that  "we live in a cynical age and find ourselves  with little choice but to adopt the individualist mode of operating that global capitalism offers us."  The best writing in this collection  comes from a place of uncompromising  honesty, wry humour and visionary truth.  The deepest layers of privilege and oppression lie below each testimony like geological strata, surfacing in moments of  profound insight and occasional ignorance. Feminist insights into the responsibilities that accompany privilege arise from many different perspectives, implicitly challenging some  of the editorial limitations of the book  itself. Denise Nadeau, a feminist  popular educator, describes her process of descending into a deeper, more  personally integrated political stance:  "I think every white middle-class  feminist who is involved with women's movements in all their plurality  and diversity has tcrcome to terms  with her race and class privilege."  Women who do not approach feminism from the mainstream raise other,  still more challenging, questions.  Blaney, an educator and a vice-president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women, asks herself: "How can I remain true to my heritage while working within a mainstream feminist framework?" Shirley  Turcotte, a Metis counsellor and  trainer on issues of childhood trauma,  raises the issue of men's need to be involved and included in the struggle for  equality, challenging the feminist movement to "have the courage, the heart and  the wisdom to adopt all the world's children, to love them, to nurture them and to  protect them."  Women come to feminism through  many different doors, some through motherhood, others through becoming educators, others through a process of recovery  from betrayals and abuse. Many describe  feminist epiphanies, turning points on  which their evolution as feminists hinged.  For example, writer and construction  worker Kate Braid explains: "One night,  just before I fell asleep, I felt what it must  be like to feel like a traditional man. It was  a moment of utter confidence that the  world was as it should be and that my place  in it was splendidly clear... When I slipped  back into my woman's consciousness, the  space was vast." Others describe a more  gradual process of change. Pamela Dos  Ramos, a counselor, educator and immigrant from Guyana, chronicles her progression from a place of unfamiliarity with  feminism to a life in which feminist analysis has become central: "As a forty-three-  year-old married for seventeen years with  sons aged sixteen and thirteen, I began my  quest."  Some of the stories in this book describe a familiar if disheartening path:  women achieve success, burn out, then focus on building houses, running businesses  and doing therapy—a life path which  meshes all too well with the isolationism  of the overworked nineties. Others (some  of them the same stories) describe breathtaking pioneer lives that continue to flourish despite the recent rise of the Right. Perhaps this mirrors a shift in feminist constituencies over time, a "changing of the guard"  during which different women and different issues have risen to prominence in a  movement that has expanded and diversi-  fied beyond Everywoman's wildest  dreams.  Brenda Lea Brown  A theme that recurs with uncanny frequency throughout this collection is the  equation of feminism with integration. In  the words of Jerilynn Prior, "Where science  is typically dedicated to dissecting things  into smaller and smaller details, my instinct  has always been to fit the small pieces into  a congruent whole." This holistic impulse  radiates out from the scientific theories of  Maggie Benston as quoted by Ursula  Franklin, through the efforts of contributors such as Margaret Dragu, mother, performance artist and ex-stripper, to reconcile her multiple identities, and into the intimate lives of Linda Uyehara Hoffmann,  "my entire family has grown into feminism" and Patty Osborne, "I never suspected that feminism would hold the key  to a cohesive and harmonizing view of the  world." It is this inclusive feminist vision  that moved and inspired me most—the dialogue that transcends the apparent separation of the contributors' separately-narrated  lives.  My experience as a reader of Bringing  It Home is, by necessity, highly personal and  reflective of my perspective and circumstance. I would recommend the collection  to any woman interested in Canadian feminism, with the hopes that she might feel re-  inspired to step out of her isolation and join  in the feminist dance. I would suggest that  she not be put off by the anti-feminist marketing spin of the back cover blurb, or the  apologetic editorial stance. Despite its packaging, and certain glaring omissions, Bringing It Home provides the feminist reader  with intelligent sustenance for mind and  soul. In the words of Ursula Franklin:  "Please keep in touch and remember, you  are not alone."  Cathy Stonehouse approaches feminism  through the back door; her demographics look  best in profile. She is white, bisexual, not a baby  boomer and not a parent, and writes poetry,  fiction, essays and reviews in between aberrational episodes of paid employment.  APRIL 1997 Arts   Pornography, freedom of speech and violence against women:  Feminists vs. Larry Flynt  by Karen Sawatzky  A mass circulation pornographic  magazine, Hustler has been known to publish a great number of extreme and sexually violent images. Because of this, Hustler's founder and publisher, Larry Flynt has  found himself in court on many occasions  facing obscenity charges. He has hired lawyers to defend himself in these court battles, using the free speech protection of the  US Constitution's first amendment. The  People vs. Larry Flynt is a mainstream Hollywood movie about Flynt, produced by  Oliver Stone and directed by Milos Forman.  It depicts Flynt's rural poor upbringing, his  rise to notoriety and wealth gained from  pornography, and the paralysis he suffers  from a sniper shooting. Many reviewers  have said The People vs. Larry Flynt is a  movie which treats seriously the issues of  defending free speech, through its chronicling of Flynt's life and legal battles. I think  it does a major disservice to the complexity of free speech issues by obscuring the  real history and harm for which Flynt is  responsible.  Between 1978 and 1982, feminist resistance to misogynist publications like Hustler was especially active. Groups such as  San Francisco's Women Against Violence  and Pornography in the Media organized  feminist anti-porn demonstrations with  more than 5000 women attending. They  held an international conference on the issue, formed action groups and conducted  consciousness-raising tours of the porn district in San Francisco, New York and Washington, DC. Women organized together  under names like The Preying Mantis  Women's Brigade and WHCH, the Women's International Terrorist Conspiracy  from Hell. Here in Vancouver, there was the  Wimmin's Fire Brigade. To challenge the  proliferation of pornography, these groups  used tactics from spray painting, to minor  destruction of property, right up to fire  bombing.  Feminist activist and academic Diana  Russell conducted research showing that  pornography does affect the degree and  quantity of male violence against women.  US author Andrea Dworkin and lawyer  Catherine MacKinnon drafted a municipal  ordinance that would make harm done to  an individual woman by pornography an  actionable cause for a civil suit. Countless  individual feminists debated the definition  of pornography and the solutions to misogynist images. Many women attempted  to hold the men in their lives accountable  for their endorsement or use of what some  people call "hate literature" against  women.  Many of these actions were controversial at the time and remain the subject of  tactical debates among feminists today.  They form part of the rich and creative  herstory of feminist resistance to male defined sexuality. However, Stone and  Forman chose not to include these details  in the Larry Flynt story, even though Flynt  himself has invested considerable energy  and funds in attempts to trivialize, humiliate and ridicule leaders of the feminist opposition to pornography. These efforts in  clude publishing sexually mutilated images  of Gloria Steinem and Andrea Dworkin  characters in cut and paste photo spreads.  In 1985, Dworkin slapped Flynt with a $150  million libel suit in response to a series of  Hustler caricatures of her in sexually humiliating poses. She didn't win, but she did  give him trouble. The movie does not include this episode of Flynt's court battles.  Hollywood filmmakers like Stone and  Forman, with the luxury of clout and creative decision-making power, have yet to  make a movie that honours Dworkin's activism on behalf of women harmed by pornography. She is certainly the equally controversial and reviled feminist anti-porn  counterpart to Flynt.  Instead of telling the whole story, the  filmmakers chose to glorify Flynt by  focussing on his US Supreme Court battle  with Jerry Falwell, the Christian evangelist  and leader of the pro-Reagan Moral Majority. Flynt comes off as a sexual liberator  and free-speech freedom-fighter when he  is played off against the hypocritical and  repressed Falwell. The court battle sets the  audience up to be sympathetic to Flynt. We  are led to think that though Flynt is vulgar,  he's at least honest about it and has a sense  of humour, if a twisted one at that. When I  saw the film, the biggest cheers from the  audience came when Flynt decides to pursue a countersuit against Falwell for photocopying the slanderous spoof ad published in Hustler. The ad claimed that  Falwell's first sexual experience was with  his mother in an outhouse. What the movie  sets up as a pitched battle between archenemies is really only a petty skirmish between one misogynist and another. Should  women care who wins?  Flynt is portrayed as a class hero and  the underdog, on a mission to bring  hardcore pornography to the masses and  rescue them from Hugh Hefner's snooty  porn monopoly, Playboy, which Flynt says  talks over the heads of the working-class  Joes who just want to see more miles of  wide-angle pussy. In the movie, Flynt is  shown being "persecuted" for his pornographic lampoons of Santa Claus and the  Wizard of Oz: "All I'm guilty of," he protests, "is bad taste."  Larry Flynt can come off as a defender  of free speech only because the movie  doesn't show what he actually publishes.  Despite five Golden Globe awards nominations, including Best Picture and laudatory reviews in the Georgia Straight, The  Globe and Mail and the Vancouver Courier  that call The People vs. Larry Flynt an "important" film and a balanced portrayal, the  movie completely glosses over the racism  and misogyny that Hustler magazine has  continually promoted. Viewers or sympathizers of the movie should remind themselves of some of the material Hustler has  published and question whether or not it  qualifies as "speech." Probably most notoriously, Hustler once featured a cover picture of a woman's body being fed into a  meat grinder. Only her naked legs are visible and ground meat is coming out of the  grinder's other end. This cover sparked a  What the movie sets up as a pitched  battle between arch-enemies is really  only a petty skirmish between one  misogynist and another. Should  women care who wins?  lot of public outrage, many column inches  in various newspapers and magazines, and  an episode of Donahue. The movie spends  all of ten seconds on it.  Other Hustler features include a photo  spread of a pool table gang rape published  a few months before the 1983 pool table  gang rape of a young woman in a bar in  Massachusetts. In response to accusations  that the Hustler photospread might have  contributed to the crime, Flynt printed postcards of a nude woman on a pool table with  the caption "Greetings from New Bedford,  Massachusetts: Portuguese Gang Rape  Capital of America."  Hustler also gained notoriety for its  cartoon serial "Chester the Molester." The  story line consists of the protagonist, Chester, stalking and raping pubescent girls. In  the 1990, the cartoonist, Dwayne Tirney was  convicted of sexually molesting his daughter. Hustler also published a photograph of  a naked woman spread-eagled and tied to  the hood of a jeep, her crotch centred in the  photo. Two men in hunting attire holding  guns sit inside the vehicle. The caption  reads "Beaver hunters—these two told Hustler that they stuffed and mounted their trophy as soon as they got her home."Hustler  has run contests offering prizes to male  readers who send in the most pornographic  photos of their wives, sisters or girlfriends.  Hustler is also known for its racist depictions. In 1987, the magazine ran a full  page cartoon of a Black shoe-shiner kneeling in front of a white businessman. There  is a surprised expression on the Black man's  face as he polishes a gigantic white penis.  Apart from Hustler, Flynt publishes 28  other magazines. One of these is called Chic  magazine. In 1979, Chic published a photo  essay called "Columbine Cuts Up." It featured a blonde woman with an ecstatic expression on her face as she plunges a large  kitchen knife up her vagina. Blood spurts  everywhere.  Flynt defends these images under the  guise of free speech. The movie certainly  does not question the belief that unqualified free speech is the highest value in a  democratic society, and that everything and  anything can be called speech. No ifs, ands,  buts, qualifications, or power analysis.  Stone and Forman cowardly shrink from  accurately depicting the content oiHustler  and what Flynt is actually crusading to protect—that is, his "freedom" to profit handsomely from the depiction of maimed, tortured, bloodied, tied up, whipped and  beaten women.  After he gets out of jail for contempt  of court, Flynt forms a front organization  called Americans for a Free Press, thereby  lending himself some semblance of journalistic credibility. In one scene in the movie,  Flynt presents a slide show for the media.  Portraying himself as a celebrator of women's bodies and sexuality, he juxtaposes pictures of massacres and battle scenes with  images of conventional heterosexual intercourse. He asks his audience "Which is  more obscene? Why is it legal to show pictures of killing when killing is a crime, but  illegal to show pictures of love-making  when sex is a beautiful and natural thing?"  By highlighting this supposed societal contradiction, Flynt and the filmmakers conveniently side-step the fact that pictures of  missionary position sex have never been the  main fare of Hustler. (Why didn't the filmmakers choose to show the Hustler photo  of a woman being forced to suck the barrel  of a gun?)  The whole point of the film seems to  be to depict Flynt as an irascible, but endearing, rebel low-life. The message: "we  need more rugged libertarian individualists like him. They are what makes this  country great." In the film, Flynt trumpets  to reporters: "The first amendment has to  be strong enough to protect scumbags like  me. If it will protect me, then it will protect  all of you, 'cause I'm the worst."  Part of the movie's attempt at presenting a balanced characterization is the depiction of Flynf s relationship with his (now  deceased) wife, Althea. They are portrayed  as a mutually loving and tenderly devoted  couple throughout the film, despite the fact  that they both are heavy drug addicts for  most of their relationship. According to the  movie, Althea could barely stand by herself for the last several years of her life.  Interestingly, the film doesn't even  make reference to the fact that Flynt has  three children. All of them are adults now.  One of his daughters, Tonya, has publicly  accused Flynt of child sexual abuse. She  joined a feminist protest at the film's opening in San Francisco and stated that, "I'm  upset about this film because it supports  my dad's argument that pornography does  no harm. If you want to see a victim of pornography, just look at me."  Karen Sawatzky is a volunteer programmer on  Vancouver's Co-op Radio CFRO 102.7FM. A  version of this article was previously published  in Canadian Dimension, March 1997. Many  of the images from Hustler depicted here are  taken from their description in three books:  Take Back the Night: Women against pornography, an anthology edited by Laura  Ledrer; Against Pornography: The evidence  of harm by Diana Russell; and Pornography:  Men possessing women by Andrea Dworkin.  16  APRIL 1997 Bulletin Board  t h i s I     INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis?? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our next Story Meetings Tues Apr 2 and Mon May 5 at 7 pm at  our new office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For  more information or if you can't make the  meeting, but still want to find out about  writing for Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. No experience is necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the May  1997 issue is from Apr 16-22. No experience is necessary. Training and support will  be provided. If this notice intrigues you, call  us at 255-5499. Childcare subsidies  available. Please note that we will be  producing the April issue at our office at  #301-1720 Grant St.   VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us-become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Thurs  Apr 17 at 7pm at VSW, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For more info, call 255-5511.  Please call before the orientation to  confirm attendance. Childcare subsidies  available.  VSWKINESIS' NEW HOME  As of March 27, 1997, the Vancouver  Status of Women and Kinesis will be  housed at a new location, #309-877 E.  Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1. Our  telephone and fax numbers will remain the  same. We will re-open at our new location  on April 1, but from Apr 1-3, our office will  only be open from 1-5pm. Starting on Apr  7, we will once again be open during our  regular office hours, Mon-Thurs, 9:30-5pm.  We apologize for any inconvenience this  may cause. Come see us at our new  space!  FUNDRAISING FOR VSW  VSW's Fundraising Committee invites the  participation of women interested in raising  funds and planning events for a non-profit,  feminist organization. The next meeting is  Tues Apr 15 at 6pm at VSW, 309-877 E.  Hastings St. Please call or fax Audrey at  255-5511 to confirm your attendance or for  info.   VSW PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE  The Vancouver Status of Women is looking  for women of colour and Aboriginal women  interested in training to be facilitators for  our communications skills and awareness  program. Come and join us and share with  us your thoughts on women's issues and  community organizing. For more info about  the program call Ema at 255-5511.  SINGLE MOMS' DAY  The Vancouver Status of Women invites  women to come and participate in the  organizing of our annual Single Mothers'  Day in the Park event to be held on Sun  May 11. It's fun and it's cool. If you are  interested in helping out, call Ema at 255-5511.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C V8K 2C8  VIOLENCE AGAINSTWOMEN  Yasmin Jiwani, director of FREDA, the  Feminist Research, Education, Development and Action Centre, will speak on the  issue of violence against women on Tues  Apr 29, 7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566  W 4th Ave, Vancouver. Jiwani will address  the ongoing feminist effort to bring the facts  to light and to reform the social and legal  values that have allowed the violence to  continue. Admission is free. For more info  call (604) 732-4128.   ANTI-RACISM WORKSHOP  The Vancouver Status of Women is hosting  a two-part Anti-Racism Workshop series  over the next few months for women  working in women's organizations. Aboriginal women and women of colour, who are  working or volunteering in women's  organizations are invited to participate in  the first part of this series, scheduled for  Apr 12-13. The two-day session will  provide Aboriginal women and women of  colour an opportunity to come together to  talk about, review and analyze different  anti-racism strategies, policies and experiences. Women interested in participating or  finding out more info call Ema at VSW, 255-  5511.   MARILYN DUMONT  Marilyn Dumont will read from her latest  collection of poems, A Really Good Brown  Girt, Tues Apr 15 at 7:30pm at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. In a  voice that is fierce, direct and true, Dumont  explores the challenges—and celebrates  the joys—of her Metis heritage, and  transcends the multiple boundaries  imposed by society on the self. Admission  is free. For more info call (604) 732-4128.  SHANI MOOTOO  Writer and video-maker Shani Mootoo will  read from her new novel, Cereus Blooms  at Night, on Tues Apr 22 at 7:30pm at  Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. Admission is free. For more info call  (604) 732-4128.   DYKEWORDS  Dykewords, readings by local lesbian  writers, is held every second Thursday at  9pm at The Lotus, 455 Abbott St, Vancouver. Thurs Apr 3 features readings and  performances by Terrie Hamazaki, Tia  Mitchell and Irit Shimrat. On Thurs Apr 17  there will be readings by local writers  featuring Janine Fuller, Tonya Yaremko and  Dorothy Seaton. Thurs May 1 will feature  readings and performances by Persimmon  Blackbridge, Karen Woodman and Elaine  Hung. Admission is sliding scale $1-4.  Everyone welcome. Call 685-7777 for more  info.  GUATEMALAN THEATRE  The Grupo Caleli production of Ixquic:  History Repeats Itself, a play depicting the  current plight of Guatemalan refugees as  well as the long history of other uprooted  Guatemalans, will be presented at the  Havana Restaurant Gallery and Theatre,  1212 Commercial Drive, Sun Apr 13 at  6pm. Using the unique theatre-forum  technique, the play is derived from traditional Mayan literature. A discussion period  follows the play. For more info contact  Stephanie Brook at 222-4115 or Miriam  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  +  Vancouver BC  ■   Spetiai orders  Voice   604 752-4128  welcome ■  ■  Fax      604 732^1129  10-* Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  Palacios, OXFAM Program Co-ordinator, at  736-7678. Presented by Project Accompaniment and OXFAM-Canada.  DYKE ART RETREAT  The eighth annual Dyke Art Retreat  Encampment (DARE) will be held June 29-  July 5 at Rootworks, near Sunny Valley in  southern Oregon. DARE offers a week of  focused group and individual self-initiated  art projects in a supportive environment.  Rustic cabins, tenting space and meals  provided. Limited registration, $160-185.  For info and registration brochure send  SASE to DARE, 2000 King Mountain Trail,  Sunny Valley, Oregon, USA 97497.   MICHIGAN WOMYN'S FESTIVAL  The 22nd Michigan Womyn's Music  Festival will be held Aug 12-17. Situated on  650 acres, the festival offers plenty of  camping in a village-like setting. The  schedule includes a 6-day women's film  festival, 300 workshops and 3 performance  stages featuring 40 sets of music, dance,  comedy and theatre. For info write to  WWTMC, PO Box 22, Walhalla, Ml, USA  49458 or call (616) 757-4766.   CELEBRATING CLOWNING  Clownwise is holding a conference,  Nobody's Fool: But Everybody's Laughing,  A Celebration of Canadian Clowning, May  31-June 3 at Gas Station Theatre, Winnipeg. The conference will examine the roots  of clowning in community and culture,  explore the healing power of humour in  regards to physical, emotional and mental  illness, encourage clowning as a tool in  education and celebrate the skill of Canada's talented commedic artists. For more  info call (204) 786-1499.   CATHERINE BENNETT  Vancouver author Catherine Bennett will  read from her latest work, Sub-Rosa &  Other Fiction, a wonderful hybrid of  conventional and genre-bending narrative,  at Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, on  Tues Apr 8 at 7:30pm. Admission is free.  For more info call 732-4128.  EASTTIMOR FILM  Vancouver filmmaker Elaine Briere will  screen her latest production, Bitter Paradise: The Sellout of East TimorIn Victoria  on Tues Apr 8 at 7pm at the Victoria Public  Library, Main Branch. The screening is  open to the public and free of charge.  There will also be a display of Briere's  award-winning photographs of life in a  Timorese village. For more info call Terry  Wolfwood at (250) 595-7519.   BCTF CONFERENCE  BCTF is holding a public conference on  Children, Schools, and Poverty, on Sat Apr  12. Speakers will address child poverty  issues—schools, strategies and the role of  government, and there will be a panel  discussion on The Real Face of Poverty."  The conference is open to everyone.  Registration fee is $50, free to students  (secondary or post-secondary), unemployed and low income participants. For  information, contact Pat Balango at BCTF,  100-500 W. 6th Ave, Vancouver, phone  871-1872, or fax 871-2289.   ARTS DAY OF ACTION  To protest cuts to arts funding, artists, art  groups and interested parties are organizing a National Day of Action Against Arts  Cutbacks on Sat Apr 26. In Vancouver, a  parade will start at noon from the Vancouver Art Gallery. Activities are also planned  in Regina, Kamloops, Ottawa, Toronto, St.  John and Halifax (see story on page 14).  For details about the action in Vancouver,  call Marusya Bociurkiw at 875-1054. In  other areas, call your local arts organization. Bulletin Board  GROUPS  GROUPS  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  SLED  Touchstone Theatre's 21st season continues with its presentation of Sled, a darkly  humorous and disturbing world, where  seemingly disparate tragedies are intimately connected, written by Judith  Thompson. Sled opens Thurs Apr 3 at  8pm and runs until Apr 20 at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895 Venables  Street. A free reading /discussion with  Thompson will be held on Sat Apr 12 at  6pm at VECC. For show times and ticket  info, call the VECC box office at 254-9578.  For group tickets (10+) call Kathleen Oliver  at 215-3853.   BUILDING WORKSHOPS FOR  WOMEN  Groundworks is holding its Women's  Natural Building Symposium and Hands-on  Extravaganza Jun 19-26 near Grants Pass,  Oregon. Groundworks calls all women  interested in creating homes and buildings  out of earth, straw, wood, and stone, with  homemade plasters, paints and floors.  Particularly appealing to those concerned  with environment, sustainability, and  affordable housing. The cost of the Extravaganza, including three vegetarian/vegan-  option meals a day plus camping, is $250-  $350 sliding scale. Registration is limited  to 45. A $20 late registration fee will be  added after May 15. Limited half-tuition  work scholarships available by letter  request only (due by April 31). Girls are  very welcome, but no child care is available. For more info contact Groundworks:  PO Box 381, Murphy, OR, 97533, USA; tel:  (541)471-3470.   PWN BOARD  The Positive Women's Network in Vancouver is seeking potential Board members to  be elected at its annual general meeting in  June. Women interested in joining the  Board are expected to become familiar with  PWN's mission statement, purposes,  policies and services, and to sit on at least  one of its committees. The priority areas for  Board members this year are HIV-positive  women, legal expertise, fundraising  experience and public relations/communications experience. For more info call  Diana Peabody at 681-2122, ext 200.  SUPPORT FOR LESBIANS  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver is offering a free, confidential  support group for lesbians and bisexual  women who have been physically, sexually  or emotionally abused by their women  partners. The group runs for 10 weeks  beginning Tues Apr 8. Childcare subsidies  and bus tickets available. For more info call  Gail or Sarah at 687-1867.  THEATRE WORKSHOP  SUCCESS (the United Chinese Canadian  Enrichment Society) and Headlines  Theatre are looking for participants for a  "Theatre for Living" workshop, exploring  intergenerational issues inside families  where the parents have come to Canada  from another country and the children are  growing up in Canada. The purpose of the  project is to create a cross-cultural understanding around issues of resettlement.  Participation is limited to people whose  family have English as a second language.  Workshops will be held May 15-19,  rehearsal May 20-22, performances 23-25.  For more info call Angelo at (604) 684-1628.  LESBIANS AND BREAST CANCER  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is currently trying to assess the need for a  facilitated support group for lesbians living  with breast cancer. The group will be  meeting at the VWHC, 219-1675 W. 8th  Ave, and is targeted to start in March. Any  woman interested in participating in this  group please call or leave a message for  Raine at 736-4234.  18  VCN VOLUNTEERS  The Vancouver CommunityNet, a community-based Internet service provider, is  looking for 10-15 community minded  volunteers to work with community groups  interested in getting online and to conduct  basic internet introductions. Some internet  and other skills training provided. Interpersonal communication skills a must. Call  Katherine on Mondays at 257-3811 or Ian  at other times at 257-3872.   FEMINIST NETWORKING GROUP  Vancouver feminists are invited to participate in the Feminist Networking Group  (FNG). The group, comprised of individual  feminists and feminists working in women's  organizations, recently met to determine  the structure, purpose and organizing work  of the ad hoc group. The FNG has set as a  priority area, organizing around the federal  election. Feminists who are interested in  analyzing issues and policies, and planning actions in order to ensure our voices  are heard by federal candidates and  political parties and by the larger society  are invited to attend the next FNG meeting,  Tues Apr 15, 6:30pm at the Vancouver  Status of Women, 309-877 E. Hastings St.  For more info call 255-5511.  RAPE RELIEF  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24 Hour Crisis Line  and their Transition House for women and  children. Training sessions are on Tuesday  evenings. For more info and for a training  interview call 872-8212.  LIBERTYTHRIFT  Liberty Thrift is looking for volunteers to  work at their store, located at 1035 Commercial Dr, Vancouver. The store is run by  the WELL Society (Women Embracing  Lives of Liberty), a non-profit organization  dedicated to providing women and their  children with resources to help them live  lives of liberty and independence, free of  violence. Various volunteer opportunities  available to suit your interests and time  schedule. For work on Saturdays, call  Aldona at 255-3087. For work on week-  days, call Lystra at 255-3087.   QUEER MOMS  A support and/or discussion group for  queer moms is being planned for this  spring by Eastside Family Place and the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection. Interested  women are asked to fill out a survey to let  the organizers know what you want in a  group. Surveys available at the VLC and  Eastside Family Place. For more info, call  Allison at the VLC, (604) 254-8458 or Janet  at the Eastside Family Place, (604) 255-9841.  ITALIAN WOMEN'S ANTHOLOGY  An anthology by Italian and Sicilian women  to reflect ourselves out to other Italian and  Sicilian women and provide a forum for  critical discourse about location and  identity within Italian culture is in the works.  Submissions of poetry, theory, oral history,  fiction, drama, photography, artwork,  autobiographical pieces, narratives about  growing up/being Italian and Sicilian are  being accepted. Deadline is Apr 30. For  more info, call (416) 539-0535, fax (416)  651-5101 or write to Italian Women's  Anthology, Women's Press, 517 College St  #302, Toronto, ON, M6G 4A2.   NATIVE YOUTH ZINE  Redwire, a recently formed zine produced  by and for Native youth, is putting the call  out for submissions for their next issue.  How sick are you of being shut out and  shut down? How tired are you of having  nowhere to speak? And how ready are you  to speak out and speak proud? Then  submit your non-oppressive, non-discriminatory work (stories/poetry/art/?) to Nena  and Billie, PO Box 34097, Stn D, Vancover  BC, V6J 4M1. For more info call 873-0616.  HOT & BOTHERED  Submissions are being accepted for Hot &  Bothered, an international anthology of  queer sex/desire-driven short short fiction.  Stories must be 1000 words or less and  can be funny, sad, hot, complicated,  poignant, tragic, hilarious, lyrical, sensual...  Deadline is extended to Apr 30. For  guidelines, send self-addressed envelope  with Canadian stamps or international  reply coupon to: Hot & Bothered c/o PO  Box 100, 1036 Odium Dr, Vancouver, BC,  V5L 3L6, or email to kxt@aol.com.  POSTER COMPETITION  The 4th International Conference of the  Visual Arts is calling for submissions of  poster designs for their upcoming conference to be held in Vancouver Aug 7-20.  The conference includes an exhibition on  the theme of "Communication and Understanding," a creation of a public art work,  and an Internet exchange. Submission  deadline is Apr 30. Requirements: 11"x17"  colour or black and white on paper. The  selected designer will receive fame, glory,  $200, and a free pass to the conference.  For info call 263-2058. Send your proposal  to: Arts in Action Society, 5570 Blenheim  St, Vancouver, BC, V6N 1P5.   TRAUMA CONFERENCE  The Justice Institute of BC is calling for  submissions of workshop proposals for its  upcoming Trauma and Community Conference to be held in Vancouver Dec 4-6. The  conference will reflect on the diversity of  traumatic incidents, and the diversity of  historical forces, social movements,  community responses, clinical approaches  and research. The call for submissions is  intended to encourage a broad and diverse  community to present at this conference. If  interested, send a one-page proposal and  a resume to: the Trauma and Community  Conference, c/o Interdisciplinary Studies,  Justice Institute of BC, 715 McBride  Boulevard, New Westminster, BC or fax to:  (604) 528-5640. Deadline is May 2. For  more info and a proposal form, contact  Cindy Bettcher, (604) 528-5627 and e-mail:  cbettcher@jibc.bc.ca; or Patricia McNeill  (604) 528-5623 and e-mail:  pmcmeill@jibc.bc.ca.  vecoimunieirM  mg  omen  Vancouver Status of Women,  in association with VanCity Credit Union,  invites you to  A gala benefit in honour of the Vancouver Status of Women  Thursday, April 24, 1997, at 7:00 pm  Keynote Speaker  Mary Woo-Sims  Silent and Live Auction of Women's Art  The Arbutus Club  2001 Nanton Avenue, Vancouver  Hors d'oeuvres & Cash Bar  Music by the Musical Undergraduate Students' Association  Tickets are $50. Tax receipts will be issued for $25.  Call Audrey Johnson at 255-6554  teapots  The Feminist Research,  Education, Development  and Action Centre  (FREDA) is proud to  present Broken Teapots, a  book of poetry by A.  Alexon, which offers a  compelling look at one  woman's journey of healing from abuse.  For more information, please  contact FREDA at  (604) 291-5197.  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN, M.Ed.  Reg. Clinical Counsellor  Relationship Therapy  Individual Counselling  Integrative Body Work  Oak & 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867  IIHIIIIIHIIIIl^  Sangam Grant R.P.C.  REGISTERED PR0EFESSI0NAL COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  when the music changes se dees the dance... Bulletin Board  VIOLENCE AGAINSTWOMEN EXHIBIT  The Surrey Art Gallery is focusing on  violence against women in its two latest  exhibitions running April 5-May 11. Anne  Popperwell, a Saturna Island painter,  presents Why Don't You Just Leave, an  exhibit of her personal response to the  issue of domestic violence, expressed in  symbolic, abstract and figurative imagery  and text. As well, the Women's Monument  Project will present the process, proposals  and final design for a national monument  that will address violence against women.  Anne Popperwell, Beth Alber and Women's  Monument Project jurist, Haruko Okano, will  hold a "kitchen table" discussion at the  opening reception on Sunday April 6 at 2  pm. The gallery will co-host a reception with  the BC/Yukon Society of Transition Houses  Sunday April 20 from 2-4 pm, marking the  beginning of Prevention of Violence Against  Women Week (April 20-26). And a panel  discussion with various women's organizations will be held on Thursday, April 17 from  7-8:30pm. All events are free. For more  information about the exhibits and accompanying programs at the Surrey Art Gallery,  call (604) 501-5580.The Surrey Art Gallery is  located in the Surrey Arts Centre in Bear  Creek Park, 13750-88th Avenue, Surrey, BC.  SUBMISSIONS  UNDERTHEVOLCANO  The 8th annual Under the Volcano Festival  of Art and Social Change is calling for  submissions from artists, musicians, poets  and activists. This year's theme is "Artists  Resisting Globalization of Cultures."  SUBMISSIONS  Annual themes include Grrlapalooza and  Decade of Indigenous Peoples. Submission deadline is May 12. Call 254-8782 for  info or email volcano@netidea.com  B.C.'s newest full-service law firm  Dahl findlay Connors  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS ^fc  ■ A full range of services to meet your business and  personal legal needs  » Free initial consultation  • Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW  CLASSIFIEDS  WANTEDTO RENT  Woman and her well-behaved older dog,  Ms. Jones, are looking for a long-term  rental in Vancouver. A self-contained suite,  preferably a two-bedroom or one-bedroom  with den, full bath, fenced yard, small  garden, view, fireplace, spacious, bright,  cupboards and storage space in the  Commercial Drive area. $600. Excellent  references. Call 253-5007.  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.   WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For more info call 876-6390.  NRTS IN PLAIN LANGUAGE  The Lower Mainland Community Based  Services Society (LMCBSS) has written a  plain language translation of Proceed with  CLASSIFIEDS  Care, the final report of the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies.  The guide, New Reproductive Technologies: A Plain Language Translation, hopes  to make this subject easier for women  (especially women with disabilities) to  understand. The guide costs $10, or less  for self-advocates or unemployed people.  To obtain a copy of the guide or for more  info call Barb Goode at (604) 294-1230.  WOMENFRIENDS  WomenFriends Music Spring Fling: A  weekend of creative inspiration for women  of all ages, stages and styles will take  place from Apr 11-13. Workshops, jamming, dance, singing, drumming with  Loretta Joseph, or just relax in the hot tub!  Fully catered! At Camp Alexandra, Crescent Beach. Cost is $150-260 sliding scale.  For more info call Penny Sidor at (604)  251-4715.   PACIFICWEST DRIVERTRAINING  A woman-owned and operated business  specializing in defensive driver training.  Become a confident and safe driver with an  experienced instructor. Learn to drive  regardless of age or previous experience;  overcome driving fears. Basic car maintenance (theory) upon request. Reasonable  rates. Call El Apostol at (604) 691-1332.  Feminist broadcasting on Co-op Radio  Spring Marathon '97, April 11-27  Public affairs  OBAA All That Is Gold Does Not Glitter. Mining, environmental and  cultural collapse in B.C. and Guyana.       April 22 / 7:00 to 8:00  Music specials  Blue Monday The Women of R & B April 14 and 21 / 2:30 - 4:00 pm  Collective Efforts Obaa, Broken Records and Claddagh Ring, bring us  from Ani Di Franco to Zap Mama.   April 11 / 8:00 - midnight  Co-op Radio, Dig in, Join up.  CFRO 102.7FM  684-8494 