 <y  snoiAL C0(' "TIONS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  INSIDK  BAD NEWS ABOUT UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE  1  WHAT WILL HAPPEN NOW AT VGH?  2  SORWUC NEWS - UNITED BANK WORKERS'NEW PLANS  3  UPDATE ON THE NURSES'STRUGGLE  5  WOMEN AS ARTISTS/ART AS POLITICS  6  DANISH WOMEN'S CAMP  10  ■ffr  PRABHA GOES TO CUBA  INDIAN RIGHTS FOR INDIAN WOMEN  CENTRE  I $ 5-  / ifi i/>  »o <  NON-TRADITIONAL WORK - W.E.A.T. APPRAISED  18  PROGRAMME FOR THE FILM FESTIVAL  21  o  ?■  r  and other stuff including all  you never wanted to know about  pro-life"  XT ■'     '  ->  \  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  Subscriber Only _  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support!  KINGSIS  50c  Vol 7 no 8  S€PT€MB€R78  Vancouver Status of Women  Pr\0~CHOIC€ MARCH  art & politics uic cutbacks  cuba visited  vgh-what next? Below: CCCA activist Liz Whynot  chairs pro-choice rally.  Right: Rally participants.  PRO CHOKE RALLY  Lyn Buckle pictures.  Demonstrating support for a woman's fundamental right to  choose, 800 people marched in  downtown Vancouver July 28.  Later, more than 500 crowded  into St.Andrew's Wesley United  Church for a rally.  Taking part were representatives  from the women's movement, from  trade unions, political parties,  doctors' and nurses' associations,  and numerous community groups.  Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion organized the action.  Unemployment  Insurance Sloshed  UIC CHANGES as of Sept 1/78  1. The necessity to work a minimum of 40 weeks to be eligible  for UIC the first time around.  Employment & Immigration Minister  Bud Cullen explained:  "We are in fact excluding those  who have at best a tenuous and  marginal attachment to the labour  force. "  "Also, we are making sure that  individuals returning to the  labour force after a long absence  are not attracted back solely because of the existence of unemployment insurance benefits, "  Cullen said.  2. Claimants applying for a second  claim will have to have worked at  least as many insurable weeks as  they have received benefits under  their first claim.  Cullen said (The Vancouver Sun,  Sept 1/78) this measure would give  claimants an incentive to make their  claims as short as possible,  since  it would affect their future entitlement;    it would break the cycle  of reliance on unemployment insurance that some claimants have  built up, and it would require  claimants to prove a substantial  work record before requalifying for  ■ insurance.  "The purpose of this decrease is to  make it more attractive for potential unemployment insurance claimants to accept jobs now paying  close to the current level of  '   he said.  3.  Reduction in benefits from 66  2/3 to 60%.  "A reduction in rate,  shared by all  claimants,  should make jobs at the  lower end of the income scale more  attractive,"   Cullen said.  But, premiums will likely go up as  there will be cost sharing for those  few people who might be entitled to  extended benefits.  Who will suffer most - WOMEN followed by YOUNG PEOPLE and IMMIGRANTS.  In October/77, the Advisory Council  on the Status of Women wrote a damming report of Cullen's Comprehensive  Review of the Unemployment Insurance  Program in Canada. The Council  said:  Although the Minister makes the  claim that this Review makes an  important contribution to the  understanding of how the unemployment insurance scheme relates  'to a changing social and economic  environment',  it is apparent that  by its lack of objective analysis  of the data, and by its technique  of making sweeping generalizations  about women claimants which are not  substantiated by the data,  this  Review is dangerously misleading  in the picture it purports to draw  of women claimants.    It should not  be used for policy purposes until  a more thorough and detailed analysis of available information has  been undertaken. "  "A preliminary reading of the Review  gives rise to serious concern about  the way in which female claimants  have been dealt with in the study.  Throughout the Review, statements  are made about women which bear no  relationship to the data presented.    Constant innuendoes about the  labour force behaviour of women  perpetuate widely-held myths and  fail to take into account recent  research on this subject.    Women  are referred to as "secondary income earners with unstable employment patterns" leaving the reader  with the strong impression that  their salaries are not an essential  part of family income.  Cullen has obviously relied on the  Comprehensive Review and ignored  the detailed analysis of the Advisory Council on the Status of Women.  WRITE YOUR M.P. AND BUD CULLEN TO  INSIST THAT HE WITHDRAW THESE  PROPOSALS!.' • Wood & Hoon  INDICTED  I  BETSY WOOD AND GAY HOON, TWO WELL-  KNOWN PRISONERS' RIGHTS ACTIVISTS,  HAVE BEEN INDICTED AND WILL STAND  TRIAL THIS FALL ON CHARGES OF  COMPLICITY IN A JANUARY ESCAPE  ATTEMPT BY 5 PRISONERS AT THE B.C.  PENITENTIARY.  Wood and Hoon were  among visitors at the B.C. Pen on  the morning of Jan. 28th when the  aborted break-out attempt occurred.  Police and Prison officials refer  to this incident as a "hostage-  taking" but in fact the visitors  were locked-in the prison by fleeing guards.  Wood and Hoon were  immediately charged with complicity in this event.  Despite the findings of a lengthy  Preliminary Inquiry in which all  charges against Wood and Hoon were  dismissed, the prosecution has  chosen to take Wood and Hoon to  trial by DIRECT INDICTMENT which  completely nullifies the decision  reached at the Preliminary Inquiry.  Their first court appearance is  set for October 2nd.  At the conclusion of this Inquiry,  Judge Clare of the New Westminster  County Court stated ". . .J have  made fairly complete notes throughout the preliminary hearing or the  inquiry, and at no time did anybody,  whether it be an inmate or a hostage,  at any time say that either Wood or  Hoon were accomplices or parties to  this  ..." Judge Clare also stated  that he could find no direct evidence  from Wood or Hoon's written correspondence or recorded conversations  with B.C. Pen prisoners to show they  were arranging a prison break, and  no evidence was produced by the prosecution to show how the Crown Exhibits, a gun and a set of handcuffs, got into the B.C. Pen for  use in the escape attempt.  Dave Bennett, Ralph Saumer and Richard Wright go to trial on September  11th at the New Westminster Court-  House on charges including attempted  murder, and attempted escape relating  to the January break-out attempt.  Steven Hall was sentenced to life  and has been sent to the Millhaven  Pen's "hostage-takers" unit in Ontario.  Andy Bruce will be tried separately this fall for his role in  the aborted escape attempt.  DO PRISONERS HAVE THE RIGHT TO TRY  TO ESCAPE FROM THE BRUTALLIZING  EFFECTS OF SOLITARY CONFINEMENT?  This is a central issue in these  trials.  All of these five men have spent  YEARS in solitary confinement at  one of the most barbaric prisons in  North America, the B.C. Penitentiary.  Wood and Hoon have been central figures in the public education campaign to have SOLITARY CONFINEMENT  abolished.  WE MUST BE PRESENT AT THESE TRIALS  TO DEMONSTRATE OUR SOLIDARITY.  .More information from the SOLITARY  CONFINEMENT ABOLITION PROJECT, Box  758, Station A, Vancouver, B.C.  CCCA people: Barb Findlay  (L)  Lameke  (R) taking 4000  Vancouver General Hospital.  and Karen  in to  what happens now  ->m  FIGHT CONTINUES!  Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion (CCCA) learned August 21st  that the Annual General Meeting of  the Vancouver General Hospital  scheduled for September 27th, 1978  is not going to be held.  $2.00 memberships will be returned  from VGH.  VGH HAS YET TO EXPLAIN:  - What is the status of the  Corporation?  - What is the status of the  present membership?  - What is the status of the  thousands of applications for  membership now held by V.G.H.?  - Why are applications for membership no longer being accepted?  This announcement leaves many questions unanswered.  The Hon. Bob McClelland has been  quoted as saying that the Administrator will carry out all the business of the Corporation's A.G.M.  Will all applications for member-  D€F€NC€ FUND  Money is urgently needed for  Wood/Hoon Defence Fund (Note: the  Prelim, cost $15,000 and the trial  is expected to cost $40,000 so dig  deeply). Forward cheques or money  orders to CCEC Credit Union, #10 -  246 East Broadway, Vancouver, B.C.  ie   *****   *  See the July/August issue of  Kinesis for in-depth interview with  Wood and Hoon.  Correction:  in the  background to that interview it  should have read that Wood was  charged separately with conveying  a car onto prison grounds to facilitate an escape attempt and that  Hoon was charged separately wtth  2 counts related to supplying a  gun for this purpose.  ship be accepted and will these  applicants be able to vote for new  members of the Board of Trustees  when the term of the Administrator  is over?  Barbara Findlay, spokeswoman for  CCCA, commented that pro-choice  on abortion members of the Corporation have always supported the  hospital in its determination of  hospital procedures and urged that  the administration of the hospital  be returned to normal as quickly as  possible.  She went on to say that CCCA  anticipates further attempts by  anti-abortion forces to take over  other Lower Mainland hospitals.  On  Friday August 18th, 1978 CCCA  learned that Lions Gate, whose  deadline for membership applications  was Sunday August 20th, was being  flooded by anti-aboriton applications.  "CCCA only managed to sign  up 800 applications before the deadline but we hope that this is  sufficient to prevent a single issue  group from gaining control of Lions  Gate Hospital." Findlay queried "Is  the government going to look to  appoint administrators to all these  hospitals? Surely the government  should take an unequivocal stand  that the availability of abortion is  a medical procedure just as, for  example is blood transfusions, and  stop this nonsense once and for all.  Hospitals could then get down to  their business of patient care".  LIONS GATE HOSPITAL ANNUAL  GENERAL FETING  All new members of Lions Gate Hospital - attend the AGM at North  Vancouver Senior Secondary School  Gymnasium, 23rd Street and St.  George's Avenue, North Vancouver,  on Wednesday, Sept. 20, 1978, 7 P.M. The Muckpmuck, Walk,  BANKWORKERS  TO CONC'Ç ̈NTRATE ON MEMBERSHIP  The United Bank Workers Section of  SORWUC has decided to stop negotiations with the banks of B.C.  For the time being, they will concentrate on braiding a stronger  organization.  In this statement, the United Bank  Workers (UBW) explain the reasons  for this major change in strategy,  announced July 31:  "Our union is not yet strong enough  to take on the banks and the Canadian  Labour Congress together."  WE ARE NOT GIVING UP  "We are not giving up.  When thousands  of bank workers in B. C. are organized,  we will have enormous bargaining power.  But to do that, we will need the  support of organized labour and  especially the support of other women  workers.  The United Bank Workers  Section in B. C. will continue to  build our own organization, within  SORWUC, as well as helping to organize  workers in other industries, so that  we will have the strength to compel  the banks to sign the kind of union  contract that bank workers deserve."  MAJOR ACCOMPLISHMENTS  "Our union has achieved major accomplishments toward our goal of a union  in the banking industry.  Almost two  years ago we applied for certification  for a B. C. bank branch.  At that time  we were told it was illegal to join,  that it was against the Bank Act.  We  established the legal right of bank  workers to organize.  There are now  bank employees throughout the province  who have experience in organizing,  negotiation, and fighting unfair  labour practices -  "In Saskatchewan, where we do have  support of other unions, the  United Bank Workers Saskatchewan  Section is continuing to negotiate  with the Royal Bank at Melfort and  the Toronto-Dominion Bank.in Regina."  WE DO NOT HAVE THE MONEY  "In B.C. we do not have the money  to continue negotions, and we are  not yet strong enought among bank  employees to be able to win a  good contract. Negotiations with the  banks have been a farce.  They are  holding anti-union meetings in the  branches, withholding benefits and  wage increases from certified  branches, and firing union members.  The banks encourage division among  bank workers by portraying the  union as a third party.  They  encourage bank employees to "wait  and see" if"the union will be  successful, realizing that as long  as the union is a small minority of  bank employees we do not have the  bargaining power to win a good  contract."  CLC CAMPAIGNING AGAINST US  "But to organize such a large unorganized industry we need the  active support of all trade  unionists.  The Canadian Labour  Congress (CLC) has been -actively  campaigning against our union.  CLC representatives have told  local unions in B.C. not to give  us any support. "The lack of  support from the CLC has hindered  our campaign as much as the antiunion actions of the banks"  said  Jackie Ainsworth, UBW Vice  President, "As long as most unions  in B.   C.  continue to kowtow to  the CLC executive,   thousands  of workers will remain unorganized.  The CLC and its affiliates must  take responsibility for that. "  MUCKAMUCK  Community support was shown for the  Muckamuck workers on August 12 as  the strike entered its 10th week.  SORWUC members and supporters walked  from Muckamuck restaurant, where workers are oh strike for a first contract,  to Ace Galleries,owned by  Muckamuck boss, Doug Christmas. Pic-  keters and strike fund contributions  are NEEDED.  Phone 684 2834 for info.  BCFW  The 5th Annual Convention of British  Columbia Federation of Women (BCFW)  takes place November 10, 11, 12 and  13 at Capilano College in North  Vancouver.  What form and direction will this  convention take?  A BCFW planning convention committee  spokesperson, Sue Moore, comments:  "We have solicited an evaluation of  last year's convention and some input  for this year's from all member groups  and standing committee members.     On  the basis of those responses,  we  have formulated the following focus  for the upcoming convention.  "Basically,   this convention - BCFW's  fifth - will concentrate on a series  of workshops.    And there will be a  workshop on what BCFW is,  and how to  use it;  several workshops on  Communication Skills - from assertiveness training and constructive  criticism workshops- to a workshop  on how to use the establishment  media.     In addition,   there will be  a workshops on organizing - dealing  with methods of organizing around  issues emphasizing the existence of  different needs in different communities.  We hope this convention will accomplish    several things - first,  a knowledge of how BC- V is working now and  "  how it could work more efficiently  in the future; second - the sharing  of communication skills; third - the  development of practical skills for  local community-based organizing. "  A detailed agenda listing specific  workshops will be mailed to all  member groups.  A women's dance with appropriate  refreshments is also in the works.  VSW members are eligible to attend  the convention as VSW delegates.  For  our delegate requirements, see the  flyer inserted in this issue.* a victory for the pregnant male  "Women should not be granted equal  treatment in the work force only on  the condition of and at the price of  denying their role as mothers... that  is not equal treatment and equal  respect for every person regardless  of sex. "  David Vickers, arguing that  discrimination on the basis of  pregnancy is discrimination on  the basis of sex  "If pregnancy is equated to sex,  then  some curious and unfortunate results  can arise. "  Commissioner Hebenton rejecting  charge of sex discrimination  A Human Rights Inquiry Board decided  July 11 that the Surrey School Board  violated the B. C. Human Rights Code  by denying sick benefits to teachers  with pregnancy-related sicknesses.  But the decision also stated that the  school board did not discriminate  against the teachers on the basis  of sex.  Commissioner Sholto Hebenton  claimed that the code's provision  prohibiting discrimination on the  basis of sex did not relate to pregnancy .  Lawyer David Vickers, who acted for  the provincial Human Rights Branch  and the Surrey Teachers' Association  had argued at the hearing:  "Since pregnancy is only common to  women, to deny leave is to discrimination against women... the result  of this policy is that it discrim  inates squarely against women - the  only people in our society who can  become pregnant.  Vickers concluded:  "...women as a class and pregnancy  are inextricably linked as part of  the biological system of the human  race.     Women should have the freedom to choose to become mothers  without being palized therefore or  being treated as persons with less  rights and protection in the work  force.    The historical and ongoing  fact is that there is bias and  discrimination in the work force  directed towards women on the basis  of pregnancy."  Hebenton's decision seems to be based  on the rationale that equal treatment  of the sexes means the same treatment.  If there are no special rules for men  who become pregnant, then we cannot  protect the rights cf pregnant women  by adopting sex discrimination  standards.  We have to have two  classes of women:  those who become  pregnant and those who don't.  Hebenton is unable to admit that discrimination based on pregnancy is  discrimination against women.  Women Penalised  for Pregnancy  Hebenton's ruling is in agreement with  the June 1977 judgement from the  Federal Court of Appeal in the Bliss  case.  Hebenton agrees with that case  "that special rules about prenancy  do not constitute discrimination on  the basis of sex."  One more time, the legal machinery  of the land has declared its unwillingness to allow women to participate  fully in the workforce.  If it is in  society's best interest for women to  continue bearing children, it is  necessary that women not be denied  the protection of the law.  In declaring that the Surrey School  Board violated the Human Rights Code  on the basis of lack of reasonable  cause, but did not violate the Code  on the basis, of sex discrimination,  the Board of Inquiry penalized a  woman for becoming pregnant.  It is noteworthy that the Hon. Allan  Williams, B. C.'s Minister of Labour,  who appoints the Commissioners on  such Boards of Inquiry, chose only  one man to make this decision which  is vital to all women.  Justice Delayed  In November of 1976 (not a typo, folks)  Ms. G?wne, with three summers of  experience on a surveying crew in  Armstrong, B. C., was referred to a  company who had placed a job order  with Canada Manpower (as it was then  called) for a experienced chainman.  Ms. Gawne was interviewed, and told  that hiring a woman would make the  wives of the other crew members jealous.  Besides, it would involve the  extra expense of renting another  hotel room on out-of-town jobs.  Two  days later, a man with less experience  was hired.  Penticton Civil Liberties referred  the case to the Human Rights Branch  in January 1977.  The Human Rights Branch has requested  a Board of Inquiry. No response from  Williams.  Jane Gawne has waited too long.  Williams' reluctance to appoint  Boards of Inquiry is infamous.  Request after request dies upon his  desk.  There are two possibilities  here: Williams never cleans his  desk or he is not committed to  enforcing the Human Rights Code.  Commission At Last  Labour Minister Allan Williams  finally got round to appointing  a new B.C.Human Rights Commission August 30. There has been  no Commission since the former  Commission ended its term of  office December '77.  Expanding the Commission to ten  from five members, Williams appointed two women only. One of the  two heads the Commission : Margaret  Strongitharm.  Two women being appointed to a commission of ten is not a just reflection of the proportion of women in  B.C.'s population. Nor is it true  that this province lacks enough  competent women who can accurately  reflect women's concerns.  One can only hope that the Minister  will provide the Commission with a  copy of the last annual report prepared by the outgoing Commission.  A report of this nature is usually  tabled in the House, but Williams  has, to date, been unwilling to share  it with other members of the Legislative Assembly.  One for Us  The Canada Labour Relations Board  'has ruled that women on maternity  leave retain their employee status,  and the right to vote in elections  deciding whether employees want  a union.  The landmark decision resulted from  an application by the Retail Clerks  Internation Union to represent  employees at a Downsview, Ont.  branch of the Canadian Imperial Bank  of Commerce.  Two women on maternity leave had  been excluded from the voters' list  by the bank which argued that the  employer-employee relationship ended  during the period of leave.  The  bank said there was no guarantee  the women would return to work, and  if they did might be at a different  branch of the bank.  Therefore, it  said the women had no right to vote,  but their replacements did.  The board, however, ruled that the  federal government recognized, "after  a long battle fought by several  groups, the important contribution of  women in the Canadian marketplace  and the fact that women engaged in  a career should be free to have  children and yet be able to retain  their employment if they so desire  —at the end of maternity leave."  from UPSTREAM, August'78) UPDATE prepared by JANICE PENTLAND SMITH  Next month, Kinesis will bring you  the inside story on the VGH situation.    Nurse Verna Lovell has been  preparing an analysis of the past  months and will give us this analysis from her feminist perspective.  In the meanwhile, the following is a  brief run down of events since the last  issue.  • The Committee formed to investigate  the firings of the three clinical directors recommended that they be rehired  without conditions. This was announced  to the press before the nurses concerned were advised.  • One week later hospital President  Larry Truitt requested a meeting with  the nurses and told them that their reinstatement would be conditional. Truitt  had also taken it upon himself to write  new job descriptions for the nurses.  All three refused to return and one  nurse is sueing the hospital for wrongful dismissal.  • Soon after two senior nurses resigned.  One stated' that she would not work at a  hospital which treated senior staff in  the manner of VGH. The other in response to the hospital's refusal to  close beds in an understaffed area.  • By the beginning of August,15 senior  nurses had resigned. These were mainly  from the surgical unit. These resignations were all individual decisions and  did not represent a mass protest. Several other senior nurses are also considering resigning.  • Despite these resignations and growing unrest among hospital staff the  administration has refused to admit  that nursing concerns are valid. They  have also attempted to cover up the  seriousness of staffing problems  with blatantly transparent statements.  VGH  NURSES  • Kinesis was told that Bazowski has  a good reputation as an administrator  and that the mood among nurses is one  of cautious optimism. Bazowski has  met with the nurses and they felt he  listened to them. He removed the cond  itions placed by Truitt on the reinstatement of the three clinical directors  and they have returned.  • The Committee of Concerned Nurses is  still active and will continue to fight  for their demands. One of the demands  of the group is for the closure of beds  which cannot be adequately staffed.  The hospital has now closed some of  these beds but has denied that it has  done so in response to staff pressure.  Despite the denials of the administration  the nurses are aware that their actions  brought about the institution of  Bazowski.  • Kinesis was told that Bazowski has  complete authority, which might include  restructuring the administration and  changing the constitution.  Should he  take such an action or actions it seems  probable that these changes would be  made in a way that deals with the problem presented by the present structure  in terms of the abortion issue.  In response to the resignation of the  15 senior nurses the hospital claimed  that summer is always a time for high  staff turnover! Many of these nurses  had been at VGH for 10 - 15 years.  • On Tuesday August 8th Health Minister  McLelland met with the Board of Trustees  and later publicly stated that the  government would not intervene. Three  days later after an emergency cabinet  meeting he announced the government  takeover of the hospital. On Friday  August 11th VGH was placed in the  hands of public administrator, Peter  Bazowski.  VSW   NEWS  Come to the Quarterly Meeting of  V.S.W.  to discuss plans for fall  actions.  Time: September 26,   7.30  p.m.    Place: Kitsilano Library  (in  the downstairs meeting room) at  8th and MacDonald.  Coming up November 1,  1978,  V.S.W.  will have a staff vacancy for an  office coordinator. Duties include  office administration, coordination  of volunteers and press officer  responsibilities.  Call Sue at  736 1313 for more information.  RAPE RELIEF  Rape Relief has been funded on  an interim basis by the provincial government. The various  ministries concerned have already requested their funding  proposal for the next fiscal  year (April 79/80)  Spokesperson at Vancouver Rape  Relief comments: We have learned that the Ministry of Human  Resources is going into   'project funding' next year.  The  terms are not clear, and this  proposal gives us cause for  concern.  FAMILY  ALLOWANCE  On August 25, the Minister of Finance, Jean Chretien announced an  increase of $20 a month to each  household now in receipt of the  Guaranteed Income Supplement.  After some hesitation, the Hon.  W.Vander Zalm has agreed to pass*  this amount on to seniors in B.C.  In the same dramatic announcement,  Jean Chretien promised changes in  deductions and family allowances  for children. Deductions for income  purposes would be lowered; family  allowance would go down to $20,  instead of up to $28, but families  earning under $18,000 a year would  receive up to $200 per year per  child as a tax credit.  Although J.Chretien stated in a  question period that this would be  a traditional tax credit, where one  would have to be paying income tax  to benefit, the Minister of Health  and Welfare, Monique Begin, who is  responsible for the programme, stated that it would, in fact, be a subsidy programme which would be simil-  are to the B.C.Renters' tax credit  programme, for example. In this case,  a family which did not have to pay  income tax would file a statement of  earnings and receive $200 per child  plus $20 per month per child : an  increase of $104.  But...  Wt&  B.C.Human Resources Minister W.Vander  Zalm is now saying that he fears he  will have to consider this income,  and deduct the whole of the $200 per  child from welfare cheques.  The best that we can guess is that  families whose income is less than  $8,000 a year, with two kids, will receive $40. a month in family allowance : either a cash grant or a reduction of their income tax to nil.  Families in the $8,000 - $20,000  bracket will gain some amount of benefit through a tax credit when filing  income tax.  BUT UNLESS A GREAT DEAL OF PRESSURE  IS PUT ON THE MINISTER OF HEALTH  AND WELFARE, MONIQUE BEGIN. AND  ON VANDER ZALM3  FAMILIES RECEIVING  SOCIAL ASSISTANCE WILL BE PENALIZED.  Write to Begin and ask her to ensure  that the Federal government concession will not simply go into the  Provincial Government's pocket. GOTTEN as ARTISTS  ART as POLITICS  What constitutes a feminist perspective in art? Does it mean  presenting women making art? Or  recognizing that traditional women's  crafts - macrame, hand-built ceramics,  quilting, batik - are just as much  art as, for example, an abstract  lithograph? Or does it involve women  artists whose work makes some commitment to other women?  The conference, WOMEN AND THE VISUAL  ARTS, organized by the Women's Studies  Summer Insitute at Simon Fraser  University July 28 and 29 raised  these questions.  It brought together  a wide range of women artists with  diverse attitudes towards feminism.  Speakers at the conference included  painters, film-makers, and photographers. Art work for the conference  was,provided by the Bau-Xi, an  establishment Vancouver gallery. The  Women's Inter-Art Co-operative  mounted a lunch-time display of women's  arts, which have historically been  denigrated and dismissed as non-  serious.  Marian Penner Bancroft, Josie Cook,  Holly Devor, Patricia Johnston, Jan  Martell and Claudie Viallon spoke about  their work as women artists. Josie  Cook and Holly Devor were the two  whose perspective was overtly  feminist.  The fact that she is able to make  art at all, Josie Cook said, is due  to the support which she receives  from other feminists. Cook's  approach to her works is influenced  by experiences common to many women.  After Art School, she married and  found her identity as an artist  disappearing under the demands of  children.  She got back into making  art because of the encouragement she  received from other women. This  encouragement enabled her to respect  her work, and to really consider it  as art - art work can legitimately  depict dreams, a kitchen window, an  arm chair....  The Women's Inter-Art Co-op, Cook  said, has been a great inspiration.  She has a studio there away from the  dishes and the children and is able  to be much more productive.  political tool  Holly Devor emphasized that she  had a really definite, political  commitment to her art, and understands that her art is a political  tool.  She explained that she wanted  to show images of women in particular,  and also of men, who have moved  outside traditional sex roles. Her  photographs are images of people  being direct and open, strong, not  coy, really showing something of  themselves.  In speaking of her photographic  images, Marian Penner Bancroft also  revealed a perspective which has been  deeply influenced by feminism. Her  work, she commented, differs from  the prevailing mode of being aggressive  with the camera, of "shooting" people  and "capturing" shots. A lot of  photography - press photography is a  central example - presents images of  disaster and tragedy from a completely  impersonal point of view. There is  an emphasis on technique and an  alienation from content. A lot of  male photography works from an impersonal, technique-oriented place.  Bancroft's photographs of her family  and friends convey a marvellous and  moving sense of shared life between  the people being photographed and the  photographer.  feminist ^OievO  Discussion following the presentations  was long and heated and moved into  the arena of feminist vs. non-  feminist ideas about women as artists.  What is women's position in the art  world - how important is it to be  accepted by the male-identified  establishment galleries. Holly Devor  commented that the content and  emphasis of her work makes it  unacceptable for galleries. The  people who are interested in her  work - women - cannot afford to pay  gallery prices. With these two factors  the issue of 'making it' in the  established art world is not an issue.  And the question inevitably, came  up: Is_ there a women's sensibility  in art?  Persimmon Blackridge, Vancouver  feminist artist, comments:  Given that women, for thousands of  years, have been subjected,  cross-  culturally,  to the same treatment,  it would be surprising if there were  not recognizable patterns in their  artistic response.    Whether or not  that response always comes up is  another matter.    Male culture defines  what is important in art, as elsewhere.  Mutti-'Media  Is the political artist a person devoted to painting happy workers with  their fists in the air?  Is s/he intent on hammering in the  message at the expense of artistic  The MULTI-MEDIA, MULTI-POLITICAL  ART SHOW, which took place at  Vanguard Books,  Vancouver from August 21 - 31, was a powerful, positive refutation of these tired  old stereotypes of political artists.  The show lived up to its name.  It  brought together a really wide range of styles by artists whose work  addresses social issues. to p. 7  LECTURE TO THE WORKERS, by Claire  Kujundzic. Above: Persimmon Blackbridge's Desert #2, in the WOMEN AS ARTISTS  lunch-time show. Below: One of Josie Cook's pieces in the MULTIMEDIA, MULTI-POLITICAL ART SHOW.  tilti-Political Art ShovO  discussion  by Persimmon Blackbridge  and Gayla Reid  Some of the artists in the show  volunteered to talk about their  work and views. Elizabeth Shef-  rin, Josie Cook, Bruce Russell,  Holly Devor, and Persimmon Black-  bridge spoke on August 31st to an  audience of artists, feminists,  leftists, friends, relations, and  assorted others. One topic that  came up in several talks was a  concern with sex roles. Persimmon  said that in her sculpture she  tries to show positive, strong  images of women. Much art in our  society shows women as passive  sex objects, existing solely for  the benefit of the viewer (presumed  male). Persimmon tries to show women as active, free human beings.  She and Holly both stressed the importance of presenting a positive  vision.  It may not always be a  realistic rellection of our lives,  but it's something to work toward  and draw strength from.  Holly's photographs often deal with  sex roles.  "The people in my photographs aren't confused about their  gender," she said, "but sometimes  the viewers are.  So maybe they'll  stop and think about it, and maybe  start to see the stereotypes we've  all been indoctrinated with."  Some of Bruce*s work deals with men's  sex role conditioning. "I use very  classical images," he said, "that  people can readily identify and feel  safe with, so they get drawn in before they notice something's wrong.  The man is too soft,sensuous, gentle.  He doesn't really fit the male image.  I try to make it subtle so  people won't just say, 'oh, that's  a picture of an effeminate man,  that doesn't have anything to do  with me.' They'll be drawn into it  first."  Art as a political tool was another  theme. Although many 'political  heavies' seem to think that art is  a frivolous occupation, the panel  agreed that an artwork which creates  an emotional experience and moves  the viewer is worth its weight in  rhetoric. Josie said that art as  self-expression is also politically  important. "Our feelings aren't  valued in this society. They're  deadened, they have  to be, for us  to stand the alienation of our lives?  My art work helps me get in touch  with my feelings, which I have to  do before I say 'I can't live like  this. It's got to change."  She is upset by the conditioning  in passivity she sees children  receiving today.* "They sit in  front of the TV and get spoon-fed  this weird version of life. They  aren't learning to make decisions,  to take action, to make their own  lives. They're learning to accept  what they're given. My kids get  mimeographed turkeys to color for  their art class in school.  It  teaches them that they can't do.  things for themselves. It teaches  them to follow orders. Art work  has helped me to undo that kind of  conditioning in my own life.  I  think it's really important."  The capitalist art market drew its .  share of fire.  It was pointed out  that the rich can effectively control what gets shown at galleries,  who gets grants, and what the criteria for good art are, simply through their economic power. Only 2%  of artists in Canada earn their  living from their art work. This  has more to do with politics than  with the "quality" of their art  work. Elizabeth feels that in  order for art to be used as a  luxury commodity or investment, in  the capitalist system it must first  be alienated from our everyday  lives. It can't be a creative  outlet we all participate in.  The snobbery of the art world also  came under attack.  "The prevalent  attitude is that most people are  Philistines with no taste," said  Persimmon.  "Well, we're not.  If  people are only exposed to black  velvet paintings, they're going  to develop a fine taste in black  velvet paintings.  If artists come  on like elitist snobs or elitist  punks, people are going to resent  them.  If people are made to feel  out of place in * fine' art galleries, they won't go. If they're^f^; 8  RECLAIM THE NIGHT  WOMEN RECLAIM THE NIGHT!    200 women  marched along Granville Street and  down Davie Street on August 25th to  reclaim the night. Take Back the  Night Marches were held the same  evening in Halifax and Ottawa, and  recently across the United States  and Western Europe.  Purpose  A flyer describing the purpose of  the march, said:  We march tonight in strength, to  reclaim the night for ourselves -  for all women.  This march draws attention to the  need for safety of women both on &  off the streets. The streets at  night have always meant danger, or  at the very least, harassment for  women. Women are also experiencing  violent attacks in the home, and  are stopped from leaving by oppressive legislation which intends to  keep the family together despite  beatings and even murder, to col 2  Attend  EVALUATION  An evaluation meeting will be held  to discuss the Vancouver march on  Tuesday, September 12,   7.30 p.m.  at the Full Circle Coffeehouse,  152 East 8th Ave.,Vancouver.  It is not a crime for women to be  alone on the street.  We have the right to walk the  street without being harassed,  We have the right to leave abusive  family situations.  We have the right to defend ourselves when attacked under any  circumstances.  This march is an expression of our  claim to these rights;  this march  expresses our power and strength  as women.  Women are not responsible for crimes  against women;    all  women regardless  of age, race, class or sexual preference are potential victims.  It is  men who are rapists and wife-beaters.  Violence against women is the logical consequence of the commonly accepted power relationships between  men and women.  It is perpetuated by  a sexist, racist, authoritarian culture through media, language and the  educational system.  It's time that intervention to prevent  acts of violence against women became  a community ethic. Too often women's  cries have gone unheeded on the  streets and in the home: We need to  find ways to publicly oppose violence  against women. Men must be re-educated to respect our integrity and our  right to defend it; men should confront other men who are being violent.  We are here to celebrate our strength  together as women, to exorcise fear  from our spirits and take hold.of the  power we have. #  Multi-Political Art  FROM PAGE 7  continually told that great art  is above them, they won't look.  And if they have to scrub floors  all day, they're not going to care  about anything."  A topic that gave rise to heated  debate from the audience was whether or not there are objective standards in art. Elizabeth said,  "It's a myth that there's good art  and bad art. There are conventions;  there are fashions; there are different tastes. There can be subjective standards but how can  there be objective ones?"  Subjective?  Some people in the audience thought  that some artworks are absolutely  objectively better than others, and  that objective standards are what  challenge artists to improve.  Bruce felt that there could be objective standards, but only within  very limited frameworks.  "If you'  re trying to do a realist painting  and no one can tell if it's a rabbit or an apple, well obviously  you've failed somewhere.  But if  you asked me, objectively, which  was better art, a Jackson Pollack  painting or a bit of crocheted  lace, I couldn't say.  It's subjective."  Holly felt that many standards in  art are not objectively, but culturally determined, and are often  based on class, race, or sex.  The  standards of the dominant culture  are usually considered "objective"  and the rest discounted.  Tied to that discussion was one on  whether artists have certain inborn  talents, or whether anyone, given  the desire and opportunity, could  be an artist. Many people in the  audience thought that was carrying non-elitism too far.  Everyone had their conflicting story.  A teacher with children of her  own said that in her experience,  children differ greatly in their  talents and interests. Another  woman said that although she was  a competent visual artist, she  had no talent in music no matter  how hard she tried. Persimmon  replied that she had been sure  she had no artistic talent up  until six years ago.  "I was  squashed in grade school. They  convinced me that I was no good.  I couldn't color inside the lines  of the mimeographed turkeys.  I  just gave up.  But now I feel like  — if I can do it, anyone can."  Positive  People from the audience were very  positive about the show itself.  The variety in style and content  was a welcome change from left-  orthodox socialist realism vintage  1930.  "Let's do it again" seemed  to be the general feeling.  Bruce  said that anyone interested in being involved in future political  art shows should contact Vanguard  Books. # AUGUST 10 : NATIONAL PRISON JUSTICC DAY  Two women prisoners returning to Oak-  all from court waved their fists in  solidarity towards Pamela Cowlishaw  as she stood under her black umbrella  at the National Prison Justice Display at the front gate. It was August 10.  The next day, another woman got the  message out to us, that "we did something, too" for the August 10 National Prison Justice Day. We'll have to  wait for the details about that one.  The important thing is that August 10  - National Prison Justice Day - happened again, for the third year and with  greater show of strength across the  country than ever before. Whenever  statistics are used to represent  growing forces of protest movements *  one can safely double the media estimate. Therefore, conceivably 7,000  and not 3,500?. The all-day news  flashes proved that August 10 is now  news. It cannot be ignored, because  it isn't going to go away.  Peaceful, non-violent protests are  exposing the incompetence and indifference to the unnecessary suffering and death which has been responsible for more than 100 lives lost  since 1970 in the Canadian Federal  Penitentiary system. A system which '  breeds mental degradation and physical  deterioration for the women it holds  in custody, has to go.  August 10, National Prison Justice  Day, is established now as a national  day. Work is already underway for  August 10, 1979.  One correction should be made to the  article in the Vancouver Sun, August  11 which states:" all citizens are  potential victims and hostages of the  prisoners who eventually emerge from  the system. "  Anyone working with prisoners knows  that the reason the public must be  concerned about prison treatment for  their own personal safety is that  some are released in a more embittered condition than when they entered.  Some, not all, have difficulty  in adjusting to the rat race where  over a million are scrambling for  jobs in one of the richest countries  of the world.  Some, not all, may  have been so devastated that they  may possibly contribute to more victimization.  Some, not all, may fall  into that category.  Sylvia Weldon outside B.C.Pen  on National Prison Justice Day.  prisoners'  rights group  DLUND'Ç ̈RS  In  report, presumably about the  August 10 National Prison Justice  Day (and printed in the Vancouver  Province on August 11), the Solicitor General, J.J.Blais, made the following errors:  "No new prisons will be constructed  without a reduction in obsolete facilities. "  Comment- B.C.Penitentiary was supposed to be phased out about 50 years  ago. This year Kent Maximum Security  Institution will be completed at  Agassiz, housing 190. They will accept approx. 135 - 150 from-the B.C.  Pen's general prison population, and  that is all'. The B.C.Pen continues  business at its old stand catering  to the other three areas - reception,  super max. security unit, and protective custody unit, totally approximately 200-300 men.  The Women's Penitentiary at Kingston,  about 100 years old, and slated for  demolition about 40 years ago, still  stands in all its monstrosity. Yet  Blais insists that his:  ".. .overall goal is a reduction of  total penitentiary population. "  "Five new prisons under construction and others being planned as part  of a five year $230 million building  programme."  Comment - The Moratorium Committee  on Prison Construction (M.C.P.C.)  more accurately estimates it to be  a $460 million building programme  (already inflated to $500 million)  for construction of 24 new Federal  institutions across Canada in the  next five years, with nine nearing  completion, by the end of 1978.  Blais, the Province reports,  defends the quality of medical and  psychiatric care in prisons.  Comment - We are left to discover  how he defends his position.  Blais, the report continues,  acknowledges more than 100 suicides  in Federal prisons since 1962.  Comment - Date is actually since 1970.  Blais adds:  "... in 1978 there have been one suicide and one murder..."  Comment - Unable to obtain accurate  statistics, it can be safely stated  that prison suicides and murders have  in recorded in 1978 Canadian newspapers as taking place at B.C.Penitentiary, Archambault, Millhaven and  Dorchester, to name a few. How can  this total "one suicide and one murder"?  Blais says:  "... only the most dangerous and disturbed offenders" are housed in our  prisons.  Comment - Any nation of 23 million  people, housing 20,000 (exclusive of  9,400 federally) "dangerous" prisoners  must be on the brink of disaster with  such a social fabric. Prevailing government statistics indicate closer to  5% - 8% of such types. The remainder  can be listed among the various levels  of non-violent, non-dangerous or 'hab-  ituals'.  Blais calls for:  a balance between consideration of  inmates' situations...with concern for  police, correctional officers and the  victim of criminal acts.  Comment - This would be more like trying to "strike a balance" between the  officer using handcuffs, revolver  and clubs on the young woman or man  held powerless, doubled over between  four other police stalwarts.  This is why we need Kinesis so desperately - to break through this growing  barrage of lies J They can lead us nowhere but into a police state - with  or without our eyes open.  The combination of error, distortion  and the big lie - the incredible blat-  ancy with which the highest in the  land brazen their way through the,news  media - has become so frequent as to  have become accepted. -Danish-  women's  oamp  gillian  marie  For five years I have heard of the  Danish "women's island", snippets of  information about a place where  women can enjoy each others company  and learn from each other in an  environment of women only. These  fragments whetted my curiousity to  find out if the island did in fact  exist, and if so, to visit it.  I  asked women in the movement for more  substantial information - did they  know of the camp? If so, how could  I get in touch with the collective?  Many women had heard of it, others  wanted to know about it, but no one  really knew any more about it then  I did. A friend located an article  in Ms (Nov., 1972) by Barbara Robin  who had been to Fem^, and through  Yetta Birkland-Hansen I was able  finally to locate the addresses of the  women's collective who organize  these camps each year. Yetta had  herself been to Femtf.  I had proof  that it did exist.'  I did not get a response to my  enquiries before leaving Vancouver  this summer for Scandinavia because  the collective had moved to a new  house.  I was determined to go to  Denmark and find the mythical island  myself.  Finding the new address of the  collective while at a women's  conference in London, I made my way  to Copenhagen. The women who run  the Women's House in Copenhagen  explained that the Fem^ camp is used  to introduce Danish women to the  movement through courses run by the  Redstockings. The demand for the  camp is so great that 1200 Danish  women are turned away each year.  It  is run on a week-workshop basis, a new  topic discussed each week.  However, on Sejer^, a less structured  camp open to all women between June  16 and August 25 has been organized  by a lesbian collective. So with  the relevant train, bus and ferry  information I set off for Sejertf.  It takes three hours to get to the  island by public transport. After  leaving the train at Holback, the  bus takes you through the Danish  countryside. Green fields of grain  and the yellow flowers of rape stretch  as far as the eye can see. The road  winds through villages of white-washed  houses, some with thatched roofs, and  ends at Havn^, a fishing village and  the terminus for the ferry to Sejer^.  The ferry carries supplies for the  farming and fishing population of the  island and takes about fifty minutes  to make the crossing to the village  of Sejerby.  If you are lucky, there may be  someone on the boat who is also  headed for the island camp.  If not,  its a lovely five kilometer walk to  the camp, along the sea. The camp is  situated on a narrow part of the  island, land leased from a local  farmer.  It consists of one large  kitchen-eating tent; five sleeping  tents, twelve women in each one;  and an outhouse cum bathroom. The  outhouse, the only semi-permanent  structure, houses the telephone, the  only contact with the outside world.  I was greeted at the camp with a hot  cup of herbal tea, and the sound of  guitar playing and women singing. A  woman lent me a dry pair of pants as  mine had got wet in a rainstorm.  Supper was just finished, so I ate  salad, and bread with soft cheese  made at the camp from sour milk and  herbs. Several Dutch women offered  space in their tent, so I settled in  with my bed-roll and sleeping bag.  The camp is organized on anarchic  principles. There are no work teams  for cleaning or cooking.  Jobs, such  as emptying the shit cans or washing  mounds of dishes, were done when  necessary,  whoever wants to start  dinner prepares and cooks the food for  the whole camp.  One evening five  Dutch women and I prepared supper  for the camp: consisting .of buckwheat  beans, and vegetables in a sauce, with  a salad of grated apple, carrot and  cucumber.  I also learnt how to make  the delicious soft cheese at the  camp. Directions as to where and  how to buy supplies are posted in  the kitchen tent. When someone sees  we are low on eggs for example, she  phones up the egg woman and orders  enough for the next few days.  Cooking  is vegetarian, and herbs picked on the  island hang in the tent. Dinners -  eaten by candlelight - are scrumptious  lively affairs, usually followed by  an impromptu jam session. One evening  we had a meeting in which the  structure of the camp was explained  and two workshops set up for the  next day, one for massage, the  other for herb collecting. Women  shared their information, explaining  the uses of herbs that we picked as  we walked toward the sea. Women  relaxed together, walked, read, lay  in the sun, or swam in the sea five  minutes walk from the camp. There  was time to be alone, or to share  experiences with other women.  There were thirty-five women at the  camp the week I was there.  It was an  international gathering with women  there from Denmark, the Netherlands,  Germany, Sweden, Norway, Austalia,  and California. The common  language was English. The camp was  smaller than usual because the  weather was cold and changeable. One  weekend last year two hundred women  were camping at Sejer<5.  The camp is a great place to visit.  I felt very much a part of an international sisterhood as we shared our  concerns and solutions to common  problems. Women's energy is powerful  and the warmth and sharing that was  such an important part of the camp  proved that an anarchic structure  can work.  It was hard to leave.  For information on next year's camp,  write to: The Sejer^ Group,  Women's House,  Gothersgade 37,  1123 Copenhagen K,  Denmark.  The approximate cost is return fare  Copenhagen - Sejer«5 $19; one week at  the camp $45 or as much as you can  afford to pay.  If you plan a trip  to Europe, I recommend a visit to the  women's camp.  * FESTIVAL in CUBA  Prabha pics  When over 20,000 [  Havana,  Cuba,  from July 28 to August  5 for the 11th World Festival of  Youth and Students,   Vancouver feminist  Prabha Khosla was among them.  In this interview,  Gayla Reid of  Kinesis speaks with Prabha to record  her personal impressions of the  Festival,  and of Cuba.  KINESIS: I think the best place to  start is to ask you to explain what  the festival was about and who it was  directed at.  PRABHA: The theme of the festival  was "for anti-imperialist solidarity,  peace' and friendship."  The real focus of the festival,  however, was clearly directed towards  U.S. imperialism.  I was among the  240 Canadian delegates and we were  housed with the U.S. delegation,  to make up a North American  contingent of 700.  Very frequently  during the festival, I felt that the  comments were being directed  specifically at this group. Time  and time again the Cubans were saying  to the U.S. delegates: "Look what we  have managed to do despite the  blockade." Time and time again they  would say, "Look, it's not the  American people we're opposing, it  is the government of the U.S." It  was made extremely plain that the  subject of the festival was an attack  on U.S. imperialism.  On every day  of the festival, there was a session  called "Youth Accuses Imperialism"  and there was also a huge display  called "Cuba Accuses" - about the  actions of the CIA.  KINESIS: How did these festivals  get going?  PRABHA: The first one took place in  Prague in 1947, and there was one in  Helsinki in '62. The last one was in  the G.D.R. (German Democratic  Republic). They are now held  regularly every five years. This is  the first time there's been one in  Latin America and the western  hemisphere. The Cubans have been  working on it for two years. They  haven't had so many foreigners in  Cuba since '59.  I want to stress  that this festival was not like some  kind of exclusive conference - it was  a whole people number.  It was really  a mass effort - 60,000 Cuban people  volunteered throughout the festival.  The streets throughout Havana and  in Havana province had all been  decorated.  Everybody had been  working for the festival.  KINESIS: The massive scale of the  festival is staggering. It sounds  like a huge, political Olympics: a  million people at the closing  ceremonies, 60,000 at the opening,  delegates from 140 countries. How do  you cope with that scale? How does  it feel?  Above: Cuban people among the one million on closing  day of the festival. Below: Cuban children welcome  Canadian delegates.  PRABHA:  Really.  It's totally incredible.  In the Latin American  Stadium, where the opening  ceremonies were held, the crowd  feeling was something else. When  the Chilean delegates marched in,  the whole place was on its feet -  chanting, shouting, clapping. About  40% from each delegation marched and  the rest were in the stands.  Delegates in the stands had their own  dances, chants, shouts.  It was an  amazing place to be - so much energy.  The Canadian delegation was one of  the most subdued and undemonstrative,  I must say. And compared to the  African delegations who were dancing  and singing the whole time time the  Soviet group looked like a large,  pale ghost.  KINESIS: Who got the most  tumultuous reception besides the  Chileans?  PRABHA: Vietnam, of course. And  Puerto Rico, South Africa, Nicaragua,  Palestine and Cuba were some of the  groups receiving the greatest  applause. By the end of the evening  my hands were sore from clapping and  I was hoarse.  KINESIS: I understand that delegates,  carried huge placards, wore national  costumes and so on.     What happened  with Canada?   Did you see any feminist  banners?  PRABHA: The Canadian delegation was  led by a woman, a Native American in  traditional dress.  I think we have  to admit that having a Native  American lead Canada's group is a form  of tokenism which doesn't have much  to do with the realities at home.  Jamaica and Cuba also were led by  women, I noticed. The only women's  liberation banners were carried by the  English and the Australians.  KINESIS: These festivals are  traditionally a focus of Communist  Party,  CP,., energies.    As a person  who isn't in the C.P., did you feel  out of place in the delegation?  PRABHA: Well, this contingent was  the most diverse one the Canadians  have ever sent to a festival. Of  course, not being CP. meant that I  was on the periphery.  I didn't have  a hand in drafting Canada's paper to  the Women's Commission, for example.  Pat Smith, of Press Gang and the  Women's Educational Press went as  part of the group from Toronto and  she's not CP. either.  I did meet  people from other countries whose  politics weren't CP.  I met a gay  anarchist from Australia, who told  me to give his love to the Open  Road people. As soon as he learned  I was from Canada, he wanted to know  about Open Road.  cont. on 12 12  .  from pg. 11  Many Cubans wanted to know if I was  in the Party. What they understood  about the difference between the  CP. here and the CP. there I wasn't  able to guage.  KINESIS: The festival invited some  heavies:    Yasir Arafat,  the PLO  leader, Sam Nujoma of SWAPO in  Namibia, Joshua Nkomo and Robert  Mugabe from the Patriotic Front in  Zimbabwe, and the heads of the Chilean  CP.  and the MIR in Chile  (Movement  of the Revolutionary Left).    Did you  get to hear any of these people speak?  PRABHA: We just missed out on Arafat.  We went to a session where we thought  he'd be speaking, but he was scheduled  somewhere else. But I did get to hear  Joshua Nkomo.  I'd seen him on  Canadian tv last year, and the contrast  between his caution in a capitalist  country and his expansive manner in  Cuba was really striking. Again, I  felt his remarks were directed right  at the U.S. delegates - he spoke about  the unity of the African struggle for  independence. One thing I remember  him saying was that the struggle  will not continue. The struggle is  going to end! Delegates from African  countries were there in the audience,  clapping and dancing....  Solidarity with the people of South  Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe was a  central theme of the festival. At  the Cuban Academy of Sciences the  festival had set up huge International  Centre of Anti-Imperialist Solidarity.  It was a poster and art display and  the Canadian contribution was a  series of paintings dealing with  apartheid in South Africa, which had  been well prepared and which was well  received.  It mentioned, of course,  the involvement of Alcan, Inco,  Falconbridge, Massey Ferguson and  other Canadian multinationals in  Namibia and South Africa.  It also  dealt with campaigns in Canada to  boycott South African goods and to  end bank loans to South Africa and  Some of the other displays I  remember in particular were the  ones from Vietnam, about the war,  and the one from Mexico. The  Mexican exhibit had lots of old  photographs from the "frozen  revolution" - incredible pictures of  women in long dresses carrying guns,  and taking part in that struggle.  Women's  Commission  KINESIS: Tell me about the Women's  Commission.    What happened there?  PRABHA: The Women's Commission was  a bore. The Commissions were official  presentations from the participating  countries on political subjects and  they took place on every day of the  festival. The lengthy official title  of the Women's Commission was: "The  struggle to create coordination that  will enable young women to obtain  their rights and contribute fully to  the development of society." I heard  presentations from Israel, Chile,  India and Ireland. After those, I  left.  Absolutely nothing new was happening.  Same old stuff. How women are  oppressed in each country: lack of  childcare, unavailability of abortion  ....  I've heard it a million times.  Actually the delegates from Chile did  present an interesting paper.  It  discussed the problems of left groups  not having addressed women's issues  specifically during the Allende regime.  I know that women's issues weren't  the centre of the festival.  O.K.  But it's about time we got around to  some ideas with dealing with  oppression instead of detailing it  one more time.  Nuclear  Family  KINESIS: In Cuba, women have abortion  on demand,  childcare centres and  nurseries and they walk the streets  at night in safety.    Since 1975 they  have had a Family Code which spells  out that women and men must share  domestic tasks equally.    Did you get  to speak with any Cuban women about  these feminist issues?    Did you find  out how the  legislated equality of the  Family Code is working out in practice?  PRABHA:  I'd say the Cuban women are  really enthusiastic about the changes.  Really.  I think the Family Code  provisions would work out better  among the young people than the older  ones.  I noticed that the younger  men were definitely less into  machismo - they're much quieter.  I think that as North American  feminists we have to recognize that  the Cuban Family Code is historically  important as one way to try and end  sexism within socialism.  But while  the Code stresses the equality of  partners within the family unit, it  also sanctions the heterosexual family  as being the "elementary cell" of  society.  For feminists, I think it's  very disturbing that the nuclear  family is promoted in this way in  Cuba. There are no facilities for  communal living, and gays are  discriminated against.  Gay Rights  Issue  KINESIS: How did the issue of  lesbian and gay rights come up?  PRABHA:  I was wearing a gay rights  button and I raised the issue.  The  older Cuban men I spoke with about it  couldn't understand.  "But don't you  like the feel of a man's body?",  they wanted to know.  If you are gay  in Cuba you're not allowed anywhere  near children. You couldn't possibly  wprk as a teacher.  Some of the U.S. delegation wanted to  develop a statement for the Commission  on Women which would include  references to the contributions of  lesbians to the women's movement and  which would list gay rights as one  aspect of the struggle for equality  in the U.S.  On the Thursday morning, when the  proposed statement including lesbian  and gay rights was discussed at  breakfast by some U.S. feminists,  there was a huge fight. Those  supporting the statement were  attacked by other members of the  U.S. delegation for showing a lack  of respect for the Cubans. A lot  of people felt that public mention  of lesbian and gay rights would  merely embarrass the Cubans and  other delegations, and even that  it's not an issue anyway.'  So that statement never got made.  It's difficult to keep raising the  question of gay rights, when it  causes very heavy tension. But I  feel we have to demand the right to  say that there is a gay rights  struggle going on in North America.  The Cubans have to hear that being  gay doesn't disqualify you from being  revolutionary.  If we back down on  this, we just perpetuate our own  oppression.  The Cubans are addressing the issue  of sexism.  I saw some guerrilla  theatre by Cubans which was very  hard-hitting against machismo. And  they are attacking sexism not, as we  are, in an advanced capitalist  society, but in a Third World  Above: Cuban billboard with  Festival theme.  Centre: Cuban translator (L)  with Prabha (R).  Below: Chilean delegation at  the opening ceremonies.  context where economic matters are  paramount. They're-not waiting until  some later date to talk about sexism.  But they have not yet recognized the  oppression of heterosexism.  KINESIS: What about racism?  PRABHA:  I looked as hard as I could  for it. And I couldn't find a trace  of racism. The Cubans do not see  themselves as "black Cubans" or  "white Cubans" or whatever. They're  Cubans, and that's all.  Childen's  Code  KINESIS:    Cuba presented its new  Children's Code on August 4, during  the time of the Festival.    The Code  guarantees the right of all children  to education, medical care and so on.  It formally outlaws any discrimination  against children born out of wedlock.  Was there much discussion of the  Children's Code?  PRABHA: You didn't really need to  speak to anyone about legislating  children's rights, because the  importance of children in Cuba  leaps right out at you.  Children  are big stuff in Cuba. Really big  stuff.  It's not that they put on special  "kid's shows" or anything like that.  It's that the children were just  present, everywhere, all the time.  I am trying to explain to you how  moved I was by seeing the children in  Cuba: they're bubbling, their eyes  shine, they're allowed to grow.  I  was just so happy to see kids with  shoes on. You never see that in  Third World countries! The life in  them was not destroyed.  I've seen  too many Third World kids with ribs  sticking out, too many pictures of  swollen bellies and the life gone out  of the kids' faces. For me, the  children of Cuba were one of the  highlights of the festival.  KINESIS: Were you allowed to go  anywhere you wanted?    Did you have  translators with you all the time?  What did you see of Havana and of  the rest of Cuba?  PRABHA: There were no restrictions.  They told us we could go anywhere and  talk to anyone. For the 700 North  Americans there were about 20  Cuban translators. The Cubans  insisted that they were open to all  kinds of questions about Cuba - they  didn't really want to know about  Canada.  I talked for a long time  with some older Cuban men down on the  beach about all sorts of things.  These were men who remembered how  things were before '59. They kept  saying there was no comparison between  now and then.  In terms of life expectancy, health  standards, and the quality of the  food, that undeniably true. Cuba is  still a society in transition.  Some Canadian delegates, who  flew from Montreal to Cuba, and  who have never lived in a third  world country, could not quite grasp  just how far the Cubans have come.  I think if you've been in a Third  World country, seen shanty town and  so on - and then you go to Cuba and  compare the way people look, people  respond - then you have some sense of  the transformation since '59.  Transportation and housing are the  biggest problems in Cuba. A lot of  the cars are pre-1959 antiques. While  we were travelling in Havana province  I noticed a large depot full of old  buses - and I wondered what they were  doing there until I realized: they're  American-made and the Cubans can't  get spare parts for them.  That tour of Havana province also  took us to Alamar - a modern town  outside Havana, complete with concrete  high-rise apartments, a theatre, day  care centre and so on. The architect  was a woman. The.heavy machinery for  building is from the USSR, but the  technological know-how and the labour  is Cuban. We also went to the dairy  producing district.  Before '59 the  Cubans had to import powdered milk  but now they have tons of milk  producing cows. We were greeted with  great enthusiasm because they have  Canadian Holsteins!  This tour included some delegates  from the U.S. and when Ramon Castro  (Fidel's elder brother and his look-  alike) showed up, again, it was to  them he was speaking. His theme was  a familiar one: the economic blockade.  KINESIS: Did the Cubans on the street  talk to you about the economic  blockade much?  PRABHA: All the time. They talked  about not being able to obtain things  like medicine. They were extremely  aware of how much they have to depend  on the USSR, and how they would have  perished without them.  I didn't have  much consciousness of what a big  thing the blockade was till I went  to Cuba.  Attitude  toward  USSR  KINESIS: Castro is taking a USSR  line these days, and devoted quite  a bit of his July 26 address to  attacking China. Did you get any  sense from the ordinary Cubans that  they feel dominated by the Soviet  Zfnion?  PRABHA: No I didn't. The talk  was all of friendship and solidarity.  The people on the street would also  attack China for being a traitor  to 'international proletarianism.'  Look at how the Chinese betrayed the  Angolans, they'd say. Look at how  they ignored Chile.  I don't doubt,  you know, that it's easier for Cubans  TURN TO P.20 INDIAN RIGHTS FOR INDIAN WOM'Ç ̈N  By Joan Woodward  Indians as problems - not problems  of Indians - seems to be the tenor  of any legislation ever passed in  regard to Indians in Canada.  The  Indian woman has been a convenient .  scapegoat for the power structure  of a white society bent on the  assimilation of Indian lands.  Indians have now been effectively  divided amongst themselves making  the appropriation of their lands a  little easier for all those who eye  those lands with envy.  LOSS OF STATUS  For quite some time now, we have  been hearing news of a group called  Indian Rights for Indian Women.  It seems that an Indian woman who  marries a white man loses her status  as an Indian.  This means:  she may  not inherit property willed to her .  by relatives on the reserve; she  must leave her own home on the reserve  even if it is in her name; she can  have no access to band funds to  improve her own education or that of  her children;  and her children will  be denied the cultural and social  amenities of the Indian community  such as Indian day care or play  groups. Most punitive of all, is  the fact that she can be denied the  right to return to her parent's or  relative's home on the reserve even  if she is in dire need, very ill,  widowed, divorced or separated.  No  such restrictions are provided in  the Indian Act for Indian men.  MEDIA EXPLOITS  Governments and media are exploiting this aspect of the problem of  Indian women to the fullest, as  can be expected.  A recent assembly of British Columbia's Indians (the United Native Nations) was held in July at  Williams Lake.  SOLIDARITY  A section of the conference was  dedicated to the problem of loss  of status for Indian women, and  large numbers of men as well as  women agreed, I am told, that the  fight for Indian rights for Indian  women was one to be taken up in a  spirit of solidarity between both  Indian women and Indian men. There  was no mention made of this support  in the conference coverage in B.C.'s  major dailies.  A similar conference to the one at  Williams Lake was held in June on  the Morely Indian Reserve in Alberta.  It was decided that status for Indian  women would be a major topic, but  representatives from the I.R.I.W.  were not allowed to attend. This  kind of attitude is not entirely new.  But it allows the blame for the  problems of Indians to be placed  on the Indians themselves.  The Indian Rights for Indian Women  issue first came to a head in 1973,  just after the federal government  had published one of its famous  "white papers" proposing that the  Indian Act be phased out. Indians  across the country protested that  the few rights they had were to be  gradually removed, eventually leaving  them with nothing at all. A twenty-  four year old Indian male, Harold  Cardinal, emerged as one of the  foremost figures in the debate. He  stated:  "We do not want the Indian  Act retained because it is a good  piece of legislation, it isn't. It  is discriminatory from start to  finish. But it is a lever in our  hands and an embarrassment to the  government, as it should be... We  would rather continue to live in  bondage under the Indian Act than  surrender our sacred rights."  GENTLEMEN'S  AGREEMENT  The government finally gave way to  the demands of the major Indian  organizations (most of which seem  to have almost exclusively male  executives and memberships) and  agreed that no part of the Indian  Act would be changed until the  entire Act had been revised in  consultation with the National  Indian Brotherhood. The result of  this gentlemen's agreement was  that a powerful blanket of silence  was imposed on discussion of the  status of Indian women, even  among Indians.  The consultative process as regards  the revision of the Indian Act has  been going on since 1975 between  the federal cabinet and the National  Indian Brotherhood.  In December,  1977, the topic of band membership  was briefly broached, but the loss  of status for women was not even  mentioned as though seen by all the  men concerned, by tacit and mutual  consent, as a matter too "delicate"  to discuss. When the I.R.I.W. was  finally allowed to make the briefest  of presentations to the consulting  parties, Indian leaders declared  the women's presence was nothing but  a sham, and refused them access to  the negotiations.  Such has remained  the stance of the National Indian  Brotherhood, and is being taken full  advantage of by media and government.  In a nationally read newspaper, the  recent headline was:  "Indian  Leaders Warned to Halt Discrimination  Against Women." And the article  begins:  "Justice Minister Ronald  Basford has warned Indian leaders  that Parliament is not going to  tolerate for too long the discrimination against women contained in the  Indian Act." Yet the man does nothing, as he easily could, to assure  that members of the I.R.I.W. are at  least represented at joint govern-  ment-N.I.B. negotiations.  Sexism on the part of many, and we  have reason to fear, perhaps the  majority of Indian men, has not always existed. Carefully documented  evidence tells us that Indian societies before the advent of white  settlements were not patriarchial.  There is some evidence of a matri-  archial tendency, but for the most  turn to p.20, col 2 LESBIAN MOTHERS  MOTHERHOOD/ LESBIANISM AND CHILD CUSTODY  PAMPHLET BY FRANCIE WYLAND  This pamphlet was written by a  founder member of Wages Due Lesbians.  As we would therefore expect she  sees the lesbian struggle for  child custody as just one battle  against the many controls which capitalist societies seek to impose  upon women's sexuality, reproduction, labour and leisure.  She contends that lesbians' social  and economic problems are not  different from other women's needs, but  rather an extreme expression of them.  Our society places more and more emphasis upon the material benefits  which parents can confer upon children and new forms of divorce' procedures which supposedly aim at  'equalizing' men and women are in  fact ensuring that custody goes to  the richer parent -usually the  father. When parental 'fitness' is  judged solely by financial standards  almost all women are potentially  'unfit' mothers. For many women  economic considerations alone impose  a false choice between the free expression of their lesbianism or  motherhood.  Propoganda, both from straight society and extremist lesbians, promulgates the idea that it is inherently 'unlesbian' to want children.  Some lesbian separatists claim that  no 'real' lesbian would want to be  involved in rearing a male child.  ("With that idea of victory, who  needs defeat?" asks Ms. Wyland)  Legal proceedings themselves are  frequently beyond the financial  reach of many women. If they get  to the courts, they face paradoxical attempts both to criminalize  and trivialize lesbianism. "Orgasm  means more to them than children  or anything else" inveighed Judge  Albert Caris (ret'd) when he had  first forced a mother to choose  between her woman lover or her  children and then, when she chose  the lover, berated her for being  'unnatural' twice over.  But all  women who rebel against  the state are liable to 'control'  of the most intimate rights of  all. Women may be condemned to  a childlessness they do not desire  (as with compulsory sterilizations  performed in Harlem) ; forced to  conceive and bear children they do  not want (by the state's witholding  contraception and safe abortion).  They may be unable to get work  whereby they can raise their children outside the nuclear family if  they so desire. Political activity can be curtailed by threatening  to deny custody to 'troublesome'  children. For lesbians it may be  tantamount to a court order to stay  in the closet.  (One of the reasons  why an English mother lost custody,  incidentally, was because copies of  SPARE RIB were openly displayed in  her home). A mere dozen North American lesbians have ever been granted  custody unconditionally.  Ms. Wyland points out that there Is  no contradiction in women's claiming  both the right to safe contraception  and  the right to have a child every  year: no paradox in demanding both  the right to a job with a decent  wage outside the home and  the right  to stay at home to raise one' children and be paid for it. What matters is that the women concerned  should have made a free choice  instead of being coerced or tricked  into the course most convenient to  the state.  Women have indeed begun to fight  back.  In 1974 the Italian government tottered when a women's referendum demanded legal contraception.  In Zambia women are organizing themselves against government pressure  to be sterilized. In the USA a  massive movement started in the  1960's, led mainly by black women,  to fight for adequate financial  recognition of the work women do  within the home - work without which  a capitalist society cannot continue.  In France prostitutes are mobilizing  themselves against prison sentences  which first separate them from their  children and then take the children  into care because of the mothers'  'neglect'.  Ms. Wyland's pamphlet welds black  women and white women, gay and  straight, mothers and childless,  whores and virtuous wives into one  cheated mass. She believes that  women themselves are coming to  realize that they have for far too  long been taught to distrust and  condemn each other lest they unite  against the'ir common enemies. Winning the battle for lesbian custody  must automatically entail gains for  all women, gay or straight.  MOTHERHOOD, LESBIANISM AND CHILD  CUSTODY is published by Falling  Wall Press Ltd., 79 Richmond Rd.,  Montpelier, Bristol BS6 5EP,  England.  and it is distributed by Wages  Due Lesbians Toronto, P.O.Box  38, Station E, Toronto, Ontario.  $1.70  36pp Illustrated.  This review was written by Alice  Hennegan, for GAY NEWS, London.  Other titles available from the  Falling Wall Press/Wages for  Housework  WOMEN AT W.A.R.  by Women Against Rape, London and  Bristol. For the first time in  print, women in Britain tell of  the rape they have experienced and  what they are doing to stop it.  $1.60  WOMEN'S LIBERATION AND REVOLUTION  A Bibliography compiled by Sheila  Rowbotham. $1.50  SEXUAL RELATIONS & THE CLASS STRUGGLE and LOVE & THE NEW MORALITY  by Alexandra Kollontai. $1.50  THE POWER OF WOMEN & THE SUBVERSION  OF THE COMMUNITY by Mariarosa Dalla  Costa and Selma James. $2.50  ALL WORK AND NO PAY: Women, Houses  work and Wages Due. Edited by Wendy  Edmond and Suzie Fleming.  $11.00  hardback; $ 3.00 softback  D€F€NC€  The LESBIAN MOTHER'S DEFENCE FUND  is a recently formed, group in Toronto which exists to assist women fighting child custody cases.  They are part of the Wages for  Housework organization. Their address: Lesbian Mother's Defence  Fund, P.O.Box 38, Station E, Toronto, Ontario M6H 4El.  They offer:  * Pre-legal advice, with information on custody battles and victories in North America and England.  * Ongoing financial and emotional  support.  * Referrals to expert, sympathetic  lawyers. • 16  ANTI-CHOIC€'S  BETTY GREEN  These are excerpts from an interview  with "Pro-Life" member Betty Green by  Jeanine Mitchell.    The interview  was part of the Co-op Radio 's  Sunrise program recently.    In it,  Green slams: United Way, YWCA,  Planned Parenthood and VSW.  JEANNINE MITCHELL (TO GREEN): You're  having to make an effort to reach a  wider variety of the public at this  point in your campaign to stop •  abortions at VGH.    I think a lot of  people are going to be asking some  hard questions about some of the  policies that your group has carried  out  (The Pro-Life Society of B.C.).  For example, when you condemn abortion  and in many cases, birth control, you  leave the actual work with the living,  such as help for rape victims and  battered wives and kids, and legal  and other kinds of counselling to  what you describe as "anti-life  feminists. "  To make matters even more confusing,  you campaign to cut off funds for  these efforts to help the living and  now you're threatening to boycott the  United Way campaign.    Could you give  some explanation for those policies?  BETTY GREEN: Certainly. Would you  like to give them to me one by one,  because you started with a long list  of things of which you are accusing  us? We are attempting to protect  the lives of the unborn children who  are threatened by abortions in our  hospitals. We're also trying to  protect their mothers, many of whom  are cruelly deceived about what the  reality of abortion is, and who only  find out after the deed's been done  and seriously regret what's happened  to them. As far as threatening to  cut off funding to the United Way  and being accused of not helping  those in need - I think there's a  corollary in there - I think it's very  interesting that it's pro-life  people who seem to be the major  supporters of those institutions.  But you know, like everyone else,  in conscience, when a particular  organization to which we are giving  our funds in the belief that that  organization is doing good, is  discovered instead to be promoting  an evil....  MITCHELL: An evil?  GREEN: Promoting abortion, we cannot  continue to give funds on that basis.  MITCHELL: Does that include birth  control?  GREEN: We're not saying that we won't  continue to give funds to those  charities which are attempting to do  good. We're simply saying that  because the United Way funds are  channelled to an agency like, for  example, the YWCA, which has come out  in favour of abortion....  MITCHELL: They 're in favour of choice  on abortion.  GREEN: Well, if you say that a woman  has a choice, you are saying that  the unborn child doesn't have any  right to be protected.  MITCHELL: Does that explain why  you're trying to have funds cut off  from Rape Relief and from the  Vancouver Status of Women?  GREEN: We have never asked for  funds to be cut off from Rape Relief.  MITCHELL: Excuse me - your newsletter has urged people to campaign  to the government to have funds cut  °ff fov these groups, which you  describe as "anti-life feminists. "  GREEN:  I haven't seen the words  'Rape Relief in my newsletter anywhere .  MITCHELL: It's well known that  you've been organizing on that issue  since there was a confrontation in  the interior over Rape Relief because  Rape Relief people say that they  feel that a woman who 's been raped  has the right to have an abortion;  and this is against "Pro Life"  policy.  GREEN: I believe what you're  talking about is an incident where  a woman answered an ad asking for  volunteers to work for Rape Relief  and when this woman arrived at the  session where the volunteers were  being trained she found that the  conversation...was directed primarily at abortion and the availability of abortion...pregnancy in  rape is one thing that is very,  very unusual if the girl gets  proper treatment as soon as the  event has happened.  MITCHELL: I understand that one of  your supporters does not believe  that pregnancy can occur from rape  because the egg will reject unwanted  sperm.    How do you deal with people  who are out a bit on the fringe on  issues like that?   Is it embarrassing?  GREEN: No.  I don't know who... said  that...You may have read... (a) paper  which was presented to the Senate  hearings in the United States and you  ^nay also have read ... at those same  hearings where pro-abortion doctors  presented papers stating that the  incidence of pregnancy from rape is  virtually nil in a treated rape victim,  that even in unprotected intercourse  between consenting adults the  incidence of pregnancy is only 3%.  Where you have a violent act upon a  woman the hormonal reaction of her  body is to build up such hormonal  changes that it does interfere with  natural ovulation.  MITCHELL:    That explains why you don't  see abortion as a possibility for a  woman who 's been raped?  GREEN: A very, very rare possibility.  Rape is always being used as a smokescreen for abortion. These women  are not demanding legalized abortion  only for rape. They are using rape  as the "hard case" to justify 57  thousand abortions a year in Canada.  You also claimed that pro-life is  opposed to birth control. We as an  organization deal with the protection  of human life, from conception. And  you know, what people chose to do  prior to conception we believe is  their own personal business.  MITCHELL:    That does not jive with  comments made in the  "Pro Life" newsletter which describe birth control  as an evil.    And that is apparently  one of the problems which you've had  with the Planned Parenthood group,  which you've also had funds cut off  from....  We have argued with Planned  Parenthood not about their education  - making available information about  contraceptive methods....  MITCHELL: That is not what your  newsletter is saying, Mrs.   Green. 17  GREEN: We have opposed Planned  Parenthood because they advocate  abortion as back-up birth control  and they say if your contraceptive  method fails, then you are entitled  to have an abortion....  MITCHELL: There is no 100% method  of birth control.  GREEN: And they fail to see the  distinction between preventing the  life and killing it once it's begun.  MITCHELL: Many people in your  organization do oppose birth control....  But you're not publicizing that  because it would weaken your position  in the public....  GREEN: There is a mentality built up  in this hate campaign about not  getting pregnant. It is sort of an  anti-child campaign that builds up a  mentality where people look upon  having a child as a disaster instead  of upon the child as something that  could bring joy into your life.  MITCHELL: Where does hate fit into  the "pro-life" scheme of things?  GREEN: Hate?  MITCHELL:    Hate.    Anti-abortion  literature labels other people  "anti-  life".    It compares women wanting  abortions to Nazis and slave owners.  It tells handicapped and old people  that they '11 be the next to be killed  by these "anti-life" people.    That goes  into a level of hate which I think we  can see in the burnings, fire-bombings  down in the States of abortion clinics,  and in the hate letters and hate phone  calls which people have received when  they have stood out in public for  choice.  GREEN: I think where you see hate  are in places like the Status of  Women newsletter, where they imply  that Pro-life people are burning  down clinics and these kinds of  things. Now Pro-life people are  not doing that and nobody has ever  been charged and -found guilty in the  United States for those crimes.  MITCHELL: The feminists have  pointed out that it is very  interesting that no one has ever  been found guilty.  GREEN:  Indications have been  coming out of the media in the States  that a lot of these fire bombings and  things that have been going on are  done because the very lucrative  abortion business is something that  is very enticing to the criminal  element.  MITCHELL:    O.K.    On August 8,   1977  the Ladies Clinic in Omaha Nebraska  was fire-bombed.    A local newspaper  received a pasted-up letter saying:  "You'd bomb a concentration camp.    Why  not an abortion clinic?"   Now that  to me does not sound like the work of  the Mafia.  GREEN: You know who said that one?  That was put out by Planned Parenthood  in a most unbelievable, slanderous  packet of cartoons which they distributed to university newspapers.  Our people would never say such a  thing. And that statement you're  making comes out of an attempt by a  Planned Parenthood organization in  Chicago to slander the pro-life  movement.  MITCHELL:    Who's funding your movement?    You say it's all individuals,  but the Catholic Grey Nuns of Winnipeg  went to great lengths to cover their  tracks after donating fifty thousand  dollars to an ad campaign.  GREEN: They didn't go to any great  lengths. The Grey Nuns formed an  organization called Valade Vitae  and last year they funded a billboard  campaign across Canada.  MITCHELL:    I have in front of me a  news story headed "Major Ad Company  speaks for Mystery Anti-Abortion  Group. "   There was no way to contact  that group, and that was finally  discovered by the media.  GREEN: It wasn't finally discovered by the media. The ads were  placed by Valade Vitae....  MITCHELL: The ads were placed but  who was providing the money was not  mentioned. .. .  GREEN: And press notices were sent  out across the country when the  foundation was set up....  MITCHELL: So you're saying, in  effect, that funding from the Church  has been very open?  GREEN: We get no direct funding from  j Valade Vitae. We greatly appreciated  that billboard campaign...our money  comes from our membership and from  a letter which always goes out to  every church once a year asking for  their support, from our dances and  our bake sales....  MITCHELL: Getting away from bake  sales....  GREEN: Now as far as the Status of-  Women is concerned. The Status of  Women was established to promote  the resolutions brought in by the  Royal Commission on the Status of  Women and one of the things is the  demand that abortion be taken off  the Criminal Code....  MITCHELL: I'd like to move off the  Status of Women and speak about some  of the techniques used by your  organization, including stacking of  nomination meetings to cut off choice  for people when they want to vote in  the federal election.  GREEN: They (the Status of Women) are  working for that purpose. They are  being funded by the tax-payer's money  and we as taxpayers....  MITCHELL: Are you going to address  my question?  GREEN: We say that only the people  who believe in what they're doing  should voluntarily support them....  MITCHELL: I'm going to wrap this up.  GREEN: And I and my friends shouldn't  be forced through public money to  help them do something to which we're  totally opposed. •  PRO CHOIC€RS  Gerda Women's Exploratory Apprenticeship  Training Program  - AN INTRODUCTION TO NON-TRADITIONAL  JOBS FOR WOMEN  by Lorri Rudland  This course is given by the Ministry  of Labour - it is for women only,  runs for 3 months, and is restricted to 16 women per session.    The  next course with vacancies commences on Dec.   4th.    Kinesis talked  to 2 women who have taken this  course, Paulette and Prabha, about  their impressions of its usefulness  to women.  KINESIS: What is the purpose of  the Women's Exploratory Apprenticeship Training Program?  PAULETTE: This is a course given  by the Min. of Labour so that women can have an opportunity to see  what kind of trade they would like  to go into. It's a survey course -  a little welding, carpentry, joinery,  auto mechanics, plumbing, electrical  work, etc. From this introduction,  women can make a choice to enter the  trade they prefer.  PRABHA: We as women have been denied access to non-traditional work  because,of our sex. The course  gives us an opportunity to see what  those skills are and to get a higher  paying job than traditional jobs for  women like secretarial work..  KINESIS: What were your personal  experiences as you went through  this course?  PAULETTE: There is a level of sexism operating at all times, because  this is a course for women only,  taught by men in an all male vocational college. However, even though  our instructor was male, he related  to myself and the other women as  adults. He was never patronizing.  I think it's real important that  women be treated as adults. We've  lost our self-esteem with a lot of  non-traditional jobs because of the  way we've been treated.  This course showed me that I need  to learn  those skills and that I can  learn them. Women don't have an innate quality which means they can't  build things.  TABLESAW TURN-ON  For example, I really got turned on  to the table saw. It was a. wonderful experience to see a table-saw,  to be afraid of it, but to get  through that fear. I had a sense  of pride when I made a file-box,  fitted it together, and it fit.  It made me feel more confident that  NON-  TRADITIONAL  JOBS  I can accomplish things now, that  I can go on to build a house which  is what I want to do.  PRABHA:  I had no perception of  non-traditional occupations.  I  didn't know the names of anything,  I knew no jargon of the trades.  I learned how to use a lot of  machines. I had real fear in the  beginning. The table saw looks  vicious and the radial arms on the  band saw. The course was really  good in that it had a lot of stress  on safety, and we were covered by  Worker's Compensation while we  took it.  I felt really good to be able to  learn those things, it was fascinating to see things created right  in front of your eyes.  And, it's just not that hard.Theve  is all this mystique about how  women can not do things.  But we  can  do it. Women can do more-  things then men can. We can type,  we can cook, and we can use a table  saw.  It is just that we have never  been given the chance. It was men's  domain and they would not let us  near it.  HOW TO APPLY  FOR    W.E.AX  KINESIS: How do women get into  this program and is there any  financial support?  PAULETTE: Women must apply to  the Min. of Labour, which is provincial. The course is not well-  advertised and most enrollments  occur by women recommending the  course to other women. There is  a small stipend available but it  is quite discriminatory. Married  women living with their spouse get  $180 per month whereas single women  even if they have children get only  $50.  KINESIS: Is there any other financing available?  PRABHA: No. There was at one time.  Originally, the course was approved  by Canada, Manpower and women could  receive UIC. However since the  amalgamation of Manpower and UIC,  these laws have changed. The Min.  of Labour should re-evaluate their  criteria.  It is just not realistically designed to meet women's needs  and recognize women's reality.  There are 2 additional stipends for  special circumstances. A transportation allowance of $2 per day if you  travel more than 100 miles a day, and  $40 per month if you have moved from  another city to take the course.  KINESIS: I recall a newspaper clipping in which Lloyd Staedtler, Director of this program,  said something to the effect that it was a  waste of the government 's money,  that women who take the course  never use it,  that they don't go  into apprenticeship training,  and  that women can take the course in  high school any way.  PRABHA:  I think Lloyd Staedtler is  a misogynist. He does not like  women, he should not be working  with women.  He has come into that  course as a man from the Apprenticeship Board who is supposed to help  women and answer their questions.  But he is absolutely oblivious to  the realities of women's roles or  women's lives.  I disagree with him that women  are not using the course or trying  to get into apprenticeships. There  are a lot of women working in non-  traditional jobs who have taken  that course, they are not there as  apprentices, but they are working  in the trade. A lot of those women  are working for really low wages  because they want to work in that  area. Another problem is that the  economic situation in this country  is not so hot. When there are  journeymen unemployed, then they  are not going to hire apprentices  especially if they are women.  KINESIS: It's very difficult for  women to get into apprenticeship  training programs.    How do you see  sexist values operating to exclude  women from these trades?  PAULETTE: In some of the non-traditional apprenticeship trades, the  Canada Employment & Immigration  Centre has a program they call  affirmative action. This means that  in some, not all, of these trades  they reserve one  seat for a woman  until 2 weeks before the course,  even if there is a large waiting  list of men.  This is just the ultimate in tokenism.  PRABHA: That is true.  It is also  because the unions won't hire women.  The unions - plumbers, electricians,  etc., don't want women. This makes  it much harder for us - we don't particularly want to be scab labour.  Some women will not take certain '  jobs on because of this principle.  But it is also our right to get that  job and to be a part of that union.  At present, there are no women listed officially as apprentices in the  non-traditional trades. The Apprenticeship Program and the Employers  are very closely tied into the  Unions.  Kinesis: How many other courses of  this kind are offered in B. C. or the  rest of Canada?  PRABHA: We think that it is the  only course of its kind in Canada.  We think it is a really important  course and encourage women to apply.  "We have a right to that kind of  course.  It should be offered all  over the province so that more  women have access to it. 'Ģ 19  international news  DEFEAT  . ANTI CHOICE  in NEW ZEALAND  A world-wide campaign has been  launched to force the New Zealand  government to back down and  repeal its oppressive anti-women  bill on abortion.  The Internation Feminist Network  (IFN)  See Kinesis- Vol 7,   §5     with  headquarters in Geneva and Rome is  coordinating the campaign.  As reported in Kinesis Vol  7,  #4  the New Zealand government forced  through a bill just before Christmas  1977 which denies abortions to women  1. on the grounds of serious danger  to life or physical or mental  health;  2. if there is a risk of serious  mental or physical handicap  in the foetus;  "3. because of socio-economic  reasons.  A New Zealand feminist comments:  "The situation in our country has  been ludicrous since the passing.o/  the bill.... doctors are almost unanimously against the new law,  as  are obstretricians and gynecologists.  It would make a very comic scene if  it were not for the real heartbreak  and economic hardship of many New  Zealand women who in order to obtain  an abortion are forced to make an  expensive trip to Australia.  An organization calling itself Sisters  Overseas Service  (SOS) has been set  up to facilitate these trips.    They  have been subjected to harassment and  at Easter their headquarters were  burnt down.    Naturally the anti-  choice people are suspected of being  behind this action. "  She also explained to IFN that the  opposition party in New Zealand, the  Labour Party, has passed an overwhelming vote stating that "the  Labour Party adopt as policy the  right of New Zealand women, to  exercise their consciences on  whether or-not to have an abortion."  General elections come up in November  1978.  Accordingly, write NOW to  the prime minister of New Zealand  expressing your disgust and astonishment at his party's abortion bill.  Also write to the Labour Party  leader, Bill Rowling, and comment  with approval on his Party's current  stand.  Both letters can be addressed to  them at the Parliament Buildings  Wellington, New Zealand  BRITAIN  The British anti-abortion movement  is trying to make anti-abortion a  major election issue. In a recent  by-election (in Garscadden) all parties were scared into running anti-  choice candidates. The Labour candidate, who formerly voted in favour  of choice on abortion, now says that  he does not support abortion on demand. (Spare Rib/OOB)  HUGE SUPPORT  FOR ERA  BOSTON |  TOESWOilEH  for the  ,ERA  ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND MARCH FOR EQUAL  RIGHTS AMENDMENT  In the largest demonstration for  women's rights ever held in the U.S.,  a hundred thousand women gathered in  Washington D.C. July 9 to demand  ratification of the E.R.A.  Three more state legislatures must  pass the E.R.A. for it to become  law.  Congress had orginally set  March 1979 as the deadline for ratification by the necessary 38 states.  Demonstrators demanded that Congress  extend that ratification time.  Rightwinger Phyllis Schlafly called  the demonstrators "the same crowd  who went to Houston, a combination  of federal employees and radicals and  lesbians who spent $5 million of the  taxpayer's money."  Many feminists have expressed concern  that so much of the movement's  energy and resources are going into  the E.R.A. issue, while abortion and  gay rights are under attack.  Alexa  Freeman, an editor of Quest, comments  "...to lose the ERA would be a devastating psychological defeat.  There's  no danger of falling into the trap  of the single-issue approach of the  suffrage movement; we're already too  broadbased.  The ERA march was a  brillant display of unity among those  bases."  PROPOSITION 13  The recent passage of the Jarvis  Gann Initiative in California -  PROPOSITION 13 - will have ramifications across North America.  The  proposition will mean a 58% cut in  property taxes and thus cutbacks  in budgets for essential social  services and massive layoffs.  Touted as a "taxpayer's revolt",  the move will be picked up by right-  wing forces as a convenient way of  withdrawing state support for  community programs, rape crisis  centres, shelters for battered  women, women's health clinics,  alternative education programs,  childcare, and so on.  With two-thirds of the state's  property in the hands of corporations,  $4.5 billion of the $7 billion rollback in property taxes will go to  such needy sectors of the California  population as Lockheed Aircraft  Corporation and Standard Oil Company  of California.  Apartment owners and real estate  interests are expected to reap a tax  reduction of 60 percent. Proposition  13's co-sponsor, Paul Gann, is, in  fact, a large real estate owner and  politician.  Howard Jarvis, the  other sponsor, is a businessman,  politician and vocal John Bircher.  § * ^  «  s. w"      * r  4tf  SOME OF 75/000 WHO CELEBRATED GAY PRIDE WEEK IN NEW YORK CITY 20  prabha in cuba  from pg. 13  to talk about the 'glorious union'  between themselves and the Soviet  Union than to consider the question  of Soviet control.  KINESIS: I understand the Ethiopian  delegates were kept under wraps to  some extent.    They did not give a  press conference at the Festival.  Do you think they were a bit of an  embarrassment, given the Ethiopian/  Eritrean conflict?  PRABHA: I didn't get to speak with  any Ethiopians, and I'd agree that  they were deliberately being kept low-  profile. I got the sense that the  Cubans were being really cautious  about Eritrea.  KINESIS: Did you meet with anyone  from the Cuban Federation of Women.  Did you find out how it was organized  and what kind of work it does?  PRABHA: I spoke with one Cuban woman  who is a Federation member. The  Federation is organized on a block-  by-block basis of small, local groups.  The women share information about  health, education, legislation. They  also try to make sure there's strong  women's representation on the local  CDR, the Committee for the Defense of  the Revolution. CDR's are also  organized on a block-by-block basis.  They were formed as citizen militia  to defend their country after the  Bay of Pigs, but now they play more  of a community role.  KINESIS: Did you get to talk with any  Cubans about how the CDR's function?  Do all the neighbours know what you're  up to in Cuba?  PRABHA: One evening, all of the  festival delegates were invited to  a CDR block party.  85% of the Cubans  are -in CDR's, and so the whole city  of Havana was partying on the  streets that night. With beer and  rum flowing, and children milling  around for photographs, and lots  of food and smiles and warm feelings  - well, you get to talk but not at .  great length. The Cubans had been  looking forward to this people-to-  people contact for two years, they  told me.  I heard someone at the  Festival say that the CDR's would  make it hard for gay people to  be alone together - but that's a  second-hand comment.  KINESIS: How would you sum up  your experience of having gone to  the Festival in Cuba?  PRABHA:  It was a positive thing  to go to a socialist country and  see how people feel about their  revolution. Tt gives some  perspective to what we are trying  to do. But I'm not an expert on  Cuba. What I got was just a  glimpse. The Cubans see the  revolution as a process; it's by  no means complete. The most  important thing you have to remember is that Cuba is a Third World  country. What they've done in  19 years is incredible. 'Ģ  NATIVE  CONT. FROM P. 14       \^f V^/Vl fc, IN  part women and men were equal partners with equal, although axfterent  responsibilities, and saw one another as having equal rights to  personhood.  The first passage of Indian legislation took place in 1869, and was  based primarily on the white men's  experience with those tribes of Eastern Canada which surrounded the European settlements of the day. These  tribes were the Iroquois and the  Algonquins.  IROQUOIS  The Iroquois were a more homogenous  group than the Algonquins, and it  has been found that it was matri-  focal. That is to say, descent was  traced matrilineally (through women,  and post-marital residence was matri-  local - after marriage the husband  went to live with his wife's family.  Women's work consisted in the maintenance of the family and the family home, and in horticulture.  Corn,  beans and squash were the main crops,  with the women organizing, jointly  owning and working the gardens and  also distributing the produce.  Fishing rights were also held by  the women. Then men's work consisted mainly in hunting, and in engaging in warfare when necessary. Because of this role, men were away  for long periods of time, and this  may account for what appears to be  a female dominated society. Never-  the less, the special place of  women did accord them certain advantages. Each dwelling, traditionally  a longhouse, was owned by a senior  woman, and in it lived her spouse,  their daughters and spouses and  their children.  If a woman did not  want her husband to continue living  there, she simply tossed his personal effects out of the door of the  longhouse and so divorced him. And,  since the men were seldom at home,  women were also responsible for  most of the political affairs of the  Iroquois Nation.  ALGONQUINS  The Algonquins were a more nomadic  people, and so their social structure  was not as cohesive as that of the  Iroquois. Although agriculture and  hunting were also their principal  sources of sustenance, they tended  to nucleate into small independent  groups with little formal political  or social organization. Post-  marital residence patterns and tracing of descent' varied from one group  to another, and although the evidence  suggests matralineal patterns predominated, the only consensus that has  so far been arrived at is that this  society was not primarily patriarchal-  These tribal patterns were in sharp  contrast to the position of women in  the European social structure of the  time. The beliefs of government officials and others were firmly grounded in the European model in which the  ideal "lady" was a delicate swooning  ornament totally dependent upon, and  subservient to her man. She was not  seen as being under the obligation  to make any contribution to the  society, and so for great numbers of  poor women who were to be found working in the mines, the' mills, on farms,  and in domestic service, the term  "lady" did not quite apply since  their role in the society was seen as  less than the ideal.  In fact, even  when women did contribute substantially through paid labour, they had  little personal, and no political  autonomy. And so it was that early  reports on the "savages" of Upper  and Lower Canada generated criticism of the Indian male, who declined to take over the work of women,  and whose hunting was severely curtailed because of encroaching European settlements.  In this sociological framework,  Indian men frequently spoke up on  behalf of Indian women as well as on  behalf of others, Halfbreeds, who,  although they did not represent  "the purity of the race" were as  poor and downtrodden as the Indians  themselves. The anthropologist  Sally Weaver, has done extensive  research on the evolution of the  Indian people, and she gives frequent examples to illustrate that  even partial segregation of the  Indian people from Halfbreeds and  from Whites was not the desire of  the Indian people, nor were they  ever, until very recently, consulted as to what the provisions of the  Indian Act should be. White government officials imposed their own  sense of necessity and morality.  For example; In 1872 the Grand  Council of Ontario and Quebec Indians (founded in 1870) sent a strong  letter to the Minister at Ottawa  protesting among other things  section six of the 1869 Act as follows:  "They  (the members of the Grand  Council) also desire amendments  to section six of the Act of 1869  so that Indian women may have the  privilege of marrying when and  whom they please;    without subjecting themselves to exclusion  or expulsion from their tribes  turn to 21,  top col 3 21  Video & Film  Festival  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S VIDEO FILM FESTIVAL  1978  September 22, 23, 24, 1978  To be held at Mount Pleasant Community  Centre, 3161 Ontario St., Vancouver  TENTATIVE'PROGRAM NOTES  Video and film productions will be  shown concurrently under topic  areas. Each work will be introduced  on the program brochure with a brief  synopsis.  Wherever possible, topic areas will  begin with a tape/film that gives a  historical perspective on the  subject. We are inviting the women  producers to be present for discussion groups and panels following  the screenings, as well as local  women who are knowledgeable in the  area. As the^drganizational work  for this is still in process at the  time of press, complete details will  be available in the festival program  brochure of both panel speakers and  final program design.  Daycare must be pre-registered by  September 7, 1978.  Friday, Sept. 22nd:  9:00 - 9:30  Registration  Video and film to be shown concurrently  9:30 - 12:30 MOTHERHOOD AND MARRIAGE  "Greatgrandmother" - "Take Her, She's  Mad."  "Quebecoisient" - "Before the Time  Comes"  "Would I Ever Like to Work" - "So  Where's my Prince Already"  "Women's Suffrage Movement in Canada"  - Discussion -  12:30 - 1:15 Lunch  1:15 - 4:30 LEGAL, HEALTH, VIOLENCE  AGAINST WOMEN  "Women and the Law" "Healthcaring:  Our End of the Speculum" "Rule of  Thumb" "Rape, the Reality" "Menses"  "Fashion as a Social Control"  "Anastasia Ma Cherie" "The Screwing  I Got"  - Discussion -  7:30 p.m.  Film:  "Aloise" by Liliane  de Kermadec.  Saturday, September 23:  9:00 - 9:30 Registration  9:30 - 11:30 Continuation of LEGAL,  HEALTH, VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  "Ma Tete n'est pas mon corps est"  "Voices from Within" "Lady from  Grey Country"  - Discussion -  11:30 - 12:00 Barbara Halpern  Martineau - speaker on:  "History  of Women in the Media"  12:00 - 12:30 Lunch  12:30 - 3:45 THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT  "Paris Commune" "Les Filles du Roy"  "Ti-Grace Atkinson: Interview"  "Some American Feminists"  - Discussion -  3:45 - 5:00 ALTERNATIVES  "Women in the Trades" "Grease"  "Karen: Women in Sports" "Journey-  women" "Like the Tree's" "Caroline  Herschel: Astronomer"  - Discussion -  Over 40 productions have been selected.  9:00 - 1:30 Saturday Evening  Women's Dance with live band: $3.00  Sunday, September 24  9:00 - 9:30 Registration  9:30 - 12:30 CHANGING RELATIONSHIPS  AMONG WOMEN  "Stress, Scars and Wrinkles" "Une  Nef et Ses Sorcieres" "Psycho-  synthesis" "Prisms" "Feminist Lesbian  Conference 1973" "Supernummeraries"  "On a Cold Afternoon"  - Discussion -  12:30 - 1:30 Lunch  1:30 - 3:30 Panel debate on  PERSPECTIVES AND DIRECTIONS FOR  WOMEN IN THE MEDIA  An important part of the festival  is the art environment within which  the festival will be held. There will  be many displays of paintings,  photography, line drawings, soft  sculptural works, life-size figures,  weavings, and larger than life-size  mythological animals. This work will  be done by local women artists.  Please pre-register for festival  tickets through:  Women in Focus,  #6 - 45 Kingsway,  Vancouver, B.C.        ,  V5T 3S7  Telephone (604) 872-2250  Steering Committee for V.W.V.F.F.  See you there.'  FROM P. 20  and consequent loss of property  and the rights they may have by  virtue of their being members of  any particular tribe."  Of course, such requests always  went unheeded, but their presence  is an indication to us that in  spite of their poverty, the Indian people were once upon a time,  a proud and unified group.  It is  quite clear that Indian men are by  far the best allies for Indian  women. And since the readership  of this paper is largely white and  female, what can we do about this  intolerable situation? But perhaps, by offering this limited insight into Indian culture and the  problems of Indian women, we may  gain a greater understanding of  our Indian sisters, and so, if asked to do so, we may be in a better  position to offer support to them.  For more information, contact the  Advisory Council on the Status of  Women, 63 Sparks Street, Box 1541,  Station B, Ottawa, Ontario. KlP 5R5  and ask for Indian Women and the  Indian Act, or their most recent  publication, Indian Women and the  Law in Canada: Citizens Minus.  ABDUCTED  AN ABRIDGEMENT OF FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN  RIGHTS....THE UNBELIEVABLE CASE OF  DALIA ZEGHAR MASCHINO   THE facts:  1. The Montreal Urban Community  Police Department has established substantial evidence that  Dalila Zeghar Maschino, a young  Algerian student, with landed  immigrant status in Canada since  August, 1975, was drugged, kidnapped and taken back to her  native village in a private jet  by her eldest brother, Mr.  Messaoud Zeghar.  His purpose  is to have her marry a man of  his choosing.  2. Dalila Zeghar Maschino has been  legally married since March 10,  1975 to Denis Maschino of Paris,  France.  Dalila is a graduate  student at Concordia University  in Montreal, while Denis is a  doctoral student at McGill  University.  They both have only  a few months of residency  requirements left before being  accorded full Canadian Citizenship.  THE ISSUES:  1. That such an event can occur in  our country is stupefying, and  that the laws of our country  have not been applied to protect  a landed immigrant.  2. A young woman has been deprived of  the basic human rights to choose  where she will live and whom she  will marry.  3. No public action has been taken  by our government in this case.  THE ACTION-REQUIRED:  Urge the Canadian government to  take immediate and effective  action toward the Algerian govern'  ment to effect the return of  Dalila Zeghar Maschino  (NAC News) 22  letters  fifty-fifty  A much delayed answer to your notice  for the subscription/membership for  Kinesis.  I have decided to cancel my  subscription as I do not wholeheartedly agree with your policy of  publishing and supporting Lesbian  News etc.  I agree it is a Human  Rights issue but women have a whole  lot more to push for than the right  for Lesbians to adopt children. We  live in a changing world and thankfully much has improved because of  people like you.  I believe in the  natural order of things, a female  still is equipped to bear children  a male to produce the sperm. My  world consists of both such partners  and gladly so, and I hope that my  girls have all the freedom I enjoy  but also respect the male world, it  is as important as we are, 50 - 50  I believe.  excited!  To those women who are responsible  for the publication of Kinesis:  thank you.  I was very excited when  I read your paper to see such a  wonderful coverage of lesbian and  gay rights issues.  It makes me feel  good and warm when I know as a gay  man I'm supported by women.  I regret I am unable to afford  to send you more than eight dollars.  Times are tight, but I know that  VSW financing is even tougher  than my own.  no disaster  Dear Sisters  As members of the Okanagan Women's  Coalition we were dismayed to read in  the July-August KINESIS that our  coalition is a disaster.  We are  referring to the interview with  Melanie, the anarcha-feminist who  stated "Some of the dangers of  structure being imposed from above  were pointed out in what happened  with coalitions of women's groups (in  the Fraser Valley and the Okanagan)  which the Secretary of States' department was going around setting up.  They were a disaster "  We think that most of the women who  have been involved at all with the  Okanagan Women's Coalition will agree  with us that the Coalition was suggested rather than imposed.  And so  if has worked well for us.  It was formed to provide a vehicle  for increased communications and  co-operation between women's groups  in the region to provide workshops  of educational interest to women as  well as to upgrade our personal and  political skills.  The workshops did more than just  bring helpful and inspiring resource  women to the valley.  Getting to know  each other has been most important.  We have found other women with experiences and needs similar to our own,  though sometimes unique to our region.  Member groups are no longer isolated  little groups, often feeling alienated from their big city sisters.  The  workshops have attracted Okanagan women  who are not members of our groups -  it's good to know there are so many  feminists in the area.  Another article in the same issue of  KINESIS states that "Okanagan women  seem satisfied with the coalition  concept."  Satisfied isn't the proper  word.  We are excited about next year's  plans for workshops and a regional  newsletter.  We are worried about for-  seeable problems regarding the Coalition 's structure.  We are concerned  about the problems inherent in our  dependency on government funds.  But  we are looking forward to working  together in the Okanagan Women's  Coalition.  Heather Field  Dianne Allen  Kelowna Status of Women  disagree  Dear Sisters  This letter is in reference to the  article in the May, 1978 issue of  Kinesis concerning the North Shore  Credit Union Annual Meeting of April  25, 1978.  We are concerned that  certain statements made in the article give a false impression of the  actual situation regarding the North  Shore Women's Centre.  Further, we  are concerned that the retraction of  the offending paragraph was not forthcoming, as promised by the author,  in the June issue of Kinesis.  The only involvement of the North  Shore Women's Centre, as an organization, was to publicize information  about the situation at the credit  union in its newsletter.  Several  women, who as individuals are members  of both the North Shore Women's  Centre and the credit union attended  the meeting in question.  It was  their intention to support, as individuals, the candidacy of a woman  who was to be nominated from the  floor that evening.  The candidate  however, had decided before attending  the meeting that she would not seek  the nomination.  The implication that  North Shore Women's Centre members  put pressure on the prospective candidate to take a public stand on the  staff problems issue and thereby  caused her withdrawal is false.  We are concerned that the article  also implies that there was a confrontation between members of the North  Shore Women's Centre and the local  NDP women's group.  As some of us are  members of both groups such a confrontation would be ludicrous.  In one fell swoop, the author of this  article has put down one woman in  particular, women as a class and two  women's groups.  We do not feel that  this type of journalism is appropriate  for a feminist publication.  In Sisterhood  Margaret Roy  Shirly Freund  Anne Billiert  Andree Lugsdin  Carol McQuarrie  Sheila N.L. Perret  response  I would like to thank the North  Shore Women's Centre for their  support in my struggle to combat  sexism at the North Shore Credit  Union.  The article ("Credit Union  Uses Entire Arsenal to Keep Feminists at Bay", Kinesis, May 1978)  was not written with-the intention  of criticising the NSWC.  The women  involved in the dispute with Mary  Bellerby happen to be members of  the group, but this was a personal  conflict and not a reflection of  the attitude of the NSWC as a whole.  Judith' Burke  I would like to voice my frustrations about the article/interview  on anarcha-feminism in the last  issue.  The tone seems too smug  and self-gratifying.  Perhaps if  more than 2 people had been interviewed, a more realistic view of  this political perspective could  have been shown.  The opinions  expressed were personal ones and  not necessarily those held by all  who identify as anarcha-feminists.  The article continually puts anarchist theory into a vanguardist  framework which indicates to me  a misunderstanding of that theory.  Anarcha-feminists come from all  walks of life and there is no  set "line" on particular current  issues (like punk rock on armed  struggle). Not all"of us have  worked for the NDP, and many of  us are working class and understand only too well why people  who are political shop at Safeway.  Merlyn 23  KINESIS  ISSN 0317-9095  September 1978  Vol 7 #8  Kinesis is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions from the feminist community and  in particular, from VSW members. We  do reserve the right to; edit, and  submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want  your work returned.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesisr Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6J IN3.  Membership to Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation and Kinesis is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year and we would ask  members to base their donations on  this and their own financial position.  As we now have the status of a charitable organization and as we are  unable to pay for Kinesis from these  funds due to government regulations,  we will be issuing tax deductible  receipts for the balance of all membership donations over $8.00.  Please remember VSW operates on inadequate funding - we need member  support.'  WORKERS THIS ISSUE: Gerda Austerlander,  Dorothy Restall, Gayla Reid, Lorri Rudland, Susan Weinstein.  ADVERTISING: Kinesis welcomes non-sexist, non-racist advertising. Call Gayla  at 736 1313 for the ad. rates.  DISTRIBUTE Kinesis in your local laundromat, doctor's offices, etc. Call 736  1313 for freebie back issues  For information on union organizing or the  women's programme of the B.C. Federation of  Labour, please contact:  Director of Women's Programmes  B.C. Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B.C. V5M 4A2  430-1421  Conference  6th Annual Conference Sponsored by  Victoria and UVIC Status of Women  Action Groups.  October 27,28, 1978  GUEST SPEAKER:  JUDGE NANCY MORRISON  Family Court  North Vancouver  Friday, Oct.   also  27 - 7:30 P.,. FEMINIST ARTS  FESTIVAL  SATURDAY WORKSHOPS " October 28, 1978  * Money beyond the grocery budget  * Participating in Politics  * Dealing with agression  * Health - what too many of us  don't know  * Dealing with sexism  PREREGISTRATION ONLY  Cost $7.00 before October 19, 1978  For registration forms contact:  Shirley Nordstrom  1429 Monterey Avenue  Victoria, B. C.  Tel. 598-6485  KEEP US ALIVE.' ADVERTISE IN KINESIS  Film Course  FEMINIST FILM COURSE CANCELLED  The need to earn a living is taking  precedence over my love of film, so  I regretfully, sadly, must cancel  the proposed film criticism class  scheduled for September.  Thanks for your support over  the last two years, I love  you all,  Brig Anderson  Women'5 Studies  Fall courses for credit are available in Women's Studies at Vancouver  Community College. Interdisciplinary  courses begin this month at Langara  Campus and the Vancouver Public Library. Call Gayla 736 1313 for info.  Surveyor  WANTED FEMINIST SURVEYOR  We are a group of women setting up a  Wilderness Community on the Bute  Inlet.  We would like a B.C. Licensed  woman surveyor to survey this 25  acres.  This survey has to be done  within one year.  If any woman is  interested in doing this please write  Womansong, Fulford Harbour, B. d  ;:•;;: ^Y-'^/v!-*- vT^Y*  •.•••"•.••'.•.•.••.•.•.•.•:•/.•.•:.•:.•.:%••/.•.•.•'     Women ''m''.:-'''  Assertiveness Training  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING. VSW is organizing Assertiveness Training Courses  for the fall. Call the office at  736 1313 for the full details.  Vancouver South  PARENT EFFECTIVENESS TRAINING  P.E.T. is a training program for  parents - to teach them the skills  they need for the most important  job they will ever have - raising  responsible children*  8 Sessions - $35.00  Commencing September 19, 1978 -  November 7, 1978  Tuesday Afternoon 1:00 to 3:00 p.m.  *Also of prime importance in basic  relationship training and  counsellor training.  HEALTH AND IDENTITY  Introductory course for the newly  emerging women.  We hope that we  can learn something of how our  feelings work, what parts of our  bodies they involve, how this is  linked to thinking.  We cannot  think our way out of troubling  feelings; but we can learn how  better to cope with the energies  constantly playing through us,  through our bodies.  8 Sessions - $20.00  Commencing November 14, 1978 -  December 19, 1978  Tuesday Afternoon 1:00 to 3:00 p.m.  - 4 Additional Sessions after  Christmas.  For further information or to pre-  register phone weekdays, South  Vancouver Family Place 325-5213.  Help Fund  the Communist Weekly!  For 5 years the Canadian Marxist-Leninist  Group IN STRUGGLE! has published every 2  weeks to make known the communist point  of view within the Canadian working class.  Today, both political repression and efforts  to divide the english and french speaking  proletariat are increasing. This is why it is so  important for us to intervene every week.  Support the weekly IN STRUGGLE!  Campaign objective: $60,000.  Send donation to:  Vancouver: 2542 Kingsway East, B.C.  v vyM in sTrinGLEita