 *—<-  KIN€SIS  vfiam o«iwnw»  vol 6 no 5  ____  APRIL 77  voncouver status of women  at VSWf       kjnesis means change INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  PICKETING AND RALLY  march 0  MARCH 8, IT RAINED. IT RAINED AS  only the raincoast can. But we  still turned out. The night of  March 7 we conducted a campaign  of saturation leafletting: by  the morning of March 8, more than  4,000 leaflets had gone up on  posts and stores and (tsk tsk) the  occasional phone booth. Leaflets  contained information about: women  in the workforce; the CORE curriculum; women and housework; women  and welfare; political prisoners;  lesbian women; native women; women  and health care; women and childcare.  On March 8, we picketed at the  DHR, the AIB, the UIC offlees,at  the Vancouver School Board, at the  hospital, at City Hall, at Daycare  Information Services, at the Court  House. Picketing was followed by  a nooi hour rally at the court  house. The evening of March 8 there  was an evening of song and celebration at'the New School.  The establishment media took due  note, and this year, more Vancouver  people than ever before realised  that March 8 was a day of international solidarity for all women.  Highlights of the month of March  were the two meetings which developed after the March 8 action. They  were discussions between the women's  movement and left coalitions in Vancouver. On March 16, two hundred  people showed up at Britannia Community Centre to debate the relationship between socialism and the liberation of women. Then on March 21,  one hundred people, mostly women,  attended an evening of debate at  Britannia High School about future  strategies for socialist women.  ABORTION  ISTHE ISSUE  The annual general meeting of the  Vancouver General Hospital is coming up April 20th. Over the past  three years, this meeting has developed as a battleground between  the pro-abortion forces and the anti-  abortionists. The Board of Directors,  elected at this meeting, decides  whether or not abortions will be available at VGH. The anti-abortionists  are trying to manoeuve themselves  into a position of strength for the  future. If they are successful, in  a year or two women needing abortions  could be refused at VGH. Then it will  be back to the back-alley butchers.  An estimated 2,000 people have signed  up as members in order to vote either  for or against abortion. In response  to the so-called 'pro-life' campaign,  feminists have been signing up as  members in order to retain VGH's  currently pro-abortion stance.  PROFILES of the candidates for the  Board of Directors will be prepared  by feminists. Phone VSW for info  about this - 736 3746. BEFORE WE GO UNDER  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  INSTITUTIONAL SUB: $10.00 p.a.  RENEWAL:  MEMBER:  KINESIS is sent to all members in good  standing of VSW. Membership fees are by  yearly donation. In determining your  donation, we ask you to balance your  own financial situation with the fact  that KINESIS costs (at least!) $5.00  per person to print and mail each month.  KINESIS costs 35 cents per copy in bookstores. Help KINESIS by distributing it  in your community.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is to promote understanding  about the changing position of women  in society.  Views expressed in KINESIS are those of  the writer, and unless specifically  stated do not reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material in this paper is the  responsibility of the editorial and  production committee.  PUBLICATION DATE: The first week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 15th of the previous  month.  KINESIS STAFF THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe,  Lilith Brewster, Leila Harding, Linda  Hourie, Marg Nelson, and Gayla Reid.  Jerry Boorda and Richard Davis, too.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes all submissions from the feminist community.  We will use pseudonyms when requested.  The editorial committee reserves the  right to edit in the interests of clarity, brevity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada. V6J 1N3.  Phone us: 736 3748.  GRAPHICS CREDITS: The graphics in this  issue are from Liberation News Service,  to which KINESIS subscribes.  The Letters head on this page is from  BROADSHEET, a New Zealand publication.  Girl in cage is from MAJORITY REPORT.  Grand Jury info. p.6 is from OFF OUR  BACKS, Beehive on p.12 is from EMERGENCY LIBRARIAN, centrefold is from  EDCENTRIC; information on p. 17 is  from BIG MAMA RAG, PHOTOS ON p. 20  from the VANCOUVER SUN, doctored graphic on p. 22 from a Federal Government blurb, graphic p. 24 from UP  STREAM, and photo p. 27 is from the  Coffeehouse Collective people.   COVER PHOTO IS COURTESY OF THE WOMEN'S KARATE ASSOCIATION. SEE NEXT  MONTH'S KINESIS.. F0JLTHEIR SZORYl,,. ......  Board of Directors  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Dear Sisters:  As a result of steadily increasing  professional and personal demands,  I must reluctantly submit my resignation as president, effective  immediately.  In sisterhood,  Nancy Conrod  KINESIS:  WOMEN IN PRISON, an excellent book  by Kathryn Watterson Burkhart (reviewed in last month's Klnesis-ed.)  is also available in paperback -  Popular Library Edition - New York,  at $1.75.  The Catch-22 however is that it  appears to be impossible to bring  it into Canada as the omnipotent  "distributor" decides what we can  read, as i_t determines what Canadian bookstores can import!  Let's swamp our bookstores with demands for this edition, and better  still, let some enterprising women  begin to compile a similar book on  women in Canadian prisons!  They  can count on my fullest cooperation  since I can't find time to do it  myself. Thanks.  - Claire Culhane  PRISONERS' RIGHTS GROUP  Having received only 60% of what  we asked for from Provincial Sec,  we have been going through our  budget. If we are going to continue  with our present services, we need  to raise an extra $1,000 a month -  somehow, somewhere...  One thing we MUST DO is find more  subscribers for KINESIS. You can  help us reach more people by passing  this copy along to a friend and  suggesting that s/he subscribe.  If we can't raise some extra $$$s,  we are facing a slow death.  HELP  KINCSIS  OUT!  Dear Friends,  We certainly don't want to be without  Kinesis!  It is bad enough to conquer  the lack of feminist contact without  losing the monthly booster shot of a  Kinesis in the mailbox!  In sisterhood,  Alison Campbell  Box 6, Site 6, R.R.#2  Vanderhoof B.C.  KINESIS:  Without the slightest acerbity I  agree with Ms. Dulce Oikawa that  I'm not a specialist in theology,  and I trust that she will recall  that I made this denial before  she did. However, when she asserts that the so-called Ecclesial  Sacraments are recognized within  the tradition of the Anglican  Church, I think I'm entitled to  quote from that Church's Catechism:  "Question: What meanest thou by  this word Sacrament?  "Answer: I mean an outward and  visible sign of an inward and  spiritual grace given unto us,  ordained by Christ himself."  Those last four words strike me as  pulling the rug out from under Ms.  Oikawa when she tells us what the  Anglican Church recognizes. May  her fall be a gentle one!  Geoffrey B. Riddebough  Dear Friends,  The Northern Music Circuit is looking  for interested persons and/or coffeehouses in the north of B.C. to sponsor  Canadian musicians travelling from  Quesnel to Prince Rupert!  Four people who help run the coffeehouse in Quesnel, Joni Rabena, Kurt  Pedersen, Lynette Winders and myself,  have now taken over the coordination of  the Northern Music Circuit. We try to  schedule   Canadian artist a month  at $50 - $75 per performance in all  the coffeehouses from Quesnel to Prince  Rupert. We would like to expand the  circuit to Williams Lake, 100 Mile,  Burns Lake, Kitimat, and anywhere else  there is interest. The talent is good  and the friendliness is good! We are  always looking for new talent and if  you would like to get on the circuit  or know of anyone who would be interested please contact either Joni Rabena at 747 2817 or myself at 747 1977.  We especially need more women artists.  I know there must be many out there!  We have more information that we can  mail to anyone who is interested.  Write to us at: R.R.I, Carbioo Service, Box 29, Quesnel, B.C. V2J 3H5  We hope to hear from you soon!  Patricia Buscn ~ J     '^-w- ',  Joni Rabena. CUTBACKS AND TOKENISM  Provincial Secretary has awarded  $75,000 to Vancouver Status of Women  for the fiscal year 1977/78. Mrs.  McCarthy says we cannot "automatically expect provincial funds in the  future." Did we ever?  Provincial Secretary also says the  proposed provincial ombudsman (could  we have a woman, please?) would replace the work of VSW.  Can one person really handle 100  women's rights cases per month for  VSW plus all the cases of sex discrimination handled by women's centres across the province who have  closed due to lack of funding?  VSW has gone through hell to get this  money each year - 100-page grant  applications; monthly, quarterly,  annual financial statements; the  indignity of being assessed internally by male bureaucrats with no  understanding of women's rights;  drumming up province-wide community  support; personal lobbying with politicians; constant prodding of the  press; waiting three months for a  yes or no at the last minute just  as the previous grant expires.  $75,000 may seem generous but we  don't know whether to laugh or cry.  We are one of the few women's groups  left in this province with any kind  of substantial funding. That puts  a tremendous pressure on us, and  them.  Given that the grant has not  increased in 3 years, and allowing  a 10% inflation rate per year, our  budget has been cut through attrition by 30%.  $75,000 pays only 6 staff at $800  per month, for 50 hour weeks. That  is 50% less than comparable work  is paid in the private sector.  The  VSW staff have no job security, no  'ñ† health or pension plans. We are  having difficulty obtaining the expertise we need for such low pay.  The government keeps promoting volunteer services. Apparently women  should work for.free never mind  equal pay!!! VSW cannot charge for  its service. The very women who  most need our help can least afford  to pay us a living wage.  At a time when the community demand  for our services is steadily increasing (due to the closure of  other women's centres and community  centres cut off from provincial  government funding), we are losing  staff instead of hiring badly needed  help.  Provincial Secretary defended her  decision to give us less than we  requested, saying we assured her  we could raise the rest from the  private sector. Au contraire, my  dear...  We have applied to numerous federal,  provincial, municipal and private  sources and have been turned down.  Even our application for tax-exempt  status which would have been attractive for funding from corporations,  has been denied.  We can't raise the needed $63,000  from bake sales. Well, maybe we  could raise $1,000 by selling feminist T-shirts. And that's our  last avenue. You don't raise that  kind of money by bake sales.  There are some who would argue we  are asking the government for free  handouts.  In reality, women are  paying their share of taxes but we  are not getting the services we  need in return.  If the government  will not provide them it has a responsibility to financially support  community groups that do.  Provincial Secretary abolished the  $200,000 budget for grants to community based status of women projects, under the Provincial Status  of Women Coordinator.  Since then  about one-third of the 200 feminist  groups in B.C. have closed for lack  of funding.  As Karen Sanford, NDP MLA for Comox,  said in the legislature recently  regarding the women's centre in her  riding, "They have lost hope."  So how is it that VSW got $75,000  again this year? Are we yet again  the token feminist group for the  Socreds? The answer is politics,  and take from that what you will.  Provincial Secretary has no grant  application forms for women's projects, no grant deadlines, no stated  guidelines for funding women's centres, no criteria for evaluating  a good women's centre.  We understand that a number of women's centres have been told by  their MLAs to apply to VSW for money  (divide and conquer). Which services do we cut to do that?  It is  not up to VSW to fund the women's  movement. We are already providing  as many skills, resources, and information with as many groups in  the province as we can. NO, IT IS  THE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE GOVERNMENT TO DEVELOP A POLICY ON WOMEN1S  ISSUES GENERALLY AND FUNDING OF  WOMEN'S CENTRES SPECIFICALLY.  In March 1976, the Women's Rally  for Action, a coalition of women's  groups throughout B.C. presented  the provincial government with an  extensive brief on women's issues.  Core funding for women's centres  was a major recommendation.  "It is recommended that:  the provincial government adopt and implement the proposal for the core  funding of women's centres as presented to the Human Services Committee of Cabinet, by the Provincial  Coordinator on the Status of Women,  1975.  "It is recommended that: the provincial government assume the responsibility for the funding of women's centres on a permanent basis*  "It is recommended that priority  in funding be given to women's  centres proposing to serve unmet  needs in the community, particularly in outlying areas; and women's  centres already established and  functioning well."  As far as we can tell, nothing has  been done about these recommendations, to date, by the provincial  government. They just keep cutting  services, right, left and centre  and women's centres, having lowest  priority, are the last funded, first  cut.  6dmti$*  VSW Evoluoted  By A Vander Zalm Team  Actually, we couldn't help but feel sympathy for them: two men  in conservative attire, doing their very best to look unobtrusive in an all-woman office which serves an all-woman community.  Just what were they supposed to be finding?  With only one work-day's notice, they arrived to 'evaluate' us.  They were on loan from the Department of Human Resources to the  Provincial Secretary's Department. VSW has nothing to do with DHR.  What standards were they using? The Provincial Secretary, so far  as we know, has not developed any criteria for testing the effectiveness of women's centres. We have no contract.  And half-way through the first day of the three-day evaluation,  we hear that we are being given 60% funding.  Which is, to say the least, all very odd. FAMILY VIOLENCE SYMPOSIUM:  The Symposium on Family Violence was  a two and a half day conference,  attended by approximately 450 people.  Those attending were from the full  range of social services (from high- '  ly degreed professionals to lay  workers and community organizers)  and from the legal profession (lawyers and police officers), plus a  small number of acknowledged 'consumers' , i.e. battered wives.  I estimate that about two thirds were  from the lower mainland of B.C.;  others came from all parts of B.C.  and Canada, and sprinkling from the  United States and Britain.  The conference originated through  the United Way and was planned by  representatives of various agencies  and professions within Vancouver.  What Kinesis is trying to examine in  this report is a feminist appraisal  of what was happening at this conference. It is clear to us that the  conference would simply not have taken  place were it not for the way in  which feminists have raised the consciousness of the public about the  issue of wife (and child) abuse;  We have asked VSW member, Tia Stra-  chan to give her analysis of the  conference, from her own point of  view as an ex-battered-wife; we reprint here excerpts from Gene Erring-  ton's fine speech (which appalled some  of the professionals), and comments  from Del Martin (author of Battered  Wives) and from Catherine Russell,  a feminist and a student. Your own  responses would also be welcome!  Tio Strochon  On the 9, 10 and 11th of March I  attended the conference on Family  Violence and it was the most sadly  ironic experience of my lifetime.  It didn't take me long to recognize  the authoritarian, non-caring way  in which this conference was structured.  How clearly this demonstrated the lack of understanding in our  society for the plight of the battered woman or child!  Most of us who are battered women  got to that point in our lives because we dared to challenge the assumed power positions of the men  in our lives. Their-demands for  constant attention and their compulsive quest for status achievement robbed us of the time we needed  from them to share our concerns,  feelings and problems - there was  no one else for us to turn to!  They wouldn't hear us, and here I  was confronted with a panel of  speakers, mostly men, in elevated  seating positions (power), floodlights on the podium and overly  long speeches (attention), impressive initials behind their names  (status), and it all served to remind me of the drama at home. Then  there was the final insult of extremely limited time for responses  from the audience, with none at all  after the speeches of the only two  women speakers out of a total of  eight (they wouldn't hear us).  Add to this that I was wined and  dined in lavish surroundings and  you have one person so sufficiently  intimidated that I could hardly  have spoken even if I had made a  point of taking the mike and making  the time.  o nightmare  I had no recourse.  It was like a  nightmare - especially when I related back to the battered woman who  also had no recourse.  She has no  money, and usually she has children,  and where is she going to go? And  who is going to help her in her  shock and desperation? She tries a  doctor, and he gives her some pills  and send her to a psychiatrist, who  tells her she hasn't sorted out her  relationship with her father!  Finally, she goes to a transition house  where she is turned away because it  is already overcrowded and no new  ones are in sight because her government has turned a deaf ear to the  crying need for more shelters for  abused women and children.  The women - and men - who have been  working for years on shoestring budgets under exceedingly stressful  conditions in transition houses all  across Canada, are forced to turn  away more people from their doors  than they are able to take in, and  these number in the thousands during  the course of a year.  And our governments, which are run  by people who choose to remain ignorant of human needs - all the  while loudly proclaiming themselves  defenders of human rights - blithely allocate funds to "keep families  together". When will they stop ignoring the quiet murders which take  place in our "together" families  every hour of the day, every day of  the year, year after year. Amen!  Those of us who want to affect  change are ruthlessly slapped down  and told to let those who are in  the "know" look after things, and  those who are in the "know" don't  know what to do and spend their time  studying the "problem", while we  struggle along, barely able to make  ends meet.  It has become clear that transition  houses need a spokesservice, and  toward that end, I and Georgina  Marshall of the BCFW Subcommittee  on Transition Houses have offered  our time and energy to try and set  up a central organization whose purpose it will be to secuie funding  and aid in the establishment of more  houses.  Gene Errington  FAMILY VIOLENCE :  IS IT A WOMEN'S PROBLEM?  This is not an easy topic for any  of us who have been involved in the  women's movement.  It is the kind of  subject that keeps you awake nights  and that fills you with rage.  Women ore excluded  from moteriol ond sociol  production  It is one of my frustrations that  the things that I have read in the  social sciences are of little use  to me in understanding and in dealing with the kinds of women and the  kinds of situations that came to me  on the other end of the phone when  I was working in the Ombudservice  of the Vancouver Status, of Women.  Nothing that has been done by the  social sciences categorically have  helped me understand the nature of  the situation that goes beyond the  particular relationship of the man  and woman that are calling, and that  somehow qualifies me to understand  and to fit that experience into an  overall picture so that I can understand the situation that women are  in, the women that call me.  It is  now occurring to other women that  social science as it is now practised doesn't apply to us at all. BATTERED WOMEN vs. THE PROFESSION  By now I think it's axiomatic, a  cliche for those of us who work in  the women's movement, that we realize that women are excluded totally  from the means of material production and the ownership of that means  of production.  So we are beginning  to realize we are exluded from  the production of the concepts which  govern our lives. We are silenced.  We do not form thoughts. We do not  produce the concepts that govern how  it is we see the world.  Our experience is never adequately described  by the disciplines in the social  sciences. We always end up the objects of study. We are told here  are some people that we will look  at from this particular position,  and the position that we are being  looked at as women is one that we  do not occupy.  It's not to say that  women aren't doing this, aren't looking at us as well but I think we  have to be very clear that the women  who are also looking have been trained in the tools and the concepts  that have been generated by and that  form the practices and methods of  dealing with the world by professionals, by managers, in terms of their  concerns and in terms of what they  think is important and these people  are not women. And so what they  tell us about our situation often is  not the least bit how it appears to  us at all.  So what we see when we  read about marital violence, we look  at things like violence in general.  Where does it come from?  It is biologic?  Is it psycho-analytic? What  is violence?  Is it a punishment?  How many bruises make a battered  wife?  Is violence legitimate?  Is  it instrumental or expressive? A  whole range of thinking that goes on  on, what exactly is it, abstracted,  totally divorced from any sort of  thing that the battered wife in fact  actually experiences. Probably the  most horrendous is that line I read  in the quote in United Community  Services Report, and I can only hope  that it was ironic.  It was talking  about alcoholism and wife battering,  and it said 'what the drunken hus-  bank may in fact suffer from is an  inability to judge the degree of  battering that a wife can take without dying'.  VIOLENCE  AGAINST WOMEN:  Wife Beating  to Snuff Movies  These are the kinds of definitions  that I suggest are absolutely useless to what we have to deal with  today. We have to decide, according  to some of the social sciences, what  amount of violence is socially approved, and I would suggest that it  is never socially approved by the  victim.  So that how the whole subject is talked about serves to disguise and modify and derail what it  is that we're looking at when we  talk about violence between family  members, when we talk about the  roots of violence in biologic and  psycho-analytic terms.  There has  been no mention in the literature  that I have read about the particular continuum of violence against  women, starting with such things as  rape, with wife battering, culminating in the sorts of things we hear  now are going on in New York where  people are paying $200, men are paying $200 to watch what are called  snuff movies where women—these  movies are made in South America—  where women have been kidnapped and  are raped and killed for the benefit  of the cameras. These are the sorts  of things that are not elucidated  for us by the social sciences.  ...One thing that I think escapes  us in the kinds of social sciences  being done today is that we do not  give enough serious consideration  to a social order that places women  in a situation where violence is  routinely done to them, and keeps  them there. And this is the family.  We see the family as a unit, as the  basic unit of our society, and we  look at the family as a democracy  where what goes on between the adults presumably goes on equally.  We are then blinded to the fact  that within the family the adults  have very different status indeed.  One has the money and also the social authority in the public world.  And we do not see the family when  we look at it this way, in its  economic context. We must realize,  I think, that in our particular  economic system all of the people  It is essentiol that there  be a huge range  of unemployment.  are not needed.  It is essential  for our economic system that there  be a huge range of unemployment.  There are not jobs for everybody  and our whole thing is based on  production.  If you're not producing, you're not needed.  It is  essential then that we have a mechanism whereby we can make one salary do for a number of people, and  this is what the family serves in  this particular context. And further, we go on to say that the earner of that salary has significantly  more value in the eyes of society  and in the rights within the home.  So that we do not seriously address  the facts that women experience marriage quite differently than men do,  and that for many women, marriage  is a tyranny and it is a trap, and  that women within it are powerless  and subordinate and confined. And  I am not saying that this is built  into the relationship between the  sexes.  I'm saying that this is a  setup in our society. This is the  product of our particular economic  needs where people who are not producing have to have a place where  they can go and be stuck into cold  storage until such time as they are  again needed, for instance, during  war or other national crises; and  then, of course, there are jobs for  women and they can come out of the  home. Meanwhile, they are there.  turn to col.3 p 26...  Catherine Russell  The symposium was a very emotional  experience for me. The conflict I  experience is a reflection of the  conflict generated by two sets of  norms. Those opposing norms were not  explicitly stated; I experienced  them and have derived my statement  from my experience.  The Professionals  Approximately 80% of the delegates  were professionals - social workers,  counsellors, academics, lawyers and  judges, police officers. And they  set the predominant tone of the symposium.  Family violence is a statistically verifiable phenomenon/  problem. The solution to the problem is to develop a comprehensive  and interlocking set of social  agencies which, in combination with  the legal profession, will provide  support services and recourse to  those experiencing family violence.  This whole approach is very cool,  intellectual, theoretical and does  not ertcourage any personal, emotional involvement with the issue.  It  reflects an attitude of "I'm guiltless", "It's happening to someone  else". And it proposes a solution  that maintains a separation of those  who staff the agencies and provide  support from those who are the receivers of services: the helpers and  the helped.  These are the people who have the  power and who do not feel personally  threatened by family violence.  The Feminists  This is the group of delegates that  formed about the people involved  directly in transition houses - including some professionals and some  men. Once of the speakers expressed  the orientation of 'this group:  "I  do not find family violence 'interesting, I find it horrifying',  (to p.26) A 'Äû  protect^  peoples rights  ty taKmg  tiiem away.  FBI:  "on obsession  with finding  evidence of  'lesbian  domination'".  When Ti-Grace Atkinson was in town  for Women's Week duiing February,  she spoke with Vancouver feminists  about the Women's Grand Jury Project  in New York, with which she has worked  extensively. Her visit was an occasion  to raise consciousness among B.C. feminists about the workings of the Grand  Jury in the U.S.  Documentation of FBI syping against theee  U.S. women's movement between 1969 and  1973 has recently been made public in  a report obtained by the Los Angeles  Times. The investigations were initiated  under the usual rationale of the "subversive ramifications of the movement,  its potential for violence and its  threat to the nation's internal security."  Data amassed included personal information  on the politics, activities and sexual  preferences of activitists, as well as  mailing lists, meeting and discussion  transcripts and other organizational  materials.  Wherever possible, informers were used  to infiltrate. Likely prospects were  approached by agents who feigned sympathy  for the movement and fear that it was  endangered by a "fanatical" fringe.  When cash wouldn't buy sources, the FBI  turned to harassment, intimidation and  blackmail, threatening to expose lesbians  and radicals. As a final resort, Grand  Juries were called : in 1975 they were  sitting in New York, Seattle, DC, New  Haven, Lexington, Harrisburg and San  Francisco. Women who refused to testify  spent months in jail. Such tactics reflect the unstated purpose of intelligence  agencies - beyond gathering information,  they actively attempt to subvert and  demoralise their targets. They count  heavily on paranoia to absorb energy  and inhibit action. As stated in files  taken from the FBI office in Media,  PA, they " want them (us) to think  there's an agent in every corner mailbox..  Not surprisingly, the FBI analysis of  the Women's Movement was far from precise. Reports from agencies indicate an  obsession with finding evidence of "lesbian domination." The Special Agent in  charge in New York in 1969 found that  "basically, the movement is made up  of liberal and radical groups of women  ...the basic difference between them ...  is that the radicals state that male  chauvinism is a direct result of the  'establishment' and existing institutions  and that these must be torn down before  women will have their equality."  The FBI would have us believe that activity against women's groups stopped in  1973. However, both Majority Report (a  women's movement paper from New York)  and the Senate's Church committee have  published evidence that spying continues.  The New York chapter of NOW learned  that its president was under surveillance through last fall. The magazine  Women: A Journal of Liberation was still  being watched, because "they didn't  prove dangerous, but they might have  been"; the co-chair of the Chicago delegation to the IWY conference in Mex-  co City, who was a former leader of  the Coalition of Labour Union Women  has been exposed as an informer for  government intelligence. Funds from the  CIA-linked Agency for International Development have supported the International Division of Planned Parenthood  and the Women's International Network  that is compiling a directory of women's  organizations in third world countries.  The Women's Grand Jury Project in New  York, among other groups, has advocated  non-cooperation with the FBI. FBI and  CIA files are now available under the  Freedom of Information Act. Although  these would make interesting reading,  there are reasonable grounds to suspect  their completeness. This latest spate  of "revelations" seems to be another  manifestation of the "Watergate I.lllus-  ion" - disclosures and promises of rectification that obscure the fact that  things really haven't changed.  But of course it can't happen here. This  is Canada. Isn't it? Can you seriously  picture an earnest RCMP type making  note that women attending feminist activities appear to purposefully dress in  'unattractive attire'. Well, can you?  All of which leads us to an interesting  topic: Canada's own PEACE AND SECURITY  ACT. This Act has already had its second reading in the House of Commons.  Take a good look at the section entitled:  SPECIAL CRIME INQUIRES.  Note that the  B.C. Civil Liberties comments: "the  proposed legislation with respect to  wire-tapping and other electronic surveillance further erodes democratic  freedom and further invades individual  privacy in Canada.'  Note, too, the similarities between the  Crime Inquiries and the Grand Juries  the offer of immunity in exchange for  information about others, for example.  And mediate on how it couldn't happen  'nere...  BUT OF COURSE IT CAN'T HAPPEN HERE - BUT OF COURSE IT CAN'T HAPPEN HERE - BUT OF COURSE IT CAN'T HAPPEN HERE - BUT OF  NAC   Conference  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women, a nation-wide group,  held its annual conference in Ottawa  March 18 - 21. On Monday, March 21,  they mounted a day-long campaign of  lobbying MPs, in order to get them to  discuss women's issues in the legislature.  They were drawing the attention of MPs  to the problems of particular concern  to women and all low-income people:  unemployment and day-care, for example.  Latest statistics show that nearly  one million Canadians are unemployed,  and that's a very conservative, government estimate.  The official un-  empoloyment rate is 9.8 per cent  among women and 8.7 per cent among  men. In addition, the average full-  time woman worker earns 57 cents for  every dollar earned by the average,  full-time male worker. "We are try  ing to do our best," said Manpower  Minister Bud Cullen, when challenged  about unemployment. Bud Cullen's "best"  is nowhere good enough.  The National Action Committee also  raised the issue of abortion, sparking  off a full-scale debate in the House.  The National Action Committee (NAC)  pointed out that the Committee on the  Operation of the Abortion Law (the  Badgley Report) cost the Canadian  taxpayers $7000,000.00 and proved that  the Abortion Law is simply not working.  The Committee on the Operation of  the Abortion Law discovered that 40%  of the population do not even live in  communities served by hospitals which  are eligible (according to the abortion law itself) to set up therapeutic  abortion committees.  More on NAC next month, from the two  VSW executive members who attended  Women's studies  One hundred and fifty women attended  the semi-annual Women's Studies one-  day conference at Simon Fraser University on March 12th.  Helga Jacobson was the key-note  speaker, whose analysis concerned the  relationship between socialism and  the liberation of women in China.  Discussion following her address centered on the burning issue of the  women's movement : does socialism  involve the liberation of women; can  women be liberated without socialism?  Afternoon workshops were held on a  variety of topics: women's herstory,  women and violence, women and psychology.  Copies of the papers presented at the conference can be  obtained from the B.C.Women's Studies Association. Contact Mercia Stic-  keny at 4931 6th Ave, Pelt*,. UIC-APPEALING?  The Unemployment Insurance Commission  has decided to appeal to the Federal  Court of Appeal an Umpire's decision  that Section 46 of the UI Act is inoperative. SORWUC (Service, Office  and Retail Workers' Union of Canada)  has successfully challenged Section  46 on February 18 in a Vancouver  hearing.  (Section 46 of the UI Act states  that a pregnant claimant is not entitled to regular UI benefit during  the period starting eight weeks before and ending six weeks after the  expected birth of her child.)  The Umpire, Judge J.Collier, held  that Section 46 is inoperative because it infringes on or abridges  the rights to equality before the  law of certain pregnant or post-  pregnant women, because of discrimination by reason of sex.  He held this insofar as Section 46  purports to deny regular UI benfits  to certain pregnant or post-pregnant  women who may be otherwise capable  and available for work.  Consequently, Judge Collier concluded, Section  46 abridges the right of equality  of all claimants in respect of the  UI legislation.  Judge Collier therefore sat aside  the decisions of the UIC and the  Board of Referees.  The UIC will appeal Judge Collier's  decision to the Federal Court of  Appeal - the next level of the UI  appeal system.  The Commission has  10 days from February 18, 1977 to  file its appeal.  If not appealed,  Judge Collier's decision would af  fect all pregnant and post-pregnant  claimants who cannot meet the requirement for maternity benefits  under Section 30 of the UI Act, but  who can prove their capability and  availability for work during any  period before or after confinement.  His decision could mean they could  be entitled to regular UI benefit.  Such cases could number 25,000 to  30,000 in 1977.  (Under Section 30 of the UI Act, a  woman who proves her pregnancy, who  can show that she was actively in  the labour force at the time of conception and who is a so-called  "major attachment claimant*", can  receive UI maternity benefits.)  With the decision to appeal Judge  Collier's ruling, Section 46 remains  inoperative until the appeal is de- _  cided by the Federal Court of Appeal.  Section 46 was introduced in 1971 to  "clarify" the period for which pregnant women were then considered to  be incapacitated for work.  *A major attachment claimant, in  UIC terms, is one with 20 or more  weeks of insurable employment, in  the preceding 52 weeks.  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  CITY HALL: ONE STEP AT A TIME  At Council on March 15, Vancouver  City Council approved plans for the  study of racial minority employment  patterns at City Hall. Data concerning visible minorities will be  collected by the Equal Employment  Opportunity Committee, headed by  Councillor Darlene Marzari.  This  committee has already compiled a  picture of the existing workforce  at City Hall in relation to handicapped persons and to women.  Within three months, reported Marzari, the committee will present  data upon all three groups to the  council, along with options for the  future of equal employment opportunities at City Hall.  Mayor Volrich, who voted against acceptance of plans for the racial  minority study,' adopted a negative  attitude throughout.  He opined that  department heads with whom he had  spoken had expressed 'serious misgivings' about the study, to which  Councillor Marzari responded that  out of the thirteen department heads  within City Hall, ten had been in  favour of gathering data, two had  been indecided, and only one had  been opposed.  Warnett Kennedy, the only other  Council member who voted against  accepting the committee's proposals  claimed that Marzari is troubling  the waters in order that she might  be able to go fishing.  Although he  apologized for his previous accusations that the committee's work  promoted "McCarthyism" (see March  Kinesis, p. 3), his attacks upon  the proposal were as virulent as  ever.  As Councillor Harcourt pointed out, Kennedy used language (about  rights, freedom and privacy) straight  out of Ayn Rand.  Councillor Rankin's response to Ken-  nedy's defence of privacy was to read  from the City Hall health questionnaire, which is administered to  would-be employees. The questionnaire asks a series of questions  about women's periods, pregnancies,  etc.  Such questions, Rankin pointed  out, were a flagrant invasion of  privacy, and yet we squeal about  privacy when it comes to providing  hard facts about job discrimination.  Councillor Puil, although obviously  embarrassed by Rankin's reference  to periods (hush, yuccky) appeared  to have a more positive understanding of the committee's work than  he had demonstrated last time a-  round, when he had spent the whole  time looking bored.  Councillor Bellamy, too, spoke positively, and has been doing some  work with the committee.  Councillor Gerard spoke in support;  "good will come" of the committee's  work, she emphasized.  She also  moved that the City Manager's department look into the health questionnaire, and recommended that  questions not be used which would  not be asked of both women and men.  Councillor Marguerite Ford successfully proposed an amendment to the  study (which was opposed by Marzari,  Harcourt and Rankin) disallowing  the use of employees' numbers in  data-gathering.  It is doubtful if  this amendment will do much in the  way of protecting the privacy of  visible minorities, women and handicapped people, as it doesn't require sleuthing through files to  recognize who is handicapped, who  is a member of a racial minority,  or who is a woman. The amendment  will only add more work to the Committee's already heavy task.  VSW members are urged to watch for  the Council meeting in May, at  which time the options for action  upon this data will be put to Council. We are going to need all the  support we can muster in order to  get Council to commit itself to  doing something. FINALLY, THE "MIGHTY FORTRESS" OF CANADIAN BANKS  is being challenged by a union of bank employees!  The United Bank Workers is currently in  the midst of a massive organizing campaign to  unionize employees in all financial institutions  including banks, trust companies and credit  unions. Our goal: to organize 130,000 workers,  •mainly women.  The U.B.W. is a local of the  Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of Can-  I ada—an independent, democratic union dedicated  to organizing working women.  Since we started the organizing drive last September, employees at 19 branches and one data  centre have joined the Union, and expect the  Canada Labour Relations Board to rule soon on  their applications for certification.  Though we work for some of the most profitable  companies, we are among the poorest paid workers  in Canada.  The starting wage in banks and other  financial institutions is less than half the  average wage in B.C.  Last July, the average wage  in B.C. was over $1100./month.  Even the most  senior women in the finance industry make significantly less than that amount.  This is one of the most exciting and challenging  union organizing drives in many years for working women in Canada.  The banks are enormously  wealthy and have many resources at hand to fight  this drive.  The combined balance of revenue (or  pre-tax profits) in 1975 for the five big banks  in Canada was $1,135,962,000.00.  Yet the U.B.W. is confident that it will win this  battle. Our biggest strength is the fact that  we the employees of the banks are conducting this  campaign on our own.  Our second advantage is  that we have a lot of friends helping us. Our  campaign is almost entirely dependent on donations and volunteer labour. We need lots of  help from people everywhere and invite you to  work on this exciting organizing drive.  HERE'S WHAT YOU  CAN DO  1. Volunteer to leaflet the bank of your choice  anywhere in B.C. (over half of our contacts in  the banks heard of us through a leaflet).  2. Tell your friends about us—especially those  who work in financial institutions.  3. Publicity. Ask your organization or union to  sponsor a speaker from the U.B.W. Arrange a  meeting on your own for us in your town. Help  us design posters, leaflets and brochures. Ask  your local newspaper or radio station to do a  story on us.  4. We need volunteers to work either in the office or out of their homes to help with all  sorts of miscellaneous work.  5. Ideas.  Give us your ideas on how to make  this the best organizing drive in the history  of Canada!  To: United Bank Workers, Local #2, SORWUC  #1116, 207 West Hastings, Vancouver, B.C.  Phone: 681-2811 or 684-2834    I would like more information    I'd like to help    I work in a financial institution and I'd  like to join  Enclosed please fine $_  towards the U.B.W.  Enclosed please find $_  wards the U.B.W.  as a donation  as a loan to-  ADDRESS:  PHONE:  THE UNITED  BANKWORKERS  NEED YOUR HELP VIVA INEZ!  New York (LNS). A Salinas, California  courtroom exploded into cheers March  4 as the jury pronounced Inez Garcia  not guilty of second degree murder.  It was Garcia's second trial for murder stemming from the self-defense  shooting of a man who had helped rape  her. Her first trial in October of  1974 ended in conviction and Garcia  served 15 months in prison until she  won an appeal for a retrial.  "I never knew before that I was a political person," Garcia said, after  the trial concluded, "but I know that  now. I met a lot of women in prison  who I promised to help."  "We're all just really happy that it's  over and that she won, " Garcia's lawyer, Susan Jordan, said. "The jury was  convinced that the District Attorney  really didn't have a case at all. One  woman juror told me, 'If that girl was  white, she never would have gotten  accused.'"  The jury consisted of 10 men and 2 women. Four of the men were Third World  the rest of the jury was white.  Jury  selection lasted about three weeks and  the trial about the same time. Evidence  substantiating Garcia's claim of self-  defense and rape was presented. And the  commcerical press was finally forced  to report that Garcia had been raped,  a significant change from the first  trial.  During Garcia's first trial, the  prosecution falsely claimed that  Garcia and her roomate were involved  in a dope deal with the rapists. The  fact that Castillo had thrown a knife at Garcia was hardly mentioned. A  And the judge instructed the jury  that rape was not the issue.  It was because of these instructions  to the jury that the appeal for a  ' new trial was technically won. Meanwhile, Garcia served 15 months in prison on her sentence of 5 years to  life. She was released on $5,000  bail.  "DIFFERENT RAPES"  "There are a lot of changes that need  to be done in the system, not only  about rape; we have all types of different rapes," Garcia said. "I have  learned that there's a lot of different oppression in the world. I know  what oppression is. You learn from wh  what you experience through life. I  can't read or write. When I speak I  try to speak from what I know or  what I have been through.  "We've tried to get a lot of groups  involved to try to help us raise  money. The defense committee helped  from the very beginning.  "In this country you have to buy justice. If you don't have the money you  have to go to jail, that's the way I  see it, that's the way they work it.  It's a shame you have to go through^  that."  "If you don't have enough people to  back you up to fight it, you ain't  going to get nowhere," Garcia concluded. "When you're fighting by yourself it's just another case and  it goes the way they want it to."  A STORY OF  THE  SECRETARY  HER BOSS  AND  HIS COFFEE  A legal secretary in Chicagors public  defender's office has been fired because she refused to make coffee for  her boss.  Iris Rivera, 35, was given a two  week's termination notice January 25  because she wouldn't comply with a  new policy set by director James  Geis at the office of the state appellate defender.  The office represents  criminally-accused poor people in  their appeals.  "From now on," wrote Geis, "all secretaries will have responsibility for making coffee without assistance from attorneys." But Rivera refused.  "I don't drink coffee," she explained.  "It's not listed as one of my job  duties - and ordering coffee is carrying the role of homemaker too far."  "If you're refusing to make coffeee,"  responded Geis, "consider yourself  fired."  Rivera, a former factory worker and  widow who supports herself and three  children on an annual salary of $9,600,  filed a sex discrimination complaint  with Illinois' Fair Employment Practices commission. At the same time, she  appealed her dismissal to Ted Gottfried,  the state public defender in Springfield. The appeal has been denied.  Area secretaries who heard about the  stand-off contacted Women Employed (WE),  an organization of women office workers. The group organized a demonstration at Rivera's office Feb 2. According to Jackie Shad of WE, 50 women  "demonstrated for the ignorant executive exactly how to make a cup of  coffee." Jean Hoffencamp of WE presented a bag of wet coffee grounds to one  of the lawyers.  "It's incredible," a WE staffer said,  referring to the response to the discrimination, "the phone hasn't stopped  ringing for two days. Women from all  over are registering their support."  Since Rivera's fair employment claim  may not be heard for two years, she expects to lose her job and is worried about getting a new one, noting, "I'm  afraid that I'm labelled a militant or  a troublemaker."  But she says she hopes the support  she's getting will force the public  defender's office to rehire her.  "I'm getting calls from secretaries all  over the country," she said. "Who would  think that something so petty would  brew up into something so big." (LNS)  OTEU local 15  BY OPAL SKILLING  (more on p.12...)  Bringing the benefits of a union  contract to the unorganized worker  is a subject of much concern to the  labour movement today. Everyone is  aware office, clerical and technical persons working in the retail  stores, drug stores and various  office units throughout our area  truly need union representation to  bring their wages above the $3.00  per hour minimum but even more so  the security of a union agreement  has. not been provided.  Part-time workers have protection  under our agreement. Unlike the  newly formed Union, our Local Union  was chartered in February 1945 and  has dedicated itself to organizing  the unorganized since that time.  We have passed out leaflets and  walked picket lines with fellow  trade unionists throughout this  period.  The Office and Technical  Employees Union, Local 15's sole  purpose is to organize the unorgan  ized in the office, clerical, and  technical field and to secure terms  and conditions for its members  consonant with ideals of fair wages  and job protection.  As mentioned,  our union defines part-time, casual  and/or temporary rates and benefits  and in addition maintains an unemployed roster.  Some of our members  are registered for full-time work,  some want or require only two or  three days a week, some only want  temporary assignments.  Our local  union is leading the way in labour  circles by providing a shorter work  year by any means we are able to  negotiate, be it longer vacations,  additional holidays than those provided by statute, shorter work week  and a shorter work day.  We have been successful in establishing a four-day work week for one  hundred and fifty members of our  Union employed at CU&C Health Services Society.  Effective April 1, women  round  th<  wor  rid  PHILIPPINES  On September 21, 1972, president  Ferdinand E. Marcos signed Proclamation 1081, proclaiming martial law  .in the Philippines, "to save the  republic and reform society".  As a result of what Marcos calls  "smiling martial law", it is guessed  that 30,000 Filipinos have been detained as suspected activists, union  organizers, communist party members  (Communist Party of the Philippines  or the New People's Army consisting  mostly of rural farmers), and people suspected of other subversive  activities.  In March 1975, prisoners of the  Youth Rehabilitation Centre at Fort  Bonifacio made a written complaint  outlining the conditions of their  incarceration: they had been kept  under continuous padlock for six  months, deprived of sunlight, ventilation, and of any way to take  care of personal cleanliness.  On December 11, 1974 Marcos stated  in a national radio and television  broadcast that, "no one^ but no one  has been tortured." The following  is an account of the arrest and  -torture of a Philippine woman.  On April 4, 1973, the Philippine  -Constabulatory Antinarcotics Unit  without a mission order or warrant  forced their way into the home of  Liliosa Hilao. The team stayed  several hours, drinking and abusing  Hilao's sisters and pistol whipping  some friends of one of the sisters.  Liliosa, coming home nine hours  later with her brother-in-law, was  beaten by the men of the narcotics  unit. After three hours interroga-.  tion, against protests of the family, Liliosa was handcuffed and  taken away. The next morning Jose-  fina, Liliosa's sister was arrested  also, taken to the same detention  centre, but was not allowed to speak  to Liliosa. On April 6 when her  brother-in-law visited her, Liliosa  complained that she was being tortured and had been deprived of food  and sleep.  On April 7 Lts. Castillo  and Garcia of the raiding team summoned Liliosa's sister Alice to the  Camp Crame Station Hospital. "Alice  found Liliosa in the emergency room  of the dispensary at Camp Crame...  (she) was able to touch Liliosa,  she noted that her body was stiff  and cold and grayish; her face was  disfigured; there was an opening  at her throat; she seemed to be  making gasping noises but the dextrose bottle next to her bed was  not dripping so that Alice believed  that Liliosa was already dead. The  room smelled strongly of formalin.  No doctor or nurse was in attendance - only two masked orderlies  who quickly grabbed Alice and  brought her outside the room claiming that the odor might poison her.  Alice then went to the CANU office  and saw Josefina, who also complained of having been mistreated.  A few minutes later Lt. Castillo  told Alice and Joseflna that Liliosa  was dead. Josefina was released  at that time and a sum of money was  given to the family to cover burial  costs. Josefina, however, was subsequently arrested on May 12, 1974  and has not been released or informed of any charges against her.  (Information for this article was  taken from A Publication of the  Association of Major Religious  Superiors in the Philippines,  Political Detainees in the Philippines.)  CHILE  Next time you're in the corner store  or the supermarket, check the food  labels. They could be Chilean. Despite continued violations of human  rights in Chile, B.C. is doing 8  times the amount of trade with Chile  than it did in 1974.  The total value of Chilean goods imported to B.C. in '74 was $604,000.  But in 1976 it had grown to $4,904,  000.  A quarter of that is imported from  Chile in the form of Chilean fruits  and vegetables. These are sold between February and May in supermarkets and small corner stores throughout the lower mainland. Chilean apples, pears and vegetables are expected to arrive In Vancouver soon.  If you notice Chilean goods being  sold in any store, contact the Committee for the Defense of Human Rights  in Chile. Let the store manager know  that you won't buy these goods. Let  the manager know about the 600,000  children hit by malnutrition in  Chile since the military takeover.  Each month, KINESIS takes part in a  letter-writing campaign coordinated  in Vancouver by the Committee for the  Defense of Human Rights in Chile.  The women political prisoners for this  month's letter-writing campaign are:  NILDA PATRICIA PENA SOLARI: biology  student at the Sciences Department  of the University of Chile.  She was  arrested on August 10th, 1974. She is  being held at the Reglmiento Tacna.  Her identity # is: 6-494-786. She is  twenty-four years old.  OLIVIA S0T0MAY0R TORRES: student  Physics and German. She disappeared on  June 17, 1975. She's nineteen.  BERNARDITA MUNOZ OYARCA: student, seventeen years old.  ALICIA HIN0J0S0 SOTO: medical student.  She's twenty-five and she was arrested  on January 25, 1975.  ROSA GOYWITZ GUTIERREZ: student at the  University of Concepcion. Arrested in  Arica in October of '73. She's 26 and  she has one child.  Write to several or all of the following addresses:  Maria Eugenia Oyarzun  Oficina de la Mujer (the women's office)  Santiago Chile.  Monsenor!;£nrique; Alveajr.-  Arzobispado de Santiago  Casilla 30-D  Santiago de Chile  General Augusto Pinochet  Edificio Diego Portales  Santiago de Chile  Ministerio del Interio  General Benavides  Edificio Diego Portales  Santiago de Chile  Servicio Nacional de Salud  Enrique Mac-Iver 541  Santiago de Chile  Sr.M.Eyzaguirre  Presidente de la Corte Suprema  Plaza Montt  Santiago de Chile  IN CANADA: UN:  Horacio Arce Kurt Waldheim  56 Sparkes St. St'e 816 General Secretary  Ottawa, Ontario      0.NoU0  Canada. New York, NY  (Cont&Gts--4K»ft!ITIEE FOR THE DEFENSE OF  HUMAN? RIGHTS IN -CHILE, 906 - 207 West  Hastings St, Vancouver; ph*:. 665 55.45) In South Africa, the minority whites  have a monopoly of political power  and economic privilege.  Backed by  an incredible network of discriminatory laws and practices, the racist  whites have tried to stop all attempts of the oppressed black people  to win their freedom and independence.  Southern Africa has become a  prison for the blacks with the minority whites as wardens. For Blacks  restriction of freedom begins at  birth, from then on their education,  employment, residence and even their  movement is closely regulated by  white authorities.  Blacks are herded into slums and  shanty towns on the outskirts of  some of the world's most modern  cities - cities enjoyed by the minority of whites.  In Soweto, live a million people in  "match-box" homes.  In nearby Alexandra Township Blacks live in single-sex hostels, huge prison-like  barracks where husbands or wives,  children and pets are prohibited.  Yet, these prisoners have not bowed  to the white racists.  Led by their  liberation movements, they have  'ñ†fought back for years.  They have  sought freedom through peaceful  means and now are turning to armed  resistance.  A mission school in Natal, South  Africa closed at the end of July  after 280 girl students between 12  and 19 years old went on a nightlong rampage to destroy their single story hostel. As the girls attacked the building they sang anti-  government slogans.  The Bantu education program was introduced in 1954 explicitly to keep  Blacks down, writes Joyce Bikakane,  who was born and brought up in Soweto.  Black children see the  schools as institutions of indoctrination for the apartheid state  (policy of white supremacy and racial segregation) against which they  are waging war.  The move by Vorster's regime to  enforce the use of the Afrikaans  language (the language of whites)  in secondary schools culminated in  a protest demonstration on June 16  by 30,000 pupils.  The police opened  fire. As a result 176 people died  and more than 1,200 were injured  in Soweto and other townships.  The white regime had just introduced the Internal State Security  measures known as the SS laws -  which meant people could be detained without ever appearing in  Court.  Two days later before the Soweto  disturbances, Tindine Sisulu,  daughter of Walter Sisulu who is  serving a life sentence on Robben  Island, was detained in the township.  During the riots, alleged  ringleaders of the pupils were arrested.  Ever since there have been  unconfirmed reports of African  women and girls in similar plight.  Dr. Fatima Meer, national president  of the South African Black Women's  "Federation and sociologist at Natal  University, has been banned - confined to one area, prohibited from  communicating with other banned  persons or attending meetings.  As reports of continuous unrest filter out of South Africa more and  more women will be victims of the  WOMEN  IN  SOUTH AFRICA  notorious SS law. A hostel for  those single women who qualify to  stay has been built in Soweto. It  consists of four-roomed houses each  with a common bathroom. Two occupants share a room.  The single women inmates of this  hostel are mostly domestic servants,  factory workers and office workers.  They are mostly from the homelands.  Some of them are push-outs, from the  Soweto housing system, girls of  working age who no longer qualify  to stay with their parents.  Widows and divorcees, orphans and  unwed mothers are also included.  Mothers are not allowed to reside  with their children in the hostel  and men are forbidden on the hostel  premises. All around is barbed  wire.  By law no woman without a husband  is allowed tenancy of a house.  Young working mothers face special  hardships in Soweto.  They are desperate for nursery centres that  would provide proper care for their  children while they are at work.  Black women suffer the double burden of belonging to the exploited  working class and being discriminated against sexually and racially.  (from "The Other Woman")  Two women from South Africa spoke in  Vancouver on March 18, as part of  a Canadian tour to raise public awareness and financial support for the  just struggle of the South African  people for equitable majority rule.  The women were Kate Molale and Mpho  Thoeaebale. Kate Molale has been  active in women's and political organizing in South Africa since 1954.  Leading numerous demonstrations against the system of Aparthied, Kate  has been in and out of South Africa's  jails in defense of the rights of  her people.  She is a member of  the Federation of South African Women, and is a representative of the  African National Congress, one of  the groups organizing against the  white minority rule in her country.  Molale, who has lived in exile for  the last five years, spoke at  length about the Pass laws,which  are integral to the denial of  basic human rights to black people.  She also spoke about the Bantustans,  the so-called 'homelands', established by the Voerster regime on  scattered, barren patches of territory. The Voerster regime has now  declared that there are 9 Bantu  nations, which are to develop  '  separately. The African people,  M  however, identify themselves as one.  M Molale also described the forced  m  sterilization of Black women as part  of a program of systematic genocide.  That, together with the breaking  up of families, works towards the  total destruction of the Black  community.  In conclusion, Molale attacked the  Canadian government for maintaining  diplomatic/trade relations with South  Africa. She called upon Canada to  implement the US resolutions for  boycott against South Africa.  Canadian  corporations  oppression  aid  Mpho Thoeaebale is a 16 year old  South African student now in exile.  Mpho was active in the June 1976  Soweto uprising.  She described the  mass fightback of her sisters and  brothers and her arrest.  In prison,  where she was tortured, she saw several fellow students bleed to death.  Mpho attacked those Canadian corporations and banks which are earning  high profits in South Africa while  paying low wages to Black workers.  It is the presence of such banks and  corporations, explained -Mpho, which  allows the white minority regime  to maintain the wage differential.  The average wage for a domestic  servant in Johannesburg, for example  is $21.98 per month. Workers in  canning and food industries often  earn less than $8.40 per month. NORTH€RN NOT€S  more about the O.T.E.U. by OPAL SKILLING  DIANA BISSCLL ^^_  Dear Sisters:  I am aware, suddenly, as I write  this letter to you, that the year  has flown by and there are only 6  weeks left in my contract - time,  where have you gone?  Just returned from Whitehorse where  Donnie Patterson, Diane Michel (of  Ts'aiku Women's Centre in Burns  Lake), Val Napoleon, Georgia Edwor-  thy (of Smithers Indian Friendship  Centre) and I met with the Victoria  Faulkner Women's Centre and Yukon  native women. What a rush - setting  up the first formal communications  link between feminist/native women  of northern B.C. and the Yukon.  After getting over the initial shock  of having B.C. women visit them for  a change, the Yukon women went all  out and we returned with pounds of  resource material, new knowledge and  lots more energy.  We were all really impressed with  the Yukon Indian Centre - a huge  building where status, non-status,  male and female native people are  all working together on all the  issues. The Yukon Indian Women's  Association is presently spearheading, with the support of other  community groups, a move to have  a Women's Transition House set up  in Whitehorse - a much needed service for both Indian and white women.  The Victoria Faulkner Women's Centre  has just completed a summer grant  application to begin "Communication  /Education/Coalition", an outreach  project that would provide educational material and resource persons  to outlying areas of northern B.C.  and the Yukon.  Along with this they will create a  communications network with the ultimate hope/goal of forming a Yukon  Federation of Women. With their  energy and commitment they will make  it happen.  Visited the Ts'aiku Women's Centre  in Burns Lake a few weeks ago to do  verbal self-defense, defining goals  and priorities session and to participate in the Skills Development  Workship that Marie Mitchell was doing with the staff. The needs of  the women of the community are so  great - they had drawn up a list of  68 (count ?em!) issues and the enormity of the task was so mind-boggling that it created an overwhelming sense of powerlessness in everyone.  Slowly and surely we went  through the "list of 68", removing  some, overlapping others, deciding  what kinds of action would be most  feasible and possible, and trying to  figure out ways of getting other  community groups involved.  This is part of the problem that  women's centres face in small towns  where there are so few social services available. They feel somehow responsible for curing all the  ills women face - an impossible  responsibility to shoulder, indeed,  one they should not try to shoulder.  Women have not failed, the system  has instead failed them by being so  inadequate.  If a centre tries to  become the ultimate social service  agency the women will exhaust themselves and fold away, handily done  in by the very system that has just  said "yes, there is a need - see  what you can do about meeting it."  It seems much wiser to pick a few  issues to work on and win at, developing community support all the way.  The difficulty lies in picking only  a few issues when the needs are so  very great. The part of Marie's  skill development workshops that is  proving to be most valuable is the  section that deals with developing  feasible, workable, and winnable  local women's issues - the role  playing sessions used to get the  point across have been incredible!  Val Napoleon has taken on a contract  to do four workshops (for non-native  women's groups) on native women's  issues. Val is the former director  of the Smither's Indian Friendship  Centre and those BCFW standing committee members who listened to her  speak (August - Prince George) of  the job and challenge of being a  native women in our society can testify to her ability to get the message across. Val is also working  closely with Georgia Edworthy, the  newly hired Native Women's Organizer  for the N.W. area of the province.  The BCTF status of women group in  Vanderhoof, chaired by Bobbie Ford,  is also working with the Stoney  Creek Indian Homemakers group to  sponsor a skills development and  native women's workshops. Bobbie  and Alison Campbell are also beginning to step out with their own  inimitable public speaking talents  - they travelled 40 miles up to  Fort St. James to assist the new  women's group there.  The northern women's task force on  Single Industry Towns had a terrific first meeting in January - special thanks must go to Gene Errington, Helga Jacobson and Linda Yancie  of the Women's Research Centre who  did an ace job of running the meeting and sharing their enormous  skills. The Task Force is now collecting pertinent material and will  have its second meeting in Kitimat  on March 19/20.  All of you would sigh with delight  if you could see the fabulous old  house that Burns Lake women managed  to scoop up for their centre. It's a  huge old, 3-storey RCMP house that  took two months of federal/provincial lobbying to obtain (Iona Campagnolo and Rosemary Brown were  especially helpful). As you may  know, one of the priorities of the  centre is to establish closer ties  between the native and white women  of the community - they are setting  up craft classes, discussion groups  for young native women, bringing  in speakers (Kathleen Ruff, Iona  C, local people) as well as doing  continual advocacy/counselling and  providing the only public washroom  facility in Burns Lake. Where  there's a will there's a way!  The weather up here is warm.  I  look at my snowboots, long underwear and furlined gloves and wonder  if northern winters are a myth -  even in the Yukon the pussywillows  are out!  1977 four hundred and fifty of our  members employed in the various  trade union offices throughout the  Province will enjoy a 32^ hour work  week with a base rate for part-time  casual and/or temporary Junior Clerk  at $7.25 per hour with double-time  for all overtime after 6h  hours per  day.  Local 15's units, both large and  small, consist of office staff of  freightway companies, shipyards and  transportation, data centres, credit  unions, service and commercial units,  pulp and paper mills, mining, etc.  which covers job classifications  such as clerks, letters, typists,  stenos, accounting, artists, draftsmen, lab technicians and other related duties required in the office  occupation. With such a variety of  industries and job classifications  our background in research enables  us to draft contracts to suit any  particular unit. We presently have  two applications for certification,  one before the Federal Labour Board  - the Bank of Nova Scotia, Port  Hardy, and one before the Provincial Labour Board - Vancouver City  Savings Credit Union, which we  should have decisions on in due  course.  Our Executive Board is sleeted from  various units and our Local Union  is strictly democratic.  As working persons involved in promoting unionism, democratic socialism and involvement in assisting  the unorganized, we are available  should any of you in the office and  clerical sector wish to meet with  us to discuss forming a Union at  your place of employment.  Contact: Office & Technical  Employees Union, Local 15, 146 East  Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. (874-5201).  Dedicated to bringing the benefits  of a union contract to office and  clerical employees since 1947. During March, KINESIS spoke with two  women from the Cultural Exchange.  Here's what we learned:  KINESIS: Firstly, could you tell us  something about the Exchange? We've  been hearing bits and pieces about  it for at least six months now...  JANET: The Cultural Exchange has been  in existence since last August. We  are a five-woman collective, and we  have been looking for a woman's space.  We held some film benefits last winter,  but mostly we have been busy with  careful groundwork.  PERSIMMON: Now, at last^ we have found  a building, and we've signed the lease!  - And our GRAND OPENING is on APRIL 15  at 8.00 pm. The address for the Exchange  is 217 B East 16th Ave (near Main).  KINESIS: How big is your space? What  kinds of things do plan to do in it?  PERSIMMON: It's 1,100 square feet - and  It's one big room. We started out with  the idea that 1,500 would be a minimum.  But the place where we're renting has  other, empty rooms. So we have the option of expanding, should we want to.  It would be good to have a separate  room for childcare, for example.  JANET: We see the Exchange as a space  where women can share ideas, show  our work, or just have a relaxing  evening with other women. The need  for such a space has often been expressed by Vancouver women.  KINESIS: Yes, I remember some women  ' were trying to get a LIP grant for  a Women's Building back in 1975.  PERSIMMON: Right, I was one of those  women. It's a familiar story: we  didn't get our grant, and our energy  was drained by the effort of chasing  around after it. With the Cultural  Exchange, we are determined to make  it without going begging for funding.  We really want to work independently.  KINESIS: How are you going to pay the  rent and meet operating costs?  THE  CULTURAL  CXCHANGC  JANET: We have several plans. One is  charging admission to events, ranging  from two dollar dances and film nights  to minimal charges for various workshops. The art shows will be up three  weeks out of every month, and the weekly rap nights will be supported by  the more profitable events. We hope  to hold a women's dance on one Saturday night of every month.  We have also been receiving donations  of $50 and more from women who can  afford it. That's been great! And  it's essential that they keep coming  in for the first few months until we  get ourselves established.  PERSIMMON: A third way of making ends  meet will be sharing our facilities  with other women's groups who need  the space. We can only do this in the  case of non-profit groups whose activities are appropriate to our space  and who wouldn't be using it during  scheduled Exchange times * We are working on this kind of an arrangement with  the Women's Karate Association. And,  of course, there's those $5.00 donations and memberships.  KINESIS: Probably quite a few of us  can scratch up a $5.00 membership.  What are your scheduled times for  the Exchange?  JANET: Well, eventually we hope to be  open seven nights a week. But at first,  our hours are going to be 8 - 11 pm,  Monday through Friday. With the monthly  Saturday night dance on top of that.  KINESIS: Who is going to make the dec  isions about what goes on at the  Exchange?  JANET: The women who use the Exchange will ultimately be the ones  who control it. The Collective is NOT  setting itself up as the directors  and the decision-makers. Any woman  who pays the $5.00 membership can  vote for the coordinators of the Exchange. Or, if she wants to commit  more time and energy, she can run  for coordinator herself. The members  will elect at least six coordinators  who will have regular meetings to  plan programs and to decide policy.  Notes of these meetings will be  kept for any member to see. We hope  that women will see the Exchange as  their facility and will mold it to  fit their needs.  KINESIS: Do you have any models for  creating this womanspace?  JANET: One of our Collective members  was very impressed with the Full Moon  coffeehouse in San Francisco, and we  see the Exchange as being in that  tradition.  KINESIS: The April 15th opening is  coming up rapidly. What do you need  at the Exchange right now, in terms  of womanpower?  PERSIMMON: We have lots of work piling  up. We need to clean the space and  to make it beautiful. We need to get  our first calendar in the mail. And  we need to make a start on our resource files. So...we are looking  for women to work on the Exchange  RIGHT NOW!  KINESIS: Where can women get in contact with you?  JANET: They can phone Jesse, a Collective member, at 327 5392.  PERSIMMON: And you can all come to our  opening, at 217 B East 16th' Ave, on  April 15th at 8.00 pm. It should be a  good night!  TH€€XCHANG€ IS FOR ANY WOMAN, ARTIST ORMOTHCR ORPLUMBCR Back to Basics
A Backward Step
WHAT'S THE FUSS
ABOUT?
Eduation Minister Pat McGeer wants
to introduce a core curriculum in
B.C. schools this fall.  CORE, as
the core curriculum program is known
will go hand in hand with PLAP
(Provincial Learning Assessment
Program), which will test the students to see if they have digested
the CORE materials.
Both CORE and PLAP- have evoked criticism from concerned people throughout the province.  What exactly does
CORE aim to do? What is McGeer up
to?  Here's how the Edvcation Department defines the CORE curriculum and its aims:
\"1.  What is the core curriculum?
The core curriculum is the
skills and knowledge generally accepted as fundamental for or basic
to the education of all children
and youth within the Province.
There are some things which everyone needs to know and should be
able to do.  The core curriculum
is the selection, organization and
prescription of this material which
must be taught to every student.
2.  What is the educational aim
of the core curriculum?
The aim of the core curriculum
like the aim of the total educational program, is to provide all students with the opportunity to develop their full potential as individuals and as members of society.
This is accomplished by:
a) preparing all students in
the mastery of the basic skills,
b) preparing all students for
further education, training and
employment,
c) providing all students with
opportunities for developing personal, cultural and recreational
skills and interests."
Note that the aim "is to provide all
students with the opportunity to
develop their full potential as individuals and as members of society."
Our comment is this: How can this
aim be achieved without a concerted
effort to eliminate sexism and racism in our schools?
CORE IGNORES
SEXISM AND RACISM
There is nothing in CORE to suggest
that any positive action will be
taken to see that students who are
not elite/urban/white/male will be
encouraged to develop their full
potential.  For example, how can a
female student be said to be developing that full potential when
schools and programs continue to
reinforce the supportive, passive
stereotype of women in textbooks,
counselling attitudes and administrative structures? Conversely, how
can a male student develop his full
potential in the face of macho
models? What happens to the "full
potential" of native students when
texts embody racist attitudes?
The British Columbia Teachers' Federation has responded to the Department proposals for CORE and PLAP by
issuing a pamphlet entitled, Are
CORE and PLAP bad for children?
The pamphlet explains the teachers'
position:
"The B.C.T.F. favours:
- a high standard of basis skillj
- upgrading of the competence of
teachers
- testing, in classrooms, based so
that it grows naturally out of the
learning process
- involvement of parents, students
and teachers in determining educational goals
- logically developed curricula
- curriculum that emphasizes learning to learn as a lifetime skill
- quality teaching and learning
The basis for the B.C.T.F. philosophy is that respect for individuality is a basic human right of every
citizen.
The B.C.T.F. opposes:
- province-wide and district-wide
testing programs which invite
invidious comparisons without recognizing a host of variables between individuals, regions, cultural groups and the like. Centrally prepared tests for a half
million children make a mockery
of individualized learning.
- central determination processes
which cannot adequately involve
those whom the education system
most directly affects.
- fitting children into the predetermined curricular molds of any
special interest group.
- practices which provide inferior
educational opportunities for
those who are socially, economically or otherwise disadvantaged
and for those who don't happen
to "fit" the school system.
- an emphasis on fact learning because of the high obsolescence
rate on factual information and
the impossibility of assimilating
more than a tiny fraction of an
increasingly enormous fund of
information. The knowledge explosion relegated factual information (from being an end in itself) to being mere raw material
for achieving human goals. A
narrow curriculum is inappropriate
to these times.
- schools being used mainly to
sort, classify and train the child
as' raw material for business and
industry.  It opposes a singular
emphasis on material values at
the expense of emotional, social,
aesthetic, cultural and personal
values."
The Professional Development Advisory
Committee of the B.C. Teachers' Federation has developed a 23-page
working paper called ESSENTIAL EDUCATIONAL EXPERIENCES.  In this excellent paper, they pinpoint the
dangers of CORE and PLAP.  The effect of CORE and PLAP will be to
assure the well-to-do middle class
people (who are often those who
want the schools to move backwards,
as in "Back to Basics") that their
children will inherit the few managerial and professional jobs left
at the top of the occupational
pyramid.
The following are excerpted paragraphs from ESSENTIAL EDUCATIONAL
EXPERIENCES, which are of particular
relevance to feminist issues:
INTRODUCTION
It is precisely to ensure the proper
treatment of children in the school
system and thus to make sure that
all children have equal opportunity
to the formal curriculum that the
PDAC determined that the development of a programme of essential
learning experiences ought to be
guided by the principle of the rights
of children.
point where the top 10% of Canadians
now take home roughly half the reported income, while at the same
time the purchasing power of the
bottom 30% of the population has
been seriously eroded.  The only
reason this trend has not been more
evident is because mothers have gone
to work.  Roughly 60% of families
in Canada now have two income earners.
CLASS DISCRIMINATION
(41) The treatment of the children
of managerial/professional workers
- the so-called "middle class" chil-
In order to do this, however, it is
necessary to understand that this
commitment marks a radical departure in the present and historic relationship between schools and society.  The development of schools
as social institutions has seldom
been guided by a concern for the
rights of children.
SCHOOLS PERPETUATE CLASS STRUCTURE
(21) The way schools work is to help
reproduce the kind of society in
which we live.
(35) Schools, in reproducing the
kind of society in which we live,
help to perpetuate the social class
structure.
(36) Income disparities have not
diminished, and in the estimation
of some, have actually become worse
since the 2nd World War to the
dren - differs in important respects
from the treatment accorded the
children of production workers -
so-called "working class" children.
With very few exceptions, the formal
curriculum of schools does not attach any validity to the lives of
manual, clerical and service workers.
CLASS DISCRIMINATION
This kind of treatment obviously has
a considerable negative impact on
the self-concept of "working class"
children.  Textbooks ignore their
lives and the lives of their parents
even though it has been the labour
of production workers which, literally, has built the Canadian economy.
As far as the school curriculum is
concerned, these are a people without a history, without a literature,
without any form of social life.
THIS KIND OF TREATMENT, OF COURSE,
IS ESSENTIAL IF SCHOOLS ARE TO PRODUCE SUBMISSIVE WORKERS FOR THE
LOWEST RUNGS OF THE OCCUPATIONAL
HIERARCHY.
(42) The "middle class" bias of
schools also means that the curriculum virtually ignores rural life.
(43) In addition to the social relations in production generated by
the class structure, schools in
helping to reproduce society, also
reproduce two other important sets
of social relationships: sexism
and racism.  Both these sets of
relationships are important in terms
of the kinds of jobs people get, and
are integral not only to the economy, but to people's lives as well.
(44) Sexism, the unequal treatment
of people because of differences
in sex, has in recent history, been
crucial to the production of goods
and services in the economy. Women
not only produce labour power in the
form of children, and then attend
.to their early socialization within
the family; they also provide a
number of services to keep male
workers on the job.  Without the
help of women, men, especially in
physically demanding jobs, with
shift work and long hours, would
find it hard to survive.  Thus, in
the interests of the economy, it is
said that women "naturally" fit a
"nurturing" role in the society.
(45) This kind of service work which
women traditionally have performed,
generates a set of social relations
characterized by passivity and compliance on the part of women and
dominance on the part of men.  For
women, passivity has been the essential social relation in production.
Both the formal and informal curriculum of schools have taught young
women this role; from home economics
to the typical passivity of girls
in textbooks and other curriculum
materials.  Considerable research
has also underscored, in this respect, the self-fulfilling effects
of teachers' expectations on girls
in the classroom.
WOMEN TRAINED
TO FILL LOW-PAID,
SERVICE ROLES
MARGINALLY EMPLOYABLE WORKERS
(46) Given the service role of women
within the family, and consequently
the set of social relations to
which they have been socialized, it
is not surprising that women traditionally have been employed in
the service sector of the economy
as teachers, nurses, domestics and
the like.  Recently, the transformation brought about by automation
and other technological advances
has created a demand on the labour
market for a large number of marginally employable workers, often
part-time and at minimal wages. Most
of these jobs are in clerical work.
Women with more education than men
at the lower levels of the class
and occupational structure, and
schooled to be passive and compliant, provide virtually a ready-made
workforce to fill these jobs*.
WAGE DIFFERENTIAL
6 UNEMPLOYMENT
Thus by 1976 in Canada, the wage
differential between men and women
has increased.  Also women now have
a much higher unemployment rate
(31%) than men, and a smaller percentage of women, than at the turn
of the century, hold professional
and/or managerial jobs.
Schools, to the extent to which they
teach young women to be passive and
compliant, prepare them for this new
work role in the age of automation
and advanced technology.
Racism, like sexism, is a set of
social relations in production.
These are best described as subjugation and competition.  The dropout rate among native students reflects this relationship to the
economy.  There is no real place
for them in schools.
STANDARDIZED TESTING
(68) Standardized testing has been
particularly successful in helping
to rationalize the job education
nexus.  So has IQ testing, which
historically has been used to assign
"immigrant" children to their place
in the occupational structure.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
DENIED
DENIAL OF EQUAL EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITY
(69) It is reasonable to predict
that the students who will do best
under CORE and PLAP (Provincial
Learning Assessment Programme) will
be the children of people who
hold managerial and professional
jobs.  What CORE and PLAP represent
consequently, is a denial of equal
educational opportunities and an
infringement on the rights of children.
DISCIPLINE THE WORK FORCE
(70) In terms of the job education
nexuB and the reproduction of the
social relations in production,
what this programme entails is
schools which discriminate more
forcefully on the basis of class,
race, and sex, where there is more
competition, alienation, subjugation and depersonalization.  The
hierarchical and authoritarian
nature of more structured schooling along with the new emphasis on
vocational and technical programs
represents, in this time of unemployment, labour unrest and downward social mobility, a new attempt
to discipline the work force, for
which the owner-managers will no
doubt be grateful.
VSW members, who have familiarized
themselves with CORE and PLAP, have
joined the struggle against them.
For more information about what can
be done, call Nadine Allen, our
education person at VSW: 736-3746.
From a feminist perspective, CORE
and PLAP are just two more things
which McGeer has to stick in his ear. More For McGeer $ £er  While feminists are opposing the  introduction of CORE and PLAP, we  are also working to educate the  Department of Education about the  -nature of sexism in our schools,  and its responsibility to do something about it. Here's a progress  report upon the status of sexism in  education in beautiful B.C. today:  1. Public* commitment - the Ministry  has yet to express significant concern for the damaging effects of  sex discrimination in education.  2. Plan of action - no program has  been developed by the Minister.  3. Advisory Committee - the Minister  refuses to reinstate the PAC. At  present, discussions are under way  for a joint Human Rights Commission  Ministry of Education Committee to  deal with human rights concerns.  The BCTF and women's groups have  not been consulted about this proposed committee.  4. Special advisor - Diana Cruchley,  who has served for several years as  .a full-time curriculum consultant,  has been named as contact person  for sex discrimination. The Minis-  - try has indicated that no terms of  reference exist for this position.  £5  thanK£!  And here's an update on correspondence between feminists and the Department :  October 12/76 - carbon copy of letter from Dr. Hardwick to K. Ruff:  "We have asked one of our curriculum consultants, Ms. Diana Cruchley,  to act as the contact person for  the Ministry of Education in matters  of sex discrimination."  November 29/76 - Deputy Minister's  Advisory Committee: "Dr. Hardwick  confirmed the intention to second a  new person to work in this area.  By the time the decision was made  to do so, it had not been possible  to recruit a suitable person for  this school year.  For the present,  Diana Cruchley, one of the curriculum consultants, had been given  special responsibility for this  area within the Ministry. A meeting is to be held with Bishop De  Roo and Kathleen Ruff on the general issue."  December 22/76 - letter from Terry  McBurney: "...no specific terms of  reference have been worked out for  Ms. Cruchley in her role as contact  person..."  Women's  Studies  Vancouver  victory  Thursday, March 24th, will go down as  a day to commemorate in the herstory of  the battle for women's studies in Vancouver secondary schools.  The Vancouver School Board approved the  course. It can now be taught in Vancouver schools come September. Only  one trustee, one Peter Westlake (boo,  hiss) voted against the proposal.  Contact the Education person at VSW,  Nadine Allen (736 3746) so that you can  coordinate your demands with others,  asking that women's studies be taught  in your local school this fall!  Durnoby victory  The Burnaby Women's Centre has recently won a major victory. They  have successfully persuaded the  Burnaby School Board to approve a  proposal for a Women's Studies course  at Burnaby North Senior Secondary  School for the 1977-78 school year.  The instructor is, in the eyes of  the School Board, "a very competent,  well-respected teacher" and the  proposal was a "quality submission".  The Board, in its approval for the  course, asked for indications of  how the unit might be developed to  suit Burnaby north, a multi-cultural  area.  In addition, it asked that  encouragement "be given to boys  to enter the program in order  to better understand the role  of women in society and hence  gain a better understanding of  their own role."  Dottles (j  Victories  TO ALL OUR SISTERS AND BROTHERS  FROM THE 43 COMMUNITY GROUPS IN  27 PROVINCIAL RIDINGS WHO WROTE  US SUPPORT LETTERS FOR OUR GRANT  APPLICATION - THANK YOU!  WITHOUT YOUR EFFORTS, WE WOULD NOT  BE HERE.   Should the Provincial Government  fund a group which is critical of  it?  Shouldn't VSW be run entirely by  volunteer labour?  Won't the Provincial Ombudsman (sic)  do the job needed?  Can't the Human Rights Commission  fill the bill?  Hold on to your hats, sisters! VSW  finally obtained a meeting with the  Provincial Secretary herself. This  herstoric first took place from 6.00  to 6.05 on March 10, '77. And the  questions above are the ones she asked.  We would like to thank the following women, all resident in Victoria,  for their help in lobbying for the  VSW funding: Lyn Carter, Nancy  Goldsberry, Brenda Laurie and Gail  Woodward.  Only 7 of the leading Social Credit  backbenchers were able to attend the  Socred caucus meeting with VSW. They  were : Shelford (Skeena); Mussallem  (Dewdney); Strongman (Vancouver South);  Haddad (Kootenay); Bawtree (Shuswap);  Lloyd (Fort George); and Jordan (Nth  Okanagan).  'Divynt$  ->■>  Unfortunately, the high point of  our meeting with the Scored's was  when Mr.Mussallem asked us if we supported what he disdainfully referred to  as "divynts". (Deviants?) Who? What?  Special thanks to the MLAs who spoke  on our behalf in the legislature this  year: Dailly (NDP, Burnaby North);  Cocke (NDP, New Westminster); Sanford  (NDP, ComOx); Wallace (NDP, Cowichan);  Gibson (Liberal, North Vancouver);  Wallace (Progressive Conservative,  Oak Bay).  Our appreciation to the following,  for arranging personal meetings with  us individually:  Pat McGeer, Minister of Education  Rafe Mair, Minister of Consumerism  Kerster (Social Credit, of Transition  House fame, Port Coquitlam)  Rogers (Social Credit, Vancouver  South)  Thanks to NDP Norman Levi, Vancouver  Burrard, and Socred MLA Harvey Schroe-  der of Chilliwack, for letting us know  they were not able to meet with us  personally, but for showing us their  interest.  Our apologies to Charles Barber (NDP  Victoria) and Labour Minister Williams  because we were not able to meet with  them as scheduled.  Our appreciation to Rosemary Brown,  Vancouver Burrard, for all her work  for feminists - VSW in particular! WOMEN:  The 7 Million Unemployed  Clerical Workers Fight Back  Protest Saves Affirmative Action  • the 7 millon  from the International Labour Office,  a U.N group based in Geneva.  An estimated 7 million women workers have lost their jobs in the  current economic slump, according  to a survey by the ILO Bureau of  Statistics covering 18 West European countries, the United States,  Canada, Japan, Australia and New  Zealand.  This figure represents more than  40 per cent of the total unemployment in the countries covered, although women make up only 35 per  cent of their labour force.  With very few exceptions, women  were the first to be fired.  In  Sweden, for instance, over 50 per  cent of the jobless in July 1976  were women, and in Belgium the  unemployment rate for women was  14.3 per cent in mid-May 1976 or  more than double the rate for men  (5.3 per cent).  The rise in unemployment in France  from May 1975 to May 1976 was  26,623 for men and 88,766 for women.  And in Japan women in large numbers have obligingly "retired"  from the labour market and are  therefore not even counted as unemployed.  Men return to work while women are  still left in the cold.  In most  places they tend to be the last  hired, ILO unemployment watchers  report.  For instance, in the Federal Republic of Germany the proportion  of women in the total number of  unemployed went up from 44 to 50  per cent between July 1975 and  July 1976; indeed, the number of  women unemployed increased by  over 107,000 whereas the number  of unemployed men decreased by  nearly 17,000 during this period.  A similar trend exists in the United  States where between August 1975  and August 1976 men's unemployment  fell by 452,000 while women's unemployment rose by nearly 80,000, thus  reaching 50.2 per cent of the jobless total.  The figures from British government sources showed that the number of men unemployed went up 64  per cent between July 1974 and  July 1975.  But for women the rise  *as 127 per cent. Between July of  Last year and this, the increase  Ln male unemployment dropped to  37 per cent, but that in female  unemployment to only 94 per cent.  The process of straitjacketing  women into "suitable and also vulnerable occupations" begins in  schools and vocational institutions, a recent ILO publication  (Women workers and society) says.  So men and women workers are pitted  against each other in competition,  and sexism is employed to eliminate  women, not by the male workers but  by the employers.  Lack of choice goes hand in hand  with lack of education and training. A recent French survey has  revealed that 66.9 per cent of  women who have lost their jobs  during recession had no post-  secondary education and 48.6 per  cent had dropped out of school  at 16 or earlier.  Typically, occupations which are  on the decline as regards job security or pay mysteriously become  suitable for women. One example  is men's tailor-made clothing in  Austria.  On the other hand, jobs that are  regarded as having a future very  quickly are considered to be "men's  work". Thus in early days of computer technology many women became  programmers, but as soon as this  work became more promising and  better paid it was often described  as ill-suited for the feminine  mind.  In many places young women  are now discouraged from taking up  this occupation.  • clerical workers  In the US, thoi sands of newly organ-  ized clerical orkers are making "  their unions tae fastest-growing  labour organizations in the country.  The women office worker movement  has experimented in various forms  of organization, including forming  locals within established unions.  Women Employed in Chicago, Nine-  to-Five in Boston, Women Office  Workers in New York and similar  organization in San Francisco,  Cleveland and other cities are  citywide organizations of clerical  workers.  They have waged successful campaigns for affirmative action plans and pushed for stronger  enforcement of anti-discrimination  laws. They have also pressed for  new laws to regulate temporary  employment agencies and to guarantee maternity benefits for working  women.  A Second Phase  The Women Office Worker movement  has been strongly influenced by the  women's movement. Jean Tepperman,  in her book "Not Servants, Not  Machines: Women Office Workers  Speak Out", quotes a former secretary and union organizer: "The  women's liberation movement appears  to be on the threshold of a second  phase - when feminist consciousness  reaches beyond white middle-class  women...A clear sign of the new  awareness felt by the so-called  typical woman is the way office.  workers are asserting themselves...  Now we see the beginning of a potential alliance between the labour  movement and the women's movement.  The publishing industry, for example, was shaken in the summer of  1974 by its first strike since the  1930s. During the strike against  Harper & Row in New York City,  there were "feminist solidarity  days" where large numbers of women  from the community joined the  picketlines of their sisters on  strike. Kay Eisenhower, an organizer of a rank-and-file caucus  within her public employees' local  told Tepperman how support from  local women's liberation groups  made it possible for the clerical  workers to win significant victories  against Lucky Foods chain stores.  (From The Guardian, March 2/77)  • protest  PROTESTS STOP GUTTING OF AFFIRMATIVE  ACTION  Women and minorities throughout the  United States are celebrating the  defeat of regulations which would  have gutted equal employment rights.  A nationwide protest by women's and  civil rights groups sent letters,  mailgrams, and telephone calls' to  officials in Washington, D.C.  Efforts to dismantle enforcement of  affirmative action coincided with  the Department of Labor's own statistics showing that discrimination  is on the rise.  On January 18, the Department of  Labor, in full retreat, published  in the Federal Register only minor  procedural changes, leaving the  existing regulations essentially  intact.  Social Assistance  is having to work  very hard for Nothing FRASER VALLEY  WOMEN'S FESTIVAL '77  Greetings!  The Fraser Valley Festival Committee  is happy to inform you that there  will be another Women's Festival  this May 13th and 14th held at the  Abbotsford Campus of Fraser Valley  College.  So far in our planning we have developed some ideas for this festival,  based on individual committee members' input from various groups they  represent, and a look at last year's  evaluations.  We would appreciate any suggestions  you can offer us in this stage of  our planning in terms of workshops  or displays you would like to see  included, and any contributions your  group or individual members would  like to make. Any displays of crafts  books, club projects, individual projects, workshops and entertainment  would be welcomed.  Contact Sharon  Syrette (826-9544) for any workshops  you would like to put on; Georgina  Marshall (826-1482) is the contact  person for entertainment; Lynn Kirk  (530-3477) is co-ordinating displays,  and Ellen Chamberlain (826-3269) is  the contact person for food. A  couple of women's groups last year  set up tea and coffee concessions  which were quite successful.  In our discussions we have come up  with two themes for workshops. Under skills our ideas include power  tools, car maintenance, video, physical self-defence, foot reflexology and massage. Under relationships , we thought of assertiveness,  parent effectiveness training,  lesbian feminism, effects on family  of women changing their life styles,  older women, couple relationships,  native women, and sexuality.  We would like to cut down on the  number of workshops this year, but  have popular ones running more often during the day, and lots of  areas for women to feel free to  wander in, look at displays, demonstrations, and sit down for a  cup of coffee and relax.  Childcare will be provided on Saturday.  Friday night and Saturday  morning will be for everyone. We  plan to have women performers and  perhaps a guest speaker for Friday  night, workshops all day Saturday  with women-only workshops on late  Saturday. All workshops will be  led by women. We are looking for a  catering group to provide us with  lunch on Saturday.  On Saturday  evening we plan to have a women only  social.  It would help us a great deal in our  planning if you could reply to us as  soon as possible to let us know your  ideas, if you plan to participate or  not, and if so the nature of your  participation.  PLEASE RETURN QUESTIONNAIRE WITH  YOUR COMMENTS TO: Fraser Valley  College, and GENERAL REPLIES TO:  Sharon Syrette, 33070-5th Avenue,  Mission, B.C. V2V I5V.  POCO  The POCO women's studies course  committee, which has been contacting groups in the community to  gather support, presented a brief  to the School Board late in February, along with the Coquitlam  Teachers' Association Status of  Women Committee.  Contact the Port Coquitlam Area  Women's Centre at P.O. Box 243,  Port Coquitlam, B.C. V3C 3V7  Great news for the Port Coquitlam  Women's Centre! They have been  funded by the Provincial Government  to operate for another full year.  Local MLA George Kerster has presented them with the cheque.  The  POCO women are very pleased. Funding is always a major concern for  women's centres and much time is  spent exploring different possibilities.  POCO is now free to go  on to plan more and new activities  for their community.  s  I  s  T  'Ç ̈  R  S  VICTORIA  On February 7, 1977, participating members of the Victoria Women's Centre decided to close down the physical space  at 552 Pandora. We felt that the cost  of maintaining the building was dis-  disproportionate to the services were  able to offer through its use. We are  using a two-month interim period to  assess our financial position, our  energy, and the services most needed  in our women's community. We hope to  initiate a format without a physical  space, providing more service at  less cost. One possibility is a 24  hour women's emergency line operating  through an answering service and staffed by feminist volunteers. We also  hope to plan drop-ins and events,  using the other community facilities  so women will still have the opportunity to discuss issues, plan action,  support each other, and have fun together. We are currently cooperating  with Rape Relief to stage a concert  by Ferron followed by a Women's Dance.  In the interim, mail can be directed  care of 2658 Roseberry. Feminist  information and referrals are available through: Rape Relief - 383-5545;  Every Woman's Books - 592-7311.  QUESNEL  The Quesnel Women's Group has applied  for a Canada Works Program Grant. They  are seeking funding for a community  centre which would house three agencies-  a Women's Centre, where emergency accommodation would be provided; a Youth  Centre and an Immigrant Integration  Centre. The project would employ sixx  people full-time for a twelve month  period. They have also applied to the  Secretary of State for funds to hire  a student over the summer to conduct  research into the need for a TRANSITION HOUSE in Quesnel. This student  would visit existing transition  houses in B.C. as well as determine  how many women could be expected to  use such a facility in Quesnel.  Quesnel Women's Group meets at 2.00pm  every other Sunday at a member's home.  To find out about the date and place  call Beth (992-5688) or Pat (747-1977). PRINCE GEORGE  Dear Sisters:  Just a brief run down on what we  are doing at our collective.  1. As the Women's Collective is totally run by volunteers and our  funding from two years ago has almost run out, we held a fund raising  sale last weekend and added a few  more dollars to our dwindling bank  balance! A feature of the sale was  a Men's Bake Stall - food made and  sold by the men who share part of  our lives.  It was very successful,  too. Another feature was books,  and records from the Women's Bookstore, and IWD ribbons and BCFW  buttons.  2. We are anxiously waiting to see  if we get our Canada Works grant.  If we do we will be hiring a coordinator, ombudswoman, two women  to inquire into the status of women  in this area, and two women to  organize our silk screening business.  3. A rape relief workshop is being  planned for the end of March with  resource people coming up from the  _Coast.  4. A workshop on Native Women's  issues is also in the wind.  5. We supported the local BCTF  Status of Women group on their  recent presentation to the school  board concerning the proposed Women's Studies course we would like  to see in the schools. We are  planning to work more closely  with this hard-working group.  In Sisterhood,  Laureen  for the  Women's Collective of  Prince George,  1306 7th Avenue  Prince George, B.C.  •J'God created woman, but it was  Rockefeller and his pack of thieves  who invented ladies." Mother Jones  RICHMOND  RICHMOND  Since its inception seven months  ago, the Richmond Women's Resource  Centre has held many workshops, an  8-week "Women Together" series and  Tuesday afternoon drop-in sessions.  The Centre has also encouraged the  formation of CR groups and many  interest groups.  With the January program, the Centre  has had a slightly different approach; more.of an inward focus to  re-energize us after a hectic seven  months and to enable us to explore  feminist ideas more fully.  The  Wednesday evening program now includes a steering committee meeting  the first Wednesday of each month;  an unscheduled evening; a formal  program; and an informal discussion  the fourth Wednesday of the month.  The formal program has been set up  to include Feminism vs. Total  Woman April 20th.  The informal  discussion will be geared to our  particular needs or areas of interest.  Tuesday afternoons are in the process of being organized and will  hopefully include films and discussions, as well as an informal  drop-in. We are also co-sponsoring  with Continuing Education a car  workshop with Mom's Garage and a  small appliances repair workshop.  Both are scheduled forthe spring  session.  Our LIP grant, "Upstream" - a babysitting exchange - is under full  steam and several areas within  Richmond have enough membership to  begin functioning.  While it is discouraging to have  women leave the Centre for the myriad reasons that crop up, we get  our strokes when we hear visiting  women say "I did not know other  women felt the way I do!" or "I  feel so good when I come here".  The Centre is open Tuesday afternoons 1-4 pm and Wednesday evenings  7-10 pm and is located in the South  Arm United Church.  NEW WEST  NEW WESTMINSTER HAS A NEW WOMEN'S  RESOURCE CENTRE  We have been in existence since the  beginning of January and have spent  the last two months getting set up,  our resources collected and our  programs organized. We are open  mainly for information and referrals and are offering programs at  present but we hope to have a  larger and more comfortable drop-  in space in the near future. We  are very excited about working with  the Coalition. Our address is:  180 6th Street, New Westminster,  telephone 526-2485 loc. 44.  NORTH SHORE  Matrimonial property will be the subject of a talk for the North Shore  Women's Centre on Pub Night, Tuesday,  April 5, 7.30pm, at the North Shore  Neighborhood House, 225 East 2nd St.,  North Vancouver.  Mark Krasnick, a civil servant in the  Attorney-General's office, has agreed  to discuss the proposed new bill on-  family law and matrimonial property.  He will present the latest developments concerning the bill, which has  been drafted as a result of the Berger Commission on Family and Children's  Law.  Paid-up members in the North Shore  Women's Centre have topped 100, the  highest the Centre has ever had. The  North Shore Women's Centre is open  at its 3255 Edgemont Boulevard address from noon to four p.m, Tuesday  to Friday, when it is staffed by  volunteers. New funds, received from  the Federal Secretary of State's  office, are enabling the Centre to  continue its work in providing resource information for women, and  working for equality of opportunity  at work and home. For information,  call 987-4822.  s  I  s  T  €  S WITHOUT A DOUBT, SOME OF B.C.'S FINEST...  This is only a brief summar' of  what went on in the local louse.  Drop by VSW for more information.  Vancouver Status of Women was in the  process of preparing a brief on the  Change-of-Name Amendment Act when it  passed before we had a chance to  send our criticism to MLAs.  We learned a lesson from this.  The  debate and passage of bills is unpredictable in this session of the  legislature, for a number of reasons.  Therefore, the best idea is this.  As soon as a bill comes up, try to  get a copy of it (subscribe). Then  write a letter to your MLA and the  Minister responsible, stating your  views on the matter.  Send any supportive documents along  with it, as well as C.R. material  and be sure to ask questions on  issues you don't understand.  Mail  it immediately.  This is one of the few ways you can  have input in the debates of bills  affecting the status of women. Your  own MLA will probably welcome the  new outlook for his/her presentation in the House.  Let's make sure the newly proposed  matrimonial property bill doesn't  get passed without the feminist  viewpoint raised.  We understand it suggests equal property division on divorce but does  not consider community of property  during marriage as a recognition of  the homemaker's contribution to the  economy.  Get set.  Go...  CHILD ABUSE  On February 21, 1977 NDP MLA Rosemary Brown, Vancouver-Burrard,  chastised the Social Credit government for abolishing succession duties for the rich while cutting back  services to the poor.  She referred in particular to the  fact that there is no child-abuse  team in Terrace where a woman recently murdered her child and noted  that the Vancouver child-abuse team  funding is in jeopardy.  On February 22, 1977 Ms. Brown noted  that an abused child in Vancouver  South belonged to an unemployed family who qualified for welfare but  are too frightened to apply because  of Vander Zalm's "reign of terror".  B.C  HON.  MEMBS.  WIVES TELEPHONE LISTINGS  On February 18, 1977 NDP MLA Alex  MacDonald of Vancouver-East introduced Bill M-205, the Telephone  Directories Dual Listing Act.  If  passed, it would allow wives to be  listed in the directory without  having to pay an extra charge which  is now required. The bill was given  ,first reading and placed on the  order paper for a second reading at  a later date. Are you writing yet??  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  On March 8, 1977 MLA Rosemary Brown  asked the B.C. legislature to join  her in marking International Women's  Day and outlined the history of this  feminist celebration.  She reminded everyone that women are  still concentrated in low-paying  jobs which are often not covered by  labour legislation.  She explained  that crimes of violence against women, such as rape and wife-beating,  are increasing.  Ms. Brown also drew attention to  the fact that native, immigrant,  lesbian and handicapped women suffer  double exploitation and oppression  in our society, especially in regard  to health, education and the law.  She quoted from the charter of the  Congress of Canadian Women which  was established on International  Women's Day in 1950:  "We the women of Canada assert that  all human rights are women's rights.  ...that while women are held in  less position in society than men,  those rights which men cherish are  in danger."  CHANGE-OF-NAME  On March 1, 1977 the Hon. Bob Mc-  Lelland, Minister of Health, Social  Credit MLA for Langley, introduced  the Change-of-Name Amendment Act.  It passed into law on March 2, 1977.  There isn't any law in B.C. which  requires a woman to take her husband's name upon marriage, but under  the old law, once she used it, she  could not revert to her maiden name  or a previous married name.  McClelland pointed out that women  had financial difficulties because  some banks and credit .unions assume  a married woman must take her husband's surname.  He said a notation  would be issued on the marriage  certificate to prove that a woman  is entitled to continue using her  previous name.  r-jcred MLA for North Okanagan, Pat  Jordan, supported the bill and said  it would be advantageous especially  for professional women who need to  use their maiden names.  NDP MLA Eileen Dailly of Burnaby-  North also supported the bill and  thanked MLA Rosemary Brown for creating a climate conducive to the  bill.  Progressive Conservative Leader  Scott Wallace, MLA for Oak Bay,  supported the bill and joked that  it should have been called "...the  Clark-McTeer Act". Vancouver-East  NDP MLA Alex MacDonald asked, "Who's  Maureen McTeer?"  Wallace also thanked Rosemary Brown  for her efforts in getting such  legislation before the House and  apologized for calling her a 'lady'.  The legislation states that:  "A married woman shall not apply to  change her surname to any other name  than a) her husband's surname, or  b) her maiden name, or c) the surname she had immediately prior to  her marriage."  Gibson said this was inadequate and  proposed an amendment which would  allow women to change their name to  any other name which they might  choose.  NDP MLA Rosemary Brown, Vancouver-  Burrard, pointed out that single  men and single women as well as married men are able to change their  names to any name they choose, and  asked why this bill did not make  similar provision for married women.  Brown pointed out the amendment  proposed by Gibson was in line with  the recommendations of the Royal  Commission (Berger) on Family and  Children's Law and that Ontario  makes this provision.  NDP MLA Gary Lauk, Vancouver-Centre,  argued against the amendment. McClelland said the amendment was  "inappropriate".  The following MLAs voted in favour  of the amendment to allow married  women to change their names to any  name of their choice: Cocke, Gibson,  Brown, D'Arcey, Lea, B. Wallace,  Barnes, Sanford, Nicholson, Barber,  Lockstead, Levi.  However, the motion was defeated and the bill passed without it.  r -*  • -.              i  r      •  *7  .  .1 £  N    ■gfyk.  ? THE GREAT VSW FUNDING DEBATE.  On March 10, 1977, the day after VSW  'ñ† lobbied with the NDP and SOcred caucus to discuss our funding, the  following debate took place in the  legislature of B.C.  DAILLY  Eileen Dailly, NDP MLA Burnaby-North  spoke in our support as "an exceptionally valuable group." She said  it was very sad that funding for  women's centres has "practically  come to a halt" under the Socreds,  so that almost one-third of 200 women's groups have closed for lack  of money.  She explained that VSW's  workload has increased "100-fold"  because of this and asked what Provincial Secretary's criteria are for  the funding of women's centres. She  asked Mrs. McCarthy repeatedly to  meet with VSW.  She pointed out that  despite the E.E.O. in the federal  civil service the status of women  employed there is worse.  Dailly  asked Provincial Secretary what her  intention was for the provincial  civil service.  GIBSON  Gordon Gibson, Leader of the Liberals, North-Vancouver, said that  "tribute ought to be paid" to numerous status of women groups in B.C.  He said that public attitudes about  women have changed favourably according to a report from the federal  Status of Women Coordinator, and  attributed this to the work of women's centres.  Gibson called for the establishment  of a "women's ministry" under the  Premier's office because the status  of women is "of such importance that  it is entitled to a rather special  place in the governmental organization."  (Let's hope he keeps his  work if he gains power.)  Gibson said women's issues should  be represented in every provincial  government department and that a  women's ministry would "be the kind  of activist advocate which would  ensure women's concerns would be  added to the checklist" by intergovernmental committees in the same  way as they consider union viewpoints.  Mr. Gibson noted that the Vernon Women's Centre asked the Minister of  Human Resources for funds to establish a battered women's transition  house and that a women's ministry  would make sure Mr. Vander Zalm  considered it.  He went on to say that the women's  ministry could also enact affirmative action plans for the public  service in B.C. and in Crown corporations, referring to the lack of  women employed by B.C. Rail.  COCKE  Dennis Cocke, NDP MLA New Westminster, said VSW activities are "some  of the most worthy programs... in  B.C.'s history." He opined that  the Socreds closed Gene Errington's  office. Mr. Cocke described Provincial Secretary as "this very  successful businesswoman....who  feels that all women have equal op-  oportunities." He invited her to  see the women of his constituency  who are not treated equally.  MLA  Cocke also reminded the House that  last year Mrs. McCarthy funded a  breast cancer research program despite advice from the Department of  Health, and has not reported back  on the $17,000 grant.  He also argued in favour of the self-help  philosophy of women's centres and  said the provincial government has  been too severe in cutting off funds  to volunteer groups who require at  least a small paid staff.  S. WALLACE  Scott Wallace, Leader of the Progressive Conservatives, Oak Bay,  said there is a "tremendous scope"  of work needed to improve the status  of women and that the government has  a responsibility to act as catalyst  in this regard (by providing funding  to people who want to help themselves) .  Mr. Wallace noted the Vancouver and  Victoria Status of Women handle a  case load of women's rights regarding marital property, divorce,  alimony, maintenance, childcare,  employment, etc. which would otherwise be demanded of government departments which would need to be  enlarged.  He noted that VSW staff are "being  paid less than the acceptable rate  for the quality of service they are  providing...these women are very  well trained...this is so important  to solid and enlightened counselling."  MLA Wallace argued that since VSW  salaries are well below the salaries of private industry, in effect  the staff are doing a lot of work  voluntarily, and noted that due to  inflation VSW needs at least a 12%  raise in the grant.  He finished by saying "this is a  very dedicated bunch of women...who  don't expect the government to do  all the work for them.  They are  in fact making a very substantial  personal contribution themselves."  He stated that the value of work  in the home by women should be recognized under the Canada Pension  Plan and asked McCarthy if she had  approached the federal government  in this regard.  Motherhood should  not prejudice a woman's rights later  on if her husband dies or deserts  her, he argued. McCarthy did not  answer this.  Wallace asked McCarthy to comment  on the anti-inflation guidelines  as they affect women, quoting June  Menzies, Vice-President of the AIB  who said that women would be the  first to suffer if the guidelines  are lifted (see our critique of  Ms. Menzies). McCarthy did not  answer this.  Wallace also asked Provincial Secretary if there are any female Associate Deputy Ministers since  there are no female Deputy Ministers and only 8 female program managers in the B.C. civil service.  He wanted to know if lack of interest by women or lack of qualifications is the reason why so few women  applied for the position of Auditor  General.  McCarthy replied with the  following statistics:  1974  1976  executive development  training applicants    7    24  correspondence course 18    81  McCarthy also noted that during the  past six months there were 333 appointments to administrative office  in the provincial government and 9  were women.  Of 1,042 applicants,  184 were women.  For program manager  positions there were 234 applicants  and 4 were women.  B. WALLACE  NDP MLA Barbara Wallace of Cowichan-  Malahat noted that Burns Lake Women's Centre is doing a project for  native/white women on a LIP grant  and has a craft shop to raise funds.  She said the Fraser Lake Women's  Centre also have a LIP grant and  the local mayor is in favour of financial aid to the group.  MLA Jack  Kempf of Omineca asked Provincial  Secretary for $5,000 for the group  and Wallace wanted to" know if it  would be granted.  She then read aloud several letters  of support for the VSW grant application, from Abbotsford Community  Legal Services, federal Advisory  Council on the Status of Women; Justice Council; B.C. Civil Liberties  Association; B.C. Women's Institute;  B.C. Teachers' Federation.  Wallace criticized McCarthy for  delaying the decision on VSW's application when she had so many endorsements from community agencies  in support of VSW.  "You cannot  expect them to keep on working until March 31 when they don't know  whether there's going to be a job  there on April 1. The morale will  deteriorate," she said.  SANFORD  NDP MLA Karen Sanford of Comox supported the VSW grant application  and went on to explain the plight  of women in her riding.  Campbell from page 21  River Women's Centre received $5,000  under the NDP but their application  was turned down by the Socreds last  year.  Sanford pointed out that because  women often are poor, housebound,  with children and lack resources,  they can't fight successfully for  funding.  She said the women of her  area had "lost hope".  "They know the government does not  have the interest of women at heart.  They base this on the fact that Gene  Errington's office was dismantled...  there was a tremendous battle to  - ensure funding for rape relief centres. They see very little emphasis  put on day care by this government."  Ms. Sanford explained the Campbell  River Women's Centre is operating  entirely on volunteer help and "raising nickels and dimes every which 'ñ†  way...".  She wanted to know if they  could apply to Provincial Secretary.  COCKE - HE SPOKE FOR US  The Honourable Grace McCarthy, Provincial Secretary, MLA for Vancouver  -Little Mountain, refused to announce  when or if the VSW received a grant  from her department that day, maintaining she was waiting for reports  from her department.  (Little did  we know VSW would be assessed the  next week by two DHR evaluators.)  Mrs. McCarthy listed at length numerous women appointed to boards and  commissions during the Socred reign.  MLA Dennis Cocke exclaimed, "She's  booted more of them off than she's  put on."  Eileen Dailly challenged the list  of women appointed to college boards  which she called "tokenism", and  said most of the women listed by  McCarthy were elected and not appointed by the government. Dailly  noted that as a cabinet minister  McCarthy has considerable influence  on political appointments.  McCarthy defended herself by saying  she did not infer the appointments  were made all by her government and  said not enough qualified women are  applying for jobs. Of 91 applicants  to the Department of Travel, only 3  were women.  Provincial Secretary said that applications are open to both men and  women and that there is no discrimination in the public service commission!  She implied that any restrictions were imposed personally  by women themselves!  OTTAWA  HON.  MEMBS.  HOUSE OF COMMONS  hmmm...two weeks until we go to Bermuda...-  February 15 - March 15  (Hansard - Feb. 25: Bank Directors  and Mar. 1: Divorce contain very  entertaining speeches by women MPs  - recommended reading.)  ONTARIO/B.C. LEAD IN WOMEN'S ISSUES  A review of the debates of the House  of Commons for the period October  1976 to February 1977 shows that  Ontario and B.C. Members of Parliament lead the country in not only  the number of politicians who spoke  out en status of women issues - but  also in the number of women's issues  raised.  Manitoba, New Brunswick, Quebec and  Alberta politicians were the next  most verbal on women's issues while  Newfoundland, Saskatchewan and Nova  Scotia were least vocal on these  matters.  Ontario had the most MPs who spoke  on feminist issues - 9 while B.C.  had 6 MPs who spoke on them.  However, B.C. MPs spoke on the most  women's issues - 7, while Ontario  MPs spoke on 6.  B.C. Members of Parliament spoke on  1_ out of 17 women's issues raised  in that five-month period.  The  range of issues was: pornography,  CPP for housewives, daycare, equal  work, Dr. Morgentaler, abortion,  human rights, maintenance/alimony,  rape, child abuse, pensions for  widows, women as bank directors,  women as senators, UIC for adoptive  mothers, women's unemployment, women  in the public service and illegitimacy.  The B.C. MPs we should congratulate  and encourage are: Legatt of New  Westminster/NDP; Basford of Vancouver-Centre/Liberal; Lee of Vancouver  East/Liberal; Brisco of Kootenay-  West/Progressive Conservative;  Huntingdon of Capilano/Progressive  Conservative; Campagnolo of Skeena/  Liberal. Why didn't the other 15  B.C. MPs speak out on these issues?  Widows Pensions  On March 8, 1977 MP Knowles of Manitoba said the denial of pensions  to women aged 60 to 65 who are not  married, or who are widowed, is a  violation of human rights.  Apparently the House of Commons was not  listening to him - yet again.  Nothing happened.  Planned Parenthood  On March 11, 1977 MP Whiteway of  Manitoba asked the House to direct  the Minister of Health not to fund  Planned Parenthood on the grounds  that the group is pro-abortion. The  motion did not pass.  There was more abortion debate  in Hansard last month. Check out  VSW summaries in our office - ed.  Monitoring Abortion  On March 2, 1977 MP Roche of Saskatchewan asked the Minister of Justice if he would instruct the provinces to monitor abortion approval  committees to ensure fair application of the law across the country.  He was concerned that some provinces  grant abortion for economic and  social reasons instead of for health-  reasons only.  The Honourable Ron Basford replied  that he cannot instruct the provinces but that he and the Minister  of Health would be meeting soon with  provincial health officials to discuss the matter.  Abortion Between Doctor and Patient  On March 4, 1977 MP Stu Leggatt of  B.C. moved that the federal government  introduce legislation to permit abortion in the first 12 weeks  of pregnancy or less, to be performed by any qualified doctor, in  consultation with the patient only.  This motion would abolish abortion  approval panels,  In accordance  with the recommendations of the  Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women.  The motion was defeated. Ask your MP to support  this motion.  End Birth Control Spending Freeze  On March 4, 1977 MP Stu Leggatt of *  B.C. also moved that the federal  government end the freeze on family  planning spending and that substantial money be provided for contraception given the need shown by the  Badgeley report.  This motion was  also defeated. Write to your MP  explaining the urgent demand for  more birth control information.  Abortion as Birth Control  On March 9, 1977 MP Fortin of Quebec  asked the Minister of Health if he  condoned abortion as a method of  birth control or encouraged abortion  in the case of unwanted children.  The Honourable Marc Lalonde replied  that the question "shows the twisted  mind with which he (Fortin) approaches the subject".  Abortion Legislation  On March 9, 1977 MP Lavoie of Quebec  asked the Minister of Health if he  would introduce legislation into the  House of Commons on abortion, so  that MPs could discuss the matter.  The Honourable Minister Marc Lalonde  said no.  Readers are urged to ask  Minister of Justice to repeal abortion from criminal code. Sisterhood makes the newS  ANDROGYNY  Andro- male, gyny- female  Are androgynous people better off  in terms of mental health? Yes,  according to studies conducted by  Sandra Bern, clinical psychologist,  Stanford University, who presented  the first lecture in the "Schools,  Society and Sex Role Stereotyping"  lecture series being held at UBC.  According to Dr. Bern, a "mentally  healthy" person must be able to  function instrumentally in the world  - that is, be his or her own agent -  and also must be able to relate sensitively to others - have awareness  of others' feelings and respond accordingly.  In our culture, she pointed out,  men who are considered "masculine"  are generally those who have developed primarily the first trait, to  the detriment of the second; and,  of course, for women who are considered "feminine", the situation  is the reverse.  According to her studies (mainly  with undergraduates at Stanford  University) only about 30% of the  population can be considered androgynous, and she feels these people  are better off in terms of mental  health because they combine the  desirable traits of both the "masculine" and "feminine".  Dr. Bern feels that sex role stereotyping is harmful because it is so  limiting to our "humanness".  Behavior should not have gender connected to it.  We should treat gender with the same casualness that  we treat our species; how often are  we aware of our humanness? Almost  never; we take it for granted, and  that's how Dr. Bern feels we should  treat gender.  -SUPERCXPLOITED  Farm and domestic workers are excluded from the Minimum Wage Act,  the Hours of Work Act, the Payment  of Wages Act, the Control of  Employment of Children Act, the  Maternity Protection Act, the Workers' Compensation Act, and the Annual and General Holidays Act. Thus  there are no laws which regulate  how much or how often they are paid,  how many hours they work, when or  if they get holidays, children are  not protected from harsh working  conditions, and women workers have  no job security if they become  pregnant.  Abuses and exploitation are common.  Wages are usually far below minimum  wage particularly for live-in domestics and farmworkers. Live-in  domestics can make as little as  $100.00 per month plus room and  board and seasonal farmworkers average between $1.00 and $2.50 per  hour.  Most domestics work more  than a 40 hour week, some being on  call virtually 24 hours per day.  Farmworkers usually work a 10-12  hour day with as much as 6 hours  transportation time to and from  work each day in addition.  SORWUC  BANK WORKERS - S.O.R.W.U.C.  On February 28, 1977 the United  Bank Workers, Local 2 of SORWUC  (Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of Canada) applied to  the Canada Labour Relations Board  for union certification for the  Bank of Nova Scotia Data Centre.  There are approximately 85 employees in the centre.  "Those of us in the Data Centre  have taken this major step for  several reasons. We are some of  the lowest paid workers in the  country though we work for some  of the largest and most profitr-  able employers.  75% of bank employees, of whom there are 130,  000 in Canada, are women.  90%  of the women employees in banks  make below $10,000 a year and the  average female wage is $7500 a  year.  The major demand of the  UBW is wages that are based on  our skills and responsibilities  and not on our sex.  Besides  wages, we need a dental plan,  grievance procedure, protection  for part-time workers, regular  coffee breaks, and shift differential."  The work that is done at the  banks' Data Centres is crucial  to the operation of the banks.  A 24-hour shutdown of the data  centres would cripple the B.C.  banking industry.  The Data Centre workers explain:  We have joined the United Bank  Workers because it is an independent union and committed to maintaining democracy in the union.  All executive members are elected  and all are bank employees. At  the BNS Data Centre, we will elect our own representatives to  represent us at the bargaining  table with the banks.  We call on all bank employees to  join with us in our struggle for  better wages and working conditions.  For more information,  call UBW, #1116-207 W. Hastings  Street, Vancouver, B.C. (681-2811  or 684-2S34) or Charlotte Johnson  UBW Vice-President (581-3209).  iCV' AUNM  r* a mm     _.  STOP  TUITION INCREASES  Students in colleges and universities  throughout B.C. have been mobilizing  themselves to protest proposed 25%  to 40% tuition fee increases. VSW  has joined with the Simon Fraser Women's Centre and UBC Women's Committee in the campaign against the  increases, which discriminate against  women and all low income people.  Less than 7% of female university students will be able to save money from  summer employment to pay for their  education if this increase goes through, because their unemployment  rate is higher than for male students and because women are paid  much less.  This situation, compounded with the  recent massive daycare cutbacks will  ensure that women of B.C. do not  have equal access to higher education.  Between 1930 and 1967, women doctorates dropped from 15.2 to 7.6%  of the total doctorates earned in  Canada. This number is sure to decrease further with the tuition  hikes, unless they can be halted.  (KR)  INCEST  SORWUC pickets UIC on March 8.  MYTHS ABOUT INCEST  Myth #1: Children lie or fantasize  about sexual contact with adults.  There is nc evidence for this common belief.  Myth #2: Because children are seductive, they are partially responsible.  Children cannot be held  responsible for the actions of adults, and their affectionate behavior has been reinforced frequently  by adults. It is non-sexual in purpose, so far as the child is concerned.  Myth #3: The mother sets the child up,  encourages the incest and knows about  it.  In most cases, mothers have not  been told, and the spouse may have  denied, when confronted, that he was  having sexual relations with the  child.  The father can come from any economic  class, and he usually has no previous  criminal record. The adolescent daughter may be an adequate student.  It is interesting to compare tnese  myths with those which surrounded I  rape until the women's movement  debunked them.  AIB  ANTI-INFLATION RAP  If you think that the anti-inflation  board wage guidelines discriminate  against women by enforcing low wages  you can protest directly.  Call  Joanne Norris, Information Officer  for the AIB, COLLECT at:  (613)  996-1072. BOOKS  Our thanks to Nancy Bain for donating her paper "A Look at the Change  in Mortgage Lender's Attitudes Towards Single Women Over the Past 10  Years".  It is a welcome addition  to our files. We would like to see  more such papers donated, especially  by those women who have used the  reference library.  Also, many thanks to Room of One's  Own for donating many paperbacks to  the VSW lending library, which are  too numerous to mention here.  The following books are now waiting  to be reviewed. They are sent to  us free by the publishers providing  that we send them two copies of reviews published in Kinesis for each  book. This is our way of developing  the paperback lending library which  we don't have money for.  Sorry, we  can't give you the book you review  but you'll get your name In print!  Yes, we can mail them to you if you  live outside Vancouver.  Here then, are the books which are  waiting to be read and reviewed:  Women Remembered: A Collection of  Biographies From the Furies  Generations of Denial: 75 Short  Biographies of Women in History  Traffic in Women: and Other Essays  on Feminism  Momma: A Start on All the Untold  Stories  Self-Assertion for Women: Guide to  Becoming Androgynous  Complete Book of Midwifery  Rights of the Pregnant Parent  Sex Variant Women in Literature  Lesbian Lives  Woman's Astrology  Women Loving: Journey Toward Becoming an Independent Woman  Trial of Inez Garcia  Wheel of Things: Biography of L.M.  Montgomery  Woman Suffrage Movement in Canada  Parlour Rebellion: Profiles in the  Struggle for Women's Rights  The Female Eye  AVAILABLE APRIL 1, feminist woman to  share slightly chaotic east-end coop  with two women, two kids, and one  reasonably non-sexist man.  Call Lark or Lisa at 253-2749 or  Lark before 5pm at 876-6814.  BATTERED WIVES by Del Martin  Published by Glide Publications,  California, 1976.  $6.95  Reviewed by Karen Richardson  Battered Wives is a definitive and  shattering report on the appalling  magnitude and sadism of wife-beating which the author maintains even  exceeds the incidence of rape.  Martin delivers a severe indictment  of the policy, the law, the courts  and social service systems, and  examines in detail the foundations  of patriarchy, the oppressive nature of marriage, and sex-role  stereotyping, which mesh together  to present an overwhelming barrier  to protecting battered women.  She does offer real hope however,  through proposals for revision of  the law, and an especially useful  chapter on how to set up women's  refuges with an overview on women's  transition houses in other countries.  The only thing that Martin leaves  out, beyond putting wife-beaters  behind bars, is how to rehabilitate them.  Surely the only answer  is men's liberation.  I highly recommend this gripping  book, but only if you aren't depressed easily.  HOW TO DEAL WITH SEX-ROLE STEREOTYPING by Nan Bostick, Patricia  Kaspar and Nancy Sallan.  Available from: Choice for Tomorrow,  P.O. Box 1455, Cupertino, Ca. 95014  Reviewed by Ann Risdon  Faced with an educational system  where "the vast majority of the  textbooks children read in school  perpetuate sex-role stereotypes,"  the authors have produced a practical framework for combatting this  problem.  A general (process) model in nine  steps shows how to get the maximum  effect in raising issues before a  school board.  This ranges from a means of identifying the problem, through planning  the board presentation (a "non-  threatening, positive approach is  recommended) to evaluating the final  results.  The strategy of planning a workshop  is dealt with in detail together  with many specific activities aimed  at consciousness-raising for sex-  role stereotyping in reading materials.  Some bases for discussion here include making a list of words which  emphasize the male person (congressman, etc.) then making a list of  alternatives that effectively deal  with male and female (terminology).  Practical exercises in counteracting  sex-role stereotyping in the classroom from kindergarten to grade six  include providing both boys and  girls with an opportunity to darn  socks, glue broken toys, use nails  and bolts with a subsequent evaluation of whether children have categorized certain kinds of fixit jobs.  In combatting sex-biased textbooks,  switching sexes in fairy stories or  picking out riddles in books which  denigrate women are some of the many  suggestions.  Some books for both adults and for  children are recommended together  with a list of sources of non-sexist  material.  Nan Bostick, Director of Educational Products for Mantra Corporation,  Patricia Kaspar, Editor for the Resource Centre for Women, and Nancy  Sallan, a teacher and co-author of  a report on Sex-Role Stereotyping,  have put together a down-to-earth  manual whose theme is organizing  effective action now.  TITTERS: Ed.Deanne Stillman and  Anne Beatts. Macmillan, hardbound  $14.95 (whew! )  If you can ignore the gross title  and divisions of this book by derogatory names for breasts, it  can be funny. The humour is of a  wide variety of types: stories,  comics, song lyrics, poems by  Adrienne Poor, Marge Piercing et.  al., Women's Sports Cards, and magazine spoofs of "Miz" and others.  Sometimes the humour works - .e.g  the side-splitting ads in "Fake  Confessions". But not always. "The  Sylvia Plath Cookbook" is definitely  in poor taste. Sexual humour is  mostly oriented towarded heterosexual women. Graphics often better  than content. (Plexus).  MY MOTHER THE MAIL CARRIER - MI MAMA  LA CARTERA (English-Spanish) by Inez  Maury, illustrated by Lady McCrady.  Feminist Press, 1976. 27 pp. approx. *  in paperback.  FIREGIRL by Gibson Rich, illustrated *  by Charlotte Purrington Farley.  Feminist Press, 1976. 46 pp. approx.  in paperback.  Reviewed by Heather Kellerhals  In My Mother the Mail Carrier, Lupita  a child of nursery school age tells  us about her mother, her work as a  mail carrier and the various outings  they enjoy together. There is a  warm, loving relationship between  mother and daughter and no lack of  communication vback and forth which  is nice to see. The illustrations,  brightened by touches of yellow are  imaginative, humorous and enhance  the feeling of warmth between the  two principal characters. The text  in both Spanish and English is very  attractively presented.  There is no story in the sense of  'plot', nor is there much real  characterization. Unfortunately,  Lupita doesn't always sound like a  young child either and the several  references to women's roles sound  forced and out of place when told  by a young child, however good the  intentions. There are better ways  of drawing these elements into a  children's story. BOOKS  Illustration from MY MOTHER THE MAIL CARRIER, by Inez Murray.  Illustration by Lady McCrady. The Feminist Press.  Firegirl is the story of Brenda  who practically 'eats, sleeps and  dreams' fire.  She wants more than  anything to work in a fire department, but is bitterly disappointed  when her father says "Girls can't  be firemen." How Brenda proves  this to be wrong completes the  story.  Firegirl is quite pleasing  visually with various shades of  reds, greens and browns, appearing on alternate pages. Apart  from presenting an interesting  account of the work done at a  firehall, the story itself should  prove interesting to a young person.  Brenda is an attractive  personality and although many of  the characters, notably the fire-  chief, may appear a bit 'stock',  there are a number of interesting  individuals sympathetic to Brenda 's cause - friend Sheilah, the  teacher and especially Jerry, one  of the firemen at the local hall.  HELPERS written and illustrated by  Shirley Hughes  Published by The Bodley Head (distributed in Canada by Clarke-Irwin)  1975, 32 pages. Hardback $5.65.  Reviewed by Heather Kellerhals  George, a teenager, is babysitting  three very young children for the  day while their mother is out - a  very slight story idea which is  fortunately redeemed by the delightful illustrations.  They are  humorous, colourful and so thoroughly true-to-life in the feeling they  convey. The children never become  real characters but they are presented in typical situations -  crawling all over the babysitter,  getting into paint pots, etc.  Again, this comes over visually,  rather than verbally and a child  would certainly chuckle at the pictures,  There is just not enough  substance either in the way of story  or characterization to go along with  the really excellent illustrations.  Commenting on all three stories, I  find too often there is a lack of  either story or characterization in  the recent crop of picture books.  The fact is, a young kid (and so do  we all!) likes a good rousing tale.  One has only to look at the Frog and  Toad books for example to see that  real characters can appear in only  a few, short pages.  GAY MAGS IN PRISON  Gay groups in the U.S. are organizing  to protest the recent banning by the  U.S.Bureau of Prisons of all gay publications from U.S.Federal Prisons.  "Publications which call attention to  or identify inmates who accept homosexuality can, in our opinion, be  detrimental to their safety as well  as to the safety of others," claimed  Bureau of Prisons head. (LNS)  YOU CAN KNOW ALL I AM  Holly Near  (Redwood Records)  Reviewed by Connie Smith  You can know all I am  Share my life, take my giving  I can't change how I'm living  But you can know all I -am.  You can know all I am  Watch me grow, know my sorrow  I can't lend and I can't borrow  But you can know all I am.  £ Holly Near 1975  The only way one can really hear  Holly Near is to really listen. Let  her captivate you as she would if  you were to experience her live. I  had forgotten until I heard the  album, just how dynamic the coda  is on "Nicolia", a song describing  the rise of a woman from factory  worker to labour organizer.  Imagine it being sung in harmony by  2,000 women. Or imagine Holly's  sister interpreting "You've Got Me  Flying" for the deaf women in the  audience. And then, there's "Damn  the Poets":  Oh, can I ever write this down  Damn the Poets  Whoa, can I dare to slow it down  You took my picture  Said I got style  But did you say "I love you"  Just to get me to smile  © Holly Near 1975  "Sister-Woman-Sister" closes Side 2;  a very moving expression of her  feelings towards the prisoners of  the California Institute for Women.  Side 1 (I always start backwards)  begins with a produced semi-country  tune entitled "It's My Move" celebrating women's assertiveness.  "Someday One Will Do" follows, and  often resembles a Hollywood musical.  I love it. The lyrics speak for  themselves:  Went out on a weekend to see a good  movie  Tried not to let all the couples get  to me.  Where is the oneness we feel with  each other  That lets us be loving without being  lovers.  There's somebody's friend a flow  and charming  Lost now to some beautiful stranger  Lovers losing all that they've known  I am one or I am three alone.  © Holly Near 1975  and "Song to a Melody":  Melody grows wider as she cries  Maybelline is covering her beautiful  eyes  Will you live your whole life in  disguise  Buying drinks for men who will go  home with each other  At the end of the night.  There are more.  But these are some  of my favourites.  Get this album.  Study it. And play Side 2, first.  (Incidentally, background vocals include Cris Williamson and Vicki  Randall. DEL MARTIN  on herstory  of wife beating  Roots of wife beating are ancient  indeed.  Frederick Engels places  beginnings with the emergence of  the first monogamous family relationships, which replaced group marriage and the extended family of  early promiscuous societies.  This  new arrangement because women sought  protection from what Susan Brown-  miller calls "open season on rape"  and because men wanted to authenticate and guarantee their identity  and right as fathers. Prior to  the pairing marriages women as  mothers were the only discernible  parents and were held in high esteem but with the new father right,  the strictest fidelity was demanded  of women; polygamy and infidelity  remained men's privilege, however,  The cost to women for protection  from one man from the sexual ravages of other men came pretty high  as we know. Monogamy brought about  the complete subjugation by one sex  of the other. With the advent of  the pairing marriage, the man seized the reins in the home and began  viewing the woman as his property.  The sole purpose of woman was seen  as satisfying his lust, bearing  his children and tending to his  household. Women were relegated to  certain parts of the home, isolated,  guarded and their public activities  restricted.  If a woman showed any  signs of having a will or a mind of  her own, she was beaten in the same  way as a strong willed horse might  be whipped and finally subdued.  The church sanctioned this subjection of women to their husbands in  everything.  Women were burned at the stake under  many pretexts including scolding and  nagging, talking back, refusing to  have intercourse, miscarrying, even  though the miscarriage was caused by  a kick or a blow from the husband  and for committing sodomy, even  though the husband who committed it  was forgiven. The inhumane practices and attitudes towards women  were incorporated into the dominant  culture by law, allowing men to  avoid responsibility for their own  behavior.  In the 1880s the British Parliament  through a series of legal reforms  began to deal with the sorry plight  of the married xjoman; the law was  changed to allow that a wife being  continually beaten by her husband  to the point of endangering her  life to separate from him, though  not to divorce him. Another law  prohibited the husband from selling  his wife or a daughter into prostitution, but only if she was under  the age of 16 and special legislation was enacted to prevent a husband from keeping his wife under  lock and key, and as I said yesterday, in the US a man was not allowed to beat his wife with a switch  larger than the round of his thumb.  Del Martin had much more to say,  but this is all we had room for.  Call in at VSW and read the transcript of her talk.  Family Violence continues  More from CATHERINE RUSSELL  continued from p.5  My attitudes on arriving at the conference were fairly consistent with  those of the majority.  I was there  to learn by absorbing theories and  facts about the specific phenomenon  of violence in the family, particularly as experienced by battered  wives. My purpose was to collect  information that would contribute  to my being a more effective worker  at Transition House. Not knowing  much, I accepted a position of  being low on the hierarchy of people at the symposium: power and worthiness derive from being able to  clearly articulate an intellectual  perception of a social phenomenon  and a theoretical solution to the  problem.  My first emotional response at the  symposium was to Gene Errington's  speech.. She made a strong, angry  statement of her reaction to the  conference and to the orientation  of professionals.  I was very uncomfortable and felt antagonistic  toward her for making a speech that  stirred up the sympoium and antagonized a large number of delegates.  I didn't want to be identified with  the feminists who were giving her  a standing ovation - even though I  was sitting with that group whose  interests coincided with mine.  I  was accepting the norm that says:  "Let's be calm and logical about  this. There's no need to get  angry." And, by so doing, I was  denying the validity of Gene's  anger.  I talked with a number of women  about my response, at different  times through the rest of the day.  No one put me down, or was antagonistic towards me, for being critical of and antogonistic towards  Gene's speech in particular, and  more broadly towards feminism.  The next day I started to realize  how I had been affected by the norms  of the majority. And in the process  had been denying others the expression of their feelings and had been  valuing people's contributions predominantly on the basis of intellectual consistency, articulation, and  coolness.  In the first workshop, one woman -  in an emotional and somewhat rambling  statement - expressed her feeling of  being battered by the conference itself.  The expression of her feelings was only briefly responded to  by the workshop speaker. However,  she had spoken for a lot of women  at that workshop, in that there was  a lot of frustration being experienced - and not spoken of - at the  tone of the conference. Her speaking led other women to speak from  their feelings.  And that's when I really started  feeling angry.  I recognized that  my acceptance of the professionals'  norms had been a critical factor in  my discounting and criticizing Gene  the previous day and others during  the course of the symposium, and  consequently in my feeling separated  from people. Those norms value  intellectual perception so highly  and emotions so lowly; they are a  basic cause of the violence in our  culture. And that was not being  dealt with!  continued from p.5  More from GENE ERRINGTON  ...I think that we have to be very  clear that wife battering is violence that the state, that the government, that the agencies are doing  absolutely nothing to control, and  furthermore, it is the only kind  of violence that the state and the  government is doing nothing to control.  Only, in my opinion, have the  women's agencies helped.  The Vancouver Status of Women, we are told,  Transition House, we are told, are  the places where women call and where  women go when they are being beaten,  and these are the places that scramble for government money and that  are continually in danger of being  cut off.  I think that we have to  look at this as a policy and see  that it is endemic and that it is  being enforced and that it comes  from the highest possible authorities and it is continued, and that  everybody who works within these  systems ensures that it continues.  On January 11, Vander Zalm, the Minister of Human Resources, stated to  the province that he was very alarmed that public money was being spent  helping people get divorced. He  said "we are trying to keep the  family together. The maintenance  (this is the quote) the maintenance  of these split families is our biggest concern." Now we have to look  at what he is saying here.  One  thing about it, he is not being  hypocritical. He is saying right  out he is not concerned about the  moral fabric of the community or  the sacredness of the hearth or anything like that.  He's saying 'we  do not want to give these women and  their children any money. We want  to make it as hard as possible for  them to leave.' He is trying to  make sure that he unloads the wife  and her children onto some person  whose salary will have to cover them  both.  It occurs to me that he does  not care how it is that that woman  must exist within that family, what  ^  it is she must put up with, the  kinds of things that she must endure.  X  lFiGh£  if  I F  I Contribute m  tr\t Liberation  of aLL vonan  dnd So  victorY  is bom even in   ,  This is simply of no interest to  him.  It is clear to me that something is being enforced here, and  what that something is is the authority of the husband, so that my  statement, my belief is that every  agency in this city, and I'll exempt  only those who are working actively  in the women's movement, shore up  this particular authority and do  not help the wife.  We have two issues to talk about:  Men beat their wives because they  are permitted to do so and nobody  stops them, and woman are beaten  because they are trained and forced  and maintained into dependence and  nobody helps them, and those are  the Issues to deal with. The FULL CIRCLE COFFEEHOUSE has  ire-opened in a new space, at 152  E.8th., Vancouver B.C. It is a  women's coffeehouse, run by a  collective of women, for the  purpose of providing space for  women in this area to share and  enjoy the music and poetry of  women performers. The coffeehouse  has been in existence for little  over a year, and, until this month,  has rented or borrowed space for  one evening a week. During this  last year, participation has increased to greater than fifty women  on some evenings, and to dozens of  performers who have asked to use  our space for little or no pay.  It is with this mandate (womandate?)  that we have made the decision to  expand into our new space, approx.  950 square feet which we are renting  by the month. We have increased the  number of our coffeehouses to two  a week, one for women only (Friday )  and one for women and men (Monday).  We have increased our cover charge  in order to guarantee $10 to $20  a night to be share between two  performers. And we are trying to  encourage the use of the space by  other feminist groups, and for  other functions held by the women's  community in this area. Other regular events so far are the Sunday  Night Drop-in and the Wednesday  night Women's Music Co-op (new  women welcome). There is a C-R  workshop (led by Isobelle Kilborn)  starting at the beginning of this  month.  This month's FRIDAY SCHEDULE IS  AS FOLLOWS: April 1: Marlene  Wildeman (poet); April 8: Connie  Smith and Kalin Wild (singers);  April 15: Eileen Brown (singer);  April 23: Cathy Ford (poet); April 29: Ellie Epp (poet).  This month's MONDAY SCHEDULE IS  AS FOLLOWS: April 4: Eileen Brown  (singer); April 11: Denise Olsen  and Laurel Webber (singers); April  18: Helene Rosenthal (poet) and  April 25: Cam Hubert (writer).  Something  to sing  about  VSW  NOMINATIONS ARE BEING CALLED for the  Vancouver Status of Women Executive.  Would-be executive members must be  members in good standing* for six  months at the time of the June AGM.  Contact the nominating committee:  Susan Hoeppner (736 3746), Carol  Norman (524 0885) and Lee Grills  (980 9650)  REMEMBER: ORIENTATION AT VSW, every  second Thursday, at 7.30 pm. April  dates are 14th and 28th.  LESBIAN DROP-IN every Wednesday night  at 8.00 pm.  BCFW  The Standing Committee meeting is  in Nanaimo on the 2nd and the 3rd,  but if you're relying on April's  KINESIS, you have probably missed  the ferry!  The LOWER MAINLAND REGIONAL MEETING  on Weds, April 6th at Women in Focus -  #6, 45 Kingsway (at Main). Time is  7.30. This looks like an interesting  meeting, so BE THERE. Call Val Embree  at 228 8143 or 732 3123 for info.  Sun  rOorO  TU65  Oed  1 nvj^  Frv  Sbt  ±  BCFW                     2.  Coi*m iTree  «H«CTS- WMv/fti/AO  Bcfw             -i  4-  15a £ ith  5  5 --30  •  H«t4    aiT  fl«5 W-uth.  #CFW-7-.v  (_  CK*nnei lo T.Jo"*  7  VSW- Va/iroo^r  F0RK/0 no£iJ  ^ !  /o  If  C°fl£«l>oos<.  is a e sv>  L?  Cov.v.#CTI«6  o.3o   cf,";c  13  ucs«i*yo  c«0p-r*/.v*v>/  0*i*.i>»iw«>aJ «t  vsia> - T.$* r~-  dead t< a*.  15"  Cot Wioijso - \tm  Fo« tjo«\eN  2>7B £ l««th:  G-KflWoOftlOllJA  '■fCoiturcl  \6   1  >7  IB  ISA e 8tK  a  (.F^t <:.,** f-rtr  Jo  W»««N   fll-(v/fc.  Ch«o««l "8  <V»' tm  r'iCft.  C>So»-rKi.vsW  2.1  VsW-Vancajv/cr  S»uV\ mtrtl n*  "7 .3. ^      7  22  Cof£e«lM>viS< - EpIA.  0-3  2H  25  C»We« b>v«e-  M«n t <Jo*rrt  2i>  rt&ACTHCo.-.-.  wt5 w.HtV  E-^ecv/Tive.   2-7  Channel ie Vy fm-  D<w-rw,vtfW  as  C^ferhooie - tiff*.   '  3o i77  i b n  Vancouver status of women  2029 west 4th avenue  Vancouver, b.c. V6J1N3  736 3746  ,,v i mu,,»», i-Ma/ine w k cowe.  ) i saw so, yet oras tcueir  / onaf A wkie «e MountAm accPS  iiKaSnSAWinme.  uet you M3U nc* teucve fc  au SLeenNQ WMen now ai/WKE  ^y    1878-1942-  j   Serials Bivision,  Main Library,  i   University of B.C.  I   Vancouver 8, B.C.  i WOMEN gl  ' k would vtiWZ  \X0\1 for Ap"^ \J  1   \\\V  HEALTH CARE PROVISIONAL SUBCOMMITTEE  ACTION ON ABORTION  Over half of the hospitals in British Columbia do not do abortions.  1, When a woman goes to her doctor;  a) s/he may not perform an abortion  b) s/he may refuse to refer her to a doctor who does  c) If, in fact, the woman can manage to find a syrrmathic doctor in time,  these delays can make the eventual abortion much more difficult.  2, Therapeutic abortion committees have absolute authority.  3. Even if the committee agrees to perform an abortion, hospital regulations  have the power to prevent an abortion by their regulations such as residency  requirements, husband's consent, age requirements etc,  4. DELAY FACTOR - Even if everything runs smoothly, a woman, continues  with her unwanted pregnancy for at least 2 weeks.  A survey is being made to collect information from all hospitals which do  abortions regarding their interpretation of law, hospital regulations, medical  procedures and counselling services.  This information will be compiled in booklet form so that women in all areas  of B.C. will have an accurate view of abortion services available.  This can be  used as a time saving device for women needing abortions and as a political  pressure device for improving the situation.  WE NEED ANSWERS:  Are abortions carried out at your local hospital?  Has a questionaire been filled out for your hospital?  Can you help collect abortion information?  For the answers to these and any other questions you have concerning the  survey contact;  Jenna Jordison,  1520 West 6th Ave., Vancouver.   736-6696