 ~/MS/D£  2 McCarthy is full of  1 1 For Exxon right or  smiles for her $40,000  wrong. Picture yourself in  promotion of "Human  the Persian Gulf, enjoying  Resources Week." But the  equal opportunity to be  United Way has produced a  dead  devastating indictment of  GAIN  3 March 8. It's this day we  1 2 Is there a life for  celebrate our strength, and  women beyond the  determination to survive  pipeline? Diana Ellis  describes northern  women's research  <  <  4 Workers who feed B.C.  14 It's No Life for a  |  with stooped labour and  Woman in single industry  sweat are fed up. They're  resource towns. We ask  I  demanding minimum  film-maker Bonnie Kreps  employment protection  why  5  Women's groups take on  1 © Nomi Kaplan's show  the inane UBC Engineering  reviewed; Nomi Kaplan  Department. When are  interviewed  those guys going to wake  up?  6 Vancouver Community  1 8 Avis Rosenberg has  College is building a new  surveyed the art scene for  campus at China Creek  Canadian women, and  with (can you believe it?) no  we're not in the picture  daycare  ■   Why Vancouver City  24 For Women's Week at  Council, with cold self-  UBC, Kate Millett  interest, wants to bury a  describes violence against  ward system voters want  women in The Basement  SUBSCRIBE TO KiMEJiJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber  $ 8  Member/Subscriber  $10  Institution  $15  Sustainer  $50  Name  Address  Payment Enclosed   Bill Me   Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate funding  —we need member support!  SOCIAL COLLECTtOH*  MARCH 80  KMJEJiJ  news about women that's not in the dailies Kinesis March 80  LOCAL NEWS  United Way report measures gap between GAIN and staying alive  On social assistance you can either eat or pay the rent, not both  The choice is between eating and paying  the rent. No news for anyone who has  ever had to live on social assistance  in British Columbia.  But now the United Way, an august and  credible body which moves with ease  in the houses of the affluent, agrees.  'Measuring the Gap1, the United Way report issued in late February, describes  itself as a "factual, accurate report  which will be a useful document for all  those concerned with human care services  in this province." It is a damning  indictment of our Human Resources policies and practices.  The cost of food, clothing, personal  care and transportation alone considerably exceed the support allowances provided under the Guaranteed Available Income for Need (GAIN), the report states.  And those costs err on the side of conservatism, because they do not take into  account any allowances for household  maintenance, recreation, and the many  other incidental expenses incurred in  normal daily living.  The gap between costs and support allowance, therefore, ranges from at least  $75 a month for a single person to at  least $215 a month for a family of five  when they first go on assistance.  Those shortfalls become even greater when  the difference between actual shelter  costs and the maximum shelter allowance  is added to them. (GAIN produces lots of  paper work and even greater shortfalls  by distinguishing elaborately between  support and shelter allowances.)  The average monthly rent plus utilities  for a studio apartment in Greater Van- -  couver exceeds the shelter maximum for  one person by $55.  The examples go on. A single parent - a  woman and her two children - would typically be $14-2 short of the bare necessities of support and shelter when she  goes on welfare.  The 1979 Statistics Canada poverty line  for a family of three is $816. That's  $221 above the calcuated GAIN income  after four months.  'Measuring the Gap' blames not only inflation for the widening gap between  GAIN rates and survival, but also the  Ministry of Human Resources. In April  1979 the ministry made two damaging policy changes. It cancelled the emergency  needs payments and it axed the rent overage system which provided extra money to  families unable to meet the increasing  cost of accommodation.  "This means," the report stresses, "that  the actual average increase in monies  received under GAIN is far less than  the (April '79) rate changes suggested."  GAIN allowances must be increased by at  least $130 a month for most single re-  ceipients and up to $230 a month for  some families during their first four  months on social assistance, the report  concludes.  Human Resources Minister Grace McCarthy  smiled her displeasure at the report.  According to her, Vancouver rental rates  based on all parts of the city, including posh suburbs such as Shaughnessy,  were employed to measure the gap. She  said that isn't fair, because "people in  our programmes don't live in those areas."  She has a nerve saying this, because  'hfeasuring the Gap' is quite explicit  about using rental averages for low-income groups. In 95%  of the vacancies  listed with the Red Door (a low-rental  agency) the cost exceeded the single  person's maximum shelter allowance.  McCarthy involved in her ad campaign  Release of 'Measuring the Gap' happened  to coincide with McCarthy's announcement  launching "Human Resources Week," with  the slogan, "We're all Involved." This  little public relations junket is expect-  . ed to ring up a $4-0,000 bill.  "We want to know what people think of  our programmes," said McCarthy.  Human Resources Week, March 3 - 8,  is now  upon us. During this week, welfare recipients will be letting McCarthy know what  we think of her less-than-poverty-level  living allowances. Loud and clear..  A women's movement activist is murdered in Vancouver  By Rachel Epstein, Prabha Khosla and Daphne Morrison  Nashter Dhahan, a 26-year-old woman active  in the Vancouver women's movement, was murdered on February 9 on her way to work.  Nashter was an exceptional woman in many  ways. Her death came as an extreme shock  to her family and to the people who knew  her and worked with her.  Nashter was a strong and committed woman.  She was aware of the exploitation of working people in our society, particularly women, and spent the last few years of her  life fighting against it.  She worked for two years with the Farmworker's Legal Information Service - a service  set up to help farmworkers with legal problems. At the farmworkers' office she spent  hours and hours of her time listening patiently to people accounting their experiences. Often people would drop into the  office just to talk with her, with no particular problem.  As part of her work with the Information  Service she gave workshops and appeared on  radio and tv, informing farmworkers of their  legal rights and informing the public about  the terrible conditions facing B.C. farmworkers .  She worked extremely hard dealing with the  problems faced by farmworkers who hadn't  been paid for months, those who were having  great difficulty collecting unemployment  insurance, and farmworkers who were being  exploited by labour contractors.  As she worked at the Information Service,  Nashter became more and more aware of the  difficulties and hardships faced by working people in our society, particularly by  women. As she became more and more aware  of these things, she became more and more  committed to fighting against them. She  was always alive and excited by new ideas,  trying to figure out what could be done  so that people could make a better life  for themselves.  Because Nashter was an immigrant to Canada,  she understood the isolation and lack of  opportunity that many immigrant women face  when they come to Canada.  It was these women who she wanted to make contact with,  to talk with and to break down the isolation. It was always on her mind - how can  I reach people? What can I say to them?  She was deeply cpncerned about and aware  of the low status that women have in this  society, and in her own East Indian community. In an interview with the Women's Research Centre she said: "Right from the  beginning, if you have a son you celebrate  the birth; but if you have a daughter no  one will even contact you."  She saw, and she knew from her own experience, how hard women have to work all  Nashter Dhahan  their lives, always expected to cook and  clean and bring up the children, expected  only to serve their husbands to to never  think of themselves, owning nothing and  never having an independent life of their  own. She explained the problem like this:  "It's your responsibility to make your  husband happy, no matter what he does, you  should listen to him all the time, you  shouldn't do what you want to do ... if  you can't make your husband happy, you're  nothing."  She was the treasurer of the Indian Manila  Association (Indian Women's Association).  With that group she wrote and translated  articles about the situation of women,  trying to reach as many women as possible.  She gave workshops at a number of different places, trying to make other people  aware of the particular problems facing  immigrant women.  She was particularly concerned about the  violence that is done to women. "If a  wife gets beaten up you're not supposed  to tell anybody. So you just get beaten  up, you don't complain.  If your relatives  or somebody finds out it's a big shame  (for the woman).  I mean, she gets beaten  up if she deserves it, right? She doesn't  get beaten up because her husband got mad."  This was the attitude towards women that  Nashter was so concerned about and worked  so hard to change. She wanted to assist  women who were being beaten, and to make  sure there were places for them to go to  get away from violent situations, places  where they could speak their own language  and where there would be people who understood their culture.  At the time of her death, Nashter was  working as a Homemaker, doing household  work and providing support to old and handicapped people. Again, she was incredibly patient and tireless, listening to  people for hours and providing them with  what they needed.  As a Homemaker, Nashter was not protected  by basic labour laws and she was working  with the Labour Advocacy and Research  Association to secure these rights for  Homemakers and domestic workers, many of  whom are immigrant women who work long  hours for very low wages in private homes  throughout Vancouver.  Nashter was an inspiration to many of the  people who knew her. She was strong and  determined and, despite the many problems  she faced in her own life, she kept right  on going.  She was deeply committed to the work she  was doing, to fighting exploitation and  violence against women. She fought for  women's rights and for women to gain a  sense of their own strength. The way she  was killed is an example of exactly the  things she was fighting against.  Two years ago Nashter participated in the  march on March 8, International Women's  Day. She walked right at the front of  the march, carrying the banner which read,  "Happy International Women's Day". She  said, "It's not for myself, it's for  other women that I'm fighting for, too."  She will long be remembered, and what  she worked and fought for, we must work  and fight for, too. inquilab Zindabad!   'Ģ Kinesis March 80  LOCAL NEWS  March 8: Why it's the day we celebrate our determination  March 8th is celebrated as a public holiday in socialist countries, with varying  degrees of fervour. Here in Canada, the  day has re-emerged with the women's  movement.  March 8, 1908 women garment workers in  New York's Lower East Side marched in  the. streets to demand an end to sweatshop conditions.  Two years later Clara Zetkin proposed  that March 8th be set aside as International Women's Day in celebration of  the march by those garment workers. The  proposal was brought forward in Copenhagen, at the Second International Conference of Socialist Women, attended by  about 100 women from 17 countries.  A women's day had been organized for the  first time in the U.S. on February 27th,  1909. On this day, women held meetings  across the country. For example, 3,000  women met in New York city under the  yellow flag of the U.S. feminists. They  passed resolutions protesting the non-  recognition of women's right to vote.  In Europe, too, the issue of the day was  women's suffrage.  The theme of the Sec-  §;  ond International Conference of Socialist ^  Women was, 'the vote for women will unite |jj  our strength in the struggle for socialism. '  International Women's Day was to be a day  of world-wide solidarity and action among  women. In 1911, March 8 was celebrated  for the first time in Austria, Denmark,  Germany and Switzerland.  Quickly, it  became apparent that the right to vote  wasn't the only issue. Alexandra  Kollontai (1872-1952), a Bolshevik feminist and member of the Party's Central  Committee, recounted how "Germany. . .  and Austria were one seething, trembling  sea of women.  Meetings were organized everywhere. Halls  Coalition for a Non-Nuclear World plans action  game but it is typically only the women  who have the insightful vision to fear  for the survival of the planet and our  our human survival.  We anticipate this day of protest to  receive the broadest-based representation  as possible, which is our exact hope. We  would like to see everyone imaginable  there, behind their group's banner and  with their specific picket signs, proclaiming concern from every segment of  society.  By Jill Bend  The Coalition for a Non-Nuclear World  was formed here in Vancouver to coordinate plans between as many of the  specifically anti-nuclear groups as possible for involvement on April 26, the  internationally chosen day of Anti-  Nuclear Protest.  The Vancouver Coalition then agreed on a  theme of SURVIVAL for April 26, with a .  practical emphasis on stopping uranium  mining in B.C. The coalition exists  solely for the purpose of organizing  this day of protest and intends to cre'-  ate the largest demonstration this city  has seen (short of perhaps the October  14 labour rally!)  It is crucial to all of us within the coalition to take the step of publicly  speaking against the nuclear industry  and to encourage the rest of the population to do so — on a massive scale.  The  organizing body represents a diverse  cross-section of people and it is expected  that the representation in the march will  be even more diverse.  As part of our outreach work we have contacted many groups — environmental, feminist, labour, peace, church, native  Indian, health care and community groups  — to voice their particular concern on  the nuclear question.  One of the groups active in the coalition  is the Women Against Nukes group, and it  is through our intense concern for all  women to have the right to a healthy future for ourselves and our children that  we wish to take an equally strong stand.  From our political position, we find it no  surprise that we are uniting as women  against the ultimate atrocity of the  patriarchal machine — the nuclear creation.  No one comes out ahead in the nuclear  This is not solely a feminist issue, but  every woman in the world stands to lose  everything from the nuclear threat. More  than any other issue has, it touches the  lives of every one of us.  The Native women are teaching us that the  genocide against natives is the same genocide against women, and the first victims of the nuclear world are the women  and the natives - especially the native  women.  The nuclear madness must stop before we  create a generation of children physically damaged from exposure to the radiation  leakage from uranium tailings, nuclear  plant accidents and fuel waste disposal.  We must end this nuclear threat before it  becomes the ultimate violent act. We call  on women worldwide to resist, with our  rage, our hearts and our actions, this  final threat to our survival.  We are hoping to see the entire Vancouver  women's community very visible at the  largest anti-nuclear rally here ... to  see our outrage at this, in a sense, our  "herstoric prophecy come true", made clear  to the world.  And we encourage women throughout B.C.  to be catalysts for a similar happening  in your own communities. Or to join us  here for the Vancouver march and rally,  l/omen's power is the force of life'.*  were packed so full that they had to ask  workers to give up their places to the  women. This was certainly the first  show of militancy by the working women.  Men stayed at home with the children  for a change, and their wives, the captive housewives, went to meetings." In  Austria alone, 30,000 women and men  marched and demonstrated in the streets.  In 1913, women in Czarist Russia celebrated international Women's Day. Even  though it was forbidden to hold meetings  women of the Petrograd Bolshevik Party  organized a public forum, which was well-  attended. At the end of the meeting,  the police arrested the main speakers.  March 8, 1917, heralded the beginning of  the revolution when women textile workers  poured into the streets demanding bread.  By the end of the day there were 90,000  women and men demonstrating.  March 8 has continued to be a significant  day for women. In 1970, it was celebrated in Uruguay by an all-women jailbreak  organized by the Tupamaros. On March 8,  1977, over 8,000 Spanish factory workers  demonstrated for equal pay, abortion,  and contraception.  7,000 people marched  in Belgium. Women in Liverpool, England,  occupied their factory, with support from  other workers.  March 8:    MABCH AND RALLY  Gather at 11:30 at the north foot of  Granville Bridge to march down Granville  to Georgia. At Georgia, we turn left and  march to the court house, where there  will be a rally, complete with a raft of  singers and speakers.  March 8:    WOMEN'S CELEBRATION  Teamster's Hall, at 490 East Broadway,  8:00 p.m.  March 9:    CONCERT VARIETY BENEFIT SHOW  At Robson.Media Centre, 8:00 p.m..  To live in freedom:  March conference  To live in freedom. That's the title of  a conference on Southern Africa refugees  to be held on Saturday and Sunday, March  22 and 23, 1980 at Langara Campus, 100  West 49th Avenue, Vancouver. The conference will provide a unique opportunity  for people from all parts of B.C. with a  variety of interests, to come together  to discuss the current refugee situation  in Southern Africa.  According to the United Nations High  Commissioner for Refugees, there are more  than a quarter million refugees in Southern Africa. These are women, children  and men who have fled from war, racial  persecution, political oppression and conflict.  A firsthand account of life in the camps  will be given by two Zimbabwean women who  jave been working in a daycare centre in a  refugee camp in Zambia.  They will be  specially brought to Vancouver to speak at  the conference.  Education for refugee children is an enormous task. To explain how the libera^  tion movements and friendly governments  are managing to provide education for  some of the thousands of teenagers who  were forced to flee South Africa after the  1976 demonstrations and massacres in Sow-  eto, a representative from the African  National Congress (S.A. ) who is connected  with the Freedom School for refugees in  Morogoro, Tanzania, will be present at  the conference. Several recently-returned  CUS0 volunteers will also be available to  share some of their experiences.* Kinesis March 80  LABOUR  Workers who feed B.C. with stooped labour demand protection  By Joey Thompson  An estimated 11,000 farmworkers, many  of them immigrant women, are demanding  that the provincial government provide  them the protection of labour legislation  covering hours of work, payment of wages  child labour and workers' compensation.  In a comprehensive report presented in  late February to provincial labour official Colin Kay, the Farmworkers Organizing Committee said farmworkers are denied  basic working conditions which most of us  take for granted. Their conditions are  reminiscent of the days when children and  adults spent tedious days in sweat jobs.  For example, farmworkers are not guaranteed any days off — weekend or holiday.  They are denied coffee breaks, clean  drinking water and washroom facilities,  lunch hours, overtime pay or even an minimum eight-hour day.  Their children are  employed in slave labour conditions.  The Farm Workers Organizing Committee says  farmwork is the lowest paid and probably  the most unhealthy occupation in the province.  The poverty and oppression of its  workers is perpetuated by a government  which to date has refused to provide them  with the minimum employment protection  available under minimum wage laws, hours  of work legislation and safety insurance  protection.  "There can be no excuses.  The 11,000 farmworkers of B.C. demand the same legislation  protection that other workers have. The  workers who feed this province with stoop  labour and sweat will no longer accept the  status of second-class citizens," said  committee spokesperson, Mahil Harindar.  Farmworkers, many of whom earn less than  $2 an hour, presented a brief and a series  of recommendations to provincial labour  ministry officials.  In it, they describe  some of the problems they encounter.  "Low wage rates are only the beginning of  a farmworker's problems. Too often farmworkers are not even paid the inadequate  wages that they have been promised and  have earned."  Frequently farmers don't use a standardized recording system to keep track of  hours worked and the rate of pay for a  specific job function.  A punch card system is used by some farmers. With this system, the farmworker is  given a card for each day's work; (she)  renders the card to the farmer or foreman  for each flat of berries picked or period  of time worked; the card is punched and  returned to the worker.  At the end of the day, or week, or month,  the card is submitted by the farmworkers  for payment. Other farmers have an honour  system, or demand that farmworkers themselves keep count of their hours.  The abuses that arise from these methods  are obvious. There is no self-verifying  record system which avoids tampering with  the cards or records.  There is no centralization of accounting.  The farmer is not  required to provide a copy of the records  for the worker. All too often cards are  lost or destroyed and the farmer or contractor avoids payment by simply denying  that the work was performed.  There have been a score of court actions  for non-payment of wages, actions that  have arisen because of the inadequate and  abused system of record keeping. Farmworkers have been cheated out of pay for  many hours of hard work, and they have no  basis for a remedy because they can't  verify documentation. This kind of abuse  M. Abrahamson/LNS  must be stopped. The report makes the  following major demands:  (1) Farmworkers are entitled to a wage  which is at least the provincial minimum  wage. We should be covered by the Minimum Wage Act's requirement that overtime pay at 1| times the regular rate of  pay, be paid after eight hours of work in  any one day and after 40 hours of work in  one week. In addition, where current  legislation calls for double time for most  workers. Farmworkers should be included  in such provisions.  (2) Farmworkers should be covered by holi  day and vacation pay provisions in the  Annual and General Holidays Act of B.C.  (3) The law should require that farmworkers be paid regular-wage rates for work  delays and time spent travelling to and  from the fields.  (4) To prevent employers from evading the  purpose of the Minimum Wage Act, a  schedule of maximum fees that can be charged for room and board and transportation  should be enacted.  (5) All farmworkers should be brought under the protection of the Payment of Wages  Act.  (6) "All government subsidies to farmers  should be made conditional upon the farmer meeting all labour standards requirements and paying all wages legally due.  (7) The normal work day for farmworkers  should be eight hours long.' A minimum  lunch break of one-half hour must be provided. Statutory coffee breaks must also  be provided. Statutory maximums of ten  hours of work per day and 60 hours of  work per week should be established. All  farmerworkers should be allowed one day  off per week.  (8) ' We recommend that farmers and contractors be jointly responsible for other  breaches of labour standards, safety, or  health laws that occur on a farm where a  contractor is utilizing a crew.  (9) That children who have not attained  the age of twelve years not be allowed to  work in the fields as farm workers.  (10) That Workers' Compensation coverage  be made mandatory for all farmworkers on  the same basis as all other workers.  (11) That farmworkers be supplied at all  times with clean, wholesome drinking water  and individual cups or a drinking fountain.  Both toilet and handwashing facilities must  be located on each acre of land being  worked. The toilets should be kept sanitary, provide privacy, and contain toilet  paper. Handwashing facilities must include  clean water and soap.  The list of recommendations goes on to include unemployment insurance coverage,  protection for domestic workers, protection  from unjust termination of employment,  eight-hour notice of termination, decent  cooking facilities and protective clothing.  Nurses vote overwhelmingly for strike action  In a strong show of solidarity, 98$ of  over all 11,000 nurses voted to take  strike action to back up demands for an  18%  pay increase, plus inflation catchup.  Association spokesperson said a strike  will be called only if the Health Labour  Relations Association (HRLA) refuses to  resume negotiations.  The strike mandate gives the Registered  Nurses Association of B.C. (RNABC) a  stronger bargaining position. A better  contract offer from HLRA is expected  early in March.  Also strengthening the nurses position  is the (tentative) contract between  HRLA and the Hospital Employees Union  (HEU), whose members include practical  nurses.  The contract, which will almost certainly be ratified, narrows the gap between  the pay of practical nurses and RN's.  Under the new contract, beginning practical nurses will receive $1441 monthly  compared to $1350 for beginning RN's by  RNABC's expired contract. An offer by  HRLA which would have given the RN's a  2%  differential over practical nurses  was rejected. RNABC is demanding a 25$  differential.  BC nurses rejected two offers before  talks broke down in late January.  This 'time the nurses are being tough.  Their slogan "1980, A Fair Deal For  Nurses" indicates that other years  brought deals that were far from fair.  Under the terms of the last contract,  nurses received 6%  increases in 1978 and  1979.  Inflation rates of approximately  9%  caused them to actually lose 3%  in  buying power per year. To partly redress  those losses, they want an inflation  catchup increase in addition to an 18%  pay increase — giving a beginning  general duty nurse a starting salary of  $1711. monthly, up 30%  over the present  rate of pay.  Their willingness to strike indicates  that BC nurses have rejected the Florence Nightingale stereotype, which  inaccurately depicted a nurse as the  selfless angel, labouring only for the  love of suffering humanity. As one  nurse put it, hospitals may be "deserted  by nurses who finally realize that altruism doesn't pay the rent.". HUMAN RIGHTS  Joan Wallace lays complaint with B. C. Human Rights Branch  Women's groups challenge UBC Engineers' rampant sexism  A. complaint of sex discrimination by the  University of B.C.'s engineering department has been laid with the B.C. Human  Rights Branch by a group representing  five different women's organizations.  Named in the complaint are Dr. Douglas  Kenny, UBC president, Dr. Martin Wede-  pohl, dean of the faculty of applied  science, and Russ Kinghorn, president of  the Engineering Undergraduate Society.  The complaint alleges that the continuing pornographic and sexist publications and activities of the Engineering  Undergraduate Society discourages women  from entering the engineering department  of the Faculty of Applied Science and  create a discriminatory climate within  the university.  The complaint is based on Sedtion 3 of  the Human Rights Code of B.C. which prohibits discrimination in any service (in  this case education) which is customarily  available to the public.  Spokesperson for the women's groups,  which include the Business and Professional Women's Club, the Council of  Women, the Vancouver Status of Women,  the B.C. Federation of Women and the  Canadian Advisory Council on the Status  of Women, is Joan Wallace, an alumni  member of the UBC Senate.  She claims that the activities of the  engineering students, which have gone  unchecked by the university administration, have had the effect of discriminating against women who might otherwise  have chosen engineering as a career.  Enrolment of women in all other male-  dominated faculties at UBC has risen  dramatically in the past nine years, but  the percentage of women undergraduates  in engineering has increased from one per  — publication of a regular newsletter  which contains violent anti-women fantasies and pornography  — violent demonstrations, such as the  mob activities associated with engineering week, a time during which women  students' offices have been broken into  and property destroyed  — intimidation, libel, and harassment  in the EUS newsletter of women who have  spoken out against engineering students'  activities.  "It would seem that racism is out, but sexism is  perfectly acceptable."  cent in the 1970/71 academic year to only  five per cent in 1978/79, Wallace said.  During the same period, she said that  women undergraduates in forestry increased from two to seventeen per cent,  architecture from eight to twenty-three  per cent, commerce from six to twenty-  five per cent, law from six to thirty  per cent, and medicine from nineteen to  thirty-one per cent. Women made up forty  seven per cent of total undergraduates  last year.  Wallace said that discriminatory activities of the engineering students include:  Wallace believes that the major blame for  the situation has to be placed on the  university administration and faculty  which have failed to speak out against  students' excesses, despite regular representations from women's organizations  over many years.  "This is in contrast to an incident in  the early 70's when the engineering  students were strongly condemned by the  whole campus for anti-Semitic views  expressed in their newspaper," she said.  "It would seem that at UBC racism is  out, but sexism is perfectly acceptable."  Violence on the Muckamuck line,picketers arrested  By Morgan McGuigan  Three picketers at the Muckamuck restaurant were arrested recently in yet another  example of the bias the justice system  holds against striking unions.  On Saturday, February 16, two picketers  were assaulted by the restaurant manager  Sussy Selbst. Pat Barter got a black  eye and Helen Potrebenko had her glasses  frames wrecked. When they attempted to  lay assault charges on Sunday, they were  told by the Justice of the Peace to return the following day. Ee said he  didn't have the police reports yet. He  also said that the JP could accept no  charges in regard to the Muckamuck because  the strike had gone on too long.  On Monday, they went to the J.P. after ^  work. They were informed that they were ^  under arrest. And then they were taken 15  to Jail. Don Fodor, who was on the |  line when it all happened, was arrested £  on the picket line. All three were •$>  charged with assault. <§  The three were released the same evening,  but only on condition that they would not  picket the Muckamuck. Their lawyer argued that this was an unreasonable decision and that the accused had had no  opportunity for a hearing. The judge  nevertheless upheld the picketing ban on  the two women, while allowing Fodor to  return to the picket line.  The union says: "The courts have consistently colluded with management in this  strike. This is a legal strike, yet they  have taken away two people's right to  picket. The courts and the police have  never been interested in protecting picketers from assault and harassment; they  have however, responded very quickly when  there are any charges, no matter how  petty and contrived, against union members ."  Other news about the strike — a.new  attempt at decertification by the Muckamuck scabs was received by Don Munro,  chairperson of the Labour Relations  Board. He can decide to refuse the application, to decertify the union, or to  order a hearing by the Board. He said  his decision should be reached in two to  five wprking days.  SORWUC filed an unfair labour practice  charge last October, charging management  with refusal to negotiate. There is as  yet no reply from the Board.  SORWUC recently declined to appear on  the Vancouver Show, CKVU, unless they  would appear with someone who was legally  authorized to speak for the restaurant's  owners. The union did not want to perpetuate the pitting of native workers  against native workers when the real conflict is between management and workers.*  We're a family, too.  "We Are a Family Too" is the title given  a project starting now in East Vancouver.  Its aim is to provide for the speciaj.  needs of the single parent family by organizing child care and social and recreational groups.  The three people hired by the project  have rented desk space at Britannia Community Centre. This gives them access to  booking rooms, for groups of single parents to use.  The project wants to pull single parents  in from the community so they can support  each other. Self-help groups will be  organized to discuss such things as legal  and financial matters, parenting, home  repairs, assertiveness and consciousness  raising. Dinners, dances, picnics, soft-  ball and other play groups will emerge  from the interaction of the people. A  lesbian drop-in will be organized when  interest is shown.  Also, there will be a Women's Celebration  on May 11, from 10-5 at Britannia (Bldg.  "L"). A child minding, centre has been  booked, but not staffed, as yet.  If you are interested in participating in  single parent activities or the women's  celebration, contact The Single Parents  Group, Britannia Community Centre, 1661  Napier St, Vancouver. Call 253 4391, local 57..  Soliciting conviction reversed  A prostitute who approaches several  different men is not guilty of pressing  or persistent conduct. For now.  A provincial court soliciting conviction,  made on the basis of the woman having  approached several men, was overturned  in county court recently by Judge A.W.  Macdonell. Judge Macdonell.cited an  Alberta judgement which read, "The  Supreme Court of Canada has made it clear  that pressure or persistence must be  involved ... in each individual case."  Senior Crown Counsel Bruce Donald said  the Crown will seek adjournment of similar cases.  An appeal on this case is pending. If  the decision is reversed, police will  resume their arrest of prostitutes who  approach several men.*  Update, update, update  The Labour Relations Board has set a  hearing date for the application of a decertification at the Muckamuck Restaurant  for March 26, 27 and 28 at the Labour  Relations Board, 1275 W. 6th Ave. Kinesis March 80  DAYCARE  VCC is building a new campus at China Creek with no daycare  By Cole Dudley  Daycare never stopped being an issue for  the women's movement. Oh yes, some of  us shelved it away once we had a few decent day care centres. Or dismissed it  once our children had outgrown its need.  Or disregarded it as not quite as important an issue. So without our support,  the problem has been growing even as our  children have.  In Vancouver, most day care centres are  full to overflowing as are the waiting  lists for them. Due to this situation,  many parents are forced to turn to poorer  alternative care. This is tough on the  kids and parents alike. Consequently,  parents sometimes are forced to give up  school or waged work altogether.  Considering this state of affairs, we do  not need additional cut-backs, but we are  getting them. The King Edward campus of  the Vancouver Community College is moving  to a soon-to-be built complex at China  Creek. Plans for this brand new campus  are minus any day care facilities.  The reason for all this? We've been told  that it's a problem of "policy". And  who's policy? The Ministry of Education's  of course. They maintain that day care  is not a service of education and-that  therefore money cannot be expended for  .the construction of a facility on campus.  The Ministry of Human Resources could perhaps provide funds, but the school cannot  accept funding from more than one governmental source. I.fore bureaucratic cow  dung]  The King Edward day care people have not  received the official "No" yet, but they  feel there is no time to lose. Already  (together with the teachers' union) they  have set up a committee to look into the  matter and are circulating petitions for  support.  An urgent need is felt not only for just  day care but better day care at the new  campus. The workers want an added service of a drop-in day care. This is to-  provide for parents requiring only an  hour or two of care, so as to attend one  class or a counselling session.  Concern is also felt about the existing  day care building at King Edward . The  workers feel it should not be discontinued as it supplies a need to the surrounding community. There would be a good enrollment even after the students' children  have left.  VCC supports upgrading and retraining at  their campus: single parents (mainly  women), who find themselves back in the  work force without a skill, need these  courses. To keep daycare out of the college is discriminating against women,  forcing them back into the home and on  welfare.  It's time for the Ministry of Education  to re-evaluate its policy and to consider  daycare part of the educational institute  and not something separate from it.  It is also time for all of us to re  evaluate our own policies and to consider  that day care is every woman's problem.  We have to demand our right to good convenient care for our children.  The King Edward day care issue is just the  tip of the iceberg. It can be used to  rekindle the dying flame of the day care  fight. We really did not win much before.  Now we must struggle to keep what we've  got and extract all that we deserve.  The plans for the complex are already  drawn up, so we must start immediately  to  push for day care at the new campus. "Soon"  will be too late. Letters of support are  needed now  so we can inform the government of our needs and our rights. We must  have a strong show of support or we will  not be listened to. Please address your  letters to:  Save King Edward Campus Daycare  c/o Vancouver Status of Women  1090 W. 7th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C.      V6H 1B3 'Ģ  Why VSW supports wards and why the city wants to bury them  By Debra Lewis  The ongoing saga of the fight for a ward  system in the City of Vancouver continues. If the apparent unwillingness  of City Council to act on the will of  citizens is any indication, it looks as  if we're in for a long haul.  Vancouver and Burnaby remain the only  two major municipalities in Canada that  elect city councillors through at-  large elections. Those of you who voted  in Vancouver in 1978 will remember the  ridiculously complicated ballot system  requiring the marking of 10 alderpersons  from a list of some 50 or so candidates.  Similar ballots were required for the  election of 9 school board and 7 park  board members.  Although some individuals and groups  (notably the Committee of Progressive  Electors since its formation in 1968)  had endorsed and promoted the idea of  electing Council by wards or areas in  previous years, the campaign for the  adoption of a ward system began in  earnest during and immediately after  the 1976 civic elections. A previous  plebicite (in 1974) had failed to win a  majority of the electorate for wards,  due in large part to its confusing  wording leading to a large number of  spoiled ballots.  In January of 1977, COPE alderperson  Harry Rankin and independent Darlene  Marzari and Michael Harcourt met with  representatives of community groups and  individuals concerned with the issue to  plan the next step. The result was the  formation of the Area Representation  Electors' Alliance (AREA), whose goal  was the implementation of a full ward  system in the city.  After considerable organizing by ward  system supporters, (and a great deal of  hedging on the part of City Council as  a whole), Council finally passed a  motion authorizing a plebiscite on the  issue for the 1978 civic elections. In  September of that year, Vancouver Status  of Women endorsed the concept of area or  ward representation. It has become increasingly clear that women can most  readily become involved in the political  process at the community level. Women  are less likely to have access to the  kind of money required for more expensive city-wide campaigns. Further, our  relationship to childrearing gives us a  particular relationship to the community  in our day to day lives. Add these factors to the more general arguments in  favour of the ward system, and it is  clear that it is an important issue for  women.  During the pre-election period, Mayor  Jack Volrich (an opponent of the ward  system) stated at a number of all-  candidate meetings that he would recommend implementation of a ward system  should the plebicite indicate that a  majority of Vancouver voters were in  favour.  We all, of course, have experience with  the soon-forgotten promises of many  politicians, and this was no exception.  The plebiscite did succeed in gaining a  majority for the ward system (51.1%)  Mayor Volrich, however, now backtracked  and stated that although it was true  that the majority had favoured a ward  system, that majority was not large  enough. City Council (now dominated  by members and affiliates of the Nonpartisan Association (NPA), a civic  group whose sole policies appear to be  opposition to the ward system and  cutting funds to community groups) now  began a series of stalling tactics  apparently designed to defuse the issue  and delay any action.  One part of the delay process was the  setting up, early last year, of a Governmental Review Commission delegated to  investigate a number of areas of municipal government in Vancouver. This mandate included making recommendations on  the ward system versus an at-large system  of elections. Five members were appointed  to the Commission, among them the Chairman L.S. Eckhardt. Eckhardt had previously been appointed by the provincial  government to study provincial riding  boundaries. His recommendations (quickly  adopted by the province) have been accused  of gross gerrymandering (that is, manipu-^ Kinesis March SO  CITY POLITICS  lation of boundaries to favour the party  in power). Recent reports on the boundary between Human Resource Minister  Grace McCarthy's riding of Vancouver  Little Mountain and the Point Grey riding  have increased skepticism at the "objectivity" of this earlier work of Eckhardt.  The Commission heard a total of 139 oral  and written submissions, of which 43 were  made on behalf of organizations in the  city.  VSW prepared a brief and presented it at  a hearing of the Commission. Once again,  we reiterated our support for the  general principles of election by wards  or areas. -Further, we detailed the particular effects of the method of civic  elections on women.  The reaction of the Commission to the delegations was less than admirable. Of the  briefs which discussed the ward system,  124 supported adoption of a full ward  system, 20 supported retention of the at-  large system, and 7 supported adoption of  a partial or mixed ward system. The  Commission dismissed most of the evidence  presented as "highly emotional, but not  supported by facts" (without giving, it  should be noted, reasons for this assessment). Further, they criticized the  "demeanor" of some delegations, further  disparaging the many individuals and groups  who put much time and effort into their  submissions. That such contempt comes  from a public body is shocking.  The recommendations of the report are not  only shocking, but present a totally inadequate "solution" to the problem. The  Commission recommeded a five ward system,  with 2 alderpersons elected from each  ward by each ward, and 1 elected from each  ward by the city as a whole. (If it sounds  confusing, it is). The boundaries adopted  were those of the present provincial  ridings, despite the wealth of criticism  they have engendered.  Particularly interesting is the response  of the Commission to a report by George  Gray of the Department of Sociology and  Anthropology at UBC. Dr. Gray (who is  also head of the University's Urban Studies committee) was contracted by the Commission to recommend possible ward boundaries. His report was given but a few  lines by the Commission, who wrote it off  by. saying that there was too much disparity in ward size. An examination of the  report, however, leads to quite a different conclusion.  Gray's report recommends the division of  the city into twelve wards. His conclusion is based on the analysis of the  city's population on a number of criteria,  including economic background, family  size, type of dwellings, age of families,  ethnicity, etc.  His goal was to determine wards that were  as uniform as possible on these criteria,  while maintaining a workable number of  them. He also considered the presence of  high schools, community centres and libraries as facilities that define a focus  for each community.  VS W is planning a public  meeting to share information  on the 12 ward proposal  Solid line: proposed wards  Shaded: S provincial ridings proposed wards by 1  Gray's results produced wards that were no  more disparate in size than those larger  ones eventually recommended by the Commi-.  ssion. Gray noted at a recent meeting of  community groups that the Commission's  boundaries were totally arbitrary ones,  respecting neither the social mix of the  city, nor historic community boundaries.  Despite the fact that Gray's results produced a rational basis for ward representation, his position was automatically rejected by the Commission in favour of a  system which has no reasonable basis, is  confusing and cumbersome, and which does  not provide an answer to the issues raised  by ward system supporters.  City Council, since th^ release of the  Eckhardt Commission report, has refused to  respond to the obvious support for ward  elections. On February 12, the issues  involved in municipal elections came before  City Council. Council rejected a motion  calling for action on a full ward system  by a 3 to 8 vote. Only Alderpersons  Rankin, Marzari and Harcourt voted in favour, with Mayor Volrich and Alderpersons  George Puil, Warnett Kennedy, Marguerite  Ford, Bernice Gerard, Doug Little, Helen  Boyce and Don Bellamy opposed.  Although a change in the civic electoral  system can only take place through an  amendment by the provincial government of  the city charter, Victoria is unlikely to  act unless a recommendation is forthcoming from Council.  Even the daily press recognizes the absurdity of Council's position. In an editorial entitled "The outrageous council decision", the Vancouver Province stated:  "The partisan rejection of a ward system by  the Non-Partisan Association majority  Vancouver City Council was predictable.  The majority adopted the relatively pilfering recommendations of the Eckhardt  governmental review commission that is  liked. And it discarded the fundamental  recommendation, that Vancouver should have  a ward system ..."  The irony and outrageousness of Tuesday's  action — particularly because the Commission was appointed by the mayor and council majority in response to the 1978 plebiscite favouring a ward system — has boiled  the blood of many people, including some  who say they voted against the wards.  Besides the theoretical arguments over the  ward issue, there is a cold self-interest  involved. Some of the present majority  could lose their seats in a ward system,  depending on its structure.  VSW is planning a public meeting on the  ward system for late April. We  hope  to give women and other concerned  members of the community the opportunity to get more information on the  12 ward proposal, and hear how the  issue has been effectively buried at  City Hall. Further details on the  meeting will be in next month's Kinesis.«  Aid. Gerard hysterical over VSW, abortion and radical gays  It appears that VSW is on Alderwoman Bernice Gerard's "hit list".  Last fall VSW decided to apply to City  Council for funding of one advocacy worker plus expenses through the city's  community grant programme. We were motivated primarily by the difficulty we face  in providing one-to-one service in this  area since the elimination of the Ombud-  service in the spring of 1978 (due to  lack of funds). The city Social Planning  Department was sufficiently impressed by  our request to recommend that Council  grant us one-half of our request, $9,920.  For most groups, such recommendation by  Social Planning virtually guarantees the  granting of funds. Not necessarily so  for VSW. On Thursday, February 21, our  request went before the Community Services Committee of Council.  The meeting had been relatively predictable until VSW's grant was raised. At  that time, however, Alderwoman Gerard  indicated her intention to vote against  the grant, and launched into a near-  hysterical condemnation of VSW based on  inaccurate information and a total lack  of understanding of the organization.  Ivfost frustrating was the fact that VSW  representatives were not allowed to speak  at the meeting to correct the information  given.  Gerard claimed that VSW uses public  funds for so-called "pro-abortion" campaigns (we don't), that we had put a  motion before the elementary school teachers association to force school boards  to hire "gay activist" teachers (we  didn't) and that VSW is a "small organization (we aren't, especially when compared to many other organizations receiving grants).  Although the grant recommendation eventually passed the committee (Aider-  persons Harry Rankin, Darlene Marzari  and Don Bellamy in favour, Bernice  Gerard and Doug Little opposed), there  is a very real chance that it will fail  at the Council level. Grant applications  require at least 8 members of Council to  be in favour in order to pass. It will  be coming before Council on Tuesday,  March 4.  We will still not be able to speak to  our application at this meeting. Council  will only hear such representation  after a recommendation has been defeated  and through an appeal process. However,  we are making efforts to ensure that our  application is given a fair hearing. If  we are turned down on the 4th, we will be  launching an appeal. We will keep you  posted as to our progress.*  CCCA planning  conference  The Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion are planning an organizing day  on March 22 at the Thunderbird Community Centre, 2311 Cassiar Street, Vancouver, from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.  All women's groups and individuals interested in organizing or with organizing experience, please come. CCCA will  plan actions around hospital board elections, repeal of abortion laws and  a province-wide action around the issue  of abortion and B.C.'s health minister.* Kinesis March SO  ACROSS CANADA  Quebecoise feminists could  explain struggle for self-  determination    ByDanyeleLeroux  Women from various groups supporting the  right to self-determination for Quebec  have come together to bring three Que-  becois feminists to Vancouver before the  referendum, to speak on women's issues  in Quebec, their relation to the national  struggle, the relationship of the P.O. to  the struggle for national rights, the  role of the referendum, and other related  concerns.  This year, the upcoming referendum in Quebec has brought heightened attacks on the  people of Quebec by the Federal government, the Supreme Court (the denial of  language rights), corporations pulling  out.of Quebec, the major political parties and the media.  Meanwhile, women and working people in  Quebec have been fighting for abortion  rights, childcare, the right to unionize,  and have won the inclusion of sexual orientation into the Human Rights Code.  The last round of Common Front negotiations featured equalizing women's wages  as a central issue and women unionists  have been in the forefront of recent activities of the labour movement (Bell  Canada, teachers, hospital workers to  name a few).  These issues are ones which women in  English Canada often share with women in  Quebec. But to join together a real understanding of the specific oppression of  Quebecois women and concrete support for  their struggles is necessary.  A single honest explanation of Quebec's  history by women involved with the women's  movement in Quebec would provide a real  understanding of the fight faced by a  Francophone minority in English Canada.  And it would provide an understanding of  the growth of Quebec as a strong nation -  a growth we are experiencing now and have  experienced in past centuries. The craving for independence will eventually lead  to Quebec's growth as a socialist country,  strong in roots and culture.  It is difficult to perceive that a positive  or negative response to the referendum  will bring Quebec to its goal. But eventually, by gaining confidence in ourselves,  by organizing all our economic, political  and social, and cutural tools and by being  supported by massive voices, we will achieve our rights as a people.  Quebec has political and cultural needs  that are being denied. But above all it  has in its own soil primary resources,  from which massive profits are extracted,  not to better the living standards of the  Quebecois, to free people from a state of  alienation, but to increase the level of  dependency and domination by American  and English Canadian corporations.  A conference with three women from Quebec  will enable Anglophone feminists in B.C.  to acquire a better comprehension vis-avis the exploitation and oppression of  women in Quebec.  It will permit the  recognition of each others' identities,  and allow B.C. women to defend a struggle  against national oppression which is  taking place not in the Third World but  within our own national boundaries. National chauvinism should not by ignorance  be able to spread Into the women's  movement in B.C. or into the unions.  I am proposing that we hold a workshop  for women on the national and women's  movement in Quebec and that we work with  the trade union movement to organize an  open public meeting on Quebec's national  rights and women's struggles.  The groundwork of locating three possible  speakers was done by myself during my  trip to Montreal in December. These three  women would be willing to come:  Andree Cote: Executive of Coordination  National pour l'avortement libre et  gratuit  Diane Lamoureux: Member of the Univer-  sity Union, Ph.D., writing a book on  women in Quebec from feminist perspective. Active with lesbian groups.  Helene David: Responsable du comite'  de condition feminine de la C.S.N,  (trade union coordinating body)  The next planning meeting takes place  March 13 at 7:30 p.m., 2930 Fir Street.  All out strike  to crack Bell  ,cTiPt  re /g»  Telephone operators in Ontario and  Quebec began an unlimited strike against  Bell Canada January 21. The walkout  followed weeks of partial shut-downs,  short strikes, work-to-rule and "super-  service" tactics by the 7,400 operators  attempting to get a first contract.  Workers (95$ women) are demanding that  Bell grant then the retroactive pay proposed by the Tremblay conciliation report  — 15.9/5 retroactive to November 1978;  12.2%  from November 1979 and another 9%  by November 1980.  Yforking conditions are another sore point.  The jobs are becoming highly automated,  and operators are closely watched by  bosses. If they want to use the washrooms, they must put a green card in the  air, and get permission. Supervisors  keep track of who takes "shorts", and  how many.  Operators are allowed little sick time.  After four to five years operators are  allowed four sick days. When they are  sick, management calls around three to  see if the worker is coming in the next  day.  According to one operator on the picket  line, the workers are being punished because they've got a new union, the Commun-  nications V/orkers of Canada (CWC). It  was certified in 1979.  Strike pay didn't start until February,  as the CWC does not have a big strike  fund. Even now the pay will amount to  $20 a week for food, $5 extra for a spouse,  and $2.50 for each child.  90.3$ of the members voted against Bell's  latest offer. A victory in the strike  can set the stage for organizing Bell's  15,000 clerical and sales workers, who  are members of the Canadian Telephone Employees Association, an out-and-out company operation. Toronto Clarion  Quebec launches campaign to  combat media sexism  In an unprecedented move Quebec's government appointed Council on the Status of  Women has launched a major campaign  against sexism in advertising. As part of  their anti-sexist blitz the Council has  commissioned a series of four commercials  that will be aired on French language  television from December to mid-June.  According to a council spokesperson, the  first commercial has generated a tremendous response from the public.  Council  members hope that the publicity created  by the campaign will pressure advertisers  to create non-sexist commercials.  In addition to the television commercials,  the Council will be distributing anti-  sexist pamphlets and posters. A slide  show entitled "Le sexe a pile" will be  touring the province. Complaints about  sexism in the media will be handled by a  newly formed investigative committee.  Total costs for the campaign is $500,000  The Council budget stems from a two per  cent "counter-publicity" tax levied by  the provincial government on broadcast  advertising.   Calgary Women's Newspaper  LABOUR S       may go down the  HAZARDS tubes  Is striking hazardous to a family's psychological health?  A university study of the social effects  of the 34-month strike by 11,700 workers  at Inco, Ltd., in Sudbury, Ontario last  year answers the question with a resounding no. In fact, the study indicates,  the experience brought most families closer together.  The report, believed to be the first of  its kind, was done by a Laurentain University sociology professor. The report  found that although most of the families  subsisted on less than $100 a week during  the strike, and that many lost their life  savings, very few reported an inarease in  intrafamily stress. Marital breakups,  alcoholism, and domestic violence decreased. More than 40$ of the strikers'  spouses reported their families were  brought closer together because of the  walkout.  The survey highlighted the key role played  by strikers' wives. Over 60% of the wives  joined a support organization that was  central to the strike effort. The wives  played an informal role in policy making  as well.  The survey also showed that over 80%  of  the Sudbury community supported the walkout.  How six Nova Scotia nurses  were awarded equal pay by the  Human Rights Commission  The Canadian Human Rights Commission has  come up with its first equal pay settlement .  Six nurses working at the Springhill penitentiary in Nova Scotia and the Dorchester  penitentiary in New Brunswick will now get  the same pay as their male co-workers.  Each of the six will receive back pay of  $1000 to compensate for the lower wages  they have been, receiving since April 78,  when their union demanded that the federal treasury board pay the women as much  as the men.  They will also receive biweekly increases  ranging between $1000 and $2000 annually,  bringing them up to the male wage rate.  Commission officials say that the settlement requires a review of pay rates among  similar workers in other prisons across  the country. The same discrimination  appears to exist in Saskatchewan and Quebec, they added.  Sun  An unlovely tale about  sterilizing welfare recipients  In Love, Saskatchewan, a provincially-  supported committee of residents set up  to help provide employment opportunities  says compulsory sterilization should be  used on welfare recipients who "won't  support their children."  The 12-member committee unanimously endorsed a resolution that reads: people  who can't or won't look after or support  their children, (with) possible sterilization after two children or less if they  apply for welfare."  The committee is one of 100 such groups  set up under the employment support branch  of the Saskatchewan services department,  using grants to create employment opportunities. Last year, the Love committee  received $18,000.  Sun Kinesis March SO  ACROSS CANADA  All-woman Arctic caravan sets  out this summer  By Pat Cathers  "All you need is a little confidence in  yourself. Because you're a widow don't  hold back. You'll find a whole new life  waiting."  The speaker is Therese Tessier, spreading  the word about the all-woman caravan to  the Arctic that she's planning for this  summer.  The goal: a three month trek "to the top  of the world" that gives its participants  a real feeling for the land of the far  north and a little more than just a passing glimpse of its people.  The caravan will visit every major settlement in the Northwest Territories, travelling in their own recreational vehicles,  by boat, canoe and plane, and reaching  north to Tuyktoyaktuk in the Beaufort  Sea.  Therese Tessier already has over 100  women signed up to join the caravan.  They're coming from as far away as Newfoundland and the Eastern States and will  meet the group that she herself is heading  from California at Cache Creek in British  Columbia.  Then they'll head to Northwest  B.C. to take Highway 37, the Cassiar Highway, north to Watson Lake and thence to  Whitehorse and beyond.  Why an all-woman caravan, and why older  women particularly?  Because a woman who is left with a good  recreational vehicle after her husband's  death need not pass up the good times  just because she finds herself unexpectedly single again.  "While you are alone, enjoy being alone!"  firmly states the 55-year-old originator  of this ambitious trek who recognizes  that something a single woman would balk  at, a large group of women can tackle together.  Therese made all the arrangements for the  journey, last summer and fall when she  covered the route.  The caravan will include two women mechanics and a doctor,  not to mention women in other professions  (anthropology for instance) that might  come in useful to their sisters on the  way.  The Tessier Arctic tour will be a triple  "first." It will be the first.caravan  along the Dempster Highway, the first to  travel the Mackenzie. .And it will be the  first all-woman caravan.  Therese is already planning beyond this  experimental three-month spree. She wants  to spend next winter in the far north with  Inuit friends, living on Banks and Victoria  Island.  Then in 1981, if all goes well  this time round, there will probably be  two Arctic tours, one in June and July  and the other in August and September.  One of those two will be for both women  and men.  Anyone interested in joining either  this year's tour or one for next year  may contact Therese Tessier c/o Dixie  L. MacLean, 505-1844 Barclay St., Vancouver, V6G 3K9. '      Northern Times  excerpt  No ring around the machinery  (CP) — Three women at Westclox Canada  Ltd. in Peterborough Ontario who quit  over a company order to remove their wedding rings plan to appeal to Ontario  Premier William Davis because their union  won't help.  "My marriage vows were bound with that  ring," said Barbara Romain, 43, who  operated a plastic-molding machine at  the plant.  "My husband put it on my  finger 25 years ago and I made up my  mind it will stay there forever."  Ms. Romain said that losing her $150-a-  weeic salary will mean cutting out the  little extras for her family, but she is  firm in her decision.  The union said it cannot help the women  because safety regulations forbid wearing  rings.  Clarence Manning, president of Local 570,  International Union of Electrical, Radio  and Ma chine Workers, has said the union  supported the factory's ban on wedding  rings.  The ban on rings affects all employees,  including those whose normal job does not  involve machinery.  Westclox workers said the idea is that  they can be called upon to operate machinery on any given day.  "I work with a pair of tweezers," said  Carol Dennie, 33, a worker who agreed to  the new ban.  "Now, it's plain silly to  think I could get caught and injure myself. "  Wanda Cox, 24, feels the same way.  "If a person isn't working at a job where  she can be hurt from wearing a' ring, then  she should be able to wear it.  "Women feel very strongly about wedding  rings.  It's something the law should  take into consideration."  Valium manufacturers on the  carpet for wiping out  competitors.  TORONTO (CP) — Hoffman-La Roche Ltd.,  the Quebec-based subsidiary of a Swiss  company that manufactures and distributes  the tranquillizer Valium, has been convicted under the Combines Investigation  Act of trying to eliminate competition in  Canada over a seven-year period.  The  company faces an unspecified fine that  vEim kmntz , howeuife v mm  EVERY DAY  WAS A MAG.  UNTIL I  ^FOUNP  fVAUUML  THE   NE_U  VEL^A: DKUD6ERY  CftNT GET HtK POKiW.'SHE WW  £V£N THE MOiT WA/JMNE TASK5/.'  Everycfau ws? 50 humdrum! I nct&ta  to c%-apc the q/irtx rcdhUci of my W>e~  lus lik- Wh VALIUM I chtit even ihink  about it." Unit get liberated'/ (ret VALIUM \  will be set by the Ontario Supreme Court  judge who tried the case.  Justice Allen Linden found that starting  in 1970, Hoffman-La Roche gave away millions of doses of Valium to hospitals and  sold large amounts in government contracts  for $1 to counter competition.  Linden said that when Hoffman-La Roche  started its give-away program it was prepared to lose $2.6 million worth of Valium  sales — which it did — to prevent a  forecast loss of $600,000 in sales to a  competitor that year.  "Roche's aim could only have been to eliminate Horner (a competing tranquillizer  manufacturer) from the hospital market  and to warn others that they too would be  eliminated if they tried to compete with  Roche in the hospital market," Linden  said.  March 8 is being celebrated  coast to coast  In Edmonton, the fight to win affirmative  action for women is the focus of this  year's International Women's Day.  Activities scheduled for the three-day  event include an evening meeting and social  March 7, followed the next day by an address by Jo Evans, who was recently an  NDP candidate in the Edmonton East riding.  Evans is an active feminist and a supporter of the Women Into Stelco campaign.  Alice Peurala, the only woman local union  president in the basic steel industry, has  been invited from the States as keynote  speaker for March 8.  Labour workshops on affirmative action for  women and Native people, informal discussions, and a placard making party will  precede a march from the Alberta legislature.  Socialist Voice  The International Women's Day Committee  in Toronto is planning an IWD march for  1980.  Jobs and Rights for Women, the  main slogan used last year, has been proposed as the theme for this year. At  an initial planning meeting, some women  spoke up for a more narrow focus, in the  interests of directing the day itself.  Others thought the press coverage should  be used to state as many issues of concern to women as possible. Toronto clarion  Regina Status of Women has called for an  emphasis on rape as a major concern for  this year's March 8.  Other demonstrations across the country  this month include one in Nova Scotia.  Grace Hartman and Madeleine Parent are  among speakers for a March 3 conference  in that province, which will focus on  day care - social service cutbacks and  will culminate in a march with candles  and flashlights during a night sitting of  the Nova Scotia legislature.   NAC notes  Snooker women smash sexism  Seven of twelve women competing in the  Canadian Ladies (sic) Snooker championships in Ottawa have complained to city  officials about sexist remarks made by  the master of ceremonies and in the promotional material.  Terry Rodgers, the general manager of  the Ottawa Sportsmen's (sic) Show included sexist remarks when introducing the  competitors at the opening of the  championships, February 20.  Group spokesperson Cora Wilson said  Rodgers had made remarks such as "you  can play with me any time in my basement" and "this girl would make a good  tight end for the Toronto Argos — she  can put her arms around me and get tight  with me any time."  The pamphlet describes one contestant as  moving "around the snooker table with a  great deal of charm and poise" and another as having "the ability envied by  many male players."  The women have demanded a written apology  from Rodgers. He has refused. He says  that he doesn't consider any of his remarks to have been sexist.  Probably doesn't know what the word  means. ■&m in^0 Kinesis March SO  INTERNATIONAL  Women press suit against  sexual harasser, claim damages  Four Northern Virginia women have filed  suit against their employer, the Allstate  Insurance Company, and a medical services  firm, alleging they were sexually assaulted during routine pre-employment physical examinations.  In papers filed in Fairfax County Circuit  Court, the four women claim a technician  named Robert Miller, who was working for  Physical Measurements, Inc., allegedly  fondled their breasts and penetrated  their vaginas with his unprotected fingers during examinations in his office  in 1978.  The women claim, as a result of the alleged assaults, they have suffered "severe  emotional distress, fright, humiliation,  embarassment, general fear of sex and  medical attention." They are seeking  $500,000 in compensatory damages and  $500,000 in punitive damages.  A spokesperson for Physical Measurement's  parent company, Equifax Inc. of Atlanta,  says the medical firm does not authorize  its employees to conduct pelvic examinations .  Technician Miller is now employed as an  executive associate at the Department of  Medicine of George Washington University  Hospital. Guardian  Leningrad feminist paper  wiped out, women detained  Three women who contributed to the Soviet  dissident community's first feminist  magazine have been detained and warned  they will be arrested if another issue  appears.. The women were taken into custody in Leningrad last month, but were  released after interrogation. The three  had published one issue of an underground  magazine called Women in Russia.     Her Say  Is killing a woman a crime?  bigotry busted  Lenient sentences for "passion killings"  in Italy, which lays down a jail sentence of three to seven years for "whoever causes the death of his marriage  partner, daughter or sister in the moment in which he discovers an illegitimate carnal relationship," is currently  under attack. Socialist and Communist  Senators claim the law is a leftover  from the conception that looked upon  women as "objects owned by men," and  pointed out that "the courts are now  bound to put a murderer on the same level  as a man who steals a chicken."    RMR  Liquid paper gives you  de-greasies  One chemical which is found in a number  of products used in offices is Trichlor-  ethylene (TCE), an organic solvent (de-  greaser). It is contained in stencil  fluid and liquid paper, among other  commonly used products.  In high concentration, TCE can cause  unconsciousness and even death. Last  year, the death of a 14-year old Oregon  young woman was blamed on sniffing liquid  typewriter correction fluid. An Oregon  State Medical Examiner explained that  soon after sniffing the fluid, her heart  ceased to beat, resulting in brief hyper-  excitement, followed by "dropping in  your tracks."  TCE is a toxic substance especially hazardous in areas where ventilation is  poor — a problem common to many offices.  The thinner for liquid paper is made up  almost entirely of this solvent.  In 1975, a study was done which showed  that TCE caused liver cancer in animals  and is now suspected of causing cancer in  humans. It produces symptoms similar to  being drunk: dizziness, confusion, irritability, loss of muscle control, nausea,  vomiting, drowsiness, giddiness, and headaches. Because it de-greases, it can  dissolve the natural oils and fats in  your skin, and cause redness, rashes, skin  cracking and blistering.  TCE enters your body through breathing  air that is contaminated. From your lungs,  it crosses into your blood and then to the  brain and other parts of the body. BMR  Attempt to cast ms into  lexicographic outer darkness is  behind the times  The Times of London has decided to eliminate the title Ms.  Writing in the Times stylesheet, Trevor  Fishlock comments, "that forlorn fatherless and motherless little word Ms. is  case into the lexicographical outer  darkness.  " This is a rallying point for common  sense. There are several reasons why  Ms. should be allowed no air," according  to the fusty Fishlock fellow.  "It is artificial, ugly, silly, means  nothing and is rotten English.  It is a  faddish, middleclass plaything.  There  is an important battle to be fought for  all women, not just a tiny elite," he  goes on. "Ms. is one of the excesses of  the revolution that should be junked."#  Steelworkers in Chicago demand an end to sexual  harassment, discrimination on the job.  Women demand labelling of  tampons for chemical content  Health International, a Washington, D.C.  based organization, is calling on the  Food and Drug Administration to start  requiring that tampon manufacturers label  tampons for their fibre and chemical  content.  Currently, the FDA has no rule for labeling tampons, which are considered a class  two medical device in the FDA code.  Women Health is urging women to write to  xhe FDA, to request immediate labelling of  tampons, and to send a copy of the letter  to their congressional representatives.  Her Say  In the States, a victory for our  reproductive rights  A Guardian excerpt  Like perhaps millions of U.S. women before  and after her, Cora McCrae, then 24,  walked into a New York City Planned Parenthood office in September 1976 and ran  into a brick wall called the Hyde amendment.  Seeking an abortion, the Brooklyn resident was informed that the amendment was  about to take effect, which meant, that  Medicaid would not pay for her abortion.  In effect, this made abortion the prerogative of the rich — and denied this  fundamental reproductive right to the  poor.  Unlike millions of U.S. women, McCrae,  with the help of Planned Parenthood, the  American Civil Liberties Union and the  Centre for Constitutional Rights, sued.  And on January 15, more than three years  later, that suit paid off.  Brooklyn Federal Distric Court Judge  John Dooling ruled January 15 that the  government's denial of Medicaid-funding  for abortions is unconstitutional, a violation of the First Amendment right to  freedom of conscience and the Fifth Amendment rights to privacy, equal protection  and due process. If upheld, this nationwide-class-action suit, known as McCrae  v. Harris, would guarantee Medicaid-  funded abortions across the U.S. and  would be a significant victory for the  reproductive rights movement.  Dooling allowed 30 days for filing of  appeals in the case before his ruling  would go into effect, and the Justice  Department immediately announced that it  would take his decision to the Supreme  Court.  Harriet Lazarowitz, a member of the  Committee for Abortion Rights and  Against Sterilization Abuse (CARASA),  noted that the decision will be a "rallying point" for reproductive rights activists.  "Obviously, we're not going to sit back  and wait for the court's decision. We  can't simply rely on the courts or the  legislature. We have to build a strong  movement."  Corrie's Bill corrodes liberal  abortion law in Britain  The British Parliament voted February 15  to cut the time limit for abortions from  28 to 24 weeks.  Sponsored by Conservative Member of Parliament John Corrie, the amendment originally sought to restrict the time limit to  20 weeks. The compromise amendment passed  with a 275-172 majority.  The 1967 abortion act has long been a target for the fetus folk.  Another section of the Corrie amendment,  which will not be voted on in this session,  also threatens to stop charitable organizations from running abortion clinics  which handle thousands of cases refused  by doctors employed in the National Health  Service. And more National Health physicians could refuse to perform abortions  under the Corrie measure since it widens  a doctor's leeway to forego the operation  for "personal reasons of conscience."  Women throughout Britain have been working against the amendment, and the Trade  Union Council drew some 45,000 people to  central London last fall in a massive  show of pro-choice strength.  Despite all  this, the Labor Party itself has been only  lukewarm.  "All the opinion polls and all  the considered medical opinion which has  come out in favour of the 1967 act has  fallen on deaf ears," says Labour MP Jo  Richardson. The pro-choice campaign con-,  tinues.  Guardian info Kinesis March SO 11  INTERNATIONAL  Hell no, we won't go!  Picture yourself in the Persian Gulf for Exxon right or wrong  By Ann C. Schaefer  U.S. President Jimmy Carter brought the  Persian Gulf crisis home January 23 when  he asked Congress to require young men and,  for the.first time in U.S. history, women,  to register for military service to allow  rapid mobilization in the event of any future "natural emergency."  Any foray by an "outside force" to gain  control of the Persian Gulf would be "regarded as an assault on the vital interests  of the United States and will be repelled  by any means necessary, including military  force," he said, obviously directing his  remarks to the Soviet Union.  Carter also asked for a 5% increase (over  inflation) in the military-budget, an increase which many observers feel will be  made at the expense of social programs.  A casual survey of the Persian Gulf region  shows Soviet troops in Aghanistan, Moslem rebels resisting their advance, a neighbouring Pakistan under military rule with  a secessionist territory (Baluchistan) which  may be vulnerable to Soviet influence, the  hostage situation at the U.S. embassy in  Tehran, the Kurdish revolt in sections of  Iran, Iraq and Turkey, the threat of a  military takeover in Turkey, and the U.S.,  British and Soviet warships ominously ringing the area.  Carter's deliberately belligerent mood was  not shared by the draft-age women and men  of the nation, who proceeded to stage demonstrations across the country, resurrecting anti-draft slogans from the Vietnam  era. Fighting to maintain the "free movement of Middle East oil", to borrow Carter's  phrase, is apparently not on their agenda.  Meanwhile, the commercial media predictably jumped into the trap - debate raged  over whether women should.be drafted,  whether women should go into combat or non-  combat positions (as Carter advocated),etc.  Demographic shift lowering number of  available men blithely ignored  Criticism of the draft itself, and of the  increasing militarism it reflects, was deflected, leaving room for mushrooming jingoistic sentiments. The fact that demographic shifts will lower the number of military-age men by as much as 25$ in the next  few years, has all but been ignored.  Newsweek's cover story on women in the  armed forces quoted Eleanor Smeal of*the  National Organization for Women (NOV/)  asserting, alarmingly, that if a draft is  necessary, women should be drafted, too:  "We are full citizens. We should serve in  every way."  This, Newsweek tells us, is the viewpoint  of most feminists.  On the same pages, anti-women's rights  activist Phyllis Schlafly intones, "President Carter has stabbed American womanhood  in the back in a cowardly surrender to women's lib," and, "V7e are not going to send  our daughters to do a man's job."  Schlafly seizes the opportunity to make a  stab at the Equal Rights Amendment with the  worn-out argument that its adoption would  force Congress to draft women, but refrains  from repeating the prediction that the ERA  would do away with separate washrooms.  U.S. constitutional law experts predict the  ultimate decision on female registration  will be made by the courts.  The American  Civil Liberties Union has already pledged  to challenge registration legislation which  applies* only to men (for reasons known only  to themselves), while Schlafly hasn't ruled  out court action if women are included. It  is unclear whether women can be drafted as  long as the ERA remains in its semi-permanent state of abeyance.  Johanne Leach, fashion editor of the Vancou  ver Sun and author of the column "Between  Us" muddles around with the question. At  one point she states, "In my opinion, if  we are to fight for equal rights we must  take on equal responsibilities and abhorrent as it is, combat may be the natural  progression in the maturing of women."  At another she refers to the incredible  maleness of Apocalypse Now and worries that  women wouldn't fit in. Still later, she  goes on to make the ultimate Canadian comment: "It's too easy in Canada to sit back  and argue that women should be drafted. I  hope we never have to make that decision  in this country."  Fine. Now back to our slit skirts and stiletto heels.  Collins-esque piece reeking of vendetta.  Three draft-age, unmarried (he notes scrupulously) women have told him, he claims,  they'll become pregnant and stay pregnant  if called up for military service.  "Frankly, this attitude disappoints me,"  he states unconvincingly. "Despite what  some shrill female fanatics may believe,  I have long admired the new, modern liberated women, and have supported their goals  "And I assumed that as female-persons sought  and won equality, they would also be willing to accept the same responsibilities as  men.  "So I'm surprised to hear liberated women  now saying that if the need ever occurs,  YOU CAN DO  WHAT HE DOES!  GET TRAINING  LwiTH THE ARAAYJ  if-  YOU CAN DO  WHAT HE DOES !  GET AN EDUCATION  WITH THE ARMY^  AND YOU CAN 00  WHAT HE  DOES !t  In spite of such inanity and the singular  unimaginativeness of the NOW's remarks, the  left is showing, for the time being at  least, a remarkable urge to forgive-and-  forget past differences with the equal-opportunities brand of feminism.  As recently as January 31, for example, the  (N.Y. ) Guardian ran an editorial criticizing feminist abortion activists for not  speaking to the needs of poor, working-  class and third world women with respect  to federal funding for abortion, and for  not linking the abortion rights struggle  to forced sterilization. The editorial referred, rather scornfully, to "the largely  white and petty bourgeois women's movement."  One week later, evaluating The Carter Doctrine, the paper had this to say: "The call  for draft registration was a blunder - necessary, perhaps, to implement (Carter's)  new policy but bound to engender a resistance movement in this country, which we  emphatically support. We oppose all moves  to reconstitute conscription - and if women are included, the antidraft movement  will be so much bigger."  For their part,'feminists in Denver have  already initiated their own antidraft  movement. They held a community meeting in  February to develop a "feminist response  to the possibility of military registration and the draft for both women and men,"  including a demonstration on March 8, International Women's Day.  Big Mama Rag, a Denver-based feminist newspaper, lists the options women will have  should'conscription take place: "We can  resist by refusing to register; or if we  do register and are selected, we can refuse induction...(or we can) register with  a pacifist group to be .listed as Conscientious Objectors....  "The most important thing is to become informed about the draft process and to be  aware of what is going on in the world.  Even if women are not forced to register,  or if we are selected only for behind-the-  scenes military service, we must oppose the  draft for all peoples.   It is vital that we  educate others, both women and men, about  the reasons for and the effects of war. The  time to organize is now."  Responses from other radical feminists in  the States were not available at time of  printing.  To the far, far right, Mike Royko in Chicago indulges his dormant misogyny in a  SuMiit  (g) 78 IMS  they don't believe women should be drafted.  "I just can't believe (it)...especially  those women who so splendidly swear and  drink and talk mean and job and slam the  racquetball around and learn karate." He  goes on to fantasize about a special contingent of these women, which he would call  the Green Bras. How ironic, after all those  years of insipid bra-burning jokes. Guess  we'll have to write it off to climacteric  ravings of one shrill male fanatic.  The Washington Post attributed Carter's  draft-registration speeches to an attempt  to prevent "further Soviet miscalculations"  and claimed, in an editorial, that the  question now is whether "registration and  perhaps the draft itself should be revived  to send a signal of popular resolve."  New wave of draft resisters organizing  The answer to that question is already in  progress. Boston, New York City and Columbia (Missouri) have all seen major anti-  draft demonstrations; other towns have  held conferences. The new wave of draft  resisters will be helped by the Central  Committee for Conscientious Objectors  (CCCO) which plans to re-establish a draft  counselling network to "educate young  Americans on their alternatives vis-a-vis  the draft."  Here in Vancouver, the Committee to Aid  War Objectors has been revitalized and has  pledged its support to all those who resist  the return of draft registration, those who  resist the draft, and those who oppose  conscription in Canada, and has renewed its  commitment to deserters from the U.S. Armed  Forces. The Committee can be reached by  writing CAWO, Box 34231, Station D, Vancouver B.C. or phoning 522-0207 or 874-  6618.  The Vancouver Sun recently printed a response to an article by Denny Boyd which  had expressed concern over a new "invasion"  of draft dodogers, this time both male and  female. The writer of the letter, M.S. But-  terworth, came to Canada in 1970 with her  husband and son, and found in Vancouver  a haven from the draft.  She writes about the positive contributions  fellow resisters have made to Canadian  society and ends on an interesting note:  "...Mr. Boyd shouldn't worry about - God  forbid - female draft dodgers. We've been  here for years, for reasons of conscience,  if not legal necessity."# Kinesis March SO  NORTHERN WOMEN  Whitehorse, Fort Nelson women describe their boom-bust towns  In conjunction with the Fort Nelson  Women 's Centre and the Yukon Status of  Women,  the Vancouver Women's Research  Centre has just completed a lengthy  report,  Beyond the Pipeline.  The report describes the life and work of  women and families in Fort Nelson and  Whitehorse, and reveals the impact that  the Alaska Highway natural gas pipeline  will have on the lives of women in northern communities.  Diana Ellis coordinated the project for  the Women 's Research Centre.  The report is  due for release by the Northern Pipeline  Agency any day now.  In this interview,   VSW member Jillian  Ridington talks with Diana Ellis about the  report and the methodology it employes.  A longer version of this discussion was  first aired on Vancouver Co-op Radio 's  Womanvision programme.  JILLIAN: How did this report \  DIANA: The work that was presented at the  Northern Pipeline Agency hearings in  Fort Nelson last December all began really  through the work of the Northern Women's  Task Force on Single Industry Towns,  which presented its report to the federal  government in 1977.  This task force was made up of a group  of women from Kitimat, Mackenzie and  Fraser Lake who had organized around the  issue of single industry towns and how  they were not planned with the needs of  women and families in mind.  That work and tnat task force led to the  conference, "Women and Economic Development" in Prince George, also in late 1977.  A hundred women came to that conference.  The federal government had just made the  final decision not to build to infamous  gas pipeline down the Mackenzie Valley  but rather to choose the Alaska Highway  routing instead.  At the conference, the women said that  the pipeline talk was all over their  towns. And here we were talking about  women and economic development. We were  talking about the need to take the concerns of women and families into account.  And the women said, "My god, this pipeline is going to be passing right near  our communities.  There's rumours of  thousands of workers, there's rumours of  another gold rush, or of it having the  effect of another Alaska Highway construction. What are we going to do?"  A community spirit has existed here and still  does, but it is lessening with industrial development. Immediate wants become important and  people don't think about sharing and giving. The  harmony of the community gets lost.  Whitehorse woman  That was in later 1977, early 1978.  It took us a year and a half to not only  identify the right people to lobby, but  to begin to lobby, to write letters, to  do our political work, to do research, to  get into what we lovingly called the II  (information Infrastructure). Finally,  in February 1979 we were able to contract  with the Northern Pipeline Agency to undertake tv-- research.  lour report, Beyond the Pipeline,  focuses  on the  lives of women in two northern  towns,  Fort Nelson and Whitehorse.     What  issues were the women in those two towns  concerned with?  It was fascinating . . . there are so many  issues.  Children, for one.  The safety  of children, the health of their children,  the education of their children. That was  of primary concern to the women in Whitehorse and Fort Nelson.  You have to wait six months for specialists to  come up or you fly south for treatment.  Whitehorse woman  They were glad to have the medical facilities they do have, but they've been very  worried about them being overcrowded and  overstretched during construction of the  pipeline.  They also worry about crisis  service for their children and for themselves. At present you can get basic  medical care, but crisis care for people  who are chronically ill is very, very  difficult.  Diana Ellis  Whitehorse Research Team for pipeline project. L-R:  Betsy Goodman, Debra Dungley, Lynn Malinsky  Safety for their children. What's going  to happen when the guys come into town  from the camps? "I'm not worried about  my child in my own home," one woman said,  "what I'm worried about is her environment  outside the home." That woman and her  family has already made the decision to  leave Fort Nelson. And this is pre-  pipeline. They left because they thought  the town was already tightening up and  speeding up. They don't want to have  their children live through that kind of  experience.  The pipeline will bring more transients and I am  afraid for the young girls.  Whitehorse woman  Some of the women probably went there in  the first place because they thought that  they could bring up their children in  safety .   .   .  That's another part of the story. Over  and over women said, "You know, we like  this town, Fort Nelson. We chose to  come north. We like bringing up our  children here. We don't want to live in  a large, urban centre." Many of them  are now making some pretty tough decisions  about whether or not they want to stay in  this community because of the kind of  boom-bust economy the pipeline will bring.  The climate must affect their lives radically,  more than it does ours in the  south.     Children would be coming home  from school in the dark at this time of  year.  The pipeline can neither hinder nor help  the climactic conditions. But it was -35  when we were up in Fort Nelson last December doing the presentations for the hearings.  I was talking on the phone to a  friend of mine in Whitehorse the other day,  and she said, "It's -50 here right now.  I  just don't go outside."  Climate and isolation are concerns that  women bring up over and over again. They  both must be taken into account when you're  planning any kind of service in that community. You always have to add on those  extra stress factors. And.climate has a  direct effect on house design.  If your  children are going to be indoors for long  periods of time, if the weather's really  bad, if people are trucking in mud, you  need a house that's designed with that in  mind.  One day we were sitting with a group of  women and asked, "Of all the things that  you could ever give or get for Fort Nelson  women, what would it be?" And one of the  women said, "You're going to laugh."  And we said, "Go ahead." And she said:  "A playroom. A playroom in every house!"  The emphasis should be on family housing. If a  man can get a job here and a house here he can  bring his family and put down roots.  Fort Nelson woman  Every woman that has ever been stuck in  the home can empathize with that one!  What about daycare in Fort Nelson?  There's a really good daycare centre —  one.    It has a capacity for about 23  children and has been going for about  four or five years now.     It's under-subscribed at the moment because it can't  provide the kind of childcare women need  if .they're going to be doing shift work  in Fort Nelson.    A lot of work that's  available up there is shift work.    A lot  of women in our study talked about different kinds of childcare.     It was absolutely fascinating — horrifying is really  the word — to see the struggle for childcare.    Some people talked about the private  home in-care that they get for their children,  and they're not too sure if it's  really good care, but they're desperate  and they have to able to go to work.    So  they work.    And they worry.  I feel the pipeline won't offer much employment  for women except if they have skills which many  women don't.  Whitehorse woman  And they're not going to be able to take  opportunities that come up with the pipeline coming through in terms of increased  employment unless there is better daycare,  and lots more of it.  Indeed. I think that anyone who's serious  about providing non-traditional employment  for women has first of all to provide some  kind of a childcare centre. And anyone  who talks about providing that kind of  work without providing that kind of work  without providing childcare is simply  not serious.  Another problem is around alcohol use,  and the lack of other recreational facilities in northern towns.  The alcohol use is absolutely incredible.  The first issue women always talk about  is housing. The second one is always  alcohol: that it is being overused by  adults, that it is the only form of recreation available in many places. (I  think there's thirty-odd bars in Whitehorse.) And that children are using it  as well. There's been excessive vandalism  on the' part of kids up in Fort Nelson,  and the women are really concerned about  the relation between that and alcohol. ►  Diana Ellis  liJ. '  ..ill  Fort Nelson Research Team for pipeline project. L-R:  Elaine Turner, Eleanor Summer, Lana Bayer Kinesis March 80  NORTHERN WOMEN  Alcohol runs this place (Fort Nelson). Bars and  lounges are the only place to go.  Fort Nelson woman  The Fort Nelson hospital is used as the  detox centre. There are no alcohol and  drug counsellors there at all. The women  said, over and over again, "We need to  have really good family life education in  our schools and that's got to include  alcohol information as well." The LCB  (Liquor Control Board) rakes in so much  money, that little liquor store is damn  busy. Yet there's no services available  at all for the people who are having  problems because of the alcohol.  Whitehorse is definitely a drinking town—there  are 29 bars. Everything seems to involve drinking—if I didn't drink I might as well stay home.  Whitehorse woman  Even before the hearings had taken place,  the Northern Pipeline Authority had already set the terms and conditions for  the pipeline, which makes one wonder how  seriously the input these women did have  into the hearings is going to be taken.  We're concerned about that. Part of the  reason for our getting involved with  this research at the Women's Research  Centre (and we have been involved for a  long time, over since the Northern  Women's Task Force on Single Industry  Towns), was to produce a good description  of these communities, to provide the pipeline agency with good baseline data on  what services already exist in the community so that they can plan terms and  conditions, supposedly, to meet some of  the problems.  But perhaps even more important in my  mind was to work with the women and have  women make their work and their lives  visible, not only to themselves, but to  the rest of the world.  Our research methodology was one of participant observation.  This means  that if you're going to understand what's  happening in the world, or a part of the  world or a society, you've got to be  participating in it. So all of our interviewers were women who actually lived  in the communities. We were trying to  get a description of how women view  their lives: what they do, where they  go; so that they, too, would have a better understanding of their work and  lives.  I'm not against the pipeline but what will happen  when the cost of living rises? Will Yukoners be  able to live on their present wages?  Whitehorse woman  And that I think has given us another  kind of tool. Our report, Beyond the  Pipeline, is about women's work and lives  in a particular northern community. But  it could indeed be almost any community.  It's an organizing took as well. I think  all of us can look at this material and  have a better understanding of how it is  that women and families work in existing  communities, how it is that our concerns  must be taken into account when the design  of those communities is being undertaken,  or when development planned to supposedly  change or develop those communities,  happens.  A recent survey expects 600 people with permanent jobs not related to the pipeline will move in  in the next while. Where are they going to live,  let alone the pipeline people? Lack of housing is  hampering business expansion. I can't get a  business partner due to lack of housing in Fort  Nelson.  Fort Nelson woman  Beyond the Pipeline is a 252 page document, with a 17 page bibliography. I  think it will bevery useful to a lot of  people.  I hope people will take a look  at it, and want to apply it to their own  situation — and carry on the work.  The Northern Pipeline Agency has the  report and they have told us that they  will be making a limited number of copies  available through their Calgary office.  Cost is $5.00  Write to them at:  Northern Pipeline Agency  4th floor, Shell Centre  400 - 4th Ave SW  Calgary, Alberta*  What is life like beyond the pipeline?  Beyond the Pipeline tells the Northern  Pipeline Agency that immediate action is  required in Fort Nelson and Whitehorse.  Here are the conclusions and recommendations made in the report:  * That the social and political structure  of communities, residence patterns and family life, be integral factors in economic  development planning.  * Regardless of whether the Alaska Highway  gas pipelines is constructed, existing  services in Fort Nelson and Whitehorse  must be improved.  * Northern standards are required for  home construction and design, mental health  services in Fort Nelson and Whitehorse must  be improved.  * That Foothills not be permitted to begin  construction of the Alaska Highway gas pipeline until the necessary social services  in Fort Nelson and Whitehorse have been  provided by the appropriate levels of government .  * That financial support be provided for  local voluntary organizations in Fort Nelson and Whitehorse to assist them in ameliorating the negative impact of pipeline  construction on community services.  * That an impact information centre, staffed by local residence whose interest is  the welfare of the community, be established. •  All talk and no do  on vital feminist issues  There is little evidence of pipeline planning on the part of governments, institutions, businesses and services. It is  entirely possible that the concerns women  now raise as potential problems will become very real problems and the present  situation will get worse as the construction of the pipeline begins.  - Beyond the Pipeline  Access to good quality health care is not  a reality for women and their families in  Fort Nelson and Whitehorse. The lack of  resident specialists is a major concern.  Special education programs are needed for  exceptional children who are particularly gifted or have a learning disability  or handicap. Adult education programmes,  with childcare provisions, are required  by women seeking to upgrade their skills  or obtain training for non-traditional  jobs.  High prices and low quality of basic foods  make it difficult for families to meet  their nutritional needs. There is a  housing emergency in Fort Nelson and a  shortage of affordable single family homes  in Whitehorse. Transportation to the "outside" is expensive and schedules are inconvenient, thereby heightening the isolation of the communities. The crime rate  is rising and women said they do not feel  safe in their communities.  Despite all the concerns raised by our  informants, the only explanation offered  by representatives of the institutions  responsible for the inadequacy of services  is geographic isolation. Apparently the  fact that Fort Nelson and Whitehorse are  northern communities is accepted as justification for low standards of service.  Northerners are expected to accept the romantic mystique of the north. They are  told they must be tough to endure.  - Beyond the Pipeline*  B.C. Federation of Labour  When this family goes north for work on the pipeline,  the needs of two of them are in danger of being ignored.  (Just guess which two.) Kinesis March SO  NORTHERN WOMEN  It's No Life for a Woman. Bonnie Kreps tells us why  The National Film Board of Canada has  just released NO LIFE FOR A WOMAN. Produced and directed by Bonnie Kreps, the  film portrays the lives of women in two  single industry B.C. towns, Fraser Lake  and Mackenzie.  Jillian Ridington of VSW spoke recently  with Bonnie Kreps about the process of  making this film. The interview here  is an edited version of what was heard  last month on Co-op Radio's Womanvision  programme.  As a context for this interview, we include some remarks adapted from the NFB  introduction to NO LIFE FOR A WOMAN-  The first instant town was Kitimat, B.C.  The city of the future, they called it.  The instant, planned town, built by  private companies to exploit the primary  resources in an area, has become multi-  nationally popular. In Canada alone,  there are now 800 such instant towns.  The towns are designed to meet the needs  of the industry. But what about the  needs of the families, of the women and  children?  NO LIFE FOR A WOMAN is a portrait of the  kind of life most women lead in these  towns. In the film, a variety of women  talk of their hopes and dreams and of  their daily battle to survive.  Housing is inadequate; there are few -  usually no - daycare facilities. There  are no medical or counselling services  for women, and often no public transportation.  The women of Fraser Lake and Mackenzie  are no longer merely suffering from  these problems: they have identified  them are their own.  And they are getting results: a weekly  drop-in for women to meet each other, a  daycare centre, a women's centre....  Their problems, and their solutions,  are relevant to other women living in  isolated towns not just in Canada, but  throughout the world.  JILLIAN: What got you interested'■■ in making a film on women in single industry  towns?  BONNIE: Well, I'd never thought about  single industry resource towns; I didn't  even know they existed, being a good urban type. So I would never have thought  of making this film except that my associate producer, Sharon McGowan, grew up  in Kitimat,  She came to me on the day after the  "Women and Economic Development" Conference in Prince George, the first-ever  conference in Canada on northern women  and development. And she said, "I have  all this material on women who live in  these single industry towns. Do you  think there's a film here?"  That was'the conference in 1977, that  came out of the Northern Women's Task  Force?  Right. I took a look at the stuff, and  yes, there was a film there. So we  made a proposal to the National Film  Board. And it went through. We did the  film.  What's the format for the film? Would  you call it a documentary?  I'm not interested in talking heads  telling me something that's "true". That  to me is part of a very masculine art  form.  I'm interested in a revelation of  character from a person, in a combination  of drama and documentary.  The film was shot in Fraser Lake and Mackenzie, but they're representative of the  800 single industry resource towns across  Canada — with about two million people in  them. Those towns are mostly, but by no  means exclusively, in the north.  What kinds of concerns did the women in  these towns express?    What are their  lives like?  The thesis of the film is that we have all  these towns, and all these human beings  who live in them. And the towns are  planned. - But in fact they are not planned  for most of the people who live in them,  namely the women and children.  Whether the children could be asked about  the planning in a useful fashion is a  mixed question, I suppose. But it's obvious that the women could he asked about  their lives in these towns. And haven't  been. They're invisible. The purpose  of this film is to make them, in effect,  visible.  Women's lives are invisible unless we talk  about them. Whatever we have to say, particularly about our own lives, is not  treated as being important. It's dismissed  as "women's stuff."  Partly because the work we do isn't paid;  so we're not seen as valuable.  the quality of life in the rest of our  towns. And that one major reason for  this is that the experts on that quality  of life are not being asked: the experts  are the women. As one woman says in the  film, the houses are built to southern  standards. Also, they're not built for  small children to run around in when  there's snow outside. And when the hus-  -band is home in the daytime to sleep —  because he works at night — the mother  has to take the kids in the car and drive  around and around. Because there's no  place to go with the kids, and her husband at home can't sleep with the children running around. There is no daycare,  there is no women's centre, no community  centre. There's no place to take the  children. Can you imagine doing that?  Driving around and around?  Who are these women you talked to?    What  are their backgrounds?    Why are they in  these towns?  They're there because their husbands are  there. The population of those towns  which is coupled is, I would think,  around 905?. The couples' average age would  be around 25. They tend to be young  couples with small children — lots of  NFB: "No Life for a Woman."  Meet the women of the single  industry towns. See how they  live  Exactly.    Even women fall into that trap.  We think,   "Oh, what do I have to say  that's important?"    The reason for making  this film is to show that what these  women have to say is_ important, and that  they are in fact experts about the quality of life in those towns,  in a way  that the men are not.  Men may be experts about working in those  towns.    But they're not the experts about  living in those houses,  and dealing with  the children.    Also,  the social life in  those towns is rigidly sex-role segregated.   .   .  During the day,  the men go to work, and  the women stay home.    During the night,  the men go to the bar (or to shift work)  and the women stay at home .   .   .  Yes,  and there's even a quote from that  conference on women in single industry  towns which says that there's no place  for women to go to meet.    Except women's  centres.    And there are very few women's  centres.    And women are discouraged from  going to the bar,  unescorted.    Without  a man,  that is.     You can go to the bar  with twenty women,  and you're still unescorted.   .   .  As you say,  we're invisible.  The idea is that the quality of life in  those towns is even more wretched than  "I can remember the first time  I came here, I was really appalled  at the place. I sat in my motel  room and looked out the window  and wrote home to my Mother,  'Remember when I married Bob  I said I'd follow him to the ends  of the earth? Finally, Mum, I'm  here."'  "Men come to these towns to  work and have their society  there, so their isolation is not so  profound as ours. We are the  ones who must live in these  instant towns, we live in their  trailer camps and the individual  homes that don't meet our  needs. We are the ones who are  responsible for nurturing our  families under these conditions. "  small children.  These women have gone there because their  husbands can get a job that pays well.  Do they plan on staying?  No, by and large, not.     It's a transient  community.  That would make it very difficult to establish long, bonding friendships.  Oh, very. As one woman said, "I hardly  feel like making friends anymore. Every  time I make one, she moves."  Do you just document all these things?  Or do you attempt an analysis?  I attempted an analysis, yes. But in an  oblique fashion. I don't like to tell  people what to think. I don't have a  narrator in the film. Diana Ellis functions as a voice. She's someone who  knows a great deal about the overview  but she's not a narrator.  She tells what  she knows from her experience and then  you, the viewer, can do whatever you wish  with that. That's basically my philosophy in documentary films.  It's the same with the rape film (This  Film is About Rape).  I personally think  rape is horrendous, disgusting, painful  and all the rest, and that anyone who  doesn't think so should be knocked on the I Kinesis March SO  NORTHERN WOMEN  head. But I'd never say that in a film.  I just present the feeling as best I can.  Either in the case of rape, I present  that; or, in the case of this film, No  Life for a Woman, what it's like to lTve  in those towns, for women, as presented  by women. I don't "manage" what I get.  I try to be very true to. what they say.  So it's like an emotional lever.  The title of the film is itself something of an analysis. I conclude from  what they say that this is no life for a  woman. But in fact this is what the  women say themselves.  It's practically  a direct quote. It is straight out of  the body of the film.  I do not do a political analysis, in the  usual meaning of the word, politics.  I  let the film do that. I think that film  is primarily an emotional medium. It's  something that gets at your gut. It's  not that much of an intellectual medium.  For that, you can write a book. So if  you want to do a heavy treatise, I would  write a book.  If I want to get people to change how  they act about something — like how they  plan these towns — I would make a film.  And in the film I would in effect be  emotional, very calmly so. That's what  I mean when I say that the film concerns  itself with personal portraits.  I seem to have a knack for doing these  portraits. I don't know why, but it probably has to do with my film aesthetics.  I am more devoted to the subjects of the  film than I am to the fact of making the  film.  I would never violate what I consider to be a woman's life. And in this  film it was a very difficult question at  times because the women tended to, I think,  say more than they might have known they  were saying.  Because they just would  open up to me.  I don't mean they would  spill their gut.  (it's not the vomit  school of film-making.  I loathe that.)  But they would say things that were very  pertinent to their painful lives. You  have to be careful how you use that, I  think, so as not to infringe on the women  in the film.  Another woman comes in with a film crew  and says, "I think your problem is a real  problem, and a valid problem; and I care  about your problem. I know how you feel  to a large extent because I've suffered  in various southern suburbs the same  kind of problem and I feel, if you like,  sisterhood."  The tendency is to say, "Oh, thank god."  And they talk. I'm very moved by how they  What that signifies to me is that not  only have women largely been ignored or  kept out so that there are no "great"  women artists by definition, but also  that as subjects, women have been considered unimportant.  And therefore what I'm interested in is  that we have a one-eyed vision of reality.  I'd like to have two-eyed vision. So for  "I am more devoted to the subject of my film than I am  to the fact of making a film. "  talk. And because they do that, I feel  under every obligation to use the material with care.  I used to work in straight TV, with CTV  in Toronto. And they used to do what I  call hit-and-run TV. They were heavy  with experts, preferably academic males  and preferably Harvard academic males.  The emphasis may since have shifted to U  of T experts, but at the time I was working there, it was Harvard. And you  would always try to make the person say  something he had not intended to say.  That was when you were really doing  your work: tripping somebody up and getting the real stuff.  That's still happening.    That's As It  Happens format.  Oh yes, it's still the format. Maybe  when you're dealing with politicians it  may be a legitimate format. I'm not  even sure about that. But in terms of  what J would consider real people, it  completely restricts what you can get on  film. And it mostly cuts out all women.  Women are not "good TV" in that sense.  We're not used to the quick banter, having  the fast remark ready for anything.  Are you concerned about developing a  women's aesthetic?  Well I'm interested, yes. When yo.u say,  "great art" people think of that as a  generic term.  I don't think it is.  "Great art" mostly means what men consider "great" about other men's art.  I  don't say that in a hostile fashion. I  just say it's a fact.  That's what "great  art" means.  me, a women's aesthetic has to do with  what we know about life, from being women,  that men don't know.  We know more about men from being women  (because we're less powerful than they  are so we have to figure them out more in  order to survive) than they know about us.  So I think that we have more than half the  vision to contribute. And in fact now, in  our ecological crisis, the things that we  have to learn on this planet in order to  survive are, in my opinion, female things.  And women know them far better than men.  So now, of all times, is a good time to  work out a women's aesthetic.  How do you think women can answer those  questions around ecology?  We have to learn, for one thing, that linear thinking is inaccurate.  If we talk  about a masculine prototype (and of course  not all men are like this) we have a type  who is heavy on rational, linear thinking,  who is time-intensive (more, more; faster,  faster) who wants to get up (whatever that  means) get ahead, who's very high on competition. Those in my opinion are the  values ruining the quality of life on  our planet.  The values we have to learn instead are  nurturing values, cooperative values; a  real understanding that life moves in  cycles, that everything changes; that to  conquer is not the answer, but to live  with is the answer.  I ask you, which of the two sexes knows  more about those values from living? I  say the answer is obvious..  What was said the day the media circus came to town  By Kinesis staff writers  Goddess knows, it's happened often enough.  Some fancy committee hits town to hear our  grievances about sexist media.  Down.we go to some hotel or other and read  out our brief. Come home, file the brief  away (Sexism, Media). Only to get it out  and dust it off again next year, when yet  another committee hits town to hear our  grievances about sexist media....  The only variation of this routine is groups  which complain often enough and loud enough  are themselves appointed to the committee.  That's why Sylvia Spring, of VSW, has  been a member of the latest media merry-  go-round, the Commixtee for Non-Sexist Advertising. This group is drawing up guidelines for the Canadian Radio-television  and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC).  The CRTC, which controls broadcast licences,  set up the working group to propose ways  and means for eliminating sexist stereotypes in the electronic media.  The committee did the rounds last month:  Montreal, Hull, Halifax, Edmonton, Toronto. And Vancouver, on February 20.  The women's movement turned out in force:  the Advisory Council on the Status of Women, the B.C. Federation of Women, Vancouver Status of Women, UBC Women's Committee, Women Against Violence Against Women, Women in Focus, Video Inn....  The joint brief made by Women in Focus  and Women Against Violence Against Women  and presented by Sue Moore, commented:  "Research and requests for input and  briefs on the issue of sexism in the media  have been continuing since 1970. Surely  enough research and date have been collected by now. We urge the end of commissions, briefs and enquiries and the initiation of action."  CRTC supports the male-dominated  structure  Advertisers and broadcasters are much at  fault when it comes to projecting sexist  imagery, the Video Inn brief explained.  The problem stems from the structure of  these industries which are owned and operated by male power. This male-dominated  structure is supported by the regulations  of the CRTC, the Video Inn feminists  stressed.  The VSW brief, presented by Jillian Rid-  ington, gave a personal account of how  it feels, as a woman, to be subjected to  sexism on radio and tv: .  "While preparing this brief, I forced myself to watch, really watch, tv commercials for one evening. No skipping out,  no picking up a book. If they had improved, I wanted to give credit where credit  was due. They haven't.  "A male, obviously supposed to be from a  'helping profession', got up from behind a  desk and wagged his finger at me as he told  me how important it was that I spray my frying pan with Pam to protect my family from  heart attacks ... the new woman, 'supermom'  was seen rushing in from work while her  family sat around waiting for her. Thanks  to Hamburger Helper, supermom was able to  get them all fed quickly — none of them  had to lift a finger."  Recommendations included:  * That discrimination against people on the  basis of gender or sexual orientation in  media be illegal."  * That sexist language be eliminated by  distribution of a language handbook.  * That special incentives be provided to  encourage development of progamming that  reflects the diversity of women's roles,  ethnic origins, income and lifestyles.  * That affirmative action plans within  industries be implemented so that women's  representation in broadcasting and marketing be increased.  * That advertising which uses women's bodies in undignified and demeaning contexts  be eliminated.  * That an independent body be established  to monitor advertising industries and receive complaints from the public.  * That more time be turned over to women's  programmes and issues that concern women.  The commmittee is supposed to present its  proposals early this summer. Don't get too  excited, however. Next year, another  committee.... . ART  Nomi Kaplan's images reveal delicacy and violence together  By Anne Knowlson  Nomi Kaplan recently had a show of sixty-  seven photographs at the UBC Fine Arts  Gallery. Each black and white photo was  hand-painted with water-colour or oils,  beautifully and carefully done.  I went to see the pictures twice. The  first time, on opening night, was noisy;  I looked briefly at nearly every one, and  was inspired by their prettiness. A  week later, in the peace of an empty  gallery, I had time to look at each one  and think.  Kaplan uses texture and light in her work  to tell us about elements that would dominate or destroy each other. Her work  contains delicacy and violence together:  a feminine experience of the world.  Kaplan takes a bleak black and white  world of simple objects and gives them  light and grace. The subtle paints bring  the covert image up to the surface. She  has taken scenes that would be ordinary  and created something that feeds the mind  stimulates.  The pictures were of things that are a  little bit mysterious, things seen not  directly, but from the corner of the eye.  It was thrilling to see my surreal perceptions recorded on paper by someone  else. Later, walking in the grey winter  woods, I saw those colours I had just  seen in the photos, more clearly in the  real world.  The photographs were arranged in sequence  of three or four, with one long story sequence of eighteen. I preferred to look  at them as single pictures; each one  evoked personal emotions and journeys of  the mind.  Some brief descriptions of the photos  would give you an idea of what stimulated my feelings.  One of my favourites  was an image of a crystal box, filled  with soft dandelion puffs. The dry puffs  had a clear look, as if seen under water,  yet they were not matted or drowned.  The  crystal box containing them had been  touched with pink, to make one aware of  beams of light passing. Kaplan points out  the plains, they were in movement, travelling. When I looked indirectly at the  photo, the tinted leaf shadows became darker, clear, like blue water moving, like  air currents rippling with light.  Other photos were about textures: one I  particularly responded to was a view of  simple, stout, full garbage bags, olive  drab, covered with frost. On a warm day,  the plastic would be soft and slick; on  this cold day, their skins have a sight-  texture of rough brittle frost.  blood. This one was so raw that it hurt  to look at it.  In some of Kaplan's photos I got a sense  of a parallel world, just behind the air.  The photo called "Quarantine" is about a  big, glassed-in room, like a verandah. The  air is calm, there are many chairs for  guests. On looking closer, the windows  have small panes, thick metal panes like  the cage/windows of a jail or mental hospital. Behind the glass, on the far side  of the Quarantine Room, there is another  Sleeping Dandelion—Nomi Kaplan  When actually touched, the pastic would  melt, smooth, cold and flexible. Inside  the protecting skin bag were dry crunchy  leaves, unaffected by all this. One might  hear them crackle. There was an almost  elusive concept about what things appear  to be and what they are.  One photograph which upset me was a picture of a tree trunk: the blue steamy  aura around the skin of the tree seemed  helplessly insulted by the pink fore-  Contained Leaves-  that light moves like flowing water.  Another image about light was a picture  of two old jars on a dusty shelf. One  jar contained energy, a small captured  aura coloured red, shimmering, fluxing.  In the next photo there were strands of  ivy on a wall. Like a herd of caribou on  - Nomi Kaplan  ground. It looked as if someone had  whimsically spray-painted with this artificial colour, and sealed off the earth .  It suggested a sense of danger to delicate  things, life choked.  Near that sinister image, was a picture of  red bamboo stalks: glowing membranes  sprouting from the ground, pulsing with  atmosphere. The air is purple, the heat  and light of another world that exists on  the skin of this one.  It reminded me of a trade school I attended.  The windows and rooms were exactly  the same. I would get so bored that my  limbs seemed to disengage themselves and  float into the air. I would direct my  eyes out the window and receive the image  of a fir tree. Very wet and green radiating cool air, glowing with colour. I  seemed to be drifting through the branches.  In the stuffy room, the instructor's voice  droned on. Multiple worlds.  I liked the show because it transported me  out of my everyday state of mind.  There  are no specific political messages in  these pictures but instead, more abstract  statements about life force.  In seeing  the show twice and in studying it, a point  I was left thinking about was its validity  in regard to feminist art'. The fact that  these statements are abstract and beauti-*  fully surreal makes their political attitude more subtle. The artist knows about  bleak and oppressive scenes, but brings  to light extraordinary ways of experiencing them. This freshens us, inspires us  with the energy to go on.«  The photographer  interviewed  Jillian Ridington and Anne Knowlson interviewed photographer Nomi Kaplan for  Kinesis. Here's some of what was said at  that meeting:  The sculptor often speaks of seeing the  image in the stone.     The task is to bring  that image,  to the surface,  out of the  stone.     We get the same feeling looking  at your work:  that you're trying to bring  to the surface,  through the use of colour,  what's already there for you in the  photograph.  The idea is that the image emerges.  NOMI:  That's it exactly.     Emergence is ART  for me the word which describes the process I've been going through as an artist  over the last year.  I take the black and white photograph and  I look at it. And I wonder what's missing.  I ask myself, "What does this need to  bring out the feeling I had when I took  this picture?"  I might bleach out certain parts■— the  background. Then I look at it again. I  begin to add colour. I paint it in step by  step, building slowly.  Some of the photographs I tone — in  copper or in blue.  I've worked with resin-coated paper,  using watercolour. But for the UBC Fine  Arts Show, I used a kind of paper which  can take oils paints as well.  How would you describe your prcess of  emerging as a woman artist?    Of gaining  the necessary strength and confidence?  I was working in black and white portraits. My first show at Powerhouse, in  Montreal, was all black and white portraits, but I had a little bit of colour  in three or four of them.  The Powerhouse show was for me not a  success. It was a boring show, I felt.  I wasn't happy with it. And I came  home, not feeling particularly turned on  by my work.  I was feeling ineffectual and timid.  Then' I took an assertiveness training  course, here in Kitsilano. It was really  an elementary kind of course — I've done  psychotherapy, groups and all that.  But the day after the first evening of the  course, I went into the darkroom and all  hell broke loose. I said to myself, "Who  am I doing this for? Who do I have to  please? Why can'.t I do what I want to do?"  And I started cutting up pictures, I started playing with F stops, I started making  crazy designs and going completely wild.  I did everything and anything that I'd  ever wanted to do.  I thought they were wonderful, I thought  they were magnificent. I started showing  them to people" and they said, "great,  great." Then I showed them to dealers,  and they said, "What is this? I can't  put this stuff up on the wall!" "Get  yourself a portfolio, get yourself a  body of work that is sequential, or  that has some similarity."  And I really didn't know what they meant.  I felt very.frustrated. Then one person  in San Francisco who is a photographer  and teacher said to me, "What you're doing  now is really ok, it's what you have to  be doing. Keep doing it until you get so  turned on by one particular idea that  you'll want to just do that. Bud don't  force yourself." She was very supportive,  she wasn't phony about it.  So I came home and I kept working. Then  they asked me in Sechelt if I would have  a show. I said, "No, I can't. I don't  have a body of work." About five minutes  later, I said, "Of course I can. Damnit.  I can have a show. I can do it." And I  did.  That was the beginning of my self-confidence in my ability to make something I  felt would work. It all had to do with  that assertiveness course.  Actually I feel I need another assertiveness training course now. I think  there's a real risk of' coasting on  something that's working — because it's  successful, because it's getting you  shows and people like it.  Do you feel that there is such a thing as  a feminist aesthetic?    Do you see yourself as working to develop that feminist  aesthetic?  Talking about a feminist aesthetic makes  me feel very uneasy because it's another  kind of delineation that is placed upon  a body of work which measures it in terms  of whether it's correct, or incorrect;  political or apolitical.  Women have so many things going against  us, including ourselves. We're constantly  diminishing our abilities; we're super-  modest. We're the first to say we can't  do something, we're doing something wrong,  we're not doing enough.  We begin by doing this to ourselves, and  we're so used to doing it as a matter of  course that we do it to each other. • Feminists will look at one another's work and  say, "You're not doing enough for the  movement."  We haye to be very careful to be freer  with ourselves and freer with each other  • All of these things serve to keep women  down. They serve to oppress. I think we  have to be very careful to be freer with  ourselves and to be freer with one another  so that we have a better chance of emerging as artists.  Because all of these things serve to keep  us behind bars, including our own labelling  of what we're doing and creating categories that are artificial. We get them  Kinesis March 80  from some political analysis and we impose them on art, and then say, "Ok, here,  you have to do this, this, this ..."  You don't have to. But if you do it,  you'll get strokes. If you don't, you  won't get strokes. So if you're smart,  you'll do it.  I'm in favour of feminist artists. Working.  If we are to overcome our terrible barriers  if we are going to see any improvement,  we have to support each other wherever  possible. Take a look at Avis Rosenberg's  work about women artists in Canada and see  how we've been discriminated against over  the years! (Ed. note: see Rosenberg's fact  sheet on p.18).  When people get good at what they are  doing, when they get established, they  really do have to lend a hand.  One of my fantasies is to have a gallery  which would be set up specifically to  accomodate both established female artists  and newly-emerging female artists. The  gallery would be for work-in progress,  for process — how something is done. Or  for before-and-after, so that you could  see how the work looked in its beginning  stages and how it looked at the end. Or  to see how someone has improved. So there  would be various ways for people to show  .what they are doing, so they could get  some feedback from other people, criticism and support.  Incidentally, a group of photographers  have started a small gallery on Dunbar,  in Vancouver, called Viewspace, and they  want people to come to them with work,  and show it. They're going to have  space for work-in-progress.  We could offer women artists some support  by making sure we know when women artists  are having shows, and making sure they 're  well publicized and well criticized,  in  the sense of their being carefully commented on.    We shouldn't just say,   "Oh,  this is women's art.    It must be wonderful. "  One of the things that could be done to  support women artists is to get a listing  of all women's art shows happening in  Kinesis. Because there are a lot of  women around, here and there, who could  be given a listing.  An artist has to be prepared to hear  what people feel. I'd' like to see our  art become more accessible to people so  that there is a greater exchange between  the artist and the viewer.*  Strawberry Princess—Nomi Kaplan Kinesis March SO  MEDIA  In Canada, women artists are not in the picture: a fact sheet  By Avis Rosenberg  Women constitute the majority of students  in art programmes and art schools.  Men:  — hold the vast majority of full-time  and/or remunerative teaching positions  — have the vast majority of one-person  shows and representation in group shows  — constitute the vast majority of jurors  for the Canada Council.  As long as this continues, women who are  artists will continue to need to support  themselves by other than art-related  means, and statistics such as the foflbw-  ing will continue to be a factor in the  lives of women artists, whether they are  acknowledged or not:  — women have to work more than eight  days to earn the same money that men do  in five days  — the wage gap is widening and women now  earn, on average, 53$ of what men earn ...  — and so on.  But at least a few women artists (or their  friends) will be working not as typists,  usherettes, or waitresses, but as teachers, curators, politicans and executives.  Some of them will be responsible for policies affecting the status of women.  How visible are women in policy-making  contexts in Canada?  — A.9%  of working women are in managerial/administrative positions  — in 1969, women constituted 6.3%  of  those appointed to the boards of directors of 97 federal agencies, Crown corporations and Task Forces. The 1970 Royal  Commission on the Status of Women included a recommendation to "increase significantly the number of women" on such  bodies. By 1978 the percentage of  women appointed to boards and commissions had risen to 13.7.  I am in no way suggesting that leaving  present structures completely intact  while replacing men with women in 51$  of existing managerial/administrative  positions is the solution to our problems.  cate how women artists are faring in  it. According to my own 1977-78 survey,  published in criteria  of Fall, 1978, we  can say roughly speaking that 18$ of the  works owned by museums in 1977 were by  women, 17$ of the artists handled by commercial galleries in 1977 were women, and  over 50$ of the students in art schools  are women. Thus we begin to get some idea  of the size of the gap between aspiration  and legitimation. Furthermore, attrition  is attributable to more than just the us-  18% of work owned by museums is by women  17% of artists handled by commercial galleries are women  But I would like to provide a topical  example of the difference it can sometimes make to have women on top rather  than men, as well as having women elsewhere .  Writing about financial support for Judy  Chicago's recently-completed five-year-  and-400 person project, The Dinner Party,  key organizer Diane Gelon said, "Our  primary support came from the National  Endowment for the Arts (NEA), and, in  addition to that, we received several  foundation grants and a great many donations ranging from five to five thousand dollars. We probably received 5  percent of the grants we applied for;  most of this grant support (outside of  the NEA) came as a result of having a  woman or women in leadership capacity  in a foundation. And the donations  were almost entirely from women."  (Chicago, The Dinner Party, p. 247)  We have now arrived back at the art  world, and there are a number of statistics from here and there which indi-  ual run of unimpeachable institutional  verdicts about Quality.  Let us look more carefully at some figures.  Several are encouraging and a number are  not. Unless otherwise indicated, the •  source is my survey.  Women received 23.1%  (148 of 641) of the  Canada Council "B" graints in visual arts,  photography, film and video between 1970  -71 and 1976-77.  Women received 22.3$ (27 of 121) of the  "B" grants in visual arts during the two-  year period 1975-76 to 1976-77.  According to the most recent list published in CAR/FAC News I  of November 1979,  women received 37$ (14 of 3&)  of the  1979-80 "3" grants in visual arts. An  even more encouraging figure for 1979-  80 is that women received 40.75? (24 of  59) of the following group of Canada  Council grants to artists: "A" grants in  visual arts, and "3" grants in visual  arts, multi-media and performance art,  photography, and video.    over top. 20 for more FACT SHEET  Kinesis goes to the flicks, with  Pat Feindel  The Rose  — Trapped by contracts, a manager who sees only dollar signs, schedules,  engagements, and travelling from here to  there, Bette Midler escorts us through  the dark side of life as a Star ~ but  also reveals the attractions — the intensity, the excitement, the audiences  and of course, the money. Offstage,  life consists mostly of bottles, pills,  and ill-fated shortlived relationships  with whoever sticks around long enough to  introduce themselves. I suppose it's  worth it if you're a Bette Midler fan.  Going in Style  — A touching and sometimes very funny portrayal of what it's  like to be "old" in our society — put  out to pasture with nothing to do and no  money to do it with. Three retired men  who share an apartment together decide to  rob a bank. Now, if someone would just  make a film about being a woman over 65  with no pension . . .  Being There  — Peter Sellers plays a  simple minded gardener who inadvertently  passes off as a cryptic sage and nearly  makes it to the White House — a modern  twist to the American Dream. The trick  is to be white, male and have a former  employer who gives you expensive tailored  clothes — you can't go wrong. Washington goes berserk trying to trace the  "career" of the mystery man, while he  watches TV and hopes there will be roses  to coddle in the spring. An entertaining  perspective on Washington wealth, politics,  and high class gullibility.  Picnic at Hanging Rock  — Although graced  with moments of breathtaking photography,  this film wallows most of the time in  hackneyed clichees reminiscent of David  Hamilton photos (he's the guy who takes  pictures of young lesbianettes floating  through soft focussed fields, in white  lace — if anything — and satin ribbons.  The "Victorian fantasy" of the 70's male).  The story takes place in the context of a  Victorian girls' school picnic where four  of the girls go for a hike (white dresses  and all) and two disappear atop Hanging  Rock. With "archetypes" like the nubile  young blonde of mystifying hypnotic beauty  and the fat ugly girl who whines all the  time, the prim/mean school mistress and the  the perfectly understanding and beautiful  assistant instructor . . . you get the  idea. Everyone politely oozes with adolescent sexuality, the film entices with  a sense of anticipation, but finally is  too superficial and melodramatic to be  anything but insipid.*  Is this how a good meal ends?  By Marion Vaughan  An ad for the Spaghetti Factory appeared  in the most recent edition of Vancouver  publication About Town.  It shows a woman lying on her back on a  table (presumably at the Spaghetti Factory), while a man lies on top of her.  Her skirt is open at the side, allowing  all us joyous viewers a generous view of  her black stockings and garter-clad legs,  between which hovers a waiter. The caption?  "A good meal shouldn't end with the bill."  The ad goes on to refer to "a few of the  ways people end their meals at the Spaghetti Factory." This ad represents one  more exploitation of women as sex objects  in order to sell a product. It caters to  the popular myth -that women are sexaally  available for the price of a meal; and  that women should pay for such attention  (being taken out to dinner) with sex.  We will be contacting the Spaghetti Factory to ask that they withdraw the ad and  print an apology. If they do not, we will  be leafletting the restaurant March 8.  Anyone interested in taking part in these  actions can call Marion Vaughan: 253 5654.•  Erotic art show prompts show  and tell meeting: chaos ensues  By Diana Smith  What is erotic art? I didn't realize the  complexity of this question until I went  to the second meeting of the group of  women organizing a Women's Erotic Art  Show.  At this meeting 25 women, being a combination of verbal and visual artists,  feminists and non-feminists, of hetero  and homosexual persuasions, were trying  to find agreement on what constitutes  erotic art. Add to this the slide show  on pornography, shown at the meeting by  two women from Women Against Violence  Against Women, and you get over three  hours of controversial, chaotic, stimulating and frustrating discussion.  At the first meeting it was suggested that  the concept of the show be a process, rather than a "bring your work" exhibition.  This means that work will not be brought  before a jury, judged, and maybe exhibited,  but* that women can bring their work and  enter into the ongoing discussion that is  attempting to define women's erotic art.  The idea for a women's erotic art show  came out of a,workshop on Feminism and  Art at the B.C.F.W. convention last year.  It was hopedi that the show would involve  women from all over the province. Although  there probably will be a way for women  outside the Lower Mainland to present  their artwork, the location of the meeting  and the "process" (being involved in several discussions, developing the concept  of women's erotic art over several months)  favours women living in Vancouver.  The show will probably be somtime in the  summer. At the next meeting (Sunday,  March 16th, 2:oo pm at the Vancouver  Women's Inter Art Society, 165 West Pender,  Vancouver, B.C. ) more women will present  their work for discussion. • Kinesis March SO  MEDIA  John Fahey's best fails to please  By Diana Smith  What you see in the accompanying photograph are two pages of the text from  "-The Best of John Fahey", a book containing transcriptions of some of his  songs plus "the best of his rambling  and bizarre stories, many photos, a dis-  cography, and more from this pioneering  American folk guitarist."  HOMOSEXUAL  GUITAR  PLAYING  You must play until you are no longer afraid of the guitar.  Many players are afraid to touch the guitar, and they act  like it. You must create an intimate relationship with your  guitar. Getting over your fear of it is much like a romantic-  sexual conquest. It is no mere poetic metaphor when some  songs refer to a guitar as though it were a woman.  Mastering a guitar is really very similar to conquering a  woman, and when you fail to master it, like when you fail  to master a woman, you have the same feelings of  humiliation and violence.  When you are alone with your guitar, you must win if you  are to be a man. And you can win—with any guitar. Sit  there with it for six hours. No guitar can withstand the  creative spirit that is in every human being.  Anyone who calls his guitar a "box" does not understand.  Anyone who calls his guitar an "axe" cannot play it  very well.  GUITAR  ANGST  Those who fear their guitars are essentially cowardly  faggots who have allowed themselves to be conquered by  perverse tendencies. They are unable to sit anywhere for six  hours under any circumstances. Their span of attention is  short, but what is much worse is that they don't care. They  don't even care to learn how to lengthen it. They have  constituted themselves essentially as hatred, opposition-  pure negativity. They are not feminine men. Homosexual  guitar playing is an imitative gesture of the non-essential  (i.e. temporary) characteristics of women—bitchiness,  frivolity, flightiness, and super-sensitivity. These superficial  characteristics are not the essence of the feminine. Look at  the homosexual guitarist pick up the guitar—he is afraid to  touch it. He is afraid of it. He thinks it hates him because  he hates so much. He has constituted his spirit against—  he is against life. He is a Nazi. His politics are against  freedom. He is a totalitarian at heart, but he has no power.  He must overcome this fear of the guitar. And he can. The  guitar must be his secret love, narcotic, whatever image he  prefers. But, he cannot forget to abuse it also, to learn to  bang on it and to make a percussion instrument of it, to  play hard on it, and bend it to his will.  Two pages of the best, from John Fahey  After reading his views on homosexual  guitar playing which, incidently, slander  women as much as gay men (lesbians obviously being quite beyond his frame of  reference), a few of us women decided  Johnnie's best wasn't good enough. In  fact, it was quite bad, being some of  the most blatant misogynist and homophobic writing we had come across in  quite a while.  Coincidently, at the same time as coming  across Fahey's flowing prose we heard  Vancouver was to be blessed with his  presence, for three evenings at the Soft  Rock Cafe on 4th Avenue, on February 14,  15 and 16.  A leaflet containing the offending text  was hastily prepared and several women  and a couple of men handed it out to  Fahey's fans at each of his five performances.  Of course, Johnnie didn't mean it  During one of the leafletting shifts,  Fahey himself and a woman companion  arrived. During the discussion that  followed Fahey was saying both, that he  "didn't mean to hurt anyone's feelings",  and, that we had misunderstood it, taken  it out of context, it was satire . . .  The woman with him was saying "He'll retract it, he'll retract it."  Although much of the book is his 'rambling and bizarre stories', the 14 pages  of introduction (where the two pages on  homosexual guitar playing appear) are  not  satirical but a straightforward history of his life as a musician, as well  as his views on guitar playing (and  women, and faggots, thrown in for good  measure). He actually did make a retraction on stage at one performance  but according to two sources it came  across as not very sincere. His since-  rety could be further questioned since  he refused to talk to an interviewer from  the Co-op Radio gay programme, Coming  Out.  Responding concretely to Fahey's hate  literature, by leafletting, was energizing and a partially satisfying way to  channel our anger.  It was also an opportunity to present people with this anti-  woman, anti-gay material; for them to  make the choice to listen to him perform  or not; and to talk to them about why it  is important not to support a man with  these views.  At least we wanted to expose this 'other  side' of Fahey which (fortunately?) is  not apparent from his instrumental music.  There was a wide range of responses from  the people leaf letted, i.tany were outraged by what Fahey had written, a few  had the point of view that being an artist excused him from any kind of responsibility, and that politics have no place  in art.  We'll do better next time  We also saw the shortcomings of our action  and were able to learn how we, or others,  could be more effective in similar situations in the future. For instance, the  leaflet needed to state clearly our criticisms of his statements and what our position was. Even though it seemed  obvious to some of us what was wrong and  that simply duplicating his remarks and  adding a headline (The Non-Essential  John Fahey) would be enough to show his  prejudices, this was not clear to many of  the people leafletted.  Some of them thought we were doing P.R.  for Fahey or that he  was gay and we were  an anti-gay protest. Simply, the leaflet relied too much on the leafletters  to explain our position.  Also we were not prepared for possible  changes in the situation — for example,  what do we do if Fahey makes a public  retraction, which he did at one performance — do we pack up and go home? Do  we demand he make a written retraction  and get the material deleted from further  printings of his book? In other words,  what change did we want?  We didn't go to the Soft Rock Cafe ahead  of time asking them to cancel his appearance. Whose side are they on? (we  assumed not ours) Did we want to for-  warn them? This may, or may not, have  been the right approach but it could  have stood more discussion among those  involved.  However, though more forethought would  have been better, we did make people,  including Fahey, aware that anti-woman  and anti-gay statements will not go by  unchallenged.*  To Ferron, a brand-  new record  By Carol Eastman  .   .   . January 1980  — all month in Blue  Wave studios, working on "Testimony"  .   .   . February 1980,  still in studio  working on "Testimony .   .   .  For Ferron, her first record production  marking the beginning of the 1980's is  not coming to birth with quick easy labour.  "Testimony" is a big full-term baby and  everybody is proud and full of hope . . .  Ferron is giving her maximum effort to  the labour, yet still looking fresh and  full of energy. One last push and the  newborn recording will be placed in the  hands of the attending technicians to be  checked, measured then dressed in a clean,  new record jacket and sent out into the  world. By March we will see "Testimony"  all around town at concerts and dances.  On this high-quality record produced by  Will MacCalder, Ferron's music and poetic lyrics are melded with the talents  of a dozen local musicians — with three  vocalists, Jane Jfortifee, Betty Chaba  and Charlotte Hodgins giving added dimensions to Ferron's voice.  The name "Testimony" was chosen for the  record to emphasize the message in the  song of the same title, written several  years ago on commission for Rape Relief,  ". . .by our lives be we spirit, by  our hearts be we women . . .you young  ones, you're the next ones, and I hope  you chose it well. . ."  The ten songs on this album are a selection ranging from "Who Loses?", written ten years ago by Ferron, to "Our  Purpose Here", one of her most recent  1979 songs. With the full 16 track  recording of backup by guitars, keyboard, drums, violin and cello for some  songs, and simpler arrangements for others, each song has a unique sound for  itself, and they all sound like hits.  Bravo, Ferron! •  The Lesbian Show Co-Operative Radio (CFRO 102.7) is now offering a tape service, through  which the following shows can be purchased.  Introductory Show  Lesbianism From The Waist Up  Our Role Models: Who Are They&  Dyke Separatism  Lesbian Perspectives on Spirituality  What Does a Lesbian Look Like?  Lesbians In Prison  Lesbian Art and the Art of Responsibility  Lesbians and Alcohol  20th Century Lesbian, Part 1,1910-1950  20th Century Lesbians Part II, 1950-1979  Lesbian Images and the Gay Movement  Lesbian Images In Hollywood  How Do We See Each Other?  Collective Process Part I: Why They Dont Work  Collective Process Part II: Why They Do Work  Lesbians in Isolation  BCFW Convention  Lesbians and the Constant State of Coming Out  The Best of the Lesbian Show: June-Dec. 1979  No Theme, Theme Show #1  No Theme, Theme Show #2  and our music series, Lesbians and Music:  Spotlight on Mary Watkins  Heather Bishop  Holly Near  Linda Tillery  Ferron  Meg Christian  Siren! Avedis  Send orders to: Tha Lesbian Show, Tap* Sarvlce, c/o Coop Radio, 337 Carrall St., Vancouver B.C. V6B 2 J4 20 Kinesis March 80  MEDIA  Feminist, gay groups protest New York opening  Open closets, close Windows  United Artists tried to convince the public that the movie "Windows" was simply a  "romantic thriller". But that publicity  bubble burst when over 300 members of the  feminist and gay communities protested —  on a week's notice — its opening in New  York City.  Their demonstration instead indicted "Windows" as a shockingly antiwoman and anti-  lesbian movie.  "Two-four-six-eight,  'Windows' is woman-hate. Two-four-six-  eight, 'Windows' is lesbian hate," the  protesters shouted.  "Very few people went in," Sheila Roher  of Women Against Pornography (WAP) reported. Across town at the only other  Manhatten theatre to open "Windows",  attendance was equally poor as about 4-0  demonstrators chanted, "Open closets,  close 'Windows'."  The movie is about a wealthy lesbian poet  named Andrea, played by Elizabeth Ashley,  who arranges to have a strange man brutally rape the woman she is secretly in  love with. Andrea, who also murders several people during the movie, hopes the  rape will propel the woman, Emily, played  by Talia Shire, into her protective arms.  Emily, thoroughly terrorized, does move in  with Andrea, who then attempts to rape  Emily again. . Emily is "saved" at the  last moment by a sensitive, understanding  — brace yourself — policeman.  "Windows" is a clear backlash to the gay  THE AVIS ROSENBERG FACT SHEET ON-  CANADIAN WOMEN ARTISTS (cont. from P. 18)  According to a survey by Jane Martin published in Carot  of July 1978, the percentage of women on Canada Council juries  for all categories of grants was, year-  by-year from 1972-73 through 1976-77,  14.3*, 12.5*, 15.6*, 3.2* and 10.8*.  Over the same period, the average percentage of female applicants was 29.9* and  the average percentage of female recipients was over 8* lower: 21.4*. By way  of comparison, Martin indicates that  47.5* of CAR/FAC members are women.  According to a list of "Canada Council-  Frequency of Jury Members since 1970"  published in CAR/FAC News!  of November  1979, (a)women constituted 30 of the 133  jurors listed, or 22.5*; (b)l2 of the 30  women jurors, or 40*, had served one time  only; (c)women served 78 times of the total 440 times indicated, or 17.7*.  Four of the five award tapes from the  1979 Second Independent Video Open were  by women. Two-of the four jurors were  women. Video and performances are often  done by the same people these days; five  of the eight 1979-80 Canada Council "5"  grants in these two areas went to women.  The Video Officer at the Canada Council  is a woman. It seems safe to say that  women are doing better outside the standard object-art realm than in it. What  can you suggest as some possible reasons?  At Emily Carr College of Art in  Vancouver, staff is 87% male  At the Emily Carr College of Art in Vancouver (E.C.A.A.), one of a handful of  major Canadian art colleges, the percentage of male faculty in 1979-80 is 87*.  This figure includes both full- and part-  time faculty. According to an E.C.C.A.  Women's Committee broadsheet, there are  30£ "full-time equivalent" male instructors (30.65) and 4i "full-time equivalent" female instructors (4.55).  In other words, adding up all the courses  taught by women results in a total that is  the equivalent of having 4.55 women  teaching full-time. In the painting department, class lists indicate that women  constitute 73* of the 2nd year students  Somebody loves Emily,  too much  The Spokeswoman/LNS  and women's movement," explained Jan Oxen-  burg, a member of the National Association  of Lesbian and Gay Filmmakers (NALGF).  , "It says lesbians, not men and male institutions, threaten the security of women.  It distorts who is causing the rapes and  denies the comfort and support women in  the past ten years have given each other."  In addition to continued picketting, the  groups intend to write TV stations to  protest the movie's ads. Roher charges  that the ads, depicting a person holding  a knife to a woman's throat, sell the  film "by sensationalizing and exploiting  violence against women."     "       ,.  •    Guardian  There's no reason to go see  Sweet Reason  If you. are planning on seeing Stage 33's  production of Sweet Reason,  don't bother.  The show, produced and conceived by  Sandra O'Neill, takes a humourous look  at the women's movement and presents it  in "reasonable" terms.  It's a two-act play starring Sandra  O'Neill and Marilyn Peppiatt and consists  of skits and songs designed to follow■  the plight and progress of women over  the centuries.  Yes, we should laugh at ourselves, but  in a constructive way. Sweet Reason  doesn't do that. The jokes have been  heard before (with slight variations)  and no new conclusions were drawn. The  show was funny . . . sometimes, but  the stereotyping was still there.  For $6.75 you may as well stay home and  see similar comedy routines on the T.V.•.  and 51* of the 4th year students, 41 and  19 respectively, while the number of men  is fairly constant. A number of female  students who began as painters have  transferred into other departments he-  cause of the painting instructors: there  are 5 men and 0 women.  According to a report by Monica Boyd of  Carleton University, male-female salary  differentials exist for all fields within Canadian universities, with men having higher median salaries than women.  In the field of fine arts, where the  salary differential is the smallest, the  median salary of male full-time faculty  was 11* higher in 1972-73 and 12* higher  in 1975-76 than the salaries received by  women in this field.  These figures do not include all the  people who teach the low-paid evening  or summer courses or who work on a one-  term or one-year-at-a-time basiss many  of whom are women.  Only one out of every five artists earns  $5,000 a year or more  According to an October 1978 national  survey of visual artists conducted by  the Cultural Division of Statistics Canada and discussed in CAR/FAC News!  of  July 1979, only one out of every five  artists earns $5,000 or more per year  in direct art sales; women constitute  over 60* of the artists' earning less  than $5,000 and having no other employment; almost three-quarters of Canadian  artists are engaged in some form of labour force activity in addition to their  work as practising visual artists  (women's overall employment situation  becomes relevant here)-,  slightly over  half the artists with additional employment indicated that their work was  teaching art or related subjects {the  low representation of women on art faculties and/or their predominantly lower  ranks becomes relevant here).  In 16 commercial galleries across Canada  in 1977, 94 of the 563 artists represented were women (16.7*).  In 50 museums and galleries across Cana  da during the 1970s, out of 1377 solo  shows, 313 or 22.7* were one-woman shows.  The percentage of one-woman shows in  Canadian museums increased from 18.9*  in 1970 (21 museums surveyed) to 31.7*  in 1977 (27 museums surveyed).  This.was  an increase from 24 of 127 total solo  shows to 65 of 205.  Women have 30% representation in  shows at museums and galleries  Of 113 group shows at museums and public  galleries during 19ro-77, roughly one-  third of the shows (having roughly one-  third the total number of artists) fall  into the 15-25* range in their representation of women artists.  The total number of artists was 3347, and the total  number of women artists was 1133, or just  about 30*.  These figures are not literally descriptive of, but probably strongly representative of, the state of affairs. If  anything, they err on the rosy side,  since the museums themselves chose which  shows to report on.  Works of art by women in permanent collections of Canadian museums have increased from 14.8* in 1970 (1902 of  12,823 total works in 18 museums). 21.3*  of the works acquired between 1970 and  1976 were by women. None of this indicates what sorts of funds were committed;  it's only about quantity of objects.  One could go on citing figures indefinitely, and one could use them in many  ways. By doing the preceding compilation, I do not mean to imply that these  figures constitute the only factors  worth considering when one is considering life, art, or the artworld.  Neither do I believe that art and artists  are subjects only discussable in formal,  isonographic, stylistic, thematic,  philosophical, psychological, historical,  or biographical terms. All these things  — and others — bear on the truth. I  wish to redress an imbalance and smash  a few delusions. Please go out and use  the information collected here. It will  benefit us all.e Kinesis March SO  MEDIA  The Marriage of Maria Braun isn't feminist, but it is interesting  By Pat Fcindel  Warning:  The Marriage of Maria Braun is  not a feminist film. It does not relate  to your everyday life. It is not the  kind of film that appeals to a lot of  people (most commonly heard comment of  those polled: "I didn't understand it  and I thought it was boring and obscure  anyway.") And true, it isn't an easy  film to understand.  Fassbinder demands  a lot of an audience.  Whether you call it challenging and  stimulating or just plain obscure probably depends a lot on whether or not you  like that sort of so-called "European  art film" genre.  Among other things, the film is about  romanticism — the classical traditional  kind rather than the Harlequin kind.  My response on one hand is, "On the  brink of global nuclear disaster, who has  the time for romantic tragedies?" On the  other hand, however, my sense is that  this filmmaker is saying a great deal  about human feelings and the movement of  human lives; about how emotion, contained,  engraves itself on the personality, and,  collectively, on the character of a  nation or society.  It is about how an idea can become an  instrument of survival or of destruction,  and about the inevitable unforeseen consequences that derive from choices.  The meanings take place in the context  of a personal story, but the backdrop  is always the war and Germany — the  story is as much Germany's as Maria  Braun's.  The film revolves around the personality  of Maria Braun, married in the midst of  Women's Building  Variety Show  celebrates IWD in style  The Planning Committee of the Women's  Building Society of Vancouvei will be  holding a concert/variety benefit show  at the Robson Square Media Centre on  March 9, beginning at 8 p.m.  This is  planned to augment events and activities  celebrating International Women's Day,  which is on March 8, and commemorated  all over the world  Tickets will be available in advance  from the Vancouver Women's Bookstore at  804'Richards St., Ariel Books, 2766 W.  4th Ave., and the Vancouver Status of  Women, 1090 W. 7th Ave. and at the door  the evening of the performance.  Price  of tickets: $4.00 for employed people;  $2.00 for unemployed.  an air-raid in Germany during the Second  World War. Her husband, Herman Braun,  leaves the day after the wedding for  the front lines.  From that time, by  force of various circumstances, the two  are physically separated from each other  for virtually the rest of the film.  Maria marries her-man. She  lives by this romantic ideal....  Nevertheless, Maria Braun is married to  Herman — "her-man".  This is essentially who she is by her  own definitition, and is the romantic  ideal she lives by internally. Externally, she takes hold of a grim life of  poverty and gradually, through sheer  brazenness and aplomb, transforms it  into one of material wealth and success.  She takes first one job, then another.  She takes first an American lover, then  a French lover. She takes what she  needs where she can get it.  While her emotions stay enclosed in some  inner altar, she gets richer.  The passage of time is marked only by the increasing luxuriousness of her clothes,  the hardness of her voice. She buys a  house for Herman to return to, little  knowing that it is her current lover who  has most recently kept Herman away.  I.'aria is an often astounding, always  fascinating embodiment of contradictions  — devoted, though never subservient, to  her husband, yet in a worldly sense completely self-sufficient — the artful,  witty, and dignified master of every  An anthology of short stories by women C  will be Press Gang's first book of ^  adult fiction. Final selection of the •£  work to be included in the anthology -jc  has been completed. Both new writers  "£  "7* Wa4e /I  Am$ Stcvif  ^0£^j_f#" and previously published authors  are     T  •^WCW represented. ^r^^^rCrk^r^^r^rCr^r^^J^  \ Sat. TfamcH 29\  13$ S. Condovat  To mark the occasion, a pre-publica- ^  tion gala called "To Make A Long Story jc  A *y,4 *k**s*^ 4** s*/f* s» Short" is planned for Saturday, March -fc  VZCCvQ  OtA&l'   %X4A€\X/&    29. Tickets for the show and dance may *  Mt <* -J y       be ordered from Press Gang J  &(* otk&ib vice 603 powei1 st *  W «       wr*v*v   QT**^ Vancouver,   B.C. £  •••••••••••••••^•••••••^••••*  The short story book will be the sixth  publication for Press Gang, a feminis  printing and publishing collective in  Vancouver. 'k*k"k"k'k"k"k*k'K'i  adcdU$5.  situation she finds herself in. Utterly  romantic and totally pragmatic. It's  worth it to see the film just for Maria  Braun's unforgettable one liners.  Fassbinder's style, too, is a curious  combination of economy and indulgence.  It is formal, stylized, each view through  the camera carefully composed and constructed. Almost no gesture or word is  extraneous. We are given only the scantiest information, and often only by  implication or symbol. As an audience  we are more likely to witness consequences than decisive events or choices. The  symbolism is stark, simple, almost ponderous. Several images repeat themselves  — the wrist held under cold water (I am  informed this is a remedy for shock), the  moving trains, the rendez-vous amidst  the ruins and rubble left by war, tears  and laughter that erupt with no warning  or explanation, radio broadcasts of the  speeches of German political leaders. . .  The resulting mood is dramatic, theatrical, yet distant and restrained. A  sense of anticipation and tension pervades the film. It is sombre and yet  has the humour that comes of intense  living at the edge.  But still I have questions, reservations — why a woman to represent a  country? Why the implications of pros- ■  titution — the close-up shot of her  legs. Why does the strong and daring  woman always have to be sexy too? And  why does this woman who did not live  like a victim, die like a victim? Is  she a symbol only? Another Other?  I still like the film. If only for its  complexity and careful, formal style.  I leave it to others to analyze more..  Vancouver needs homes—families,  single parents, singles—to provide  foster care for children, birth through  teen, long and short term placements.  For more information please call  872-8154  Ministry of Human Resources  Hiyou Muckamuck  Janet Berry and Janet Beebe (left to right above, or is that  right to left?): Yes, we're still enjoying our new-found  status as sisters-in-struggle. Thanks to all of you for  bringing us together!  (If you're puzzled, you've obviously never confused us. Congratulations.) BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  At the WOMEN'S ART GALLERY:  March 3-27 - Marcia Pitch, "Garden  Labyrinth", environmental sculpture.  Opening on March 2, 7:30pm. All are  welcome. #6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver.  Hours: 9-5pm Mon-Fri, 9-8 Thursday.  WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE sub-committee  meeting, March 29, 10am at 45 Kingsway.  This sub-committee and all interested  women will be organizing our provincial action for Mother's Day in May.  Contact person is Bet Bateman, RR#1,  Winlaw, B.C. VOG 2JO.  GAY WOMEN'S FILMS, part of a series of  Gay Films as benefit for Vancouver  Gay Community Centre.  Sun. March 16,  7 and 9:30 pm (2nd show, women only):  Home Movie, Jan Oxenberg, 10 min.,  A Comedy in Six Unnatural Acts, Jan  Oxenberg, 25 min., Jill Johnston Oct.  1975, Wazana and Armatage, 30 min.,  Sandy and Madeleine's Family Farrell,  28 min.  Sun. March 30, 7 and 9:30 pm  (2nd show, women only):  In The Best  Interests of Children, Iris Films,  53 min., Moon Goddess, Hammer, 15 min,  Great Goddess, Hammer, 25 min., 9:30pm  only - Women I Love, Hammer, 27 min.  Also in Gay Series: Sun. March 2, 7pm  and 9:30pm, Word Is Out; Sun. April 20  (at the Ridge Theatre) Gay USA.  This  film series is $16 by subscription,  limited door sales $2.75. Contact  V.G.C.C, P0 Box 2259, Vancouver, B.C.  Celebrate the RITES OF SPRING March 30  at Odd Fellows Hall, Gravely and  Commercial, llam-3pm. Tickets available at Ariel Books. Proceeds to the  Vancouver women's coffeehouse.  ON THE AIR  VSW and Co-op Radio has developed a programme called TALKING LAW. We need  some new people to take part in producing and scripting the programs.  Call VSW 736 1313 for information.  WOMANVISION'S March program:  Mar. 17 - Interview with Nellie  McClung about her new book  Mar. 24 - Women and Health, with  Madeleine Boscoe, member of the  Toronto Health Sharing Collective  Mar. 31 - News Show, featuring coverage of the midwifery conference  THE LESBIAN SHOW'S March program:  Mar. 13 - Lesbian relationships: the  different ways we relate to our  lovers and friends.  Mar. 20 - The constant state of coming  out: to employers, parents, ourselves.  T5ar. 27 - Lesbians & Music: spotlight  on Alix Dobkin.  The Lesbian Show on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, Thursdays from 7:30-8:00pm.  FEMINIST  CARTOONS  The Fine Arts Gallery at the University  of British Columbia is planning an exhibition of feminist cartoons, to be  culled primarily from published examples  in the feminist media, and from pamphlet  and book collections.  The exhibition will originate at the  Fine Arts Gallery in early spring 1981,  and subsequently will travel.  Send suggestions and requests for more  information to: The Fine Arts Gallery,  University of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1W5. (228-2759)  GROUPS  WOMEN'S GROUP forming to discuss mutual  concerns about infertility. For more  information phone Beth at 738-6397 or  Harriet at 438-3397.  SECHELT WOMEN interested in contacting  other women in the area and looking  at starting a women's centre in that  area, contact Gayle (885-2626) or  Anne (885-5029).  LESBIANS OVER 40 meet Monday night at  7:30 at the Women's bookstore ,804  Richards to talk about common concerns. Come join us,we're friendly.  LESBIAN MOTHERS DROP IN meets Sundays  at 2pm at the Women's Bookstore, 804  Richards, Vancouver. For info, call  Laurel (525-1336) or Lynn (734-9784).  Are you a SINGLE PARENT? Having hassles  from welfare? A self-help group is  forming. For information, call  931-8154, 7pm-6am.  -VSW-  Vancouver Status of Women provides free  assistance to low income women with  their income tax and child tax credit.  Simply call our office (736-1313) and  set up a time to come in.  If you work full-time, you have a hard  time making it into VSW during our  office hours. For this reason, we have  extended our hours and are now open  every Thursday evening until 9:00 pm.  We are interested in setting up a  lesbian mothers group in Vancouver East.  Call VSW at 736-1313.  VSW QUARTERLY MEETING: Tuesday, March  18, 7:30pm, at Kits Library, 8th and  MacBonald, Vancouver.  The CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM COLLECTIVE  wants to train women to help teach  constructive criticism. If you are  interested in teaching or would like  to be a facilitator for your collective, call Karen (253-5654) or  Paulette (255-0523).  WE ARE A FAMILY TOO is a single parent  support service located at Brittania  community centre, 1661 Napier St.,VAN.  ph. 253-4391, loc.57 Ask for Darlyne  or Michelle.We are funded by Canada  Employment for 6 months. If you are a  single parent we would like to know  what you need most(beside money,day/  nights child care,alone time and a  certificate of sanity)  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is open to calls  two nights a week, Thursday and Sunday,  from 7-10pm.  Call 734-1016.  MEETINGS  The VANCOUVER COALITION FOR A NON-NUCLEAR  WORLD is inviting you to join us in organizing the April 26 march and rally.The  coalition represents a variety of groups  and individuals concerned with the future of life on the planet.   We meet  every Sunday at 7:30 at the Britannia  centre(Commercial & Napier) in the senior  citizens lounge. Phone 738-8293 or 874-  0994.  A CONFERENCE ON REFUGEES IN SOUTHERN  AFRICA is planned for the week of March  15-22 by Oxfam, Canadian Aid for Southern African Refugees, CUS0 and Southern Africa Action Coalition. A photo  display of women under apartheid is  scheduled. $10 employed, $3 unemployed  and students. Call Krenza Lai (743-1712)  for more information.  RECLAIMING OURSELVES, a feminist perspective on pornography, a slide-  tape presentation by WAVAW, followed  by discussion. CUPW Hall, 950-A  Richards St., Vancouver, March 13  at 7:30pm. Women Only. Admission by  donation. Pre-register for childcare  by March 10. For info, call 872-2250.  OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WOMEN Monthly Meeting  March 11, 7 p.m., downtown YWCA:  Lecture on Hypothermia, kayaking pool  session (Bring bathing suit and t- .  shirt).  Sat. March 15:  Snow Shoeing  with children to local mountains.  Sun. March 30:  Cross country skiing  Mount Baker area - USA-North Cascades  Avalanche work. Snow study.  For more  information phone Clasina Van Bemmel  683-2531.  WEEKEND WORKSHOPS in constructive  criticism and other techniques,  for self-help, for community, for  struggle. Fee: $50 (negotiable).  To register, call Carol (254-4910).  Child care is available. All fees  go to help build Rape Relief House.  Mar. 14-16: Sally Batt & Isobel  Kiborn (women only)  Apr. 11-13: Isobel Kiborn & Tom  Sandborn (women and men)  CLASSIFIED  SORWUC needs your help. A number of women are leaving the office and SORWUC needs people to take their place.  Any time, evenings included. After  this wonderful training you, too, can  get a job in an office and organize  it. Call them at 684-2834 or 681-  2811. Address is: 814 - 402 W. Pender  Street, Vancouver B.C.  What's Left  in this country that  only costs three bucks?  itUtt  A leftwords  Subscription,  That's What!  Leftwords is an all volunteer newspaper produced jointly by independent socialists and  the Socialist Organizing Committee  Jor Subscription, fill in the form below and send to leftwords, P.O. 69367, Stn. K,  \ ancouver, B.C.  8 issues regular ' $3.00 □  8 issues regular ± $ donation □  8 issues sustaining—$25 (& you'll receive an I read leftwords t shirt) Kinesis March SO  BULLETIN BOARD  JUST OUT  A second, enlarged edition of the HOSKEN  REPORT is now available.  Includes  history, rationale, facts and politics  of genital mutilation, a geographic  overview and case histories. 368pp.  Send $17 to: WIN News/Fran P. Hosken,  187 Grant St, Lexington MA 02173.  NEW FILM:  Good Daycare: One Out Of Ten  Canada 1978, produced by Good News  Productions, Inc., 30 min, colour,  16 mm.  For sale: $525.00, Rental:  contact IDERA, 2524 Cypress St.., Van.  V6J 3N2, ph. 738-8815.  A WIDOW'S HANDBOOK is a project of the  Newfoundland and Labrador Women's  Institutes. This $2.00 booklet is available from Box 4056, St-John's Newfoundland A1C 5Y2.  STORY OF A WOMEN'S CENTRE tells about  the establishment of the Port Coquit-  lam Area Women's Centre.It's $3.50 from  the Centre at P.O. BOX 220,Port Co-  quitlam,3.C. V3C3V7.The second printing  is due out this month.  SEXISM IN ADVERTISING is a report of the  findings of the Montreal YWCA. It examines the extent of sexism in advertising in Canada and proposes action to  eliminate it. Available for $3.00 from  YWCA, 1355 Dorchester Blvd. West Montreal. Quebec H3G 1T3  NUCLEAR DETERRENTS:  UraniumCorrespondence with the Premier,  single copy $3.00 & 50 cents for handling and mailing  Nukenomics,single copy: $2.00 & 50 cents  for handling and mailing.  Available from RGNNS Distribution  2230 Smith Street, Regina.Saskatchewan,  S4P 2P4.  1980 INDEX/DIRECTORY OF WOMEN'S MEDIA,  available for $8.00 from Women's  Institute for Freedom of the Press,  3306 Ross Place, N.W., Washington,  D.C. 20008.  WAVES is going independent. To subscribe,  send $5.00 to WAVES c/o FLAG, Box 237,  Station A, Victoria B.C. V8W 2N1  Room of One's Own, feminist literary  journal, has devoted its most recent  issue to writer/poet DOROTHY LIVESAY.  Copies available for $4 from Room of  One's Own, P.O. Box 46160, Stn. G,  Vancouver V6R 4G5.  Recent titles at the women's bookstores:  ARIEL BOOKS, 2766 W.4th Ave.  733-3511  I'm In Training To Be A Tall Blonde,  The  Energy  File  w$m*mm  Nicole Hollender, $5.25.  About Men, Phyllis Scheiler, $14.75.  Gift From The Sea, Anne Morrow Lind-  burgh,  $1.95.  The Anderson Affair, A.I.Fuwier, $2.50.  WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE, 804 Richards,  684-0523  I Love Myself When I Am Laughing,  Zora Neale Hurston, $8.00.  Gyn/Ecology, Mary Daly, $8.00.  Amazons I, ed. Jessica Amanda  Salmonson, $2.95.  Middlewatch, Suzan Kerslake, $6.95.  Our Mothers' Daughters, Judis Arcanda  $4.55.  Common Herbs For Natural Health,  Juliette de Bairacle Levy, $3.40.  RESOURCES  LIL is now training new members. Lesbian feminists interested in working with them, call Carol at 872-  8212.  HELP THE LIL LIBRARY. Donate your fine  old lesbian feminist classics. For  details, call LIL 734 -1016.  LETTER OF THANKS  The Vancouver women's coffeehouse collective would like to thank all those  who attended the January benefit held  at the Quadra.  We were successful in raising $500,  falling short of our goal by only  $1500. With your continued support,  Vancouver will soon see the re-establishment of a women's coffeehouse.  Please check the Events section in  Kinesis for our next attempt to defeat  the deficit.  GET FIT, KEEP FIT  The following is a partial list of  Community Centres and Swimming Pools in  Vancouver that have fitness facilities,  saunas, weight-lifting equipment, whirlpools etc. and have specific times set  aside for women only.  Trout Lake Community Centre  3350 Victoria Drive 876-9285  — Health Club Tues. & Thurs. 8-10 p.m.  Britannia Community Centre & Pool  1661 Napier 253-4391  — Thurs. 1:30-2 p.m.  — Swim & exercise Thurs. 1:45-2:45 p.m.  Carnegie Centre  401 Main Street 665-2220  — Mon. Wed. & Fri. 1:30-3:30 p.m. -  exercise room  Aquatic Centre  1050 Beach Street 689-7156  — Mon. Wed. & Fri. 9:30-11:30 a.m. -  exercise, swim, sauna & whirlpool  — Tues. & Thurs. 5:30-6:30 p.m. -  exercise, swim, sauna & whirlpool  Count me in!  □   Enclosed is $10.00 for a subscription to  the next 12 issues of Energy File.  I I    Send me my free copy!  402 West Pender St.  Vancouver, B.C.,  B.C.'s Only Energy Magazine  KINESIS HAS SUSTAINED  APPEAL  Thank you,  sustainers.  Your contributions  give us a powerful feeling of community  support, and make the continued existence  of Kinesis possible.  If you have not yet made a sustainer  donation or pledge, but have sufficient  income to do so, we ask you to think  about it. Sustainers make a personal  commitment to keep Kinesis alive.  Sustainers contribute $50 a year, in  a lump sum or in installments of $5 or  more. In return, you receive your own  subscription, along with any number of  complimentary copies for your friends.  Why not fill out this sustainer form  and help Kinesis continue?  Postal Code  I enclose my monthly installment of    I enclose a lump sum of $50    Clip and mail to:  Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly  to all members. Individual subs to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year. We ask members to base  their donations on this, and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe, Jan-,  et Berry, Cole Dudley, Penny Goldsmith,  Morgan IIcGuigan, Gayla Reid, Kathleen  Rivest, Ann Schaefer, Diana Smith, Cat  Wickstrom, Joan Woodward, Michele Morel. Kinesis March 80  WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE  Kate Millett speaks of violence against women in The Basement  By Janet Beebe  As women, we turn away from our knowledge and very real evidence of the  violence done to us, pretending that  "there is no meaning in our death." But  if we believe this, then we are not  really alive.  These words are from Kate Millett, who  spoke February 15 to more than 600  people as part of UBC's Women's Week.  She focused on violence against women,  within the context of her most recent  book, The Basement.    Many who were there  found her speech moving, others found it  horrifyingly graphic, and some were  provoked to anger by her words.  Millett began with a theoretical framework for violence against women, using as  an example the widespread atrocities  which were perpetrated against Vietnamese women during the Vietnam war.  "A  woman who is raped is nobody — no name  — just someone's possession," she said.  As another example, she paralleled heterosexual relationships with the master-  slave bond. "In those relationships is  the seed of racism, classism, the conqueror and conquered." She called the  heterosexual model "sad, brutal, ugly and  a terrible waste of time and energy."  The worst aspect is that the coercion  in heterosexual relationships has, by  rape of one form or another, ruined sexual expression and pleasure. According  to Millett, the real issue for us as  feminists is not equal pay, but being  subject to brute force, battering,  ownership, and especially fear.  It's this fear and its corollary, shame,  which fascinates her in the death of  Sylvia Likens. Sylvia Likens died in  October 1965 in Indianapolis, Indiana,  after months of deprivation and torture  at the hands of her foster mother and  children in the neighbourhood.  "I was Sylvia Likens."  This story, fourteen years later, resulted in Millett's novel, The Basement.  During the intervening years, the murder  was "an incubus, the nightmare of adolescence, of growing up a female child,"  which led her to sculpt cages and more  cages . . . cages with women and children in them. This was the only viable  metaphor she could see, not only for  Sylvia's life, but also for our own lives.  "I was Sylvia Likens," said Millett.  "She was the terror at the back of the  cave. It was her story, but we all have  one — if you're sixteen, or ever have  been, or a woman."  Sylvia's experience embodies the essential experience of all women — shame.  For the breaking of the spirit, not only .  the body, is the real meaning of shame.  It is the female experience of being  "endlessly shamed" which controls us, and  is instilled in most of us during adolescence.  When Millett began to write The Basement  she said she didn't understand Gertrude,  the foster mother, in her role of torturer.  In writing the book, however, she  came to better understand the nature of  evil, and of institutions of social control. She came to understand the Gertrude that lies inside each woman.  Gertrude "was the keeper of the cage."  She had embraced the alien ideals of  violence advocated by patriarchal society.  To the extent that we all have  embraced violence within ourselves, we  are all Gertrude.  Throughout her speech, Millett urged that  .§ women understand the violence in our  |j lives, stating "we cannot go on not know-  ^ ing, not understanding." We cannot go  | on dismissing incidents such as Sylvia's  murder as unimportant, isolated events  involving crazy people. We can all understand violence; it's only a matter of remembering our own childhood, in a society  where children are brutalized and without  rights.  In concluding, Millett declared herself a  pacifist, stating that revolution accomplished by violent means is no revolution. We have to fight to cease being  victims, but by organizing, educating,  and providing a safe place for women who  have been victims of violence.  A number of women in the audience challenged Millett on this, stance, advocating  active, militant resistance to our oppression as women. Millett replied that she  considers herself a militant, and certainly doesn't equate pacifism with  passivity.  "We are all under the threat  of violence . . . but we must learn to  go beyond murder as a way of life."  Questioned whether a revolution without  violence is possible, Millett queried:  "Has feminism ever had violence on its  agenda ... in the end, what does violence do to human life? We (women's  movement) invented a lot of non-violent  tactics, and have effected enormous social  transformation."  WAVAW completes research  project, holds open house  A Vancouver feminist group will soon complete an extensive research project into  one of the most disturbing problems  facing Canadian society — violence  against women.  Women Against Violence Against Women  (WAVAW), a federally funded project  focusing on pornography, violence in the  home and sexual harassment at the workplace, will present the results of this  research at an Open House March 18 from  2 p.m. to 8 p.m. at its office, #8-45  Kingsway, Vancouver, B.C.  A slide-tape presentation which examines  pornography from a feminist perspective  will be shown at 3 p.m. and again at  6:30 pm. Entitled "Reclaiming Ourselves:  A Feminist Perspective on Pornography",  the presentation looks at the increasing  use of violent pornographic images in  the media. The production is suitable  for presentation to women's groups,  university and college groups and concerned community organizations. Members  of the WAVAW collective will be available  on request to lead seminars or discussions  on the presentation should an individual  or group wish to rent it.  Two leaflets produced by WAVAW will also  be available. The leaflets — one on  violence in the home (available in seven '  languages) and one on sexual harassment  (available only in English) — include resource lists for residents of the Lower  Mainland and elsewhere in British Columbia. The leaflets could also be of interest to groups and individuals outside  the province.  Resource materials under production include a 16mm film on sexual harassment  and an annotated bibliography on violence  against women.  The critical problem of  sexual harassment is just beginning to be  recognized and it is hoped the film will  bring about greater awareness of the  problem. All areas of violence against  women are covered in the bibliography.  Women's Building dance was a  great success  The Women's Building Planning Committee  held a highly successful women's dance on  February, 16th at the Teamsters Hall. As  a welcome to the spring, it was a high  energy occasion. We have had good feedback — from "the music was absolutely  fantastic — the atmosphere so warm and  friendly" to "I had a great time." Financially it was successful also. We  cleared $552.  The committee is compiling a list of resource and contact people we used for the  Valentine's dance. It will be on hand at  Vancouver Status of Women for those groups  interested in fund-raising.  The Secretary of State has come through  with a $1000.00 grant to cover the costs  of publicity, and general office supplies,  as we continue the work of fund-raising  and publicizing the concept of a women's  building through social and cultural  events.  Women with energy and new ideas are welcome to attend and participate in our  plans for the spring and summer. We  meet every other Thursday at 5:30 p.m.  Our next meeting is on March 13. Gillian Marie  Read about the  in- movement meeting  Rape Relief and VSW have run off copies  of minutes from the in-movement meeting  February 19. If you're interested in  reading what was said, drop by either  office and pick up a copy.