 HAPPY I.W.Y.  73-8305  Serials Division  Main Library  University of B.C.  VANCOUVER 8,  B.C.  Vancouver Status off Women 2029W.4thAve.  December  1975  ISSN 0317-9995  VOLUME V       NO 5 I  ms. claus says "merry xms anyway."  Last January Roberta Schlosberg, commenting on the prospects for International Women's Year, wrote that the year  was like a pomegranate — "promising on the outside but filled with precious little meat." Now that IWY is drawing  to a close, I am tempted to say it proved to be very like a pomegranate — on the whole seedy. That is not entirely  fair. We got some good things — a little money for women who wanted to gather and talk to one another, a little  more money for women's centres, the IWY Van instead of a conference, the festival at Kaslo. And Gene Errington's  office — late and with insufficient money, but there. Some things, not everything, and certainly not enough.  Elsewhere in this issue there is a rundown of what we got from last year's Christmas list (one thing) and an all  too depressing summary of what we didn't get. More depressing yet, one gift we thought we had — a victory in the  PWA stewardess case -- has been snatched away. Another — a victory in the Lornex mine case — is in grave danger.  In-retrospect IWY looks very like years past — some progress for women, but so slowly. The future, in comparison,  looks alarming. Roberta wrote last January that inflation, not women, was the pressing issue of the moment. The  economy is even more of an issue now and we must be very watchful of the effects that economic policies have on  women.  The intent of the present federal guidelines is to freeze the economy in its present condition. And we all know  where that leaves women. In job ghettos further reinforced by a government committed to honouring "traditional  relationships" in wages. In the marketplace faced with rising prices (sellers of goods can pass through rising  costs) while struggling on fixed incomes. Falling farther and farther behind as they receive the minimum allowable  wage increase while those at the top get their $2400 a year.  We in the Movement are committed to a revolution. A revolution aimed at a'redistribution of money and power in  the society. A redistribution in favour of the largest disadvantaged group in society — women. A freeze of the  present economic structure does nothing for us.  During the coming months we must not be lulled by appeals to "responsibility" nor seduced by calls for "restraint  in the cause of the higher good." The economy may well need "saving". But it cannot be saved at our expense. We  have too long sacrificed our needs for "higher goods" — husband's, children, family, war, prosperity, stability,  society.  It's our turn :  -Nancy Conrod,  VSW President we should have asked ms.claus...  In last year's December issue of  KINESIS we* composed a Dear Santa  letter of requests for the coming  year. We felt the items on our list  were badly needed by women, and in<-  deed many of them we had requested  the year before and were still waiting for. For the sake of tradition  we decided to do the same this December. As we began to list them, some  of our requests had a very familiar  ring. So we dug out last year's Christmas list for comparison. Baby, we  have not come a long way!  For instance:  ...Last year we asked for a new Maternity Protection Act to protect the  rights of pregnant working women. We  asked for this the year before as  well. We had better ask for it again.  See September KINESIS, page 7, for  the details of what the Act should  nclude.  ..We asked for homemakers to be included in the Canada Pension Plan.  Any of you homemakers got CPP protect-  on yet?  ..We asked for our children to be  given non-sexist text books. There  1 ray of hope here at least in  that the number of teachers and parents who recognize and condemn the  sex tole stereotyping found in the  standard text books is increasing.  More good children's books are available. Never Done will be on the reading list of Social Studies classes,  a lot of parents are looking at the  books their children are taught from  ~frrr '_he first time, and some of those  parents are protesting. When we hear  of workshops like North Vancouver's  "Sexism in English 8,9&10" we can  smile — when we once again see the  badly needed Women's Studies courses  left off the school curriculums by  a vacillating Department of Education,,  we grind our teeth in rage.  ...We asked for control of our bodies  —take abortion out of the Criminal  Code. We know what happened there —  abortion is still in the Criminal  Code and Dr. Morgentaler is in prison.  ...Arrange for a total transplant for  Otto Lang,we begged. Well he's been  transplanted with Ron Basford. We  should, everyone of us, write to Basford and ask him how he stand on the  issues that are so vital to us.  ...How about a Federal Human Rights  Act? we asked in 1974 since we didn't  get an answer when we asked in 1973.  Well, Bill C-72 was introduced at  the end of the Spring session. It's  still sitting there,and according to  Lalonde it won't be passed this session either.  ...How about an amended Federal Labour Code that takes the needs of women into consideration? After all we  are 33.2% of the working force. We'd  still like to see this.  ...We suggested that teachers be given courses in sex role socialization.  When we hear about male teachers  'teasing' female high school students  about their 'women's lib meeting' and  'manhaters club' we know there aren't  many of these courses going around.  ...More Shop courses for girls, more  home Ec. courses for boys — well,  as one Shop teacher explained, the  shop facilities are limited and its  dangerous to mix the classes because  the girls distract the boys. However,  there are cooking classes for boys.  Very nice — except that it seems to  cost more to teach boys how to cook  steaks and lemon meringue pie than  it does to teach girls the muffin  method and macaroni-cheese casserole.  ...Pass a Community of Property Act  that will make marriage an equal partnership, we said. Has anyone heard  of the Berger Commission Report on  Matrimonial Property lately? Do they  think if they drag their feet long  enough we will forget about it?  ...As usual every year — a desperate  plea for day care facilities. We  thought it was deperate last year!  education  A Federal Government grant from the  Secretary of State (Citizenship Branch)  Branch) has provided the financial  means to start a citizens' advisory  service in education. A starter grant  of $4,800 will allow C.A.R.E. (Citizen Action to Reform Education) to  survey the needs of education consumers and to publish information  bulletins. SPARC (Social Planning and  Review Council of B.C.) whose principal aim is the promotion of "widespread citizen participation in planning and decision-making, based on  the belief that people in a*local  community are best able to determine  their own needs and priorities" will  assist C.A.R.E. in this project.  C.A.R.E., based for over eight years  in the Greater Vancouver area, has  encouraged reforms such as alternative schools, parent education and  school consultative committees.  Among its aims is community involvement in educational planning and the  creation of learning environments  which guide children to their fullest  physical, emotional and intellectual  development. Last year C.A.R.E. helped develop a kit, Parents in Schools,  for student teachers in community education.  Ed-Advisory joins a growing list of  agencies devoted to assisting parents  and other citizens to become involved  in their education systems. Among  these groups is the National Committee  for Citizens in Education (NCCE) in  the United States which recently shepherded a bill through Congress which  guarantees privacy of student records  and permits access to records for  parents and older students.  Ed-Advisory bulletins will:  ...convey news of successful examples  of participation  ...expose barrieio to participation  ...alert readers to important issues  and research findings  ...supply references and list sources  of help  Since then inhome day care subsidies  have been eliminated and the shortage  of day care centres is as acute as  ever. A great step backward for our  children,  ...Eliminate sexism in advertising.  I don't even want to talk about this  ...Eliminate the courts 'double standard' regarding rape. Ex-Justice Minister Otto Lang introduced amendments  to the Criminal Code last July that  included changes in the legislation  that deals with rape. It is the feeling of the Rape Crisis Centres in  Canada that the proposed changes do  not go far enough in eliminating the  sexisr. stigma that is placed on women  who have been assaulted. They have  presented a brief to the Justice Minister recommending further changes  and women should also write to the  Minister. There is an article on  rape in the August issue of KINESIS.  ...Hasten the implementation of all  recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women in  Canada we cried in a fit of seasonal  optimism! The Report was completed  in 1970. It contains 167 Recommendations. Of these,only about one-third  have been acted on. The Federal Government says it has plans to put through  several bills dealing with issues of  importance to women before the end of  the year (five weeks from now). We  will be most pleased.  These requests are not frivolous .  They reflect very real needs. Their  fulfilment is part of our basic rights  as equal members of our society. Always women are asked to wait —  because of inflation, because of unemployment, because it is winter,  because it is summer. We must increase  the pressure on government officials  to deal with women's issues now!  We are tired of waiting!  - Jo Lazenby  To prove that  Pollyatma is  alive & well &  living at VSW  we are agaxn  this year mentioning some of  the good things  that happened  in 197 5. And  once again our  heartfelt thanks  to those who  worked so hard  to make them  sible.  SOMETHING TO CELEBRATE WOMEN WANT ANSWERS  [ The following information and suggested  j questions on women's issues, has been  I prepared by the Vancouver Status of  jWomen for its members and other concern-  j ed citizens. It is hoped this will prove  I helpful in the election campaign in  | raising the consciousness of both candidates and constituents about the status  of women in British Columbia. We believe it vital that the needs reflected  in this outline be brought to wide  attention.  It is suggested that the information  ' and questions here might effectively  be used not only in candidates' meet-  | ings, but also for radio talk shows  and in visiting candidates' headquarters. Other questions may occur to you.  ASK THEM! Take note of the answers to  all questions.  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  Despite equal pay laws, the gap between  men's and women's salaries is increasing yearly. Things are not getting  better for working women, they are getting worse. Women are still being channelled into lowpaying job ghettos. They  can't have equal pay until they get  equal work. Affirmative action legislation is required to promote equality  between men and women in all aspects  of employment, including hiring, promotion, superannuation, training and  re-training. Such laws were passed in  America in the mid-60's with success.  WHAT IS YOUR OPINION OF REQUIRING EMPLOYERS WHO RECEIVE GOVERNMENT MONEY  TO DEVELOP AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN TO  IMPROVE THE STATUS OF WORKING WOMEN?  WHAT WILL YOUR PARTY DO TO ENSURE THIS  LEGISLATION IS ENACTED?  MATRIMONIAL PROPERTY  The Family and Children's Law Commission has recommended the enactment of  legislation recognizing society's concept of marriage as a full and equal  partnership of both sexes. This recommendation for equal rights and responsibilities of both spouses in the marriage is embodied in the concept of full  and immediate community of marital property. The Commission's report was tabled  in the legislature in March this year,  and women's groups throughout the province consider it vital to improving  the status of married women in B0C0  WHAT IS YOUR PERSONAL OPINION OF COMMUNITY OF PROPERTY PROPOSALS? WHAT IS  YOUR PARTY'S POSITION ON THIS MATTER  AND WHEN DO YOU FORESEE ITS TRANSLATION INTO LAW?  HUMAN RIGHTS  The provincial Human Rights Branch is  an important vechile for improving the  status of women. It handles an enormous  number of cases from around the entire  province. However, without sufficient  money and staff it cannot do its job  properly. Penalties in the Human Rights  Code of B.C. are not high enough to  deter discrimination. Also, the Code  is being interpreted in a conservative  manner, so much so that a case must be  in black and white for a complainant  to win"  WHAT COMMITTMENT IN STAFFING AND FUNDS  WOULD YOUR PARTY MAKE TO THE HUMAN  RIGHTS BRANCH? WOULD YOU INCREASE THE  POWERS OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS BOARDS OF  ENQUIRY TO NOT ONLY ORDER HIGHER PENALTIES BUT TO REQUIRE EMPLOYERS TO ENACT  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLANS TO ENSURE  FUTURE DISCRIMINATION DOES NOT OCCUR?  WOULD YOU AMEND THE CODE TO READ"EQUAL  PAY FOR WORK OF EQUAL VALUE'.'?  DAY CARE  Some 43% of B.C.'s labour force are  women, working out of financial necessity. They cannot have equal opportunity at work until they are relieved  of child care responsibilities. Very  few child care services are available  to them and those that are, are expensive o Excellent day care(educational  not just custodial) at a reasonable  cost is a vital necessity to any society committed to equality of opportunity both for children and women.  WHAT IS YOUR OPINION ON DAY CARE AND  WHAT IS ITS LEVEL OF PRIORITY ON YOUR  PARTY'S PLATFORM?  WOMEN'S CENTRE FUNDING  There are some 200 status of women  groups in B.C. performing valuable  social and ombudservices to women  (rape crisis centres, health collectives, daycare, birth control info,  human rights.counselling,etc. see the  ''Guide to the B.C. Women's Movement").  The majority of them rely entirely on  volunteer labour. In comparison to  grants awarded to other social and  community agencies, women's groups  receive a pittance. Are women always  to work for free?  Provincial Status of Women Coordinator  Gene Errington has tried during IWY  to get the provincial government to  commit a decent budget to women's programs, with consistent guidelines and  a central place for grant applications  —so far without success. If IWY is  to have a continuing impact such groups  must be allotted a greater portion of  the taxpayer's money.  WHERE DOES THE FUNDING OF WOMEN'S GROUPS  AND PROJECTS COME ON YOUR LIST OF PRIORITIES? HOW MUCH FINANCIAL SUPPORT DO  YOU THINK THEY SHOULD GET COMPARED TO  OTHER EQUIVALENT AGENCIES? WHAT IS  YOUR PLAN FOR THE CORE FUNDING OF WOMEN'S GROUPS (SALARIES PLUS OPERATIONAL EXPENSES)? SHOULD THIS BE THE RESPONSIBILITY OF ONE OR ALL GOVERNMENT  DEPARTMENTS AT ALL LEVELS OF GOVERNMENT?  IF THE LATTER, HOW WOULD YOU IMPLEMENT  THIS?  SEXISM IN EDUCATION  Over the past 3 years, the B.C. Teachers' Federation, Vancouver Status of  Women and the Provincial Department of  Education have done many studies proving sex discrimination exists at all  levels of the B.C. Education system.  It is a myth that women receive equal  education. Although shop and home- economics courses are now open to both  sexes, content of these courses are  not the same for each sex. Boys are  taught more expensive gourmet cooking  and girls' learn 'powder-puff mechanics.  Sexist textbooks are still in use.  There is no in-service training for  new teachers to eradicate their own  sexist attitudes. No new non-sexist  educational materials like the proposed women's studies courses have been  implemented. No affirmative action  plan exists to promote female teachers  into administrative positions. No improvement has been made in sexist  career counselling for students which  channels girls into traditional low-  paying occupationso More funds are  committed to boys' athletics and other  programs than are committed to those  for girls.  WHAT DO YOU PROPOSE TO DO ABOUT THIS  SITUATION? WHAT IS YOUR OPINION OF  THE WOMEN 'S STUDIES COURSE? WHERE  DOES NON-SEXIST EDUCATION STAND ON  YOUR PARTY'S LOST OF PRIORITIES?  BREAST CANCER SCREENING  A full year has passed since provincial cabinet was presented with a proposal for a mass breast cancer screening program. Since that time B.C.  women's groups have been asking the  government to implement this program  because 1 out of 15 B0C. women will  get breast cancer, the highest rate  in Canada. The mass screening program  would make tests for breast cancer  available to women throughout B.C.  without a doctor's prior referral,  just as T.B. x-rays are conducted today. The pilot program would begin in  small centres in B.C.  WHAT IS THE STATUS OF THIS PROPOSAL  IN THE PROVINCIAL DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH  WHAT HAVE YOU DONE, OR CAN YOU DO, TO  ASSIST IN ITS IMPLEMENTATION? WHAT IS  YOUR PARTY'S POLICY ON PREVENTATIVE  HEALTH PROGRAMS FOR WOMEN? WHAT KIND  OF FINANCIAL SUPPORT DOES YOUR PARTY  COMMIT TO SUCH PROGRAMS?  MATERNITY PROTECTION  The present Maternity Protection Act  says that a woman cannot be dismissed  for absence from work because of pregnancy for any part, or the whole, of  a 6-week period prior to the expected  birth. But there is no guarantee that  she cannot be dismissed for pregnancy  prior to this 6-weeks period. After  the birth her employer, under the present Act, cannot allow her to return  to her work for at least 6 weeks, or  a period recommended through a doctor'.1  certificate, whichever is the longer.  However an employer is required to  guarantee employment security for a  total of only 16 weeks of leave, including the optional period prior to  birth and the mandatory 6-weeks period  after.  It is apparent that the Act does not  adequately provide for situations in  which a woman is declared by her doctor to be fit and able to resume work  (and earnings) in a relatively short  period after the birth or, because of  complications or circumstances, is  unable to return within the 16-weeks  limit for which an employer is required to guarantee leave. Surely consideration — reasonable and flexible —  should be extended by law in both case;  Moreover, the present Act does not  guarantee that a woman who has taken  pregnancy leave will be returned to  the same or a similar job at no less  rate of pay than she was getting before. Nor does the Act guarantee that  Maternity Leave will be regarded as  continuous employment for pension and  other fringe benefits.  It is a Maternity Protection Act which  obviously lacks necessary protection.  POINT THIS OUT TO CANDIDATES. ASK IF  THEIR PARTIES SUPPORT REFORMS UNDER  WHICH SUCH PROTECTION WOULD BE PROVIDED.  AN ELECTION IS YOUR OPPORTUNITY TO  SPEAK OUT ON ISSUES THAT CONCERN  YOU — TO DEMAND ANSWERS. O   CANADA  Singing is a good way to learn  a new language.  I teach English  to a class of adult immigrants  and they like to .Jing.  This was  greatf   until they asked me to  teach them "0 Canada".  So far,  I have put them off by saying  the words are too difficult, etc.  etc.  But the truth is, I'm  heartily ashamed of the words.  The tune written by Lavallee is  a stirring one.  Unlike the  American anthem, it has a medium  range that everyone can manage.  In the U.S., at a football game or  some such august gathering, they  have to call on an opera star to  sing "The Star Spangled Banner"  while thousands of Americans  stand like statues and listen.  In Canada, we can all handle the  tune - but the words make one  cringe.  Lets take it line by line.  "0 Canada, our home and native land"  - as at least one third of our population was not born here, "native"  is inappropriate, but this could  easily be change to "cherished," a  lovely word.  However, I really see  red at the second line: - "True  patriot love in all thy sons command". First, one cannot command  "love", like"respect" it has to be  earned.  Second, "Sons" - what about  daughters?  Having consulted history  books, this can easily be explained.  Indians and Eskimos apparently have  always had normal family units, but  not so the pioneers.  Aside from a  handful of nuns and Laura Secord,  there were no other women in Canada  tor two or three hundred years prior  to the First World War.  A wonderful  male species, the first explorers and  homesteaders!  They did all that hard  work, and apparently gave birth too,  although not much mention is made of  these offspring either.  However the  fact remains that we are a nation of  23 million, so this must have been  the way it happened.  I shouldn't leave you with the misapprehension that women aren't mentioned by Dr. Weir. In verse 3 (which  no one sings) there is the "May  stalwart sons and gentle maidens rise"  Ugh! Such "violets by a mossy stone"  are typEs Canada doesn't need — they  can go elsewhere to swoon and expire!  The anthem goes on and says "We stand  on guard for thee" — not once does it  say it but seven times if one includes  the chorus! Well, all the women of  Canada and most of the men are too  darn busy to stand around with a rifle  over their shoulders looking like so  many little tin soldiers! The complete  song runs to four verses — altogether  we're doing this guard duty about  twenty-five times. It really leaves  very little opportunity for business,  farming, caring for a home etc.  The  only solution I have to my current  dilemma is to teach my class the  second verse which is tolerable:-  "0 Canada, where pines and maples  grow,  Great prairies spread and lordly  rivers flow,  How dear to us thy broad domain,  From East to Western sea,  Thou land of hope for all who toil,  Thou true North strong and free."  But if we're going to "toil", and  most of us do, we're still left with  that chorus of "standing on guard"  three times over.  It's darn hard  to nurse the sick, get logs out of  bush, be an efficient businessperson  or fly a plane and pack that darn  rifle at the same time. Help! Help!  Margaret Atwood, Margaret Laurence  or even Pierre Burton- couldn't you  come up with something better?  "Patricia M. Russell  poem  INTERNMENT  Inside  the doors  are women, watching T.V., trying to read or listen to the radio  pretending they are relaxing or being entertained  when really, they would like to be  Dutside  Downtown. - where all the lights are bright etc.  where are  bars, dim, people, talk, conversation  to watch characters, reallife  images of their city, nation, through their eyes,  Man can do that  Woman get hustled.  ces,   gestures.  /7oman alone  Can you do  it?  Can you make it?  down the street, daytime, verbal abuse  nighttime, more physical gestures, obscene gropes - well, you ask  for it.  I have been to a movie alone, twice. Both times, a man came and sat behind me. Then,  just barely, I would feel him touch my hair - so imperceptible, I was never sure. It  jould stop as soon as I moved my head, then begin again, softly stroking. I never  saw the end of those movies.  (Joman inside  ingrown, like a barnacle attached to the other side of the welcome mat  enclosed, lying beneath the surface, the toughened veneer, the bars.  \re  we man's conscience, staying at home, keeper of the fire  or are we secretly amassing a wealth  of madness?  ._ J. Annis Freeman  ?"rs •••••■ •■  ■  Women. wanted: CLOUT!  In the area of human rights, we have  all felt fairly satisfied with the  B.C. code.  The code existed and in  the area of employment, tenancy, public services, purchase of property,  we felt somewhat protected against  discrimination on the basis of our  sex, marital status, etc.  If one files a complaint under the  Human Rights code, and a satisfactory agreement can not be reached between the complainant and the person  who is allegedly discriminating,  (respondant) a board of inquiry of  three people is set up, and all sides  of the case is heard, and the board  makes the decision whether or not  discrimination has occured.  Two disappointing decisions have  been made in the past couple months.  In giving the respondant the widest  possible latitude, the boards have  made very reactionary decisions.  One realizes that if a human rights  case is to be found in favour of the  complainant, the case must be air  tight.. Discrimination particularly  sex discrimination is subtle - one  doesn't have to be too sophisticated  to do it, and get away with it if the  recent intrepretations of the code  are any indication.  The case of Wayne Kesterton and The  Spinning Wheel restaurant in Gastown  is one ot the cases.  Kesterton  alleged that he was dismissed on the  basis of his sex - the proprieter  wished an "all female" look.  He  even went as far as to express this in  a letter of recommendation he gave  Kesterton.  At the board of inquiry  the respondant admitted to having lied.  He dismissed Kesterton for other reasons  involving his work as a waiter.  The  "all female" look was merely an excuse  to avoid confrontation.  The respondant never mentioned these other reasons  (complaints from customers, and fellow  employees) to Hanne Jensen, the Human  Rights Office investigating the case,  and they didn't come out until the inquiry took place.  In addition the  respondant offered to recommend  Kesterton for his brother's restaurant.  One questions the credibility  of such a witness, who admits that  he didn't tell the truth initially,  and whose actions are hardly consist-  ant with his story.  And what about  the weight of evidence that states,  on paper "because of the style of our  restaurant, I decided to employ female waitresses only". The decision  of the Board was that discrimination  on the basis of sex did not occur!  The other disappointing decision regarded an equal pay for equal work  case. Here the issue was whether in  the jobs of stock records clerks  and order fillers were substant  ially the same.  The differential  was $130, and it so happened that  men occupied the higher paying position.  Women occupied the. lower.  The women's job, that of stock records clerk was considered an office  job, though minimal amount of time  was actually spent in the office.  Basically, the board concluded that  the jobs were different, though not  vastly.  A measure of responsibility perhaps, therefore the complaint  was unjustified.  The concept of  'substantial' was the issue to be  interpreted.  Obviously, the job  has to be exactly the same, before  a case is found in favour of a complainant.  It is the legislation  which has to be more substantial.  It must not leave so much open to  interpretation!  We have to remember that the code is  only as strong as the intrepretations which are made of it.  If they  are narrow and reactionary, the code  is of no use in protecting us.  Certainly we don't want to discourage  anyone from laying a complaint, but  we lack the confidence that the complaint will be upheld by the board,  based on the experiences so far.  Obviously the code must be tightened up, or it will hold no clout  at all.  - Miriam Gropper -  quote  D.E.R.  "You can't change attitudes by public  relations campaigns; you have to change  and enforce laws, and let people get  used to the painful but necessary laws  enforcing equal rights, just like they  got used to income tax."  —Judith Adams, head of Toronto's  Mayor's Task Force on Women.  NEWS  soRwuc opposes Wage controls  Service, Office and Retail Workers  Union of Canada, the first women's  union in B.C., opposes government  wage controls as discriminatory  against women."Percentage increases  always mean the lowest paid workers  (women) get the smallest raises,"  says Pat Barter, Local i, 'SORWUC.  The union says unorganized women  workers have been falling behind  further and the amount allowed by  the government is not adequate for  them to catch up.  -WCWN  quote  "The world has suffered from too much  masculinity and not enough humanity  ....and men and women alike are to  blame for tolerating it." —Nellie  McClung, In Times Like These  THE DOWNTOWN EASTSIDE WOMEN' S  CENTRE  In the Downtown Eastside community, there is an abundance of problems confronting local residents.  There are problems of poverty, lack  of decent housing, alcoholism, and  lack of available recreation facilities, to name only a few.  (The  combined effect of these problems is  to create an environment which is  generally not conducive to a healthy  mental and physical existence.) In  an area where the overwhelming majority of the population are men, (the  1971 census showed 78.7% men an 21.3%  women) the existing facilities are  geared towards dealing with men and  their problems.  The Downtown East-  side Women's Centre has been open  since July, 1975, in a storefront at  243 Main - a central position.  The  Centre is providing an alternative to  usual social gathering places (ie.  beer parlours and single sleeping  rooms) as well as a varied program  of activities and entertainment.  Moreover, it provides a location and  acts as a catalyst which will enable  women to meet and discuss problems  which they share and ways of solving these problems.  Finally, it provides a place for women where they  feel they belong and can be a part  of.  Speaking to the women of this  area is a real education in the ways  that women have traditionally been  disadvantaged in society .  From  their conversations it is possible to  gain an insight into the special problems facing the women of the Downtown  Eastside. 6  IfC/iLTff  women's health  conference  The B.C. Federation of Medical  Women sponsored a Health Conference  for Women on October 18th.  which I  attended with about 100 other women  at the Queen Elizabeth Playhouse.  This conference was the third held  this year by B.C. F.M.W., thanks to  funding from Provincial Status of  Women Co-ordinator, Gene Errington.  The major'plus' of this conference  was, for me, also an unexpected one.  For it is unusual to find a group _of  doctors actually taking time out to  sit and "talk shop" with a group of  interested health care consumers.  That we were all women, talking about  our own bodies, was an added bonus,  and it was a delight to see the good  sharing and dialogue going down.  It  was reassuring as well, to hear medical people dealing openly and honestly with their differences on medical matters.  This may not seem like  a big thing, except that doctors have  not often been willing to disclose to  the public the questions, doubts and  dissension within their ranks.  Be  this as it may, though, the organizers' primary aim was to provide.  information to us, and the conference was successful in this way as  well.  We covered topics ranging  from Vaginitis and Abortion, to  Nutrition, Breasts, and Psychiatry  in panels and workshops.  Questions  were taken from the floor in written  form in order to get to as many as  possible - and there were lots!  I  don't doubt we all learned at least  a little, and I'd like to share some  of the more interesting points with  you:  - did you know that the onset of menstruation is more related to body mass  (weight) -about 1001b.-than it is to  age?  This is what one doctor told us.  - it remains up to either you or your  doctor to consider V.D. a possibility  and suggest testing-remember, either  one of you.  So why are you waiting  for your doctor to bring it up?  - when combatting vaginitis and /or  taking antibiotics, try yogourt tablets (available over the counter in  drugstores) in the vagina, instead  of messing around with the real thing.  - and finally, re douching and feminine hygiene products-who ever said  we were supposed to smell like a rose?  The B.C. Federation of Medical Women  plans to hold two more of these conferences during the next six months  in smaller B.C. centres.  If you live  in one of these towns, be sure to attend.  We can only hope that doctors,  and especially women doctors, will  continue this effort to make themselves more available for dialogue ■  and exchange.  — Janet Beebe  fc  'emimzing   rower  Pc  SUE FINDLAY ON THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT  Speaking at the Vancouver Public Library November 13, Susan Findlay, Director of Women's Programs for the federal Secretary of State Department,  summed.up her outlook on how to change  the status of women.  Describing women's groups as the  "backbone of social change" Ms. Findlay emphasized  that only through their  collective strength could women's  groups.reform the system both internally and externally.  Ms. Findlay noted that changing the  status of women is "radical" both  personally and politically. She said  that women's groups must go beyond  the consciousness-raising stage and  get involved in politics and the civil  service and .plan other strategies for  change.  In order to do this,she explained,  women's groups must develop an understanding not only, of women's issues  but also of the limitations of government and bureaucracy, where and how  change takes place within it.  Sue Findlay urges more 'women's advocates' to get into each government  department to focus on women's issues  and to act as liaison between women's  groups and the bureaucracy.  Advising that women have a perspective  on the social structure which men  don't, she urged women to sensitize  bureuacrats on women 's issues. This  has been called 'feminizing power.'  Speaking from her own experience as  an activist and a feminist in the  government she warned that such advocates are often harassed and 'punished', but the benefits of taking  such a stance must be weighed with  the disadvantages.  Ms. Findlay stressed the need for  women to enter the civil service  and government at all levels and  while there to work collectively with-  within the system to make it flexible  and responsive to women's social needs,  needs. However she admits the system  presents continuous and "horrific"  obstructions to this goal.  Finally she commented that the Secretary of State's budget for Women's  Programs grants is.reduced for 1976,  from the IWY level of 2.5 million to  approximately the 1974 level of  $200,000 for all of Canada. This  allows a B.C. budget of some $25,000.  However, she said she hoped there  would be more.  - Karen Richardson  pregnancy  On June 20 1974, my son was born 12  weeks prematurely. As he weighed only  1 lb. 4 oz. at birth he wasn't released from Vancouver General Hospital  until August 15, when he weighed 5Jslb;  Yet in late October UIC claimed I had  become disentitled to pregnancy benefits as of July 22,1974. (This was  exactly 6 weeks after the child's  birth.) This meant I had to pay back  9 of the 15 weeks benefits that I  had received because my child was not .  born 'normally.'  I attempted to fight back by contacting Community lawyers, appealing the  decision of the officer, and writing  numerous letters. I was trying to  understand my situation, as at the  time it was not clear, and I was trying to find a solution. Eventually,  after my second appeal failed, alone  and frustrated, I became dormant with  exhaustion.  Now that my son is healthy, I have  regenerated new energy to spend investigating the existing laws. I want to  find out why I and other women have  had to go through similar traumas because of inadequate laws. But most of  all, I want to do my best to change  these laws to prevent further unnecessary injustices.  This is my plea to any women or any  organization that can widen my knowledge of 'abnormal' pregnancies and  how these cases are handled by UIC  to contact me. Any suggestions leading to people awareness and changes  in the existing law, or support of  any kind will be very welcome.  Please contact:  Rebecca Georges,  2726 Alder St. #303, Vancouver, B.C.  Phone: 733-5908.  UBC IGNORES CAMPUS RAPE  UBC Vice-President Eric Vogt said in  October he will take no action on a  petition signed by 80 female students  demanding that the campus be made safe  for women at night. Six sexual assaults  have taken place there since the fall  classes began. UBC women have been  lobbying for some action in this regard  for several years. Vogt said the university could probably find money to  install improved lighting if the  problem became 'serious.'  RAPE RELIEF CENTRES SUBMIT BRIEF  Recommendations for amendments to  current rape laws, developed at the  first national conference of Canadian  Rape Crisis Centres, held in June this  year, have been submitted to the Federal Justice Committee this fall. For  more details contact Victoria Rape  Relief, 406 Simcoe Street, Victoria  or call 385-4059.  -WCWN WOMEN'S   CONFERENCES  We plead and beg for conferences,  and work our asses off when we finally have one.  But we gain shockingly little in relation to the  amount of energy we invest in them.  In the planning stages they look,  wonderful.  Resource people to share  all their information on abortion,  rape, counselling, organizing, public speaking...etc.  Promises of  exchanges cf our written material,  briefs, proposals, bibliographies,  research, manuals.  Workshops on  internal structures, group dynamics, volunteerism. A time to bridge  all those barriers of physical isolation, and build lasting contacts  with one another.  Somehow, it doesn't quite succeed.  We came away exhausted, overwhelmed  - and disappointed. We heard about  a lot of issues - but only enough to  be reminded of how much is left to  be dene, and with no greater wealth  of information that could help us  ACT.  We did exchange seme material  - but little; the groups that have  the most to give, didn't know what  would be wanted, and couldn't bring  their whole library.  We heard a lot  about collectivism, funding, volunteerism - but only more about pitfalls; we had no time to share our  solutions.  We met a lot cf women -  but very few well enough to remember  who is with which group, doing what.  We get over some of the barriers of-  physical isolation - only to discover many other (greater) barriers between us: lesbian vs. straight, old  groups vs. new, urban vs. rural,  ideologically left vs. apolitical.  - and we had nc time to deal with  those at all!  So, what's the problem?  It's not organization.  I have been  to poorly - organized, and well -  organized conferences, and my frustrations have been the same (the only  difference with well - organized conferences is that I'm left with the  added frustration, of not knowing  exactly why its so frustrating, for  it "looks" so good).  Conference failure is due to a lack  cf REALIZABLE and COMMON objectives.  Our objectives are too many, they are  often ill-defined, they are. too varied, they are not common to all attending (rather, they are the collection of the various different objectives of those attending); and they  are too often totally unrealistic,  given time restrictions.  For fear  of alienating one group, or another,  or being prejudicial to one topic,  over another, or one format over another, we attempt to account and plan  some theory  for all needs.  By having one hundred  objectives, we end up paying only lip-  service to each, and alienating each  other in the process one hundred times  more than had we been narrow in focus.  1. We must limit cur objectives to a  reasonable quantity, for a conference.  It is ridiculous, for example, to hold  25 different workshops in 3 days.  We  can't attend more than a fraction of  them, yet they're all of importance.  There is no continuity from one workshop to another,and there is no time to  delve into any topic sufficiently to  get beyond generalities, and an 'outline'  of the issue.  Workshops on different  topics should not be held simultaneously.  Each person is put in the  strange position of not knowing whether to go workshop A - about which topic you don't know anything, and have  much to learn, or to workshop B - about  which you know a lot, are involved in  already -and could give a lot of information to others.  So we find workshops on, ie. funding problems where  none of the people who have been successful at funding are there, only those  who are still struggling - or we, find  where workshops on ie. abortion - and  everyone there already has all the info - those who want to know, are at  the funding workshop!  2.We must ensure that our specific  objectives are realistic: Too often  we "title" a workshop - and go no further in stating its objective.  The  topic "Rape Relief" warrants a book, or  a 6 week training course - two hours  is impossible.   It _is possible, however, to cover one small area like "what  are the legal issues around rape", or  "what are the procedures a rape victim  goes through with police." o_r "how did  Rape Relief begin to organize".  It is  useless to set ourselves so huge a task,  that we can have no hope of completing  it.  3. Any workshop must have a previous  agreement as to the objectives. We arrive  at a workshop, with no previous indication of what to expect.  The resource  person must deal with anything that comes  under the general topic - so can't prepare solidly for any area and does not  know what resource material to bring.  Others don't know any better - and  cannct beforehand prepare their knowledge, and their questions either.  Half  an hour into a workshop some people discover they don't belong in this workshop - and leave.  Others discover, the  next day, that they should have been  there, after hearing what was discussed.  Through it all, hardly a soul walks out  with any understandable notes.  Thats  virtually impossible when the talks goes  in ten different directions at once.  4. Workshops must be structured according to the kind of objective. Dissemination of straight information is teaching.  Those workshops are for a lecture format with abundant written material as backup, and responses to questions; not discussion or debate.  Workshops on dynamics, and ideologies, on  the other hand, are no place for lectures; these are for exchanges of opinions and values, and experiences.  When  we don't make the distinction we get  workshops where we"discuss" pelvic self-  exam, and workshops where we get a "lecture" on power!  5. Workshops must speak to the context  of the topic, as much as to the topic  itselfo Information on "how to organize (something)" must be geared to a  specific situation to be useful.  Very  different tactics are required for a  rural group than for an urban, (or old/  new, funded/not-funded, small/large,  one issue/multi-issue group).  When we  attempt to deal with all our contrasting needs at once, we only can resort  to generalities that are of no use to  anyone - like "to organize successfully one must "develop strong community support?'  (...The question remains:  how?)  Group structures is likewise an area  where the context has everything to do  with it.  The structure chosen, and the  problems encountered depend on the community, the. people available, the funding, the tasks of the centre, and the  political.or service, or educational  orientation of the group.  6. Conferences, if they are to cut  across ideological and lifestyle differences between us, must bring these  to open discussion and debate. Keeping the political/apolitical and lesbian/straight issues somewhat underground only creates more tensions, and  strengthens the barriers that we feel  are not to be crossed.  Moreover, our  lifestyles and over-all ideologies  have often very direct connections to  our stands on all sorts of other specific issues and our choices of strategies.  Workshop directions have as  much to do with our various philosophical orientations, as they do with  the issue, the context, and the format.  We must begin to evaluate conferences  more critically and find better ways  of handling them than we have in the  past.  I have attempted to give one  analysis.  However,  I hope to hear  other views - for ultimately this can  only be a collective task.  "Johanna  den Hertog  NEWS  "Poor Kids", the March 1975 report  by the National Council of Welfare  on Children in Poverty in Canada  states that: among children in two-  parent families across Canada, 21.2%  were in poverty; among those in male-  headed single-parent families, 33.7%  were in poverty; among those in fe-j  male-headed single-parent families,  an incredible 69.1% were in poverty.  /^eenPPc°fntinent of  / "omen?'3"6" to the  Branch. EC°n°mic Rights , 8  MAIL STRIKE  Well, we kept hoping the strike would  be "over" soon and delayed beginning  the onerous task of hand-delivering  KINESIS until mid month.  As a result  most of our membership activities,  except for those long-standing groups  have slowed down considerably. When  the mail strike is over we will begin  advertising group activity again.  WOMAN ALIVE  There will be a Woman Alive  meeting on Thursday, Dec. 4 to discuss  plans for the January T.V. season.  We have had a terrific series of  shows this fall—hope you have been  watching!  Topics included "Women  and the Police", "Downtown Eastside  Women's Centre", "Women's Studies",  "Women's Advocate Cttee", interviews  with the staff of the IWY van, and  several out- o    studio productions  including interviews with a woman  harpist, women sculptors at the  SculptureSymposium, and two shows  covering the "Our Hidden Heritage"  display at the Provincial Museum.  If anyone is interested in helping  with ideas, interviews, porta-pack  shows or whatever, please come to  the WOMAN ALIVE TV meeting, Thurs,  Dec 4 at 8 pm in the office.  IWY PROJECT  Diana and Nadine are wrapping up  the community centre IWY project and  are involved in plans to extend  the project theme through other  contacts made this fall.  We are  busy letting social workers, public  health workers and other community  resource areas know of our availability to do lecture/discussion  series with any of their clients—  things are popping!  VERBAL SELF-DEFENSE  SOMETH1  GOING C  NGONAT  It's finally ready!  Our VERBAL  SELF DEFENSE pamphlet has been  written, re-written and polished  and now sits on our publications  shelf.  It is 9 pages long, has  Diana Bissell  a 2 page introduction and 7 pages  of responses to put-downs—sells  for 50 cents.  Topics covered  include women and work, intelligence,  stereotyping and the movement.  Buy yours soon.  STAFF STUFF  An important area of action for the  office in the last few weeks has  been the provincial election.  We  want to hear what all the parties  have to say about "women's issues"  and after lengthy discussion decided  to print and distribute a resource/  question sheet on women's issues to  all women's groups possible, and all  constituency offices in the lower  mainland area.  JOHANNA DEN HERTOG  has been co-ordinating this project,  and she has whipped the feminist  pony express in high gear, delivering  the sheet to all candidates,  assigning staff members to attend  all-candidates meetings and generally  making a lot of lists!  All staff also attended the weekend  long BC FEDERATION of WOMEN conference  Oct 31 and member SUSAN SANDERSON and  staffer DIANA BISSELL were elected  to positions on the Standing Cttee.  LEE MASTERS attended the Family  Life conference in Victoria, addressed  a class at Templeton High School,  a women's group in North Van and the  Sergeant's Mess at Jericho LEE also  wins the "Punish me--I'm a Feminist  Martyr" award of the month for  agreeing to appear on BCTV with the  woman who wrote "Fascinating Womanhood"!  Lee also received her Law  Degree from UBC.  MIRIAM GROPPER represented VSW at  the Justice Meet weekend at the PNE  and also spoke to the New Westminster  Dental Assistants Assoc?and 2 high  school guidance classes.  As well  as co-ordinating the election action  at the office JOHANNA spoke to a class  at Douglas College on the women's  movement.  NADINE led a workshop  for teachers at Centennial Secondary  School on non-sexist teaching  techniques, spoke to two mother's  groups on the women's movement and  is sitting on the Margaret Randall  Tour Steering Cttee.  DIANA spoke  to a Beta Sigma Psi group on the  VSW, a Cap College class on the  Royal Commission Report and to the  Maple Ridge Status of Women on  verbal self-defense.  Thanks also to members PAT RUSSELL  who assisted with the putting together  and distribution of the election  sheet, PAT BUCKLEY who did a VSW  speaking engagement on Woman and  Religion and LESLIE DIXON who spoke  to a sorority group on sex roles.  Executive member DOROTHY HOLME  attended the Liberal policy making  meeting in Cttawa along with JOAN  WALLACE.  Dorothy also organized  and chaired the Oct. 31 meeting all  staff and executive had with MARC  LALONDE.  Executive member NANCY  DEN0FRE0 was the VSW contact for  CIDA's "Women Sharing" workshop  at the YWCA.  Bh  with a little help from  our friends....  We would like to express our gratitude  for all the volunteer help we have received over the last few weeks. It has  brought us new friends and lightened  our work load.  Kitty came to a Volunteer Night meeting and has taken charge of the 0mbud&  library — bibliography, coordinating  it with our other library, putting out  a list that will be available to other  groups, and getting the information  we need to complete our resources.  This is a huge task and anyone who  would like to help Kitty should contact her here at the office.  Trudy Wijnbeck has given a great deal  of her time to helping out in the office — answering telephones, etc. She  also represented VSW at the Vancouver  Pioneer Women's IWY Day where she  personned(?) a display booth of information on VSW. And she even baked  Lee a birthday cake — which was  delicious!  Joan Chandler once again typed a  large part of Kinesis to get it  ready for the lay-out sheets, and  also typed the entire BCFW Constitution.  And for dedication above and beyond  the call of duty — Johanna's mother  Ann den Hertog, and brother Vincent  delivered the November issue of  Kinesis to, all members in Richmond,  as well as to all libraries and  centres in that area. They have offered to do the same for the December  issue!  frown f£a8^  ^ Ro  ,that * vomardPedC^Paign       S  / her Principlededlcated  c°  f an effect'   I" I  can have  '   u Rosemary. 9  mmm  MAINTENANCE IN. THE NEW CONCEPT OF  MARRIAGE  (Speech by Ed Ryan, Consultant, Law  Reform Commission of Canada, to the  Ontario Status of Women Council,  September,1975, edited for reasons  of space.)  In my opinion the root cause of sexual discrimination is the law of the  family. Marriage is the. primary relationship between the sexes, the primary  source and justification for sexually-  biased discrimination. Our economy  and power structure are organized  around the family and marriage. Family  law reform is the keystone of the arch  of human equality.  A woman is expected to get her share  of the country's goods and services  from a man as his dependent. Marriage  is a real economic goal in a society  where things are organized to make it  difficult for women to otherwise provide for themselves.  So long as the  law continues to support the idea that  women are to be supported for life  and men as a class must support them,  then women will be excluded by sex  from the social/political/economic  technostructure.  The reason is fairly obvious. A male  required by law to share the fruits  of his labour with a dependent wife,  carries a handicap and will resist  sharing the limited opportunities for  advancement with women. "Why should  she get the job when I'm the one responsible for the support of the family?" I believe is a real characteristic of most hiring and promotion  practices, and exists independent of  pure sexual prejudice.  The expectations and requirements  flowing from the traditional legal  concept of marriage encourage a differentiation in life roles based on  sex. It is my firm conviction that nc  amount of consciousness-raising and  affirmative action plans have any  chance of success until some fundamental legal changes occur in the marriage law. So long as sexual classification is institutionalized in the  letter and spirit of family law, we  will have institutionalized sexual  discrimination across the spectrum o#  the entire society. The wife retains  her unilateral right to support so  long as she behaves herself. If she  commits adultery, she is cut off from  financial provision. This is an incredibly harsh penalty in a law that  is based on the assumption that a woman is unable to support herself.  Since sexual exclusiveness is the  basis of the bargain, lapses from fidelity can cost a woman her dower  rights, the right to contest her husband's will etc. The property of a  wife who commits adultery can be taken  from her and given to her children,  but not the property of an aldulter-  ous husband.  There are then, several interwoven  themes: an economy that excludes women from full participation and which  enables men to use economic power to  attract women; marriage rules reinforcing sexual roles that give women  access to wealth at the price of their  autonomy; matrimonial fault rules  providing economic penalties to control female behaviour, according to  male concepts of honour.  I suggest the present family law is  a product of the mid-Victorian era.  Legal rules embodying these Voctorian  concepts and needs have been projected onto the present day by a legal  philosophy dominating the courts since  the 1850's.  Statue books show the relationship  between men and women: '.n the legal  structure of marriage is still an  amalgam of feudal status concepts  expanded by the medieval matrimonial  fault doctrine brought up to the Victorian times.  The object of reform of marriage and  divorce laws is to remove every specific example of sexual discrimination  in the law. This is a direct attack  on marriage as the financial preserve  for women while the job market belongs  to men. This could be done by repealing the female dependency rule; repealing every rule that disqualifies women  financially because of marital misconduct; abolishing all common law precedents inconsistent with the new  concept of legal equality between  spouses.  Legal right to financial claim on a  spouse should be based on need. The  law must abandon the male breadwinner/  female housekeeper idea in favour of  the view that these are equal responsibilities for both spouses. An employed spouse would be legally obliged to  support a spouse who cared for the  children and managed the home, not  because the latter happened to be  female but because there was a need.  This would strike at the heart of the  male insistence in priority in education and the job market. A woman seeking employment would have the full  support of the law in saying her family financial responsibilities were  precisely the same as those of a male  candidate for the same job.  Several things follow from this.  First, on divorce, maintenance would  be rehabiliative and not a pension.  This is aimed at eliminating the idea  that all a woman has to do is ensure  she marries, after which she will be  taken care of for life. Maintenance  amounts would be set on reasonable  needs and not on the style in which  the spouse was accustomed to being  kept. This again is aimed at eradicating the concept of marriage as  an alternative to seeking training  and employment.  If maintenance is to be based on need  then it can no longer be exchanged  for female sexual exclusiveness.  Matrimonial fault would no longer  be a consideration in maintenance  awards on divorce. I cannot overemphasize the need to eliminate fault  and conduct in divorce procedures.  The weight of legal precedent on  fault is anti-female and punitive.  Instead of asking who is the adulterous spouse, the courts should ask  which spouse, if either, has an economic need arising out of this broken  marriage and how long it will take  for them to become self-sufficient.  This is precisely the approach to  the new Divorce Act by the Law Reform  Commission of Canada.  (Ed. note: the marriage laws vary  slightly from province to province.)  dhe avid  articler  MADEMOISELLE, November/75 has a series of three articles on women and  humou«r: "Funny Ladies in the Movies.,  and why they are an endangered species" by Andrew Sarris, "Can a Women  Get a Laugh and A Man Too?" by Anne  Beatts, and "Lily Tomlin on Lily  Tomlin".  A little late now, but try to get  ahold of the September/75 issue of  MS» and read Robin Morgan's beautiful statement of her committment to  the Women's Movement, "Rights of  Passage."  leaflet  FAMILY PROPERTY, HIS OR HERS?  This leaflet, prepared by the Law  Reform Commission of Canada, discusses  possible alternatives to the Canadian  family property laws and the status  of women. It is available free from  Shelia Ward, Communications Coordim-  ator, Resource Centre, YWCA of Canada  571 Jarvis Street, Toronto,  - WCWN 10  //  The second Annual Convention of the British Columbia,  Federation of Women was held at Capilano College in  North Vancouver the weekend of October 31st. Approximately 80 women from various areas of the province met  to pass a new constitution, elect a Standing Committee,  and adopt policy for the Federation. The new constitution, which received unanimous approval, was the result  of 14 months of work by the Structure Committee. It defines the structure and goals of the Federation and gives  the new Standing Committee guidelines on how to organize  around issues.  The Preamble to the BCFW Constitution, reproduced here,  expresses the philosophy that the Federation is based on.  The British Columbia Federation of Women is a Federation  of women's groups x^hose objective is to bring about the  liberation of women through fundamental change in our society. The Federation will work to implement legal, social,  economic and cultural changes necessary for the eradication of sexism. In order for women of this province to  acquire power to bring about meaningful change women must  organize to maximize the collective strength of the women's  movement. Only through the strength of united action can  the British Columbia Federation of Women achieve more  than individuals and individual groups. The Federation  will not usurp or duplicat the work of any existing women's  groups. It will not substitute its work for theirs. It  will actively encourage the development of new feminist  groups and it will support feminists everywhere in British  Columbia. It will provide a mechanism for communication,  education and mobilization to overcome the physical and  cultural isolation faced by all our sisters in this society.  The Federation recognizes fhe oppression of women is manifested throughout this society and consequently it is  essential that a variety of women's groups exist to fight  this oppression. Such groups must continue to form, and  to develop a wide range of methods to combat those aspects  of women's oppression important to them. The Federation  however, considers that even with the diversity of the  women's movement there are a vast number of goals and  methods upon which women will agree. The Federation will  isolate common goals, focus upon them, and provide a  framework for united political action.  No woman is free until all women arc free. The intent of  the Federation therefore is not only to mobolize women  around specific issues, but also to provide a network of  full support for women's diverse struggles.  The British Columbia Federation of Women recognizes that  the oppressed must fight for themselves. Traditionally,  women in particular have been encouraged to remain mute  and impotent and now must acquire experience, confidence  and political skills. Therefore all Federation functions  including conventions, conferences and meetings shall be  directed towards and open to women.  The British Columbia Federation of Women will not completely resolve the problems created by the diversity of  goals, the conflict of political ideologies, or the  financial poverty of the women's movement. It will endeavour to end the isolation of women caused by the  geographical barriers of this province. The Federation  will create a new, strong and vitally necessary form of  political expression for women.  The following press release was issued at the conclusion  of the Convention:  The British Columbia Federation of Women completed a  successful convention in North Vancouver on Sunday November 2nd. A new constitution was ratified, stating that  the objectives of the Federation are to bring about the  liberation of women through fundamental change in our  society. The Federation will work to implement legal, social, economic and cultural changes necessary for the eradication of sexism.  As well as strengthening existing policy in the areas of  education, child care, employment and health, decisive  policy regarding lesbian rights was unanamiously adopted  by the convention. The women attending the convention  gave the Federation a clear mandate to initiate public  and political action in order to achieve the liberation  of women.  THE CHART BELOW IS A ROUGH ATTEMPT TO ILLUSTRATE THE INTER-LOCKING STRUCTURE OF THE BCFW.  MEMBERSHIP  Two categories of membership —  affiliate & associate.  Affiliated organizations shall include  women's organizations in B.C.  Associated organizations shall include  organizations whose constitution does  not permit them to affiliate, & sympathetic organizations. Associate organizations shall not participate in  any aspect of the Federation.  The BCFW is a federation^of women's  groups. If you are an individual who  is interested in participating you  should contact the BCFW Coordinator  who will direct you to the appropriate  regional representative for information on affiliated BCFW member groups  in your area or help in forming a group.  REGIONS OF THE BCFW  The BCFW has divided B.C. into 12  regions to ensure participation of  women all over the province. These  regions are?l. Far Northwest Corner  2. Vancouver&Lower Mainaland 3. Terrace/  Prince Rupert&area 4. Prince GeorgeS  area 5. Dawson Creek&area 6c Northern  Vancouver Island 7. Quesnel&area 8.Sunshine Coast 9. Okanagan 10. Kootenays  11. Southern Vancouver Island 12. Fraser  Valley.  *"  I  DELEGATE STRUCTURE  All affiliated member groups may send  delegates to the annual convention.  Delegate ratio is based on membership  numbers: 2-25 members receive 2 delegates, 51-100 members receive 3 delegates, 151-200 receive 4 delegates,etc.  yl  CONVENTIONS  The Annual Convention is the governing  body of the BCFW and whenever possible  will be held outside. Vancouver. Only  registered delegates shall have voice  & vote. The Convention will: receive  reports from standing committee, subcommittees, regional representatives;  receive financial statement from standing cttee; debate resolutions; elect  standing cttee; ratify new sub-cttees.  CONFERENCES  Regional conferences will be encouraged.  Sub-committees will be encouraged to  hold provincial or regional issue  oriented conferences.  SUB-COMMITTEES  These are the main action areas of  the BCFW & are organized around province wide issues. Sub-committees are  ratified at the annual convention and  only members of the BCFW are eligible  for membership in sub-committees. 'Each  sub-committee has a chairperson who,  serves on the Standing Committee. As  of Oct./75 the BCFW has ratified subcommittees on Childcare, and Rights  of Lesbian Women, and has provisional  s/cttees on Rights of Women in Prison,  and Education.  T.  t  S  STANDING COMMITTEE  The Standing Committee is elected at  Convention & is the governing body of  the Federation between Conventions.  The Standing Committee is composed of:  a coordinator, a secretary-treasurer,  a membership organizer, a rural organ-,  izer, an external communications coordinator, an internal communications  organizer, an action organizer, a fund  raising organizer, 12 regional reps,  3 members-at-large, & the chairwomen  of the sub-committees.  The Standing Committee will meet a  minimum of every second month & whenever possible outside Vancouver.  REGIONAL REPRESENTATIVES  Each region has one representative on  the Standing Committee, elected by the  delegates from that region. The duties  of the Regional Rep are to:make & maintain contact with women's groups in her  region; to work with a committee of  representatives from member groups in  her region; to coordinate activities  of member groups participating in BCFW  action; to act as a resource person in  her region for all BCFW information; &  to be responsible for the distribution  of the newsletter in her region.  At the Convention Regional Reps were  elected for 5 regions, leaving regions  1,3,4,5,7,9 & 10 unrepresented.  MESSAGE FROM COORDINATOR  After the Convention was over on Sunday,  Nov.  2nd, the new Standing Committee had  a short meeting at which we established  our first priority — to communicate as  quickly and effectively as possible with  all individual and group members of BCFW  (as well as all women's groups in B.C.)  in order to bring them up to date with  the recent "constitutional changes in the  Federation. The new constitution and policy replaced completely all policy and  structure passed at the founding convention — we are indeed beginning from  scratch. In order to be a Federation we  need member groups. BCFW believes it has  something to offer, something to share —  and that is the opportunity for all of us  in the women's movement in BC to link arms  anf move forward as a unit. I feel as if  we have finally oiled the parts and greased the wheels of the hugh machine created  at the founding convention and we can now  move forward in a substantial manner. We  need everyone's participation to be effective. If any people have further questions  about any aspect of the BCFW please call  me and we'll talk about it. I'm at the  Vancouver Status of Women office Monday -  Friday, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver.  736-3746.  In Sisterhood   Diana Bissell  STANDING COMMITTEE OF THE BCFW  Coordinator  Diana Bissell  Secretary Treasurer  Bonnie Leiphart  Fund Raising Organizer  Mo Simpson  External Communications Organizer  Susan Sanderson  Internal Communications Organizer (Ne  (Newsletter)  Margaret McKay  Membership Coordinator  Lorna Stirling  Rural Organizer  Kathryn Hazel  Action Organizer  Gail Borst  Member-at-Large  Kate Swann  Member-at-Large  Jay Stewart  Member-at-Large  Susan Belford  Regional Representative, Region 2  Vancouver  Yvette Perreault  Regional Representative, Region 6 ■  Northern Vancouver Island  Betty Jeffries  Regional Repregentative, Region 8 ■  Sunshine Coast  Lorene Danroth  Regional Representative, Region 11 -  Southern Vancouver Island  Ruth Phillips  Regional Representative, Region 12 -  Fraser Valley  Nym Hughes  Chairperson, Rights of Lesbian Women  Sub-committee  Contact BCFW Coordinator for information.  Chairperson, Childcare Sub-committee  Ellen Frank 12  In the November issue of KINESIS Susan  Levin described her reactions to the  Jewish women's movement that she encountered in New York City where she  spent several weeks on her way to  Israel where she will be living.  Although Susan is from the Eastern USA,  she had lived in Israel before coming  to Vancouver. Susan promised to let  us know what was happening in the women's movement in Israel and how she  felt about returning.  The secular issues in Israel are so  ironic you could cry. The Iraeli women of up to say 30 years ago were  a model of equality. The most commonly  cited example is that they often  fought alongside the men (I consider  this no great honour)" They worked  hard in the fields—true pioneer women.  The socialist values of the kibbutz,  purer then, permeated the values of  the country. The beauty standard was  of health and strength...whoever  heard ojf cosmetics? Kibbutznic often  wore the same clothes.  The women are still in the army,  mostly as secretaries or medical  assistants, although they may elect  more active duty. Women go through  training, but it is a fact of Israeli  life that their presence in the army  only helps to free men for combat9  and well, although nobody says it  out loud, isn't their presence on  the base to keep the men happy?  Kibbutz are under a great deal of  stress, as the country becomes more  materialistic, as the young leave,  and women are playing a crucial role  in the changing idealogy of the kibbutz. Seen through North American  eyes this is not for the better.  Slowly, as the kibbutzim grew, the  men stayed in the fields,and the women settled into service, like food  and laundry and child care. Of course  women can work in the fields if they  want, but few do, and what is even  worse, few aspire to political power  within the kibbutz" This is really  frustrating since the kibbutz is such  an ideal format potentially for democracy and equalityo At this time,  kibbutz women would rather leave the  and give up a job of folding laundry  six to eight hours a day to live in  the city where at least they can have  a variety of household tasksc They  see their well-dressed city sisters  and are tired of looking like shlumps.  The issue of Reponse magazine referred to in the November issue of KINESIS  made this point: in less than one  generation Israeli women have lost—  given up?— and incredible amount of  personal freedom and equality. We  must all understand, the writer warns,  that the freedom for which we are all  working must be understood in our  hearts, in our guts—or the next generation will see it lost.  I am not talking about political issues  here, but rather the vibes. The image  of the Israeli woman has changed from  the healthy vibrant individual to the  fashionably dressed, good cooking,  good looking, heart-in-the-home mother  of the '50s ala USA. (Yaoosh, I moan  in the Hebrew for depression).  borne of the things that struck me  here at first: The women are for the  most part well-dressed (the shlumps  are Americans and Europeans) 0 Every-r  one is married and everyone who is  married is pregnant!  About the well-dressed: I found myself saying "Well gee, they had so  little for.so many years. Let them  dress up a bit. Why should I feel inferior being a shlump?" Why indeed?  Well I find I'm working on remaining  a shlump and liking myself at the same  time.  As for everyone being married: well,  that hit hard. Israel, rooted as it  is in Jewish tradition, is very family  oriented. . .children oriented.. Complete  strangers on the street may ask you  why you're not married. It hit hard  because in North America with millions  of single people its easier to be  single. Here with fewer single people,  percentage wise, all of a sudden marriage do-sn't seem like a political,  economic unit but rather a warm, secure niche safe from a lonely, all-  alone, long life. Does this mean Susan  with her budding feminist feelings is  going under? No, its just scarier sometimes, if I let my imagination run  wild.  And just when I had overcome my tall-  ness and thinness to the easiest point  of unselfconsciousness in years, I  come here and BAM — the very uninhibited little bastards, aged 16 to 20,  that sit along the sidewalks in Jerusalem, call out mercilessly,"Hey lady,  you're so thin! Why don't you eat?  Wow, is she ever tall! Would you get  a load of that chest! etc. etc." I  suffer it all in silence,furious,  not wanting to stoop to their level,  but angry at having to take that crap0  Finally I got so paranoid that I asked friends if they got the same business. Of course, was the answer. And  it seems that such remarks are reserved by those sweeties for foreigners.  I'd appreciate some advice. Somehow  responding to such crap seems like  stooping to a rotten level, but...  Verbal self-defense committee HELP!  And everyone's having babies. Is this  a country especially overflowing with  love for its unborn? No. Doesn't this  country realize that there are too  many people in the world already? No.  Do they want to keep the population  up because of the large numbers of  Arabs within Israeli borders? Well  yes, frankly that's it. A minority  of Jews holding political power in  Israel would mean an apartheid state,  would be ethical death to Judaism.  A very thorny problem here. Do they  want more children because the country  needs more soldiers? Yes, I've heard  that said. Pretty twisted isn't it?  I believe in the power of women to  say,"Children must be born of love,  not politics."  I believe in the power of women to  say,"My child must live in peace. I  demand to create a peaceful world for  him/her."  I believe in the power of women to  say,"My child must not learn war anymore. S/he was not born to kill, not  born to be murdered in battle."  I believe in the power of women to  say,"We want live husbands, lovers,  fathers, not dead heroes."  I believe in the power of millions  of women to make peace.  That is why I got in touch with the  secular women's movement in Israel.  - Susan Levin  child cane  Speaking at the October conference of  the Child Care Federation in Vancouver,  provincial Human Resources Minister  Norm Levi said there will be no expansion of day care services in B.C.  this fiscal year, but priorities would  be revamped. He noted there are 77  children's vacancies in day care  centres presently because of restrictive subsidy regulations and parents  are withdrawing children from centres  when they are unemployed.  Levi claims there are too many staff  for the number of children served in  some centres. Currently 43 qualified  day care workers are looking for employment in B.C. The Minister said  he is in favour of them unionizing  but this would necessitate cutbacks  in other areas of spending. The budget for day care in this province has  increased from $107 to $14 million  in the last three years he said. Day  care will cost some $30 million this  year. Unionization of day care workers  and increases in salaries could cost  an additional $8 million.  The Department of Human Resources is  considering raising the subsidy for  child care costs(paid by the government to parents on a sliding scale  according to their income) from $120  to $140 per- month, but this has been  postponed  until spring 1976. Levi  anticipates a forum in which the public can propose amendments to current  day care regulations.  -WCWN fe&^ta i® IStoli® a: mmm, %©<?* qa<j sie«ee&i©n  13  A conference called "Women in Motion:  Health, Sport and Recreation" was held  at U.B.C. on October 24, 25, and 26.  Organized by university staff and students, the conference was well attended by an interesting cross-section  of people, both local and out-of-  town.  The sessions took place in the  Students Union building and consisted  of a number of key speakers, interspersed with panels, seminars and numerous question periods.  The conference opened on the Friday with an excellent 25 minute film, "Your Move"  that attempted to show the naturalness  and joyfulness of athletic participation and why women historically  were denied their rightful position in  the sport's world.  Too often in the  past, the film pointed out, sports  as far as women were concerned meant  watching.  The film was an excellent  starting point for the conference,  bringing together the dominant themes  that ran through the three days of  discussions - the naturalness of recreation, the beneficial effects of  an active life and the factors which  work against women's participation in  the sport's world.  Shortly after  the film Simma Holt spoke on the topic  "Mature Women Participants", a group  that perhaps more than any has suffered  from a lack of well planned programs.  Athletics is still very much a man's  world, Ms. Holt insisted and a woman  has to fight every inch of the way.  The first of the seminars took place  on Friday afternoon.  Personally I was  somewhat disappointed by the session  I attended, "Developing Childrens'  Attitudes towards Sport".  There was  an overabundance of men in our group  who failed to appreciate that girls  are customarily doled out a very meagre portion of the sport's cake' and  may still be chanelled into cheer-  leading type activities.  Saturday  sessions focused around the panal topic "The Inferiority of the Female:  Reality or Myth".  This was perhaps the  most interesting part of the conference, because so much nonsense has been  written on this subject and not only  in the past! The five panelists poured out enough statistics etc. to banish the inferiority idea forever.  They agreed that one could not speak  of the inferiority of the female, but  only of slight differences which have  often been exaggerated.  For example,  due to hormonal influence a woman  athlete (this is always the average)  can not build up the same 'bulging  muscles' as a male athlete, though she  may have greater endurance in certain  activities. All over body strength,  except for greater shoulder strength  in the male, is fairly equal.  More  important, the panelists agreed that  there is nothing that women can not  or should not do.  The. old "oh that's  too rough for women" putdown just won't  do anymore. There was some discussion  at various points about P.E. programs  in high schools and whether they should  or should not be integrated. The general feeling seemed to he that this  would work against women's self image  and their full participation in various sport activities. The latter  part of the conference concentrated  on the government's position in relation to women in sports and how  women could be encouraged to participate.  To reinforce this participation idea, a sports  festival  was proceeding during the conference - from October 23 - 30 actually.  Various demonstration and participation clinics were free and open to  the general public. You could watch  soft lacrosse, netball, speedskating,  yoga and many other activities and  then give it a whirl yourself.  The  winter sport's centre was practically  'taken over' on Saturday afternoon,  October 25.  Great fun it was too  with ringette and hockey going on as  well as squash and racquetball.  The  conference summarized a number of recommendations that arose from the seminars and these were more concrete.  For example 2. f) states:  "the programming of equivalent and exciting  health, sport and recreation opportunities for all ages of women and  girls, including programs in all  types of facilities (ie. ice, field,  court, gymnasium) and including  women's, co-ed and family programs".  In summing up, the conference was  well organized, speakers were generally good and panels were excellent.  Question periods might have been  livelier, but time was always a factor here.  I for one, would like to  have had more discussion on feminism in the sport's world and the  feeling that has been expressed that  feminists have tended to ignore the  problems of women in sport.  -tHeather Kellerhals  space to  spare  The Women's Legal Advice Clinic has  office space to share with another  women's group who would like to share  the rent. The space is at 45 Kingsway  #4—in the Johnston Motors Building.  There is a large waiting area/work  space, and two smaller rooms which  can be used as work space or as interview rooms. The total rent is $130  per month. For information about sharing this space phone Jean Letwyn at  874-3971.  The Women's Legal Advice Clinic is  run by women law students for women  who have legal problems. We use the  space from 6:30 to 10:00 p.m. on Mondays and Wednesdays—ie. it would be  available for daytime use by another  interested women's group.  The Women's Legal Advice Clinic is  run as a collective. We believe that  "delivery of legal services" is not  simply treating a woman's legal problem. We try to educate the women who  come into the office about their situation, and we encourage women to  learn how to take responsibility for  their legal problems. We attempt to  demystify the law, and we are committed to trying to help women both with  problems which are "legal" and those  which are not.  .The Clinic is free, and is operated  on a first-come, first-serve basis.  Telephone number is 874-6116.  POLITICAL WIVES  In my efforts to keep up with  what's going on, or rather, under,  in the world, I watch an American  .(UoS0) newscast on T.V. to go along  with my Canadian content.  On one  recent newscast President Ford was  taken to task by Harry Reasoner for  interpreting what his wife had meant  when she said she wouldn't be surprised if her daughter told her she  was having an affair. As Reasoner  pointed out, Betty Ford speaks with  great clarity and honesty and really  doesn't need an interpreter,, The  President in his haste to mend any  breaks in the political fence,  caused by the predictable outcry :  from Baptists, Mormons and William  Buckley, committed the unforgivable  act of telling his wife what she  thought, in public yet.  It has been argued that political  wives should preferably say nothing  at all, but if they are called upon  to speak must be a mirror image of  their husbands views and policy.  If you carry this argument to its  logical conclusion, all wives, political or not, must become mindless  idiots incapable of having, much  less expressing any opinions of their  own.  The President would do well to  remember that half the voters in his  country are women, many of whom have  strong opinions of their oWn which  they have no hesitation in airing,  and that Mrs Ford received a great  deal of support via telephone calls  and telegrams to the White House.  vlrs. Ford is reported (Newsweek,  \ugust 25th. 1975) to have said "He  (Ford) didn't kick me out of the  rlouse (wow!) but he did throw a  pillow at me" but she said it "laughingly." Well, of course.  It does seem odd though that Betty  Ford should be jumped on for her  lack of "taste" (and what about the.  ill-mannered clunk who asked the  question) and yet have her recent  operation discussed in the most minute detail in the appalling way  Americans do that sort of thing.  And what about our Canadian political wives - they seem to be a well-  trained dutiful lot with one or two  notable exceptions. Maybe nobody  asks them on the grounds that it's  bad enough having to listen to all  that political doubletalk once without having an instant re-play.  Political husbands scarcely enter  the picture for obvious reasons -  they are a rare breed, in constant  peril of becoming an endangered species, and we should all do our best  to save them from extinction.  Mr. Ford should count his blessings  and remember poor Ted Heath, who  probably lost as many votes as the  President figures he will, simply  because he was not married - playing  the organ didn't help much either.  - Margaret Nicholls 14  VSW   meets LALONDE  Friday, October 31, (Halloween), 13 VSW  staff and executive met with the Honourable Marc Lalonde, Minister Responsible for the Status of Women at the  Hotel Vancouver (who were well aware  that we were the group who protested  their sexist ad.  To boot, we arrived  in the middle of a Socred convention!)  For an hour and a half, we questioned  the Minister about equal pay for  work of equal value, affirmative action,  the Federal Human Rights Commission,  inclusion of housewives in CPP, funding  for women's groups, rape, abortion, and  Manpower.  We were well prepared in advance with a  written agenda which Dorothy Holmes  chaired and we were pleased to have  Joan Wallace accompany us on behalf of  the ACSW.  While it is not possible to  really change anything at such a meeting, it did give us a unique insight  into the workings of Government.  Although we winced at some of Lalonde's  comments, there wasn't time to explain  our objections, but we have ongoing correspondence with him to serve this purpose.  On the whole, we felt he was a  good Minister and we were especially  pleased to find out that both his wife  and his special assistant are active  feminists.  Our next step is to get busy and send  off briefs to the Federal Government  about rape, abortion, Manpower etc. as  Lalonde requested and send letters in  the same regard to our MP's whom we have  already been meeting with.  We hope our  members will be moved to do the same and  we urge other women's groups to meet  with Government officials when possible.  Lalonde remarked facetiously that he had  been waiting for us to invite him over.  (After all, they are not going to invite us to Ottawa!)  The following is an informal report on  the Minister's answers to our questions.  We make no editorial comment, leaving  the reader to make her own judgements,  No doubt we are all thinking the same  thing between the lines anyway.  The bill to establish a Human Rights  Commission has had first reading.  Lalonde noted that in the current session of Parliament, the bill is subject to amendments and will not likely  pass until the next session in 1976.  He stressed that now is the time for  women's groups to make representations  to Ron Basford, the new Minister of  Justice, in this regard while the bill  is still open to debate.  The Minister said he was sceptical that  affirmative action legislation will  work for women as there are many ways  of getting around the law.  He hopes  Crown Corporations like the CBC will  set an example for the business community, but admitted the Federal Government cannot force CBC to implement the  recommendations of its own task force  report on the Status of Women.  Lalonde  commented he is not ruling out the possibility of affirmative action legislation and would like to know more about  the American affirmative action experience (send him what you know).  Since  Canada is a smaller country, he concludes it should be easier for women to  reach management positions but he admitted many 'captains of industry' are  'neanderthals.'  He would prefer that  business implement such plans voluntarily, and predicted perhaps a two year  period before Federal Government considers affirmative action plans.  The Minister said he thinks the Provinces will agree in the spring to include housewives in CPP, and waive the  3 year waiting period before implementing the new change.  Two-thirds of the  Provinces have to agree on this and he  has met with all the Provincial Welfare  Ministers to discuss the matter.  He  said, however, that some Provinces are  worried because it will cost 30% more  to include housewives.  Lalonde said the greatest barrier facing funding of women's groups is reduced expenditures by Federal. Government because of inflation.  He explained that many departments have fixed budget allotments which they are not at  liberty to either increase or decrease  to make room for special women's funds.  Lalonde thinks we should keep applying  to general programs causing the departments to see the need for funding women's centres and we should not ask for  special programs at this time.  (We  informed him we are not asking the  Government to spend more money but to  redistribute the pie.)  The Minister  advised us that women's groups do not  qualify for money under the Canada  Assistance Plan unless they are serving  women in poverty and would have to  undergo a means test.  Lalonde advised that the new rape law  is open to amendment right now and recommends that women's groups submit  their briefs to the Federal Government in this regard.  He said he is  familiar with the Washington, DC, Task  Force Report on Rape, (a very comprehensive set of recommendations) but does  not know what progress has been made on  them in America.  He told us there is  some opposition by 'civil libertarians'  to eliminating the sexual nature of  rape in the law and making it into an  assault.  The Minister informed us that Mr. Basford, Minister of Justice, requested  the Government Task Force on abortion  to make its report in 6 months and said  there would be a debate on abortion in  the House of Commons before the next  Federal election.  Lalonde thinks Parliamentarians are lagging behind public  opinion on this question and advised  women to educate their MPs in this regard o  He said the one million anti-  abortion signatures presented to Ottawa  this summer only reinforced the anti-  abortion MPs and Ministers but did not  change the opinions of the pro-aborticn  Government officials.  (In other words,  petitions are not all that effective.)  The Minister said Ron Basford, who has  taken over Otto Lang's position, is an  'understanding' man and has 'no doctrinaire position' on abortionc  Lalonde  is afraid that abortion will become a  'partisan' issue with each party jocky-  ing for position in the election battle.  He said he 'respects' Morgentaler who  he predicted would not be released  until the abortion law changes.because  he has broken many of the parole rules"  alonde completely dismissed the poss-  )ility of a pardon.  The Minister said there is impatience  and frustration amongst Cabinet Ministers and MPs on the slowness of passing  women's rights legislation and that  there needs to be a change in Parliamentary procedure to help Government deal  with pressing issues quickly but he does  not see this happening in the near  future.  Lalonde thinks a separate portfolio on  the status of women is advisable and  agrees it should belong to a female  Cabinet Minister.  He noted that this  position need not necessarily be tied  to a Minister of Health and Welfare  as it has been coincidentally since  its inception.  Lalonde expressed his interest in the  Manpower demonstration inviting" women's groups to present their views to  him on the natter.  Commenting en "Action 75", the Federal Government IWY conference, in  Ottawa in October Lalonde noted that  businessmen participating in the convention were impressed by the female  workshop leaders and that advertisers  had their consciousness raised a  great daalc  After the Minister left we had some  15 minutes to talk with his special  assistant Anne Jamieson who gave us  some tips0  She noted that most MPs  and Cabinet Ministers only give Lalonde  lip service and that it is important  for women's groups to give him support  in order to accomplish what we want.  She recommends that all women's groups  open and maintain contact with the  Minister by letter, telephone, brief,  personal representations, meetings,  whatever.  As Special Assistant Ms. Jamieson's  superior is the Executive Assistant  under the Minister. She told us special assistants are appointed by the  Federal Government and have often  worked with the politicians in the  party prior to their becoming elected.  She advised women's groups to write  to their Cabinet Ministers and MPs  asking them how many women are on  their staffs and what positions they  hold, and what their duties entail.  She said when they are asked this publicly it is embarassing and they have  to do something about itc  She noted  that most of the time they seldom think  of hiring a woman and she considers  this worse than overt opposition to it0  Well, that's about it0  We have heard  most of it before, but it's good to  meet the people who are looking after  things and who we have been writing  to for so long.  For one thing, it's  a chance for politicians to meet with  women who are actually involved in the  women's movement.  It shows them that  we aren't the lone radicals, and that  we are a force to be dealt with.  - Karen Richardson.  quote  "If any person doubts that the society of the present day has been made  by men, and for men's advantage, let  them look for a minute at the laws  which govern society." — Nellie  McClung, "In Times Like These." books for    children  15  SOME IDEAS FOR XMAS  About a year ago VSW produced a bibliography of non-sexist children's books  (still'available for 50c at our office).  It seems that publishers are becoming  aware of a growing market for non-  stereotyped books. One of the best to  come out this year is the Heath series  entitled "Women at Work". In these  eight colourful booklets real Canadian  women are depicted doing their various  jobs — a sculptor, an owner of a fish  store, a veterinarian, a TV producer,  a dentist, a politician, a pilot and  a woman who builds her own house. The  Department of Education has placed  four of these booklets in elementary  schools throughout the province as  supplementary readers.  Vaughn McMorland of the Victoria  Status of Women has recommended a  book by Leslie McGuire,"You — How  Your Body Works", published by Piatt  and Munk, New York.  Heather Kellerhals-Stewart, a member  of VSW concerned over the lack of  good non-sexist material has taken some  some action and written several stories  which were published this year.  "She Shoots, She Scores" is the story  of Hilary, a girl who enjoys playing  hockey and through determination and  the support of her family finally  makes the team.  "Muktu: the Backward Muskox" is a  delightful book about a girl muskox  who saves the herd.  Support your local feminist author,  publishing company, artists and photographers. Buy from the Women's Bookstore which has a good selection of  non-sexist books.  - Nadine Allen  BOOKS  ACTIVISTS' HANDBOOK  The TOOL CATALOGUE  is a 250-page  handbook from the American Assoc.  of University Women, a comprehensive  guide for citizen's groups on how to:  influence legislation; handle publicity; organize a lobby. The manual is  a gold mine of tips on how to: use  petitions; get endorsements; run a  demonstration; operate a speakers'  bureau; organize a conference; issue  newsletters; recruit volunteers; submit propsals; run.-an election campaign;  influence budgets. Advice on liaison  with institutions, community and government is given; concensus versus conflict tactics; how to deal with outside  hostility; how to form coalitions; how  to get appointed to advisory committees.  Send $6 to AAUW, 2401' Virginia Ave. West,  Washington, D.C. USA 20031.  . - WCWN  CHRISTIAN FEMINISTS  A group of Christian feminists are  compiling a book of articles to make  current theological thought available  to women.  Those who have related ideas  or articles to contribute should write  Beverley Wright, 241 Howe street  Victoria, B0C. V8V 4K7  THE WOMEN'S GUIDE TO BOOKS  The Women's Guide to Books is a nation-wide (American) bookservice,that  selects, reviews and sells a wide  range of books on topics of special  interest to women. Their second catalogue is now available and reflects  the shift of interest in women's books  away from the'Housewife's lament' toward the practical advice manual.  The bookservice has also inaugerated  a sales program in which popular paper  backs are offered at discount with  the purchase of The Guide. Write The  Women'" Guide to Books, 655 Madison  Ave. New York, New York 10021. $2.  WOMEN, WORK AND VOLUNTEERING by Herta  Loeser presents reasons and practical  advice for participating in in a wide  array of volunteer opportunities"  Loeser describes herself as a "firm  believer in women's rights" and deals  with the distrust of many women towards  volunteer work.  Illustrations by Inge Pavlowsky.  Available from Civic Centi i and Clearing House.Inc. Beacon Press- 25 Beacon  Street, Boston 02108, Mass0 Paperback,  $4.45 prepaid.  THEATRE  Women Playwrights Competition  A women's playwriting competition is  being, conducted by Women Write for  Theatre of the Playwrights Coop.  Funded by the Ontario Arts Council, it  is aimed at introducing more women  writers into existing theatre structures.  Deadline entry date is January  31st. 1976.  (One-act or full-length  plays.)  For further information contact Connie Brissendon, 344 Dupont St..  Toronto, Ontario.  — films —  INTERLOCK. A periodical about Women  and Film published by Unit D (NFB)  under Kathleen Shannon. Lists of  groups, films and women filmakers  as well as feature articles. Ask  your nearest National Film Board.  WE     MOURN  PAT     LOWTHER  POET & FEMINIST  MARYON KANTAROFF is the title of a  film study of Canadian sculptor and  feminist, Maryon Kantaroff, produced  exclusively by women, under the dir-  ecton of Solveig Ryall. The 18 minute  film is available for rent from the  Canadian Filmmakers Distribution  Centre,406 Jarvis Street, Toronto,Ont.  Feminist Films  Two feminist films have been produced  by the. Ontario Federation of Women  Teachers' Association in honor of IWY.  Both are available on loan without  cost.  "A Matter of Choice," is a 10-  ninute film illustrating sexism in  education.  "The Visible Woman," is a half-hour  documentary on the history of women's  rights in Canada.  Some of the material is rare Canadiana. Contact  lean Coohrane, FWTA, 3rd. Floor,  1260 Bay Street, Toronto, Ontario. 16  terrace  Alice Chen Wing of T.W.O. stopped in  Vancouver on her way home from the  Women and Voluntarism Conference in  Ottawa. She gave us information on  what is going on in Terrace and took  with her the Kinesis papers for members in Terrace and Kitimat, the  BCFW newsletter packet, and 50 copies  of the VSW "Women Want Answers" set  of questions to ask election candi-;  dates. The feminist pony express  system!  ■ As usual thing are really happening  in Terrace!  On October 30, Marc Lalonde, Minister  of Health and Welfare and Minister  Responsible for the Status of Women,  spoke at the R.E.M. Lee Theatre at  the invitation of the Terrace Women's  Organization.  Lalonde was introduced  to the audience of approximately 160  men and women by Iona Campagnola, MP  for Skeena, who was instrumental in  bringing the Minister to Terrace.  Lalonde spoke on the issues of IWY,  health and welfare, wage and price  controls, and engaged in a lively  question and answer period with members of the audience.  A very important FIRST for women is  about to take place in Terrace. The  Department of Northern Development  through the Provincial Coordinator  on the Status of women, has made  money available to open a Hourly  Child Care Centre. The money will  cover the salaries of coordinator  Leslie Wetherston and three hourly  helpers. It is anticipated that volunteers will also donate time to the  Centre. One thousand square feet of  space in the centre of Terrace have  been rented and the Centre will open  December lc It will be open four days  a week for 6 hours a day and women  can leave their children by appointment for up to 3 hours. The Centre  will be limited to 15 children at  first but it is hoped that enough  money can be raised to expand to  30 children. The organizers are  approaching the city Recreation Committee, the Chamber -of Commerce and  the local Service Clubs for help.  It is also hoped that the coordinator,  who has received training in England,  will be recognized as qualified to  care for children under the age of 2  years at the Centre A service of this  kind is extremely important to women  who live in isolated areas and when  they do come into town to shop, etc.  must try to cope with errands, snowy  streets and bored, tired children.  An hour or two of worry free time  can make an enormous difference!  Other women's groups in the interior  and north should consider using the  Terrace centre as a model for a similar service in their own community.  Alice Chen Wing can be contacted at:  4729 McConnell Ave., Terrace, phone  635-7763.  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  ywca  ubc  CENTRE FOR CONTINUING EDUCATION  The Women's Resource Centre, Centre  for Continuing Education, UBC, in cooperation with The Vancouver Public  Library will resume their noon hour  programs in January. In the meantime  the Drop-In Centre.on the 3rd floor  of the Vancouver Public Library will  continue to be open from 10 a.m. to  4 p.m. Monday to Friday and 6:30 p.m.  to 9 p.m. on Thursday. Information  on a range of programs and services  is available at the Centre.  north  shone  The North Shore Women's Centre is having a Mulled Wine Christmas Party at  Neighbourhood House, 225 East 2nd,  North Vancouver on December 9, 7:30 pm.  HOUSING.SERVICES OF THE YWCA .  Residence at 580 Burrard Street with  accomodation for permanent and transient guests with a wide range of costs  depending on accomodation selected.  Rooms Registry- A referral service  located in the Burrard building for  those who desire accomodation outside  the YWCA in various areas of the city.  Call 683-2531, local 233.  Group Homes for Single Parents -  Shared living accomodation and sub-  . sidized child care while parent works  or continues education. •  Call 683-2531 or ask at front desk,  YWCA, 580 Burrard St, Vancouver.  cap college  EXPLORATIONS  A lecture series to introduce women  to the role of their predecessors  and contemporaries in various areas  of society.  Wednesdays, 7:30 to 9:30 pm. Fee: $1  per session.  St. David's United Church, 1525 Taylor  Way, West Vancouver.  December 3 — The Women's Movement —  reformist, revolutionary or reactionist? A debate among Women with different views on the utility and aims of  the Women's Movement.  Margaret Roy — Moderator  Sponsored by the Women's Studies  Programme, Capilano College.  people's   law  school-  LABOUR LAW — Dec. 1,2 & 3.  Location: B.C. Labour Federation  Building, 517 East Broadway  Time: 7:30 p.m.  Instructors: Rod Germaine & Drew  Schroeder  Dec. 1 — Rights of unorganized worker, right to organize, Labour Relations  Board composition and responsibilities.  kelowna  The Kelowna Women's Centre has conducted a study on the status of women  in thei area, with a grant from the  Provincial Status of Women Coordinator.  For a copy contact KWC at #8 - 375  Bernard Avenue, Kelowna, or call Linda  Moor at ,763-8223.  -WCWN  Dec. 2 — Responsibilities of union  to members, grievance procedure against  union by members.  Dec.3 — Enforcing a collective agreement, law regulating bargaining process,  strikes, lockouts, picketing and arb-^  itration.  ALL COURSES FREE. PRE-REGISTER  BY CALLING 681-7532 17  members'     forum  Marc Lalonde is a gentleman and,  according to the impressions received by those of us who met with  him for an hour on Oct. 31st, a  gentle man.  The impression is  composed of interlocking details—  the 3 piece grey, pinstripe, wool  suit and rough tweed tie (a contrast to the Fortrel-wrapped Social Credit conventioners meeting  in the same hotel that says more  than a thousand words), the soft  voice and gracious, attentive  manner, the lean lined appearance  (sort of an elongated Yves Montand  with less hair), and even the ability to handle an armless chair,  a cup of coffee and a chocolate-  covered donut gracefully.  The grace and self-assurance are  the result of generations of setting the standards; the gentleness  and sympathy a part of the man's  personality.  For he is sympathetic to the problems of women, our social, legal  and economic inequality. Intellectually he understands our com  plaints and demands.  Sympathy is  there — but empathy?  Is it possible that a man with his background  and experience and position, with  all the good will in the world,  can begin to understand the frustration and anger that women feel  when their needs and rights are  once again given second priority?  Can he imagine what it is like to  be one individual woman, earning a  pittance wage, trying to find a  babysitter who will give her social insurance number so that the  mother can claim the paltry $500  child care allowance on her Income  Tax when the other woman is in the  position of not being able to afford  to babysit if she has to give  her social insurance number and  list it on a tax form?  Can he understand what it is like to behave  in a petty and defiant and graceless fashion because you know you  are being treated unjustly and you  are powerless-, and frightened?  Can he see from the other end of  the tunnel what the 2 or 3 year experiment in waiting for businesses  to voluntarily fulfill their responsibility to 33.2% of the working  force looks like to women who have  always had to wait until the male  system has felt moved to generously  grant us what is rightfully ours?  How can he? He might as well be born  a planet away from such things. His  response to the idea of collective  decision making was revealing — an  indulgent smile, a firm dismissal.  The existing structure works for  him.  And for us the question remains —  is it possible for us to receive  justice in a structure that was formed without reference to or consideration of the needs of women or their  view of society? It is possible —  in fact it is entirely probable, that  Lalonde was the best minister available to take on the status of women  portfolio. The best man available in  a system that wasn't designed to include us.  - jo lazenby  Men in the Office: PART2  Another episode of "Men in the Office."  A male film crew moved into the back  Of the basement of the Vancouver Status  of Women office.  Remember? With visions of insufferable chauvinism, we  quickly informed them they would have  only minimal use of our office:  access  to the bathroom, use of the front door  (not control thereof) and copier.  They agreed to this.  Round two. Predictably, more problems.  We arrived at work one day tc find we  had acquired a doorman who let us in  and out of our own front door (they had  their own back door) according to priorities for silence during filming.  The same guy later refused entrance to  women who came to brouse through the  information desk downstairs where the  sound technician had stationed himself  in the hallway. We had not been asked  if it was 0.Ko  They just did it.  We were permitted access to our own  lower office (they called it the lounge)  and bathroom when it was convenient to  the film crew due to the noise factor.  (We are not noisy neighbours.). At one  point we couldn't even open our window  for fresh air.  At the boiling point, we asked the crew  to at least notify us beforehand when  they needed silence so we could plan  around it0  (So feminine of us. Why  not them planning around us?) They  agreed to this but did not keep their  half of the bargain even though they  had the better deal!  The straw to break the camel's back was  when they asked if their movie extras  could use thexlounge'for a while.  We  said O.K. thinking there would only be  a few.  The whole room was filled with  actors dressed in full police uniform  and we had to use at least half of the  space to get a newsletter out on time!  Staff discussed the problem with much  resentment.  Our "radical" radical did  not want to accommodate them in any  way whatsoever.  She reasoned this was  our office and sound was their problem.  Our "moderate" moderate said it would  only be a few more days so why not put  up with it?  The rest of us felt somewhere in the  middle. We were angry about the imposition but we were willing to negotiate  so we sent two of our own down to talk  with the film crew's rep. We told them  our needs were equally important and  that in future if they needed silence  they would have to wait until we were  ready to give it to them, which would  not be longo  They agreed to this -  too easily.  Through it all, we were amazed to  automatically find ourselves once again  in the traditional female role of accommodating others, males in particular.  We asked ourselves if we were really  feminists after all. They were not  only being chauvinists, they were just  being plain selfish. Any neighbours,  male or female would have resented  their behaviour.  Sometimes we were winked at or made  faces to.  It was hard to tell when  they were flirting and when they were  being cocky. Maybe they weren't sure  about it themselves.  One of their secretaries came up to  tell us her troubles with them, and  let us know they were trying to placate us. What placation?  Saying yes  and then not cooperating?  A gift of  incense in the "spirit of peace?"  We were in a double bind.  It was so  classic.  The only tactics we could  use were destructive. We could obstruct them as they had obstructed us  by refusing to be quiet and getting on  with our work.  But in doing so, the  hostility would only escalate, never  mind that we would be called bitches.  Or we could crash through the hallway  past the technician when we weren't  supposed to be there at the risk of a  bodily row.  This would have been foolish since they were bigger and more in  numbers and none of us practised physical self-defence.  Feminists yet!  The only other alternative was to remain silent and put up with it.  If  You can't use force, and reason doesn't  get you anywhere you are powerless.  They created the situation and then  blamed us for it.  We were forced into  the feminine role whether we liked it  or not.  We had to compromise (cower)  and wait it out, however much we disliked the us/them approach.  The war between the sexes is escalat  ing.  Some call it a backlash.  It's  not because feminists want it that way,  but because men refuse to respect women,  however much they talk about chivalry  or liberation. Men continue to ignore  their selfishness even when they are  told about it, and they are in a positior  not to have to change.  Our advice? The best defense is offense.  Don't let men into the office  except for short times and for specific reasons. Otherwise, practise on  them at home0  - Karen Richardson  If" ^11 the good  Icomments We have  /received about our  /and a11 our great  / guests 18  media action  the  media mirage  The Honourable Marc Lalonde, Minister  of National Health and Welfare and  Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women, recently addressed the  Ottawa Women's Canadian Club on the  topic of Women and the Media. His  address is entitled "The Media Mirage"  and deals with what he terms "the  portrayal—or the betrayal—of women  in the media."  This is an excellent speech! Everyone  should read it! Write the Health and  Welfare Department in Ottawa for a  copy.  Following are excerpts from the speech  —edited for reasons of space.  In recent years, an increasing number of studies have been done on the  ways in which women are protrayed in  advertising. It is evident that women  are rarely shown as they are. Rather  they are shown as advertisers believe  they wish to be.  Media are directing their advertising  to the women of the 50's. This fictional woman was no more real than the  media image of women in the 70's. In  the intervening decades, an enormous  change has occurred in lifestyles  and values. But advertisers are wasting a great deal of money. They appear  to have lost touch with their audience.  There is a dichotomy between women as  they appear in advertising and as they  are in life. Perhaps the audience is  a mirage.  Rene Bartos, vice-president of J.  Walter Thompson advertising agency  is conducting a study to determine  if advertising research on women  conducted during the day when only  homemakers are available may be based on an unrepresentative sample of  women.  Why is it possible for an advertising  man to say:"Most men in advertising  think women have low intelligence.  They believe that women are really  children. Even the calibre of soap  operas doesn't approach the idiocy  of commercials." In a study by the  National Organization of Women, less  than one percent of commercials showed women as intelligent people with  individual identies. This is stereotyping: placing people in roles that  give a single lens view of real life.  Dr. Alice Courtney in an article in  the Financial Post wrote:"The authority figure in commercials is still  overwhelmingly male." The Ontario  Status of Women Council has released  a report "About Face"which confirms  that women still find advertising  offensive.  Just last fall there was a major conflict at the University of Victoria  over advertising placed in their  directory. The university's Women's  Action Committee protested the ad.  In response, one of the advertisers  said"Lots of male students would be  pleased. If the ladies are hurt, I  am sorry but this is universally done.  In 1974 the United Nations Commission of the Status of Women tabled a  major report, "The Influence of Mass  Communications Media on the Formation  of a New Attitude Toward the Role of  Women." One of the statements that  appeared in the document was "If women are protrayed by the media as  children or sex symbols, that is the  self-image they will form." It is  strange that in International Women's  Year the status of women in advertising is still somewhere between idiotic and infantile.  Rights are an empty victory if society continues to believe in old  myths about women. Much of the responsibility lies with the media itself. But we as individuals must  also accept responsibility. If we  are offended, we must protest.  Repeated often enough this type of  advertising contributes to the self-  fulfilling prophecy, the tendency to  fulfill the expectations of society,  the molding of the aspirations of  young women. The media purpprt to  be a mirror image of our daily lives  but what is seen is a distortion.  For our children, the media is often  as real to them as the people they  know in real life—and may have even  more influence,.  action 75  "Action 75", a conference organized by  the Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women, in October, presented 350  captains of industry with positive programs for improving the status of women.  Speakers included Prime Minister  Trudeau, the Honourable Marc Lalonde,  Sylva Gelber, Pauline Jewett, Florence  Bird, Barbara Boyle, Meredith Kimball,  Catherine Mclver, and Lorna Marsden,  among others.  The chief executives in the audience  were impressed with the calibre of the  women participating in the panel and  asked "Where did they all come from?"  They were told many such women existed  "out there" and to go and find them.  The male bureaucrats underwent some  c.r. on women and came out of it aghast  at sexist adverising.  Below is an  example of the questionnaire they took.  - Karen Richardson.  quotes:  From ABOUT FACE — Towards a Positive  Image of Women in Advertising, produced by the Ontario Status of Women  Council.  "In my opinion, almost all TV ads  make women appear as fools, interested only in their wash or their  breath."  "I realize 'ad men' believe it doesn't  matter if their ads aggravate the buyer  so long as they remember the name of  the product.''Taint so!"  "Give 'em hell and make them change!"  Hey! I just got a promotion .  7ft £-£tJ/OCt it UHZ±  -f'\ mtfl   '*  Eitner  i :s ineffective' ana 1  :rg how would you (  vould you describe the 'copy', or c  Koffee K latch Kcffee-Maker!  7H0NC   66f 22CC   TOR   !■    fSfif   OFt-irt   01VCrjSTr:»-iOr.-  KOFFEE  KLATCH  KOFFEE  SERVICE •  24 ACME  BLVD.  •  NOWHERE. CANADA 19  subscriber   Letters  PHONE (home)  (work)  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  LIBRARIES, etc. SUBSCRIPTION $10/ YEAR  RENEWAL   NEW MEMBER    Kinesis is sent to all members in good  standing. Membership dues are by yearly donation.  In determining your donation we ask you to balance your own  financial position and the fact that  KINESIS costs approximately $3.00 per  person per year to print and mail.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objective is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W.  PUBLICATION DATE:  The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE:  The 1st of the previous month (e.g.* Nov. 1 for Dec.  issue).  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to  the editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be  used where requested. Where necessary, the newsletter committee  will edit for brevity, clarity, and  taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone:  736-3746  THIS ISSUE:  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE:  Jo Lazenb' ,  Bobbie Patrick, Monica Mui, Eloah  Giacomelli, Viviane Hotz, Diana  Bissell  CONTRIBUTORS: Nancy Conrod, Lee Masters  Susan Levin, Miriam Gropper, Karen  Richardson, Johanna den Hertog, J. Annii  Freeman, Patricia Russell, Heather  Kellerhals, Margaret Nicholls, Janet  Beebe, Nadine Allen, Jo Lazenby  GRAPHICS: Kathy Sopkc, Kathy Horrocks  LAYOUT: Jo Lazenby  TYPING: Joan Chandler, Kathy Horrocks,  Jo Lazenby  PROOF READING: Trudy Wijnbeck, Jo  Lazenby  KINESIS:  I am enclosing fifty cents for a copy  of the list of non-sexist books for  children.  I would also appreciate  having a list of the other printed  material that is available for purchase.  I am a member of the Vancouver Status  of Women and am working on the Letter  Lobby Committee.  I have recently learned of something quite interesting which  might be followed up by someone in the  office.  The Keenlyside Report recently  published in the Province concerning  proposed changes and improvements to the  Fire Departments made a suggestion that  women be allowed to become fire inspectors for fire departments in British  Columbia.  According to the information  I received this is running in to heavy  criticism with the Fire Chiefs. At a  recent conference that was held they  all agreed that they can't see how this  move to let women in can possibly be  accomplished etc. etc.  Just thought  I would pass the information along.  Maybe we would like to picket the  Fire Halls.  There must be lots of  women who would like to earn $16,000  a year for four days work in this  type of field.  Sincerely,  Dianne Westerlund  KINESIS:  Please find enclosed my post dated  cheque for renewal of membership. I  enjoy reading KINESIS and would like  to compliment: the staff for producing such an informative and interesting paper.  Keep up the good work, I  I'm sure there are women besides me  who feel that this is OUR paper and  look forward to its arrival each month.  Sincerely,  Deryl Duncalf  NEWS  WOMEN'S TRANSITION HOUSE IN LIMBO  The Corrections Branch of the B.C.  Attorney-General's office has modified the Vancouver Justice Council  proposal for a cooperative half-way  house for sentenced women. The VJC  Women's Sub-committee will not support the changed plan. For more information contact Betty Tarrant,VJC  202 - 1541 West Broadway, Vancouver  or call 736-4577.  -WCWN  The IWY Van — Lynne, Shelia, Gillian  & Dryme travelled the entire province  (did they ever!) and talked to 10,500  people about women and their needs  and their rights. A resource booklet  will be compiled to coordinate all  this information.  lee's lady  She's beautiful, I love her, and she's  been fighting a long, long time.  Her  hair is white now, and she hurts in  more places each day, and sometimes  she's forgetful.  Forgetful about little things, but never the big ones.  Never voting.  I met her a year ago, when she was new  here, a little afraid of new places  and faces.  She confided in me, not a  permanent secret, but a little one  just for the time.  She's a socialist.  Just a little confidence that first  day, so she had someone in her new  world to trust while she felt out the  opposition, as it were, and identified  a few prejudices.  I think about prejudice often when I think of her, and  I start wondering.."..  I wonder what it was like in B.C. when  her husband ran on the C.C.F. ticket,  what it was like when she was a suffragette demanding the vote.  I wonder  why she came to me about the, List, of  Electors, and wonder what she knows of  prejudice that you and I can never know.  I wonder how she answered so quickly  the priest who asked why I preferred  Ms., and answered more bluntly than I  would have dared.  I wonder how many times I've been told  "older people can't understand" and  how many times she was told "women can't  understand." I wonder what the colour  of her hair has to do with her mind,  why wisdom is presumed to be lost with  long life.  I wonder how she remembers her vote  when she's forgotten her key» What  price did she pay for the vote, and  what price the key?  I wonder if grand-daughters and granddaughters' grand-daughters will live in  a better world, or any world at all.  I wonder if the insanity of people hating people can end, whether the tyranny  of judgment can ever be annihilated.  I wonder if my beautiful lady wonders,  too, and wonder if she has wondered for  a long, long time.  She has a beautiful  smile, my beautiful lady, and she gives  Be peace.  - Lee Masters VSW   -  .-;-  board of directors  general  The October meeting of the VSW Board  of Directors was held October 22nd,  in the VSW office.  Dorothy Holme informed the Board that  she had arranged for members of the  VSW Board and staff to meet with Marc  Lalonde, federal Minister Responsible  for the Status of Women, October 31st,  at the Hotel Vancouver. A written and  verbal presentation would be prepared  for this meeting. (For report on the  meeting see page 14 this issue.)  It was reported that the response to  a  mailout to all B.C. M.L.A.s  regarding provincial government inaction on  women's issues was poor. More lobbying will have to be done.  The National Action Committee (NAC)  requested a VSW delegate to attend  their fall general meeting in Toronto.  It was agreed that we ask Leslie McDonald who was on the VSW staff during  the summer and who is living in Tor—-  onto to represent us.  Board members exchanged information  regarding their interviews with M.P.s  for the NAC Questionaire, As a follow-  up to their interviews the members involved are to send out packets of information to the M.P.s who'were interviewed.  Hanne Jensen reported on the 'Captains  of Industry' conference she attended.  The meeting was arranged by the Western Conference and aimed at raising t  the consciousness of people in management positions. An excellent audiovisual presentation by Kathy Sopko  was showno  Canadian International Development  Association (CIDA) has invited VSW  representatives to a 'Women Sharing'  workshop to be held NOvember 21st  at the YWCA. Three women from developing countries (Ghana, India, Brazil)  will be attending.  meeting  A General Meeting of all members of  the Vancouver Status of Women will  be held Tuesday, January 20th, in the  Board Room of the Vancouver YWCA at  7:30 p.m. This is an important meeting  and all members are urged to attend.  important  Members who are interested in running  for a position on the VSW Board of  Directors for 1976-77 should remember  that to qualify they must be members  in good standing for six months prior  to elections. Elections for the Board  of Directors are held at the Annual  General Meeting in June and therefore  to qualify candidates must be VSW  members as of December 1975.  quotes:  "Why aren't there ever Wise WOMEN?"  "I do believe that the personal is  political, and vice versa (the politics of sex, the politics of housework, the politics of motherhood),  and that this insight into the necessary integration of exterior realities and interior imperatives is one  of the themes of consciousness that  makes the Women's Movement unique,  less abstract, and more functionally  possible than previous movements for  social change."  - Robin Morgan "Rights of  Passage", MS. Sept./75.  "Today, my just-as-ever-urgent anger  is tempered by a patience born of the  recognition that the process, the form  of change itself, is everything: the  means and the goal justifying each  other."  - Robin Morgan "Rights of  Passage", MS. Sept./75.  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  What with Christmas & the Mail Strike  & the Election,energy usually put into  membership group activities is being  channelled elsewhere in December. For  information on any specific group call  the VSW office.  MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR!  1 «e were very f^f^^i My  l-.5l.oM "k*In"f "en - although  VBrarFeroeerdr8ai"xy Lt pleaaed ahoat  \"U heing cancelled. "