 jfPCIAl COU.BCTWNS  r  laj^cirTacfe J  73-S305  SERIALS  DIVISION  MAIN LIBRARY  UNIVERSITY OF B.C.  VANCOUVER 8, B.C.  Vancouver Status off Women 2029 W. 4th Ave.  MAY     1976  VOLUME V      NO.55  ISSN 0317-9995  /to.  March this year brought bad weather.  It also brought the annual money  worries to Vancouver Status of Women0  If we are to continue to provide an  ombudsservice  and all the other  services we have in the past, VSW  needs money in addition to members'  contributions. We have benefited from  time to time from LIP grants, Secretary of State grants, some private  grants. They have supported specific  projects, such as preparing the high  school women's studies course. Continuous operating expenses were not  included. Since August of 1973 the  B.C. Provincial Secretary has provided core funding to keep the office  open and operate the Ombudsservice.  The last grant ran out March 31, 1976.  The executive applied to a variety  of sources for 1976-77. We have had  some success and some failure" The  Provincial Secretary has agreed to  provide core funding for the office  and a staff of six until July 31,1976.  We must submit monthly reports on  finances and activities and each  monthly cheque will depend upon sat  isfactory reports. Also, the Provincial Secretary will undertake an intensive reassessment of all our activities and consider whether we should-  receive funding after July 31.  We applied to United Community Services, to Vancouver Foundation, and  to Secretary of State for support to  establish a reference library. We  asked for materials and one salary,  a total of about $12,000. They all  said no. In addition the Canada Council refused us a book donation for  the library.  We have outstanding applications with  the Attorney-General for the Ombudsservice and with the Canada Department of Justice for the Ombudsservice.  The money situation is not good. Even  with four month's operating expenses  we must be looking to the future. We  cannot maintain a paid staff without  outside funds" Membership donations  now pay for the materials and postage  for KINESIS. That's all. The rent for  the office is $350 per month, the  phone bill is about $150,. The^e are  paper, typewriter maintenance, insur  ance, stamps, etc. At the moment our  operating costs, exclusive of salaries, are about $1000 per month. The  costs would go down with no paid  staff, but we still estimate that  the present office space itself will  cost about $9000 to keep open for a  year. That's $10 per member, over  and above subscriptions to KINESIS  and membership fees. Remember that  figure.  We need paid staff to maintain our  present services. Our work is important and its worth must be recognized.  Funding for all types of services is  very tight this year. The general  climate seems to be against our maintaining grants for our operations.  But we will try. And if we cannot  obtain core funding after July 31,  we must depend upon our members to  carry us over any dry period with  their monetary donations, and most  important, with their time in providing what service we can on a volunteer basis.  - Nancy D. Conrod  President VSW nnon  ^  important message  As President Nancy Conrod explains  on the Front Page of this issue of  KINESIS,.it will be necessary for  Vancouver Status of Women to depend  more heavily on the help of the membership in order to continue our services  and work towards the goals of this  organization. The future of our funding, and so the continuation of a  paid staff, is uncertain. The involvement of members in activities and plans  of action is more vital than ever and  in order to facilitate this involvement  we must determine the needs and interests of our members.  More than 1000 copies of KINESIS are  mailed out monthly and of this number  it is not accurately known how many  are to members (supportive of the  objectives of the Vancouver Status of  Women) and how many are to subscribers  (receive KINESIS for informational  purposes only or those who are supportive but do not wish to be members).  This absence of a true definition  between member and subscriber has resulted from the fact that KINESIS  originated as a members' newsletter.  KINESIS has since evolved to a more  widely read and circulated newspaper,  making personal contact with the large  and scattered "membership" very difficult To facilitate more personal  contact between members and their organization it has become necessary  to reassess VSW membership in order  to determine "MEMBERS" and "SUBSCRIBERS o" Through this reassessment,  we hope to increase member participation in the activities and concerns of  the organization^ VSW policy has always been that the members determine  the membership activities by expressing their needs and concerns and  chanelling them through organized  activities that will ultimately  strengthen the organization. It would  be of little value for VSW staff to  organize a workshop or interest group  around an issue of concern if there  are no members interested in participating. In order to determine what  members would like to get from the  organization and what they want to  give to the organization, we ask that  all KINESIS readers fill out the form  below and send it into the VSW office.  Future funding possibilities are dim;  however the B.C0 Federation of Women  is established (of which VSW is an  affiliate member —which means that  all VSW members are also members of  the BCFW), and has a framework to  accomodate the formation of action-  oriented concern groups; the Women's  Rally for Action has proven it can be  done ..o but  YOUR INVOLVEMENT IS NECESSARY TO  BRING ABOUT THE NEEDED CHANGES IN  BOTH LEGISLATION AND SOCIAL ATTITUDES .  Membership in VSW has always been by  donation and all members reoieve  KINESIS. We would like to remind our  members that the cost of producing  and sending 12 copies of KINESIS is  about $5 per year and donations above  this amount to help with VSW activities are always appreciated. For those  who wish to subscribe to KINESIS but  not become a member of VSW, the subscription rate is $5 per year for  individuals and $10 per year for institutions.  - Judy Bourne  ADDRESS_  PHONE  I i     MEMBER    i  EZJ SUBSCRIBER  MEMBERS ONLY:  1. WHAT ARE YOUR SPECIFIC INTERESTS AND CONCERNS WITHIN THE WOMEN"1 S MOVEMENT?  eg. Abortion,  Affirmative Action, Childcare, Education, Employment, Family Law, Health, Lobbying, Native  Women, Political Action, Research, Single Parents, Unions, Volunteerism, etc.  2. HOW DO YOU SEE YOUR INTERESTS/CONCERNS BEING BEST MET THROUGH THE ORGANIZATION? eg. Education  workshops, formation of Action Groups, Letter Lobby, Personal Growth Groups, etc.  30 HOW WOULD YOU LIKE TO PARTICIPATE WITHIN THE ORGANIZATION TO PUT YOUR INTERESTS/CONCERNS INTO  ACTION? eg. Action Group participation, Speaking engagements, Women Alive TV program committee,  volunteer office work, etc0  4. WHICH AREAS OF CONCERN DO YOU NEED MORE INFORMATION ON? INTRODUCTORY INFORMATION? MORE  COMPREHENSIVE INFORMATION?  5c ARE THERE SPECIFIC SKILLS YOU WISH TO LEARN WITHIN THE WOMEN'S MOVEMENT? eg. researching  issues, compiling fact sheets, public speaking, assertiveness training, consciousness-  raising, etc.  60 ARE THERE SPECIFIC SKILLS OR KNOWLEDGE YOU CAN CONTRIBUTE TO THE ORGANIZATION? eg. Childcare  worker, accountant, secretarial skills, member of a concern group, single parenting, etc.  7c COMMENTS? SUGGESTIONS? I have just returned from a 3-week  tour to Cuba sponsored by the Canadian Cuban Friendship Committee, and  would like to share some of what I  learned about women's position in  Cuba's socialist society.  I had opportunities while in Cuba  to visit offices of the Federation  of Cuban Women (FMC), speak informally with women there, and bring  back material with me to share with  Canadian sisters.  I have placed a  copy of the new Cuban Family Code,  one of Fidel's speech to the 2nd  congress of the FMC, and a summary  statement from the   FMC of the  Mexico city International Women's  Conference, in the Status of Women's  resource library in Vancouver.  The FMC is a very vital organization  for assuring recognition of women's  50% role in the growth and construction of a new society.  It was founded  in August, 1960, and now embraces  63 % of Cuban women over 14 years  old.  From its inception it established  its purpose of incorporating women into  the country's social, political, and  economic life by making them aware of  their duties and rights in the new  societyc  Before the revolution, women in Cuba  were typical of the most oppressed  groups still prominent throughoutthe  the rest of Latin America. They had  the highest illiteracy (30%), and of  the few that were employed outside the  home, 70% were domestic help. They  suffered from starvation wages,  inadequete nutrition, no medical  attention, no hope. All the people  suffered though,  in the days of  dictatorship before 1959, and the  fact that women were doubly oppressed  was hardly significant when set beside  the brutal impoverishment of all.  But with the revolution came the right  to education, the right to employment,  the right to medical attention, and  the right to full enjoyment of human  dignity. However, a revolution overnight does not change society's attitudes overnight, and, as Fidel Castro  in his speech to the 2nd congress of  the FMC in November 1974 stated,"When  the struggle for national liberation  is finally achieved, women must continue struggling for their own liberation within human society. It is  not of course only a task for women.  It is a task for the whole society."  The FMC has assured many advances for  women in Cuba, extracting her from  the narrow scope of the home, teaching her the importance of her contribution to the revolution, organizing  women together for study, exchange  of opinion, and specialized training.  The women of the FMC provided the impetus behind the literacy campaign  (whereby illiteracy in Cuba was reduced from 25% in 1959 to almost 0%  in 1961 by sending volunteers, mostly  young girls, into the primitive  CUBAN  WOMEN  countryside to teach the peasants to  read and write), child-day care construction, increased agricultural and  industrial production, and many other  areas of revolutionary importance to  the whole society.  The state is providing as quickly as  possible the material basis for  woman's full role in society. Thus  day-care centres, boarding schools,  workers' dining halls are going up in  greater and greater numbers. Women  are 34% of the country's work force,  and increasing towards 50% participation. They of course receive equal pay  for equal work, and participate in  all levels of the economy. Their  children are cared for free, and by  the letter of the law in the new Family Code, all housework and responsibility for the children is to be  equally shared by the two spouses.  However as mentioned before, old  attitudes and customs die hard, and  despite the extensive propagandizing  by the revolutionary government, the  work centres, and the FMC, many women  are still, expected (and often themselves expect) to play the double-  job role. There are also not enough  boarding schools and daycare centres  to provide for the needs of all women  who wish to work outside the home.  However, they are constantly being  built and their present lack is a  source of constant concern to the  revolutionary government? ... quite  unlike our Social Credit government  which blithely goes ahead squeezing  off funds to the few daycare units  available.  Pregnant working women in Cuba receive  12 weeks paid leave before, and six  weeks paid leave after, the birth of  their child, as well as paid days off  for a year after paturition for medical checkups for the baby.If there  are complications, this paid leave  may be extended. Of course all medical  services, hospital stay, and medications received while in hospital, are  free.  Women have advanced dramatically in  terms of material wants since the  revolution, but what impressed me more  than the exterior benefits available  for their liberation, was their internal  struggle to become full participatory  members of society.  Unlike here in  Canada where it is more profitable to  keep women oppressed, for utilization as  a labour pool, etc., in Cuba everyone's full participation in the political and economic running of the  country is needed. There is no unemployment, and in fact a shortage  of labour, due to the expansion of  production Cuba is implementing.  With the United States only 90 miles  away, and the constant threat of  covert attack and infiltration (as  occurred in 1961 with the CIA-backed  Bay of Pigs attack), the people must  be alert to the protection of their  country. Only men are compelled to  serve 3 years in the military, but  a great many women volunteer and advance to all officer levels. Women  are equally politically aware as men,  and share to the same high degree  the spirit of solidarity and support  for other liberation struggles throughout the world.  I remember once stopping at a CDR  (Committee for the Defense of the  Revolution) office, that actually  resembled more the scrubby little  living room of someone's house..I  took a picture, and then started  talking to the women and men who had  collected around me. We discussed  Angola, China's position with South  Africa, and the brutality of the  military junta in Chile, and through  all this exchange I observed the bilateral respect for political views  between the two sexes. In fact it  would be artifical to divide them  thus into two groups based on sex,  for they were all well-informed and  to various degrees articulate. There  was none of the sexist condensation  I have experienced in group conversation here.  The FMC is strengthening every year  with greater and greater participation of all Cuban women. The gradual  change in women's mentality, initiated in 1959, is establishing her full  participation in the socialist society, with the parallel evolution of  the men's mentality from Latin macho-  ismo to respectful regard of women  as female comrades. With the young,  Cuba's revolutionary society is  creating the new woman and the new  man, but there are still many prejudices and attitudes to struggle  against in the older sector of the  population.  Cuba is a fantastic place to visit, to  witness the progress that can be made  when the society is truly progressive  and humanitarian in its goals.  I lost a lot of my political despair  and cynicism on seeing the "impossib-  ilites" that have become reality there.  I hope that you will be able to visit  there, to momentarily connect with  that flow of positive human commitment characteristic of the new society.  - Alison Inglis  quote=  "The way to get things out of a government is to back them to the wall, put  your hands to their throat, and you  will get all they have."  - Agnes MacPhail, 1927.  public  lecture  Fred Storaska, New York producer of  the film "How To Say No To A Rapist",  will be lecturing in Canada for the  first time on May 10 & 11. A free pu  public lecture is being sponsored<by  the SFU Counselling Services and the  RCMP on Tuesday May 11th from 8:00 -  10:30 p.m., Room 9001, Academic  Quadrangle, Simon Fraser University.  Men and women welcome. Come early  as a large turnout is expected.  For more information call: Madeline  Dent, 291-3693. It is difficult to imagine the Vane1  couver Status of Women Office without Diana Bissell! For almost 2 years  she has been involved in almost everything that has gone on in the Office.  It would take a team of women to replace the energy and enthusiasm that  Diana brought to her work.  The variety and success of membership  activities at VSW has been largely  due to Diana's efforts. Her willingness to talk to students and uniniated  women and to help beginning women's  groups was well known. Many the flight  that we have shuddered at the thought  of Diana trustingly clutching a hand   |gf  drawn map of East Surrey or North  Richmond, forging through the dark  and rain in Pansy Volkswagen,with her  one operational windsheild wiper and  bald tires, to deliver her "non-  threatening but serious introduction  to the women's movement."  It is Diana's belief that women  "have to approach feminism in stages.  I did." She recalls how in the Spring  of 1974 the long discussions with her  friend Glinda Sutherland, a member  of the VSW Ombuds Staff, and a growing knowledge of the issues helped  her to re-examine her own values and  situation. She began to do volunteer  work one day a week at the VSW Office.  In June the job of Membership Coordinator was open and Diana quit  her part-time job at The Bay and  joined the staff of VSW. "It was  time." she says. "Everything fell  into place."  Diana threw herself into carrying on  and expanding the work begun by the  previous Membership Co-ordinator Pam  Smith. The concept of Orientation  Meetings was new — a recognition of  the fact that lobbying for legislation did not completely fulfil the  needs of the membership — "People  wanted to do something—there had to  be. ways for them to get involved."  That summer Diana and 5 students hir-  hired under a Secretary of State  Student Community Service Grant participated in and facilitated a Writers'  Workshop, a Health Group, a Graphics  Group (the beginning of our T-shirt  and poster industry), and a Newsletter  Group. Other groups such as the Letter  Lobby, the Communications Skills Workshop, and several Consciousness-Rais-  ing Groups grew out of the twice  monthly Orientation Meetings conducted  by Diana.  In 1975, another Secretary of State  grant, under the IWY Community Service Program, enabled Diana and Nadine  DIANA  Allen to work with 11 Vancouver Community Centres, providing women with  information and resources, raising  their awareness and helping them to  view their position in society from  a new perspective. This is part of  the public education that Diana feels  is sc essential if women and society  as a whole are to understand and  appreciate the values and goals of  the women's movement.  Diana has also been deeply involved  in working to pull the different fragments of the women's movement in B.C.  together into a unified powerful social force. One. of her greatest satisfactions has come from participating  in the formation of the B. C. Federation of Women—the working together  to build a structure that all women  can participate in. When the BCFW  Constitution was adopted unanimously  at convention last Fall Diana felt  it was "a giant step for the women's  movement in B.C." Ker own term of  office as Co-ordinator of the BCFW  Standing Committee has been "a real  growing experience."  So with all this activity, with this  feeling of commitment and involvement  —why is she leaving her job at VSW?  "It's time," she says.  Diana will be one of two Community  Education Consultants on Women's  Issues under one-year contract to  the Women's Program, Secretary of  State. She will be working out of the  Secretary of State Office in Prince  George and her territory will be  Northern B.C. She sees her work as  an extension of what she has been doing with VSW and BCFW—on a broader  base. Her duties are to stimulate  action on women's issues and to work  with community groups that haven't  dealt with women's issues before. She  describes the terms of reference as  "so nice and broad—not just resource  sharing and talking about women's  issues but assisting women to organize action. We will respond to the  needs exposed by the IWY Van and share  our experiences and expertise to ensure on-going organization and action.  The job will entail many new experiences—a new environment, seeing a  new part of the province, the experience of being a urban woman learning  about the needs and ideas of northern  and rural women.("I intend to do a  lot of listening!") Even the forsaking of Pansy Volkswagen. Diana may  be able to adjust to Northern B.C.  winters but Pansy is too old to learn!  The hardest decision Diana had to  make in accepting the job was her own  decision to resign her position as  co-ordinator of the BC FW Standing Committee, three-quarters of the way  through her term of office. But the  support and sisterhood expressed by  the other members of the Standing  Committee made the decision less painful and relieved her anxiety0  "By working for the government there  is always the danger of losing the  support of sisters. It has been seen  in the past as being co-optedc" Diana  said. "But we must get feminists into  the structure and support them in  order to deal with the system. As Gene  Errington said, we haven't been taught  the rules of the game—it is alien  territory. We need to learn how the  structure operates. But we must have  a support system to help these women  in alien territory."  Diana will be keeping in close contact with the VSW and we know we can  expect long newsy reports of her adventures. When Diana began work at  VSW Karen Richardson remembers how  "enthusiastic, fresh and eager she  was." These qualities remain undiluted.  We will miss you Diana!  - Jo Lazenby  hostels  ..the company way.  Did you know...?  That in the last  5 years the percentage of women  travellers staying in hostels has gone  from 2%-25%, quite a statement.  These are the figures from the  Jericho Youth Hostel, which is also  the location of a new library that's  being set up for travellers who are  visiting Vancouver.  It is growing  with donations of books from people  like you and me.  With your help we  can shed some light on women's  issues by opening a complete women's  section in the hostel.  Do you  have some books that you'd like to  share?  Phone me, Phyllis Victory,  at 736-1012.  ] The following set of rules was sent  |  in to KINESIS by an employee of a  i large firm in Vancouver.  j  RULES REGARDING PRESENTATIONS TO GIRLS  LEAVING THE COMPANY  1. Girls with 2 years or more service  with the Company should receive a  full presentation when leaving the  Company.  2. Girls with less than 2 years service but not less than one year with  the Company should receive a gift  from the girls only when leaving the  | Company.  j 3. Girls with 2 years or more service  with the Gempan^ who leave to accept  another position within the Company  should be given a small gift and a  tea during afternoon coffee period by  the girls only.  4. No presentation will be made to  girls who are being married and returning to work.  5. The amount of money collected from  each individual for a full presentation should be limitless; for a tea —  enough to cover the cost; for a gift  from the girls, limited to not more  than 50c each.  All collections to be approved by the  supervisor before started. MESSAGE FROM COORDINATOR OF BCFW  STANDING COMMITTEE  At the recent Standing Committee meeting I spoke to the group about my  application to Secretary of State for  one of the "Consultant on Women's  Issues" contract positions advertised  recently.  Well—I got one of the positions—  the one in the north'—and I move to  Prince George immediately. My feelings  of excitment and challenge are heightened by the wonderful show of support  and solidarity from everyone on the  Standing Committee. However, as Nym  Hughes said last weekend, it is I who  has to make up my mind about whether  or not to carry on in the role of BCFW  co-odrniator. My decision is to resign as co-ordinator, effective May  17, 1976. This resignation date will  allow me to continue planning for the  next BCFW Standing Committee meeting,  it will ensure that the BCFW doesn't  get "left in the lurch" and it will  ensure no split feelings in the Standing Committee over having a coordinator  who is working for the government!  This was a very difficult decision  to make and I am totally committed  to the growth and success of BCFW and  it hurts not to finish out the year  that began last October 31st. However,  my new job will involve much BCFW  communication and I am very excited  about organizing up north—so really  there is much to be gained!  In Sisterhood — Diana Bissell.  STANDING COMMITTEE MEETING—March 27/28  The third meeting of the BCFW Standing  Committee was held March 27/28 in  Roberts Creek.  Five general resolutions dealing with  follow-up to the March 22nd Rally  were drafted and were presented later  at the April 8th Women Rally for  Action organizers' meeting.  1. The BCFW will instruct its regional  redistribution committee to re-organize  along electoral boundaries (provincial).  2. BCFW regional reps would take the  initiative in getting in touch with  all lobbyists in their region and all  member groups in their region in order  to facilitate ongoing communication  and action.  3. There was a recommendation that the  BCFW work towards developing regional  women's councils eventually composed  of member group representatives, regional reps and subcommittee members  from that region.  4. In order fo make the BCFW more  accessible to everyone we will get a  list of all lobbyists and inform them  ot BCFW member groups in their region  that they could join or inform them  how to form their own group in order  to affiliate with BCFW.  5. It was recommended that the BCFW  encourage the formation of a provisional sub committee on legislative  action;(would be ratified at convention.)  A resolution was also passed to begin  planning a network of organizing workshops throughout the province as well  as resolving to form an ad hoc media  committee team that will plan educational media action.  Also discussed during the weekend  meeting were methods of presenting  BCFW to the community the Standing  Committee is meeting in. BCFW has a  responsibility to live up to and present all its policy and we have a responsibility to work closely with the  regional reps and member groups to ensure that the time spent out of our  bcfw  j EVERY TWO MONTHS A PAGE OF KINESIS  [ WILL BE DEVOTED TO THE B.C. FEDERAT-  5 ION OF WOMEN AND ITS ACTIVITIES.  REPORT FROM RIGHTS OF WOMEN IN PRISON  SUBCOMMITTEE  meeting is spent with the local community in the most valuable way possible.  To this end, a floating ad hoc committee has been formed-r-consisting  of the feasibility committee, the regional rep (of the area we are having  the Standing Committee meeting in) a  and any other Standing Committee members interested in working out a  "community program" to fill in the  spots of the weekend when we aren't  meeting.  REPORT FROM THE CHILDCARE SUBCOMMITTEE  ATTENTION: The Childcare Subcommittee  Meeting & Workshop will be held in-  Nelson May 16th at 12 noon. Contact  Nelson Women's Centre for details.  The following is summarized from the  report given by Ellen Frank, Chairwoman,  On March 30 about 250 people attended  a Rally at the Vancouver Courthouse  to support a one-day strike by day  care workers. The workers were represented by the Social Service Employees (SSEU) & Service, Office & Retail  Workers Union of Canada (SORWUC). The  workers have union contracts but nobody to negoiate with. The "Parent  Boards" are set up as employers but  do not control the funds. So the  ^Boards" approve the contracts^but  have no power to upheld them.  The Minister of Human Resources has  upped the daycare subsidy to $140  (from $120) and said centres can charge  whatever they like but the govt, will  only subsidize $140. Subidies are  hard to qualify for. The govt, is refusing to take responsibility for day  care. The whole business of fee per  child is complex AND NOT IN OUR EEST  INTERESTS!  If we can't afford daycare and have  to withdraw our kids from centres,  the centres may fold and the govt,  will say "See—there really isn't  much demand for daycare."  What can we do? Anyone interested in  helping contact: Ellen Frank, 4465  Quebec St, Vancouver. 876-7831.  The following is summarized from a  report given by Claire Culhane,  Chairwoman:  Attention was drawn to the growing  problems facing women who are held  in detention centres, prisons,  correctional institutions and mental  health hospitals in all regions of  .C.  Wherever improvements are sought in  the areas of women's health, education,  Illegal rights, and child care facilities special attention should be directed to these same needs of detained  (women.  Wherever native women constitute more  than 1/3 of prison population (as compared with their 1% representation in  the general population) serious questions must be asked about the reasons  for such discrepencies.  Wherever women struggle against their  own condition of powerlessness, a  more senscitive awareness of the multifold problems facing these sisters  must be developed in order that some  solutions be found for them—even if  they are short-term in nature pending  an overhaul of the entire prison system  of this country. This can begin by  individually obtaining the names of  women to visit in any such detention  centre in your own area—to get to  know them personally—hear their  stories and find ways of helping them.  We should also approach the authorities as a group of concerned taxpayers  and make regular visits to the prisons  to see how they are run and to talk  privately with the inmates.  And, finally, we must understand that  when inmates return to society in a  mood of bitterness, anger and frustration, the incidence of street violence  is bound to increase, and we and our  children all become potential victims  of this totally inadequate and inhumane penal system.  For further information contact Claire  Culhane, Chairwoman Rights of Women in  Prison Subcommittee Chairwoman, 3965  Pandora, North Burnaby. 299-7178.  REPORT FROM RIGHTS OF LESBIANS SUBCOMMITTEE  Workshops are planned on Employment  Discrimination, Lesbian Mothers, Women's Movement Consciousness  Raising, Theraphy Alternatives and  Media.  The next meeting of the Subcommittee  will be held May 8th at 1 p0m. at the  Vancouver Status of Women office, 2029  West 4th Ave. Vancouver.  VACANCIES  There are 2 vacancies on the Standing  Committee—Membership Organizer and  Co-ordinator. The positions will be  filled at the next Standing Committee  meeting (May 15, 1976). For further  information contact Bonne Leiphart,  1730 Stephens St, Vancouver 683-6711  local 316 (work), or 738-6682 (home).  r  IF YOU WISH TO BECOME INVOLVED IN THE BCFW CONTACT YOUR REGIONAL REP  OR MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZER LORNA STIRLING, BOX 171.R0YST0N, 334-3931.  IN ADDITION TO THE REGIONAL REPS LISTED ON THE BCFW PAGE OF THE MARCH KINESIS  THERE ARE THE FOLLOWING NEW AND TENTATIVE REGIONAL REPS:  NSLSON AREA - Nelson Women's Centre,  490 Baker St, Nelson. Kathy Ratz &  Camille Bush. 252-9916.  Barbara Rich, Gen. Delivery, Queen  Charlotte Islands. 539-4645.  Dorothy Behncke, RR//2, Armstrong,  Doris Jeanotte, 1001 - 102nd Ave,  Dawson Creek.  Helen Doucet, Williams Lake. 6  BOOK  ELIZABETH SIMCOE, FIRST LADY OF UPPER  CANADA, by John M. Bassett, Fitzhenry  & Whiteside Ltd, Ontario, 1974,  On the first page the author states,  "Mrs. Simcoe was a remarkable woman.  She enjoyed every new experience,  welcomed every new activity.  Everything that she found of interest she  put down in her diary, ... Thanks to  this diary, we have a picture of life  on the early Canadian frontier that  can be matched by few other acounts  of pioneer life in any country."  Unfortunately we gain only a very  sketchy picture of Mrs. Simcoe from  this book.  The story often appears  disjointed as if the author, in taking  bits 'and pieces from Mrs. Simcoe's  copious diary, had become confused him- .  self with the bulk of the material.  For  REVIEWS  no apparent reason important and unimportant events are often juxtaposed.  For  example while Governor Simcoe was making  his last journey around the province  we learn that Mrs. Simcoe had tasted  her first pumpkin pie and found it  delicious with lemon juice.  This,  when the diary is chock full of interesting descriptions of early frontier  life! Or the author might have commented further on Mrs. Simcoe's valuable  sketches and maps drawn for her husband.  It is this lack of judgement in using  the research material that makes this  book almost useless to students, for  whom it was intended.  Several inane  questions are asked alongside the  text.  One example - "Why in the year  1795 did Mrs. Simcoe connect dirt with  democracy?"  No, the serious student  would be better advised to go to  Mrs. Simcoe's Diary as edited by Mary  Quayle Innis:  MacMillan of Canada,  1965.  From her own words we see a  vital woman who could enjoy the  variety and excitement of frontier  life, a woman not put off by the  hardships which included a long and  rough sea voyage.  Apart from the actual diary, Florence  McLaughlin's, First Lady of Upper  Canada; a Burns and MacEachern series,  Adventures in Canadian History, 1968,  76 pages, is an excellent book.  It  contains a vast amount of useful  detail, plus numerous direct quotes  from Mrs. Simcoe's diary.  - Heather Kellerhals  CONCERT  MEG CHRISTIAN CONCERT  "And we will dance  after all these years  of cryingo  and self-denying...  And begin..."  So it was, as 200 women, in out of  the rain, gathered under Ms. Christian's musical shelter to celebrate  the theory and practice of sisterhood.  For an hour and a half, she commanded  our emotional levels as we identified  and relived our own experiences through  her songs. Her music was her catharsis, as it was ours.  From her album "I Know You Know" she  entertained us with "Hello Hooray",  "Scars", "Ode to a Gym Teacher", and  "Song to My Mama", the latter of which  she called "the song my mama never  heardc " She spoke at length and almost lightly of conversations between  herself and her mother regarding sexual preference and privilge0 But as  she sang she beat the side of her  guitar with the same force that she  must have used on her kitchen table  the night the song was conceivedc  Anger, pain and alienation pouring  out through her fingers, her face,  her soul.  New materials included a song to her  cat, Alex Dobkins' "Mary B.", and the  Four Seasons' oldie "Sherry". And  with a raised consciousness, the lyrics  to "Sherry" held an entirely different  interpretation. Her audience was very  responsive.  Even though Ms. Christian considers  herself "a guitarist who sings", her  voice was rich and resinate. And her  professional presence was very human  and very woman.  She elaborated on the importance of  involvement in the women's movement.  There was too much energy, she said,  being generated at the concert to let  subside when we all dispersed. She  strengthened her viewpoint with the  tune "Where Do We Go From Here?-'  We ended the evening with applause,  solidarity and tears.  - Connie Smith Antoinette  RECORD  RITA'S RECORD  "Hey terrific! — look what came in  the mail — Rita MacNeil's record  BORN A WOMAN! Hey Jo — can I take-  it home and listen to it? — oh —  only if I do a review for KINESIS,eh?  O.K."  First surprise — music! When I heard  Rita sing live at the Kaslo Festival  last June she sang unaccompanied —  and the raw power in her body and  voice was something else! So it was  a surprise to hear music on her album  ... but a pleasant one. The music is  super professional, complements her  voice and rounds out the songs.  And the songs — my favourites —  "Born a Woman", "Angry People in the  Street", "Angus Anthony Store". I  made copious notes on each one (thinking this is the kind of thing professional reviewers do) — but they don't  make any sense to me now. Just let it  be said that Rita McNeil has lived  through angry/sad/pathetic/joyous  occasions and all these are reflected  in her words.  In her ballads she often drifts to  the past, remembering the world/people  as they and she once were — and knowTs  it cannot be that way again — and  indeed was it ever all that real? A  particularly perceptive piece is "Rene".  In Kaslo, Rita told us it was about  her mother — and how when her mother  was young she had "dreams like so  many others" and slowly as life turned,  her youth and buoyancy left her —  her life as only "for others." Rita  ached out loud at the injustice of it.  Rita"s strong feminist lines come out  beautifully too — lines like:  "To be born a woman you quickly learn  Your body will be their first concern"  and:  "In the war of conditioning they  never use a gun  They only use people to fit in the  plans  And those by the wayside have a  long road to go  It's jufet not proper to stray from  the fold."  Rita has a strong conviction that  things must change and the women's  movement is the best route to travel.  It's enough to set everyone marching  on the legislative buildings in  Victoria again! And as far as I'm  concerned we need lots of Rita Mac-  Neils around to do that kind of inspiring. Go buy her record — it's  worth it!  - Diana Bissell  BORN A WOMAN is released by Boot  Records Ltd. ($7.95), 1343 Matheson  Bvld. W., Mississauga, Ontario.  Kelly's in Vancouver says it has the  record on order.  CLICK!  At an advanced management seminar —  attended only by men, of course! —  held at the Calgary Inn recently, the  leader was trying to introduce a discussion of automation. He started by  describing the plight of a factory  worker stuck at a really monotonous  job —"a job no man wants", he said.  "So what could a manager do in this  situation?" One of the seminar participants raised his hand and suggested, in all seriousness:"Hire women."  (from NAC Status of Women News) win  MANPOWER CANCELS WOMEN'S JOB SERVICE  Women's Independence Necessary, a  job service for single-parent and  welfare women in New Westminster,  will be closed by Manpower April 31,  because WIN, "has not been effective  in meeeting the objectives of their  contract."  Betsy Wood, on staff at WIN, says these  reasons are vague, invalid and  contradictory.  "Manpower does not  specify which goals we alledgedly  didn't fulfill and yet they say they  they don't wish to imply our workers  were ineffective," she say.  Ms. Wood thinks the real reason  Manpower is closing them down is  their participation in the occupation  of the Vancouver Manpower office in  fall 1975, when they demanded a  women's advocate be hired by Manpower,  after several years of frustration  over Manpower's unresponsiveness  to women's employment needs.  In January 1975 WIN's contract was  renewed by Manpower for a third year  and was expanded to include the additional responsibility of "advocacy."  Since that time, WIN has been outspoken in criticism of Manpower's  female job program.  Manpower proposes to set up another  agency similar to WIN to be sponsored  by representatives of the local community. Ms. Wood is pessimistic about  its possible effect. "Few women sit  on boards of community agencies,"she  notes. "So a sponsor composed of reps  of these groups would still be out  of touch with women's needs.  WIN has been fighting for women's  uarticipation in decision-making  affecting them, in the Manpower  bureaucracy. WIN workers work closely  with their clients and feel they  know best what unemployed women need  in terms of training and jobs.  However,Manpower has already set up  a women's centre at the Vancouver  YWCA "to gather objective data to  make recommendations to management  on women's employment needs."  Betsy Wood considers this ironic.  "WIN has been telling CMC for three  years what needs to be done to improve  the status of working women but they  won't listen to us. They pretend to  want community input but if we disagree with them they abolish us. They  only listen to their own bureaucrats  who are out of touch with grass roots  women and who themselves are non-  feminist."  - Karen Richardson, WCWN  More replies to the letter sent to  MLAs requesting that they state their  position on a number of issues that  are of vital importance to women.  G.H. KERSTER, MLA COQUITLAM  "Unfortunately, due to the delayed  decision by the BQC. Courts of Appeals  regarding my election confirmation,  I have been unable to answer the flood  of correspondence received, until  such confirmation was received and I  was officially sworn in and was able  to take my seat in the Legislature.  I am in full support of most Status  of Women contentions and desires, but  as you well imagine, I am undergoing  an extremely taxing and heavy educational period in my new position. I  have, however, supported the Women's  Centre In Port Coquitlam and was re-  MLA  LETTERS  cently in contact with Ms. Bev Le  Frencois, to offer any a^sistrcice  possible regarding funding, grants,  etc. Although I was informed the  Centre is funded adequately through  1976, I have committed myself to continued support in the future.  As to the many questions you ask in  your general letter, I would be irresponsible if, without proper and  in-depth study, I gave you answers  off the top of my head. I would welcome the opportunity,however, to discuss these matters with you personally  in the near future, should you be in  Victoria and could take the time to  visit my office.  I further wish to assure you that I  am not a sexist and as a former employer, compensated my employees regardless of sex, on the basis of job  classification."  PATRICIA J. JORDAN, MLA NORTH OKANAGAN  "This is just a note to thank you  very much for your letter which included your views on a variety of  subjects of great importance to women.  As you know, I am much involved with  and very determined to see that our  government makes positive steps in  the area of particular concern to  women.  As always, your information will be  most helpful."  IWY & BEYOND  IWY AND BEYOND: A CHECKLIST  Some questions to think about — as  individuals and as groups:  * In your activities do you include  women from "minority" as well as  majority groups? women from labour?  elderly women? As planners and participants as well as guests?  * Are you taking into account the  aspects of women's roles in the home  and community iife?  * Have you given public recognition  to women who contributed to the founding and/or growth of your city or  town?  * Do you know how many women are on  the board of trustees, or other governing bodies of your local institutions?  community colleges? hospitals? museums':  orchestra? Are you suggesting the  names of qualified women for such posts?  Do you accept such posts yourself, if  asked?  * Do you know how many women are  school principals in your school district? are in responsible positions  in local labour unions?  are presidents or vice-presidents of local  business firms? are members of your  local governemnt or school board?  Are you seeking their support for  your activities?  * Do you know what women are doing  locally in sports? Do they have adequate equipment and facilities?  Adequate coaching and opportunities  or competition?  * Are you continuing to work with  your schools, colleges, libraries,  museums, universities to continue  projects, programs, exhibits on the  issues concerning the status of women?  To make sure that books and other  essential materials are available?  To counsel and encourage young women  in planning and starting careers?  * Are you working with your local  media by providing them with brief,  newsworthy reports of your activities? By encouraging them to report  on issues, local and national, tha,t  affect women? By reminding them (and  regulatory agencies) when their reporting and programming' is unsatis  factory, and how it could be improved?  By •fcelling them when they have done  a good job?  -Reprinted IWY Newsletter,  adapted from the Check List for IWY,  U.S» Centre for IWY, Washington.  first woman  FIRST FEMALE UNDERGROUND MINER GRADUATES  Teresa Vincenzie, 24, is the first  female underground miner to graduate  from the Rossland mining school. She  was the best student in a class of 11.  While she was the fifth female to grad-  . uate in mining, the other four all  I were in open pit mining, rather than  underground.  Recent legislative  changes have allowed women to work in  all phases of the mineral industry.  The Rossland mining school operates  I under the Department of Education.  i Canada Manpower sponsors approximately  50 percent of the students.  - WCWN 8  WOMEN'S RALLY FOR ACTION  Please see the summarized report of  each lobbying team's visit .with their  MLA elsewhere in this issue. WRITE  A FOLLOW-UP LETTER and remind your  MLA of his/her promises. This is an  excellent way for those of you who  were unable to attend the Rally on  March 22nd to add your voice of  support. Continued pressure is the  only thing that will convince this  government that women's issues are  not to be ignored or taken lightlyc  CANADA LABOUR RELATIONS COUNCIL  You will by now have heard that the  Canadian Labour Congress has withdrawn from all federal government  boards, commissions and, councils.  We are still going to compile our  list of qualified women to sit on  boards such as the C.L.R.C. and others.  I personally feel that Joe Morris,  C.L.C. President, will eventaully  reconsider the folly of "dropping  out." If you believe that Mr. Morris  was wrong in his decision, do write  and tell him so. Send a copy to Shirley  letter  lobby  Carr, C.L.C. Vice-President, as she  may be more sympathetic to the unorganized woman's problems than Mr. Morris.  A sample letter:  Canadian Labour Congress  2841 Riverside Drive  Ottawa, Ontario.  I believe the Canadian Labour Congress  . acted hastily in withdrawing labour  representatives from the Canada Labour  Relations Council and other boards,  commissions and councils. It is most  unfortunate that organized labour is  not yet ready to take its place in  the decision-making process.  Women's groups, too, are unhappy with  many of our government's decisions,  including wage guides. But we also  realize that our problems will not he  solved if we choose to ignore the  government's existence.  The Prime Minister has assured the  Vancouver Status of Women that Hon.  Marc Lalonde's staff is compiling a  list of women suitable for appointment  to federal boards, commissions, and  councils. Mr. WaH. Wightman, of the  Canadian Manufacturers' Association,  has also asked VSW members to provide  him with suggestions for the C.L.R.C.  I sincerely urge you to reconsider  your decision. Otherwise we cannot  help but conclude that the C.L.C. is  only interested in the organized labour  force, and cares little about the  problems of unorganized workers, the  majority Of whom are women.  I look forward to hearing from you.  Sincerely,  (Send copies to Marc Lalonde, John ;  Munro, the Prime Minister, c/o the  House of Commons, and Dr. Katie Cooke,  63 Sparks St. Box 1541, Station B,  Ottawa).  - Dorothy Holme  Following are excerpts from two  responses to Dorothy's letters.  "Dear Ms. Holme:  Thank you for your letter of January  12,1976 in which you enclosed copies  of your letters to Messrs Morris and  Wightman concerning the absence of  women on the Canada Labour Relations  Council.  The government is aware of and concerned about the relatively small number  of women on boards and commissions.  This matter has been discussed by  Cabinet recently and we are now taking  active steps to seek out qualified  and interested women for appointments.  The Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women, the Honourable Marc Lalonde,  has directed his staff to compile a  roster of qualified women which will  provide Ministers with a source of  names of women suitable for appointment. In preparing this list we have  been greatly assisted by the Canadian  Federation of University Women which  has provided us with its own roster.  We would also welcome any suggestions  from yours or any other organization.  In regard to the Human Rights Bill,  I hope this will receive second reading in the near future. We have been  pleased to receive a number of useful  responses  comments on this Bill from groups and  individuals all across the country,  and thepe ar¬Æ being carefully considered by the Department of Justice.  When our evaluation is completed we  may introduce amendments to the Bill  in committee stage.  The disparity in wages between the  sexes is a problem which concerns the  government and as you are aware,  specific provision is made in the  Anti-Inflation Board regulations for  exceptions to' the guidelines to be  made for the purpose of eliminating  discrimination in pay practices based  on sex. The government is well aware  that since most working women are  among the lower wage earners, they  are a group that is praticularly hard  hit by inflation, and we hope that we  can count on their support in our  efforts to stabilize the economy.  I would like to take this opportunity  to stress that the government is firmly committed to continuing its efforts  to improve the status-of women in  Canada. We realize that although In  ternational Women's Year served a  very useful purpose in helping to  change traditional attitudes about  women, work still remains to be done  to promote equality between the sexes.  I trust that we can count on the  support of the Vancouver Status of  Women in our ongoing efforts.  Sincerely,  Pierre Trudeau "  "Dear Dorothy:  I have been delighted to see all the  pressure being put on the appropriate  officials by Vancouver Status of Women members, concerning the Canada  Labour Relations Council. As you know,  I cannot agree with you more about the  need for awakening these types to the  availability of qualified women in  most areas if they really are serious  about removing discrimination. -It  certainly is frustrating to see such  repeated lack of action despite glorious statements. Your continued pressure is what really will change things  in the end.  Sincerely Yours,  Katie Cooke, Ph.D  Chairman(sic) Advisory Council on the  Status of Women  DAYCARE DILEMMA  Did you know that half of the daycare  grads quit the field within two years  because of low pay? Did you know that  daycare workers get between $500 and  $700 a month for"supervisory positions  in community daycare centres while  government run daycare centre workers  get twice as much? Did you know that  600,000 more daycare centres are needed in Canada according to the Canada  Council on Social Development? Did  you know that a number of daycare  centres in B.C. may have to close  very soon dua to lack of funds? Write  letters in support of daycare to  Human Resources Minister Bill Vander  Zalm, Parliament Buildings, Victoria.  Send copy to SORWUC, 72 East 18th,  Vancouver.  -CHILDREN  DAY CARE MAGAZINE  DAY CARE AND EARLY EDUCATION a bimonthly magazine published by Behavioral Publications recently won the  Alliance of Child Development Associations Award for outstanding full-  service reporting.  For subscription details write:  DAY CARE AND EARLY EDUCATION, Behavioral Publications, 72 Fifth Avenue,  New York, N.Y. USA 10011.  DAYCARE RAISE TOO LITTLE TOO LATE  Human Resources Minister Bill Vander  Zalm announced a raise in the daycare  subsidies paid by government to daycare  centres on behalf of parents, from $120  to $140 per month, the only raise in  2 years. Daycare centres say this is  only enough to cover 1975 costs.  Letters thanking the Minister for the  raise but urging him to implement a  further raise in the near future,  should be sent to him at Parliament  Buildings, Victoria. Send a copy to  your MLA. CR  Registration lists are starting for  structured and unstructured consciousness-raising groups which will be  underway this summer at the VSW.  CR has been described as the cornerstone of the women's movement, and  rightfully so. CR is the process in  which we as women learn that we are  not isolated. We re-discover ourselves  learn to vent our anger honestly, and  learn to deal with the contradictions  in our lives. Through CR, we see that  our problems are not just ours alone,  but the burden of everywoman in this  oppressing society. CR creates a positive, supportive, confidential environment where we as women exchange  and benefit from each other. With  this comes solidarity, and with  strength comes change.  The structured group meets weekly for  10 weeks with pre-arranged topics  relevant to women of all ages and  backgrounds. A facilitator who has  been trained in the Los Angeles method of consciousness-raising is with  the group. The unstructured group  meets regularly, also with a facilitator for the first few sessions to  help the group decide what their needs  are. From that point on, they are  independent.  Please come in and talk to us about  it.  - Connie Smith Antoinette  THE STORY OF WOMEN IN B.C.  IS THERE  SQMETHII  GOING ON AT  ^W  YOU  A slide presentation and lecture by  Basja Broches focusing on women in  British Columbia's past and looking  at the lives of both exceptional and  typical women of the time.  The program lasts approximately one  hour and the cost is $1 per person  with a minimum of $35. If enough of  us are interested perhaps we can get  a group together — 35 of us at $1  each, or 17^ of us at $2 each, or  70 of us at 50c each.,0.  Call the VSW Office if your are interested— 736-3746.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  WHEN: Mondays 8:00 - 10:00 p.m.  May 10 - June 28.  WHERE: 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver  LIMIT: 12 participants.  Assertive behaviour aims at equalizing  the balance of power in relationships,  at opening the way for honest communication. In this workshop, we will  concentrate on skills necessary in  situations arising on marriage breakdown, situations in which a woman  must be able to communicate effectively with:  Husband and children.  Lawyers, court workers.  Government agencies, bureaucracy.  No charge for this series, registration by phoning Lee Masters at VSW  office: 736-3746.  SPECIAL REPORT  DOROTHY HOLME has just returned from  the National Action Committee conference and lobbying in Ottawa and is  writing up a report for next month's  KINESIS.  It's sad when anyone leaves the VSW  Office, but at least it gives us an  excuse to have an Office Party!  CR TASK FORCE  A consciousness-raising task force is  being formed at the Vancouver Status  of Women. Our first meeting will be  Thursday, May 27 at 7:30 at the VSW  office. Any woman who has completed  a structured CR may attend. Women's  input is needed for developing new  topics as well as possible leadership  training. Anyone interested, phone  the office and leave your name and  number or attend our first meeting.  Please come and share with us. We  need your ideas.  - Connie Smith Antoinette  Marnie Wildeman  OFFICE STUFF  There have been lots and lots of workshops! NADINE ALLEN was on the planning committee for the "Occupation Housewife" professional development day for  women in the home. Nadine arranged for  workshop leaders and led a workshop  on "Sex Roles in the Home." NADINE also  did 2 workshops at Templeton High  School Careers Day on the topic "What  does the future hold for the family,  work and leisure." LEE MASTERS led a  workshop on "Women and the Law" at  the Occupation Housewife development  day and attended workshops on "Interviewing and Organizational Development'.'  She also attended the 4 day UBC Resources Centre "Skills for Women Who  Work With Women" conference. LEE has  been busy preparing her own workshop  on Assertiveness Training to be held  at the VSW office. See the write-up on  this page. MIRIAM GROPPER attended a  2 day Assertiveness Training workshop  at UBC. MIRIAM also spoke to the Family  Law Subsection and did a show on Co-op  Radio on "Human Rights." NADINE represented us at a meeting of the Vancouver  Secondary Teachers' Status of Women  on the integration of athletic programs  in public schools, and at the Annual  General Meeting of the Greater Vancouver Federated Anti-Poverty groups.  NADINE also spoke to 2 Family Life  classes at New Westminster High School.  LEE chaired the Welfare Appeal Family  Court Coordiantor Meeting. JOHANNA  DEN HERTOG has been busy with speaking  engagements — to a group of immigrant  women at Britannia Community Centre &  another group in the training program  of Manpower & YWCA. JOHANNA also spoke  to a new women's group in Richmond  about organizing.  JOHANNA attended  the Multicultural Women's Conference  and has been very busy working with  the Women's Rally for Action followup  committee compiling lobby reports  and working on the fantastic kit on  the Rally and its organization that  will be available to women in a month  or two. JOHANNA is also doing research  on Transition House funding for the  Canadian Bar Association. The Ombudsservice has been very busy with cases  —both new and on-going. The staff of  the Ombudsservice is undergoing some  changes—MIRIAM is leaving and was  very busy going over resumes and arranging interviews to fill the position.  LORI RUDLAND is joining us as the new  Ombudsservice staff member and we are  delighted to have her! It won't be  the same around here without MIRIAM  but she promises to drop by as often  as possible to give us a hand.  The Women's Rally for Action has  stirred up a lot of interest and KAREN  RICHARDSON who is developing the  VSW  Reference Library has been busy sending out materials and information on  funding and co-ordinating community  involvement to women and groups all  over the province. See KAREN's list  of resources on page 16. KAREN is just  finishing up her WCWN grant by putting  together a booklet of feminist resources  and a communications kit both of which  will go to women's groups in B.C.  JUDY BOURNE has taken over the co- ..  ordinating of Orientation Meetings now  that DIANA BISSELL has left the VSW  staff to work for the Secretary of  State Women's Program (see page 4)..  %FUDY has also"been working on a plan  of action to reassess membership involvement. It is very important that  all VSW members respond to the questions  on page 2! With DIANA gone NADINE has  taken over the co-ordinating of VSW's  Women Alive TV program seen on Wed.  nights at 9:30 on Channel 10. NADINE  reports that our bus signs are almost  ready—so if you're on a Vancouver  bus look for us. Trans-Ad supplies  free space for community service groups  and NADINE has been in charge of producing the sign.  AND SPECIAL LOVE AND THANKS to SHELIA  MITCHELL and CONNIE SMITH ANTOINETTE  who have done an incredible amount of  volunteer work in the office — during  the preparations for the Rally and  since!  SPECIAL CONFESSION  It can now be revealed that that  incredibly chirpy voice on CFUN Radio  a few years back that warbled "Tab  the tunes now on 'FUN. Pick the hit  and win!" belonged to none other than  our own DIANA BISSELL. You've come a  long way baby! 10  BILLS    COLLECTION    AGENCY  According to the Vancouver Province  of Friday, March 19, Human Resources  Minister Bill Vander Zalm announced  on Thursday that the provincial government intends to establish an agency  to aid women trying to collect alimony  from wayward husbands. Mr. Vander Zalm  is reported to be unsure what form  the agency will take, or what its  authority will be. He is quoted as  saying"We've had three goes at it  so far and have had to change it three  times." He also pointed out the need  to establish cooperation between the  provinces, and the final paragraph  in the article reads as follows:"He  said that there are no such agencies  in Canada and the only one he knows  about is in Israel."  We can only suggest that Mr. Vander  Zalm has done little homework on his  subject, and perhaps even less thinking. Consider:  1. Where are the children?? Not only  did Mr. Vander Zalm make no mention  of them, but he restricted his vocabulary to use of the single word alimony. LEGAL NOTE: Alimony refers  only to payment of money on behalf  of a spouse prior to divorce. Money  paid for the children is called "maintenance", whether before or after  divorce, as is money payable for the  spouse after divorce.  2. Much closer to home, and operating  under existing law, is the enforcement  division of the Vancouver Family Court  one of perhaps three or four such  "agencies" in all of Canada, and  certainly one of the best. Mr. Vander  Zalm appears to be more familiar with  circumstances in Israel than in British Columbia. His ignorance of the  Vancouver enforcement office is perhaps explainable in the fact that  such enforcement is properly administered by the Department of the Attorney-General, and is not within Mr.  Vander Zalm's area of responsibility.  3. Alimony and maintenance are both  payable only after a court has order*-  ed such payment. Such orders establish right to receive that amount  ordered, *and a right in the payor to  pay no more than that amount adjudicated by the court. Anything more  than a purely administrative enforcement of those rights constitute an  interference with an order of our  courts, and is a totally unacceptable  alternative in a free and democratic  society.  4. The primary difference between  maintenance orders and other court  orders is the fact that maintenance  orders extend over time, requiring  payment in the future from money not  presently available. It is precisely  this difference which makes enforcement of the order more difficult,  and justifies governmental supervision of the orders on behalf of the  recipients. There is nothing, however, which can justify the interference of social workers with the  rights inherent in the oders themselves.  5. Administrative supervision of  these orders is in the economic  interest of the Province. With the  exception of a skilled interviewer  and court processor, the skills required are totally clerical in nature  and paying highly trained social  workers for this task is unjustifiable. Moreover,,such administrative  supervision must take place through  the Department of the Attorney-General  for the prime requirement of such  work is an awareness that the agency  is dealing in people's legal rights  and must function totally within our  judicial system.  6. As to the difficulty mentioned by  Mr. Vander Zalm, the tracking down  is within the responsibility of the  Attorney-General, whose duty is the  enforcement of laws and protection  of legal rights.  7c There is no doubt that tracking  down indigent husbands prior to receipt of a cour order is a major  problem, as is enforcement of B.C.  orders against husbands resident outside the Province. These are problems  inherent in existing family law, however, and in the nature of the Canadian court process. Neither of these  problems can be effectively dealt  with through the establishment of  yet another governmental bureaucracy.  - Lee Masters  (The above was used as a special last  minute addition to the material presented to MLAs by the March 22nd  Women Rally for Action lobbiests.)  women in  focus  The Women In Focus Audio-Visual  Tape Library is the result of over  a year's work by a group of women who  came together to try and do something  constructive about the lack of women  in the communications media, and to  fill the need for information about,  and of relevance to women.  The Women In Focus team, brought  together through the Women's Office   •  at U.B.C. and receiving friancial  resources through the Secretary of  State and production facilities at  Vancouver Cable 10, have now built  a resource library of 32 video tapes.  These tapes are available to individual  women, women's groups, educational  institutions, and any other interested  parties on either a rental or purchase  basis.  The team feels justifiably proud of  these tapes and hope the history behind their production will inspire  other women to enter fields previously the domain of men. Not only are  the tapes for women and about women,  they are also created, directed and  produced by an all women crew.  The women involved in the Women in  Focus productions have held weekly  workshops and productions from September 1974 on. At these workshops  they were given training in all aspects of video production be women  from the Women's Office, learning  about lighting, sets, graphis, audio,  switching, camera, editing, dubbing,  etc. It was an experience in demysti-  fication of the media. As the team  became more competent with each aspect of production — working together, sharing responsibilities,  talents, ideas and energies, improving the quality of the tapes they  created and made,— their confidence  in the abilities of women spread to  other areas in their lives and to a  new way of thinking. There came the  realization that women could operate  and thus have more control over the  ideology and technology that controls  so much of present day society, yet  which has traditionally denied women  positions of responsibilty and has  thus denied women the opportunity to  have their voices heard or their needs  met.  The team took as their potential audience "Everywoman" trying to cover  as wide a range of topics as possible,  and presenting the subject matter  through a variety of approaches to  appeal to differing needs and tastes.  The only criteria was that the subjects and their presentation be relevant and sensitive to the needs of  women. Many of the tapes have already  been aired on Vancouver Cable 10 (and  are still currently being shown—Monday at 9 p.m.). There is a catalogue  giving a brief description of the  tapes, outlining their content which  covers: women as artists—writers,  poets, sculptors, singers, dramatists;  women and education; rape; lesbianism;  women in history and women today;  women in politics; and much more.  The team welcomes any feed back on  the tapes,v new ideas for productions,  etc. , though at the present moment  the group's energies are being concentrated on dubbing tapes for the  library and distributing the catalogue  and ordered tapes to as many women's  groups and educational institutions  as possible. We would like the tapes  to be used as a resource in Women's  Studies courses.  Women are coming together in groups  to share their lives, skills, and  energies, working towards achieving  their ideals of a situation where women have the power and the voice to  be represented in all aspects of their  lives. Women printers, photographers,  filmmakers, musicians, women carpenters, mechanics, farmworkers, house-,  wives, all are finding that it takes  only determination and a conviction  in their strengths and abilities to  find new skills and energies to create  a world more equitable for women. The  Women in Focus enterprise is one more  example of this awareness and awakening, and one more success for women  everywhere. We hope it will be used  and useful to as many women as possible.  For information concerning any aspect  of the Women in Focus Audio-Visual  Tape Library and productions please  contact Marion Barling at The Women's  Office, Box 85, Student Union Bldg.  UBC, Vancouver. Telephone 228-2082 or  228-6228. 11  WRA  March 22nd is now just a historic  event—but WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION  is still alive and well—and living  in all of B.C.  Here in Vancouver we had but two days  to sleep and recuperate, for on March  24th we had aur first follow-up meeting of the coordinating committee.  Once again we are in the fray of weakly meetings brainstorming, discussing,  planning, organizing, and writing  (...and typing and stenciling—ugh!)  The first task has been to produce  the information that has directly resulted from the Rally. We are putting  together a three-part packet on WOMEN  RALLY FOR ACTION: (1) a reprinting  of the entire Brief, including all  the addendas (2) all the Lobby Reports  in full, and (3) a history of how  WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION was organized,  what happened on,the day and how we  might improve on it next time. The  first part is to be called "OUR STORY",  the second "MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE  ASSEMBLY TELL STORIES",and the third  "A RALLY STORYBOOK". Covers are being  designed by our WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION  commercial artist Carol Norman (who  also designed the famous billboard).  The Lobby Reports are printed and be  available shortly, as well as the reprint of the Brief. The "Storybook"  will take somewhat longer to produce.  The packet will be distributed through  the Intercom mailing list of 400, and  also will be available to the general  public for a nominal fee to cover production costs. (VSW is collecting  requests for any or all parts of the  packet and will mail them as they become available.)  As well as producing in this way OUR  historic document on OUR historic  event, we hope that the packet will  also prove to be a useful organizing  tool for future action here in B.C.  —and even perhaps elsewhere!  The second phase of our follow-up is  to plan further actions and strategies for the year(s) to come. Here in  Vancouver we have begun to hold meetings to brainstorm about what we could  do next and how. Our greatest concern,  however, is that during this time of  reflection and planning we get as much  communication between all of us in  the province as possible. We will be  soliciting ideas from all the WRA  contacts in the various ridings through  the last Intercom issues, but we also  urge all other interested women to  communicate your ideas to us. The  WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION material is  being collected through VSW, although  the WRA committee is, as before, made  up of many different individual women  and women's groups.  Some ideas which have grown out of  our brainstorming seesions are:(1)  to set up a "shadow cabinet" or "shadow legislative assembly" where each  minister or MLA would be watchdogged  by one or more of-us, constantly; (2)  to organize a WOMEN RALLY FOR ACTION  (on an even larger scale!) on a yearly  basis ie. every International Women's  Day; (3)to hold a retreat somewhere  this summer (maybe mid-B.C.) where a  lot of us could meet again and discuss  long term strategy and goals of our  women's movement in B.C.; to set up  a province-wide organizing network  among women's groups in the form of  a relay system, where one group would  visit the neighbouring group and exchange skills, knowledge, and viewpoints on issues and idealogy n that  we continue to build on our gi   ~g  understanding and unity.  An over-all concern that we are battling with now is whether organizing  around an outside force (ie. the government) or concentrating on developing our communication and organizing  within, should be our focus at the  present time. (Help us with your opinions !)  In terms of long-term coordination of  women's groups in the province, one  hoped for follow-up action is that  hundreds more women's groups all over  the province affiliate with B.C. Federation of Women. The structures are  already there in BCFW for excellent  and fast communication—of information, of skill sharing9 of organizing,  and for building collective, united  policy. What BCFW still needs is involvement by all, and practice by all  of us in developing the existing  structures into effecient and effective tools. The main drawback, at present, of BCFW being the caretaker  follow-up action to WOMEN RALLY FOR  ACTION, is its infancy—so we must  build it, as well as carrying on for  the next while in our WOMEN RALLY FOR  ACTION "spontaneous" ways.  All over the province WOMEN RALLY FOR  ACTION has given rise to* foll»w-up  action. Many lobby teams are now going for their second and third visits  to their MLAs. Letters continue to be  written. Hansard is being followed.  New women's groups are forming in  ridings where hone existed before0  Neighbouring groups are getting together and extending the contact begun  at the Rally. New blood is again coming into the Movement.,  More than we ever anticipated, WOMEN  RALLY FOR ACTION, March 22nd, 1976,  was truly just a beginning!  - Johanna den Hertog  ,***********************  Please write to WRA c/o Vancouver  Status of Women if you wish to receive  a copy of the full Lobby Reports on  the MLAs, or any other sections of  the "Packet".  This month KINESIS has printed the  highlights of the Lobby Reports on  all the MLAs plus some Cabinet Ministers whose Reports were not available last month.  LOBBY  EMERY BARNES, NDP MLA VANCOUVER CENTRE  Representation for women in govt: suppo  supports at all levels of policy & decision making. Will push for.  Prov. Co-ordinator's Office: is supporting re-instatement.  Women's Centre Core Funding:supports  where need exists & meets criteria.  Against discrimination against families  with children in housing.Also on basis  of sexual orientation.  Believes homemaker is full & equal  contributor to marriage0  Education:should re-instate Sex Discrimination is Schools Cmmttee. Agrees  should be teacher training on sex-role  stereotyping. Supports women's studies.  Supports improvement in Maternity  Protection.  Followup Contact: Linda Hurst, 243 1  Main St, Vancouver.  688-0914.  PAT JORDAN,SOCIAL CREDIT MLA, NORTH  OKANAGAN  Asked lobby team where came from and  how they earned their money. Asked if  any on welfare. Adamant that no notes  be taken as didn't want to be misquoted.  Maternity Protection Act:Favours revisions.  Prov. Co-ordinator's office:Contract  with one govt, which now ended. Said  she is not a job finder & unless Gene  Errington came to her personally she  is not prepared to do anything about  her former job.  Increased benefits for single parents;  Vague.  Funding for Women's Centres:Favours  & will try to arrange but wants to  know being run efficiently & with  budget she can see. Also wanted more  definition of what centres do. Told  about supportive nature of centre, able  to enjoy friendship unique to women,etc  Said she didn't understand as she can  say anything she wants to her husband.  Health:Abortion-against abortion on  demand.Feels should be based on medical decision based on background of  person. Availibility of birth control  info-wants to know doctors who withhold, as understood it was freely  available. Sex ed. should be left to  parents and due respect to church  groups who are against it. Everyone  should have right to choose the life  they want. Re perpetuation of erronous  attitudes towards sex passed onto to  children by uninformed parents - parents should also have sex education  offered to them. Preventive health -  wasn't aware breast cancer exams and  general checkups not covered by medical plan.  Family Law recommendations:Not clear  on but seemed to support. Felt illegitimacy issue might cause legal hassles.  Seemed defensive, said certain members  of team hostile. Said status of women  were a destructive force out to ruin  this country.  Would not set definite time for future  meeting.  Follow-up Contact:Pat Hogan,Vernon  Women's Centre, #6 - 3000 30th St.  Vernon. 545-6552.  CHRIS D'ARCY,NDP MLA ROSSLAND-TRAIL  Friendly & agreeable but reluctant  to take a stand on action.  Education:supports recommendations in  principle but powerless to help. Re  special advisor-should be continued,  and also sex discrimination cmmttee.  Daycare:govt, is responsible for adequate daycare.Should be a flat rate  form. Supports better pay for staff.  "Whenever any centre in riding asks  for anything specific I will take it  to the various agencies."  Transportation:agrees on inter city  buses. Municipal Affairs Min. is reviewing his proposal for buses to Selkirk, Trail, Rossland, Fruityale.  Dental care:private matter, doesn't  concern govt.  Working women:supports provincial  training program, should expand.Need  more Human Rights Officers.  Maternity Protection Act:must have  enforcement provisions.  Consolidate Labour Acts:wasn't really  interested "other dragons to slay..."  Next meeting in April in riding.  Follow-up Contact:Jane Wright,2081 2nd  Ave. Trail. 364-2764. 12  Bake  FRANK CALDER, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA, ATLIN  Health: Will support air ambulances &  training of para-medical workers and  midwives. Min. of Health & Welfare  will review situation of Atlin women  who must go to Yukon for medical treatment which is not covered by B.C.  Medical.  Communications: Will work on problems  with radio signal and telephone rate.  Public Officers: Justices of the Peace  will be appointed in Atlin. Non-commit-  al on no courts held in Atlin and use  of Yukon judges. Will be a centralized  probation officer at Dease Lake. Will  look into need for Child Welfare  Officer in Atlin. Will talk to new  doctor in Cassiar about rape, birth  control and VD information but favours  leaving to RCMP.  Family Law: is reading Berger Report.  No commital yet.  Education: Non-commital on drop-out  rate of girls (80%) and reasons.- Is  fighting for equalization grants for  students travelling to high school  and higher institutions. Will meet  with students coming to tour Victoria.  Native Women: Supports land claims.  Provincial Co-ordinator Office:Non-  commital.  Special Advisor on Sex Discrimination  in Education: Non-commital.  Prime Concern of Govt: "Services to  people rather than business."  Follow-up: Refused to commit self to  public meeting in June. Mary-Dawn  Rippell will be keeping in touch re  progress in areas Calder agreed to  act on and will share findings at  public meeting and in Atlin News-Miner.  Contact her Box 91, Atlin,phone Atlin  451.  LORNE NICHOLSON,NDP MA NELSON-CRESTON  Core Funding:"Desirable". Should  approach Community Resources Board.  Transition House:Termination of funds  like"kicking people when down."  Affirmative Action:More imp. to educate  employers than enact legislation.Felt  Rosemary Brown's AABill good for publicity but unlikely to pass.  Economic Development:Felt women's problems included in genera], economic problems of area. Would provide info from  Dept. of Economic. Development.  Single Women & Housing: Most effort  took place in urban areas. Should support all local housing projects as  these free rental accomodations. Pressure govt.  Health & Rural Women:Agreed facilities  lacking. Supported concept of preventative medicine - Family Planning Clinic  & Well Person's Health & Dental Co-op.  Mental Health:Aware of shortcomings in  present facilities. Predicted more  cutbacks in local area.  Transportation:NDPhad planned system  for Kootenay."Present govt, is cutting  back & I intend to press for public  transportation."  Education:"As a party we would support  re-instatement of the Provincial Advisory Cmmttee. on Sex Discrimination &  continuing the position of consultant  to the Min. of Ed."  Notre Dame U.:Personal stand"l fought  my own govt, on this issue."  Homemakers:Pension Plan good idea &  recommendations of Berger Commission  "eminent good sense."  Day Care:Priority."Makes more sense  to spend money on daycare than welfare."  Women's Rally:Well organized & represented & impact would be felt over a  period of time. Urged "don't give up."  Impression:Generally sympathetic to  women's issues but difficult to pin  down to commitment because in opposition  Follow-up Contact:Camille Bush,490  Baker St. Nelson 352-9916.  GRAHAM LEA; NDP MLA PRINCE RUPERT  Family Law:would vote for recommendations of Berger Report on Matrimonial  Property but felt some technical difficulties in legislation. Favouredjabolishing illegitimate status of children,  favours "no fault divorce'.' Would ask  about revisions to Maternity Protection  Felt area oi child custody inequitable  towards father.  Education:Aware of discrimination &  sex-stereotyping. Favours re-instatement of Advisory Cmmttee.  Childcare:Norm Levi present for this.  Both felt to improve & expand facilities institutions other than govtc  should be approached.  Rape:Public attitudes need changing.  Women's Centres Core Funding:Would find  out where women should apply. Favour  of re-instating Prov. Co-ordinator's  Office.  Non-commital about future meeting.Team  will write & request definite one0  Follow-up Contact:Rhoda Witherly,  1609 Overlook, Prince Rupert.624-9043.  WALTER DAVIDSON, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,  DELTA  Prov. Co-ordinator's Office: Waffled,  suggested we contact Grace McCarthyc  Child Care:Evasive. Budget restrictions  Family Law:Supports Berger Commss.  recommendations on matrimonial property  Somen's Centre:Favourable to -self-help  groups. Volunteers should receive funds  Human Rights:Agrees with concept of  equality. Quibbled over interpretation  of "equal pay for work of equal value"  situation. Would not initiate action  for legislation prohibiting discrimination on sexual orientation.  Supports guaranteed income plan and  would like to gee in B.CC Not in  favour of loss of incentives."People  who help themselves should be helpedc"  Lobby team felt budget used too often  as means of avoiding commitment.  Wouldn't commit to open forum on  women's issues on Cable 10.  Follow-up Contact: Babs Sprague, Delta  Women's Centre, 8327  120th St. Delta  594-3456.^  HARVEY SCHROEDER, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,  CHILLIWACK  3 as not very familiar with brief,  ffice of Provincial Co-ordinator:  Had served necessary function & should  be re-instated if funds found. However  dept. for men or women added to'problem'  Advisory Cmmttee on Sex Discrimination:  "Should be operative; no reason but  money."  Berger Commission Recommendations:Not  familiar with. Would try to read.  Farm & Domestic workers: "Should decide for selves if want to be covered."  Transition Houses: not familiar with.  After explanation asked for studies &  said would talk to Vander Zalm.  Rape: Supported most proposals. Would  support preventative Rape Education  program in his constituency.  Child Care: no need in his constituency  as "vast majority are family units."  But would support if -money available.  Core Funding for Women's Centres: Felt  was province's responsibility & would  support in caucus.  Scheduled another meeting.  Follow-up Contact: Pat Wood, Ishtar  Women's Centre,2420 Montrose, Abbotsford, 859-7681.  JIM NIELSON, MINISTER OF THE ENVIRONMENT, SQGIAL CREDIT MLA RICHMOND  Would like to meet with concerned  groups once a month.  ProVo Co-ordinator's Office:waste of  money as govt, deals with men & women  equally.  Family Law:Agreed to write Gardom  about pilot project Unified Family  Court situation in Richmond'ÄûAlso to  press for>more counsellors.  Transition House:seemed favourable if  could be tied in with women's health  & family planning groups - save money,  Health Care:supports preventative medicine such as self-help groups.Thought  yearly check-ups covered by medical  plan might be too expensive .  Daycare:confused. Children a high  priority. Daycare must not substitute  for parents. Would support if tied in  with counselling parents on living  skills.  Follow-up Contact:Lorene Petrini,763  Lombard Rd. Richmond. 277-8422.  KAREN SANFORD,NDP MLA, COMOX  Would be happy to meet with Indians  to discuss land claims issue0  Transition House: supportive of idea  of funding.  Funding for Women's Centres: Try Sec.  of State  Day Care: Doesn't think this govtc  will fund.  Transportation: Recognizes need for  public trnasport. Meet with your regional board, but she can't apply  pressure as they are elected boards.  Feels feminists should involve selves  more in traditional community groups  so as to reach more people with women's  issues.  "Are you as a woman and a MLA willing  to support women's issues?" "I feel  supportive towards what you are trying  to do."  Follow-up Contact: Trixie Lutes, Wo-  nen's Place, 660 Island Highway,  "ampbell River.  EILEEN DAILLY, NDP MLA, BURNABY-NORTH  Resposnibility Centres within Govt:  would support concept in caucus.  Prov. Co-ordinator Office: supports  re-instatement  Equal Employment Opportunities Programs: Not familiar with proposal presented in 1975 but supported idea.  Education: Will try to get Women's  Studies programme implemented, and  will bring up position of Julia Goulden  and Advisory Committee. Says no figures  to show inequality in funding for  male and female athletics.  Human Rights: supports equal pay for  work of equal value. Will speak to caust  causus and support inclusion in Human  Rights Code to prohibit landlords discriminating against families with kids.  Labour: Supports review and reactivation of Women's Bureau "with teeth"0  Women and Prisons: supported right of  citizens to visit inmates freely.  Follow-up: Contact Leslie Dixon,c/o  2029 West 4th Ave,Vancouver or phone  980-1855.  BARBARA WALLACE, NDP MLA, COWICHAN-  MALAHAT  Day Care:Supports separate funding  apart from fees & day care for under  3's. Supports 24 hr. care in cities  but not economically feasible in rural.  Education:Supports re-instatement of  Julia Goulden's position and Advisory  Cmmttee on Sex Discrimination.Too  large a portion of ed. funds go to  sports. Doesn't favour integrated contact sports. Sports programs too competitive.  Human Rights:Supports extending protection of women under Code & more Human  Rights Officers but"we're lucky to  keep the ones we have."  Core Funding:Not a high priority -  "refund centres already going."  Supports need for transition houses.  "Do you intend to bring issues concerning women before the House?" Maiden  speech has a section devoted to women's issues.  Follow-up Contact: Patsy Screeton,  c/o Cowichan Vallev Status of Women,  Duncan. HOWARD LLOYD,SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,FORT  GEORGE  Mrc Llyoyd had read brief.  Resources Boards:Agreed with principle  but felt directors should be elected"  Prepared to ask for continuation.  Day Care:Badly informed. Important only  to enable single mothers to work.  Agreed to a meeting in Prince George  to discuss day care.  Women's Centres:Hadn't changed previous  pbsition(rigid & chauvinistic) - opposed to special consideration for specific groups (women).  Transition Houses:Wants^njore info.  Prov. Co-ordinator's office:If women  are really neglected by society he  will help catch up "You can't all be  wrong."  Min. of Northern Affairs:opposed to  such portfolio.  Discrimination against women in employment policies in Prince George & Mac-  Kenzie:unaware of this. Would talk to  company officials.  Assessment by team:very nervous,slightt  ly defensive, cautious but not unsympathetic.  Agreed to follow-up meeting.  Follow-up Contact: Marie Mitchell,  1199 Houston Lane, Prince George.  564-6197.  SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,  JAMES CHABOT,  COLUMBIA  Had not read brief but would before  next meeting.  Prov. Co-ordinator's Office: uninformed on issue. Would look into.  Core Funding:Good idea, would look into  Family Law: Supports Berger Commission  Recommendations & would bring up in  House. Will look into law on maintenance on divorce.  Education:Supports renewal of Julia  Goulden's office and Sex Discrimination Cmmttee.  Rape:Concerned. Would work with women  in his area.  Pensions for Housewives:Not familiar  with issue. Believes in guaranteed  income "every person has a right to  live with dignity."  Child Care:Recognizes need for more.  Money a problem. Supports better wages  for Child Care workers.  Mental-Health: Supportive. Agreed to  need for more community support for  women.  Because the women from Columbia were  unable to get to Victoria they were  represented by a proxy lobby team who  they had briefed on issues of concern  to them. The proxy team felt Mr. Chabot  would be receptive to further meetings  — women of Columbia follow this up!  GEORGE MUSSALLEM,SOCIAL CREDIT MIA,  DEWDNEY  Prov. Co-ordinator's office:Supports  re-instatement,will speak to Grace  McCarthy.  Family Law:"I support what Berger has  done."  Sexism in Education:Didn't really  think there was any.  Core Funding:Would suggest to govt.  but thought women should show some  initiative towards self-support.  Transition House for riding:Good idea,  would speak to Vander Zalm.  Child Care: "Vital service" - but  there is only so much money.  Rape Relief:Uninformed - "I didn't  know such a thing was necessary."  Family Life Education:In favour but  wants it done tastefully.  Transportation:Supported recommendation  Meeting set for April.  Follow-up Contact: Bette Goode, Maple  Ridge Women's Centre,22369 Lougheed  Highway, Maple Ridge. 467-1633.  ROBERT SKELLY, NDP MLA, ALBERNI  Skelly's wife was present & supported  the women's issues.  DayCare: Aware of cutbacks. Hasn't  raised in caucus becuase not a priority due to economic problems. Wants  to diversify economy before accomodating day care.  Family Law: hadn't read Berger Commission Report but aware of problems. Had  idea of Divorce Insurance(similar to  Pension Plan). Agreed with idea of a  central govt, agency to cover maintenance payments.  Education: Has sent letter to Min. of  Education recommending re-instatement  of Julia Goulden. Agreed with need  for women's studies and will talk up.  ICBC: Problem for low-income people.  Human Rights: Aware of discrimination  in housing against children — wants  to see changes in Human Rights Code  to cover. Lesbian rights: will read  brief and discuss at next meeting.  Resource Boards: Concept is excellent.  Fully supports and is writing letters.  Indian Women: Expert on land claims—  agreed to meet with Agnes Dick to get  women's perspective. Aware of lack of  women's rights in Indian Act.  Follow-up: Will meet again with women  near end of April. Is very interested  in consultation with women! Contact I  Kathryn Hazel, RR 3, Lakeshore Rd,  Port Alberni, 724-0854(h), 724-2321(w).  BILL KING, NDP MLA REVELSTOKE-  NELSON  Affirmative Action:supports. Should  be policy statement on women which  would be implemented at all dept levels  Training Programs geared to rural  employment for women: woulfl approach  Dept. of Labour when community gives  him a specific proposal.  Use of local people & women on construction projects:committment to see  that union membership or temporary  work permits issued for Revelstoke  Dam Project.  Maternity Protection Act:will support  revision.  Transportation:lack of public transportation impedes women seeking employment - would support development of  public transportation.  Health Care:will look into merits of  outpost hospitals & mobile health units  Therapeutic Abortion Cmmttee: recog---  nizes need in area.  Daycare:Important, will support extension of services.  Education: reduction of number of teachers detrimental.  Follow-up Contact: Feme Van Home,  General Delivery, Kaslo. 353-2244.  ED SMITH, SPEAKER OF HOUSE, SOCIAL  CREDIT MLA NORTH PEACE  Said Speaker of House so non-political  but would listen.  Pensions for Homemakers:at first negative, then thought could work out  something.  Equal pay for farm management courses  at vocational school:not aware of  discrimination. Like to know reason.  Health Care(mental health brief presented by Women of the Peace):lack of  personnel,difficult to get people to  go up north,money not a concern. Mammography - talk to Min. Of Health. Will  look into travel expenses for patients  who must travel to other areas.  Women's Economic Rights Branch:feels  important, but is not in favour of  satellite towns0  Impressions:fairly receptive but evasive. Gave lecture on radical elements  in our group. Next meeting in Apr^.1  in riding.  Follow-up Contact: Sharon Boyce,1200  116th Ave. Dawson Creek., x  LYLE KAHL,SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,ESQUIMALT  Prov. Co-ordinator's office:Will  support in both House and causus -  with funding on long term basis.  Affirmative Action and EEO in Public  Service:Supports in principle but no  commitment.  Family Law:Hadn't seen Berger report  Funding:Will press for funding for  transition houses and rape relief.  Child Care:Agrees with concept of 24  hr. care. Will press for core funding.  Education:Advisory Cmmttee - will support verbally if priorities re-arranged  Special Advisor-supports position but  doesn't favour any radical programs or  changes.  Healht: Mental Health - on Drop-in  Centres no capital expenditures for  buildings,no commitment for funds for  existing centres. Will work to establish permanent drop-in centre at Pacific  Centre for Human Development at Calwood  Mammography - will press for funds to  establish mass screening & ed. program.  Made appointment for meeting in April.  Follow-up Contact: Alice Ages, 553 View  Royal Ave,Victoria. 479-2696.  DENNIS COCKE.NDP MLA NEW WESTMINSTER  Health: On abortion-matter between  woman and her doctor. Would never  support abortion on demand.  Child Care:Should be more. No commitment on finances or 24 hr.  Education:Advisory Cmmttee & Special  Consultant very necessary0 "Kids should  be regarded as kids, not be sex."  Human Rights:Should be more officers.  Core Funding:Will push for it.  Family Law:Favours Berger Commission  recommendations.  Rape Relief:100% in favour0  Economic Development:If women come  up with proposal would see them &  support.  Dave Barrett came in during meeting.  "NDP did more for women than anyone,"  If you had it to do again would you  put more teeth into women's programs';  "We would do the same thing all over  again."  Meeting set for April.  Fcllow-up Contact: Joan Murphy,#103  38 -6th St. New Westminster 525-4376,,  GORDON GIBSON, LIBERAL, MLA NORTH  VANCOUVER - CAPILANO  Prov. Co-ordinator's office:Strongly  supports. Will speak to House & to  Premier about re-establishment.  Affirmative Action: Supports plan.  Education:Sexism Advisory Cmmttee -  very important to re-instate. Should  change Ed. Min. Govt, doesn't recognize  problems, better to deal at local  level(school boards, BCTF). Will speak  on Cmmttee in House. Special Consultant  should be re-instated0 Women's studies  would like to see copy.  CoreFunding1; Would support experiment &  then evaluateo Not convinced best way0  Wants more info on women's centres.  Maternity Protection Act:Govt, is  stumbling block.  Welfare:Rent control has harmed low  income people in end. No adequate way  of protesting to govt. Supports Community Resource Boards.  DayCare:Suggests using School Boards  with a local democratic setup to administer.  Accomodation:Disagrees with recommendation that landlords not be able to  discriminate on basis of age. Suggests  that anyone with over 50 units should  make a % of units available to families,  Says Women's Movement most important  human movement of the last quarter  century. Had done his homework on brief  Meeting in late May  Follow-up Contact: Andrea Davis,227  New Dale Court, North Vancouver  980-8236. 14  ALEX MACDONALD, NDP, VANCOUVER-EAST  Family Law:supports Berger Commission  Report in principle. Will bring up.  Private Member*s Bill if necessary.  DayCare:"basic social service".  Welfare:feels groups should be formed  among welfare recipients.  Core Funding:suggests approaching  labour' movement.  Will meet in April with lobbiests.  Followup Contact: Jane Hewes, 1429  East 3rd, Vancouver. 876-6370.  GARY LAUK, NDP, VANCOUVER CENTRE  Family Law; agrees with Berger Commiss.  Says illegitimate status of children  has already been eliminated. (It hasn't)  Agrees with no fault divorce in principle but would be an excuse to avoid  reforms in maintenance law.  Representation for women ^.n govt Provincial Co-ordinatorfs Office should  be re-instated. Will pressure for this.  Core Funding for Women's centres: provincial govt, should accept responsibility—with strict criteria. Volunteers should be encouraged.  Child Care:some expansion necessary.  24 hr. daycare premature because of  cost. "Fee per child" encourages  efficiency. Agreed with childcare for  homemakers who are ill.  Education:priority! Sex Discrimination  Cmmttee should be re-instated. All discrimination in schools eliminated.  Landlords should not be able to discriminate against children.  Farm & Domestic workers should be  covered by provincial labour standards  legislation.  Equal Employment Opportunities program  should be implemented.  Agrees with inclusion of homemakers  in CPP.  Strong support of Eileen Caner and  WER Branch.  Health:abortion commttees should be  available in rural areas. Favours  mammography program but costly. .  Favours funding for Transition Houses.  Followup Contact:Marian Vogels 688-0914  STEPHEN ROGERS, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,  VANCOUVER SOUTH  Direct, reasonably well informed.  Day Care: important, good investment  socially.  Transition Houses:obvious need.  Pensions for Housewives: "Absurd".  Affirmative Action:favours legislative route rather than goals & guidelines.  Farm & Domestic workers included in  minimum wage: No.  Indian Lands Claims:No comment.  Manpower vocational counsellor:"severe  weakness in that area."  Sex Role Stereotyping:favours development & distribution of non-sexist material by volunteers. Elimination of  sex discrimination in schools a priority but does not support plan of action,  funds or timetable of Sex L^scriminat-  ion Cmmttee. 228-2181  Followup Contact:Ann Ironsides loc. 218  RAY LOEWEN, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,  BURNABY-EDMONDS  Had not read the brief but was willing  to set up another appointment in May.  Day Care: recognized need for adequate  facilities in his riding.  Provincial Co-ordinator Office: not  prepared to take a stand. Must review  financial situation of province first.  Supported strongly creation of Alimony Agency as an example of Socred  policy for women. (See p.10 for a  comment on this proposed agency.)  Transition Houses: strong personal  sympathy for women in need of help  but questioned at what point.  Followup Contact: Michele Jahn c/o  Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre,  Box 243, Pt. Coquitlamc 941-6311,  SAM BAWLF, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA, VICTORIA  HMd not read brief, completely unprepared. Did not show at scheduled time.  Would not commit self to anything.  Said we were naive to think he could  do very much. Had to read so much in  every dept.  Suggested a delegation of women to  the caucus.  Sexism in schools:"You have a point  but let's face it—in spite of it all  we turn out OK. Especially men my age  and younger—I mean in the last ten  years, we're OK—we don't play all  those roles."  Followup meeting to be held.  Followup contact: Marilyn Callahan  GERRY STRONGMAN, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA  VANCOUVER SOUTH  Had read the brief, seemed preparedc  Childcare:should be increased both rural  & urban but not 24 hour. Budget problems.  Felt raises were "substantial." Some cost  of afterschool care should be borne by  parents.  Maternity Protection:should be enforced  by Dept. of Labour. "I can't believe an  employer would fire a woman for  being pregnant."  Farm & Domestic Workers:would support  being covered by labour standards legis.  Immigrant women:increase in educational  & community services should be provided  by the ethnic community itself. Not  sure govt, should be involved.  Supports resolutions in brief re Rape.  Rape Centres should be under police dept  Followup meeting May 1st in Vancouver  Followup Contact: Astrid Davidson  325-2313  CHARLES BARBER, NDP MLA, VICTORIA  Had read brief, generally sympathetic.  Funding of Women's Centres questioned.  Do they cater to all women. Would women  be coopted by govt, funding?  Will present amendment to Vital Stastics  Act to cover change of name.  Questioned value of single day care  agency in prov. —possiblility of rigid  govt, structure.  A-bortion laws no place in Criminal Code.  Wants as many "Human Interest Stories"  as possible.  Followup Meeting in April.  Followup contact: Muriel Overgaard  477-6945. Lynn Carter 595-6378.  ROSEMARY BROWN, NDP MLA VANCOUVER  BURRARD  Supported issues on brief 100%0  Women's centres:high priority, should  be core funded. Should be community  rated, not govt, rated.  Affirmative Action:will continue to  introduce her bill.  Childcare: total support of 24 hour  community controlled quality care.  Abortion & Health: must pressure govt-  funded hospitals. Would like to see  women's health collectives move into  rural areas more,  Lesbian rights:supports sexual orientation clause in Human Rights Code.  Sees herself as channel for NDP women's  caucus & women—can give her bills &  issues to present.  Followup:1 Barb Taylor, 2518 Cornwall,  Vancouver. 731-8850.  ELWOOD VEITCH, SOCIAL CREDIT, MLA  BURNABY-WILLINGTON  Mr. Veitch had an engagement and had  - Sam Bawlf's Executive Assistant meet  lobby team.,Team requested meeting  with their MLA be arranged.  Follow-up: Contact Ruth Moore c/o  Women's Centre, SFU, Burnaby, 291-3670  GEORGE HADDAD,SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,KOOTENAY  Said would personally answer all letters  Family Court Services in Fernie "very  necessary." Would investigate further  funding.  Day care:"Committed to funding.  Women on Welfare:re humiliation by welfare officials"l won't stand for this."  Child Support:Should be inter-provincial system to enforee child support  payments. Cutbacks by former govt.on  social services unfair.  Agreed East Kootenay district neeas  full-fledged university.  "I am your elected servant & you will  always get the truth from me. In fact"  he laughed"! hardly ever lie to my  -<rife anymore."  Follow-up Contact: Florence Scanlon,  Box 1528, Fernie. 423-6500.  DON LOCKSTEAD,NDP MLA, MACKENZIE  Prov. Co-ordinator's office:Disbelief  at closure of such an important office.  If sufficient pressure govt, may reopen. Not a question of economics -  political revenge against NDP.  Education:Termination of Julia Goulden's  position unfair & if NDP re-elected  would be re-established.  Child Care:Unaware of need for 24 hr.  care. Supportive of idea and for  under 3's.  Family Law:Supports Berger Commission  recommendations.  Health:Supports massive ed. program'  in schools on birth control & VD.  Agrees in principle to free birth  control.  Meeting arranged for May.  Follow-up Contact: Barb Pederson, Bex  137, Bella Coola. 799-5504.  JACK KEMPF, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA OMENICA  Had read brief.  Women's Centre Core Funding:Has written  to Grace McCarthy, doesn't know how  __  long review of situation will take.  Will let group know. Would support i#  felt women of B.C. would profit. Will  speak to McCarthy re: Fraser Lake Centre  closure.  Family Law:agrees with principles of  Matrimonial Property. Will have to  study Berger Report before supporting.  Education:Will push for larger travel  budget for Julia Goulden so can reach  more of province esp- North.  Economic Development:Would like views  of women on study done by Equity Mining on proposed mine develoment. Endorsed idea of social impact emmttees  50% local women to study all future  development.  Human Rights:Didn't know much but  agreed need more Officers,  Mammography equipment:Unprepared. Will  look into.  Indian Land Claims:In contact with  Stuart Trembleur band. Must be settled.  Regional Arts Panel:funding continued.  Promised appointment in June in riding  Follow-up Contact: Joyce Hamilton,RR  KRose Lake), Burns Lake B0C.  SCOTT WALLACE, LEADER PROGRESSIVE  CONSERVATIVE, MLA OAK BAY  Careful attention, took notes.  Education:Agreed with recommendations  in brief. Will bring up Advisory Cmmttee  & Special Advisor at time of estimates.  Family Law:Supports Berger Commission.  Give him individual cases & will bring  up at estimates & Human Resources budget.  Women in Govt:Recognizes govt, sets  example. Put pressure on places like  universities that get provincial govt,  gran ts.  Women's Centres:Supports all points.  Will meet with team again& set up sub-  emmttee to work with team. Will raise  issues in House.  Follow-up Contact: Norrie Preston  598-1390.  (WRA LOBBY REPORTS continued on p.24) THE  INSIDE   STORY  15  WOMEN'S DAY AT THE CIRCUS — an a  account of the goings-on inside the  esteemed Buildings of Legislature on  March 22nd.  Would you like to know just what our  honourable elected MLAs actually did  on the day 500 women travelled from  all over B.C. to present their needs  to Victoria? Perhaps you wouldn't.  But I'll tell you anyway.  I missed the first part of the question period, but did arrive in time to  watch Rosemary Brown make a valiant  attempt to adjourn the assembly in  order to discuss the Rally issues.  Garde Gardom, our Attorney-General,  for heaven's sake, snickered and then  laughed outright. Bill Bennett looked  bored, and most of the other Socreds  grinned in the secure knowledge of  a majority government that knows it  has nothing to fear from those few  frustrated segments of the electorate — all jealous man-haters no  doubt. So they settled back in their  well-oiled chairs to discuss the Real  business of the day — an amendment  to IBCB legislation. Don Phillips,  Minister of Agriculture and Resources,  harrangued for at least 3/4 of an  hour at 'government interference' of  the ICBC (who , may I ask, could be  more appropriate to interfere in a  government-owned agency — the  Opposition? Mutual of Omaha? Metropolitan Life?) I think he said "hang  your head in shame!" to the NDP about  11 times — Bill Bennett frequently  joined in and the NDP just laughed.  Of course. (Bring on the dancing  bears.) After much pointing of fingers (Phillips has put on this act  so continuously in his many years in  the Legislature, that I am sure his  arm extension has increased by several inches), there were the inevitable  references to NDP cover-ups and of  course their ignorance of the desper  ate need for more roads to develop  this just-begging-to-be-exploited  (read raped) virgin province of ours.  Then there were two maiden-debutant  Socred speeches. I swear Walter Davidson of Delta ran his finger down the  page as he read from his carefully  scripted reiteriation of what Don  Phillips had just said (cries of  "Author! Author!" and "Dan Campbell  strikes again!" were rather to the  point.)  I decided to leave after 3 hours of  this useless invective and table -  thumping, but it was interesting to  see just which of the MLAs had bothered to wear the Rally button — about  5 Socred backbenchers, and neither of  the Socred women; about 4 NDP men,  and only One of the 3 NDP women.  Clearly, we are quite free of party  affiliation, and certainly are far  from universal sisterhood.  And on the steps outside, the 500  women had discovered each others  support and ideas, as well as the  realization that we are governed  chiefly by clowns — and not very  funny ones at that.  Pass the Cracerjacks.  - J.Annis Freeman  GREER:     FEMINISM & FERTILITY  My first encounter with Germaine Greer  (other than the printed page) came when  I watched her televised debate with  William F. Buckley. The question being  discussed on that memorable occasion  was whether or not the house should  • support the Women's Liberation  Movement.  Buckley spent the entire  time searching for his glasses (which  he never found) and of course argued  that it was not women's liberation  he was against, just support for an  organized movement - I mean, how  distasteful, and unnecessary!  Germaine won the debate with a sizeable majority, and was, I remember,  astonished.  I was not astonished,  since she had not only made several  important and valid points, but had  outclassed Buckley with her inevitable  sharpness and wit.  It was my memories of that debate  more than anything else which took me  to Convocation Hall in beautiful  downtown Toronto (in the dead of  winter even) to hear her lecture on  the topic "Feminism and Fertility."  Those memories were strong enough to  take me back again, two weeks later,  after the first date was cancelled  when she refused to cross picket  lines set up outside the building.  I was not disappointed.  She spoke  quite calmly and engrossingly for  almost two hours - without any  notes, a feat in itself awe-inspiring  to the non public speakers among us.  She touched on many things in those  hours, related to the advertised  topic, and not so related:  the distasteful phenomena of 20th Century  western "coupledom"; and £hat  society's interest in foisting birth  control methods, without much  thought or consideration, on the  third world; she also pointed out  how male chauvinist piggery is now  something men are proud of:  "To say  'I'm just a male chauvinist pig'  implies that I have enormous sexual  appetites, am very well hung, and  picturesquely old fashioned." Too  true, I'm afraid.  She rambled on to sexual practise  in Italy where coitus interruptus is  (and has always been) The Thing; the  phenomenon of "middle class mums"  in Australia who are known to give  their teenage daughters oral contraceptives surrepticiously at breakfast  without ever discussing it with them;  and the continuing horror of the fact  that a normal male ejaculation spends  80 million sperm ("whatever for?").  It becomes obvious that her lecture  was not merely a laundry list of birth  control methods, ending with the  inevitable dilemna - they're all  rotten in one way or another; what do  we do now?  In Greer's view vasectomies should  only be had by men who no longer wish  to have children, not so that their  wives or lovers will no longer (or  never) conceive.  "Each one of us  has the responsibility of fertility  to accept. We can't pretend that  responsibility, duty and freedom  don't apply to us." "We couldn't  allow men to be infertile on our  account like opening doors or carrying suitcases.  It's ridiculous!"  She did not come out categorically  against the pill (although she is  against it being called 'The Pill"),  but on the other hand she was not  coy about side effects, "Quality of,  life" which is as good a reason as  the risk of thromboembolism to berate  drug companies for better-pills*  and alternate methods..  She objected to the increasing use  of pills by young (teenage) women,  who, although they menstruate, are  not necessarily physically mature.  She fears that the suppression of  the reproductive organs before  maturity may cause some permanent  damage as far as proper functioning  is concerned.  The direction in all this led to  prostaglandins, a chemical produced  by the body which has been used to  bring on late periods and would  continue to do so as a contraceptive, or more correctly, an "automatic abortifation" method. The  great benefit in the use of prosto-  landins would be the infrequency of  their use - she calculates conception  when not otherwise interfered with  wouldn't occur more than three times  a year.  Besides being used only when  needed, unlike the overmedication of  the pill, they are local rather than  systemic.  When asked she agreed that they might  prove to have problems as well, but  still said she thought them preferable  to the daily ingestion of the pill,  and to the horrors of "modern"  abortion.  All in all it seemed an effort on her  part to publicize the possibilities  of prostolandins (as well as the fact  that little research is being done by  drug comapnies) , Her obvious knowledge  coupled (sorry!) with her amazing  personal magnetism and effectiveness  as a speaker made it a thoroughly  enjoyable indoctrination.  - Leslie McDonald 16  FEMINIST RESOURCES  Hi! I'm looking after developing the  VSW reference library now, so all new  materials we receive will be announced  in this new column each month. You are  welcome to look through our files any  day of t;he week from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.  Out-of-towners are advised to order  materials as listed. We hope you will  donate copies of your research papers,  thesis, reports, etc. on status of  women issues to the reference library.  - Karen Richardson  ORGANIZE WORKING WOMEN  "Organize! A Working Women's Handbook"  is a book aimed at organizing clerical  workers:how to organize a union; writing and negoiating union contracts;  a sample contract; building a women's  causus; a key to rank and file control;  parliamentary procedure; women's  issues; strategies and tactics. $2.75  from Union WAGE, Education Committee,  PO Box 462 Berkeley, California 94701.  REGILIOUS FEMINIST BIBLIOGRAPHY  "Jesus Was A Feminist" is a 66 page  bibliography based on women and the  church current to 1974, put together  as an IWY project by female students  at St. Thomas More College, including  materials from Holland, France, Germany  Italy and Russia with a list of films,  hymnals, newsletters, kits appended.  Free from Shannon Library, St. Thomas  More College, 1437 College Drive, Saskatoon, Sask.  WOMEN'S ACTION HANDBOOK  "The Forgotten Five Million:Women in  Public Employment" is a 300 page guide  to eliminating sexism in the civil  service, through affirmative action  plans, through unions and through  establishing status of women pressure  groups. Contains: how to tell when  you are being discriminated against;  suggestions for legal action; organizing a women's lobby through fund-  raising and public relations. While  American, it will be broadly applicable to Canadian women. An excellent  tool for groups looking for action  plans. $5 from Women's Action Alliance  370 Lexington Ave. New York, -N.Y.  USA 10017. Ask WAA for their publications list — they are an excellent  resource centre.  IWY REPORT ON B.C. WOMEN  "Women in British Columbia, Issues,  Resources and Services" is a 75 page  booklet produced by the International  Women's Year travelling women's info  van which visited 91 B.C. communities  in 197 5 in" an attempt to reach women  not involved in the feminist movement.  The booklet is divided into sections  on major issues of concern to women  in each town, media contacts, resources  section and services in each locality  of interest to women. Gives a good o  overview of the province as a whole,  especially groups, outside the larger  cities. Free from Lynne Pearson  Pick up at VSW Office or send for  (please include 50c postage).  INTERNATIONAL STATUS OF WOMEN  The September 1975 issue of the UNESCO  Courier is devoted to articles on women internationally. Includes information on Japanese women, Cuban women,  Muslim women, Afghani women, Socialist  women,etc. $1 from Info Canada Bookstore, 800 Granville St., Vancouver.  RESOURCES  US WOMEN'S CREDIT LAW  In October 1975 the United States  passed a federal law called Equal  Credit Opportunity Act prohibiting  sex discrimination in credit granting.  All we have here in B.C. are guidelines  which are not enforceable and which  credit grantors follow only voluntarily, if at all. Details in the Consumer Action League newsletter, Feb.1976.  NON-SEXIST CAREER COUNSELLING  "Issues of Sex Bias and Sex Fairness  in Career Interest Measurement" is a  220 page booklet issued by the National  Institute of Education (USA) in Spring  1975. It deals with the impact of  career inventories on career choice,  rate of change in occupational characteristics, sex-role stereotyping, reducing sex bias, expanding opportunties  for women re-entering the labour force  and  or mature women and legal implications of sexist career counselling.  Free copies limited to one per request  while supply lasts.from Dept. Health,  Education and Welfare, National Inst.  Education, Washington DC USA 20208.  HOW TO START YOUR OWN BUSINESS  The April 1976 issue of Ms. Magazine  has a bonus 16 page handbook for women  on how to start their own businesses,  including tips on a business plan,  what professional services are needed,  overextending yourself, where to get  inexpensive advice, merchandising  ideas, how to raise money, leases and  options, cash flow, how to sell yourself, graphics and publicity, and  notes towards a feminist business  ethic. Also included are places to  order more materials. Will be of  special interest to women's centres  who are struggling to stay open financially.  NON-SEXIST RESOURCES FOR COUNSELLORS,  TEACHERS AND ADMINISTRATORS  The Project on Sex Equality in Guidance  Opportunities has producer1 a 11 page  booklet of materials on non-sexist  education which can be ordered free  or very inexpensively. This excellent  pamphlet outlines resources on everything you need to know about non-  sexist education including: bibliographies, films, counselling, curriculum, sports, law, recommendations for  change, etc. Free from American Personnel and Guidance Association, 1607 New  Hampshire Ave, Northwest, Washington  DC, USA 20009,  DISCRIMINATION CHECKLIST  "How Do You Know When It Is Happening  To You?" is a 5 page pamphlet outlining the ways in which you can be  discriminated against on the job,  equal pay, job opportunities, advancement, benefits, termination policies,  etc. $1.50 from Boston Municipal Women's Project, 140 Clarendon St.  Boston, Massachusetts, USA 02116.  HOW TO GET MONEY FOR WOMEN  "How To Get Money For Women" is a  professional manual directed at both  the novice and the experienced fundraiser. Includes excellent chapter on  program planning and proposal writing,  detailed funding sources, but American.  Free from Chilton Book Co. Human Resources Centre, Radnor, Pennsylvania.  HIGH SCHOOL WOMEN'S MATERIALS  The Feminist Press has received a  $340,000 grant from Ford and Carnegie  Foundations for a 3 year period to  produce supplementary high school  women's materials in English and Social Studies. Although non-sexist texts  are available now at elementary and  college levels there isn't much for  secondary schools. The project will  produce two series of paperback books  and pamphlets, 13 in all. The first-  series will deal with the socialization of men and women and the second  will focus entirely on the history of  women at work. Each book will be  accompanied by a feminst teachers'  guide. Materials will be jointly published by the Feminist Press and  McGraw-Hill. Contact Brett Harvey,  Feminist Press, State University of  New York, Suny College at Old Westbury, Box 334, Old Westbury, Long  Island, N.Y. USA 11568.  THE TOILET BOOK — KNOWING YOUR TOILET  AND HOW TO FIX IT  This publication by Helen McKenna,  published by her company A Harmless  Flirtation with Wealth, identifies  16 problems with toilets and how women  can fix them. Humourous but practical.  $3 from her at P.O. Box 9779 San Diego  California, USA 92109.  IMPROVING THE IMAGE OF WOMEN IN TEXT  BOOKS  An 11 page pamphlet by the Scot,  Faesman and Company Sexism in Text  Books Committee, gives general tips  en text and illustration, recommendations for avoiding sexist language,  eliminating sex-role stereotypes.  Free from the publisher at 1900 East  Lake Ave. Clenview, Illinois, USA.  POLICEWOMEN  This 1974 report of the American  Police Foundation "Policewomen on  Patrol" evaluates the performance of  women on patrol, after every police  department in the USA had to hire  women on an equal basis with men to  demonstrate that there was a bona  fide occupational qualification for  not doing so. Free from Police Foundation, 1909 K St. North West, Washington  DC UFD 20006.  MATURE WOMEN  Jobs for Older Women of Oakland Calif.  aims at improving work opportunities  for older women and self-help for  mature women. They have published the  following materials: WE SHOULD LIVE  SO LONG, a program on Women and Aging  25C, ACTING OUT AGAINST AGE DISCRIMINATION, an action packet 50c, ROSIE  THE RIVETER REUNION, how to stage one  50c. Order from 1941 High St. Oakland,  California, 94609.  WOMEN IN THE URBAN ENVIRONMENT  42 page booklet, bilingual, a report  from the national workshop on concerns  of women in shaping the urban environment, held in Ottawa in Oct./75. Includes identification of specific needs  of single-parent women and elderly  women for housing, daycare, transport- •  ation and recommendations for same.  Also strategies for improving women's  input into planning process. Free  from National Capital Commission, 48  Rideau St. Ottawa, Ontario. kaslo  ishtar  17  mission  Jean Pickard and friends who participated in the Women's Rally for Action  want to start a women's centre in  Kaslo. Right now they need to be visited by speakers from other feminist  groups and want materials on programs  and funding. Send help to them at Boh  742, Kaslo B.C. or call 353-2581.  north  shore  Members of the North Shore Women's  Centre met with the three North Shore  mayors in March to inform them of  the services offered by the Women's  Centre and presented them with the  brief on women's issues prepared for  the March 22nd Women's Rally For  Action. North Vancouver District  mayor Ron Andrews felt that the Women's  Centre was a duplication of services  and was concerned that the demands  in the brief should be changed to  "requests". West Vancouver mayor  Peter Jones said it would be difficult  to legislate opportunities or special  advantages for women but he recognized  the need for more day care. Mayor  Tom Reid of North Vancouver City was  concerned with the men who don't take  the responsibility of providing for  their wives and children.  The North Shore Women's Centre is  located at 3255 Edgemont Bvld. North  Vancouver. Phone 987-4822. Pub nights  are held every second Tuesday of the  month at North Shore Neighbourhood  House 225 East 2nd. St. North Vancouver.  Parents in Crisis has weekly meetings  in three local areas for women and  men. Child abuse can be stopped. Get  help through P.I.C. Langley:Elinor  at 534-7364. Aldergrove:Margot at  856-2255. Brookswood:Dawne at 534-  5535. Babysitting can be arranged.  LANGLEY FAMILY SERVICES  Women's Effectiveness Group:Personal  growth group. Mondays, 8 p.m.  Women's Drop-In: Thursday mornings a  10 a.m. to 12 noon. For young mothers  to share interests and talents. Free  babysitting available.  Personal Problem-Solving Group: Tues.  lo a.m. to 12 noon. Non-structured  For more info call Langely Family  Services at 534-7522.  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  Campbell       festival  river  The Campbell River 1% day conference  for North Island women has been moved  from April to May. Check with the  Campbell River Women's Place, 915  Island Highway, Campbell River,  287-9144, for date. Workshops will  be offered on a variety of subjects  including Self-Health, Self-Defence,  Assertiveness Training, Verbal Self-  Defence, Women and Employment, Reflexology, Rape Relief, Yoga and more.  The Campbell River Women's Place has  changed address and is now located  at 915 Island Highway, Campbell River.  Women's Place offers Drop-in facilities (tea & babysitter available Friday  afternoon), Lending Library, C-R  Groups, Legal Advice & Referral, etc.  port  alberni  The Port Alberni Women's Centre is  now in the Port Alberni Friendship  Centre, 3178 2nd, Port Alberni.  Telephone 723-8281.  The Centre provides: information on  human rights, legal aid, birth control,  efc, a library, a place to rap. Drop-  in!  Hours: Monday, Tuesday, Thursday &  Friday: 7-10 p.m. Saturday 1-4 p.m.  Fronya Women's Centre operates a drop-  in each Thursday from 1:00 to 4:00  p.m. We try to present a programme  each week, ranging from films to power  tool demonstrations to visiting hypnotists! During the last year we've  presented 2 speakers series, a film  series, and co-sponsored 3 courses  in Parent Effectiveness Training.  We've also offered Assertiveness  Training and C-R. We regularly visit  Twin Maples Women's Prison.  All this has been undertaken by about  6 active members. At this point, we  desperately need input of ideas and  energy. There must be more women in  the area interested in the status of  women. Our main focus is educational,  such as the above programmes, and  speaking to schools and other organizations.  If you can help, call Lynne 826-6056,  or Mally 826-3550, or drop in Thursday  33045 Seventh Ave. at Grand, Mission.  duncan  Cowichan Valley Status of Women is  researching the need for a transition  house in their area. They need info  on grants, legal advisors, police  protection, etc. that would help them  present a brief to the community.  Please send relevant material to them  at Box 891, Duncan, B,C.  There will be a Women's Festival at  Fraser Valley College, 34194 Marshall  Road, Abbotsford, Friday May 28th & .  Saturday May 29th,  Keynote Speaker will be Rosemary  Brown, MLA.  Workshops will include: Women & Relating—sessions on family, assertiveness, older women, religion &  change, women in groups, women alone,  raising children; Women & Achievement  —sessions on resuming education,  careers, homemaking, lifestyle planning; Women & Creativity—lots of  music, dance, theatre, crafts, both  as workshops and ongoing events.  Come for music, dancing,information  on local resources & options, sense  of community & sharing with other  women, fun & nonsense. BRING A FRIEND!  If you have ideas to share or can  help with the Festival or would like  more information contact Margaretha  Hoek, Fraser Valley College 853-7441.  Hchmond  A group of women in Richmond want to  start a women's resources centre. VSW.  sent Johanna den Hertog out to speak  to them. They are interested in hearing from anyone else who has ideas  and materials for them. Contact Doreen  Steiner at 775 McCallan Road, Richmond  or call her evenings at 277-9638.  conference  B.C. WOMENS STUDIES ASSOCIATION  CONFERENCE  There will be a B.C. Womens Studies  Association Conference October 1st  & 2nd at either Simon Fraser University  or Capilano College. Conference organizers are calling for papers in areas  such as: New Research, Methodology,  Teaching Methods, Dilemmas in Womens  Studies, or other relevant topics.  Send title, abstracts or requests for  information to: Cindy Schreck, V.V.C.  Langara, 100 West 49th, Langara, Vancouver, by July 31st,1976.  maple nidge  MAPLE RIDGE WOMEN'§ CENTRE  22369 Lougheed Highway. Phone 467-1633.  Women in the World is a bimonthly  lecture series that investigates  women's position and function in  the world today and in the future.  Cost is $1 per session, lectures  held on Thursdays at 8 p.m. in the  Centennial Arena, Board Room 1.  May 6 - ADVERTISING: THE ROLES PEOPLE  PLAY  Diana Bissell, Vancouver Status of  Women. A look at the portrayal of  women in commercials.  May 20 - WOMEN IN TRANSITION  Dr. Susan Stephenson, Vancouver General Hospital, Child Psychologist.  share  |IF YOUR GROUP HAS NEWS IT WOULD LIKE  !TO SHARE WITH OTHER WOMEN SEND IT TO  !KINESIS. 18  Greetings from Terrace! Terrace Women's  Organization has been so busy lately  we've not had a chance to report, but  here it is finally.  Cur Child Minding Centre which opened-  in December has had a great response.  (Editor:see p.16 December/75 KINESIS)  The children all love it, and so do  the parents. Alas, the Provincial  Government has not seen fit to renew our grant, but we're not going  to take that sitting down! We applied  for and received a grant of $7165 from  the Federal Government. This will  cover the salaries of three University  students for the summer. The Centre  is moving to a more central location  and we hope all systems are go. Great  credit to our Co-ordinators Lesley  Wetherston and Adair Hobson.  We campaigned and successfully elected  to our Municipal Council in a By-election Sharon Biggs. One of our original  members, Sharon was pitted against  big business, so our success was all  terrace —  the sweeter. Great to have such a  dynamic Alderperson! We know she'll  be a great asset to our Council.  Another of our original members Gail  Johnson has been named as the government representative on the Terrace  Hospital Board, so Terrace Women's  Organization is being heard.  We're gearing up for what will be our  biggest conference yet — "Women's  Changing Role," on May 29th and are  hoping for women from Dawson Creek  to the Queen Charlotte.-Islands .  CON FERENCE  CONFERENCE— WOMEN'S CHANGING ROLE  May 29,1976 at Clarence Michiel School  3430 Sparks St. Terrace, B.C.  Speakers: Rosemary Brown,MLA; Diana  Bissell, Northern Community Consultant  on Women's Issues(Federal Govt); Gail  Borst, Women's Organizer for B.C.  Federation of Labour; Johanna den  Hertog, Vancouver Status of Women;  Julia Goulden, Program Consultant on  Sex Discrimination in Public Schools  for Provincial Dept. of Education.  Childcare:limited but available. Contact Lesley Weatherston 4926 Gair Ave  Terrace(635-9789) before May 20th.  Billets:contact Adair Hobson, 2902 S.  Eby St. Terrace (635-9498) before  May 20th.  Travel:limited amount of money available. Contact Joyce Krause,4806 Loen  Ave,Terrace before May 20th.  Registration fee $2. Students free.  Send to Adair Hobson, 2902 S. Elby,  Terrace. REGISTER EARLY AS SPACE IS  LIMITED TO 200!  people's   law  school  The Summer Session of free law classes  offered by Vancouver People's Law  School begins in May. Each course  takes three evenings and is supplemented by a free pamphlet summarizing  the lecture. To pre-register call  681-7532. Vancouver People's Law School  Suite 610, 207 West Hastings, Vancouver.  IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES: May 10,11,12.  7:30-9:30 p.m. at Kitsilano Secondary  School, 2550 West 10th Ave, Vancouver.  Instructor:Kit Rigg.  Outline: Nominating & sponsoring immigrants; acquiring landed immigrant  status; deportation procedures, special inquiry & appeal procedures.  LANDLORD AND TENANT: May 25, 26,27.  7:30-9:30 p.m. at John Oliver See.  School(41st & Fraser).  Instructor: Alan McLean  Outline: Examination of Landlord &  training  WOMEN'S EXPLORATORY APPRENTICESHIP  TRAINING  An 8-week exploratory course in  apprenticeship training for women has   i  been established by the Women's Employ- f  ment Bureau of the B.C. Department of   I  Labour. This pilot program, which has  been approved by the Human Rights  Commission, is open to women interest-  ed in becoming apprentices in a skilled j  trade. \  Applicants accepted for training will  have their tuition fees paid and a  training allowance will also be pro-    |  vided, together with one return fare  from the trainee's home, where applicable.  The course begins May 17 at the Haney  Educational Centre. For application  forms and further information write:  Director, Women's Employment Bureau,  4211 Kingsway, Burnaby  OR: Apprenticeship & Industrial Training Counsellors, B.C. Dept. of Labour  Offices, Cranbrook, Dawson,Creek, Kamloops, Kelowna, Nanaimo, Nelson, Prince  George, Terrace and Victoria.  OR: Haney Educational Centre, P.O.  Box 3000, Maple Ridge, B.C.  Tenant Act regulations & interpretations. Procedures for making a complaint  with the Rentalsman Office. Discussion  of tenants rights & how to enforce  them.  SMALL CLAIMS COURT PROCEDURES: May 31,  June 1, 2. 7:30-9:30 p.m. at Kitsilano  Secondary School, 2550 West 10th Ave.  Outline; How to use Small Claims Court  both as a defendant & a plaintiff.  How to initiate an action; how to prepare a case; how to conduct a case;  how to collect.  WELFARE RIGHTS: May 17, 7:30-9:30 p.m.  at Vancouver Technical School, 2600  East Broadway.  Instructor: David Mossop.  Outline-: Will deal with all aspects  of Welfare Regulations, basic rates,  eleigibility, special allowances,  extra earnings, appeal procedures &  fraud.  burnaby  SELF-PROTECTION FOR WOMEN  The following program is being co-  sponsored by the Burnaby School Board,  Community Education Department and  the Burnaby Detachment of the RCMP.  Session 5: May 5 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Security of Premises" - Constable  George Romark - Police Community  Relations Office, Burnaby RCMP  Session 6: May 12 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Physical Self-Defense I" - Sgt.  Doug Farenholtz, Sgt. I/C of Zone 4  General Duty, Burnaby RCMP  Session 7: May 19 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Physical Self-Defense II" - Sgt.  Doug Farenholtz  Session 8: May 26 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Open Session" - to be decided by  the women in the program  Burnaby Central Senior Secondary  School, 4939 Canada Way, Burnaby  weekend        concert  FEMINIST WEEKEND  A collective of women is organizing  a feminist weekend to reflect on the  political work and lives of women,  and to discuss the development of a  new politics that is an expression  of our basic values as feminists. A  collection of papers and articles  which can serve as a stimulus to discussing these issues is being compiled and will be sent out in advance  to all who register for the conference. The fee is $30. Contact Eve  Zaremba, 30 Sword Street, Toronto,  Ontario. State if day care is required.  Feminist weekend will be held May 21-  23, 1976, at Cedar Glen Camp, Bolton  Ontario.  festival  Festival Habitat is co-ordinated by '  the City of Vancouver in cooperation  with the Province of B.C. and the  "  Canadian Habitat Secretariat. There  will be theatre events, street activities, music, films, art displays &  more. Phone the Habitat Festival  Office: 682-4691.  WOMANKIND Promotions and Productions  is presenting two Bay Area musicians  in concert. Betty Kaplowitz (Blues &  Rock) and Julie Mark (Jazz, Rock &  Classical Music) will perform Saturday, May 15th at Kits House, 2305  West 7th Ave. Vancouver, 7:30 p.m.  performance Everyone Welcome. 10 p.m.  performance Women Only. Admission $3.  Refreshments Available.  group  A Growth Group for Women sponsored  by the Vancouver Health Department  will be held on Mondays from 1:30 to  3:00 p.m. from May 10th to June 14th,  at West-Main Health Unit, 3998 Main  St, Vancouver. Telephone: 876-6741.  Leaders will be Margaret Sherlock  and Joan Kolson, The format will be  flexible but primarily based on a  assertiveness training for women.  Participation is free.  For referrals and inquiries call  Joan Kolson at 736-2033. education  19  NOTES FROM THE BCTF ANNUAL GENERAL  MEETING  As Dr. Pat McGeer delivered his "the  cupboard is bare" speech in front of  a huge banner proclaiming "We will  never stop paying for cheap education"  another era of confrontation between  a Minister of Education and provincial teachers began. Delegates laughed  when Dr. McGeer solemnly stated "I  can assure you of one thing—we are  in for exciting times in education  in B.C. in the next few years," The  previous day delegates had unanimously  passed a motion condemning the government's 1976 Education budget on the  basis that:  1, It substantially reduces the provincial share of the education budget  and imposes a major tax increase on  local taxpayers,  2. It attacks the educational opportunities of students at a time when high  er standards are being demanded by  the public.  3. It will remove up to 5000 teachers  from the classroom.  Any increase of the pupil teacher  ratio or layoffs of teachers will be  actively opposed by the Federation.  Community support will be sought at  mass rallies. Delegates raised their  membership fees in order to carry out  political action.  The three major recommendations  brought forward by the Status of Women Task Force, calling for integrated  physical education programmes emphasizing life time participation, passed  with strong support. Several resolutions which, attempted to exclude extracurricular activities (school athletic  teams) from integration were defeated.  Naturally any change of emphasis from  the traditionally highly competitive  programmes will require the support  of parents and students who want some  reform. Enough studies have been done  documenting the appalling level of  fitness to inducate a re-evaluation  of school physical education is long  overdue.  Deputy Minister Walter Hardwick indicated that the Department will print  the Women's Studies Course as a Resource Guide—which means that it  will not be provincial curriculum.  If a teacher wants to teach this  course she/he must go through the  local school board for approval. When  questioned about the Provincial Advisory Committee on Sex Discrimination  Dr. Hardwick said that all department  committees were under review.  - Nadine Allen  federal funds  FUNDING FROM LALONDE  Did you know that aside from grants  from the federal Secretary of State  Department Women's Programs, there  are also funds available from the  federal Minister Responsible for the  Status of Women?  The criteria are that a project or  group must be nationally based to  qualify and individual grants are  necessarily small as the total fund  for the country is only $75,000. Operating expenses are not included in  grants. Projects should be designed  to increase public awareness of the  status of women.  Examples of groups which were funded  by Marc Lalonde during IWY are:Ottawa  Rape Crisis Centre for national conference on rape $4,760; Task Force on  Status of Women in Social Work in  Canada, Vancouver $5,000; Vancouver  YWCA to study needs of women aged 40  to 60 in Canada $5,000.  For further details contact Anne  Jamieson , Executive Assistant, Office  of Minister Responsible for Status of  Women, Ottawa, Ontario.   (KR)  FUNDING FOR WOMEN  Provincial Secretary Grace McCarthy  has said that despite the closure of  the Provincial Status of Women office  under her department, women's groups  could still apply to her for money.  By now, most of us should know whether  or not we. have funding from the Provincial Secretary. The Women's Rally  for Action would like to collect information on who got money, how much  and who got turned down.  Presumably, not many women got money  and what they got was probably minimal.  We'd like to know the specific details  so we can lobby for the implementation  of Gene Errington's proposal for core  funding for women's centres.  Please send us information on your  funding situation as it relates to  the office of the Provincial Secretary  as soon as possible. Thanks for your  help. Sisterhood is powerful.  Johanna den Hertog, Women's  Rally for Action, % Vancouver Status  of Women, 2029 West 4th St. Vancouver.  NAME OF GROUP:  TITLE OF PROJECT:  PURPOSE OF PROJECT:  AMOUNT OF GRANT REQUESTED:  AMOUNT RECEIVED:  GRANT TURNED DOWN? WHY:  WHAT DO YOU PLAN TO DO NOW?  NUMBER OF STAFF AFFECTED(LAID OFF,  SALARY REDUCED,ETC.):  WHERE DID FUNDING COME FROM BEFORE?  DID IT COVER OPERATING EXPENSES? SALARIES? MATERIALS ONLY? OTHER:  nthiw  ABORTION LOBBYING  It's too late now to join the Vancouver  General Hospital Association to vote  in the election of new board members  who set abortion policy. VGH has had  a liberal abortion policy but this  year anti-abortionists will be nominating their reps to four of the  open positions. Become a member of  your local hospital association and  find out when the next election occurs.  Membership fees are usually nominal.  Write your local hospital and .express  your views on their abortion policy.  - WCWN  ALZA - T IUD  The progesterone IUD known as ALZA-T  will soon be available in Canada pending approval. It is a small plastic  T which does not cause as much cramping and bleeding as other IUDs placed  in the uterus. The small amount of  progesterone contained in it is the  equivalent of several birth control  pills and has an effect only on the  cervical opening to prevent conception.  Effective for one year, and it is  99% effective, it is without the  massive hormonal effect of the Bill.  -WCWN .-••- -  important  WOMEN'S STUDIES COURSE  The Department of Education is in the  process of printing a limited run of  the Women's Studies Course. To ensure  a large printing and to guarantee  that you get a copy, write the Dept.  of Education, Dave Huggins, Publications, Victoria.  Community support is necessary in  order to get the course approved for  local schools. In'order to ensure  that the Women's Studies Course will  be available to students in your  school write NOW for your copy of the  course and contact your School Board  NOW requesting that it be included  in the curriculum in your school  district. 20  GOING    IT    ALONE  For some four years, Ms. Kathy Horrocks  has been living on welfare. She is a  single-parent mother and has a retarded  daughter Dawn, 4% years old. As such,  she is eligible for $326.00 per month  Social Assistance.  To supplement her income, Kathy has  been doing clerical work, 40 hours  per month at Vancouver Status of  Women, for the past two years. Her  wages, $100 per month, are paid by  the Vancouver Opportunities Program,  an employment training scheme for  disadvantaged workers.  The V0P program will be discontinued  and Kathy will have to find work elsewhere or her already minimal total  income of $426 per month will be reduced by almost one-quarter.  Dawn attends a special school from  8 a.m. to 2 p.m. each day, and she  can't find suitable daycare for the  other period, therefore Kathy's work  schedule is limited. So it is likely  she will have difficulty finding any  part-time work.  Even if she were able to find another  job at more than the minimum wage V0P  pays, the extra earned over $100 per  nonth would be deducted from her welfare cheque, and taxes would be charged... In addition, a more formal job  would require extra expenses on better  clothes. It is quite possible that  Kathy would be worse off with a part-  time job.  With or without the V0P supplemental  earned income, managing a budget is  hard for Kathy. Prior to her preganancy  Kathy worked as a taxidriver, hairdresser, kitchen help in a private  hospital, and housekeeper in a rest  home — jobs she would not like to  return to. Her income at that time  was between $250 and $300 per month.  As a single person that was enough to  live on five years ago. Her income of  $426 per month today does not absorb  inflationary costs and the added expense of raising a child.  What kind of decisions does Kathy  have to make about her budget? "I  have to ask myself if Dawn really  needs a new t-shirt this month or if  it can wait. When next month comes,  it's the same thing. There isn't  enough money. And I seldom have time  with my job and looking after Dawn to  visit thrift shops," she says.  Aside from regular rent, food, transportation, hydro and miscellaneous  expenses, Kathy has about $20 per mo  month for personal expenses and entertainment. She tries to save $40 per  month but lately she has found this  impossible. She had to pay $20 just  for her new I,U.D. for example last  month.  Life is one financial hurdle after  another and living on wTelfare magnifies  other problems. Because she is not  only a single parent, but female, and  living on welfare, and has a retarded  child, Kathy is discriminated against  by landlords.  She and Dawn live in a one-bedroom  suite in a run-down Mt, Pleasant  apartment. Rent is $184,50 per month  and the building is,in Kathy's words,  "filthy". It is also in ill-repair  and has "insects". The amount she pays  for this inadequate housing is equivalent to the going rate for a one-  bedroom apartment in a modern section  o-f  town. But she can't get one. Landlords in fancier buildings won't rent  to her even though she can pay the  same amount of rent. "They don't consider us a family," she says.  A few years ago rent wasn.'t so high  and Kathy's welfare cheque had not  increased in over a year and a half.  Her rent is due to increase in the  spring and has already increased twice  in two years. Kathy could reduce her  rental expenses by living with her  parents or sharing a place with another  person, but the welfare would be reduced accordingly. At age 30, she would  find living with her family difficult.  She is used to her independence and  has encountered a number of communal  living situations in which people took  advantage of her.  "People will look after you," she says,  "but they have their own problems. You  can't depend on them all the time and  I've had some very bad experiences  with roommates and babysitters."  Is there still a welfare stigma? "At  this point in my life, welfare is a  necessity," says Kathy. "I don't feel  degraded by it as others may."  "In this society, welfare is a right  not charity. I am entitled to a decent  standard of living if I can't provide  for myself and child. Most people admire me for being able to keep going  on what little I have."  Kathy admits she does get discouraged  and bitter momentarily but through it  all she remains basically optimistic  and forward-looking. "On welfare there  are alot of things to complain about,"  she notes, "but it is better than it  was a few years ago. The welfare  agency is more genuinely interested  in you personally now and you have  your own social worker today instead  of being shuffled from one to another  without prior notice. There isn't as  much preaching at you anymore either.  I know that once Dawn is older I will  be able to get a full-time job. I  won't be on welfare forever."  What would Kathy be doing if she had  her-choice when VOP runs out? "I wish  I could stay at Vancouver Status of _  Women, it has increased my confidence  so much. When I was out of the job  market because of pregnancy and childcare responsibilities I lost it.  Raising a child is the most difficult  job in the world and I was doing  nothing with my personal life at the  time. I need the social contact and  training I get at VSW."  - Karen Richardson  We would like to thank Kathy for her  work at VSW over the past two years:  for her undaunted patience in typing  address labels each month for KINESIS;  for her illustrations in KINESIS; for  her work on the reference library and  the newsclippings. It was wonderful  to stumble into the office some mornings sleepy-eyed to be greeted with  the aroma of fresh coffee because  Kathy was always there early to open  the office.  Kathy will still be doing illustrations  for KINESIS from time to time so we  won't have lost her altogether. We wish  her all good fortune in the future.  single parent       help wanted  SINGLE PARENT RESOURCE CENTRE  Are you a parent who is divorced,  separated, widowed, or single?  There are several single parent -  clubs in the Lower Mainland. If  you would like to know about one  in your area call Kathy or Elaine  at the Single Parent Resource  Centre, 435-1820.  VANCOUVER CHILEAN ASSOCIATION  The Vancouver Chilean Association  urges people to help bring internation- I  al pressure to bear in order to obtain j  the release of political prisoners in  Chile and Argentina.  Contact Vancouver Chilean Association,  48474 Bentall Centre, Vancouver, B.C.  quote:  r  "...Until they become important to  the economy, not just as a reserve  labour pool but because in large  numbers they possess the major professional and executive skills, women have no means of exercising  political power, which means gaining  control of institutions and having  an effective say in how society will  change in the coming decades. Once  again: liberation means power — or  it hardly means anything at all."  - Susan Sontag, "The Third World  of Women", Partisan Review. no.29  1973" " 21  members'     forum  WHAT IS HAPPENING TO OUR CIVIL RIGHTS?  Behind a barrage of concern for 'peace  and security" both Federal and Provincial governments are moving in with  legislation that may well result in  the abrogation of our civil rights.  Extradition Treaty signed between  Canada and USA — new immigration law  (only until Dec.31,1976??) barring  suspected terrorists at the border —  Bills C83 and C84 under pretext of  dealing with capital punishment slips  in removal of 90 day wire tapping  provisions — Emergency Powers (BC)  which empowers arrest of anyone committing a hostile act, but omits to  define what "hostile" means —  Is there anyone who would be interested to:  a) maintain contact with B.C. Civil  Liberties Association and  b) read Hansard both provincial and/  or federal and report back all relevant material.  If so, contact: Claire Culhane, 3965  Pandora, North Burnaby. Phone 299-  7178.  GROWING ALL THE TIME!  ~Next time somebody tells you the  women's movement is a dying fad tell  them this: In May 1974 when the first  master list of feminist groups in B.C.  was compiled by WCWN in the "Guide to  the Women's Movement" there were some  100 status of women organizations in  the province. Two years later, there  are now some 200 feminist groups in  B.C. Over the past year an average of  two new groups have formed each month.  -Karen Richardson  WHERE WERE YOU ON MARCH 22ND?I  When a woman escapes from her house  at 3 a.m., wearing only the lightest  clothing, and her crying child being  dragged along, she had until recently one place to go. Transition House.  That avenue of escape was close to  being wiped out until today. It is  quite ralistic to assume that events  that occured on the 22nd of March  saved women from having to return  to a wife-beating husband.  Yesterday at the Women's Rally for  Action, in the late morning I looked  around and became so angry I almost  left. Later the attendance increased  but at 11 a.m, there were about 200  women there. At the peak of the rally  there were 500 people there, not all  of them on our side, 99.97% of the  women in B.C. were not at the rally.  When Vander Zalm realizes he is talking to .03% of the women in the province he can afford to be nasty. He  was. If there really are 150,000  people out of work in this province  (there are) just grabbing a figure  out of the air and saying half of  them are women, that means possibly  75,000 women in this province have  a number of reasons for attending  the rally. A single, unemployed, female parent has so many reasons to  be there that I cannot fathom wThy  there were only .o3% of the women in  the province at the rally.  It may sound naive, ignorant, or insensitive, but I think many women who  normally work should have called in  sick long distance, collect from Victoria. I have been out of work for  thirteen months, ostensibly I am one  of the people who could least afford  to be there. I was there. Long ago I  made up my mind that no job was worth  the sacrifice of my principles, I  would never have let anything stand  in my way of attending that rally.  The women who are labourers in a  typing pool have as much reason to  stand up and fight as the woman who  can't get housing for herself and her  child. The injustices are so blatant  — how can any woman say "I don't  care"?  I am well aware that the rally was  in response to a large number of  vicious assaults on the women's movement during the last few weeks. I  know that the amount of work accomplished in the amount of time allowed  is impressive. I am elated at the way  a few dedicated fighters created a  beautiful unification of the women  with a consciousness. Perhaps if we  had more time we could have reached  more women. Would they have come? I  walked into a shop for coffee and  ended up talking to two women who  were running it. They asked me ...  WHAT KIND OF ACTION DO THEY WANT? I  took the time to try to sum it up  briefly. Through my mind was running  the question "Where the hell have  these women been?" How can anyone  exist in our society without knowing  the conditions of women, of native  people, of people—both men and women—in prison? If you see a forest  fire can you not know the trees are  burning?  I think it was a good rally. I think  it gave .the women involved the confidence that in the future it's "bigger and better." It gave a chance to  release a lot of pent up frustration.  It was a healthy growing response to  a quasi-fascist regime. From here I  hope we can just go on, getting louder and more demanding until we get  the things we need to make us equal.  Maybe we'll win. I sure hope so.  - Gordon Marx  The Vancouver Community Legal Assistance Society is issuing a monthly  bulletin of legal information and  has given us permission to reprint  the bulletins in KINESIS.  DEBT PROBLEMS  Are Wives Responsible For The Debts  Of Their Husbands?  . A wife -±s not n  debt of her husband  signed any form of a  money. If she does i  she may be sued for  if the husband does  that you are legally  pay, seek legal advi  sponsible for any  unless she has co-  promise to pay  o-sign for a loan  the whole of it  not pay. To ensure  responsible to  ce on the matter.  Can Debt Collectors Harass Me?  . All debt collectors in B.Co are  required to be licensed under the  Debt Collection Act which prohibits  them from engaging in what are called  "unreasonable collection practices."  For example, debt collectors cannot  communicate with you or your family  or your employer in such a manner or  with such frequency that alarm, dis-  ega  hints  tress, or humiliation are likely to  result. There are other unreasonable  collection practices, and if you  think some of them have been used  against you, you should contact the  Director of Debt Collection, Dept.  of Attorney-General, Victoria. In  addition, you may be able to sue the  debt collector in Small Claims Court  and if you succeed you will be awarded damages of at least $100.00.  What Can Be Done About Overwhelming  Debt?  . If you have debt problems contact  the Debtor Assistance Division of the  Dept. of Consumer Services which provides the following services free o#  charge:  1) Arranging repayment schemes that  you can afford and that creditors  will accept;  2) Helping you arrange a budget;  3) Advising if necessary on bankruptcy procedure, and  4) Mediating disputes between you and  your creditors.  ... Taking care of your debts may help  resolve other problems. In Vancouver  the Debtor Assistance Division is  located at 535 Thurlow Street, phone  689-8721.  inhere Can I Get Legal Advice?  1) The Law Students of U.BoC. run 12  free Legal Advice Clinics throughout  Vancouver — phone 872-0271 to find  the one closest to you.  2) The following Legal Information  Pamphlets are available at 50c each  plus postage from the Vancouver  People's Law School, 610 - 207 West  Hastings St. Vancouver, phone 681-  7532. They will bill you when they  send the pamphlets.  Women and the Law, Matrimonial Law &  Divorce, Civil Liberties, Mental  Patients and the Law, Labour Law,  Small Claims Court Procedure, Immigration Procedure, Family Law, Wills  & Estates, Criminal Procedure. 22  media action  Talking to our  Gold Medal Banker  about home  furnishings meant  alot to us* T  'U  "We really needed furniture  for our new home. But we didn't  want to borrow more money  than we could reasonably afford.  So we talked to our Bank of  Montreal Gold Medal Banker.  And we're happy  we did.  "First, she.ga'  financial advice.  This helped us plai  a home budget, so  could start saving towards c  new furniture.  "Soon after, our Gold  Medal Banker arranged an  economical home furnishing:  loan for us.  "We combined our loan  with our savings. And were  able to buy the living room i  kitchen sets we wanted, without   »  upsetting our budget."  There are a lot of good  Montreal Gold Medal  Banker. A Firstbank "  home furnishings loan is  just one of them.  So come in today. And  talk to your Gold Medal  Banker about our Gold  Medal Banking Service.  Good things will  happen for you, too.  Good things happen with a  Gold Medal Banker. Let's talk.  ^    The Firs, Canada Bank    -...,-, mb Bank of Montreal  Servinu British Columbia and Yukon since 1887.  A VSW member sent KINESIS the ad shovm  above. She was pleased to see the Bank  Manager referred to as "SHE" and saw  it as "a healthy sign for the Women's  Movement." We are pleased too. Way to  go Bank of Montreal!  Now for a sobering stastic: The labour  force in the banking industry is 70%  female, but only 1.2% of the managers  are women.  SEXIST SPORTSCASTERS  On April 1, CBC sportscaster George  Young said that the BCTF decision  to integrate girls and boys sports  was like an April Fool's joke. Some  months ago Jim Kerney, another sports-  caster suggested that Canada should  lie down and enjoy it like a rape  victim even if the Olympics cost  Canada so much. We wrote to CBC to  protest this coverage and here's the  answer we got backI  "Dear Ms. Richardson:  With regard to your letters dated  April 1st and 2nd concerning certain .  statements made by "Good Morning Radio"  sportscaster, I can truthfully say  that I appreciated the letters.  "Good Morning Radio" has treated  women's issues objectively, fairly  and even sympathetically in the past  and will continue to do so in the  future. I realize that this is not the  case in the coverage allotted to  sports and I am doing my utmost to  rectify that situation. I am dealing  with a solidly entrenched, mini-empire  over which I have, at best, only tenuous control. I had already spoken to  the sportscaster concerned before  your comments arrived and hopefully  this kind of puerile editorializing  will,disappear from this program.  I too 'believe that sportscasters'  consciousness should be raised, but  it would take a crowbar, preferably  applied to the base of their craniums.  Your organization could be more helpful, if similar situations arise in  the future, by sending copies of your  letters to both George Young c/o"Radio  Noon" office and to Keith Barry, Radio  Program Director.  Yours Sincerely,  Curtis Albertson  Producer "Good Morning Radio."  subscribe!  PHONE   (home)  (work)  OCCUPATION   VSW MEMBERSHIP  (INCLUDES KINESIS SUBSCRIPTION)  KINESIS SUBSCRIPTION ONLY ($5/year)   INSTITUTIONAL SUBSCRIPTION ($10/year)  UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE  NEW MEMBER  RENEWAL  NEW SUBSCRIPTION  VSW Membership is by donation and includes subscription to KINESIS. We  would like to remind members that it  costs approximately $5 to produce and  send 12 issues of KINESIS and any  donation above that amount to help  with VSW activities is always appreciated.  Members unable to contribute financially will receive KINESIS on a complimentary basis.  KINESIS is published monthly be the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization, and to provide  information for interested individuals, groups, and members of the  government and media in order to  promote understanding about the  changing role of women in societyc  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W.  WRITE A LETTER!  Women should write letters concerning  the following issues. Letters do make  a difference!  SEXIST SPORTSCASTING ON CBC RADIO  See Media Action this page.  PREGNANT STEWS LOSE  Joan Wallace, B.C. member of the  federal Advisory Council on the Status  of Women advises you to urge the Canadian government to take the pregnant  flight attendants of PWA case to a  higher court. Three pregnant stewardesses were laid off last month in their  fourth month of pregnancy for "safety  reasons". The judge ruled PWA could  not defend the dismissals for this  reason but had authority to do so under  the union contract. How can a union  contract over-rule the Canadian Labour  Code? Write to Ron Basford, Minister  of Justice, House of Commons, Ottawa.  Send copy to Jean James, CALFA, 1665  West Broadway, Vancouver.  BATTERED WIVES BILL  Now that Transition Houses will be  funded after all(on a fee for service  basis), maybe we should be looking at  ways that the battered wives syndrome  can be tackled. In England a year ago  the Battered Wives Right to Possession  of the Matrimonial Home Bill was given  first and second reading. There are  some difficulties with the bill which  are still be worked out. Basically  it says that a woman who has heen  beaten by her husband should be given  complete ownership of the home if she  applies for it. If you think this is  a good idea, write to your MLA asking  him/her to sponsor a private member's  bill on the subject"  VANDER ZALM ON VOLUNTEERISM  Human Resources Minister Bill Vander  Zalm recently said he hoped that women's transition houses would not  maintain large paid staff, but would  rely more on volunteer help.  We advised that when women's work is  unpaid their economic dependency on  men and the (welfare) system is reinforced. He replied that he could  understand feminist reservations on  the matter but nevertheless found  the concept of volunteerism "intriguing."  How coy of him. Consciousness-raising  letters should be sent to him at the  Parliament Buildings, Victoria, B.C.  *    '   - Karen Richardson  PUBLICATION DATE:  The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month (e.g/ Nov. 1 for Dec.  issue).  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to  the editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address.  Pseudonyms will be  used where requested. Where necessary, the newsletter committee  "will edit for brevity, clarity, and  taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone:  736-3746  THIS ISSUED  WORKERS: Miriam Gropper, Darlene Cornet, Jo Lazenby.  CONTIBUTORS: Judy Bourne, Alison  Ingles, Karen Richardson, Gordon Marx,  Heather Kellerhals, Claire Culhane,  Diana Bissell, Connie Smith Antoinette,  Nadine Allen, Dorothy Holme, Lee  Masters, J. Annis Freeman, Leslie  McDonald, Jo Lazenby.  £fclTO.R'    -Jo   i-fltCtr/lR} Letters  23  KINESIS:  Enclosed herewith is my cheque for $5  to cover membership and mailing costs  for the next year.  May I take this opportunity to tell  you how much I enjoy KINESIS. It  provides much moral support and inspiration!  Yours Sincerely,  S.J. Matheson  North Vancouver  KINESIS:  I have just received my copy and would  like to congratulate you on the excellent coverage of our March 22nd victory  day rally.  However, I do feel I must make one  comment — and that is to deplore the  fact that in all the. twenty pages  coverage, you could spare only 9  lines to the Native Women's contribution to that day.  Considering the fact that they are in  the forefront in this province in the  struggle to preserve not only the land  but the environment — any success that  may be scored will surely accrue to  their white sisters as well.  Perhaps they could be invited to contribute a special article to the next  issue.  Sincerely,  Claire Culhane  P.S. Three lines accorded to the needs  and conditions of women in prison also  fell far short of the existing urgencies in that area too, I feel should  be added.  ED: KINESIS would very much like to  print an article by a Native woman.  If anyone would be willing to write  such an article or knows of someone  who would, please contact KINESIS.  KINESIS:  I would like to subscribe to your  paper. I have been bumming copies  from various friends for the past  year or so and am feeling quite  guilty about not contributing financially. Enclosed is $10 for my sub-,  scription and my year of free reading.  Sue Moore  KINESIS:  I want to take the opportunity to  compliment the organizers of the  Women's Rally for Action on a job  extremely well donee As a member of  the Dewdney lobbying team I also want  to thank Gail, Johanna and Miriam for  helping us to be so well prepared. All  the games and manoeuvres they warned  us against were tried, but we felt s  strong, unified, capable and one" We  felt everytime we spoke the women  outside were backing us up and when  I gave our report I felt everyone was  with me all the way.  I'm happy and proud that I was part  of this rally and would not have  missed it for anything. This is only  the beginning — let's keep it up  and keep growing stronger.  Johanna te Boekhorst  Maple Ridgeyt://*\.  KINESIS:  As a male househusband I read with  interest your article by Marlene  Schneider Wages for Work" which appeared in your last edition. I have been  suffering all the ailments of housewives (except one of course), plus  all the stigma attached to being a  man who doesn't drive a front-end  loader or occupy an office chair in  some rapidly expanding furniture factory, with the rapidly expanding waistline that goes with it.  I have in hand a copy of a pamphlet  on a recent workshop held at Simon  Fraser University which dealt with  many of the areas Marlene dealt with  so effectively in her article. On the  back page of the brochure entitled  "Occupation:Housewife!" a place is  provided for you to mark your choice  of discussion groups, such as "Who  is a Housewife?", "The Value of Housework", and the one that affects us  men in particular,"The Effects on  Self-Esteem of Being a Housewife."  Some two and one half years ago I  finished a job at a well-known rest- .  aurant as a band leader and singer,  and took over most of the household  chores wjile my wife worked, until I  could get a new job in my field. As  luck would have it, it has not been  forthcoming. Now, my wife makes twice  as much money (after several promotions) as I could possibly do if I  started back to work tomorrow. In the  meantime, I have learned to enjoy  being a homemaker or househusband!  However, like many homemakers, I lack  the "self-esteem" or "self-worth"  referred to previously.  I have one child, a teenaged boy, who  by all reports, is doing beautifully,  principally I think because he's had  his father home much more than the  average family. Yet because of the  lack of a regular pay cheque and all  the other things Marlene refers to in  her article, I suffer from lack of  esteem, according to the so-called  professional people I have consulted.  They included all the routine problems  plaguing the modern housewife—loneliness, use of tranquilizers, alcohol  and so on. Having learned what housewives have been going through for  years, I am now anxious to participate  in any way with your organization and  perhaps assist in moulding a powerful group composed of both housewives  and househusbands. Having been a man,  I have some ideas (not about anyone  but my wife), but about how to handle  the men in power who have held us  homemakers back for much too long. I  am currently writing an article which  I hope will inspire women and men  across the country to get together  and provide the effective lobbying  necessary to get the job done. Beleive  me, I'm doing my "homework" on it  now.  Sincerely,  Rick Conway  P.S. Perhaps you may already have such  a lobby group now. If so, I would be  very interested to hear about it or  any other ideas you may have on contacting or forming such a group.  KINESIS:  RE: I.C.B.C.  I wonder how many women are having  problems with I.C.B.C. AND HAVE NO  WAY OF FINDING ANY ANSWERS TO THESE  PROBLEMS?  On Feb. 5th, 1976, I was rear-ended  by a male driver while making a  legitimate stop before proceeding  onto a busy street.  I made my police  report to a male policeman, .and I  drew a male I.C.B.C. adjuster, so  guess where I am getting with my  settlement—nowhere! So here are some  some of the things I have learned:  1. Never move your car to let traffic  out. Let it pile up, someone will  soon phone for a policeman so they  can get moving again.  2. If the other driver is beligerent,  ask someone to phone for the police.  3. Try to get a witness, no matter  who is at fault, this will prevent  anyone from telling lies.  4. Never admit to the I.C.B.C. that  you haven't got a witness. One may  show up later on that may be helpful.  5. Make no statements at the scene  of the accident.  If the other driver  involved refuses to produce his or her  drivers licence, get the car licence no.  and make and colour of the car, and  they will be charged with hit and run.  6. If a policeman' attends the scene  of the accident you will come out  much better with I.C.B.C. Listen to  what the other person is  saying to  the officer, as this is written information that will not be available  to you later.  7. The police have to attend if you  are hurt and/or if the other driver  is belligerent.  8. The other driver has to file a  police report within 48 hours if the  damage is over $200.00, and what  damage isn't these days. To find out  if this report has been filed, phone Cpl.  Walsh at 665-2296 or 665-2298 and  between 8:30 and 9:00 a.m. is the best  time to contact him. You will have no  access to this report, but if it  isn't filed, the other driver can  say they never heard of you.  9. Be prepared to be lied to, ganged  up on, and generally horsed around  by the I.C.B.C. At no time show any  fear of taking them to the small  debts court. The small debts court  will handle cases up to $1000. If  you need help as to how to do this,  phone the Justice Development Board  at 684-9911, and ask for their packet  called "Small Claims Procedure". This  board has actually been disbanded  under the new government, however,  they responded to my request as they  had a few packets left.  10. I.C.B.C. works on the theory that  everyone should pay their own deductible. If you are not at fault,.why  should you? Many women, such as myself, do not carry collision. This  is a No No as far as I.C.B.C. is  concerned.  (CONTINUED TOP OF PAGE 24). 24  (CONTINUED FROM PAGE 23).  I would like to suggest that we strike  a committee to assist women in dealing with I.C.B.C. I think we are getting the same prejudiced treatment  that We usually receive from men when  they are in the driver's seat and we  are not properly represented. Let's  compile some data on claims that have  been unfairly handled and compile  some stastics as to how women's cases  claims are handled. I am willing to  help. My phone number is 261-6658  and I am usually available in the  evenings.  Sincerely,  Sharon Simpson  ELECTIONS  3n June 15th the ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING of VSW will be held at 7:30 p.m.  in the Boardroom of the Vancouver YWCA.  The Annual Report of the organization  will be presented and the election of  the 1976-77 Board of Directors will  take place.  Positions open for election on the  Board of Directors of VSW are:  PRESIDENT, VICE-PRESIDENT, SECRETARY,  TREASURER, and six MEMBERS AT LARGE.  In the case of PRESIDENT and VICE-  PRESIDENT, nominees must have served  at least one term on the Board of  Directors.  Nominations should be submitted to  Judy Bourne, Nominations, VSW Office,  2029 West 4th Ave. Vancouver by the  end of May. Nominations should include  a biography and agreement to stand  should be obtained from the nominee*  Members are encouraged to nominate  themselves. If you have time and  energy and interest to devote to the  Board of Directors, VSW needs you!  WRA       LOBBY REPORTS (continued)  JIM HEWITT, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA,  BOUNDARY-SIMILKAMEEN  Lobby team focused on Day Care & the  Women's CentreD  Women's Centre: didn't know what a  women's centre was "is it a social  club or something?" After discussion  of services provided said could see  some merit but the Women's Centre was  discrimination in itselft but "OK as  long as it's not abused."  Day Care: wondered how many day care  centres are "used by women with $73,000  homes and skidoos?" "Are you relieving  the mother of her duty to raise children?" Supports funding "providing that  it serves the need and the need isn't  abusedc" Said he would support a bill  for greater allocation of funds for  Day Care.  Followup Contact:Chris Salaris, 48  Forbes Stc Penticton. 492-7614.  LEN BAWTREE, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA, SHUSWAP  Had not read brief. Very uniformed.  Childcare:supports idea for single  parent families.  Education:does not support re-instatement of Cmmttee on Sex Discrimination.  Doesn't feel we truly represent the  majority thinking on thisc "Women in  other countries would like to be in  position of North American women."  Women's Centre Core Funding: unaware  any centres in his riding. Doesn't  agree should be funded provineially.■  Prefers them to be coordinated with  other groups.  Health care:supports extension of  home care programs0  Meeting scheduled for Aprilc  Followup Contact: Pat Maika, Box 1734  Salmon Arm, 832-6563.  GARDE GARDOM, ATTRONEY GENERAL, SOCIAL  CREDIT MLA VANCOUVER POINT GREY  Also present—Executive Assistant &  David Vickers, Deputy Attorney General.  Berger Commission on Family Law Reform:  not one of his priorities. "Constant  re-assessing is necessary."No money."  Rape Relief: Vickers said core funding available through Dept. of Health  & Attroney General's office. Gardom  would support federal govt, move to  change rape victim being questioned  about her past sexual life.  Hedged about followup meeting.  Impressions:generally indifferent,  sometimes hostile. Had not read brie#  & showed some ignorance of issues.  Gave a scant 20 min. of his time.  Followup Contact: Edith Thomas, 733-  6080 (H)  733-7812 (W).  CYRIL SHELFORD, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA  SKEENA  Women's Centres:govt, has a lot of  problems & what programs would we like  to see cut in order to fund Women's  Centres? Would take up in caucus .  Berger Commission:not familiar with.  Pensions for Housewives: believes in  pensions & they should be portable  from job to job.  Education:not too sure about women's  studies as should be for "people."  Childcare:denies provincial responsibility o Funding should be on local  level."Do you want children's programs  or smelters?"Native Land Claims:step  in right direction. But you have to  pare down programs to settle claims.  Rape Relief: no knowledge. No comments  Followup Contact: Lil Farkvam, 4913  Gair St. Terrace. 635-7435.  NORMAN LEVI, NDP MLA VANCOUVER BURRARD  Knowledgeable, straigthforward. «  Core funding for centres & transition houses:should be more, especially  in North but women must articulate  services these provide., Concerned  about welfare & low income women.  Daycare:said never received proposal  on 24 hr. daycare.  Housing:is pushing a private member's  bill in regard to discrimination.  Pensions for Housewives:will push  private member's bill.  Family Law: is working on a complete  administrative coverage of "community  property laws."  Human Rights and Labour Legislation:  public education is crucial prerequisite. Supports Berger Commission.  Followup Contact: Penny Fuller, 2686  West 5th, Vancouver. 733-3397.  CALENDAR OF EVWIS  MAY 5  WOMAN ALIVE Cable 10 TV  MAY 13 ORIENTATION MEETING 7:30 p.m.  Come and find out about VSWC  MAY 27  CR TASK FORCE MEETING  MAY 10  9:30 p.m.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING WORK  MAY 19  WOMAN ALIVE 9:30 P.M.  (See p. 16).  SHOP BEGINS. 8 - 10 p.m. .  MAY 26  WOMAN ALIVE 9:30 p.m.  MAY 27  ORIENTATION MEETING  MAY 12  WOMAN ALIVE 9:30 p.m.  7:30 p.m.