 VMJIDM  2 At the BCTF AGM this  year, the pro-choice forces  won a powerful victory  3 VSW breezed through at  City Hall and came away  with a grant for advocacy  work  4 Is there reasonable cause  for asking B.C. Human  Rights Branch Director  Landucci to get packing?  6 Meet Marcia Braundy:  she's the first fully qualified  woman carpenter in this  province  10   Nicaraguan women:  after the revolution, the  struggle continues  lZ The issue was not  Doris Anderson's leadership  but our right to  representation.  14 The BCFW Prison subcommittee lays out its  perspectives, philosophy,  programme  16 You answer the Kinesis  quiz and want more short  news pieces and greater  cultural coverage  18 BCFW women request  some changes in Kinesis  editorial policies  Cover photo by Shannon Lee Mannion  SUBSCRIBE TO K/M&SZT  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y1J8  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $10  By donation  $20  $50  Payment Enclosed _  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding — we need member support!  JUNE 1981  /  KIMESiJ  news about women that's not in the dailies Kinesis June 1981  REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS  Right to choose triumphant at BCTF annual general meeting  A triumph for women's reproductive rights.  That's one way to describe the recent  annual general meeting of the British Columbia Teachers' Federation,.the BCTF.  Despite strenuous efforts to have the recommendations deleted from the agenda, two  pro-choice motions not only managed to get  to the floor but were passed by majorities  of sixty to seventy per cent.  Here's what they were:  • that the BCTF support the right of females, regardless of age, marital status, «  income or geographic location to:  a) have access to a full range of information, counselling and medical services  with regard to their health and well-  being  b) decide whether or when to have  children  • that the Canadian Teachers' Federation  should seek to have abortion removed from  the Criminal Code  "It was a big victory to get these recommendations on the agenda," BCTF Status of  Women committee member Jane Turner told  Kinesis.  "A lot of teachers shy away from  social issues on the grounds that they are  not, narrowly-defined, 'teacher issues'."  Co-ordinator for the BCTF Status of Women  committee, Peggi Hall, explained, "the  first motion will allow teachers to give  students access to all  the information.  We're not pushing abortion. We're saying  that -the student should know what all her  options are, so that she can make an  informed decision.  "With these recommendations part of BCTF  policy, teachers are no longer on their  own when they do this. They now have  29,000 union members behind them."  As for the second motion, "it's no longer  simply a position taken by the B.C. Status  of Women committee. It's up to the federation at a national level to take pro-  choice action."  Hall also pointed out that the adoption  of these resolutions will enable the BCTF  to work for choice alongside such groups  Jo Nesbitl/Spare Rib  as the YWCA. And they will help to pressure Education minister Brian Smith into  introducing adequate family life education  in B.C.  For more than ten years, the BCTF has had  policy on sex education. In 1969, it resolved that "the BCTF believes that family  life education and sex education should be  an integral part of the school curriculum."  Again, in 1979, it declared that "the  minister of education should, in conjunction with the BCTF, develop and implement  family life and sex education at all levels  of the public school system."  "What we want and what we don't have,"  Jane Turner said, "is a comprehensive  curriculum from kindergarten to grade 12."  No more than a squeak from Smith so far.  He has, however, just introduced compulsory consumer education courses at the  high school level.  "Is this an indication  of where his priorities lie?" Peggi Hall  queried.  The recent pro-choice policy has of course  run into right wing opposition. A few  teachers have threatened to withdraw their  union membership. And anti-choicers can  always attempt to reverse the BCTF policy  at future annual meetings. It's also  important to let the BCTF know you applaud  their pro-choice stand. It's also important to tell the minister, Brian Smith,  to get a family life curriculum on the  road.  Heartened by these successes, the BCTF  Status of Women committee is taking further  feminist issues to the union membership.  In the next few weeks, the BCTF will vote  on the proposal that "the Canadian Teachers  Federation work towards the inclusion of  women's equal rights before the law in the  new federal constitution, including the  right to freedom of choice in birth  planning."  The committee is also developing its  sexual harassment policy and will continue  to press Smith to make Women's Studies into an elective, which grade 11 and 12  students can take for credit.  For more information, and for letters of  support, contact Peggi Hall at the BCTF at  #105-2235 Burrard Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 3H9. 9  Sign up now for Surrey  Memorial AGM  Once again this year the Surrey Delta  Association for the Right to Choose (ARC)  is beginning to conduct a membership  drive for the Surrey Memorial Hospital  Board's annual general meeting in September.  The purpose of the drive is to gain members  to enable the election of those Hospital  Board candidates who take a total interest  in the running of the hospital. ARC is  in the process of finding candidates to  meet these requirements.  ARC sees the Surrey hospital board elections being abused by a minority group in  the community those wishing to deny a total  health care program to the women of our  community.  This group wishes to inflict their beliefs  on others who may not agree with them. As  a result the annual general meetings become  a one-issue confrontation with many other  important hospital issues being ignored..  For more information please contact Sandra  Letts 584-8041. £  Not enough Choice in the  Maritimes  While our American sisters must fight the  well-organized moral majority for the right  to choice on abortion, the anti-choice  movement in Canada is rapidly growing.  According to the National Action Committee  on the status of women, it is currently  almost impossible to get an abortion in  Newfoundland: Since 1980 the number of  doctors performing terminations in that  province has been reduced from three to  one. Also, approved applications for  abortions have been cut by about 75 per  cent so that only three or four applications are approved weekly.  With a six to seven week waiting list and  a regulation banning abortions after the  twelfth week of pregnancy, for many women  abortion is no longer an option. The  provincial medicare program has also been  changed to prevent women from receiving  funds to travel to the mainland.  In Halifax and Dartmouth, anti-choice  mayors recently declared Valentine's Day a  'pro-life' day. And in Toronto, while  Cardinal Carter has demanded that priests  end public distribution of. anti-choice,  anti-abortion literature of a local pressure group, Campaign Life, he is conducting  his own private campaign.* The cardinal  has stated that he will, "constantly strive  to seek legislation to eliminate legal  abortion via the Criminal Code or any  other item." Q  YWCA ratifies pro-choice  positions at bi-annual conference  One of the most controversial issues to  surface at the recent YWCA conference in  Victoria was women's reproductive rights.  More than 300 Canadian and 8 international  delegates met at the University of Victoria to discuss and pass policy and recommendations dealing with political'action and  change.  While the YWCA has supported a woman's  right to self-determination regarding  abortion since 1971, it was an issue that  was not previously been brought before a  convention. The issue is a very controversial one since many YW/YM associations in  small Roman Catholic communities found the  their funding and livelihood have been  threatened by a pro-choice stand.  However, the Y at both the national and  local levels have not given in to pressure  and voted 74 per cent in favor of choice .  on and decriminalization of abortion.  Delegates also voted to work actively to  ensure that, divorce legislation would remain under the federal jurisdiction.  Violence against women in all its insidious  forms was condemned. A strong statement on  social action and the status of women was  passed, also a four year national plan to  ensure that the YWCA of Canada move forward  in a concrete and constructive way.  Women's Building AGM calls  for women's groups to  demonstrate commitment  On May 31 1981 the Women's Building Committee held its annual general meeting at the  boardroom in the YWCA.  Policy was passed on a variety of topics  dealing with funding, acquiring a building,  and use of actual space within the Women's  Building.  The meeting considered that now was the  time for women and women's groups to demonstrate their committment to acheiving the  vision of a Women's Building. Women and  women's groups who want to use such a space  are asked to select a representative to  'work on the Women's Building Planning  Committee. Members Of the outgoing committee expressed enthusiasm for the positive  experience they had had in working on a  common vision.  Women also considered that a discussion  regarding feasibility of a Women's Building was now timely.  A meeting has.been called for June 18 at  7 p.m. at Vancouver Status of Womens new  space at 400a West 5th Ave. at Yukon.  On behalf of VSW, Sylvia Spring will  make a presentation to the "Apple-  bert Commission" — the Federal Cultural Policy Review Committee — on  June 18, noon, at the Hyatt Regency,  655 Burrard. Please come and give her  moral and sisterly support.    Q Kinesis June 1981  VSW  We had a good time at Open House, and we won at City Hall!  "Vancouver Status of Women does an awful  lot of good for women who have their backs  to the wall and have no place else to go."  So said council member Don Bellamy June 2  as our grant for one advocacy worker was  being discussed.  We agree with Bellamy. So did the majority  of city council, which granted us $22,000.  Councillors George Puil and Warnett Kennedy cast the only two opposing votes.  We're jubilant.  "I'm certainly going to vote for the Status of Women grant," said councillor Helen Boyce.  "I don't always agree with what VSW does  but we're giving a grant for a specific  service," pointed out Aid. Marguerite Ford.  As in previous years, VSW and DERA — the  Downtown Eastside Residents Association —  were attacked as being 'too political*.  This year, Red Door Rental Aid was added  to that list by Aid. Warnett Kennedy.  But as Aid. Bruce Eriksen pointed out, "if  these groups don't raise social issues  Vancouver Status  of Women's  Annual General  Meeting  takes place  JUNE 24  at 517 East Broadway  7:30 p.m.  All members and friends  are welcome  politically, they might as well go out of  business."  Referring to VSW, Warnett Kennedy complained, "I've never had a good experience with  them." Chuckles in the council chambers.  If Kennedy thinks that, we must be doing  something right. Right?  The other opposing vote was Puil's, who did  not bother to speak. He had, however, had  his say at committee level where he had  announced he was going to vote against us  because he didn't see any community groups  doing "advocacy work with men."  "The whole world does advocacy for men,"  Aid. Harry Rankin had retorted.  We were very pleased to see that the other  'too political' groups — DERA and Red  Door — got their grants, too.  Now, on to the open house. It was great.  On to the AGM. It will be a good one. Ruth  Busch, legal consultant to the Women's Research Centre will discuss why there is  now only slight protection for battered  women, and outline feminist recommendations  for substantial changes. See you there I  Mother's Day: we want our work recognized  The second annual Mother's Day celebrations at Britannia on May 9 were a positive declaration of support between women  of diverse cultural groups. Above, (L) Peggy Lenti emcees. Harminder Sanghera (R) of Mahila, speaks to the gathering.  Women protest Eaton's advertising sexism  all pics Darlyn Jewell  By Julie Wheelwright  "LadiesI Interested in a little bondage,  humiliation and degradation? This afternoon, go shopping at Eaton's!"  That was the message a couple of displays  in Eaton's large downtown store appeared  to be giving female shoppers. A belt display had three belts in a strangulation  motif around the white female mannequin's  neck, waist and feet. Another display in  the sports department showed a doctor standing between the legs of a female dummy  and directing an electric drill into her  stomach.  Krys Constabaris, who frequently shops at  Eaton's, said she noticed the belt display  first and was enraged. "I was in the store  one"Tuesday and I noticed a display that  I thought looked like bondage."  Constabaris then phoned Eaton's general  merchandise manager, Bill McCourt, to complain about the implied bondage in the display. "McCourt said that it was just another way of displaying the belts, and that  jewellery is displayed in the same way."  McCourt added that jewellery displays depicted mannequins with necklaces and bracelets. Constabaris pointed out to him that  women do not wear belts around their feet  and necks.  She then phoned Vancouver Status of Women  and Rape Relief, to see if they had received any other complaints about the display.  When VSW members talked with Constabaris  she found out about the medical display  and learned that other women had made complaints about Eaton's.  "I was really angry with Bill McCourt,"  she said. With the backing of the B.C. Federation of Women, Constabaris and two other  women organized a protest outside Eaton's  four days later. "But Eaton's headed us  off; they had changed the display slightly."  Constabaris said she and other women were  going to encourage shoppers to boycott the  store until the offending displays had  come down. Protestors also planned to  tear up their charge cards.  The three protestors met with McCourt to  explain why they felt the displays were  offensive and should be removed. McCourt  later told Kinesis that he and the woman  who had- arranged the medical display were  "shocked and surprised" by the protests.  What I think we've concluded," McCourt  went on, "is that there's a perspective  that is legitimate and we have to respect  that." McCourt added that since the protest he has brought the Eaton's display,  staff together and told them to be "damn  careful" not to offend women in the future.  But Krys Constabaris said she doesn't feel  that Eaton's really agreed to the protestors' demands. The Saturday of the protest  way the day the medical display was scheduled to have come down, anyway, she said.  "McCourt said that if the press phoned him  he'd apologize publicly. But as far as I  know he hasn't."  What was the argument she and the other  protestors used to convince McCourt that  the display should come down?  They asked him if it would have been a  suitable display if the female patient had  been male and the doctor, female. McCourt  replied, "No, that would have been castration ."  The protestors also demanded that the belt  display come down. They went to the displayJ  stood looking at it, and •<  said Constabaris.  crowd gathered,  "People asked us what we were doing there.  We weren't blocking the elevators or handing out pamphlets as Nicole Parton said  in her article (in the Vancouver Sun)."  She told Kinesis that McCourt then came  down and removed the belts himself. The  rest of the medical display came down on  Monday morning when the display crews returned to work.  But Constabaris adds that while McCourt  was approachable about the issue, Eaton's  displays are an ongoing problem. "Everyone  I talked to about this had some complaint  about Eaton's ads; they've been offensive  over and over again."  The day before the protest, she explained,  she carried out a survey to see if people  really thought the displays were offensive.  She printed up a petition and circulated  it at Langara campus with pictures of  the display. Within an hour and a half  about 100 people had signed the petition.  "If something else comes up again at Eaton's, I'll be there," she concluded.  0_ Kinesis June 1981  HUMAN RIGHTS  We take an inside look at Landucci's Human Rights Branch  While community concern over events at the  B.C. Human Rights Branch grows,  NDP MLA  Emery Barnes has called for the resignation of its director Nola Landucci.   Time for  a closer look, we decided.  By Mary Sims  In January 1981, a former Human Rights  Officer (HRO), Val Embree resigned and  made public her concerns regarding the  Alcan vs. Barbara Caldwell and Francie  McLellan settlement (see Kinesis, March  '81).  According to Embree, she and fellow officers felt these settlements were inadequate and did not deal with the issue at  hand — equal pay for "similar or substantially similar work." The settlement was  proposed and agreed upon by the branch  director before the Board of Inquiry convened its hearing; and over the objections  of the officer involved in the case investigation.  Embree also voiced her opinions regarding  the direction that the branch was taking  on human rights issues; the branch was not  providing adequate leadership and branch  director Nola Landucci lacked sufficient  instruction for the job. All of these  factors contributed to "low morale among  the staff," Embree said.  Along with the general public, I accepted  the explanations from the director that  Embree's complaints of low morale, and  criticisms of the branch were not shared  by the other HROs. In January 1981, I  started working at the Human Rights Branch  as an auxiliary HRO. During my first few  weeks of work, I began to realize that the  director's explanations of Embree's criticisms were a false impression.  Low morale  did indeed exist and continues to exist  this day.  My initial enthusiasm towards the branch  and the work I would be doing was reduced  to dreading and wondering what new policies  and administrative procedures would be  brought forth by the director to further  handicap enforcement of the Human Rights  Code.  After three months in the auxiliary position, I declined an offer to continue with  my position in the branch. In my memo  to the director informing her of my decision, I outlined the reasons for my  declining the job. One reason was that  when I was informed (along with all other  { 'auxiliary personnel) on February 19 by  i the Director that budget money was not  available to continue our services beyond  March 31, I was able to come up with another job  i Secondly, and most importantly, I informed  ; the director that I had serious reserva-  ; tions about the direction in which the  4 branch, under her leadership, had taken.  ; I have decided to make my criticisms  | public because as a double minority, I  !\ am concerned about Landucci's willingness  ;; to let the HRB become an administrative,  t bureaucratic agency that will not set  ) policies based on human rights principles.  }    Administrative hurdles stymie officers  l  j Some examples of administrative hurdles  \ that the director has placed on officers:  | HRO's used to obtain legal opinions direc-  | tly from the lawyer assigned to deal with  ! the branch. (Legal opinions are being  I obtained where the officer is not clear  i where the language of the Code stands on  j certain issues, e.g. "What evidence is  | the Respondent (alleged discriminator)  1 required to supply the officer in the  j course of his/her investigation".)  i On February 12, officers received a memo  .\   from Landucci stating that officers were  now prohibited from direct contact with  the branch's legal counsel. Instead,  officers are now required to "write a memo  to the director, for your supervisor's  signature and specify:  - all the background facts  - clearly, what is the question  - what in your view, are the implications  of the various answers  - by what date you need an answer and why  This is an unnecessary precaution.  Legal  opinions have been used only as guidelines  for the officer. If a written opinion  is necessary after the informal inquiry,  the officer can send a memo to the legal  counsel asking for it.  This policy is basically ridiculous.  It  doubles the officers' work load. They  must supply the director with the implications of various answers and justify the  need for the director's reply by a certain  date. While the paper work is shuffling  from Vancouver to Victoria and back again,  both the complainant and the respondent  are kept waiting. Frustration with the  branch grows. Potential complainants are  tired of the bureaucracy and respect diminishes for the officer and the branch.  CjLtMJUik/LJI.S.  It is imperative that women and  minority groups organize to ensure  the survival of B.C. human rights  ... I urge we demand Landucci's  resignation.  A second administrative hurdle was an instruction to officers that they do not  have authority to sign a Memorandum of  Agreement waiving further action by the  branch. (A Memorandum of Agreement is  signed by both the respondent and complainant, and the officer on behalf of the director when a complaint is settled. Standard Memorandums of Agreement deal only  with the specific complaint, and does  not mean that future complaints against  the same respondent will not be deat with).  This policy reduces the officer's role  and again further delays settlement procedures if the director must agree with  settlements before a Memorandum of Agreement is signed.  An officer is directly involved with the  investigative procedures and is aware of  all the information on a case and the  reasons for the amount of the settlement.  If this policy is followed through, and  the director must agree with all settlements, officers envision the director  criticizing settlements without facts.  (Too many cases to review thoroughly. )  Officers also fear the director will  create more administrative policies in  order that officers justify settlements  before the director will agree to or sign  a Memorandum of Agreement.  Both of these instructions have only  served to diminish the HRO's role and  allows them no initative to deal with a  case. Landucci's willingness to let the  branch become a bureaucracy has seriously affected the staff and officers'  morale.  Director decided not to pursue complaints  On several occasions, the director decided not to pursue complaints that were  clearly within the Code's jurisdiction.  Subsequent time-consuming discussion ensued where Landucci did reconsider and  pursued the complaint.  But she is seldom available and her whereabouts 'seem often unknown even to her own  support staff. She also questions their  motives'-for their lines of inquiry and  refuses to support officers requests for  relevant evidence from a respondent. In  the latter case, pressure from a superior  changes Landucci's opinion and the information was obtained. In most instances,  the respondent was aware of the director's criticisms of the officers' work  before Landucci informed them that she  was dissatisfied with their investigation.  It seems that the director does not want  to approach the minister of labour to request appointments of Inquiry Boards.  This seriously affects officers' respect  for the director's commitment to human  rights principles. Officers wonder out  loud why Landucci was hired for the  position.  The director's failure to question the  Minister's decision regarding Boards of  Inquiry is shown in the following cases:  (due to the oath of confidentiality,  complainants and respondents will not be  identified. Also, officers involved in  the cases will not be named).  Pregnancy: reasonable dismissal?  • a woman was fired from her job, days  after she told her employer she was pregnant. She filed a complaint alleging  discrimination on the basis of sex and  without reasonable cause — pregnancy.  The officer appointed, was able to find  evidence and discovered that the respondent had discriminated against the worker  on both counts. However, the officer  was unable to settle the case and reported this to the director. The director  sent her report to the minister and  asked that an Inquiry Board be appointed  to hear the case.  Heinrich refused the request for an Inquiry  saying that there was insufficient  evidence to support the finding. The  officer was mystified by the decision  since part of the evidence produced was a  UIC separation certificate which the employed filled out. "Pregnancy" was  stated as the reason for dismissal.  Through the director, the officer requested in writing information on what further  evidence was needed for the Minister tc  appoint a board. To the best of my knowledge, the officer has yet to receive a  reply from either the director <or the  minister.  Sexual orientation case dumped  • a group of persons identifying themselves as members of a homosexual organization wished to charter a yacht for  recreational purposes. The respondent  refused them the service and stated that  the reason for the refusal was solely due  to their sexual orientation. Again, the  minister refused to appoint a Board of  Inquiry, saying that it is his belief that  the gay movement would not be furthered  by taking this, issue to a Board. This  opinion was and is not shared .by either  the complainant or the officers investigating the case. It is expected that it Kinesis June 1981  HUMAN RIGHTS  Carleton students face court for sexual harassment challenge  By Julie Wheelwright  "I didn't know about his reputation. I  went to his office to pick up a book. He  reached over for it and sort of patted me  — a little too close to the breast and a  little too long to be casual.  "He asked me if I wanted him to read out  all the 'dirty parts' in the book and he  said, 'I see you're wearing a pair of nice,  sexy jeans today.' I felt just sick.  "Usually I talk a lot in class but now I  just wanted to never go back. Here I was  taking this class from this terrific professor who I really respected, only to  find out he's a real slime." A Carleton  Journalism student.  Sexual harassment. It's that subtle pat  on the bottom, the 'dirty' joke told in  class, a professor's hand dropped casually on a knee. It's also a humilitation  that one in 10 students face sometime in  their academic careers.  Last winter three journalism students at  Ottawa's Carleton University decided that  the problem had gone on behind closed doors  for long enough.  They invited women on campus;to a meeting  to discuss sexual harassment, to determine  the extent of the problem and to draw up  a list of recommendations for the university administration to deal with the problem.  The result of that meeting was a list of  five recommendations to the administrators,  asking that a grievance procedure be established to deal with sexual harassment and  that the procedure be well publicized on  campus. To date, 95 per cent of those recommendations have been met.  Pressed for details  Once the meeting was called by Maureen  McEvoy, Susan Dusel and*Debbie Woolway,  they were hounded by the press for details.  They decided the most logical way to deal  with the press was to call a press conference to discuss the issue. On March 17  they read a prepared statement about the  problem of sexual harassment at Carleton  and explained their recommendations to a  . crowd of 100 people.  Not everyone in the university community  was supportive of the actions taken by  McEvoy, Dusel and Woolway. Three Carleton  professors, Roger Bird, Brian Nolan and  Bob Rupert, have launched a libel and  slander suit against the three women.  At the end of May two of the professors  made their statement of claim: $100,000  in general damages and $20,000 in punitive  damages.  When McEvoy talked with Kinesis from Ottawa  recently she said that a court date has  yet to be set. The lawyer for the three  women will ask to have the case thrown out  of court and there is a 50-50 chance that  this will happen, McEvoy added.  The three women would not divulge the  names of women who made specific claims  of harassment. They want to protect the  harassment. Women see that they are put  on trial rather than the man who has harassed them," Doherty said in the letter.  Another support letter came from the Carleton school of social work: "Sexual harassment, implied or explicit, is a daily  factor in women's lives and we have great  admiration for the courage shown by the  anonymity of the victims. But the three  point out that sexual harassment in the  journalism school has ranged from sexist  jokes in class, fondling and bottom-pinching to sexual assault and blackmail.  Support for the three women has grown  rapidly across the country, especially  from women's groups who recognize that  sexual harassment is a problem women face  daily. ' -  Shortly after the writ for the suit was  served last term, about 60 Carleton students came to the women's defence and organized a support committee to raise funds  for legal costs.  Speaking tours have publicized the problem.  A benefit dance in Ottawa raised funds,  and a nation-wide letter-writing campaign  has brought in a strong show of support.  "We've been getting a lot of support from  women's groups across the country," McEvoy  told us, adding that the defence fund now  stands at just under $4,000.  Students speak out in support  National student organizations have also  spoken out. In a letter to the Dean of  Arts at Carleton, National Union of Students executive officer John Doherty said  the issue of sexual harassment is being  buried under debate on the reputation and  tactics of the three women who protested.  "This only serves to make it harder to encourage women to raise incidents of sexual  -&3!&iX©79 LNS  women who have spoken out."  The problem of sexual harassment is no  worse at Carleton than it is everywhere  else, McEvoy pointed out.  "It's just  one of those great untalked about things. "  And while support from the journalism  graduate students has been "overwhelming,"  Carleton faculty members have reacted negatively to the women's action, McEvoy told  Kinesis.  According to a recent survey by the Canadian Association of University Teachers  (CAUT), approximately one in 10 students  experience some form of sexual harassment  during their university career.  The National Union of Students (NUS) is now  working on a survey on sexual harassment  for distribution to university students  next term. The survey states that sexual  harassment "becomes extremely dangerous in  our educational system. Sexual harassment  is bad enough in itself, but when it is  used by someone in a position of authority  to influence the academic future of a student, it is a very grave situation."  All the support from groups across the  country is encouraging. The CAUT and NUS  surveys will do much to educate the public  about the problem. So will the trial. But  sexual harassment is going to be around as  an issue for a long time. As McEvoy says,  "change is going to come really, really  slowly."  WHAT'S HAPPENING AT THE HUMAN RIGHTS BRANCH  was not politically expedient to deal with  gays.  In the April issue of Kinesis there is an  article entitled, "Spotty white paper  issued by the Human Rights Commission."  This article raised serious concerns  about the language of the supporting  paragraphs to the sexual orientation  recommendation, some omission (mentally  disabled), and the wording regarding  appointments of Inquiry Boards.  I agree  with the criticisms.  However, the article's writer is possibly  not aware that the director of the HRB  has said she wants remove the "reasonable  cause" provision from the Code. This  provision has meant that the respondent  must give the branch evidence to show  reasonable cause existed for a denial or  refusal of service or discrimination on  the prohibitive grounds.  This provision has also enabled the branch  officers to look at other forms of discrimination not specified by the Code (e.g.  disabled, gay, under under 45 - over 65,  pregnancy, etc. )  It is essential that the "reasonable  clause" provision remain in the Code.  There is a real concern among HROs that  the recommended inclusion- of sexual orientation and others, as prohibited grounds  We have to make sure that the  "reasonable cause" clause  remains in the Code  of discrimination will not pass in the  legislature because of the Social Credit  majority. If this fear becomes a  reality, and "reasonable cause" is also  removed from the Code, gays will have no  protection against discrimination and  other unspecified forms of discrimination  such as mental disability will not be  dealt with.  Don't be fooled by the white paper from  the Human Rights Commission. It's just  that — paper — unless the current  director and the Social Credit government which appointed her implemented the  paper in its entirety. That doesn't  seem likely.  It is imperative that women and minority  groups organize to ensure the preservation of human rights in B.C.  I urge that we demand Landucci's resignation.  Please write to Jack Heinrich, Minister of  Labour and your MLA and make your concerns  known. Don't allow your rights to be  diluted any further. Don't allow the  director to turn the Human Rights Branch  into a bureaucratic jungle of red tape.  Demand that the government recognize  that Human Rights are important to the  people of British Columbia. We will not  sit idly by and watch the Human Rights  Branch and its officers become another  paper pushing, ineffective government  agency. ^_ V Kinesis June 1981  WOMEN AT WORK  Marcia Braundy, first fully qualified woman carpenter in B.C.  By Honorine Loader  In a few days Marcia Braundy, a fourth  year carpentry apprentice now in her final  training period at Pacific Vocational  Institute, will sit her Inter-provincial  examinations, and, if successful, will  become the first fully qualified woman  carpenter in British Columbia.  She will join the growing ranks of women  who are making a successful career in one  of the many occupations that have been  male strongholds up to now.  Who are these women who choose one of the  non-traditional occupations and why do they  do so?    All the women I have spoken to  have previously worked first at some  traditional "female" job, but found it did  not meet their personal or financial  needs. Most said that the higher pay of  the traditional male occupations was a  major attraction; that they liked working  with their hands and being able to see  the results of their efforts.  Some said  they prefer an outdoor life working as a  member of a team. Others enjoy the  challenge of being a pioneer — but life  for them, as for all pioneers, is often  a struggle.  Marcia was thirty when she decided to become a carpenter. She had been a teacher  and a community worker and had spent three  years helping to raise $35,000 and to construct a community centre in the Slocan  Valley.  She had put her "heart and soul  into the place" and decided that constructing buildings was what she wanted to do.  But few would take her seriously and she  found getting into training was a slow and  difficult process.  In 1977 she was admitted to the pre-  apprenticeship carpentry course in Dawson  Creek as the first woman in any trades  course. This was a "horrendous experience"  and she would not have survived without  support from the Director of Continuing  Education for whom she was doing work in  organizing women's study courses and the  women's group in Dawson Creek. Later, when  the matter was brought to the attention of  the College Council, the Principal of the  College visited every trades class and made  it clear that sexist harassment would not  be tolerated.  Since then she has attended classes as an  apprentice at Camosun and PVI.  It will  take a long time to overcome generations  of conditioning about the roles of men and  women, but she notes an increasing acceptance of women in trades training by both  instructors and fellow students.  A number of things are happening at PVI  that are making a woman student's life  much easier. The basic matter of providing  accessible washrooms is being worked on,  MARCIA BRAUNDY: "You get a little stronger every  day—but you also learn to use your head and your tools to  conserve your strength..."  a Women's Committee has been formed and  is organizing a twice weekly informal  lunch time drop-in centre where students  can exchange ideas and come for support.  Appointment of a women's counsellor is  planned, if a request for funding is  approved by the Ministry of Education.  Marcia says she has been lucky in having  a good employment experience. In her first  job with a small company in the Kootenays,  she learned good finishing skills and  later acquired the skills of a construction carpenter as a member of the Union.  It was a proud day for her when she was  the first woman elected to the 90 member  Kootenay Local 2458 of the United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America.  She is now apprenticed to the Union and.  has been sent on a number of jobs including  construction of the extended care hospital  in Nakusp. She says as a union member she  was immediately accepted and treated with  respect as a fourth-year apprentice.  Small changes but still difficult  Some employers she says are becoming more  open minded, but it can still be very  difficult for a woman to get a job and  she is often passed over for a man. This  was a major reason for joining the union.  "Your name is put on a list and as work  comes up, you are sent out in rotation."  Marcia is a strong feminist and though at  first when she started training she tried  to cope with sexual- harassment by ignoring  taunts and innuendo, she learned that to  relate to fellow students and workers she  had to be prepared to meet problems head  on, make her point — to educate with a  smile but without antagonizing others.  Assertiveness training for all women in  the trades would help.women to accept what  for many of them is a new role and necessary, for survival on a construction site  or lumber camp or training program.  We cannot change society and society's  attitudes overnight — that will take 20  years, but we do want to be fairly treated  and we want many more women so that they  may explore a variety of options and find  which appeals to them.  An argument often used to counter women's  employment in non-traditional occupations  is the relative strength of men and women.  But Marcia says she has never been faced  with a load she could not carry.  "You get  a little stronger every day — but you  also learn to use your head and your tools  to conserve your strength and you learn  to use helpers effectively. No one carries  a 12 foot sheet of gyproc up a 12 foot  ladder alone — ever."  Marcia is single and it is easy for her to  travel to take training courses or to a  job site; for many women with a family to  care for or children to support, the development of an adequate daycare system is  essential.  "It is always tough for the pioneers, and  you need motivation and maturity to survive", but Marcia hopes that her experience  and the experience of those like her will  help to make the way easier for women to  follow. J  Want to teach medical students  how to treat us right?  Have you ever been to a doctor for a pap  smear and come away from the examination  feeling embarrassed, upset or angry? Have  you ever wished that you could talk to  someone about your experience?  A group of women who assist in teaching  3rd-year medical students how to do pap  smears, cultures and pelvic exams are  interested in your opinions on how these  necessary examinations can be conducted  to minimize embarrassment and pain.  We believe that what medical students  are taught can influence how they treat  us and our daughters and we would like  to hear what you have to say about how  you would like to be treated.  We invite you to write us about your  experiences and changes you would like  to see jnade. If you have-had a particularly good experience, we would like  to hear why it was good. All letters  will be strictly confidential.  In two years, when UBC's 3rd-year  medical student numbers increase, we  will need more teachers. We are setting up a program for new teachers  which will take place in the coming  year and we invite any interested women  to write or call us soon.  Please mail all correspondence to:  Doris Olsson, 2317 Turner St, Vancouver, phone 251-3888, or contact  Bonnie Fiddler, phone 277-5662.  Susan Jorgensen finally gets a  cash settlement  The wage settlement for Susan Jorgensen  finally came down at the end of May. She  will receive $5,100 in back pay for having  been denied the same wages as men while  performing comparable work at B.C. Ice and  Storage.  Jorgensen was denied a category shift from  Group 2 to Group 1, despite the fact that  she worked alongside men doing Group 1  work and being paid 65 cents an hour more  for it.  Workers in Group 2 are traditionally women;  those in Group 1 are men.  But the Board of Inquiry didn't recognize  that it was a case of discrimination on  the basis of sex. And although Susan and  her union are pleased to have the matter  settled at last, it's disappointing not  to have won that sex discrimination ruling.  According to Jack Nichol, president of the  United Fishermen and Allied Workers Union,  such a ruling would have helped "in bargaining the equal pay for equal work argument ."  Jorgensen laid her complaint with the B.C.  Human Rights Branch back in 1977. Such a  long delay can only act as a deterrent to  people thinking of taking such action. Q  Be a big sister  Big Sisters is a lay-counselling  service which provides one-to-one  relationships for girls between 7 and  17, who need special attention.  We look for women, aged 20 to 35  who are prepared to commit 5 hours  a week for at least a year, and to  attend monthly support groups.  The work is both challenging and  rewarding in terms of personal  growth and enrichment.  Enquiries welcomed at 873-4525. Kinesis June 1981  LESBIAN RIGHTS  Lesbian Conference was an exchange, re-discovery of bonds  On May 16, 17 and 18 Vancouver felt the  presence and the impact of the 1981  Lesbian Conference, three days of workshops and culture attended by over 500  women from across Canada and various  parts of the U.S_.  The theme of the conference was 'Lesbian  Power: Organizing for the 80s', and  whether in the plenary sessions, the  workshops, the dance or the coffeehouse,  that power was evident in every woman  who attended.  We were gathered to organize together,  to realize the dream of a lesbian movement. This movement would take us from  often individual and too often isolated  action to a network that would speak for  and represent all of us.  We were lesbians from every location and  age and background, yet I'm sure we left  the conference feeling a bond that perhaps surprised us by its clarity.  The weekend was, in its broadest sense,  an exchange and a discovery-. In workshops  ranging from politics to health to spirituality to employment to art to sexuality to so many more, we were able to  exchange not only information but a sense  of self which brought us out of ourselves,  out of our closets, and into the lesbian  community which is our home.  We discovered that we need no longer be  invisible, that indeed being invisible  denies our identity, our very existence.  We have no choice but to come out -  politically, socially and spiritually  - to whatever degree we can. Together  we can make our presence felt.  %k~<    4  Society wishes to confine us by its  definition of who we are; together we  can redefine lesbianism so that it becomes us as proud, noble and strong  women. The 1981 Lesbian Conference has  indicated that not only will we be  together in the 80s, but that we will  be triumphant.  NOTICE  If you have any conference resolutions,  photos, contact names, or projects that  you would like included in the final  conference report, get them in to the  conference organizers by June 30. Send  them to Box 65563, Stn. F, Vancouver.  Regional reports: our history re-told  Six women from across the country - except  the Maritimes and the Northern territories  - reported on activities in their regions  as a way of introducing us to one another.  A woman from Seattle also spoke, to signify  the presence of a good number of American  sisters.  Dorrie Brannock of Vancouver presented an  interesting chronological and categorical  history of lesbian activity locally since  the late sixties. Her categories included  bar dykes and professional lesbians on the  one hand, who have generally relied on informal support networks and have not been  politically involved, and movement lesbians  on the other hand.  In her account, Dorrie moved from the landmark Indo-Chinese Women's Conference a decade  ago, where lesbians met and decided to organize locally, through various organizations  of the early 70's such as A Woman's Place  and the Lesbian Drop-in, to 1975 when B.C.  Federation of Women passed (unanimously,  but not without struggle) its first lesbian  policy.  Then came lesbian music - starting with  Lavender Jane and Meg Christian - followed  by the birth of more and more groups, both  more visible and more determined to be heard  than ever before. That growth of the lesbian  community and lesbian politic continues to  this day. In Dorrie's own words, "Whether  they want us or not, we are here to stay.  We're proud to be lesbians, women loving  women."  Silva Tenenbein spoke for the BCFW Rights  of Lesbians Sub-Committee in urging us to be  political and join the fight against the  Right. Of groups like Moral Majority and KKK,  "we are their common problem - but we are not  the problem to them, that they are to us."  Diane Fisher of Saskatoon cited recent history in describing the struggle for lesbian  and gay rights on the prairie. The Saskatoon  community in particular includes many children, and much energy is going into parenting  groups, and struggling to win union contract  protection for lesbian mothers. A Lesbian  Information Line and a drop-in were started  recently, and there is good caring energy in  the community.  Lesbians in Saskatchewan are very concerned  with coalition work and rural outreach -  the Gay Community Centre has contacts in 40  towns throughout the province, and quarterly  meetings rotate around the province.  Mallory Newman gave a short report on Winnipeg. The prime concern of lesbians there  currently is saving The Women's Building  from bankruptcy. The facility needs input of  several thousand dollars, and Mallory asked  that women make donations to keep it open.  Public meeting space is obviously vital to  the growth of any lesbian community.  Francie Wyland of the Lesbian Mothers Defense  Fund spoke on lesbian life in Toronto. She  also took an historical tack, recalling that  since 1975, when only two groups (both male  dominated) represented lesbian interests,  lesbian organizations have multiplied. LOOT  was a driving force in the late seventies,  and lesbians still have groups like the  Lesbian Mothers Defense Fund, Gay Youth and  recently GLARE (Gays and Lesbians Against  the Right Everywhere) and LARE.  LARE is particularly interested in outreach,  and in addressing tensions within and without the community. Inside the gay community  gay men are having to deal with the emergence  of women leaders, as well as lesbian demands  for autonomous organization. Outside of it,  groups like Moral Majority, Right to Life  and Renaissance are currently pushing very  hard to curtail the rights of gays and lesbians. But Francie says, "there wouldn't be  an Anita Bryant or a Moral Majority if we  weren't making a tremendous impact. Those  groups aren't called reactionary for nothing  ...The (apparent) lull in Toronto is really  a reconstitution of the movement, and its  transformation into a mass movement."  Anne Michaud of Montreal spoke of the position of lesbians in Quebec. She said she  was sad not to see more Francophone lesbians at the conference, but that this was  a reality, and bridging that gap was the  work we have to do. Historically in Quebec, a lesbian conference in Ottawa in  1976 produced Quebec's first lesbian group.  Women in this group worked together  for three years before the group split over  ideological differences - specifically,  whether lesbianism or feminism was to be  their primary identification. Since the  demise of that group, social events have  been the main focus for lesbian energy.  (However, it is not to be forgotten that  Quebec is the only province with a sexual  orientation clause in its Human Rights Code  legislation passed in 1977.)  Quebec lesbians take credit for Canada's  first Lesbian Pride March. What started as  a Gay Pride March two years ago was so  thoroughly dominated by over 200 lesbians  that even the mainstream media perceived  it as a lesbian march. Energy generated  from that march, Anne says, was tremendous.  Lesbians are experiencing hard times in  Quebec right now, but there is much cultural work going on. A group called Amazon  Video has a film in the works called,  "Yesterday's Amazons, Today's Lesbians."  Quebec feminists have had a very successful organizing conference just recently,  out of which emerged the beginnings of  discussion on links between lesbians and  the women's movement in Quebec. Anne spoke  of the need for increased visibility, reminding us that we are being called upon,  in response to rising reaction against us,  to be visible at a level above and beyond  our actual numbers. 8       Kinesis June 1981  ACROSS CANADA  CUPW fighting for paid  paternal leave  The Canadian Union of Postal Workers is  currently battling the Canadian Treasury  Board for the right to paid paternal leave  for all its members.  In the final stages of contract negotiations the union is stressing the need for  up to 20 weeks paid maternity leave for  mothers, up to five days leave on a chiId's  birth for fathers and five days paid leave  for parents adopting a child.  "It's taken a real long time for the labour  movement to recognize this as a really  important issue," said CUPW grievance  officer for Vancouver local Marion Pollack.  "For most women of child-bearing age it's  really important," said Pollack who added  that 40 per cent of the inside postal  workers in the Vancouver local are women.  Under the current contract when a member  goes on maternity leave she loses her sick  credits and her vacation leave. When she  returns to work she must also pay back into  her pension plan, said Pollack.  Women also receive no income during the  first two weeks of their maternity leave  and if they meet UIC requirements they get  only 60 per cent of their earnings, to a  maximum of $189 a week.  According to Pollack, this forces women  postal workers to choose between having a  child at all or "scrimping and saving" to  support it.  "We've only had a right to  maternity leave since 1962," she said.  Pollack added that she thinks the union  will "make some headway" on the issue of  paternal leave. The union is in its final  stage of contract negotiations with the  treasury board which has been adamant in  its refusal to agree to fully paid leave,  according to CUPW president Jean-Claude  Parrot.  "We know...that our employer will not  readily agree to end these forms of discrimination despite the fact that both paid  maternity leave and paid paternity leave  are very inexpensive benefits," Parrot said  in a recent CUPW newsletter. 0  my KAir- qete $o rwnny  *jhc* 1 h,k€ Off  <*y hard-hit  Manitoba woman receives her  carpenter's papers  Kathleen Joan Lyons recently became the  first woman in Manitoba to receive her  papers as a carpenter. Joan is the second  woman in Canada to achieve journeyman  status in this particular trade. This  precedent seemed to go unnoticed by the  Apprenticeship and Tradesman's Qualifications Division of the Manitoba Dept.  of Labour.  A letter to Joan which outlined the  successful completion of all requirements  came addressed to "Dear Sir" and went on  to discuss "his" marks and the final  marks assigned to "him"I  Joan took her apprenticeship under the  supervision of Don Plowman, through  Embla Ltd. Three other women are also  associated with Embla and are close to  completing their required hours. Q  (Manitoba Action  Committe newsletter)  ^  O Female-headed houses Male-headed houses  EARN UNDER $9,000.00  Federation founded to support  our access to non-traditional  jobs  Some 200 women attending a conference in  Hamilton April 24-26 voted unanimously to  found a federation of groups and  individuals to support women's access to  non-traditional jobs.  Representatives from local Women in Trade  and Industry (WITAI) organizations in  over 13 Ontario towns met to discuss the  problems and activities of women in the  trades and industry.  Shirley Hawes, a crane operator at INCO  in Sudbury and a steward in Steelworkers  Local 6500, addressed the opening session -  and spoke of her experiences working at  INCO.  Some resolutions from the various workshops that were passed included: targeting  specific companies in industry for "women  into" campaigns; working with unions to  build support for such campaigns; and  support to the recent 0FL policy paper on  daycare.  Also adopted was a motion to write a  letter to Stelco in Hamilton protesting  their refusal to transfer a pregnant  worker, Joanne Clifton, from the blast  furnace area, where carbon monoxide fumes  will damage the health of her unborn  child. 0.  (Socialist Voice)  They held a conference on  immigrant women and forgot to  invite them  They held a conference on immigrant women  at the Park Plaza hotel in Toronto but  someone forgot to invite the immigrant  women.  An information officer from the Ministry  of Multicuralism said that the media would  not be encouraged to attend the workshops  lest they "intimidate the participants."  But the scare was groundless, as it turned  out. The March 20-22 conference was on  immigrant women, not of them. Most of the'  immigrant women in the immediate vicinity  were well out of hearing: they were upstairs changing the beds, or in the  Empress Room next door, laying out the  places for luncheon.  The delegates were preponderantly social  services agency representatives, responsible for administering programs. Few  were even front 'line workers with immigrant  women.  However, the urgency of the needs of working class immigrant women were brought  home forcefully to the conference by a  Toronto group Women Working with Immigrant  Women and by a Regina group Immigrant  Women Working Together.  This group had  great difficulty in getting an invitation  to the conference at all, but persevered.  (Toronto Clarion)  Kootenay theatre group heads  east  A theatre event from the Kootenays will  head east for a performance in Thunder  Bay, Ontario after performances in their  own community.  Maybe There's Something of Me in This  is a  collage of images, stories.,and songs which  reflect the lives of Kootenay women: themes  of isolation, fears, masks, joys, and  triumphs are woven together with tenderness and humour.  Two veteran members of the company Theatre  Energy present over a dozen characters in  the hour-long piece, who tap dance, ride  motorcycles, sing songs, tell bad jokes  and garden in their quests for expression  as people.  It was hailed as the company's best work  in its six year herstory. 0_  (Images)  n&  □  □  a  Affirmative action needed in the  oil patch  An ever increasing number of women in  Alberta are working. A large number of  them are involved directly or indirectly  in the oil business.  Most of them, however, are employed in  clerical, secretarial and other rather  poorly paid jobs traditionally held by  women. Relatively few women are employed in a professional capacity and even  fewer hold labouring or other "blue collar'1  jobs.  Interestingly, neither the Calgary Society  of Petroleum Geologists nor the Association for Professional Geologists and  Engineers of Alberta keep track of the  number of women members. A random sample  from the membership roster of the Calgary  Society of Exploration Geophysicists  consisted of 90 per cent men and 10 per  cent women.  Roughnecking or relatively unskilled well-  site jobs are not open to women because  the person hiring claims that it is not  possible for a woman to live comfortably  with the crew.  One of the women cooks on a rig said, "I  asked for a job as a lease-hand once but  they said I would have to shower with the  men." Roughnecking, field engineering  and so on are often physically very demanding and require that the employees  live and work with an all-male crew on a  24 hour basis.  One woman geologist with plenty of well-  site experience, said, "Let's face it.  There is a lot of emphasis on being macho  in these jobs. I'm in a position of  authority on the site and sometimes I feel  like I'm on thin ice." Q  (Calgary Women'i  Extract) Kinesis June 1981  INTERNATIONAL  Women working in post-revolutionary Nicaragua  By Jeanne Dancette  On July 19 1979 the Nicaraguan people defeated Somoza's dictatorship. Immediately  after that, they embarked on a nation-wide  literacy crusade, which ended one year  later.  A group of teachers from English Canada  went to Nicaragua last winter to examine  the results of the literacy crusade, and  to see how it fitted into the revolutionary process underway.  From its beginning, women have been involved in the literacy crusade. They participated in the writing of teaching materials related to the needs of a population  kept in ignorance and poverty for 40 years.  And'they provided the/major force as teachers, helpers, nutrjftion-and-health advisors, going to the countryside and the  shanty towns.  The literacy crusade/formally began in  March 1980 and ended'August 1980. After  the "final offensive" against illiteracy  (as the Nicaraguans called it), a literacy rate of 80%  to 90!? had been achieved.  The meaning this campaign had for women is  most striking. They put as much energy  into it as they had put into the fight  against Samoza.  More than in any other central American  country, women in Nicaragua have always  been active. They have fought as part of  the labour force for more decent conditions, as mothers to get their daughters  and sons out of the National Guard's jails,  and as family heads to get a subsistence  living for their children. Over 605? of  families in Nicaragua are women-headed.  Always exploited, the women put all their  hope in winning the revolution and their  own liberation. They took to the letter  this chapter of the literacy crusade  textbook: "Women have always been exploited. The revolution makes their liberation possible,"  While in Nicaragua, four teachers, Ann,  Chris, Hillary and Jeanne, spoke with  Zela Diaz de Porras.  Zela Porras is the Nicaragua Women's Association (AlfflJLAE) coordinator In Chinandega,  a rural district in the northwest of the  country. Zela is a lawyer and she i% representative of the many middle-class women  who put their professions aside and volunteered their talents and time towards  building a strong women's organization.  This interview with Zela Porras, an  original member of AMNLAE, was transcribed by Margarita Sewerin, translated  by Hillary MacKenzie and prepared for  publication by Jeanne Dancette.  Could you tell us how the women of AMNLAE,  the women's organization in Nicaragua,  were involved in the literacy crusade?  ZELA: During the campaign, women organized in AMNLAE were involved through what  we called the.Mothers' Committees for. Literacy.  They also participated as literacy teachers in the neighbourhoods. They encouraged the organized women who were illiterate  to learn to read and write.  It. was also necessary to campaign amongst  the illiterate to get them to make the  : effort to learn. Not everyone wanted to.  People thought they were too old to learn.  We had some people who were really outstanding. One comrade in AMNLAE, Maria  Ulloa de Analiz, gave the speech in the  19 de julio square when the campaign came  to an end. She read a poem she had written. She not only learnt to read and  write during the campaign, she also learnt  to express her thoughts in a poetic way,  which is something extraordinary.  As well as material support, the crusade  needed a tremendous amount of moral support.  The need for moral support became obvious  after the murder of a brigadista here, in  the northern region of Chinandega. That  made parents panic.  So the AMNLAE mothers' committee for the  literacy crusade started a campaign, which  An AMNLAE poster: "In building a new country, we.  become a new woman."  was supported by so many people that it  turned into a public demonstration denouncing the murder and supporting the children. It was important; it was a moral  victory.  Then on Mother's Day which is celebrated  on May 30 here, another.campaign was begun.  Instead of the children coming down to  greet their mothers on that day —■  a romantic idea, isn't it, that they should  come and see their mothers out of filial  love? — a campaign was started so that  the opposite could happen. The mothers  would go and see their children out there  in the country and celebrate with the peasant mothers and their children.  This was a good idea because, for the first  time> the women from the cities were able  to meet the peasant women.  The city women do not live well as nearly  all Nicaraguans are quite poor. But compared with the peasant women, they live in  luxury.  Out there they discovered; another world:  peasant women had only seen sugar when  their children brought it in; they had  never sweetened their food. They.had  found out about oil only when their children brought oil. They had always eaten  stewed food: bananas, stewed beans — .  this was their diet, with maybe the roast .  meat of mountain animals.  So the city women discovered a world they  nothing about, although they had thought  they knew about and had believed it to be  quite similiar to theirs.. This had a  great impact, as people began to realise  the needs of the majority of the population in Nicaragua. Of course, the AMNLAE  AMNLAE: Association de Mujeres Nicaraguen-  ses Luisa Amanda Espinoza. This is the Nicaraguan women's organization. It includes about  35,000 active women from both rural and urban  areas. Luisa Amanda Espinoza was a young  working class woman killed shortly before the  final insurrection. AMNLAE is now actively  organizing a health crusade with the ministry of  social welfare. AMPRONAC was the precursor of  AMNLAE.  CDS: Sandinista Defense Committees. These  committees are organized at the block level in each  community and are often organs of local power.  They are also often headed by women.  ATC: Agricultural workers union. About 40% of  its members are women.  women didn't do all the work alone.  They  just launched the campaign and then got  support.  Near the end of the literacy crusade,  during  the final offensive,  as it was called,  AMNLAE took a very active part in workshops  explaining the political situation. We  went and discussed with the literacy workers the political analysis that is in the  workbooks.  This was extremely useful because, although  the local people always chose the theme  to be discussed, the role of women came  up,  as was to be expected since we were  from AMNLAE.  Women here have been badly discriminated  against.   If a poor family had the means  to send only one child to school and there  were six intelligent daughters and one  son, who was an idiot,   then the son would  be the one to go to school.   The daughters  would stay at home, making tortillas,  washing and looking ,-after the young children.  The son who went to school might spent  two or three years in grade one without  completing it,  as the conditions in the  schools were terrible,  too.  People finished primary school with a very low academic  level.    You could finish grade one or  grade two without being able to read and  write properly.  This was not the fault of the teachers.  It was because there were 60 to 80 children crowded into one room.    Part of the old  system was to maintain the appearance of  offering an education without really doing  so.  AMNLAE: not a feminist group in  traditional sense  When the women from AMNLAE discussed the  position of women with students learning  to read and write, we talked about the position of women in the revolution. We are  not a feminist organization in the traditional sense, but a mass organization like  the CDS (the Sandinista Defence Committees)  and the ATC (Agricultural Workers Union)  and the Sandinista party.  We explained the extent of discrimination  against women here in Nicaragua, the extent of illiteracy and why more women were  illiterate than men, and why it was that .  the sons had been the ones to be sent to  school.  Our.organization, AMNLAE, began in 1977.  So it began during the worst repression  of the dictatorship,: and it began as political organization for women struggling  to overthrow that dictatorship. Thus it  didn't begin as a feminist organization  but from women's awareness of the conditions people were living in and of the need  to end that situation.  Now that the revolution has triumphed it  is necessary for women to understand that  the revolution is giving them a lot of  opportunities and rights, and that they  must make use of those rights and take  advantage of those opportunities.  Just as they struggled against the dictatorship, now they must struggle with the  inheritance of the dictatorship such as  poverty, illiteracy and also the social,  political and economic isolation in which  they were kept.  So they must really win these rights that  they are being given politically. These  will not become a reality until they have  been accepted by everyone in our society  and they can only be obtained by struggling for them....  As I was saying, in the literacy crusade  and in the final offensive AMNLAE was  very involved. We played an important  role in the first literacy unit, which  was here in Chinandega. In this unit most  of the participants were from AMNLAE and Kinesis June 1981  INTERNATIONAL  Kinesis June 1981  it was almost completely run by women.  During the final offensive we carried out  a campaign with posters and murals. You  can still see some of our murals on the  walls: a hand with some pencils and also  some girls with windblown hair saluting  the crusade's conclusion.  How did you personally become involved  in AMNLAE?  When the precursor to AMNLAE, AMPRONAC,  was being set up, some friends of mine  from Managua who were organizing AMPRONAC  told me about it.  Then, after the murder- of Pedro Joaquin  Chamorra* and the strike that set off, I  was involved in the Chamber of Commerce  (I belong to it because of my business)  and that became the centre for the strike.  And the women in business who were involved felt that they would feel more at ease,  more secure, struggling against the dictatorship through AMPROWAC. So we invited the women who were organizing AMPRONAC  in Managua to come and help us organize  here in Chinandega.  We invited a lot of people and filled up  the hall at the Chamber of Commerce. And  so we organized AMPRONAC in Chinandega.  In the beginning we were a very belligerent organization from the political point  of view. We found it necessary to get involved with the women in the country, who  were taking an active part in the land  problem.  There were a lot of peasants without land  who had been pressing' the government to  solve their problems. The government had  set up an Agricultural Reform Institute.  It was really just a way to get aid from  the Alliance for Progress.** It was all  lies.  Then the peasant women organized themselves in AMPRONAC. They began to fight  and to occupy. The guards would come and  take the men off to prison, and the women  remained on the land. The landowners  brought in their gigantic agricultural  to hunt the women off the land. But the  women stood in front of the machines, demanding solutions to their problems.  How old are most of the AMNLAE members  and what do they dol  Women of any age take part in AMNLAE. The  majority are housewives. They are the ones  who have been the most isolated politically.  In the end, women who work already  have some influence in their union and women who study at university have some  political power. It is the housewife who  has always been forgotten, although it is  she who can have the greatest influence on  the population through influencing husbands,  wives and children.  Because of the level of isolation of women due to the extent of machismo here,  it is difficult for women to attend meetings or express their political opinions.  Husbands don't like it and sons don't  like it and brothers don't like it. They  always find reasons why they can't cooperate and try to exaggerate women's defects  as housewives and put them down to their  involvement.  When a man goes to a meeting he thinks  it's natural that his wife should help out  in any way she can. You'd think they'd  see that the logical thing would be for  this to work the other way round, too.  They don't.  Is machismo worse now?  No. The revolution has done quite a lot.  Before it was impossible to imagine having  female commanders. We have made progress  because many women distinguished themselves  during the war.  Also, women have been developing and bringing themselves forward and gaining respect  as professionals, as women who are able to  make decisions. The revolution has pro  vided a lot of opportunities for them. It  has given them leadership and administrative posts. In the crusade for literacy, I  think that five out of the six best departments were run by women.  I think that changing the male mentality  will take many years but we are working  in this direction and making progress.  Is there an organization for daycare?  Yes, the ministry of social welfare is organizing child development centres, that  is, daycare facilities. The ministry  wants to organize them properly, to look  after children between 45 days and six  years old. They will not only look after  the physical health of children, but will  also provide psychiatrists, teachers and  tutors.  This type of complete daycare is going to  be very expensive for our country. So we,  at AMNLAE, carried out an experiment in  the country last year.  When the cotton-picking begins, a lot of  women arrive to do it. With Social Welfare  we trained 20 women. They were given a  short course, and three were chosen to  go and work on a state-owned cotton plantation .  However, the female workers didn't want  to leave their children. So we organized  a campaign among the peasant women in  order to get them to leave their children  in the daycare.  During the coffee-harvest the AMNLAE members in Carazo tried to get the peasants  themselves to look after the children of  other women and they sent volunteers. But  there wasn't enough training.  In our scheme we gave them training and  the state paid their salary. From this  experiment by AMNLAE the Rural Services  for Infants was founded. This service provides temporary daycare services during  the harvests. On the estates where there  are enough women with small children and  enough permanent work, the daycares will  be open year-round.  We are now trying to establish these services in an even more basic form on other  estates, including privately-owned ones.  We are presenting a project to the owners  to persuade them that if they pay about  three women to look after the children, we  will give them their basic training and  a minimum of equipment.  It's true that this appears to increase expenses, but this small increase will lead  to greater productivity by the working women. .  We have to introduce the project in a way  that helps the women with their work but  does not increase costs for the producer  too much. There have already been many  economic problems this year as the cost  of imports has gone up. For each dollar  we earn, producing cotton, we have to  spend 60 cents on imports from abroad. So  all we earn with cotton here is 40 cents  out of the dollar.  Together with the unions, AMNLAE has presented the proposal to three privately-  owned plantations. We think that the owners will accept it.  What's the proportion of rural women involved in AMNLAE, as compared to urban  women?  At the moment here in the Chinandega district we have more peasants than urban  women organized. It is as if new horizons  have opened for the peasant women. Before,  the peasant women were almost like beasts  of burden, almost people who had no right  to think or feel, only to suffer and work.  When they got organized and joined up  with other women — not to argue, or because their kid had fought with someone  else's, which was more or less all the  contact they'd had before — but to dis-  Women have always been exploited. The  revolution makes their liberation possible.  .\-vft';  cuss joint projects, to talk about politics and such matters...all this created  new possibilities for peasant women.  What projects is AMNLAE working on now,  beside daycare?  We are trying to train women more. First- .  ly in traditional work, such as sewing.  Then there are the bread collectives —  we have them in two areas in the country.  The women in one of the bread collectives  collected money by doing theatrical presentations, going from one part of the  country to another. Then when they had already collected a certain amount and had  begun to build, we spoke to Social Welfare  and they came up with the equipment to  begin making bread.  Now these ten women are working. This helps,  not only because there was no bread in that  village before, but because the ten women  didn't have work before, either.  Unemployment is a problem in our country.  It is an agricultural country with by far  the majority of people working on the land  — without having any.  The extensive growing of cotton and coffee  cleared the small proprietors and peasants  off the land. People who used to grow  basic crops were turned into an agricultural labour force, working seasonally.  People work for three months out of 12  and don't earn enough to support themselves. I mention this because, due to it,  rural women suffer from chronic hunger.  We are now trying to get producers' collectives to provide work for unemployed people,  people who didn't have anything and who  were suffering from hunger.  AMNLAE is in the process of setting up a  pottery collective. We have a woman who  is a potter. She makes beautiful things.  With her help, we are setting up a small  factory. We are going to make things in  various colours in earthenware, of which  there is a lot here. We're going to begin  by making dishes we'll call "Nicaraguan  dishes." We've had some help for this  frdm the Mexican government and from  International Applied Technology of the-  United States.  Are there other initiatives to include  women in all sectors of employment? In  industry, for example, are women's wages  the same as men's?  This is a struggle. Traditionally, although there was nothing in the law that  discriminated against women, in fact they  were discriminated against in wages.  We had one woman who was the manager of  a branch of a bank, who had a lot of responsibility. She gave up this responsible  position to go and earn the same salary  in another job without so much responsibility. And they appointed a man to replace her, at a much higher salary. That  was before.  Now we are fighting so that there won't  be such discrimination. And, in fact, at  the government level there isn't discrimination. And as the initiatives of the  private sector are trying to do better  than the state, the situation is improving.  As for work in the country, cotton, for  example, is paid by the amount picked. If  a woman picks more than a man, she earns  more. However, there are some jobs that  are almost always done by women, such as  the "deshija", which is the treating of  the shoots of the plants. And traditionally the wages have been lower for this  kind of work.  The ATC (the agricultural workers union),  supported by the Sandinistas is trying to  improve the wages for such work.  It is inevitable that the ATC has some problems at the level of the peasants themselves. When there is work, for example,  for 50 people, they might give work to  44 men and six women. If something like  this happens, AMNLAE protests. The local  group might come to us — the coordinators  — with a complaint.  We go to the executive of the ATC and  tell them that they are discriminating  against women by giving them less work.  Then the executive goes out and points  this out. Then things are levelled up and  work is given half and half, to men and  women.  In another place, in the country, too, we  had a union representative say to us, "You  are women, we don't recognize this; your  organization isn't worth anything." The  executive of the ATC went out and said  to the unionists, "No, you must recognize  them, and respect them."  Now, in all the unions in which women work,  we'll have a women's representative to  protect women's rights within the union.  We have been working on this. And now it  is being put into effect. We already have  a representative in the union for butter  producers and in the liquor producers"union, too. And women are being elected to  the union executives. Q  Will you join us in supporting  the struggle of our Nicaraguan  sisters?  Would you like to join us in supporting  our sisters of Nicaragua in their fight  for liberation?  We recently went to Nicaragua and were  both particularly impressed by the decisive role that Nicaraguan women played in  the revolution and are now playing in the  building of a new society.  Among many other activities, they are involved in women's battalions, women's  production co-operatives, daycare pilot  projects, the organization of a nealth  campaign, the revival of their culture and  an ongoing fight against machismo. They -  are also playing a prominent role in mass .  organizations and local defence committees  (CDS).  However, they face many difficulties: the  lack of material resources, inadequate  support facilities, limited funds, etc.  Fundamentally, there is no guarantee that  the gains they have made will be long-  lasting. The tense situation in Central  America and the possibility of a right-  wing coup and/or external military intervention in Nicaragua pose a serious threat  to further social change snd women's emancipation.  For these reasons, support for Nicaraguan  women's struggles is crucial. We would  like to see all women's groups in B.C.  united in:  • educating ourselves about the situation  of women in Nicaragua;  • participation in support activities, such  as allowing La Voz de la Mujer,   the Association of Nicaraguan Women's (AMNLAE) newspaper to be published again, by subscribing  to it, or just sending donations;  " organizing a delegation of B.C. women to  Nicaragua.  Other ideas have also been suggested and  we already have asked AMNLAE to send us  information about the health campaign.  We would like you to consider this information and, if you are interested, contact  us at 525-8136 or 731-1454  Yours sisterly, Jeanne and Katherine  AMNLAE newsletter, La Voz de la Mujer  (the Voice of Women),, has recently stopped  being published because of lack of funds.  One way to ensure that AMNLAE keeps its  major organizational and educational tool  is to help them publish again.  Canadian women, individuals and organizations, interested in a first concrete act  of solidarity with Nicaraguan women can  subscribe to La Voz de la Mug'er.  Send $10 to $20 along with your name and  address to Katherine or Jeanne 1526-7th  Avenue, New Westminster, B.C. V3M 2K3  We can learn a lot from Nicaraguan women,  discuss their experience and compare it  with ours and show them our sisterly support by just visiting them and getting to  know them.  A trip is planned for next winter:  Dates: December 19th - January 3rd  Total cost: between $1,000-$1,200.  * Chamorra was the head of the Conservative  party, the opposition party to Somoza's  liberal party and the owner of the paper La  Prensa. His assassination led to huge protest movements in the whole country.  ** The Alliance for the Progress was an  American aid program for Central and South  America, started by Kennedy after the Cuban  revolution. The Peace Corps program was  part of it. Kinesis June 1981  ACROSS CANADA  Issue was not Anderson's leadership but right to representation  By Jill Porter  I was extremely disturbed to read Joanne  Linzey's account of the Advisory Council  "fiasco." I am particularly disappointed  to see Doris Anderson's personality given  as the reason for the recent developments  within the Canadian Advisory Council on  the Status of Women (CACSW).  Similar statements, written by remaining  members of the advisory council, are cropping up in women's publications across  the country. Those members seem to feel  that by taking Ms Anderson to task on her  leadership qualities the real issue — that  of representation — will be lost in the  shuffle.  / This year we have seen a great change in  the Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women. The council has had a much  higher profile in government, in the public eye and with women's organizations.  Under the directorship of Doris Anderson  the advisory council was beginning to regain contact and credibility with the women's movement.  The initial announcement in July 1980 of  the proposed conference on women and the  constitution had a profound effect. Hundreds of women registered, although they  were expected to pay their own expenses.  Hundreds more called the National Action  Committee, which was responsible for administering travel subsidies. Thousands of  women who could not attend the conference  clipped coupons from ads printed by the  council in newspapers and sent them to  show their support.  Clearly, women in Canada wanted and needed  the opportunity to meet and discuss the  implications of this round of constitutional talks. The council had here a golden  opportunity to win the support of Canadian  women. At the last minute, the conference  was postponed.-  Following a series of attempts to re-schedule, plans for-a February conference were"  underway. Meanwhile, women raised their  own funds and met on a regional basis to  acquaint themselves with the complex issues  involved in constitutional reform.  NAC-sponsored meetings across Canada  With:local and regional groups, the National Action Committee co-sponsored meetings  in •Toronto, Halifax and Vancouver. Yukon  women held a discussion at their annual  general meeting and Newfoundland women met  in St John's. In November, a number of  well-prepared submissions were made to the  Special Joint Committee on the Constitution,  including an excellent presentation by the  advisory council.  Contrary to Joanne's statement, however,  the Charter of.Rights and Freedoms had not  been sufficiently."dealt with." The proposed amendments were woefully inadequate,  as one can easily see from the resolutions  which resulted from the Ad Hoc conference  in February, and which were supported at  the annual meeting of the National Action  Committee. .  We lobbied, made some gains  We lobbied for very basic changes to the  Charter, which had not been "dealt with."  It appears that the efforts of lobbyists  are paying off. We .may see some substantial changes despite the advisory council's  silence, since Anderson's resignation, on  these basic, crucial issues.  As Joanne mentioned, family law and overlapping jurisdictions are still very important items on the constitutional agenda.  The research papers covering those issues  were submitted in August 1980. The ministers ' positions have not changed since  then, so I find it hard to understand why  more preparation time is necessary. If,  in fact, further research is being done,  I'm curious to know where and by whom. The  CACSW research staff knows nothing about  it.  Following the now-famous five-to-one vote  when a second conference postponement  seemed imminent, the CACSW office was flooded with letters, telegrams and telephone  calls urging the council to hold the meeting as planned.  Ignoring the wishes of Canadian women, the  council approved the cancellation.  A number of women in Ottawa and Toronto  were determined to see the conference held.  The Ad Hoe Committee of Canadian Women  planned and negotiated for three weeks. We  raised travel funds and produced the conference that the advisory council had decided was unnecessary.  It was attended by 1300 women from across  the country and was supported both financially and in spirit by thousands more.  After many hours of discussion a package  of resolutions was passed, dealing with  the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, access  to social services and representation of  women throughout the political system.  On the second day, we engaged in a lively  and thorough discussion of the Advisory  Council on the Status of Women.  Conference called for minister's resignation  The resulting nine resolutions, which included a.call for the resignation of Lloyd  Axworthy as the minister responsible for  the status of women and of the three incumbent Council vice-presidents,, were presented to Axworthy at a meeting the following  day. •..■;..■■■■•'  The resolution dealing with the need for  an independent review of the council was  also stressed at this time.  Representatives from national women's organizations were invited to the meeting to  discuss the "recognized structural problems"  of the CACSW, to present our views of the  best means of ensuring that the council  operates effectively and independently.  We were tcld that it was our views.that the  minister valued in this matter since it  was women's organizations who were largely  responsible for the creation of the council.  The impression left by that meeting was  that Axworthy seemed amenable to accepting  some of the recommendations.  He has, however, since chosen.to ignore  them. He has, in fact, made new appointments to the council without consultation  and has promoted one of the vice-presidents  to the position of president.  Axworthy has called us "tiresome" and un-  presentative. The new council president has  recently announced that, rather than an independent review, an internal study will  be conducted.  Axworthy's nose-thumbing continues  The Ad Hoc Committee's recommendations were  supported in March by National Action Committee members. But Axworthy's nose-thumbing continues, despite the fact that representatives from over 150 organizations supported the NAC motions.  I too am filled "with sadness, frustration  and a deep, burning rage." My outrage, however, comes from the knowledge that the  minister responsible for the status of women and those who currently sit on the  CACSW feel no sense of responsibility to  the women of Canada.  "They apparently feel that they can continue  with business as usual, and, now that they  have hired a new person to improve the  image of the council, the whole thing will  blow over.  Furthermore, I'm amazed that members of the  council can remain loyal to a man who has  publicly discredited them by saying that  their position on the constitution is  based on poor legal advice. The minister  in charge of federal-provincial relations  was, at the same time, congratulating the  CACSW on their thorough, impressive and  well-researched presentation to the Constitution Committee.  If, in fact, Doris Anderson was "patronizing and belittling" as president — and  her staff insists she was not — there are  other ways of dealing with the problem  than sacrificing the interests of women.  I disagree, again, with Joanne's statement  that "the council's reputation for first-  rate research will not be destroyed." The  research is conducted not by council members but by a staff which has resigned almost en masse. The vacant offices in that  arm of the advisory council attest to the  fact that no one remains to do "first-rate  research."  The Ad Hoc Committee of Canadian Women and  the National Action Committee on the Status  of Women recognize "that there is a valid  role for a publicly funded federal advisory council on the status of women."  There was overwhelming support for this  motion at the Ad Hoc conference.  We also recognize that some good work has  been done by the council in the past, and  have no problem giving credit where credit  is due. ;  We have called for the resignations and  for an independent review because the  interests of Canadian women must be represented; by the advisory council, or that  council loses its validity.  When it comes to making a choice between,  putting "our minister in an embarassing  position towards his government," and responding to women, we expect the obvious.  Five of the six members of the council executive made the wrong choice. And no  amount of personal squabbling can.obscure  that fact. 0.  Women's Action on Occupational Health  participated in the recent workshop on  VDTs organized by Working Women Unite.  (See article by Mary Schendlinger in  May Kinesis.)  Affiliated with the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective, WA00H is a separate  group, with its own projects and membership.  For more information on Women's Action  on Occupational Health, contact 1501 W.  Broadway, Vancouver, phone 736-6696. Kinesis June 1981     13  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Readers recommend stepping up short news, cultural coverage  Eighteen women, two men and several unidentified people answered the Kinesis "Give  Us a Piece of Your Mind" questionnaire in  the May issue. You wrote from Vancouver  and around B.C., from Banff, Toronto and  Paris. The four main topics of excitement  were: the Bulletin Board (number one by  far); women's culture; Kinesis' style;  and the audience readers think we should  be trying to reach.  Don *t abandon Bulletin Board  Moans and cries of no!  greeted the suggestion that we consider abandoning the  Bulletin Board. Most say it's the first  thing they read. Many women depend on the  Bulletin Board for information on women's  events, although many subscribers don't  receive their copy in time to make full  use of it. One woman offered to pay extra  to cover a first class mailing to her.  Even out of town women were adamant about  keeping the Bulletin Board intact. It is  an important part of the news of what's  happening here, offering both ideas for  their activities and encouragement that  women are working together elsewhere.  There was a great demand for fuller coverage of cultural events and discussion of  issues in women's culture.  "Cultural  reinforcements are essential for the survival of women's health and lives."  Women's culture is positive news, you said.  Kinesis could play an important role as a  forum for sharing our thoughts, both  critical and creative.  One woman suggests a theme page, with women  sending in journal entries, book reviews,  film discussions that pertain to the  theme. This would not be restricted to  the traditionally-defined arts.  "Journal  writing is so much a part of many women's  lives (including my own for 14 years)  that it would be interesting to include  journal excerpts as a legitimate way of  exploring various subjects.  I get tired  of too much rational/objective reporting."  Another reader wants to see reviews accompanied by further opinion and information  on some aspects of culture brought out in  the review.  "Maybe connected with a review you could have a piece on an aspect  of that person's or that group's work.  I  thought the review of Robin Morgan's visit  neither gave an accurate representation of  the event nor a serious discussion of the  issues she raised . . . This left a gap  a feminist artist or art critic or poet  or anyone might have filled by picking up  on some of the unsaid."  Too much political jargon?  Generally our feature articles get read.  People like their length and depth, and if  there is repetition, then that is the nature of our struggle.  "Women are ignored  and our struggle does not come to fruition  quickly."  However, the comments on how we handle  that problem were diverse. For some the  political jargon seems thick, and puts off  potential, non-converted readers.  For one, the view is narrow, ought to be  more objective, and does not contribute to  our understanding of the changing position  of women in our society. On the other hand,  many approve the honest bias and enjoy the  writing from a very involved perspective.  There were several requests for more short  news items to supplement the longer features. And the variety of useful purposes  readers can put our features to was wonderful: information is used for writing  further analysis; term papers get a feminist analysis; posters are put on fridges.  Occasionally, articles are passed around  at work — the recent article on workers'  health is an example. And some prove  ideal for rolling up for the cat to bat  about.  "Ideally everyone reads a feminist newspaper." Articles that provide a lifeline  for discussion and development in the  feminist movement are valued highly as  plainspoken facts and consciousness  raising material. As one woman said, "I  get angry all over again, which I think is  good."  And another reader, male, UI think Kinesis  can continue to reach everyone by continuing to publish non-rhetorical, rigorous , material."  Here's a list for inspiring new directions  So for those who feel inspired, here is a  list of ideas for further contributions:  news stories by the people involved  recipes  • photographs  ■ graphics  "how to" articles (how to fix your bike  or tune your car, what to do if you're  arrested)  open discussion of politics, art  more lesbian content  out of town news, events, correspondence  journal excerpts  in-depth reporting  news of children's activities  more letters.  And to help us with the Bulletin Board:  get your event announcements in to us by  the fifteenth — on time for the deadline!  Because so many people have told us that  they get their Kinesis late,  we have decided to be bloody-minded about the deadline.  It's the 15th of the month. Nothing  submitted after that date will be printed.  This way, we hope to get the paper to the  printers and back and mailed out before  the end of the month. 0  Please, let us not resign from the human race  By Ruth Meechan  I am a woman. I am part of huMANity. I  am proud to be a woman. It is a good word,  with connotations of strength and warmth  and compassion.  I do not like to have those connotations  taken away by misspelling the plural of the  word. "Wimmin" suggests a group of silly,  shallow bird-brains from the comics. As  for "wemoon" — let's just forget it as  quickly as possible.  "Man" is another good word. There are many  good, warm, compassionate men. They, too  are part of humanity. This is a fact that  the feminist movement must remember and  seems to be in grave danger of forgetting.  If we make enemies of men we have moved  backward, not forward, for without the  active cooperation of men we will get nowhere with the feminist movement.  A few women may be able to eliminate men  from their private lives. But there is no  way they can be eliminated from the world.  They are here, and we have no choice but  to live in the same world with them.  If  we are to have equity in that world we  must educate, not eliminate, them. And  we cannot do that if we make enemies of  them.  Lesbians, by their own count, make up 10%  of the population. They have every right  to live their own lives as they wish, but  they have no right whatever to dictate  policy to the other 90%.  I am having difficulty recovering from the  shock of there being a negative reaction  to men working against rape. If men don't  reject the idea of rape and work against  it how can we possibly eradicate it?  What is the purpose of Rape Relief? Is it  merely to give relief after the rape? If  we refuse the cooperation of men we can  expect plenty of opportunity for giving  that kind of relief.  It seems to me that it would be better to  work towards giving relief from the possibility of rape. We need the full cooperation of men to do that.  And if a rapist has the character and the  guts to admit his mistake and try to atone  for it, then I, for one, respect and welcome him. We need more of that kind of  man, for it is only by a great many men  seeing their mistakes and trying to change  their ways that we can get true relief  from rape and an improvement in the status  of women.  Women most certainly cannot do it by themselves for we have no choice but to live  in the same world with men.  Here is a definition from my dictionary:  Man 1 a) a human being, a member of the  human race; b) the human race, mankind. And  it gives a quote from David Hume: "...all  men, both male and female." .  Let us not resign from the human race.  Let us, instead, take our place as full and  equal partners with the male members of  the race. If that is impossible in society as it is, then we must change the  thinking of that society to the extent  that makes it possible.  The greatest part of that change, of course  must be in the thinking and attitude of  the male section of society.  We will achieve that only by recognizing,  welcoming and working with those men who  are already thinking along the right  lines. We will make it completely impossible if we refuse to work with men  at all. VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  BCFW subcommittee, Women Against Prisons are two groups  By Miriam Azrael and Heather Conn  To the casual interested observer, the  present proliferation of women's groups  focussing on prison issues might seem, if  a little confusing, at least encouraging.  After all, women in prison are the most  oppressed of our sisters and for too  long the women's movement in Canada has  done little to address their situation.  Unfortunately, awareness and even caring  are not enough to help the women trapped  in the vicious cycle of which prison is  only a part.  The B.C.F.W. Prison Sub-Committee believes  that prisons are not necessary, effective  or rational.  Locking people up is dehumanizing, alienating and costly. Further  more, it doesn't work.  It does not make  people more considerate, but rather  nourishes resentment and mistrust.  Accordingly, we are committed to working  towards the time when a better way to resolve social conflict will be available,  i.e. a new social system.  How this will  come about is dependent on what we are  doing now.  We would like here to begin to clear up  some of the misconceptions that have been  flourishing since the splintering of the  women against prisons.  In particular,  we wish to address the interview that  appeared in the March 81 Kinesis and the  subsequent response of Mrs. Drew from  Twin Maples.  The Prison Sub-Committee is still unsure  just who was interviewed by Cole Dudley  in the March issue.  It was not any of us.  We want to clarify the BCFW position  It is not our intention here to try to  untangle the thread of half-truths, distortions and wishful thinking that was  woven into the more solid body of the  article.  Nor do we want to denigrate the positive  nature of some of the work that has been  done by other groups.  We wish to clarify  our position, and more than this, to  arrive at some sort of mutual understanding.  It is not exactly clear who is now working  under the banner Women Against Prisons,  although this was the name the sub-committee took on when it was ratified at the  B.C.F.W. convention of 79 in Victoria.  We chose this name to make it clear from  the outset that we were women against  prison, not any particular administration.  The sub-committee at first was composed  of women representing a variety of perspectives and a number of groups.  Our  basis of unity was our concern for the  women inside,and what was happening with  them. At the founding workshop in Victoria in 1979 we decided to work with  existing policy (formulated by the old  sub-committee before it disbanded in 1977)  instead of getting immediately involved in  theoretical aspects.  We felt it was more important to move directly into the task of bringing feminism  into the prisons. We realize now that  we didn't deal adequately with our theoretical differences, which we hoped we  could overcome. We considered ourselves  an action group.  Some of the women who joined the group  had previous experience which they were  able to share with those of us who were  less familiar with the prison system. We  decided that a program drawing on the  resources of the entire women's community  would be ideal for giving incarcerated  women the opportunity to discover for  themselves alternate ways of expressing  their rage and disgust within a society  that has offered them such limited choices.  The women's community was responsive and  thirteen women's groups and various  talented women offered to facilitate workshops in the prison. While some expressed their doubts about the feasability of  working within an oppressive institution,  everyone thought it was worthwhile to  attempt.  Unfortunately, our efforts to negotiate  with Oakalla Women's Unit were thwarted  by an administration reluctant to trust  us in their prison. Even individual  visiting was hindered and the few personal  visits we were able to arrange were  through security glass.  While some of the staff seemed sympathetic  and interested, we got the impression that  for the most part, they were suspicious  of our motives.  They did not welcome  our suggestions. After a lengthy correspondence and a couple of meetings, we  were curtly dismissed.  Contact was made with Twin Maples. Our  reception there was more open and we were  given permission to try out our program.  Perhaps it was just bad luck that we were  given a time that proved inconvenient for  many of the women, two hours between work  and dinner, the only unstructured time in  their day. .Still, on some days we had a  roomful of women and even when only a few  showed up, we felt good that the lines of  communication were opening at last.  Certainly the experience was different  than in our anticipation. Exchange at  first was very tentative and there was a  certain awkwardness with the staff. At no  point were we supercilious in our approach as Mrs. Drew has charged in her  letter to Kinesis (May'81) Naive maybe:  our intentions were so honourable that we  didn't even allow ourselves the chance to  wonder if the women liked us.  We had no way of knowing what kind of  space they would be in the day we came  out, nor whether they would be receptive  to what we had arranged for any given  day. We certainly made every attempt to  fulfill their requests. Definitely, they  taught us just as we attempted to inspire  them.  Sometimes we just had fun  As bizarre as it might seem, sometimes  we just enjoyed ourselves. These were  mostly times when all participated in a  shared activity, like the volleyball and  baseball games, the song session and the  dance with Ad Hoc. Yet we always felt  sad upon leaving—we were free to go, but  they were still locked up.  This was a crucial point for our group.  We had made contact with the women and it  was essential that we strengthen our  connections.  Of course we seemed a bit  strange to many of them: we are committed  feminists who clearly reject the whole  baggage of "feminine requirements". Perhaps our appearance and our message seemed  threatening.  At this point, it would have been helpful  to have had the active co-operation of  the staff. Yet at each visit it seemed  there were more restrictions and while we  were never officially "barred" from Twin  Maples, we were not encouraged to come  back.  By the time of the 1980 convention in  Vancouver, the group had split. Our work  had just begun and we all felt that we  weren't doing enough. Ideological differences and growing frustration prompted  some women to look for other approaches.  Those that left took the name Woman  Against Prisons with them, and it is their  perspective.that we-assume is the one  presented in the March Kinesis. Some of  their projects that we know of, like the  excellent slide-sound presentation at the  National Lesbian Conference, have provided valuable occasions for women to get  together and discuss what is going on in  the prisons and how the women's movement  can be involved.  Yet as much as we agree with some of WAP's  analysis and trust their good faith toward  women, we are disturbed by some of their  statements and some of their implications  in the Kinesis article, especially their  glib dismissal of B.C.F.W.  Our group does not think that our initial  contact with Twin Maples was such a failure. For most of the women prisoners it  was their first exposure to feminism, and  while it would have been gratifying to  have evoked a more consistent response,  at least the seeds were planted. We know  for sure that a number of the woman  appreciated our efforts and the contact.  The administration never hindered us  overtly, and some of the staff were keenly  interested in what we were trying to do  in the prison and in the broader issues of  feminism, with which they were familiar.  It is regretful that there has been so  much misunderstanding and that it is so  difficult to agree on the truth. It seems  disastrous that the people most concerned  about the situation of women in prisons  seem to be working at cross purposes.  The eventual goal:  the discarding of the keys  After all, the truth is simple and its  application free. Only trust can act  as a medium and only by recognizing each  other and working together can we progress  towards the eventual goal: the discard  of the keys.  Active coercion has to cease and cooperation must extend a lot further than  polite but wary communication. Politeness can't disguise what is oppressive  and what is truth. The truth is that  oppression is destructive. By oppressing  each other, women are contributing to the  maintenance of an oppressive system.  Systematic oppression is what we must  challenge and it is our task at this  point to figure out how we can change it,  without letting our differences of opinion  destroy us in the meantime. After all,  we all together are society whether we  recognize each other or not.  We have to change what is destructive in  the way we deal with each other and to reject those laws, customs and institutions  that provoke hostility and reduce the  world to such a miserable place.  It is vital that we confront the routine  daily violence that goes on in the name VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  A woman is murdered at her workplace on Saturday morning  By Beverly Lyons  A woman shop clerk was shot and killed in  the Pacifie Centre Mall one Saturday in  May.  A "domestic dispute."  This was not just an isolated event symptomatic of the sick society living in densely populated urban situations.  It has to be named for what it was — sexism carried to its extreme, male violence  against women.  The shooting was "not a surprise" to the  woman's co-workers, according to the newspaper report. The owner of the shop and  his partner had been regularly escorting  the woman home from the shop after work  because she feared for her life.  A woman security officer reached the scene  of the crime alone, unarmed.  I work as a security officer.  This event brought home to me how grossly  underpaid, unprotected and unprepared we  are. How vulnerable we'are'-to attack. And  how we have to take responsibility for the  lives of thousands of citizens.  Where I work we work alone, unarmed, with  a radio for communication. And whatever  skills each of us has invididually developed are our sole protection.  Responses ignored real issue: sexism  The responses I've heard to Saturday's  shooting haven't surprised me.  "I've felt  that way about my wife at times," one man  said.  "He must have been high on pot or  something," was another comment. And, "He  must have been mentally deranged."  Nor was I surprised by the lack of attention the people at my workplace gave to  this event.  It' s too late now to give the woman who  was killed the support and protection she  needed in a society where the police and  the legal system carelessly file away  threats on women's lives as "lovers' quarrels ."  But there are some things we can do now.  We can spread correct information about  events like this one.' We can communicate  in a real way about how women can support  each other everywhere, in every workplace  and living situation.  And most important of all, we must never  pretend that when a man threatens a woman,  he doesn't mean it.  The only protection we have is to never  property of men, women don't have the freedom to act as independent persons. We are  not bought outright as slaves, but we are.  treated as slaves, with a greater fear of  leaving a relationship of dominance/submission than staying in it.  Our fear increases; so does determination  As women, collectively, our fear increases  each time we confront an event such as that  IM T/#£D OF HEAR/NO HOW 44£N /!/?£ TH#£jr£M£D.  lose the perspective that our oppression  is real. We, as women, must consistently  support each other to use the system we  do have: Rape Relief, counselling services,  crisis lines, transition houses and so on.  And we must support each other to move to  new locations if this seems the only safe  alternative.  In a sexist society where women are the  Saturday's shooting. Even if we don't have  words for it, deep down we feel what it is  like to be hunted.  Have you ever identified with that wary  alert look in the eyes of a deer? As our  fear increases, as we recognize a real  enemy, so does our will to support each  other in ever-more effective ways to defeat the enemy. Q  BCFW PRISON SUB-COMMITTEE   of order and survival. Violence in response to violence prevents health. It  is blindness to these facts that constitutes the basis of prejudice. We cannot  succeed in any of our efforts until we  can see this.  The B.C.F.W. takes a line somewhere between those that would burn the prisons  down and those who are employed by the  institutions. This does not mean we are  middle of the road: we are quite clear  where we stand.  Burn a prison down and three more will  take its place. We wish to transcend the  divisions of class, race, and political  conditioning. We acknowledge that there  are women of integrity trying to do their  best, working within an impossible and  corrupt system, if not to redeem then at  least to make tolerable the senseless  tedium of a prisoner's day. Our position  is independent: evolving yet consistent  with B.C.F.W. policy and with our recognition that part of our task is to work  with the staff as well as the prisoners.  Feminism is an ethic for all women and  the way to cut through the barriers that  perpetuate oppression is to step beyond  them.  Instead of prisons being maintained  we wish to see money being spent on alternative facilities in the form of  transition houses, crisis centres and  refuges. By a refuge, we mean a home  situation that is basically supportive.  We can see no sense in providing prisons  when homes are what people need, and  opportunities to discover their creative  potential. Prisons hinder rather than  facilitate social respect and cultivate  differences instead of developing perspective. The sooner we do away with  prisons, the sooner we can begin to reconstruct this crumbling edifice we call  society.  But how can this reconstruction begin?  After the regrouping, the sub-committee  decided to devote some effort to research,  theoretical and on the street. Theoretical:  trying to clarify our position on such  things as prostitution, drug abuse and  street life in general. And on the street:  getting to know the women personally and  becoming familiar with the particular  problems and challenges they inevitably  face on release as they trade one oppressive environment for another in their  efforts to survive.  Also at this time the Oakalla Women's Unit  is slowly beginning to recognize the  potential of the women's movement. It has  been recommended after the inquest into  the tragic suicide of Maureen Richard in  Oakalla last fall, that community groups,  especially women's groups, be allowed  access to the prison.  Our application to present feminist work  shops is being reviewed and we are hopeful  that this time we will be more successful.  The Prison Sub-Committee welcomes feminist  input and we are counting on the feminist  community to make this project comprehensive .  The task that we have taken on grows with  our awareness. We cannot speak for other  women's groups in Vancouver working on  prison issues. We would appreciate^it if  they did not assume to speak for us.  It is unfortunate that strategic differences have interfered with our working  relationships and we hope that this  article has cleared some of the confusion  that has flourished as a result of our  lack of communication.  It would benefit us all to become more  familiar with each others work. Determining common goals, recognizing our  respective positions, and allowing for  our differences means that ultimately we  can all benefit from them. Supporting  each other in this manner—that is where  our strength lies. 0_  Women Against Prisons chooses  not to respond  We are choosing not to respond to this opinion because we have long felt that energy is best put to use fighting against  the System that is oppressing us, rather  than creating our own system of oppressing each other.'  It is not that we think process is irrelevant, but that we want our work to be directed primarily against the Enemy out  there in a positive and constructive way.  As to the allegations and innuendoes tossed aro'uid in this article, Women Against  Prisons has already given the details of  our herstory and political position in  the March 1981 issue of Kinesis. We  stand by that. Kinesis June 1981  CULTURAL WORK  Energetic, inspiring, progressive.. .that's  By Eileen Brown  High quality jazz music with a progressive  political-message is rare enough, but it's  a special occasion when it comes from a  group of highly skilled lesbian wimin.  Swingshift, a band of four highly-skilled,  energetic wimin from San Francisco, played to an appreciative audience at Magee  Secondary School, April 25. The event was  produced by the Lesbian Conference  committee.  Bonnie Lockhart on piano and vocals, was  exciting and energetic, moving through a  variety of styles and singing many of her  original compositions. Lockhart was  previously with the Berkeley Women's Music  Collective and can be heard on their album  Tryin' to Survive.  She has also worked  with the Red Star Singers, singing on the  album, the Force of Life.  On drums and vocals Joan Lefkowitz displayed her broad knowledge of rhythm  structures, sensitively flowing from slow,  quiet pieces to all-out foot stampers with  .equally satisfying results. Lefkowitz is  another musician with experience; over the  year she's worked with various groups  including Rosie and the.Riveters.  Susan Colson on electric bass and vocals  is a fine soloist, using the full range  of the instrument and producing a consr-  istently clean sound. Her use of the  bass went far beyond maintaining the rhythm  structure of the tune. Colson was  involved in Portland's Baba Yaga and plays  on their album, On the Edge. M&ny of the  original songs are hers as well, including  a driving anti-nuke song called Time Bomb.  Schapiro's flute worked like a silver thread  Naomi Schapiro, on flute, saxophone and  vocals, comes from Boston, and was in a  group called About Time. Her flute worked  like a silver thread, melodically stringing together all the other instruments  with their percussive sounds. She displayed wonderful control in pitch, tone  and rhythm, soaring up higher than any of  the voices. She plays the sax much less,  but it's a real treat to hear what she does  with it as well.  Working together they have come up with  some dynamite arrangements of original  and standard jazz compositions. Many are  instrumental pieces, giving us a chance  to really hear the*music, without having  to concentrate on the words. When they  do sing, however, their four voices work  quite well together.  They are skilled singers and are able to  do complex harmonies with or without the  instrumental back-up.  Lyrics about jobs, politics, hopes, fears  It's in their a cappella  singing, though,  that we best hear the intricacies of their  singing and the content of their lyrics.  They are really telling us something -  about jobs, about political struggles,  about hopes and fears for the future of our  planet. There is a Bernice Reagan song,  predicting: "everything's gonna be turning  over," and a South African song telling of  the black wimin's struggles against  apartheid.  They also sang a beautiful song in Spanish  which has arisen from the support movements for Nicaragua and El Salvador,  entitled "Nicaragua Vencio".  I personally could have done without the  slightly altered 60's pop song, "My Girl"  but none of the other songs were objectionable.  In fact the choice of material  on the whole, was quite moving and thought-  provoking .  It's unfortunate that so few of us got to  hear and see this fine performance. One  hopes that the next time they come to  Vancouver (they said they would, like'to  return) they'll be playing to a full house.  SWINGSHIFT: (L to R( Joan Lefkowitz, Susan Colson, Bonnie Lockhart, Naomi Schapiro  J got together with Swingshift members  and a tape recorder the day after their  performance.    What follows is an edited  version of that interview.        — EILEEN  EILEEN: I would like to know what kind of  training and background each of you have  had in music.  NAOMI: I started playing piano when I was  seven and started playing flute when I was  11 or 12, studying with private teachers.  About five years ago I started playing jazz  and studied pretty intensively. I've been  playing saxophone for eight months.  SUSAN: I started playing the piano also  when I was about 5, 'till I was about 10.  T started playing guitar cause I really  liked Johnny Cash, and studied it.off and  on all through high school.  I lived in Brazil for a year, which pretty  much turned my head around musically,  about what I listened to and played.  I pretty much stopped playing music in the  last couple of years of college, cause I  was so politically active, and then I hurt  my hand in %  car wreck and so I stopped  playing completely for several years.  Then I began the bass five years ago, mostly because I had always really wanted to  play the bass morr than the guitar. It  never really occurred to me to do it until  I saw another womon do it. Then I went to  a community college in Portland that has  a great jazz program.  JOAN: I didn't start playing piano when I  was 5 and have never played piano. But I  have always sung. I started playing guitar  when I was a little kid, which I enjoyed,  but I always knew it wasn't my instrument.  So about 7 years ago, I started playing  drums. I've taken lessons from various  different musicians - a guy who played in  a symphony, a rock drummer, and than a  jazz drummer who's real into polyrhythms  and African rhythms of various kinds.  BONNIE: My background is also mostly in  singing, mostly in church. I had a real  loud voice when I was a did. My brother  played the piano, and I wanted to too, but  it was a real competitive scene. So I sort  of bowed out of it, but I felt sad cause I  felt real attracted to the instrument. I  had a guitar when I was in high school and  I'd put on a fake ponytail and go to the  only coffeehouse in Orange County, California and sing Joan Baez songs and stuff  like that.  I worked as a vocalist in a lot of shortlived rock bands and finally in the Red  Star Singers and felt real dissatisfied,  even though I loved singing, with the role  of the "girl" singer.  I really wanted to have an instrument, but  it took me a real long time to decide to  play piano. I finally did, and went to the  community college and studied music theory,  and found a womon jazz pianist named Debbie  Porres who plays in the Bay Area. She's an  excellent teacher. She really understood  what'it was like to start an instrument  when you're 25. Actually I was more like  28,  and I've been playing for six years  now.  EILEEN: I'd like to know about the band,  how that came together.  When the Berkeley Women's Music Collective  was taking a break, Bonnie and I started  jamming together. Then Susan came down from  Portland to produce the B.W.M.C. album,  and finally after about two months of phone  calls between me and her, the three of us  got together to jam. We jammed for awhile  and when we decided to call ourselves a  band we started looking for a horn player.  Our politics, lifestyles were similar  A few months later Naomi, who lived in  Boston, was visiting the Bay Area. She  played with us and we all liked it a lot  and realized that our politics and working  styles were similar. But she lived 3000  miles away. She was thinking about moving  and we were definitely looking for a melody  instrument, so we asked if she would come  out and join us.  NAOMI: And I did. I had finally decided  that if I wanted to be a serious musician  I couldn't do it in Boston. It's really  true that, generally, in the Bay Area, CULTURAL WORK  Kinesis June 1981  there are more people trying to do some  kind of combination of culture and"pro-  gressive politics.  EILEEN:  With all these people doing cultural and political work,  do you feel  supported? Or do you feel that there could  be more support for cultural workers?  BONNIE: I would say both. It's real important to feel the support that there is  because we wouldn't be here if it weren't  there. And we also need more support just  like any working person needs more support.  No one gets the support they need. I guess  that economically, that's where it's  hardest.  SUSAN: There's never enough money to go  around within the community that supports  us.  EILEEN: And you all work at outside gobs  as well? What kinds of gobs do you do?  BONNIE: I teach music in three different  school programs. It's part-time work, so  it gives me time for the band, too.  NAOMI: I'm a nurse, and I work with a  temporary agency, three days a week.  SUSAN: I work at a smaHr-eommunity organization that finds volunteers to work with  other organizations. That's a very fortunate situation cause I have flexible hours.  JOAN: I used to do the kind of work that  Susan does. Now I do radio and TV tech  stuff. Definitely it's necessary for us  all to be working. The band does not support us. We're supporting the band.  EILEEN: Do you think it will ever be possible for the band to support you?  the kids and all, I just want to smash  things against the wall, because I feel  that for us as lesbians that's not possible.  If my lover had all the support in the world  from her family, etc, it might be possible  for us to have the freedom for me to be  on the rOad and to work any weekend and be  up late, and stuff — but we don't have  that kind of support.  The answer is that there is no answer at  this point.  I think that's another reason why I work  with kids. I really want kids in my life  and that's a way I can have them.  JOAN: I also have a relationship to Toby,  But it is really limited by the rest of my  life. I see him every other weekend for a  day and a night and I really treasure it.  But if it happens when we have two gigs  I have to call up and make some sort of  trading arrangement with other people  who spend time with him. It makes me feel  bad.  I'd love to be able to be more committed about it. It's a big question.  Also, I haven't finished making decisions  about whether or not to have kids of my  own. Whenever we get more than a year  ahead of now in our planning for the band  — I start thinking: what does that all  mean?  Still deciding about having children  SUSAN: I've never made a choice not to  have kids.  I feel like I make that choice  every day.  NAOMI: That's how I feel, too. I'm 31. I  keep saying that next year I'm going to  I choose music that is healing to me  SUSAN: I think it could be possible. I  think that's a choice. Maybe after four  Qr five years we would be at the point  where we could be and then we would have  to decide if we're willing to do that —  to take that risk and be on the road that  much.  JOAN: Alive (a women's jazz band in the  Bay Area) is on the road eleven months of  the year now and that's how they survive.  BONNIE: Right, and Robin Flower and Nancy  Vogel have made a living out of it this  year. But it means being home about six  weeks out of the year.  JOAN: If you have anything else at home  like a lover or kids or...  BONNIE: You won't:  SUSAN:  It will all be gone.  JOAN: But that's just the way it is for a  woman musician.  If you want to make it  you have to tour a lot.  BONNIE: For me, I want to move in that direction. I don't want us to feel defeated,  that we could never make a living. But it's  not like we're all gonna quit our jobs next  year and go for it. It's too brutal to  take those kinds of risks, but I feel like  we all want to take more and more risks and  then evaluate where that puts us.  EILEEN:    Speaking about kids,  I'm curious  about your situations.    Are any of you  being responsible for kids right now? And  how is that working out?  BONNIE: Well, my lover has a kid, Toby.  He's one-and-a-half years old. And it's  very hard to live the life that I live and  be responsible for a kid. I don't know  anyone who does it, working in performing  arts at the level of commitment that I want  to, and really work that out satisfactor-  ily.  It feels very sad to me and I end up thinking a lot about men, who have relationships  and children and get to have that.  Every time I hear the Crosby, Stills, Nash  and Young song about that little house and  —Bonnie Lockhart  decide if I'm going to have kids or not,  cause I've never made the decision not to.  But in some ways it feels like it's being  made for me.  JOAN: I know that at least in San Francisco the number of collective households  is diminishing really quickly — to the  point where I hardly know any now — which  is a big factor in childraising, I think.  It's a big production to schlepp the kids  around. Whereas if we all lived in the  same house it would be able to happen.  EILEEN: The next thing I want to talk  about is spirituality and healing with  music.     What are your thoughts on that?  NAOMI: One of the things I really love  about playing music is that it's one of  the few areas of my life where I put huge  amounts of energy and get as much out of it.  Political organizing for years and being  a nurse for a living are extremely draining.  So for myself, playing is rejuventating.  In terms of the effect of our music on  the audience I think more about inspiring  people and giving people a lot of energy.  I don't think about our music in terms of  healing so much.  You can touch people  SUSAN: I think? there's a way to do a performance so that you can have people feeling both energijzed and touched in a calming sort of way. I can do this for myself  with us as a group, or with other musicians  — not in a performance situation.  BONNIE: I know I choose music that is healing to me. It's a direction I want to go  in more — really hearing the different  sounds that our instruments can make and  getting those vibrations into our bodies.  I think it's scary to perform. It's harder to trust that people are going to know  how to react.  JOAN: I feel that a cappella is a healing  kind of music, that people love to hear  just voices. And I love singing along  with people. That's very healing for all  of us.  EILEEN:    I know you do music from Black  and Latin cultures,  and I'd like to know  if you 've had any reaction from Black and  Latin communities about being white and  doing that music.  JOAN:  In terms of Latin music, in the Bay  Area the bonds between the Latin community  and the white gay and lesbian communities  are being built now, and we've been asked  to do several rallies around El Salvador  and Nicaragua. We don't stand on stage  and go, "Hey, we're a bunch of white dykes  ...dig us I"  But we want them to accept  who we are and we want to accept who they  are and we really want to work together.  I don't think we've ever received disrespect for doing Latin music, or for doing  Spanish lyrics. They're often surprised  — happily.  NAOMI: It's always a question for me someplace because I know that I'm coming into  a history, where, in the U.S., the white  mainstream has diluted and exploited music coming from other cultures.  I think  that we are very careful to try to give  credit to the roots of our music. If people feel bad about it we've never heard  it.  You have to remember you're white  SUSAN: If you're white and you play this  music I think you have to be conscious  about that and express' that at all times.  That what makes it or breaks it.  NAOMI: I'm also trying to be more conscious of integrating all^the influences  — sometimes there's a part of a flute  solo that the melody line comes from a  Bach flute sonata, and sometimes I use  the kind of minor scale that was in the  Jewish songs I heard when I was growing  up.  BONNIE: If music has some kind of visionary role for me it's real clear that it's  about multiculturalism. Music is a place  where that kind of vision can be presented  and people can be not so scared. And that  is real exciting to me. So it's a matter  of finding a way to do that which gives  credit to everybody who make the contributions .  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN offices are now located at 400A West 5th  Ave., Vancouver V5Y 1J8. Office hours  are Monday through Wednesday 9 to  5:30, Thursday 9 to 9.  Our new phone number is  873-1427  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society  and work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those  of the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 400A West 5th Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C. V5Y1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation. Kinesis is mailed  monthly to all members. Individual subs to  Kinesis are $10.00 per year. We ask members to base their donations on this, and  their own financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Ani Arnott,  Janet Beebe, Cole Dudley, Jan de Grass,  Penny Goldsmith, Darlyn Jewett, Gayla  Reid, Julie Wheelwright and Cat Wick-  strom. LETTERS  BCFW women request changes in Kinesis editorial procedures  Lee MacKay, speaking for the women who attended the May 19,  1981 British Columbia Federation of Women Lower Mainland  Regional Meeting of Accountability.  At the British Columbia Federation of Women  Lower Mainland Regional Meeting of May 19,  1981, we discussed accountability, focusing  on practical ways to facilitate understanding between one feminist group and another  and between feminist groups and individual  women.  Understanding one another's positions will  not always lead us to agree with each other  but when we fail to understand each other,  agreement becomes impossible.  We believe that debate on controversial  issues within the movement is essential,  but that insofar as possible we need to  find ways to enable this debate to take  place in ways that do not give anti-feminists ammunition that they can use to damage  our movement.  At our regional meetings, a woman from each  member group represented at the meeting  gives a report on the activities of her  group since the preceding meeting. We  decided that we would combine these group  reports with what we are calling a "clearing".  *  After each group representative reports,  we will take time ask questions, check out  rumours, share our concerns about or  criticisms of wha"-- the group is doing,  and share, as well, information or opin--  ions we have about how any policies and  actions of the group seem to be particularly useful and effective. We can also  share ideas that we think might be useful  to each other's groups. Information, ideas,  concerns and opinions shared at regional  meetings can be taken back to individual  groups by their representatives.  We need a forum wider than the BCFW  We tried this clearing procedure at the  May 19 meeting and we thought it worked  well. If many groups send representatives  who are well informed about their group's  activities and policies to regional meet-_  ings, the clearings at these meetings  will help us understand and learn from  each other.  Not all feminists belong to groups which  are B.C.F.W. members, or indeed, to any  feminist groups. We need a forum wider  than the B.C.F.W. in which to share our  ideas. In British Columbia, Kinesis is  one of the most important mediums of  feminist communication.  Clearing can be done between feminist  groups, and between groups and individuals within our movement, in the pages  of Kinesis. When we call each other to  account in Kinesis, however, we must  remember that not everyone who reads what  we have to say will be a feminist.  We have two requests to make to the women  who put together Kinesis. First, we would  like you to adhere to the editorial policy you set out on page 23 of the February  "Kinesis will make every effort to prepare  for publication any group's response to a  criticism in time for simultaneous release.'  We note that Cherbeau criticizes the Vancouver Rape Relief collective in an article entitled "Accountability - "ho is  Accountable to Whom?" in the May/81 issue  of Kinesis. The Rape Relief representative  at the Regional Meeting told us that Rape  Relief had not been invited to respond to  this criticism in the same issue.  Clearly, group members cannot respond to  a criticism in Kinesis of their group unless they are given access to the criticism well before the deadline for submission of articles.  We therefore suggest that anyone who decides to use Kinesis to comment on the  policies or actions of a feminist group or  individual send a copy of her article to  the group or individual she is discussing  so that those discussed can respond immediately.  If the writer of an article fails to do  this, we think that the women preparing  Kinesis must take responsibility for providing the group or individual discussed  with a copy of the article soon enough  that an immediate response can be prepared .  Our second request is that you make an  addition to your editorial policy. We  would like you to be ready to delay  publication of an article for a month if  a group or individual being discussed  convinces you that immediate publication  could be substantially damaging to an  individual or group within the movement,  or to the movement as a whole.  We are not suggesting that articles be  censored, or that publication be delayed  for trivial reasons. You would have to  judge when the possibility of damage was  serious enough to warrant delaying airing  a controversy, and in making- this judgment  you would have to weigh heavily your  responsibility to provide feminists with  an open forum for debate.  I will give a couple of examples of cases  in which Kinesis collective members might  want to delay publication of an article.  Movement criticism of a group could be  used by unsympathetic government officials  as an argument against extending funding  to that group. It would therefore seem  sensible to avoid public censure of a  group in the month in which their funding  was under review.  If a mother was fighting a 'child custody  case in court, it would not be wise to  publicly criticize or even comment on  the way in which she had participated in.  a lesbian conference.  If you make sure that groups or individuals criticized in articles have access  to the article before it is published,  the groups or individuals concerned will  be able to inform you if they believe  there is serious reason for waiting before  printing it.  Dorrie Brannoek argues in her article  "We Must Have Complete Freedom of Feminist  Thought" (Kinesis, April/81) that giving  people a chance to respond to criticism  in the issue of Kinesis in which the  criticism appears would "just create  another obstacle that women would have  to jump over in order to express themselves."  She seems to equate giving women a  chance to reply to. criticism at the  time when it is given with censorship,  with failing to take risks and be direct  with each other, and with "not being  strong enough to be able to express our  differences."  At the B.C.F.W. Regional Meeting, we  all agreed that clear direct communication within our movement is urgent,  and that differences of opinion must  be aired if our feminist analysis is  to grow and deepen. But we think that  communication will be facilitated, not  stifled, by giving people a chance to  answer public criticisms when they are  given.  A letter to the Quadra management  By Vancouver Women's Bookstore, Ariel Books and Octopus  We had hoped that the dialogue which took  place last year between the Quadra management and the feminist community had cleared  some of the tensions which had built up -  that it was agreed to disagree but respect  each other's focus. However, in the past  few weeks, acts of commission and omission  would seem to negate the "truce" that has  existed.  The first blatant act of omission was not  spreading the word that Teresa Trull was  appearing at the Quadra several Thursday  nights ago.  We realize that the Quadra management is  wary of very overt publicity, but placing  some announcements-or at least phone calls  - to women spaces like Ariel Books, the  Vancouver Women's Bookstore, Octopus Books,  the VSW and Women in Focus would not  jeopardize their position; after all, they  have distributed notices of their operation to these places.  The feminist community welcomes the opportunity to see and hear good women artists,  whether local or from out of town - so it  was with great chagrin that just a few of  us heard about Trull's appearance quite  by chance - and we understand the singer  and her piano accompanist were given short  shrift during their performance.  The act of commission referred to was in  reference to Robin Tyler's appearance at  the Quadra. It seemed a bit strange that  no advance tickets were available since  her timing was made to concur with the  Lesbian Conference, so we were relieved  to receive tickets from the conference  organizers two days prior to her engagement; we'd had many inquiries for them.  3ut on the day of the performance, the  management of the Quadra determined that  these tickets contravened terms of the  contract with Tyler and were, therefore,  "bootleg". Octopus Books East appears to  have been the first ticket distributor  "hit" by a member of the Quadra management. Accompanied by a number of women  using threatening and intimidating tactics, they went to the Women's Bookstore.  The Vancouver Women's Bookstore fared  somewhat better since it received a phone  call from the Quadra advising cease and  desisting sale of the Tyler tickets so  that when the ticket confiscators arrived,  they learned ticket sales had ceased - but  this fact didn't deter some intimidation  in the course of confiscating the "bootleg'  tickets.  These tickets were placed for advance sale  in good faith - that there was a misunderstanding could have been cleared up in a  more civilized way.  Why the strong objection?  But why the strong objection in the first  place? It appears advance sales did not  contravene the terms of the contract between Tyler and the Quadra. There could  have been better control of the flow of  people if numbered tickets had been used  both for outside advance sales as well as  at the door. The way things worked out,  many women felt trashed and frustrated.  In terms of economics surely the Quadra  need not freeze out the feminist community by ignoring us; it.can certainly use  the patronage of as many women as possible.  All we are asking is the common courtesy  of letting us know when you have live  artists performing so that we can take  advantage of such opportunities - particularly for those of us who don't make the  bar scene all that regularly. Kinesis June 1981  LETTERS  Proposals are convoluted, cumbersome and unnecessary  By Dorrie Brannock  This letter is a response to the requests  from Lee MacKay, "speaking for the women  who attended the May 19, 1981 British Columbia Federation of Women Lower Mainland  Regional Meeting on Accountability."  There were six women at this meeting. One  had left before a decision was reached.  It would have been more honest but less  impressive if the names of the women at the  meeting were signed beneath the letter instead of the long and cumbersome title.  I question the intent of the women at the  meeting. I got a phone call from Lee Mac  Kay (a person whom I like and respect but  don' t always agree with) on Friday May 22  telling me that she and some other women  at the BCFW meeting had decided to request  that the staff of Kinesis make some new  editorial policy.  Here are their suggestions:  "...anyone who decides to use Kinesis to  comment on the policies,grractions of a  feminist group or individual send a copy  of her article to the group or individual  she is discussing so that those discussed  can respond immediately.  "If the writer of an article fails to do  this...the women preparing Kinesis must."  They also request that Kinesis delay publication if a group or individual convinces  Kinesis that publication would be "substantially damaging."  My response to the phone call was anger  because I thought that the request has the  weight of the BCFW behind it. And because  I think that it is a very cumbersome meth-  It will effectively silence women  It's a method that will effectively silence  women who are just beginning to speak out  in a public way.  I also believe that it would only lead to  women feeling less powerful and from their  sense of powerlessness rumours and confus-  sion would increase.  It is true that those good with a pen, the  more articulate, experienced political women might be able to use Kinesis effectively on this "immediate response" basis. But  a lot of women wouldn't be able to.  It was quite ironic that after I st<  being angry and started using reason I  said to Lee, "If you believe what you have  written you can't publish your letter without first giving me a copy and giving me  time to respond.  Lee's response to this was, "Can you get  an article into Kinesis by tomorrow?"  (That was the deadline. )  I answered, "No  and I think that it is an unreasonable request ."  Lee said, "We talked a little about that  and decided that even though we referred  to you in the article you don't fit into  the category that qualifies for needing  time to respond."  I went to down to Kinesis and got a copy  of the letter. After reading it twice I  still don't understand why I don't qualify.  Who interprets the rules?  I think, it is a good practice to send out  a copy of a criticism to the people that :  the article is about. But because it is  a good practice does not mean that it  should therefore be a rule. Nor does it  mean that one must always write an article  in time to give the group or individual  mentioned in the article time to reply in  the same issue.  The letter signed by Lee MacKay comments.,  "Dorrie Brannock...seems to equate giving  women a chance to reply to a criticism at.  the time when it is given with censorship."  I don't.  I just think it is a cumbersome practice  that would hinder women who are just learning to speak out in public.  It also puts the person who takes the in-  iative to write as always being the first  to speak and the person who replies as always having the last word.  Or do women who reply have to send a copy  of their reply to the original writer for  her to reply? And if she replies does she  have to send a copy of her reply to the  replier, etc. etc. Where does it end?  The requested policy changes would also  make it very difficult for the staff of  Kinesis who are busy trying to put out a  paper.  What might happen  I want to address a few more things here.  As long as you use examples of what might  happen and don't give concrete examples of  what has  happened you will find reasons or  excuses why Kinesis should now made additions to its editorial policy.  The letter used as one example to back up  requests for a change in editorial policy  the case of lesbian custody: "If a mother  was fighting a child custody case in court  it would not be wise to publicly criticize or even comment on the way in which  she had participated in a lesbian conference ."  When has Kinesis ever come up with a boo-  boo like this? They haven't.  No policy, no matter how fine-sounding can  ever beat integrity and honour. And the  staff at Kinesis have both.  What actually happened  The article that started the murmurs around  groups getting space in the same issue was  Ellen Baragon's article, "To court or not  to court" in the October 1979 Kinesis.  That article came in for a lot of criticism from Rape Relief both in Kinesis and  at the first accountability meeting around  Rape Relief's new policy.  Ellen Baragon's article was clear, precise  and informative. None of the letters  from the women at Rape Relief that were  printed in Kinesis nor anything I heard at  the accountability meeting contradicted  a word she said.  The next article that made a rumble was  Margo Dunn's, "Is there a place for.men  inside the women's movement?" in the November 1980 Kinesis. It was the. subject of  debate in following issues. The most recent article to cause a stir .was Cher-  beau's "Accountability— who is accountable and to whom?" in the May 1981 Kinesis.  Cherbeau is a woman who when I?do understand what she is saying I usually don't  agree with.' I tried not to let the way  I perceive Cherbeau influence my judgement. I don't think I succeeded. It was  one of the most incomprehensible articles  I have ever read.  I do not think that any of the above articles are reason enough to implement policy of the nature requested by the five  women.  It is ironic how I am staying up until,  the early hours of the morning trying to  finish this letter in time to get it in  the same issue.  If the letter was signed  by the five women who were present at the  meeting I would have been happy to wait  until the next issue of Kinesis. But  because the letter gives the false impression of having the weight of the Lower  Mainland BCFW groups behind it I wanted  it corrected.  That's my reason for beating the deadline.  My reasons for writing the article are:  * To let people know where the suggestions  for policy change were coming from.  * To show support for the staff of Kinesis  and its present policy.  * To keep Kinesis accessible to as many women as possible as a vehicle for expressing ourselves.  * To keep an open forum to show our appreciation and discuss our differences.  * To make the reader aware of the issues  from different viewpoints.  * To get support for my point of view. 0.  A note on Cherbeau's article. It was  submitted in response to the article  by Rape Relief in the February Kinesis. We asked for a rewrite. By the  time it was printed, two issues had  gone by. Do readers want simultaneous -  responses to responses? We pulled  this off for the prison article (p.14)  because the group responding did so  by not responding.  Watch for our response to MacKay's  requests in the July issue. We'd like  to hear from you, too. — Kinesis  Szaz's takes food out of the  mouths of babes  Dear Kinesis,  For a mother and child breastfeeding is a  joyful and rewarding experience. However,  in spite of a trend away from bottlefeeding  women continue to encounter social prejudices which inhibit the right to breastfeed children outside the home.  Several weeks ago I was in Szaz's on the  corner of 13th and Granville, which describes itself as a family restaurant and  delicatessan. While I was there I had to  feed my hungry three month old son. Not  two minutes passed before the manager  approached the table end advised that the  policy of the restaurant was to ask breastfeeding mothers to sit back by the washrooms, or leave the premises.  According to him, "single people and men"  find the sight offensive.  After a lengthy conversation with two  managers, one of whom was.extremely obnoxious, as well as with the owner, Mr.  Peter Szaz, I left.  However, I find the situation totally  absurd that such a natural and loving  necessity of feeding a young baby in a  public place be judged obscene. Must I and  other mothers feel awkward and hesitant to  care for the needs of our children outside  the home?  Would restaurant owners, such as Mr. Szaz,  have us remain at home twenty-four hours a  day that we might not "offend" others with  the necessities of child care?  For parents and others concerned with the  rights of children what is offensive  is a policy which refuses service to mothers  on the premise that breastfeeding is unsightly and indecent in the eyes of the  general public.  Theresa Stowe  This experience has happened to others in  town. Has it happened to you? If so, we'd  like to hear about it. Kinesis June 1981  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  VSW ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING takes place  June 24 at 517 East Broadway, 7:30  p.m. Everyone welcome.  ' VSW presentation by Sylvia Spring to  the Federal Cultural Policy Review  Commission takes place June 18, noon,  in the Hyatt Regency, 655 Burrard.  Come and show your sisterly support.  WOMEN AGAINST IMPERIALISM one-day workshop  on imperialism in Canada takes place  June 14 at Britannia above the library.  Race and class, plus action around imperialism will be topics. Nilak Butler  of the People Struggling to be Free  will speak about Native struggles.  Lunch is available. Times: 11 a.m.  Britannia Community Centre, 1661 Napier.  WALKATHON FOR RAPE RELIEF HOUSE 11 a.m.  Sunday June 28 along Stanley Park Seawall. Childcare provided. Walk or sponsor a walker. For details and pledge  sheets, call Rape Relief at 872-8212.  BCFW REGIONAL MEETING of lower mainland  groups takes place June 16 at VSW,  400 A West 5th, at 7:30 p.m. Accountability will be discussed. Call Cole  at 732-6819 if you need childcare.  WOMEN'S BUILDING MEETING on June 18 at  7:00 p.m. at VSW, 400 A West 5th Ave.  Please send a representative from-  your group if you want to use such a  space.  GROUPS  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is open for calls  two nights a week, Thursday and Sunday  from 7:00 to 10:00 p.m. at 734-1016.  Drop-in every second Sunday.  LESBIAN AND FEMINIST MOTHERS Political  Action Group meets every first and  third Wednesday of the month at 926  Commercial Drive at 6:00 p.m. LAFMPAG  is open to any woman interested in the  issue of mothering and children within  the feminist community. For more information call Mary at 251-5034.  DROP-IN FOR LESBIANS OVER 40, Mondays at  8:00 p.m. at 322 West Hastings. Make  friends and socialize in a non-threatening atmosphere.  PRESS GANG Printers and Publishers are now  open on Saturdays 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. at  603 Powell, 253-1224. They're open during the week, too, from 9:30 to 5:30.  BCFW NEEDS A NEW BANNER for use by the lower mainland in paradestand at women's  events. Anyone who would like to make  one please submit a design and a cost  estimate to 1740 East Georgia Vancouver  before June 16.  WOMAN-CENTRED TRANSFORMATIONS, providing  psychic survival tools for women involved in personal and social change will  be taking place in weekly groups May  20 to July 8, 7:30 — 10:00 p.m. at  #1  - 1774 Grant Street, Vancouver. For  details call 251-2534.  SINGLE . .OTHERS SYMPOSIUM planning mtg.  will be held on an ongoing basis  Tuesdays, 7-9pm at the YWCA, 580  Burrard in the library/lounge area.  Childcare provided. Volunteers are  needed to help plan this year's  symposium. Call. Judy Rogers,  683-2531, local 252 for more info.  *&&  HOSPITAL AND HEALTH WORKERS, two programs  on health & safety, presented by Women's  Action on Occupational Health. Wed, June  3 and Tues, June 9 at 7:30pm at Mount  Pleasant Community Centre, 3161 Ontario.  Free. Childcare provided - call 224-4098..  ON THE AIR  THE LESBIAN SHOW  June 11: Political and non-political  lesbians.  June 18: Lesbians in sports.  June 25: Music show, highlighting some  artists scheduled for mid-July Vancouver  folk festival.  THE LESBIAN SHOW on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, 7:30 ~ 8:30 p.m. each Thursday.  JOBS  PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT WORKER AT VSW. We  need a worker to develop and coordinate  our programming for women; to liaise  with other community groups; to do media  work on pertinent issues and to communicate with governments about funding.  ADVOCACY WORKER: We also need a worker  to help set up women's self-advocacy  groups and to do one-to-one peer counselling and referral.  Call VSW at 873-1427 for more details.  TRANSITION HOUSE in Coquitlam has an opening for a permanent part-time worker.  The counsellor will be on-call for a  minimum of two hours a day in the house.  Weekend work, Saturday 9 am to Monday  9 am. Person should have good communication skills and have taken an assertiveness training course. Apply by June  10 to Coquitlam Women's Transition  House, Box 213, Port Coquitlam, V3C 3V7.  CONVENTION PLANNING COORDINATOR for the  BCFW convention to be held in Vancouver  November 6, 7 and 8 is being sought by  the convention planning committee.  Apply immediately to BCFW, Box 24687,  Station C, Vancouver V5T 4E2.  CLASSIFIED  BESELER 35mm ENLARGER FOR SALE. Also Seal  Compress dry mounter and assorted darkroom accessories. Call Makara 253-8931.  for details. Going fasti  WOMEN IN FOCUS has available a complete  catalogue of Womansize, the latest exhibition at the Women In Focus Art Gallery. The catalogue includes 32 8" x  10" photographs of women's art and  is ideal for framing. " The Womansize  poster is also available (23" x 17").  Catalogue is $9, poster is $1.50 and  individual postcards are 40 cents. Contact Women In Focus at #204 — 456  West Broadway, Vancouver V5Y 1R3.  AMAZON APPLIANCES ~ a complete appliance  repair service by women in the Vancouver — Fraser Valley area. Rates are  negotiable. Call Dorothy at 462-7710  weekends and evenings.  JUST LOST A SPOUSE? Emotional support,  social and educational activities for  the widowed, separated and divorced  being offered by LIFE resource centre.  For details phone 873-5013.  W0MANVISI0N SHOWS  June 15: Art show, with a review of  Erika Ritter's 'Automatic Pilot'.  June 22: News show.  June 29: Preview of coming events at  Vancouver Folk Festival in July.  W0MANVISI0N on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM  Monday, 7:00 — 8:00 p.m.  PUBLICATIONS  THE RADICAL REVIEWER has a new address:  P.O. Box 24953, Station C,. Vancouver  B.C. Subscriptions are $5 individual,  $ 10 institutional and $50 sustainers.  Deadline for submissions to the next  issue is August 15.  ROOM OF ONE'S OWN, a feminist journal of  literature and criticism, invites submissions for two upcoming special issues: Works In Progress and Memoirs.  Length should be 6000 maximum and the  deadline is September 30 1981. $100  will be offered for each lead piece.  Room of One's Own, P.O.Box 46160, Station G, Vancouver B.C. V6R 4G5.  HOWE SOUND WOMEN'S CENTRE, located at  38036 Cleveland Ave, Squamish B.C. has  just published Vol 1, #1 of their newsletter. To subscribe, send $5 to the  centre, Box 2052, Squamish B.C. VON 3G0.  WOMEN WHO ARE BLIND or physically disabled  can receive feminist and lesbian books,  periodicals and information on women's  issues from the Women's Braille Press,  P.O. Box 8475, Minneapolis, MN 55408.  THE FEMALE ATHLETE conference proceedings  are now available. More than 400 women  from across North America participated  at this conference at Simon Fraser U  last year. Abigail Hoffman, Dorothy  Harris and Marina van der Merwe are  among contributors. Cost is $9 from  Continuing Studies, SFU, Burnaby V5A  1S6.  IN HER OWN RIGHT, selected essays on women's history in B.C., edited by Cathy  Kess and Barbara Latham is still available for $6 from In Her Own Right,  Liberal and Applied Arts Division, Cam-  osun College, 1950 Lansdowne Road, Victoria B.C. V8P 5J2.  MIDWIFERY IS A LABOUR OF LOVE, a source-  . book of factual and moral support for  introducing quality midwifery services  to your province and state is available  for $8 from the Midwifery Task Force  Association, 1244 Shorepine Walk, Vancouver B.C. V6H 3T8.  WIMMIN OF THE EARTH BONDING newsletter,  aiming to provide eco-feminist information, will appear this summer. Two  issues a year for $4 from WEB Newsletter  c/o Arcadia, P.O. Box 7516, Grand Rap  ids, Michigan 49510.  VOICES: A SURVIVAL MANUAL FOR WIMMIN is a  new publication which describes itself  as being "all about old and young wimmin' s tales... focussing on women's  health of body, mind and spirit." Cost  is $5 for five issues from Voices, e/o  I. Andrews, R.R. #2, Kenora, Ontario  P9N 3W8.