 We remember Audre Lorde  Special Collection S©ricH»  EC/JAN 1993 Inside  EDITORIAL BOARD  Ria Bluemer, Lissa Geller, Agnes  Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew, Kelly  O'Brien, Kathleen Oliver, Gladys We  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Carolyn Delheij-Joyce, Faith Jones,  Winnifred Tovey, Lissa Geller, Gladys  We, Charmaine Saulnier, Carla  Maftechuk, Fatima Jaffer, Kelly O'Brien,  Fatima Jaffer, Kim Sorenson, Frances  Suski, Theresa Best, Harriet Fancott,  Brenda Wong, Karen Mahoney, Lisa  Marr. Cynthia Low, Agnes Huang,  Marsha Abour, Frances Wasserlein,  Agnes Nazar, and Shannon e. Ash  Advertising: Birgit Schinke  Circulation and Distribution:  Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer Johnstone,  Tory Johnstone, Birgit Schinke  Production Co-ordinator: Anne Jew  Typesetter: Dee Baptiste  FRONT COVER  Photo of Leslie Komori, Wai Geln a  Fast Life on z  by Linda Chin  Alls  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issuer  Features and reviews:  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin  Display advertisi  ready): 1i  isign required):  News  BC's new labour law 3  by Susan Briscoe  Human rights legislation and lesbians 3  by Shannon e. Ash  ELP sets up in Surrey 4  by Kelly O'Brien  Child sexual abuse and the Limitations Act 5  by Sharon Lindores  Features  Women in the Yellowknife goldminer's strike , 8  by Erin Mullen  Honduran women resisting NAFTA 9  by Gloria Russo Chlld sexual ab"Se  Sexism and research on breast cancer 10  by Nancy Armitage  Remembering Audre Lorde 11  by Sky Lee, Lynne Wanyeki, and Zara Suleman  Afterthoughts on women, backlash and empowerment 12  by Jennifer Russell and Christine Cosby  Vancouver's Women's Caucus: an herstory 18  by Frances Wasserlein  Centrespread  Making the Links: Anti-racism and Feminism   written and told by Fatima Jaffer, Punam Khosla,  Nahla Abdo-Zubi, Fatma Alloo, Cassandra Fernandes,  Pam Fleming, Fawzia Ahmad, Miche Hill, Viola Thomas,  Celeste George and Denise Lonewalker  Arts  Dancing on the edge with Lee Su-Feh's 20  by Cynthia Low  Film review: Toward Intimacy 20  by Mamie Hall  Women in View: An Overview 21  by Kathleen Oliver  In the Face of the Hungry Lions in review 22  by Cynthia Low  Humoured by Kate Clinton? 23  by Noel Currie  Book review: Anne Dandurand's The Crack 24  by Nancy Goldhar  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes To Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6  by Charmaine Saulnier and Lisa Marr  What's News 7  by Lissa Geller, Agnes Huang and Kelly O'Brien  Paging Women 24  by Christine Cosby  Bulletin Board 25  compiled by Theresa Best  Making links  We need to see our own  IMAGES  If you produce or have  photos and/or graphics  of Aboriginal women and  women of colour  Please call 254*5499  Lee Su-Feh 20 It's been one of those productions...you know, your sleeve catches on something when  you've got a mug of scalding coffee in your hand...the mug never makes it to your lips and  you've ruined your precious Forbidden Love T-shirt...  ...but we're on our way to press, the sun's just rising and we didn't mention the word  "referendum" once in this issue...well, Kate Clinton did and is quoted in the review of her  recent show on page 23. We're not responsible.  We also managed to avoid mentioning the US elections...except in that review of Kate  Clinton...but wait...did you hear Colorado is taboo following the elections because Colora-  dodos (Coloradians? people from Colorado?) voted in favour of Amendment 2, which  basically takes away legal protections from discrimination for lesbians and gays..if you're  thinkin' of taking a trip to Colorado, don't count on seeing Barbra Streisand or Martina  Navratilova—they're never going to Colorado again, they say, and are hoping no one else  will either.  Speaking of lesbian rights, OutRights is looking for anyone who's interested in  documenting some of what went down at the national lesbian and gay rights shebang they  had in October to be on their working committee. Call barb findlay or Pam at PFAME,  Actually, this column is pretty hard to write this month...not only are we tired, but we're  feelin' pretty sad—Audre Lorde died of cancer on November 17 [seepage 11]. She meant a  lot to most of us...if you'd like to write about her, tell us what she meant to you, or send us  an image...you know where to find us. We figure Kinesis should never stop running stuff on  her. Her spirit lives on.  We received a copy of a letter by Audre Lorde a short while back. It's addressed to the  Chancellor of West Germany calling for official outcries against "the horrifying demonstrations of racial hatred and community compliance in the assault upon refugees..."  "Our hearts grow heavy with fear for our own safety, and for the safety of our Afro-  German sisters and brothers, as well as for the safety of Jews, and all others who white  Germans may decide are unacceptable because of who they are...how can Germany  maintain any pretension of moral rectitude either as a nation of moral persons or as a nation  of moral standing before the courts of the world..."  We're also feeling pretty sad about the rumours we've been hearing about the changes  at Legal Services Society. Due to restructuring at LSS, the Native Programs Branch is no  longer part of the policy making processes of the Society. Its exclusion from the executive  committee, where policy decisions of general application and affecting Native communities  are made, has reduced the role of Native Programs from a policy making to a policy  enforcing body. We're trying to stay on top of what happens and we'll bring you a clearer  story on that sometime soon.  Two im portant stories we were unable to cover this issue were the new immigration bill  C-86 and the health care reform in BC. Those waiting for the latest on the latter may want to  attend a provincial women's health lobby meeting on December 13 and 1 pm at the  Vancouver Women's Health Collective.  We have five pages of coverage on the CRIAW conference so we'll keep this brief but  we jus' wanna say it was a historic gathering... we lost our tape recorder early on in the  conference so we were unable to tape some of the incredible women who spoke at  workshops. Thanks to the organizers for one helluva brave, spirited, and politically dynamic  conference.  Cepia Players Co. has a new space at last and is presenting For Colored Girls Who Have  Considered Suicide When the Rainbow is Enuf. The new address is 396 Kamloops St. The  production, directed by Louie Elie, runs from Nov 26 to Dec 12. For more info, call 254-5075  or 253-5539.  We were too busy going to press to find out who all was having a party over the holiday  season, but if you're a volunteer at the Vancouver Status of Women or Kinesis or wanna be  one, drop by on January 14 and ring in the new year with us. It's a week before we start  putting the February issue out so we'll be real happy...you know, one of those days when  you don't get your sleeve caught in something when you have a mug of scalding...  Read us next year!  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in November:  Mary Ballon • Judith Burke • Rita Chudnovsky • Catharine Ess on 'Tracey Ferguson  • Christopher Gainor • Sandra Howell • TamaraKnox • Barbara Lebrasseur • Lynne  Parisien • Donna Petit • Veronica Strong-Boag • Sheilah Thompson  We would also like to express our appreciation to the following donors who have  responded so generously to our recent fund-raising appeal:  Susan Adams • Sam Archer • Ruth Bullock • Diana Cattarello • BritCharlebois •  Elizabeth Clark • Susan Clifton • Pamela Cooley •Veronica Delorme • Ellen Dixon • Pat  Feindel • Janet Fraser • Janet Freeman • Catherine Fretwell • Stan Gabriel • Carole  Gerson* Hannah Hadikin • Aphrodite Harris • Alison Hopwood • Janet Kee» Leslie  Kenny • Kyong-Ae Kim • Kris Klaasen • Jennie Klokstad • Ursula Langenhorst • M.K.  Louis • Lynne Marilyn Johnson MacFarlan* Louise MacNeil • Deborah McDougall •  Estelle McLachlan • ArleneMcLaren • Paule McNicoll • Joan Meister • Mary Moore •  LeslieMuir • Laura Parkinson • Janet Patterson • Colleen Penrowley 'Shirley Peters •  Carol Pettigrew • Marion Pollack • Joanne Quirk • Diane Ransom • Mary Read •  Josephine Reger • Eva Sharell • Helen Shore • Ruth Simkin • Ken Smith • Helen  Sonthoff • Donna Stewart • V. Stikeman • Veronica Strong-Boag • Joanne Walton  • Susan Wendell • Andrea Wilson • Patricia Yee  Some special thank you's this month:  To the Hongkong Bank of Canada, a huge thanks from all of the VSW volunteers who  will be using our newly donated computer for allkinds of wonderful projects! And thank you  to Mr. John Holmesfor arranging everything.  To Uprising Breads Bakery,a heartfelt thanks for all thedelicious goodies for our recent  meetings and volunteer events!  And, to all of the members of the Hospital Employees Union, thank you for your annual  donation to VSW. Your generosity will make a difference and contribute to VSW's vital  services and programs.  Finally, we would like to thank the following women who have generously donated  their time by answering VSW's referral line over the fall months:  Karen Amlin • Olivia Anderson • Tracey Ferguson • ElizabethKendall • Barbara  Lebrasseur • Karen Mahoney • Shamsah Mohamed • Kim Sorensen  View with a room  Watch the sun rise and the sun set over the  snowcapped mountains of the North  Shore, the rooftops of East Vancouver,  and the highrises of the downtown corey  as you browse through the Kinesis style guide, proofread piles of copy,  brandish exacto knives with exacting precision, wax poetic flats and  engage in stimulating conversation with other ecstatic volunteers. Call  to reserve now.  255-5499  So... we've received a bunch of compliments on the new and improved redesign of  the paper. A BIG thanks to all those folks for  letting us know your innermost aesthetic  thoughts on PageMaker, fonts, and running  heads. It's inspired the gals at Kinesis, well...  mainly Anne—the production co-ordinator  who never sleeps—to make one more  change.  Check out the spiffy column heads for  this column (a mere 30 lines up), As Kinesis  Goes To Press and Paging Women. Anne told  me to tell you that the pictures are meant to  demystify the production process! And I  guess if they don't do that, at least they give  a fascinating behind-the-scene glimpse of  some faces and hands around this place.  Back to the design—d'you love love it or  hate it? Let us know.  Also new and of interest, in this  packed-full-of-stuff double issue is a  brand new feature on women's herstory  in Vancouver. This column will be appearing on a regular basis, and if you're  keen on helping us research the fascinating herstory of women's organizations and activism in Vancouver, come  to the next writers' meeting on January  5th or call Fatima at 255-5499.  Hellos galore to new Kinesis writers  Lisa Marr, Nancy Armitage, Noel Currie,  Nancy Goldhar, Mamie Hall, Cynthia Low,  Sharon Lindores, Cassandra Fernandes,  Viola Thomas, Celeste George, Denise  Lonewalker and Gloria Russo.  An extra-special hello to the brand new  compiler of Bulletin Board, Theresa Best. She's  done a great job this issue organizing all  those events, submissions, classifieds, and  groups—and she's hooked. She's taken it on  as her beat for the next six months. (It's in  writing now, Theresa, so you can't change  your mind!)  First-time volunteers in the production  craze and daze this month are Lisa Marr,  Agnes Nazar, and Theresa Best. To find out  what 'craze and daze' means, call Anne at  255-5499.  Speaking of hellos... just as we said  hello to Editorial Board member Kelly  O'Brien and were getting to recognise that  wonderful laugh amid the production clamour, Kelly decides to leave us for a year of  school in Toronto. Kelly's been volunteering  at Kinesis for eons (a couple of years, at least)  and we're going to miss her terribly. Endearing to the end, Kelly has already asked if  we'll have her back when she graduates this  time next year. We said, we'll think about it.  Just kidding! PS. She's even made No Fun  Fatima, our humourless editor (on press  night), laughhysterically at 3 am when pages  are blank and the world seems bleak. Don't  leave, Kelly!  We're going on holiday for a while.  We're all just real tuckered out—too much  caffeine, nicotine [no, we do NOT smoke!],  and way too many pizzas and sleepless  nights. See you in February. Until then, read  back issues!  Next  Writers' Meeting  Tuesday, January 5  7pm  No experience necessary  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 News  New BC labour law:  Service sector loses  by Susan Briscoe  The NDP government announced its  new labour legislation in late October, replacing the 1987 Industrial Relations Act  with a bill intended to equalize the balance  of power between labour and management.  However, Bill 84, touted by the government as "a modern approach, built on mutual respect and cooperation between workers and employers," has been criticized by  labour because it doesn't promote the rights  of the province's most exploited workers.  A trio of special advisors—all men—  representing the interests of labour, industry, and labour relations, reached agreement  on 98 percent of the bill's provisions after  extensive consultation with a panel representing labour and management groups.  According to labour analysts, however,  the government's advisors ignored the panel's strong support for sectoral union certification, which would enable traditionally  under-organized sectors, such as the retail  and services sectors, to organize more easily.  Under sectoral certification, unions  would have been able to use one breakthrough contract as the master agreement  for others in the same industry, making it  easier for workers to organize and gain better contracts. Bill 84 maintains provisions  which call for each workplace to go though  its own certification and bargaining process.  Without the provision for sectoral certification, many workplaces, particularly those  with fewer workers, will continue to be denied the bargaining power that comes with  trade union membership.  Jan O'Brien, of the BC Federation of  Labour's (BC Fed) Women's Rights Committee says she is "really disappointed that  sectoral certification will be left out of the  new labour code when the majority of the  review panel thought it was the most important and significant provision, especially for  women, minorities and youth." Mary  Rowles, the BC Fed's women's advocate,  says that sectoral provisions are what is  really needed "to make a big difference for  women workers."  Rowles says the least the NDP could  have done was provide for sectoral bargain-  Bffl  Some highlights of Bill 84  Deletes provisions that:  • helped employers to operate non-union workplaces in addition to their union sites;  ■ enabled employers to go dormant for two years, thus de-certifying their unions and  ducking their obligations;  called for secret ballot voting on union certification in favour of organizing by signing  of union cards by 55 percent of the workers at a particular work site;  ■ called for government supervision of strike votes;  permitted individuals to opt out of their unions simply because they disagreed with a  single union policy (i.e. abortion).  Adds provisions that:  • simplify and fast track unfair labour practise hearings, grievances and arbitrations;  ■ call for compulsory first contract arbitration where negotiations drag on;  ■ prohibit employers from using replacement workers during strikes;  • limit unions' secondary picketing rights to protect employers at non-struck locations  from picketing by workers who are lawfully striking at their primary locations;  ■ ensure striking workers can picket sites shared commonly with employers who are not  involved in a dispute but who would suffer from picketing.  ing in the public sector and sectors receiving  public funding. These sectors include many  community-oriented services with large  numbers of women workers, such as counsellors, caregivers and transitionhouse work-  But, Rowles pointed out the "other proposed changes around certification do a lot  to strengthen the rights of workers to organize" [see box for highlights of Bill 84].  And, although the legislation "does not  deal directly with the issue of pay equity, it  makes it easier for women to organize and  that will lead to pay increases."  The bill's other pro-labour provisions,  such as the ban on scab labour during strikes,  "will help all workers, including women,"  O'Brien notes.  Rowles recalls the recent struggles of  striking women at the Comox Medical Centre where "doctors scabbed right away",  keeping the women out of work—a tactic  which would not be allowed if Bill 84 becomes law.  O'Brien says another positive aspect of  the new legislation is that certification will  be automatic when 55 percent of the workers  at a workplace sign union cards and apply  for certification. This provision eliminates  the previous legislation's demand for a secret ballot vote as a step in the union certification process.  "The necessity for a certification vote  created an opening for employers to intimidate and divide employees," says O'Brien.  Christine Micklewright of the Canadian  Auto Workers Union says that, overall, Bill  84 is "definitely an improvement over Bill  19, the Socred's labour legislation."  But, in actuality, Bill 84 is not at all  radical. Much of it simply reinstates provisions from the 1970s that were eliminated  under Bill 19 in 1987. The new legislation  only puts BC on the same footing as many  other provinces in terms of labour relations.  Micklewright says "the NDP got cold  feet" and, with elections in mind, "the government was not going to take the risk of too  many radical changes."  Susan Briscoe is a volunteer Kinesis writer  living in Vancouver.  Child sexual abuse:  Limitations  lifted  by Sharon Lindores  Legal barriers that stop child abuse survivors from taking their abusers to court for  damagesarecrumblingafteraSupremeCourt  of Canada ruled in October that child abusers can be sued for an offense years later than  the law currently permits.  Time limitations on filing suits have  prompted courts to throw out several cases  and have stopped many incest survivors  from bringing their abusers to civil court.  Provinces—except BC—still impose  time limits on incest survivors who must file  suits within two to four years after reaching  adulthood.  But the Supreme Court of Canada's first  ever ruling on an incest case may create a  national impetus to eliminate deadlines on  civil suits. Time limits do not apply to criminal charges.  "This is an important development in  law because it recognizes the tremendous  abuse of authority involved in incest and  offers the potentia 1 for greater recognition of  the harm caused," says Helena Orton of the  Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  (LEAF).  Karen Marciano, at age 28, filed a sexual  assault suit against her father seven years  ago in an Ontario court. A jury ruled  Marciano should be awarded $50,000 but a  provincial trial judge later dismissed her  case because Marciano had missed the legal  deadline to sue.  See CHILD ABUSE page 5  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 News  End Legislated Poverty:  Setting up shop in Surrey  by Kelly O'Brien   The staggering number of people living  in poverty in Surrey, BC, has prompted End  Legislated Poverty (ELP) to open a new  office in the area. ELP is the first grassroots,  anti-poverty organization with an office in  Surrey.  "Surrey is changing fast and low-income people are getting totally lost in the  changes," says Linda Marcotte, a community organizer with ELP who is running the  new centre. Even the recent change of name  from Whalley to Surrey City Centre, says  Marcotte, is indicative of a trend towards  'gentrifying' the municipality and making it  more attractive to big business.  Surrey's high poverty rate has been attributed largely to uncontrolled development. The municipality, consisting of 20  town centres with a population of about  250,000 people, is the fastest growing in BC.  ELP is a coalition of 28 anti-poverty  groups across BC. One of its member groups,  the Child Poverty Committee, has been active around poverty issues in Surrey since  1989. They were instrumental in initiating a  lunch program in 13 elementary schools in  the area. "ELP has definitely had a base [in  Surrey]," says Marcotte, "but now we have  a physical space."  ELP was started in Vancouver in 1985  by a handful of people working for social  justice. Its mandate is to work towards ending poverty by making government account  able to the legislation that creates e  inequality.  The organization is committed to lobbying government, political organizing and  educating around poverty issues. Some of  its priorities include raising the minimum  wage, increasing welfare rates and affordable housing, and universalizing medicare.  Pam Fleming, a spokesperson for ELP,  says the group is primarily interested in  getting low-income people directly involved  in the fight against poverty.  ELP's plans for the Surrey office include  distributing a monthly newsletter, forming  support/action groups around different  poverty issues, training people to speakabout  poverty to various groups, and referring  people to other agencies for advocacy.  The number of people on welfare in  Surrey has been steadily increasing—from  7,000 people in 1990 to 11,000 in 1992. According to the Ministry of Social Services,  one out of nine people on welfare in BC lives  in Surrey. And recent Revenue Canada statistics find Surrey has the lowest overall  income levels of all the municipalities in the  Greater Vancouver Regional District  (GVRD)—incomes are 10 percent lower than  the average.  Marcotte estimates there are the same  number of working poor as welfare recipients in Surrey. The Vancouver ELP office  receives 25 percent of its phone calls every  week from Surrey residents.  The lackof services for low-income people—a small YWCA, a few affordable hous-  ingprojects,andoneneighbourhood house—  reflects a social planning process that excludes poor people and ignores their needs,  says Marcotte.  The municipality will be holding public  meetings in the new year to address the  concerns of low-income people. The Child  Poverty Committee is working to get low-  income people involved in the social planning.  The Surrey municipality, Ministry of  Women's Equality, Ministry of Social Services and the Legal Services Society are encouraging ELP to apply for more funding.  At present, the $175,000 funding ELP  receives from the Ministry of Social Services  goes towards publishing three anti-poverty  newsletters, and staffing and running the  Surrey office, the provincial office in Vancouver and the Vancouver Island office in  Victoria.  Marcotte says any additional funding  will enable the Surrey office to carry out  three planned projects: a video about single  mothers, entitled "What Does Your Mother  Do?", a research project of statistical data on  poverty, and a legal clinic with lawyers and  advocates.  Marcotte says there has "already been a  positive response from Surrey residents and  a lot of people are interested in volunteering."  ELP is having its first province-wide action, "Justice Not Charity," on December 12.  "Justice Not Charity" events will be held in  Vancouver, Kamloops, Nelson, Smithers, Terrace, and Victoria, BC. Interested participants  should call ELP at 879-1209. For more informa-  tion about the Surrey office, call 583-7363.  Kelly O'Brien is a regular contributor to  Kinesis who is leaving Vancouver for a  break from being a regular contributor to  Kinesis.  The National Association of Women and the Law's Tenth Biennial Conference  Healing  The Pasi  Forming  The Future  February 19-21,1993  Vancouver BC  For further information and  registration forms, contact  our Vancouver office:  National Association of Women and the Law  Box 21548 • 1850 Commercial Drive,  Vancouver, B.C.V5N 4A0  Telephone (604) 255-1811  MORE SPEAKERS TO BE ANNOUNCED AS THEY ARE CONFIRMED  KEYNOTE SPEAKER: The Honourable Bertha Wilson, former Supreme Court Justice and Chair of the Canadian Bar Association Task  Force on Gender Equality in the Legal Profession • PLENARY: HEALING THE FEMINIST MOVEMENT: Mary Eaton, Columbia  University; Sunera Thobani,South Asian Women's Action Action Network; Lynnette Mensah, Dalhousie School of Nursing •  PLENARY: WOMEN IN THE LEGAL PROFESSION: Joan Brockman, Criminology - SFU (moderator); Catherine Bruce, formerly*  of the Hughes Commission. BC • PLENARY: WOMEN AND FREE TRADE: Miriam Palacios, Women to Women Global Strategies;  Shelagh Day. National Action Committee; Jean Swanson, End Legislated Poverty; Marjorie Cohen, SFU • SEXUAL HARASSMENT  IN THE WORK PLACE: Anita Braha, Public Interest Advocacy Centre; Celia Garcia, West Coast Domestic Workers Association;  ■ ChristinaDavidson,: West Coast Domestic Workers Association* PAY EQUITY: Mary Rowles. British Columbia Federation of Labour;  Mary-Woo Sims, Human Rights & Employment Equity, Metro Toronto; Senka Dukovich, Pay Equity Advocacy and Legal Services, Toronto  • APPOINTMENT OF JUDGES: CREATING DIVERSITY: Lynn Smith, Dean of Law, UBC (moderator/discussant); Mary Eaton,  Columbia University: Deborah M. Hanly, Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples • SURVIVING THE SYSTEM: SEXUAL  ASSAULT: Megan Ellis, lawyer, Vancouver; Victoria Gray, LEAF Counsel on Norberg v. Wynrib; Susan Vella. Counsel for Grand View  Survivors • SURVIVING THE SYSTEM: BATTERED WOMEN: Rhonda Johnson. Vancouver (moderator/discussant); Tracey  Barker, Battered Women Support Services; Joan Meister, Disabled Women's Network Canada; Patricia Monture-Okanee, University  of Ottawa-Crown Prosecutor • BATTERED WOMEN, CUSTODY AND ACCESS: Ajax Quinby and Nancy Drewitt. Munroe  House; Ruth Lea Taylor, lawyer. Vancouver • SEXUAL ASSAULT LAWS AND FEMINIST LAW REFORM: Sheila Mclntyre.  LEAF Legal Committee; Lee Lakeman, Vancouver Rape Relief; Shirley Masuda, Disabled Women's Network Canada • DOMESTIC  WORKERS: GOOD ENOUGH TO WORK, GOOD ENOUGH TO STAY: Lois Shelton, West Coast Domestic Workers  Association: Audrey Macklin. Dalhousie University • WOMEN'S RIGHTS ARE HUMAN RIGHTS: Marie Louise Cote. Counsel  to "Nada"; Jill Pollock. Vancouver Association for the Survivors of Torture; Mary-Woo Sims, Human Rights & Employment Equity, Metro  Toronto; Kerry Buck, External Affairs; Cris Kurata, human rights Lawyer • CRIMINAL JUSTICE ISSUES FROM ABORIGINAL  PERSPECTIVES: Patricia Monture-Okanee, University of Ottawa; Lee Maracle, historian/writer, Toronto • ABORIGINAL  JUSTICE SYSTEMS AND COMMUNITY HEALING: Christine Deom. Akwasesne Longhouse System; Sandra Greene, Indian  Homemakers Association; Florence Hackett, Indian Homemakers Association; Georgina Sydney, Tribal Justice, Teslin Band, Yukon ♦  THE CONSTITUTIONAL NEGOTIATING PROCESS: Judy Rebick, National Action Committee; Marge Freidel. Metis Women  of Canada; Rosemarie Kuptana. Inuit Tapirisat; Maureen Maloney. Dean of Law, U. of Victoria (moderator/discussant) • ACHIEVING  SELF-GOVERNMENT: Marge Friedel, Metis Women of Canada; Sharon Mclvor, Native Women's Association of Canada; Wendy  Grant, Assembly of First Nations; Rhonda Johnson, Native Council of Canada, Darcy Edgar, lawyer (moderator) • GOVERNMENT  COMMISSIONS AND INQUIRIES: Punam Khosla. community organizer, Toronto; Debra M. Hanly. Royal Commission on  Aboriginal Peoples; Shauna Butterwick, Women's Employment and Training Coalition; Didi Herman, Oxford University • LOBBYING  FOR WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE: Raine McKay, Vancouver Women's Health Collective; Marie Christine Cirovac, Centre de femme,  Montreal; Madeline Bosco, Winnipeg Women's Health Centre; Shirley Ross. Global Health Project; Anne Johns. Equal Justice • OUR  BODIES, WHOSE LAWS?: Mary Williams, BC Coalition for Disability Rights; Karen Gallagher. Positive Women's Network: Lee  Lakeman, Vancouver Rape Relief; Helen Turbett, Mental Patients Association; Deborah Mearns, Vancouver Native Health Society; Kim  Zander, BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics • REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES: Harriet Simand, DES Action Canada; Sari Tudiver,  Winnipeg Women's Health Clinic; Lynette Mensah, Dalhousie University; Louise Vandelack, U. of Quebec • WOMEN OF COLOUR  STRATEGIES: Two Part Series: Punam Khosla, community organizer; Fatima Jaffer, Kinesis, Vancouver; Zara Suleiman, WAVAW  • ANTI-SEMITISM AND FEMINISM: Marlee Kline, UBC • LESBIAN ANTI-HOMOPHOBIA STRATEGIES: Davina Cooper,  University of Warwick; Claire Young. UBC (moderator/discussant) • WOMEN'S RIGHT TO SPEAK: SECTION 2 AS BOTH  SWORD AND SHIELD: Anne Derrick, Counsel for Pandora Magazine; Kathleen Mahoney, Counsel for LEAF on Butler; Janine Fuller,  Little Sisters Bookstore • WHERE'S THE NEWS THATS FIT TO PRINT?: Fatima Jaffer. Kinesis. Vancouver; Noelle-Dominique  Willems; Jeannette Busque; Patricia Graham, Vancouver Sun'PRISONS: BevFolkes, Black Inmates and Friends Assembly; Kim Pate.  Canadian Association of Elizabeth Fry Societies; Sharon Mclvor, Native Women's Association of Canada; Corrections Canada  Representative; Gayle Horii, women's prison activist • THE CORPORATE AGENDA AND WOMEN'S POVERTY: Pam Fleming.  End Legislated Poverty; Pat Chauncey, End Legislated Poverty: Cecilia Diocsin, Phillipine Women's Centre  KINESIS  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 News  Human Rights Act & lesbian rights:  Pissed off,  no surprise  by Shannon e. Ash  Lesbian rights advocates and feminist  groups are pissed off, but not surprised at  the federal government's decision not to go  ahead with amendments to the Canadian  Human Rights Act that would make it illegal  to discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.  In late October, Justice Minister Kim  Campbell said the federal government will  not appeal a landmark court ruling that lets  the justice system read "sexual orientation"  as protected grounds under the Human  Rights Act. The Ontario Court of Appeal  instructed that the words "sexual orientation" should be "read in" as if they were  included in the human rights act.  bian couples are eligible for benefits given to  opposite-sex couples.  This decision also leaves lesbians at the  mercy of the courts to decide the extent of  their rights. The head of the Canadian Human Rights Commission says, although the  Commission will now accept cases of anti-  lesbian and gay discrimination, the federal  government should change the law rather  than let the courts determine it.  Contrary to her earlier statements,  Campbell responded to criticism by saying  the courts have settled the issue of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, but  the issue of scope remains and "should be  settled in Parliament."  Campbell appears to be trying to both  placate the "family caucus" and keep the  Campbell appears to be trying to both placate the  "family caucus" and keep the votes of the large  gay and lesbian population in her ...riding.  After another court ruling in October  led to the lifting of the ban on out-lesbians  and gays in the military, women thought the  government might finally introduce long-  promised Human Rights legislation. Instead,  Campbell announced the Ontario court's  decision had "pre-empted" the legislation  and therefore the government would not  proceed with it. The Ontario court decision  is to be considered applicable to the rest of  the country.  An amendment to the Human Rights  act outlawing discrimination against lesbians and gays has been promised since 1986.  Repeated delays in introducing the legislation have been attributed to opposition from  some Tory backbenchers, known as the "family caucus."  The decision not to include "sexual orientation" as protected ground in the act  means it is now up to the Human Rights  Commission and the courts to determine the  scope of the law—for example, whether les-  votes of the large gay and lesbian population  in her Vancouver Centre riding. Her calls for  more consultation are being described as  ploys to put off making a decision until after  the 1993 election.  Lesbian lawyer and activist barbara  findlay says that Kim Campbell is "sailing  through on the back of court cases." But  partnership benefits and family status are a  stickier issue—they cost money, and are more  likely to offend those with traditional views  of what "family" means, says findlay.  The issue of "scope" is central to the  discussion of lesbian rights. Amendments  Campbell was earlier planning to introduce  hadalreadybeencriticizedbylesbiangroups  for including a definition of spouses as "members of the opposite sex", precluding the  extension of spousal benefits to same-sex  couples.  Laurie Robertson, who ha s worked with  the Lesbian and Gay Benefits Committee  (LGBC) says that, while she wants the words  \L  "sexual orientation" in the Human Rights  Act, she also wants the words "families of  choice" and recognition of lesbian couples  as legal couples included.  Havinghuman rights protectiondoesn't  necessarily mean having access to partnership benefits, says Robertson. The situation  regarding benefits hasn't changed in BC,  and it is "still a fight."  She says she believes fighting the  homophobia that causes discrimination is  important too. The Committee has received  funds to do education on homophobia in the  workplace.  Diana Smith, a union activist, has been  active in this education process. Although  she would like to see government amendments to the act, she believes a more immediate issue is family status.  Getting sexual orientation in the Human Rights Act protects individuals, she  says, but it doesn't necessarily recognize  lesbian or gay families. The Mossop court  case is the most important right now in  deciding this issue, says Smith. Brian Mossop  is a federal government worker whose collective agreement allows bereavement leave  when a (heterosexual) partner's parent dies.  When his male partner's father died, his  request for leave was denied, and he filed a  complaint claiming discrimination on the  basis of family status. The case has gone to  the Supreme Court of Canada, where it has  been heard but not decided.  Many cases are on hold awaiting this  decision, says Smith. One such case is that of  Carol Nielsen [see Kinesis July/Aug 1992].  Nielsen lodged a complaint with the BC  Human Rights Commission when her employer wouldn't allow dental insurance coverage for her female partner and the partner's children. Her case is supported by  LEAF (Women's Legal Education & Action  Fund), which is arguing discrimination on  marital status, family status, sex and sexual  orientation.  Lesbians face multiple discrimination  and there doesn't seem to be a simple answer, or one piece of legislation that covers  everything.  findlay adds that court cases regarding  lesbiansand "family" statushave "goneboth  ways". She cites the Egan case in BC, where  a court ruled a gay man and his partner were "  not eligible for spousal CPP (Canada Pension Plan) benefits. The court said, "parliament is entitled to privileging families."  Even 'progressive' governments are  loath to include lesbian and gay families as  benefit-eligible, due to anticipated costs,  barbara findlay points out that the recent BC  sexual orientation protection legislation has  no amendment specifying its scope, and  Ontario, when human rights legislation was  introduced, altered other legislation to define spouses as heterosexual in regard to  benefits. An Ontario human rights tribunal  has since ordered this definition to be  dropped.  In a recent meeting with Vancouver-  based groups OutSpoken and Lesbian and  Gay Immigration TaskForce, Campbell said  benefits were meant to compensate women  for their traditionally inferior economic position in heterosexual relationships. Therefore, benefits may not be appropriate for  homosexual relationships, findlay notes that  this position is ironically similar to that of  some lesbian feminists, although it emerges  from very different analyses.  According to this logic, it could be argued that lesbian couples are doubly disadvantaged. As women, they have less access  to well-paying jobs and benefits than men  do; both partners in the relationship are  economically disadvantaged, rather than  Shannon e. Ash is a regular contributor to  Kinesis.  CHILD ABUSE from page 3  After her subsequent appeal failed,  Marciano brought her case to the Supreme  Court of Canada with the help of LEAF.  The seven j udges unanimously ruled on  October 29 that time limits on child abuse  suits should start only when a survivor understands the full extent of the crime and its  perpetrator's responsibility. Most of the  judges agreed this recognition usually coincides with therapy rather than an age of  majority.  "The Court's decision is a tremendous  step forward in...removing the barriers to  civil action," says Orton.  She adds that the ruling will also act as  a greater deterrent to childhood sexual abuse.  Marciano's father began to abuse her  when she was eight years old. But her attempts to seek help and expose her story  were thwarted by her father. Marciano said  she believed the abuse was her fault until she  entered therapy.  "I want the other girls out there to know  they don't have to hide," Marciano said in a  recent interview in The Globe and Mail. "The  secrecy surrounding incest is what allows it  to continue."  Court awarded Kathy Gray $85,000 compensation for the sexual abuse by her uncle  more than 20 years ago.  Vancouver lawyers Megan Ellis and  Theresa Stowe represented Gray in the first  "a landmark victory for people who have been  abused."  Toronto LEAF lawyer Connie Nakatsu  called the case "a landmark victory for people who have been abused."  Nakatsu credits BC's new legislation on  time limitations as a major influence in the  ruling.  In September, BC removed a law-binding restriction that required incest survivors  to file childhood sexual abuse civil suits  before they were 21 years old.  The change in legislation followed a  case last February in which the BC Supreme  ssful case ever in Canada that challenged time limits on civil incest cases.  "Abuse and its ramifications were not  understood until recently," says Ellis.  BC legislators were already examining the time constraints in February,  but Ellis said this case gave the issue a  higher profile.  In the Marciano ruling, Justice Gerard  La Forest urged other provinces to follow suit.  Andrea Yim of Vancouver's Women  Against Violence Against Womensaid judges  have finally opened their eyes to the parameters of incest cases.  "For many women, reporting immediately after becoming of age or after the abuse  isn't an option," Yim said. "So historically,  the justice system has served the interest of  offenders and criminals, rather than survivors."  She adds that time limits have let off  many male offenders.  A 1984 federal study showed at least  one in eleven children under seven years old  in Canada were sexually assaulted by a parent. Ninety-nine per cent of Canada's incest  offenses were committed by men.  Yim says the legal system should try to  embrace more women's perspectives in cases  of battery, emotional abuse and acquaintance rape.  Sharon Lindores is a first-time writer for  Kinesis living in Vancouver.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  She adds that, while research itself is  useful information, women do not need  more task forces or panels to tell us violence  is a serious problem.  Pilot stressed the commitment of the  Women's Research Centre in insuring that  the particular experiences and concerns of  Aboriginal women, women of colour, immigrant women and women with disabilities are front and centre.  by Lisa Marr   by Charmaine Saulnier  New research  centre  One of five federally funded centres in  Canada to deal with research on family violence and violence against women is being  established in Vancouver.  ^ The new BC and Yukon Centre for Action Research on Violence against Women  will be undertaken jointly by The Women's  Research Centre, the Simon Fraser University Feminist Institute for Studies on Law  and Society and the UBC Centre for Research in Women's Studies and Gender Relations.  In addition, many women's organizations, such as Battered Women's Support  Services, MOSAIC, and Shaughnessy Hospital Sexual Assault Service, will be members of the Steering Committee.  Johannah Pilot, of the Women's Research Centre, says she sees the new centre  as bridging together these organizations to  promote action.  CCLOW  handbook  The BC Network of CCLOW (Canadian  Congress for Learning Opportunities for  Women) is planning to develop and distribute a handbook for women in BC who are  thinking about going back to school, whether  it be finishing high school or upgrading  their job skills.  Based on women's experiences, the  handbook will explore issues such as juggling work and family responsibilities, finding adequate child care, and securing financing.  The handbook will also give an overview of the variety of training providers  such as public and private institutions, community-based agencies, distance education  programs and Canada Employment.  The handbook will be written in plain  and accessible English and will include  graphics and cartoons, as well as space for  notes. It can be used by individual women as  a self-help tool or as part of a group program.  CCLOW is a national voluntary organization, established in 1979. Through both  1697 Venables at Commercial 254-5635  Mon-Fri 8am-5:30pm Sat 9am-5:30pm  national and provincial activities, including  research, advocacy and the development of  learning resources and training models,  CCLOW seeks to improve both formal and  informal learning opportunities for women.  BC Network activities include educational programs for members, and collaboration with other groups such as the Women's Employment and Training Coalition  (WETC) and the Women's Employment  Advisory Committee (WEAC).  The need for a handbook such as  CCLOW proposes has been identified  through discussion with members of  CCLOW and through a needs survey of  other women's groups.  For more information contact: Shauna  Butterwick, BC Director, BC Network of the  Canadian Congress for Learning Opportunities for Women, 5-216 9th Street, New  Westminster, V3M 3V3, Tel: (604) 524-0788.  Rainy Day  funds  The Rainy Day Fund announces a $600  award for the best piece of journalism by a  woman of colour, Aboriginal woman or  lesbian to be published by Kinesis over the  next six months, covering issues of relevance  to lesbians and/or women of colour.  The money comes from royalties received by the editors and contributors of  Telling It: Women and Language Across Cultures (Press Gang, 1990). The goal of the  Fund is to encourage writing by lesbians/  women of colour in keeping with the focus  of the conference that led to the book.  Last year, the Rainy Day Fund made a  donation to Asian Lesbians of Vancouver,  who in turn helped sponsor a South Asian  writer from Bombay to attend the Asian  Lesbian Network conference in laoan.  This year, administrators Jamila Ismail,  SKY Lee, Daphne Marlatt and Betsy Warland  chose to support Kinesis in recognition of its  ongoing work to "get the news out about  women's issues, and especially for women  of colour."  An additional intention of The Rainy  Day Fund administrators this year is for the  award to increase active writing support for  the paper as well as stimulating more writing and discussion in the community.  For more information contact: Kinesis,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, BC, V5L  2Y6.  Money  for Moge  The Women's Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF) is looking for donations in  support of the Supreme Court case known  as Moge v. Moge.  Gm^tkfe  zJlm&XviQy   v^3  tJ^n^tW^^J  . - - Y£T7 C-HS.IS -THif   >fe»£.'5  Wolipav f€PSr   HAS   £E5=M  a tRuw Ai-TTRMAT/ve EXpeRie^ct   FRoM   THC CHoice   »F FoqP>—  TO    TMG   t-ACK   OF  "&KCP   »N  TM£T    &t>Ne"   t-oue. ?LW>   THAT  Flrtp   VS    p.eS*C?5/MG   To ouR.  CsHiwHvop 5-tatts  whstJ we'a.E  IdiTH   OuR    "oTH&R1'    FAM/LlES..,  LEAF is using the equality provisions in  the Charter of Rights and Freedoms to intervene in this case, arguing at the Supreme  Court of Canada that it is contrary to the  principles of sex equality that the costs of  ha vingand raising children be borneby women.  During the course of her 18-year marriage, Moge ra ised three children while working as a homemaker during the day and a  cleaner in the evenings. When she and her  husband separated in 1973, she was given  custody of the children and a combined  child and spousal support payment of $150.  Her ex-husband and his lawyers have  now appealed to the court for permission to  stop support payments to Moge, arguing  that she has had ample time since their separation to become financially self-sufficient.  LEAF is arguing that, just as unequal  pay for the same work is a barrier to sex  equality, the lack of recognition of women's  unpaid work in the home promotes inequality and economic disadvantage for women.  The case is crucial in making spousal support awards adequately recognize the value  of women's unpaid work in the home and  the extent to which women have been economically disadvantaged as a result of family responsibilities.  For more information write to Helena  Orton c/o Women's Legal Education and  Action Fund (LE AF),489 College Street, Suite  403, Toronto, M6G 1A5.  Classes on  classism  Women who attended a spontaneously  planned lunchtime session on internalized  classism at October's lesbian and gay  Outrights Conference in Vancouver are planning to continue the discussion and are extending an open invitation to any women  who might like to join in.  Diana Smith, a member of the Lesbian  and Gay Benefits Society who attended the  original session says, "of the eleven people  who came, all were women and all but one  woman were white. Just this says a lot. My  guess is that white men generally don't feel  the adverse effects of the distribution of  wealth to the same extent white women do.  Although sex, race, class and ableism have  to be understood in combination, it is also  necessary to understand the workings of  each one separately. At this short session, we  tried to isolate class for discussion."  The meeting will be from 10 am to 3 pm  on Saturday, December 5 in the Jim Green  Room of the Four Sisters Housing Co-operative at 153 Powell St. It's free and wheelchair  accessible. Bring a lunch or food to share.  Phone Linda Marcotte of End Legislated  Poverty (ELP) at 879-1209 for child care. ELP  will reimburse lower income women (on  welfare, UI or earning low wages) for transportation costs, at-home child care costs up  to $3 per hour, and will provide lunch.  MIDWIFERY SERVICES  • Child Birth Education Film Nights  • Prenatal Counsel...Dr. Referral  • Breast Feeding Information & Support  • Childbirth Classes Reg/VBAC  • Midwifery Care, Home & Hospital  • Post Partum Care  • Midwifery Study Group  Sue McDonald L.M. Suzanne Naciri A.C.H.I.  licensed midwife Assoc. For Childbirth at Home  CCE certified childbirth International CCE Birth  educator Attendant  582-1281/pager 683-3615 521-1005   DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 What's News  by Lissa Geller, Kelly O'Brien and  Agnes Huang  US approves  Depo-Provera  A controversial drug has been given the  stamp of approval for use as a contraceptive  in the US despite its previous scientific links  to liver, breast and cervical cancer.  The US Food and Drug Administration's advisory committee on fertility and  maternal health voted that the potential benefits of Depo-Provera outweighed the risks.  The drug is administered as an injection  and works for three months to prevent pregnancy. Research has shown that possible  side effects include weight gain, dizziness,  nervousness,abdominalpainand menstrual  irregularities.  The drug has bounced from being approved to banned in the US since the 1960s.  It is currently available as a contraceptive in  90 countries.  The Canadian government has not yet  legalized the drug for contraceptive use, but  allows Depo-Provera to be used to treat  kidney, breast and endometrial cancer.  The government is consulting with scientists to see whether or not Depo-Provera  should be approved for contraceptive use.  The Toronto Women's Health Network  (TWHN) says that despite serious concerns  about the safety and long term effects of  Depo-Provera, a loophole in Canadian law—  physicians can prescribe it—already allows  doctors to market the drug as a contraceptive. TWHN says that Depo-Provera is now  being given to women at the Bay Centre for  Birth Control in Toronto.  Doctor  misconduct  Women are not reporting sexual misconduct by physicians and when they do,  complaints are subject to the random policies of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of BC.  These are among the findings of the  committee on sexual misconduct set up by  the College to investigate complaints and  make recommendations to the College. Its  report was issued November 9.  In addition to interviewing 8,000 people  and over 6,000 doctors, the committee set up  a toll-free line which received 208 phone  calls reporting sexual misconduct.  Of the callers, only 23 filed a formal  complaint with the College. The majority  did not contact the College because they felt  nothing would be done.  The committee criticized the College for  failing to recognize the seriousness of sexual  The radical feminist magazine  £  Issue 23 Spring 1992  *   Hail Mary Robinson!  £*  *   Childcare: The forgotten  demand  \v\  *   Anita Hill speaks out  *   Southall Black Sisters  E3  *   Fat Lesbian in art  —"A formidable feminist magazine -  not for the faint-hearted." The  E  Guardian  Subs for one year (3 issues):  ■ ^  1  Airmail: N&S America    £13  Australasia £14  Institutions  £30  Fc  >r your free sample copy send to  Trouble & St rife (free) at the address  Lb  below.  Distributed to all t>ood US bookshops  In- Inland Hook Company. Tel: (20.1)  \ 467-4257  Trou  ble and Strife, PO Box 8, Diss,  Norfolk, UK 1P22 3XG  misconduct and for failing to deal properly  with complaints.  The report makes 97 recommendations  in all, most of which the College has agreed  to adopt. These include an overhaul of the  complaint procedures, a comprehensive  definition of misconduct, an education program for doctors, medical students and the  public, and the hiring of two people to deal  specifically with sexual misconduct complaints.  No recommendations were made requiring doctors to report the sexual misconduct of their colleagues.  The report also recognizes that sexual  conduct between a physician and patient is  unacceptable because of the power imbalance.  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  lias formed a coalition with Vancouver Rape  Relief and WA VAW (Women Against Violence  Against Women) to deal with sexual misconduct  by physicians. For more information contact the  Health Collective, 255-8285.  Myth of the  mammogram  A recent study out of the University of  Toronto has cast doubts on the effectiveness  of mammograms (x-rays of the breast) in  reducing the number of deaths of women  from breast cancer.  Researchers for the Canadian National  BreastScreening Study claim that while there  are no harmful effects associated with  mammography, the benefits are negligible.  After observing four groups of women  over an eight-year period, the researchers  conclude mammograms do not benefit  women 49 and under, and that mammogram  screenings also failed to reduce breast cancer  women between 50 and 59.  Other studies have shown that women  over 50 do benefit from screening, but the  results for women between 40 and 49 has  been inconclusive.  The University of Toronto study, which  began in 1980, involved 90,000 women with  no history of breast cancer.  The study looked at women in two age  categories: 50,000 women between 40 and  49, and 40,000 women between 50 and 59.  Women in the younger age category were  divided into two groups, as were the women  in the older age category.  One group from each age category was  given an annual mammogram and a yearly  physical examination, while the other was  given an annual physical examination only.  Raine McKay of the Vancouver Women's Health Collective is not surprised by the  recent findings. "Although mammograms  have a place, they were not meant to be used  as a screening device", says McKay.  "Mammograms were originally designed  only to detect the location of tumours."  McKay adds that other methods of  screening are available but very little money  is put into them. "No money is put into  teaching women how to do breast self-examinations."  Round one to  Little Sister's  A Vancouver lesbian and gay bookstore  has won a preliminary battle with Canada  Customs over the seizure of books and magazines.  The BC Supreme Court ruled November 15 that Little Sister's Bookand ArtEmpo-  rium has the right to challenge Canada Customs on the grounds that its actions violate  provisions in the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms guaranteeing freedom of expression and protection from discrimination for  lesbians and gays.  Government lawyers tried to halt Little  Sister's court challenge, arguing that Little  Sister's case should have been taken through  the Customs review process and not directly  to the courts. The government also claimed  thatLittle Sister's should beasking the courts  to determine whether the seized material is  "obscene" and not whether Customs' seizures of the material violated the Charter.  In dismissing the government's claims,  the court ruled that the case raises important  constitutional issues and the bookstore  should be allowed to proceed.  Janine Fuller of Little Sister's says  Canada Customs seized copies of On Our  Backs, a US lesbian erotic magazineavailable  elsewhere in Canada, and another US lesbian magazine containing a review of an art  exhibit by Vancouver-based artists that Customs says includes material of a "sexually  degrading" nature.  Little Sister's has challenged seizures by  Canada Customs before, but has always  followed Custom's appeal procedures.  The bookstore appealed the seizure of  Pat Califia's book Macho Sluts and won, but  the book has since been seized several times  and their current shipment has been held up  for more than eight months.  They also won a ruling releasing seized  copies of the US-based gay magazine, The  Advocate, but Canada Customs had already  destroyed the magazines when the decision  came down.  More time  please!  Once again, the controversial Royal  Commission on New Reproductive Technologies has asked the federal government  for more time to complete their final report.  The government obliged, granting the Commission an extension to July 1993.  Nl is the one  journal anyone  concerned about  international  development must  read."  - Frances Lappe,  author of Diet for a  Small Planet  For just $2.50 you can sample Nl, the world's largest-selling  J monthly magazine on international developmental issues.  I Send your cheque or money order payable to: Chaos  | Consulting, 4-1825 Nelson Street, Vancouver, BC V6G 1M9.  Don't forget your address!  The Commission was set up in 1989 to  study issues such as in vitro fertilization,  surrogate motherhood and embryo research,  and was supposed to have fulfilled its mandate within two years. That original deadline was extended to December 1992.  An internal dispute earlier this year,  resulting in the firing of four commissioners, diverted the Commission's attention  away from its work.  The commissioners were fired for criticizing the functioning and narrow mandate  of the Commission and the inappropriate  conduct of chairperson, Patricia Baird [see  Kinesis Feb 1992].  After the firings, many women's groups  refused to participate in the Commission's  hearings, claiming the Commission was biased.  Book award for  Baxter  Vancouver writer, Sheila Baxter is the  first winner of the VanCity [Savings and  Credit Union] Book Prize for the best book  dealing with women's issues. Baxter's book,  Under the Viaduct: Homeless in Beautiful BC,  was chosen from 41 entries.  She receives a $4000 award, $1000 of  which will be donated to the Soup 'n Bannock  program at Crabtree Corner in Vancouver's  downtown eastside.  Under the Viaduct is a collection of interviews with homeless people living in Vancouver interspersed with Baxter's commentaries. In the book, she talks to street kids,  people living in parks and rundown hotels,  women living on and working the streets,  survivors of psychiatric institutions, and single parent families.  Baxteralso points out solutions to homelessness: affordable housing, safe shelters  for street kids, and decent welfare and minimum wage rates.  Under the ViaductIs Baxter's second book.  Her first, No Way to Live, was published in  1988.  Refugee claims  valid  In November, the Federal Court of Appeal upheld an earlier ruling by an immigration adjudicator saying a Trinidadian woman  had a valid claim of persecution.  The woman—whose name is not being  disclosed for fear her husband may locate  her—fled an abusive relationship.  Theadjudicators ruled the womancould  claim refugee statusbecause she belonged to  a particular social group—Trinidadian  women survivors of wife abuse—which fears  persecution. Women receive virtually no  protection from the Trinidadian justice system.  The federal government disagreed with  the adjudicators' ruling and appealed the  case to the Federal Court. The government  argued that battered women are not a social  group and a battered woman's fear of assault is not the same as "fear of persecution."  "Women are the most persecuted group  in the world," says Felicia Ross of Montreal.  "But no government wants to acknowledge  that women are in danger."  Ross fled from her native Trinidad in  1987 with three of her children for fear that  her abusive husband would kill her. Ross  said her husband once tried to kill her. The  police did nothing to help.  In January 1992, Ross successfully presented her claim for refugee status to immigration adjudicators.  Call for excellent  ad rates now!  255•5499  L.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Feature  Yellowknife goldminers:  Women in  the strike  by Erin Mullen  The most important labour dispute in  recent Canadian history is raging in  Yellowknife, North West Territories.  For six months, members of the Canadian Associationof Smelter and Allied Workers (CASAW) Local 4 have fought for the life  of their union against their American-based  employer, Royal Oak Mines. On the side of  the company are two levels of government,  the RCMP-whose outrageous behaviour on  the picket line has prompted calls for a judicial inquiry,~private guards at thePinkerton  mine, scabs (strike-breakers), the courts and  the media.  Two days after the dispute began, the  wives of the Yellowknife miners came together to form CLASS (CASAW Ladies Association Support System). The women are  demonstrating in support of the strikers,  and raising money to help sustain the strike.  June Roberts is a full-time homemaker  raising three young daughters and comes  from a trapping family in Labrador. Before  the strike, Roberts, like most of the women in  CLASS, was not a political activist.  She was recently touring i n BC, trying to  garner support for their struggle and spoke  at a benefit for Cosatu (Congress of South  African Trade Unions) in Vancouver on November 21.  Kinesis spoke with Roberts about  CLASS'S efforts.  Erin Mullen: Maybe you can tell us how  your lives have changed since the strike  began.  June Roberts: At the beginning of the  strike, and before the strike actually, a lot of  us stayed at home with our children. We  weren't very politically active in the community—demonstrating and that sort of  thing.  After the strike began, we found ourselves yelling in the streets, protesting the  strike-breaking, and holding demonstrations. It was quite a shock to our systems--a  complete turnaround from what we were  used to.  Another thing that was difficult for us  was the fact that nobody was listening to us.  No matter how many times we told people  what was happening to us and about the  frustrations and the walls we kept coming  up against, we just couldn't get any help  from the people we elected to power.  Mullen: Do you think now, with things  like this tour, that people are starting to hear  your side of the story?  Roberts: I think for the first time, people  are actually listening to what's going on in  Yellowknife. It's important that we continue  to go around and spread the word because  the media is only portraying one side of the  story.  The media leave out critical pieces of  information to explain situations and they  sensationalize a lot. We need to get the word  out to the working people of this country  that things are not all cut and dry. There's a  lot of stuff going on in Yellowknife that  shouldn't be happening.  Mullen: What sort of things?  Roberts: In the first couple of days of the  strike, the company was granted an injunction against our CASAW members that restricted picketing at the gates. We were only  allowed five people per gate [under the injunction] . We got [the limit] raised to ten, but  now it's back down to five.  We faced all kinds of intimidation tactics from management. And three days after  the strike started, the Minister of Justice  okayed 50 members of the riot squad, a  special tactical team of the RCMP, to come  up from Red Deer, Alberta. They were dispersed among the picketers. They moved  scabs and equipment through our picket  lines, and harassed and intimidated strikers  and [the women with CLASS] on a continual  basis. They left near the end of July but the  local police have continued their efforts right  up until now.  Mullen: I believe the special tactical squad  ran up quite a bill that taxpayers will have to  pay?  Roberts: Yes, it cost about $60,000 per  day to have that 50-member team there.  I  ^Td Vear Anniversary Cdebr<3ft-0/? ,  20% off with This coupon  MlM util Dm 3\ 1991 I  Qood Food Store dfi&  ORGANIC PRODUCE S&W  biggest selection & best prices in Vancouver  BULK ORGANIC  Produce 'Grains •Cereals •Pasta • Herbs  i Restaurant & Juice Bar  Meat, Egg & Dairy Free »AII Organic  !  f Circling Dawri i gw. opcn 10.9 ^ -  | (JTganiC Foods   ' 1045 Commercial Drive ph. all-bean I  Collective   Supporting Sustainable Agriculture I Native Sovereignty ,  June Roberts  They've run up a tally of close to six million  dollars and now the territorial and the federal governments are arguing about who's  going to pay for it.  Mullen: The dispute only really got national attention after September 18 when a  fatal underground explosion at the mine  killed nine scabs. The RCMP has implied it  was the fault of the union. What has the  RCMP done to investigate the cause of the  blast'  Roberts: After the explosion happened,  fingers were pointed at the union. The union  had to spend the first four or five days after  the explosion defending themselves against  violent attacks by scabs, and accusations by  the police and the territorial government. It  was basically hell.  Since the police started to call [the explosion] a deliberate and multiple homicide,  they've been interrogating strikers and [the  women of CLASS]. From the beginning, the  union told the police we would fully cooperate with them in their investigation and we  would submit to voluntary interviews but  the interviews have turned into interrogations. The police have been yelling and  screaming at people, pounding their fists on  desks-basically the only thing missing is the  bright light in our faces.  Mullen: Are the RCMP investigating any  other possibilities about the cause of the  explosion? Are they looking at anybody else?  Roberts: It's been my understanding that  [the police] feel the company has no motive.  They say they've questioned all the "replacement workers" as they call them—we call  them scabs. I was told that, right now, only  the strikers and [the women of CLASS] are  being interrogated. I asked [the police] why  [the wives of strikers] were being brought in  and they basfcally said they feel somebody  in the union is responsible for the blast.  Mullen: What's the union's theory on  what happened?  Roberts: Basically, the union feels that  [the scab workers], in trying to maintain a  high production rate at the mine, were probably transporting explosives, possibly underneath their seats or holding them in their  hands [when the blast occurred].  The union says the scab workers who  were killed underground were travelling in  an enclosed mining car and the car was  being pushed by a motor instead of being  pulled, which is what is supposed to happen.  If these scab workers did have explosives under the [mining car] seats and the car  was being pushed, the scab workers probably were not able to see ahead. In that case,  the probability of derailment is high and-  likely was the cause of the explosion. The  tracks underground are very treacherous  and mining cars derail all the time.  Mullen: What has the situation been like  for the women in CLASS since the blast  happened?  Roberts: Since the blast, the women of  CLASS—a lot of us—havehad death threats  and phone calls telling us to keep our children close. Women have been confronted in  schoolyards by people yelling and calling us  murderers. CLASS has had to cancel all our  fundraising activities for fear of confrontation, both verba 1 or physical. We're basically  just trying to keep a low profile because we  don't want to be put in a situation where we  might not be able to defend ourselves.  Mullen: Maybe you can tell us a little bit  about CLASS' more recent initiative: the  Adopt A Family program.  Roberts: We decided to try and get local  unions across Canada to send financial support to the families to help them cope with  the cold, hard winter in Yellowknife. It's so  expensive to live up there. We set up a  committee—there are two CLASS and two  CASAW members. We set criteria to use as  guidelines and we prioritized families according to need. We're hoping to give the  families at least $500 per month plus $100  per child. That way, along with their strike  pay, they should be able to pay for their basic  necessities and maybe even be able to pay  the minimum payments on their bills. We're  hoping we'll get more support out there so  we can help all the families before Christmas.  Mullen: And wha t kind of response have  you had so far on this tour of BC?  Roberts: Since Harry [Seeton, CASAW  Local 4 president] and I came down last  Monday, we've toured around and talked to  many different union people. We've raised  close to $15,000, which is going to help a lot  of families at the end of the month. Last  month, we were able to help 18 families, and  this month we're hoping to help at least  another 20 or 30.  To help support the families of the striking  miners, send donations to CLASS, PO Box  1628, Yellowknife, NWT XI A.  Erin Mullen is a Vancouver freelance  writer and an organizer of the BC tour of  June Roberts and Harry Seeton.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Feature  u  Women in Honduras:  Resisting and organizing  by Gloria Russo   Gladys Lanza has been a labour union  activist in Honduras for 24 years. She is  currently an executive member of the Coordinating Committee of Popular Organizations (CCOP), and a member of Visitacion  Padilla and Honduran Women's Committee for Peace. She was in Vancouver in October to speak about the North American Free  Trade Agreement (NAFTA), the US military  presence and the demise of organized trade  unions in Honduras.  Lanza lays the reason for the demise of  workers' rights on the US military presence, <  the US's close ties to the Honduran govern- |2  ment which now controls the unions, and ^  the growing number of transnational com- |j  panies supporting this government, [see §  box this page] o  Lanza points to an accelerating worn- j=  en's movement that is affecting change, and  fighting back for workers' rights. Resistance  is often crushed, opposing unions are shut  down by force. Union leaders, like Lanza,  are replaced with leaders congenial to the  Honduran government, which has close ties  to the US. The list of missing and tortured is  extensive.  The CCOP is currently organizing independent schooling for children as an alternative to the US propaganda and sexism in  regular schools. They are identifying alternative foods that are less expensive and  healthier, for example, soya bean milk. They  are also fighting against violence against  women.  US troops have been using women and  children for sexual purposes, paying them  of f with bribes, says Lanza. Rape is currently  nota felony inHonduras. Thosefound guilty  are merely made to pay fines. The CCOP is  pushing for changes in the penal code, fighting for protection for women against violence and rape but has not made any gains  yet.  Lanza urges Canadian  women not to support  NAFTA...  Honduras is home to seven military  bases, down from 14 after the military expansion of 1984. Lanza talks about trained  groupsof torturers, knownasDeath Squads,  who get rid of popular communist trade  union leaders. Unions such as the Public  Workers' Union, Printers, Postal Workers'  Union, The Housing Institute, Communication, and Transport Workers' Union are  closed or in the process of closing. Lanza's  union fought hard to secure its jobs. Lanza  argues she is fighting against neo-liberal  economies, against a current regime which  has sent unemployment rates soaring in  Honduras.  The value of currency has dropped,  with new taxes imposed. The inflation rate is  growing. The cost of medicine, for example,  has risenby 300 percent. Half the population  is illiterate, while 34 percent of pregnant  women are anaemic.  It is the women who are most deeply  affected, says Lanza. Many work in factories  known as Maquiladoras. These have increased ra pidly in num ber since 1985. N inety  percent of the employees are young women  between the ages of 14 and 25. Tenhour days  are not uncommon. Social programs are  non-existent and the right to organize is  denied.  Women are forced to engage in birth  control so the companies they work for, who  must pay maternity leave, can cut costs. A  worker averages $100 US per month which  is not enough to support one person, let  alone a single mother with dependents or  families. There is no minimum wage. Women  fear a loss of jobs, and are too poor and  frightened to fight.  But the women's movement is stronger,  says Lanza. A new energy is revitalizing the  movement. Women are fighting against labour laws and other injustices wrought by  the transnationals. They get together from  the shanty towns, working centres, schools  and universities.  Gladys Lanza and Tamara Hurtado of Canada-Honduras Information and  Support Association (CHISA)  The following is an excerpt of Gladys Lanza's speech made in Vancouver on October 30.  In order to understand what's happening in my country right now, one has to go back  to a little bit of history.  The US transnationals established themselves in Honduras at the end of the last century.  They did so by taking over a great number of opera tions there.. .in the trade, communications,  transport, mining, and banana industries since the end of the past century, preventing the  birth of a national bourgeoisie in Honduras.  These transnationals acquired not only economic but also political power. For many  years, they appointed our Honduran functionaries, including tne president or tne repuonc.  Workers in these transnationals have miserable standards of living and working  conditions. And many of the workers who rebelled against such conditions were assasinated  by thugs or gangs hired by transnational executives.  In 1954, the workers in the banana fields decided to go on strike. They went on strike  to have their union recognized. The strike lasted 69 days. While the strike was on, workers  throughout Honduras had great control over many of the most basic aspects of the country—  communications, transport, business, banks, and so on. The workers learned, during these  69 days, that it was possible to have control of their own country.  The workers learned... that it was possible to have  control of their own country.  And the Honduran government did not like that. The transnationals resorted to getting  help from the United States and an agreement was reached between the government of  Honduras and the US to the effect that the army of Honduras would be trained by officers  from the US army.  And from that day on, all the military officers of Honduras are trained in the military  schools of the US, either in the Panama Canal or the US itself. Also, [they are trained] in some  of the US's schools in Chile...Argentina and Venezuela.  But, coming out of that strike in 1954, the workers fought for the right to organize trade  unions. They got a labour law issued. The ministry of labour was created, the social security  law was issued. Peasants gained the right to organize, women got the vote, and political  parties included in their agendas demands that had to do with labour.  At the same time, however, newcomers to trade-unionism were sent to be trained in  trade-unionism inPuerto Rico and Washington by the transnationals. This made for a change  in the essence of trade union struggles. What it gave us was a trade-unionism that was  conciliatory, a follower of government policies. The majority of the trade union leaders in my  country have gone to these schools for trade-unionists organized by the US.  But some trade union leaders, such as myself, rebelled against the schooling the  transnationals were offering. This is how the trade union leadership came to be divided into  anti-communist and communist trade union leaders. Communist trade union leaders  pointed out the ways in which the other leaders sold workers' independence in order to  follow the government. A little later on, the anti-communist trade unions adopted the name  Resistance is often  crushed, opposing  unions are shut down  by force.  Women are denied the right to own  land. They must pay for health services for  their children and themselves. Government  assistance is used to politically manipulate  women. They are giving single mothers $4  per month but, to receive this, the woman  must be a member of the political party in  power and accept conditions imposed by  that political party. Because these women  have sick children and transportation problems, many cannot receive this assistance at  scheduled times. If the appointment is  missed, this money goes to political campaigns.  In support of Honduran women workers of the Macquiladoras, Lanza urges Canadian women not to support NAFTA, as the  women in these textile factories are not allowed to organize and therefore cannot fight  for their rights. Lanza adds that NAFTA will  lead to a further reduction of hourly wages.  She says that, in Honduras today, the  trade union movement is not strong enough  to oppose NAFTA alone. Moreover, there is  a lack of firm opposition for World Bank and  government policies. Honduras is a fascist  dictatorship, says Lanza. The union executives are conciliatory, not confrontational—  the government does what it wants.  Honduran government. These will increase  pressure on government, and allow many  Hondurans to "live a few days longer." Also,  she says it is necessary for the Canadian  people to monitor Canadian foreign aid going into the country. Canada will be sending  $30 million through the Social Investment  Honduras Fund which, Lanza says, will  never reach the poor and is not going to  produce social services in Honduras.  "Women are resisting heavily," says  Lanza, "...showing courage and bravery."  Leaders, though oppressed, continue fighting as they feel they owe it to the workers'  struggle and "believe injustice."  Gladys Lanza's life has been threatened,  and she has fears about returning to her  country.  Contact CHISA: Canada-Honduras Information and Support Association, Vancouver,  for information or for donations at 872-1382.  Gloria Russo is a freelance writer and  photographer living in Vancouver.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Feature  Breast cancer:  Sexism in research  by Nancy Armitage  The following is based on a presentation  made at a panel on breast cancer at the "Leaping  into Health: Women Taking Action " health conference sponsored by the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective on November 13,14 and 15 in  Vancouver. Nancy Armitage was presen ting for  the Vancouver Women's Health Collective.  We live in a society dominated by men,  and it's a woman-hating one. At best, we are  treated with indifference and face exclusion.  At worst, we meet contempt and hatred, and  we are violated or killed. This hits at every  level of our experience and the health system  is no exception.  Sexismand misogyny deeply affect how  we see our bodies, how others see our bodies, and how health practitioners see our  bodies. And it is affecting progress in the  search for preventions, treatments and cures  for breast cancer.  Little progress has been made in the last  century towards an understanding of breast  cancer. This can be directly related to who  controls funding for research into breast  cancer, as well as to the neglect and abuse the  medical system has historically demonstrated for women in general. On all levels,  the system operates asone of violenceagainst  women.  According to Dr. Susan Love's Breast  Book, "...women find themselves dealing  with a largely male-dominated medical  establishment...a frighteningnumberof male  surgeons still recommend mastectomies  [breast removal] when a less severe operation would be equally helpful and  some even recommend 'preventative' mastectomies for women they feel might get  cancer."  Love adds that "the ovaries, the uterus  and breasts are practically the only organs  taken out to prevent cancer."  "Breast Cancer:  Unanswered Questions"  In September, the BC Ministry of Women's Equality made public a report of the  Standing Committee on Health and Welfare, Social affairs, seniors and the Status of  Women called "Breast Cancer: Unanswered  Questions".  The inquiry's mandate was to look at  increasing public awareness of the serious  proportions of breast cancer in Canada, and  to get an accurate idea of the amount of  research dollars spent on breast cancer in  Canada, as well as to trace where the research is being directed.  The report states that the committee  was unable to find accurate figures on how  much money is spent on breast cancer research in this country but suggests the  amount of money spent on breast cancer  research relative to other cancer research is  minute. This they deduce from approximate  numbers received from each of the main  funding bodies—The National Cancer Institute of Canada (NCIC), the Medical Research Council and the National Health Research and Development Council.  Of about $300 million for cancer research received by these bodies, less than  three million was spent on breast cancer  research. That's less than one percent.  Given that approximately 14,000 new  cases of breast cancer will be diagnosed in  Canada, and approximately 5,000 women  will die of this disease, there is a need for  greater targeted research on breast cancer.  The report is revealing regarding the  nature and direction of cancer research in  this country. This is determined, for the most  part, by applications for research projects  received at research facilities.  Final funding decisions a re made based  on a "peer review" process—applicants submit research proposals and these are reviewed by an applicant's peers—other physicians, scientists, researchers in the field,  and so on; applications are scored; those  with the highest scores are then reviewed by  various panels or committees within research organizations where final decisions  are made.  Thismeansresearchon cancer inCanada  is carried out by a small number of mostly  male researchers, physicians and scientists  who review each other's work. Because there  exists a lack of gender balance in the peer  review process, and because of the nature of  decision making through peer review, the  process ensures that, with respect to the  type of research done and the amount of  funding available to it, the status quo is  maintained.  The process continues to exist without a  policy to govern the inclusion of women in  general, let alone women of colour, lesbians,  poor women, Aboriginal women, disabled  women and women from other marginalized  groups. It is the quintessential "closed" circle, the "old boys network."  Accountability is non-existent. We have  to assume that our current medical model,  which is controlled by men, does not have  our best interests at heart. Few specific directions or policies on cancer research guide the  process. Avenues for input from the public,  who contribute to the research funds, are  limited, if they exist at all. And the existing  peer review process excludes public accountability.  The formation of lobby and advocacy  groups around the issue of breast cancer that  demand accountability is crucial if we are  going to have a system that works for w  Who is at risk?  As things stand, breast cancer research  directs the greatest part of existing meager  funds toward determining who is at risk.  Few studies even begin to look specifically at  how lesbians are at higher risk for breast  cancer than heterosexual women, or document the incidence of breast cancer among  Aboriginal women and women of colour.  The bulk of these dollars is spent on  developing mammographic [X-rays for  breasts] screening technology which emits  less toxic radiation. Despite efforts to identify cancer-causing risk factors, in 60 to 70  percent of women diagnosed with breast  cancer, not one of the risk factors is present.  In other words, at this stage we can  conclude that simply being a woman is a  major risk factor for breast cancer. Greater  efforts must be made to uncover the causes  of breast cancer. More funding must go  toward genetic research, a kind of basic  research that may aid the search for what the  causes of breast cancer are.  A lot of attention and resources have  likewise focused on early detection of the  disease. Here lies the assumption that early  detection will contribute to greater long-  term survival. But for many women, the  disease rapidly progresses or the cancer  spreads to other parts of the body even with  early detection. Because of this, the enormous amounts of funding that go into breast  screeningmammographyhasbeen criticized  on many levels.  Central to the intense debate over the  use of mammography should be that this  cancer-detection technology uses the very  substance known to cause cancer—toxic radiation. And, despite overwhelming evidence that breast screening programs for  "early detection" are not working, more and  more money is pumped into making  mammography safer for women. Why are  funds not directed into finding alternative  methods of detection that are less invasive  and less life-threatening?  In 1988, a Swedish study found that  mammograms and early detection of breast  cancer did not reduce mortality rates. The  study of 42,000 women, printed in the B ritish  Medical Journal, strongly recommended the  restriction of mammography.  I understand that, since these and other  findings, Sweden has legislated restrictions  on the use of mammography. It is only used  once breast cancer has been detected and  only to locate the site of the tumor.  The study points out that "the philosophy of breast cancer screening is based on  wishful thinking that early cancer is curable  cancer, though no-one really knows what is  "early'."  Eighty to 90 percent of all breast cancers  are discovered by women themselves. For  obvious reasons then, breast self examinations should be encouraged. Yet, literature  and public information on breast cancer promoting breast self examinations takes a  'blame the victim' tone, laying blame for  much of breast cancer mortality on women's  negligence in performing breast self examinations.  A recent US study acknowledges that  delay in diagnosis of breast lumps by physicians is one of the leading grounds for malpractice suits.  The most frequently cited reasons for  delay in diagnosis were: the physician's failure to be impressed by a woman's history,  by a woman's own finding, or by the physician's own physical finding.  Testimony from a US breast cancer support group estimates that, among their group  members, about 25 percent of the women  who made their initial report of a suspicious  breast lump to a physician, were advised  that it was "probably not serious." These  women were monitored for breast cancer  from three months to a year before pathologic  findings confirmed that they all had breast  cancer. Some have since died of metastatic  cancer.  On the brink of a breakthrough?  Research trends into treatment focus  m ostly on chemotherapy and radiation treatments. There is no question that the current  disease model—a framework for research  into treatment of breast cancer—are invasive therapies that leave the breast cancer  victim sick or mutilated.  "Most cancer patients in this country  d ie of chemotherapy," sa ys one doctor at the  University of California San Francisco.  "Chemotherapy does not eliminate breast,  colon or lung cancers. This fact has been  documented for over a decade.  Yet doctors still use chemotherapy for  these tumors. Women with breast cancer are  likely to die faster with chemotherapy than  without it."  We are constantly told science stands  on the brink of a breakthrough and that  mortality rates are lower than before. One  US study found there has been an eight  percent increase in cancer since 1950, and  that figure continues to soar.  It is no wonder we are confused when  we read government publications like those  funded by Health and Welfare Canada,  which assure us that, with early detection  and progressive medical care, breast cancer  survival rates are improving.  It is part of a medical system that strives  to lull us into complacency by telling us to  accept that 'the experts' know what is best  for us and we just have to trust them. Yet for  every one answer to a question about breast  cancer treatment, about ten contradictory  statements are made.  What we know for sure is that women  are dying. We also know that the health care  system, as it exists, is not meeting our needs  because women, especially women of colour and Aboriginal women, are still dying at  alarming rates.  We need a new design or model that  addressesour concerns. And our voices must  be a part of this design.  Such a design must address the need for  a holistic approach to health that is inclusive  and non-discriminatory; that must not dismiss our needs; that must allow for new,  alternative theories to be uncovered; that  must be based on input from the public and  have policies ensuring human needs are met  and are not subordinated in the name of  profit or prestige; that must be open-ended,  flexible and humane with a broad enough  scope—and that must be legislated.  Nancy Armitage is a Vancouver-based  feminist activist, working at the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 We remember Audre Lorde  1934 - 1992  V.  Divide and conquer  in our world  must become  define and empower  —Audre Lorde  Audre Lorde of ten identified herself as a blacklesbian feminist warrior poet mother. She  wrote groundbreaking poems and essays on racial identity, political consciousness, and  connections between Afro-European, Afro-Asian, and Afro-American women, whom she  called "the hyphenated people." She was the daughter of Grenadian parents.  Her work carried themes of the need for love and commitment in our lives,  interconnectedness, difference as a creative force, the South African struggle, the beauty and  love of women, the pain and compassion of Black mothers and the encouragement of the  voices of lesbians and women of colour.  Lorde published nine volumes of poetry and five of prose, and contributed writings to  numerous periodicals and anthologies. Her work has been translated into many languages.  Her publications include: The Black Unicorn, Sister Outsider, Zami: A New Spelling of My Name,  Coal Between Ourselves, The Cancer Journals and A Burst of Light. Her most recent work,  Undersong, was published in 1992.  She taught college students, organized among women of colour, and politicized  audiences with her poetry readings. In 1980, she helped found Kitchen Table: Women of  Color Press. She lived the last years of her life in St. Croix, Virgin Islands.  On Tuesday, November 17, Audre Lorde died of cancer.  In honour of her life and work, a memorial fund is being established to commission a  bust of Lorde and to create a scholarship fund for Black women writers. Send donations to  the Audre Lorde Memorial Fund/Astrea Foundation, 666 Broadway, Ste. 520, NY, 10012. In  lieu of flowers, please send donations to Sisterhood in Support of Sisters in South Africa, PO  Box 24966 GBS, Christensted, St. Croix, US Virgin Islands, 00820. / Am Your Sister perpetual  calendars for birthdays and all occasions with 31 conference photos and selections from  Lorde's writing are available from / Am Your Sister, PO Box 269, Astor Station, Boston, MA,  02123 for $12 US plus mail costs. Calendar sales go to reducing the perpetual conference  debts.  by SKY Lee  This one is for Audre Lorde  I remember when I first fell head over heels in love with a woman. I was arrogant,  married, a mother, middle-classed, and blind. And afterward, when the patriarchy came  after me with the chains to hog-tie me and drag me back or punish me, I got very scared. My  new love made me feel crazy, as if I had been zapped by a bolt of lightning, which threw me  bodily, psychically, and spiritually over to another side of reality. The terrible fear of my new  love isolated me.  That was when I met my first Audre Lorde words, "lama Black Lesbian, and I am your  sister." I remember staring smack dab right into the power and courage that these  ridiculously simple words evoked in me. And I asked myself, do you mean to tell me then,  that all I need to say is, "I am an Asian Lesbian, and I am your sister."  "Yep."  "Well, then, I am an Asian Lesbian, and I am your sister." And I have been ever since,  for no other good reason than that I see life in my future, in the future of my women's  communities, and all our communities in struggle.  Audre Lorde died on Tuesday, November 17th, 1992, after some of the most amazing  victories over cancer I have ever heard of, but she left her strength behind. She left her  strength behind, because she sowed her gifts all over this earth, wherever there were women  like me, like you, who have warred and wept in the deep, and long, and dark of our worst  nightmares. She left her beauty and power and wrath and love for women, like you, like me.  And she went on ahead.  There are times when I feel left behind, ejected and rejected—the urban landscape  around me cold and barren and endlessly terrible. I have learned to look for those tough little  seeds that Audre Lorde has scattered as I negotiate daily, and very carefully, the violence and  insanity of a blinded society which worships oppression. Little green shoots in the cracks of  concrete walls, sometimes a lush and gorgeous mossy green growth over destroyed land.  Look up. Amazing. There, a whole rainforest, ancient and sacred, has actually survived.  Where, where? Here, there, everywhere, don't you see it—beauty where its oppressors have  overlooked it.  Under the duress of war waged against women and children everyday, I have learned  that Poetry Is Not A Luxury. Poetry is hope which sustains us. Poetry is a code which our  enemies, soulless and distorted, cannot interpret. Yet, for those who have reached "down  into that deep place of knowledge inside herself," and have experienced the Erotic as Power,  poetry is a bridge which challenges us to touch our old fear of others, of difference, of stigma.  It bonds us as women, to each other and connects us to the work of networking that we all  do for the love of life.  "Black Lesbian Feminist Warrior Poet Mother..." Audre Lorde is an award-winning  visionary in contemporary feminist theory. And there is a simple, if earth-moving reason as  to why she is the most often quoted writer in the lesbian/feminist movement today.  In the spirit of sisterhood, she took what was quickly solidifying into a narrow, weak  feminist movement, so often criticized for being the last bastion of the patriarchy precisely  because of its inability to let go of the "old structures of oppression," and basically blew it  wide open.  The feminist movement, Audre Lorde stated loud and clear, is a movement of women  of colour, women in poverty, and women of conscience. She said, "When we define  ourselves, when I define myself, the place in which I am like you and the place in which lam  not like you, I'm not excluding you from the joining—I'm broadening the joining."  Audre Lorde said and wrote so many beautiful things about being a woman among so  many women in resistance and struggle. To me, she wasn't exactly "the powerful  unf rightening sister who will make the pain go away." She was "the powerful un frightening  sister" who showed me a lot of my own beauty. She was there for me when I came out as  a dyke of colour, she was there for me when I wrote my first novel, she was there with me  through the recent death of my own partner from cancer. She is with me now, because our  work continues.  by Lynne Wanyeki  Audre Lorde was one of the first writers to articulate the experiencesof lesbiansof colour '  in North America. She defined a positioning which challenged the fragmented frameworks  of reference available to lesbians of colour. Her work filled a void and created the space for  a fast-growing body of theory and activism around questions of cohesive identity. She  questioned external constructions of this identity, as well as strategies derived within those  constructions. She celebrated the erotic power of lesbians of colour and affirmed the  importance of taking care of each other in the most personal of ways.  Her work serves as a point of reference, and more importantly, as a point of departure  for our own attempts to articulate identity and positioning. Her voice will be missed.  I say the love of women healed me...there were those women whom I loved  passionately, and my other friends, and my acquaintances, and then even women  whom I did not know.  —Audre Lorde  The Cancer Journals  by Zara Suleman  Black and Third World people are expected to educate white people as to our  humanity. Women are expected to educate men. Lesbians and gay men are  expected to educate the heterosexua I world. The oppressors maintain their position  and evade responsibility for their own actions. There is a constant drain of energy  which might be better used in redefining ourselves and devising realistic scenarios  for altering the present and constructing the future.  There are many kinds of power, used and unused, acknowledged or otherwise.  The erotic is a resource within each of us that lies in a deeply female and spiritual  plane, firmly rooted in the power of our unexpressed or unrecognized feeling. In  order to perpetuate itself, every oppression must corrupt or distort those various  sources of power within the culture of the oppressed that can provide energy for  change. For women, this has meant a suppression of the erotic as a considered  source of power and information within our lives.  —Audre Lorde  excerpt from Sister Outsider  For me, as a woman of colour, writer, feminist, and cultural activist the writings of  Audre Lorde give voice to kindred spirits in the struggle. The quotes above are ones I have  reflected on on many occasions. They carry rich messages and strategies of empowerment  that Audre Lorde spoke and wrote of in her work. Her ease in expressing emotions and the  analysis in her writing helped other women of colour and me negotiate relationships with  the white feminist movement, with each other and with ourselves.  I was saddened to hear of the loss of Audre Lorde. But I know that her words of pain,  resistance, struggle and celebration will live on in the "movement" and in our individual  lives. I know the words and wisdom will linger on in my heart and soul, thank you Audre,  thank you Ms. Lorde.  The struggle continues...  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993  11 Feature  Women and backlash:  Kicked and still  , by Jennifer Russell and  Christine Cosby   WOMEN OF THE 90S—FROM  BACKLASH TO EMPOWERMENT  One-day conference sponsored by the  Women's International League  for Peace and Freedom  _   Vancouver, November 7,1992  "Women of the 90s—From Backlash to  Empowerment," a one-day conference presented by the Women's International League  for Peace and Freedom, was much like the  book which inspired it—SusanFaludi's Bacfc-  lash. While it dealt with the anti-woman  backlashbeingfeltby mainstream women—  ^ feminists or otherwise and primarily white,  middle-class professionals—it failed to address the realities that, amongothers, women  of colour, Aboriginal women, lesbians,  younger and older women, and poor women  experience in the name of backlash. Despite  these faults, the conference sparked much  discussionamong the Kinesis volunteers who  attended. Much of our conversation had to  do with the violence we have personally  experienced and we are uncomfortable with  publishing it. So instead, two of us give the  following summary of the discussion that  took place after the conference.  Christine Cosby: Jennifer, you thought  there were different ideas and definitions of  backlash presented by the speakers. But was  there a common theme for you?  Jennifer Russell: The common thing I  heard from all of them was that, the more  "   backlash the better, because it means we're  doing something right. But, no, I didn't see  a common definition.  Cosby: Margaret Fulton, [the former  president of Mt. St. Vincent University],  talked about ideological paradigms—a  model of patriarchal culture. She said backlash is something that is always going to be  there because the "chauvinism of our dominating, nationalistic, planetary patriarchy"  has control as its central motivation. The  patriarchy wants to keep everything constant—it doesn't want change, and it certainly doesn't want women to have their  own 'world'.  I thought Fulton went beyond the backlash to present a new paradigm for culture,  for society. She said we need to change all of  society's institutions, from within and without. She said feminism is starting to chip  away at these institutions, but the women  inside the power structures need strong support. Systems change the women before  women change the systems. Altogether  though, it was a fairly academic discussion.  Russell: Frances Wasserlein [of Langara  College and Simon Fraser University] had a  good definition, I thought.  Cosby: Something about a "sudden,  forceful reaction."  Russell: But she said it wasn't so sudden, because backlash has been around forever, for centuries. But it was definitely forceful, definitely reactionary, in the violence  that we see against women. There is a war  against women and Wasserlein said we can  see the backlash in violence against women,  the diet industry, breast implants, debates  over political correctness and academic freedom, and in the myths in the media about  women. Someof these myths weredebunked  by Susan Faludi in her book Backlash. These  myths work to silence women.  Cosby: And how do you think Patricia  Graham [senior editor of The Vancouver Sun]  defined it?  Russell: Graham said she saw backlash  as something relatively new.  Cosby: I understood from her that  women and feminists were being blamed  for everything—the demise of 'the family,'  and so on. Interestingly, at the same time the  media is blaming feminists for everything,  they are declaring feminism dead each year.  Patricia said, "Welcome to the longest lasting, vdead' movement in history." She said  the backlash is nothing new. She said we  need to get beyond the backlash and recognize that we are prevailing. We are prevailing because it is a revolution. Feminism is "a  piece of consciousness that we can't go back  on."  Russell: I came out of that conference  feeling worn down from school and the  backlash that I experience in my life. I came  out of the conference feeling good that I'm  not alone in facing the same thing. For me,  the goal in my life is to learn how to deal with  it, because it is obviously not going to go  away.  No matter what I do or what I say,  people around me aren't going to change  their attitudes or their behaviour overnight.  So how am I going to survive in the mainstream society, which is where I am right  now. I haven't figured the answer out yet.  Cosby: I think one of the options for  surviving is getting together and being  around other like-minded women—break  the isolation.  Russell: Yes, to get away from the mainstream for a little while, by volunteering at  women's centres or going to feminist conferences. It empowers me to go back out and  face it all again.  Cosby: Wasserlein also said she doesn't  expect the revolution is going to happen in  her lifetime. But that doesn't mean we should  stop working for change. We need to recognize that every little thing we do on the  feminist front does have an impact. Patricia  Graham said that feminism is a piece of  consciousness that we can't go back on.  But things have changed, even the basic  change of women having the vote or being  able to attend post-secondary institutions.  Now, some of us struggle to get the boys to  say women instead of girls—we're trying to  get something across. We have to do it one  step at a time. The point is to try not to be  defeated by the backlash.  Russell: It's very hard for me to be objective about the whole thing, when I'm in  mainstream society all the time. Who was it  who said we lose sight of where we've come  from?  Cosby: They all said that. Our herstory is  very important. Graham said "we all need to  become biographers. We need to record our  own experiences and record the herstories of  our women ancestors." Fulton said one of  the strategies of the patriarchy is to deny us  our herstory so that we keep reinventing the  wheel. We need to tell our stories to each  other, the same way that Wasserlein told us  the herstory of the Vancouver Women's  Caucus and the cross-Canada abortion cara -  van [See story, pages 18-19.]  Russell: Yes, it's a way of showing them  that they can't silence us.  Cosby: You get defeated though. For the  last two and a half years I've surrounded  myself with women, volunteering or at work.  To go back to the BC Institute of Technology  was a real culture shock. I had a lot of  insecurities for those two and a half years,  because there were a lot of wonderful and  powerful women around me doing all these  amazing things and having a real understanding of the world.  Then, when I went back to BCIT, I felt I  could blow people out of the water at school  who harassed me. I got a real sense of myself  and how strong I really was and how I could  withstand all that bullshit out there. Instead  of being the good girl who was ashamed of  having that power, I felt good about being  able to 'intimidate' these people and being  able to command respect, even in this small  sort of sense, because I was strong. That was  a real revelation. And it was all thanks to  these women.  Russell: Being with women is very empowering.  Cosby: I can't wait to drop out of the  mainstream again though and go back to  being in the women's movement.  Russell: Same here.  Cosby: But that's what it's really all  about—we have to try to impact on the  mainstream, to change it.  Russell: I don't think we ever really opt  out of 'the mainstream' completely. 'The  mainstream' is there, everywhere. I tell myself I'm at school right now in a mainstream  setting, but it's a temporary thing that I have  to put up with. And when I get out I'll try to  find a work environment I can live with,  with women. That's something that helps  when I have to be around these ignorant  sexist...  Cosby: ...asshole...  Russell: ...men.  Cosby: The backlash, in one way, can be  something to use to your advantage. The  key is to be aware of it and what is going on.  It prepares you for fighting back. We get  practice. If everything was going along  smoothly and then something blindsides  you, you're not prepared. But if you're  struggling all along, you get, for example,  the words to argue or to defend yourself or  to assert yourself. It keeps you on your toes.  And it keeps you struggling. I think a lot of  young women take for granted what the  generation before them had to struggle for.  Part of that is because we don't know our  own herstory. But the other part is that these  women don't have to struggle for many  things—a trivial example is not having to  wear skirts all the time or at all, if we don't  want to. So we need to get on with the bigger  struggle.  Russell: I think each time you assert  yourself, it makes you a little bit stronger for  the next time—because they keep on coming.  Cosby: I guess we can take heart from  Margaret's final words "Change is the only  constant. Motion is all we know."  Jennifer Russell is studying nursing at  Douglas College.  Christine Cosby is  studying financial management at BCIT.  They both love Kinesis to bits and have  found their strength in volunteering for  the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its that time of year again..  • Excellent rates on fixed and variable terms  • Instant tax receipts  • RRSP loans available  • No user fees  Deadline: Monday, March 1,1993  Come in now, don't wait for the deadline!  CCEC will be open 6 DAYS A WEEK starting January, 1993  Your RRSP investment at CCEC will help promote  economic development in your community.  CCEC Credit U  al Drive, Vancouver, B.C., V5N 5P<  ne  254-4100  Fax 254-8558  EASTsidJE DataGrapIhcs  1460 CommercIaI Drive  { teI: 255 9559 Fax: 255-5075  OfficE SuppliEs  Art SuppliEs  UNiQUE SeasonaI Gifts  Watercolour, Acrylic & Oil Paint Sets,  Children's Activity Sets, Recycle Stationary Sets,  Cross Pens, Fountain Pens, Day Runners,  Briefcases and Portfolios...  CaU or fAx Aivid we'U sencj you our MONThly flyER  of qREAT officp supply spEciAls.  -UnIon Shop Frff NEXT-cky dElivFRy.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Making  the links  Anti-racism and feminism  by Fatima Jaffer  More than 1,500 womenattended a very  unusual annual conference of the Canadian  Research Institute for the Advancement of  Women [CRIAW] in Toronto on November  13-15.  Titled Making the Links: An ti-Racism and  Feminism, the 16th annual conference drew  an unprecedented number of anti-racist and  feminist activists from across the country  and around the world. For the first time,  more than three quarters of the delegates at  a national meeting of a mainstream women's organization were women of colour  and Aboriginal women.  As conference organizer Rita Kohli said  in the closing session, "This is more than a  conference—it's about a beginning, it's about  us, our lives, about struggles, about future  generations and about possibilities. I would  like to say that this has been what we all have  made it and we all need to take that piece  with us as a source of inspiration to keep us  moving."  Kohli's words summed up the spirit of  the gathering, drawing a standing ovation  from the women seated in the ballroom of  the downtown Holiday Inn.  Enthusiastic ovations and moving tributes were not uncommon over the weekend.  On opening night, women gave a rousing  reception to keynote speakers, EllenGabriel,  member of the Turtle Clan, Mohawk Nation  and Mohawk spokesperson for Kanehsa take,  and Dionne Brand, Black lesbian poet, writer,  and filmmaker from Toronto.  The opening plenary, featuring a panel  of women exposing women's positionin the  new world order, set the tone for the conference debates. Women presented a range of  views on how the current global restructuring affects women in Africa, the Middle  East, and women of colour and Aboriginal  communities in Canada.  Fifty workshops, round tables and panels during the three-day conference enabled  participants to explore strategies on issues  and initiate political alliances across recognized differences based in class, race, age,  ability, sexual preference and geographical  boundaries.  Topics up for debate included: Palestinian and Jewish women organizing; white  racism in the provision of rape crisis services; women in conflict with the law; racism  and sexism in the media; empowerment of  First Nations lesbians and lesbians of colour; race, class, gender and sex in cultural  production; Aboriginal culture and feminism; foreign domestic workers and citizenship rights in Canada; women and AIDS  in Uganada—making the connections; free  trade; Black women's poetry, music and  voice; women and poverty; resisting violence against women—international perspectives; policing and womanassault; refugee women; psychiatry and social control of  women; and colonialism, nationalism and  anti-racism.  Guatemalan human rights activist and  Nobel peace prize winner Rigoberta Menchu  addressed a crowd of 2,000 women after  dinner on Saturday night.  Delegates were encouraged to do more  than just talk. A number of performances,  concerts, readings, film screenings and as  well as a dance were peppered over the three  days.  Celebrating the gathering on opening  night were Sadie Buck and the Six Nations  Women Singers. Toronto-based singer/songwriter Faith Nolan and Tamai Kobayashi and  the Wasabi Taiko Women Drummers played  to tired, but enthusiastic crowds.  A diasporic fundraiser dance featuring  DJs Marva Jackson, Amita Handa, Vinita  Srivastava and Maria Elena, raised spirits  and funds to support three women in struggle with the State—Mary Pitawanakwat,  Winsom and Doreen Silversmith.  Participants gave up lunch on Saturday,  the costs of which were donated to the Coalition for Fair Wages and Working Conditions for Homeworkers. The coalition, which  was holding a parallel conference in Toronto  the same weekend, staged a demonstration  attended by many CRIAW delegates at the  Eaton Centre to protest the increasingly appalling conditions of homeworkers in the  garment industry.  CRIAW's annual business meeting on  Sunday morning honoured grassroots workers, Ruminder Dosanjh of the India Mahila  Association of Vancouver, Nancy Simms, a  Black-Metis activist, and Maria Shin, an Asian  researcher and activist, with awards for notable contributions to women of colour communities.  Elected as president of CRIAW was  Carolyn Andrew. And for the first time in the  organization's history,an Aboriginal woman,  Monica Goulet of Saskatchewan,  takes the position of president-elect. Goulet  will take over as president in November,  1993.  Not everything at the conference went  smoothly—hotel management were largely  uncooperative with conference organizers  and participants, and the choice of the site  was problematic. Women with disabilities  took issue with the lack of accessible facilities at the Holiday Inn. Latin American  women were critical of the lack of appropriate simultaneous translation in the workshops.  Caucus meetings and the closing plenary on the last day were rushed because  hotel management insisted that the main  meeting room be cleared by 5 pm for another function. Kinesis is still investigating  why the room was still unoccupied at 10 pm  that night.  Caucuses did manage to register their  recommendations, criticisms and commendations to the Board of CRIAW and the  organizers of the conference before the session ended.  Conference documents and resources  are in the works. Kinesis will report on their  availability in an upcoming issue. In the  meantime, a full set of the conference proceedings are available at $6 per cassette.  Call Dawn Kerton at 514-845-8000 for details. A set of cassettes are available at the  Vancouver Status of Women's Reference  and Resource Centre for in-house refer-  "...on the frontlines of resistance."  OPENING PLENARY—"FEMINISM IN 'THE NEW WORLD ORDER'"  Moderator: Punam Khosla  Panelists: Nahla Abdo-Zubi, Ottawa; Joanne St. Louis, Toronto; Fatma Alloo, Zanzibar,  Tanzania; Jo-Anne Lee, Saskatoon; and Dorothy Christian, Barrie.  The following are excerpts of three of six speeches made at the opening plenary of the Making  the Links: Anti-Racism and Feminism conference in Toronto in November.  Punam Khosla is a South Asian political, media and cultural organiser and feminist activist.  Formerly from Vancouver, she's been living in Toronto for the past six years. She was chair of the  openitig and closing plenaries of the Making the Links conference.  When the programming committee thought about doing this panel on feminism in 'the  new world order,' we realised that the women's movement is playing an increasingly critical  role—not only in what have traditionally been seen as gender issues, but also in very  important economic and political changes that have gone on around us for the past two or  three years in the most dramatic ways. And they're quite frightening.  But what we can take heart in, I think, is the role that women have played in so many  different parts of the world, in actually resisting and fighting back against this New World"  Order. We've seen it in the Native communities all across the Americas. We've seen it in the  Black communities here in Toronto, in Nova Scotia, all across the United States, in LA. We've  seen it in the work that all the women across this country did to say No to the constitutional  accord. We've seen it in the [work that women in the] Maquiladores [factories in Mexico] do  and the role they play in organizing against the North American Free Trade Agreement.  We've seen it in the role of women in the defeat of George Bush in the US and we see it most  courageously in the role that women played in the Intifada on the West Bank and in Gaza.  Our fight as feminists, as progressive, politically conscious feminists, is the fight against  all forms of oppression. It is nothing short of the fight against fascism, against militarism—  the militarism that we're seeing in our very own communities.  This is no longer a question of doing something for 'someone over there.' The militarism  we are seeing is happening right here. In metro Toronto, we have seen the police be on so-  called strike for one month. This strike is nothing short of a grab for political power, a  takeover of the state and we must resist it and it is women who are on the front lines of that  resistance.  This fight is also about fighting against homophobia, against the increase of lesbian  bashing we are seeing across the country. It's also about the fight against violence against  women and the ways in which the state is trying to co-opt the role of the women's movement  in the work to end violence against women. And last and probably most importantly, it is  the fight against the marginalization and poverty that this so-called economical restructuring, this so-called new world order is going to put us all in.  Nahla Abdo-Zubi is a Palestinian/Israeli woman wholws been active in the student, anti-racism  and women's movements and who currently teaches sociology at Carleton University in Ottawa.  I would like to talk tonight about the 'new world order'—the so-called 'new world  order,'—which I believe is a nickname for a real movement, a movement for the consolidation of global capitalism.  What I would like to do is look at the impact of the Gulf War and the so-called New  World Order on the Arab world in general, but on women in particular. I will begin with  putting the Gulf War in a historical context, and then look at how that context has been  working to affect the lives of Arab children, women, and men as well.  See SPEECHES page 14  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993  13 One of the  things we  would like to  see is images of  Africa as a  continent  struggling to  stand up to the  same things you  are struggling  AGAINST.  1  -FatmaAlloo    1  i feel it has created  solidarity among  women, especially women  of colour, and has  given us a renewed sense  of purpose and direction.  -Cassandra Fernandes  Fatma Alloo from Tanzania  SPEECHES from page 13  The Gulf War viewed from a historical perspective can be seen as the latest in a string  of crises which have confronted the Arab Middle East for the last quarter of a century. During  the so-called Cold War between the two superpowers, people in the Middle East were  experiencing quite hot and bloody wars—from 1967 to 1982, the Israeli invasion of Lebanon;  the 1973 to 1979 war; the Iran-Iraq war—and by the way, none of these wars is over.  In addition, instead of channelling all the sources and funds for human development  projects, many Arab states, such as Syria, Egypt and Iraq, were preoccupied with entrenching their regimes and the authoritarian nature of their respective states.  The end of the Cold War crystallized in the collapse of the Soviet Union and the Eastern  Bloc as an independent power. Coupled with the savage bombardment and destruction of  Iraq, this has given the US a particular hegemonic status, a new power with a very vicious  agenda, prepared to resist any official challenge at least for the foreseeable future.  The Gulf War has been just one driving force in the emergence of the so-called 'new  world order.' Also in the making were social upheavals and acts of change taking place  throughout the Middle East, particularly in the Arab Muslim parts, that is, the impact of  Khomeinism and the impact of Muslim fundamentalism.  Nonetheless, the Gulf War was still unprecedented in the history of humanity, partly  because it was able to utilize the most advanced technology in communication, mass-  controlled media and dissemination of information in effecting massive destruction in such  a short period of time. In addition to the hundreds of thousands of Iraqi children, women and  men said to have been wiped out during that war—we must not forget that the Gulf War,  which was driven primarily by economic, political and strategic interests in the region, was  also primarily fought as a racist war on racist grounds—we have seen the dehumanization  of and Arabs and Muslims.  Understood from this perspective, there is no doubt that the Gulf War can't be seen as  the gift of this 'global perestroika.' This is a new order—or rather, an order expressed in the  global offensive of the right, the global retreat of the left, and the retreat also of that which  was progressive, as far as the Middle East is concerned, and the Arab Middle East in  particular.  The implications for Arab women, particularly working class women and refugees are  that these women have suffered and will continue to suffer under this global disorder. In the  short term, I believe the global consolidation of capitalism will maintain the status quo in the  Middle East by consolidating the present state system, both in the Arab world and definitely  in Israel, legitimizing oppressive regimes in the regions and simultaneously asserting a new  and almost uni-polar political hegemony over the area to share militarization.  It is not surprising to learn that the US is the leader in arms sales to the third world. With  the elimination of other powers that supposedly were serving as deterrents, the military  budget of the US has risen in tremendous proportions, from $14 billion in 1986 to an  estimated $52.7billion in 1991. Sixty-five percent of this is spent on military action in the third  world and most of it goes to the Middle East.  Global capitalism means mounting foreign debts, high inflation, swelling  unemployment and increasing poverty, all of which make a perfect recipe for public  disenchantment, frustration, and helplessness. Unfortunately, as we can see throughout the  Middle East, these feelings [of disenfranchisement] will not be directly channelled at the level  of global capitalism but rather at the level of local regimes or local states.  And let us not forget that colonial and imperialist racism has fuelled the presence of  Muslim fundamentalism as a reaction to oppressive Western ideology. Racism against  Muslims and Arabs in general has characterized Western colonial and imperialist culture.  The Gulf War epitomized this. It was fought as a war against Eastern terrorism, against Arab  backwardness, against Muslim reactionaries. That war was fundamentally packaged in  racist baggage. It presented the superiority of the west over the inferiority of the east and, on  that basis, they wanted to 'liberate' Kuwait.  These are the difficult challenges that are facing Arab women in general, but Palestinian  women in particular. The kind of struggles Palestinian women have been waging for over  25 years involve direct colonialism, and the nationalist, racist state of Israel. It also involves  the presence of the US. Unfortunately, lam not sure, as far as the Middle East is concerned,  whether the [US president] Clinton government is going to be any better than the Bush  government. But I do know, facing the new US administration and the new.Israel Labour  Party—which is also not much better than the [preceding Israeli government's] Likud  party—is going to be a very tough struggle for Palestinian women. But they are there and they  will continue the struggle.  Fatma Alloo is a media person from Zanzibar, Tanzania. She writes on and researches how to  use media as a mobilizing force, which she beliei'es is a basic tool of empowerment of women at a  grassroots level. She's a founding member of the Tanzania Women's Media Association, of the  Uganda Women's Association, and of Akina Mama wa Afrika, based in London.  I would like first to open with greetings from where I come. For us coming from Africa,  seeing this here is quite empowering. When I was asked to talk on "Feminism and the New  World Order", 1 told Rita [Kohli, organizer of the conference] that I reject the term, and she  said "never mind."  My position is that there is no such thing as a "new world order." It is the same world  order that came to Canada, trying to manipulate the people of this land, the people who you  today in Canadian terms call "the traditional people."  I don't know what terms you use here—you do have very funny terms. One of my  biggest surprises was when I heard of "the Black people" and I was told they are "the visible  minority." I couldn't get over it for days.  My contention is, this is the same order which came to Africa, brought our people here  and called them niggers. It is the same order that has deprived Africa of one hundred years  of productive forces and has set us back. This exploitation of Africa has not stopped. It  continues today.  And yet, although Africa is the richest continent globally in terms of resources, in your  media images, you are shown images of a deprived Africa, a poor Africa, a begging Africa.  You are shown pictures of refugees in Somalia and dogs running after black people in South  Africa. These are the media images they are giving to you and to your children.  I'm glad that those of you who come from that history are reclaiming that history. In  Canada, you have also reached a stage where you have no choice but to reclaim that strong  history, to know where you come from so you can pass it on to your children and to your  people.  We heard this morning in the keynote address of the struggles of the people of this land.  I was doing some translation for the colleague I came with from Tanzania, she comes from  the Masai people, from Masai land [in Tanzania]—it's a pastoral society—and she understands these issues well. I was trying to link it to what is happening here and there was a  surprise. Do you know what media images [of Canada] we are given? We are told this is the  land of milk and honey.  When I came to Canada, I was also thinking about how, according to the UN human  development report which came out about four months ago, Canada is the best country to  live in globally—except for the situation of women: in that respect, it is number eight. I am  amused now because this is not what I see here. The media is doing the same thing to you  as it is doing to us.  We are fed with media images that continue to perpetuate our dependency and rob us  of our own autonomy, our own history, of the struggles of peoples going on in Africa-—  which have been going on, which have always been there, and which are never heard of here  in the so-called First World.  So what are we going to do about it? This conference is called [Making the Links] Anti-  Racism and Feminism. What do I, coming from Africa, see as a linkage with the visible  minority—I really have to get used to this term, you'll have to forgive me. I see that one of  the most important damages being done is the media image.  I've been watching your news since I came here—Africa doesn't exist in your media. It's  just not there unless there is a calamity happening. One of the things we would like to see is  images of Africa as a continent struggling to stand up to the same things you are struggling  against. You are in the belly of the beast that is the USA. It is the same system that is working  on both ends, and if we do not work to counter it at both ends, I think it is going to take a long  time to make the changes.  The time zvill come—I have no illusions that this change will come. If it is not in my time,  it will be in my grandchildren's time— and we, as the people who are trying to make sense  of this world and trying to change the basis of it, need to come together.  Maanda Ngoitika of the Masai from Tanzania  So, what did you think?  by Cassandra Fernandes and Fatima Jaffer  As the Making the Links: Anti-Racism and Feminism Conference in Toronto to a close on  November 15, Kinesis asked participants what their thoughts were on the conference, what it had  achieved and ivhat they had got from it. The first woman interviewed, Cassandra Fernandes, acting  on her own words [below], shared the work of bringing this story to Kinesis readers. The following  are a sampling of what some participants had to say in response to our questions.  Cassandra Fernandes, Toronto: I believe this was an excellent conference. I feel it has  created solidarity among women, especially women of colour, and has given us a renewed  sense of purpose and direction.  The various workshops have been very enlightening and, I would like to stress, gets us  together as a force, opens all the networking avenues and, brings us closer to a vision of being  to able to speak with one combined voice and to move forward with one political agenda.  Adrienne Blenman, Toronto: I think it was a conference with a lot of good intentions.  But racism on the CRIAW Board [which sponsored the conference] and on the part of white  participants at the conference makes me feel it's been somewhat of a sham.  Some of the workshops were really good. The times I felt the racism were when all the  participants were together in the main hall, or when I was around women in the hallways.  In terms of what is needed, I think they need a conference for women of colour period,  talking about making the links.  Fatma Alloo, Zanzibar, Tanzania: This conference has been a very pleasant surprise  and I'm not going to forget it. What I believe is, we're seeing the beginning of a new era.  Margot Lacroix, Concordia Women's Centre, Montreal: On a personal level, the  conference has been a challenging experience. It was questioning, destabilizing, painful. I've  had to deal with these issues at work, but I'm going back energized with more ideas about  how we can make it more inclusive. As a person who needs to have these answers, I have to  admit I don't have any—but I keep seeking them.  One of the things I've learned is that I have to go beyond my own fears because it's the  only way we can create space for all of us.  Carmen Henry, York University Anti-Racist Women's Coalition, Ontario: I'm a  unionist and I've just come from another conference. There were 500 participants and only  a few women of colour. It was wonderful to see how many women of colour were here.  We came here to make links, but I just made links with Black women. I was hoping we  could have made links with Aboriginal women. There were some opportunities but we are  going to get in touch with [conference organizer] Rita Kohli to see if contacts with Aboriginal  women can be had.  See CONFERENCE page 16  14  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993  15 A question of class  by Pam Fleming  Conference organizer Rita Kohli  CONFERENCE from page 15 =  NayyarJaved, Saskatchewan Action Committee on the Status of Women, Saskatchewan representative for NAC, past president of immigrant women of Saskatchewan,  Saskatoon: I think the conference was a really useful endeavour for many reasons. The most  positive thing was making the links at the national and international level...making these  links in the voices of those who experience those levels of racism and sexism.  I have mixed feelings right now. I was extremely impressed and proud of the talent  which exists among the marginalized women, by the really incisive analyses in terms of  coming up with concise strategies.  I also think that, while the system we live in and Canadian public policy talks about unity  in diversity, it never does anything about it. So you lose hope. You don't think it's possible.  This conference has provided us a glimpse of the possibility of unity within diversity.  I'm also saddened to see the commonality of women's struggles all over the world and  the emergence of oppressive forces such as neo-conservatism and fundamentalism, and the  international support these forces receive, such as the US, Canada, Europe and other  industrialized countries.  Probably never before in history of humankind has the urgency to equalise power been  so critical as now. Unless we do that, the human species and the planet cannot survive. How  to send that message everywhere is through conferences like this.  Maanda Ngoitika, Dar-es-Salaam, Tanzania [translated from Kiswahili]: I was very  happy with the content of the conference.  The one thing I like most is the way the women got together and were able to organize  this conference.  One of the things I was really struck by was the racism in Canada—it was something I  didn't know about.  Sayonara Mairena, Mississauga: I found it interesting and inspiring. For the first time,  women of colour were given an opportunity to have a say.  I would like to see action; there was some resolution at various workshops and I'd like  a follow-up to that. It's good to get together and talk, but I want us to follow it up.  I'd like a networking directory of names and addresses to be published and sent to  participants.  Vivian Khalal, Chicago: I want to congratulate all the organizers, especially Rita Kohli,  the participants and presenters. The conference was, to say the least, empowering.  However, I felt that Middle Eastern women were under-represented in workshops.  Inclusion is a necessary element. One sector of women should not be marginalized at the  expense of another. Each and every one of our issues are equally important and should be  treated as such. Hopefully, we'll do better the next time around.  Carol Thames, Toronto: One thing I found missing from the list of workshop topics was  "Mother and Mothering And Our Children." Our children are the future of the movement  to end oppression of woman and of people of colour.  Overall, I enjoyed the conference and was glad I was a part of the process.  Maria Elena Escobar, Toronto: From a Latina American woman's perspective, I  discovered a lack of organizational links between the women that come from Latina America  and the Latina American women living in this city, in this country.  Also, I think many women could not be here for two main reasons: fees for the  conference were not affordable for most of us; and lack of access to information—some  women are here because they heard about it from someone else, not because information was  distributed through the channels where Latino American women work, other than in  Toronto.  So the few women that are here from Latino America didn't have access to meet, to  interact and to strategize as well as to educate or learn something and take back to the rest  of the women in Latino America.  The other problem was the lack of professional translation available in conference,  where women who didn't speak English or French were isolated because of lack of  understanding.  Josephine Meirlynes, Etobicoke: The conference was very well organized and presented women of colour with a good forum for exchanging ideas and issues. A very  important addition could have been greater attention to effective strategies for networking  and maintaining links. This is vital if women of colour are to articulate their own definitions  of feminism and provide each other with the necessary support.  Debbie Gough, Toronto Rape Crisis Centre, Toronto: I was glad to have been part of  CRIAW this year. I did, however, have some problems with the way child care was  organized. In choosing caucuses to attend, I felt [because they were all held at the same time,]  I had to make a choice as to which part of me I wanted to put first.   Cecilia Diocson of Vancouver's Phillipine Women's Centre and I (of End Legislated  Poverty) attended the Making the Links conference in Toronto as panelists to talk about  poverty issues. It was exciting to be part of the dynamic dialogue at the panel, "Women and  Poverty" with Susan Butcher and Dini Peters of Toronto, and Mary Pitawanakwat of  Saskatchewan.  Cecilia and I talked about the global corporate agenda and the exclusiveness of the  middle class women's movement. Butcher talked about cutbacks and her upcoming hunger  strike to protest them in Ontario. Pitawanakwat told her story of sliding from a paid  professional to welfare recipient because of poor health. Peters talked about getting  organized.  We were told by many that this f illed-to-overflowing workshop of more than 60 women  was the most useful workshop they attended because it was practical and concrete.  I attended other workshops at the conference—"Women in Conflict with the Law" and  "Women, Police Violence and Militarism."  At the latter, there was some excellent analysis by Cynthia Hamilton of Los Angeles  about the recent LA uprising that she said resulted from the International Monetary Fund's  (IMF) austerity programs. She said there were more than 80 food and bread IMF riots in over  22 countries in the last year.  Others on the panel—Winsom, Chan and Beverley Bain, of Toronto and Dehra Etienne  of Kanehsatake—talked about the militarization of the police force. In Toronto, police don't  want to have to report that they pulled their guns on people of colour. Police in Toronto are  "striking" against having to make these reports and are, instead, demanding guns that make  it easier to kill people.  At the "Women in Conflict with the Law" workshop, panelists—Georgette Djan-  Draper, Saskatoon; Jennifer Reid, Toronto; Terry Saunder, Waterloo—said that if we had  decent family benefits and welfare, most women, despite racism, would not be in jail.  Both panels demonstrated that class cannot be separated from race. Racism is a cause  and effect of poverty and disenfranchisement. We have to tackle these issues together.  Thank you, Rita Kohli [conference organiser], for this conference!  ££  ...a sense of oneness.  jj  by Fawzia Ahmad  Cassandra Fernandes lives and works i,  Kinesis.  Toronto. Fatin  i Jaffer  regular contributor to  WOMEN AND RESISTANCE TO RACISM:  Caribbean Black women, South Asian women and Indo-Caribbean women  Making the Links: Anti-Racism and Feminism conference  Moderator: Lezlie Lee Kam, Toronto  Panelists: Yvonne Bobb-Smith, Toronto; Raminder Dosanjh, Vancouver;  Ramabai Espinet, Toronto; Amanthe Bathalien, Montreal  I'm from Trinidad & Tobago. I identify as a middle-class Caribbean woman of Indian  descent. I have purposefully left out the word "feminist" since, in this society, it refers to  white feminism. The experiences of many women of colour have been left out and  disregarded. I will not to refer to the Caribbean as part of the "third world." Countries of  people of colour are from the real world.  In the conference schedule, one of the workshops was on "Caribbean Black women,  South Asian women and Indo-Caribbean women resisting racism." 1 cannot express in  words the excitement I felt at being able to attend this conference. It was to attend this  workshop that I travelled thousands of miles across Canada.  The presentations of particular importance to me were those by two women from  Trinidad & Tobago, Ramabai Espinet and Yvonne Bobb-Smith.  Espinet uses calypso, a form of musical socio-political documentary in Trinidad and  Tobago, to illustrate the way in which Indo-Caribbean women are manipulated and  objectified by society. I've tended to not always listen to the words of these commentaries  because I have always been more wrapped up in the rhythm of the music.  For the first time, I thought about the struggles and anger my grandmother, mother and  aunts tried to express to me about being of Indian heritage in the CaribbeanJ often dismissed  them with an arbitrary hand. Ramabai's presentation made me think of many other  calypsoes that objectify Indian women. It hurts me to think I needed a woman I didn't know  to bring this realization to me. Indo-Caribbean women are strong women and their  experiences have often been ignored.  I go to Toronto about twice a year. Each time I return to Vancouver, I ask myself what  lam doing here. The Caribbean presence is much greater in Toronto than in Vancouver. I feel  alienated within the South Asian women's community. My needs as an Indo-Caribbean  woman are not being met by the neat categories we are placed in. As one Indo-Caribbean  woman said in the workshop, "which South Asian women are you referring to?"  Do not assume we come from the same place and do not expect me to understand all  South Asian women's experiences. I have always felt I was alone in my identity distress. It  was a relief at this workshop to find other women felt the same, not only Indo-Caribbean  women but women of mixed heritage and Black-Caribbean women too.  For the first time in Canada, I felt a wholeness. I came to the conclusion that my  community is all Caribbean women, which includes all possible—rand sometimes, it seems,  impossible—racial combinations.  I suppose I knew this all along. What I lacked was the validation of my unique  experience. Within this whole, there are fragments with which Caribbean women can  further identify. For me, it is with other Indo-Caribbean women.  Espinet made me remember the differences and struggles which still exist in the  Caribbean between races. Issues of homophobia, racism, classism, ableism and ageism still  need to be addressed.  Yvonne Bobb Smith's perspective focused more on a sense of "oneness." Because I live  in a white-dominated society, I try to connect with all Caribbean women who cross my path.  I hunger for Caribbean presence and, for me, this "oneness" is the only way I can survive in  a society in which white supremacy pervades.  Bobb-Smith says her experience with racism in the Caribbean is nothing compared to  what she experiences in Canada. It consumes her every living moment.  'How do you identify?' is a question I have had difficulty answering. In a white feminist  movement, where identity justifies your existence and experiences, I feel great resentment.  From this conference, I bring back the reinforced belief that women of colour are ahead  in solving the ending of oppressions. If the white feminist movement does not listen to our  voices, we won't be there to give direction.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 u  ...stories of resistance."  The following is based on a tape-recorded conversation between four Aboriginal women from  Vancouver who attended the Making the Links conference in Toronto. Celeste George is a Carrier.  Miche Hill is a Mi'Kmaq. Denise Lonewalker is a Hopi Apache Mi'kmaq performance artist. Viola  Thomas is from the Secwepmec people.  George: My main impressions about this conference were of having the contradiction  right in my face that some of the actors of racism in my life were at the conference. I was there  feeling it was surreal to be with women who had gotten rid of me because of my anti-racist  agenda and who continue to work in these organizations. I felt likel really didn't have power  for myself as a First Nations lesbian woman, knowing they were there.  The reality is that First Nations women and women of colour will continue to be fired  by white feminist organizations because, when women of colour and First Nations women  speak out, we get shown the door.  But what was powerful for me was meeting and seeing women of colour and First  Nations women—primarily First Nations women. The times we had together were very  powerful for me. My impression was, what a great time for me in terms of meeting so much  resistance, hearing so many stories of resistance.  And I wondered if these white women were here just to get the anti-racist lingo right.  I wondered where a white feminist organization like CRIAW got the money for a national  conference like this. If women of colour or First Nations women had wanted to do this  something like this, I wonder if we would have been given that money.  I'd like a world free of racism, and I'd like white feminism to address racism but I keep  experiencing [racism] over and over again—and one conference is not going to stop it.  I was disturbed that, twice when we had specific set-ups for First Nations women and  women of colour, we had white women coming in. Even at this conference, women who  were supposed to be looking at the power relations around racism were totally ignorant of  the fact they did not belong in the room. But there they were, taking up more space.  Hill: I saw a problem right from the beginning around the whole structure of the  conference. It didn't lend itself to meeting other Native women or even being able to see or  identify each other. I felt it was real drag we couldn't have met at the beginning of the  conference. I didn't even know there were that many sisters there.  Also, there we were, trying to do an anti-racism conference, and we were doing it under  a system that's really set up, a completely European system and a completely structured  thing that's on timelines identifiable only to one specific cultural group—white Europeans.  And everybody else goes along with those lines. It became really obvious at the  Aboriginal women's caucus when they kept interrupting us that they just didn't understand  their time isn't our time.  Thomas: I guess it was reaffirming for me when I heard Dorothy Christian say [at the  opening plenary] that the challenge of carrying on the act of decolonization has to be not only  with First Nations people but with all other peoples of the world. I guess that's what echoed  in my mind throughout the conference.  The conference also showed the dichotomies each of us talked about in having a  conference that tried to address anti-poverty in a downtown Holiday Inn in Toronto. It's like,  okay, we're used to the extreme types of dichotomies as Indigenous people and especially  as an Aboriginal woman. They might feel they're being progressive by having a large  representation of women of colour and, maybe for the first time at this CRIAW conference,  the highest ever Aboriginal women's participation. But it wasn't in a manner that respected  the differences in a true way. Part of that means looking at and honouring those differences.  And part of that is reflecting it in a way that speaks not only the truth but the memories of  our grandmothers and grandfathers.  Also, it must touch on the true principle, which is respect for humanity—and it has  nothing to do with categorizing it in little boxes, or with who experiences greater oppression.  It certainly reaffirmed to me that white people are not the only people who have ownership  of racism, and classism and sexism and all these other things. A part of the challenge, going  back to the words of Dorothy Christian, is really carrying on the act of decolonization with  all peoples honouring differences.  George: I sort of looked at two parts of it: the act of decolonization and the act of  dichotomy—an example is having Rigoberto Menchu, a Guatemalan Aboriginal woman  from South America, speak at the dinner. I relate to their struggle but, at the same time, it's  a dichotomy because she advocates the ideology of the church state under the guise of what  is called liberation theology.  I have to challenge that because I come from a third-generation Indigenous people in  Canada, who have been subjected to the oppression of the church state—the Catholic  church—under the guise of residential schools. But in third world countries, they call it  liberation theology. They won't call it brainwashing by their Catholic ideology.  Our people here in Canada did not suffer the same level of murder as the Indigenous  brothers and sisters in South America. It's taken different forms, and a kind of difference has  been promoted through the selfish means of ideology, whether church or political ideology.  It doesn't reflect the philosophies of our true teachings as Indigenous peoples because  our principles honoured all life and the mainstream system doesn't do that.  The workshops that stayed with me were for women of colour and First Nations  lesbians. They were good because we didn't have a bunch of talking heads sitting in front  of the room having a monologue. In the time we were together we did some real sharing.  Hill: The panels are kind of like a lecture or something. You don't really get to think or  talk about things.  George: The fact that the woman who was facilitating chose to find another more  liberated structure is amazing to me.  Hill: How was it set up? There wasn't a panel at all.  George: No, no panel at all.  Hill: I found the size of the conference a bit much.  Lonewalker: Cattle call.  Hill: There were over 1,000 women in that hotel. It was almost unrealistic in some ways  to be able to have a good workshop. I liked the one with Sharon Mclvor from the Native  Women's Association of Canada. Some interesting comments were made in that discussion.  It was too bad we didn't have more time for discussion. I thought it was a good place for  things to happen but, once again, there wasn't enough time to really get into things.  George: Well then, let's have our own conference. That's what I mean when I say I find  it hard. I know that if CRIAW, a big feminist organization, hadn't sponsored it, it wouldn't  have happened.  Lonewalker: Yea, so everyone's happy ever after now?  Hill: Do they think that's it, that it's a one-time deal? But, for me, the [Aboriginal  women's] caucus was one of the most intense times of the whole weekend. It was very  emotional. There were so many stories that were similar and different at the same time.  Thomas: And it felt liberating because we just ignored someone else's timing.  George: And everybody agreed to it, there was not one person who objected.  Thomas: I certainly had the conditioning in my head going.  Hi'//: I found myself fidgeting the first half hour.  Thomas: And "there's 30 women here—how the hell are we all going to agree in 45  minutes." [laughter]  Hill: That's part of the colonization. That's what it is. These are the easy ones, the ones  we recognize. It's the ones we don't see...  Thomas: ...the colonization of the mind...  Lonewalker: ...internalized multiculturalism. [laughter] It was pretty draining. Thatwas  my first conference.  Hill: Your first conference was a 1,500-delegate conference on racism. Wow!  Lonewalker: I didn't hear much new. It wasn't an enlightening experience. The new  things I learnt were from a Palestinian woman and an Arab-Jewish woman.  Thomas: I really liked Sadie Buck and the Six Nations women singers. Apparently  they've been singing since they were kids.  Lonewalker: I had to go to a conference to meet a fellow Mi'Kmaq.  Hill: We have to travel 3,000 miles to meet each other and we live in the same city. I swear,  it'll only happen to Mi'Kmaqs.  Lonewalker: There were a few Mi'Kmaqs who came up to me and said, "can you tell me  anything or sing me any of the songs." It's kind of a consolation to know I'm not the only  one who doesn't know my language and dances and songs. It's understandable why a lot of  us don't know our language. Our parents and grandparents didn't want us to go through  what they went through in residential school—they taught us English so we wouldn't go  through the same hell.  Hill: When I get asked, my first feeling is a feeling of sadness that I can't say "Oh yea,  I know my own language." I know there are Mi'Kmaqs all over the east coast who can speak  and understand their language fluently and have their culture, know all their stories and  understand a lot more than I do. Just because we got taken away.  Loneivalker: I wanted to add that they should have had more workshops on racism on  live-stage. The racism I encountered all the time I was in the ballet world is phenomenal.  Hill: It's true. But look at how we remember one woman who felt guilty about saying  what she did "because I'm a poet?" I thought, "why are you saying that about yourself—  you're the most cherished of all of us—you're the historian, you're the one who tells the  stories."  Lonewalker: You should never apologize because then you're going to verify all that  racism. I thought I was the only First Nations woman in the whole world of dance when I  was a kid. Yet all of our peoples have had songs and dances for years. It's part of our culture.  It's part of everyday living.  Thanks to Faith Jones and Kelly O'Brien for hours upon hours of transcribing.  Conference organizer Jane Wong i  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Feature  A twenty-five-year-old herstory:  Women's Caucus  by Frances Wasserlein  The following is the first in a mon thly series  of features Kinesis will be running on the history of women's organizing and activism in  Vancouver. Some of the organizations we will  look at are Women Against Violence Against  Women, the Vancouver Status of Women and  India Mahila Association. If you would like to  contribute to this project in any way, please  contact Kinesis.  Twenty-five years ago, the first autonomous women's organization in Vancouver  was set up. The Vancouver Women's Caucus does not exist in name today, but many  of the women who were part of it still live  and work in the women's movement.  On September 11, 1968, women at Simon Fraser University (SFU) held the first  meeting of what they called the Women's  Caucus. This was to become the first organisation of the autonomous Women's Liberation Movement in BC.  Women students, staff and facultymem-  bers at SFU had been talking together since  the early months of the year. They tried to  grapple with what they were beginning to  see as their exclusion from real action in the  growing movement to democratize the university.  SFU was a relatively young university,  three years old at the time, and it, like many  other campuses in Europe and North  America, was in the throes of what some  called the student revolutionary movement.  Youth on both continents, and elsewhere,  were learning from liberation movements  around the world that organizing together  and working for social change was effective.  However, women at SFU, and elsewhere, were only listening to the speeches  they typed and duplica ted, not writing them  and giving them. Women were hearing suggestions they had made and which were  ignored being repeated by men and taken  up. Women were the emotional support for  male studentradicals,evenas they were told  their concerns were petty.  In a class assignment that spring, Marcy  Toms and a writing partner had to re-write  the Communist Manifesto in contemporary  terms. They wrote the Feminine Manifesto,  which ended, "women of the world unite,  you have nothing to lose but your apron  strings." Marcy says they chose the word  "feminine" on purpose, because the word  "feminist" was too confrontational, and was  associated with a political practice they did  not support. How quickly they found things  changed!  In July, a group of young women student activists at SFU decided to learn from  the Student Non-ViolentCoordinatingCom-  mittee in the US who had chosen to expel  white people from their civil rights organization. The women decided they would hold  a meeting at SFU for women only.  Male reporters from the SFU student  newspaper, The Peak, published a photograph of the women around a table, under  the headline "Pussy Power Strikes at SFU."  The men were furious at being locked out of  a meeting that women held to talk together.  Maggie Benston had been on sabbatical  in California, and had been reading about -  the new women's liberation movement. On •§  her return to Canada, she learned there were g  others who were interested in working to- S  gether as women, and they met at Maxine •  Gadd's house in Kitsilano one evening.        _§•  Someone invited a woman psycholo- §  gist to attend this meeting and to talk about 1  women's psychological development. Pat  Davitt remembers her saying that women  grew like flowers—buds which slowly open  and mature, bear fruit and die. Most women  at the meeting were appalled by this description and, for the rest of the evening, ignored  This Volkswagen van was one of three vehicles which left Vancouver on  April 27,1970 to make the journey to Ottawa. The women travelled  to Kamloops, Calgary, Edmonton, Saskatoon, Regina, Winnipeg, Fort  William and Port Arthur [now Thunder Bay], Sault Ste. Marie, Sudbury,  Toronto and Ottawa. They slept in church basements, ate a lot of chili  and salad, performed on street corners, and spoke at meetings and to  reporters for media in each place. By the time they got to Ottawa, there  were hundreds of women with them.  This photo was taken at the BC College of Physicians and Surgeons  office at 10th and Burrard Street in April, 1970. Women from Women's  Caucus had gone to demand action from doctors to make the therapeutic  abortion committees work for women, not just for doctors. They were  eventually thrown out. This was a part of the Abortion Campaign.  the woman sitting in the only chair in the  room.  Brenda Morrow suggested they talk  about what they might do. They did. At least  one woman at that meeting wanted to talk  about the personal ways she experienced the  pain of being a woman. The others began a  conversation that was to last some of them  for decades. They decided they wanted to  work to change the world, and that working  together successfully and learning new ways  of working would change them as individual women.  And so, in September, 1968, they began  to organize. They began with what they  knew, and what other women on campus  were telling them. It was illegal then to  distribute information about birth control,  or birth control products. It was illegal to  perform and to obtain an abortion. Women  needed help from one another.  The Women's Caucus put an ad in The  Peak, which ran only one week: "Girls - need  help? in trouble? Contact the Women's  Caucus Counselor at SFU Student Society or  phone her at [a phone number] evenings for  information."  In a short time, calls were coming from  as faraway as Saskatchewan. Women's Cau-  cusdemandedthatSFUHealthServices provide information to students and others in  \    /  For women who are stretching boundaries  V        k  And think broadest maybe describes them best  W 7  And wonder if women's clothes in size 0  Isn't really some very bad jest  FOfwomen out there who are larger  \^_   1  And realize this is their fate  c^ I  I carry clothes that are bigger  kK  I know, isn't that that great!  i    Quality consignment  \  clothing  (s  1 Size 14... plus  V  I    Amplesize Park  ,f     5766 Fraser Street  fl     Vancouver, BC  \  J         V5W2Z5  \  Sarah-Jane (604)322-0107  LABOUR/LE TRAVAIL  JOURNAL OF CANADIAN LABOUR STUDIES  Labour/Le Travail is the official publication of the Canadian Committee on  Labour History. Since it began publishing in 1976, it has carried many  important articles in the field of working-class history, industrial sociology,  labour economics, and labour relations. While the supply lasts, new subscribers may purchase sets of the journal at a special bargain rate of $250.00  (28 issues, 9082, reg. $338).  Subscription rates (outside Canada): Individual $20.00 ($25.00 US); Institutional $25.00 ($30.00 US); Student/Retired/Unemployed $15.00 ($20.00 US).  MasterCard accepted or make cheque payable to: Canadian Committee on Labour History,  History Department, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada, A1C 5S7  Articles are abstracted and indexed: America: History and Life; Alternative Press Index; Arts and Humanities Citation IndexTM; Canadian Magazine  Index; Canadian Periodical Index; Current Contents/Arts and Humanities;  Historical Abstracts; Human Resource Abstracts; PAIS Bulletin; PAIS  Foreign Language Index; Sage Public Administration Abstracts.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Feature  Women from Vancouver  on the Caravan  The Abortion Campaign culminated in the two-week Abortion  Caravan from Vancouver to Ottawa. On May 9, 400 women and a  few men squeezed into the Railway Room in the Parliament  Buildings to hear from MPs and  activists. Only a couple NDP MPs  showed up—no Liberals, no  Tories. After the speeches, everyone marched in the rain to Pierre  Trudeau's house, and left the  coffin on his doorstep, a graphic  reminder of women's pain.  the campus community, and that "The Birth  Control Handbook," written by medical students at McGill University in Montreal, be  distributed freely.  Women's Caucus opens office  Early in 1969, the Women's Caucus  opened their office in Vancouver, in the  Labour Temple near Broadway and Cambie.  The clandestine abortion information and  referral service was operated out of a tiny  room in the basement. The "Women's Caucus Program" was written and distributed.  It called for pay equity and the protection of  collective bargaining for working women;  for accessible child care; for reproductive  choice; for equal education for children; for  research into the history and contemporary  situation of women.  The Western Regional Conference on  Women's Liberation was organized for October, 1969. It took place at UBC, with several hundred women from BC, Alberta,  Washington and Oregon present.  And it was at that conference that Betsy  Wood suggested women travel to Ottawa to  demand, in person, changes which would  permit equal access to abortion services for  all women in Canada as the only way to get  the attention of disinterested politicians.  The Abortion Caravan  In April 1970,17 women set out in three  vehicles on the Abortion Caravan. Writer  Cynthia Flood described them as "an arrow  aimed at the heart, which was Ottawa, so far  away."  The Caravan stopped in cities across the  country. Guerrilla theatre skits showed how  difficult it was for women to get the health  services they wanted under the newly "reformed" laws. Women spoke out to their  communities about their experiences with  botched abortions, their fears of unwanted  pregnancies. And women joined the Caravan, reaching Ottawa many hundred  stronger than when they'd left Vancouver.  Women from the Caravan entered the  House of Commons on Monday, May 11,  1970, and demanded changes in the law.  They were thrown out of the galleries, and  joined a support demonstration outside, still  feeling exhilarated and hopeful. It took 20  long years for the work they built on to be  realized, to put an end to legislation controlling women's access to abortion.  After the Abortion Caravan, unresolved  political differences meant that quite a large  number of women left the Caucus to work in  other groups. The women who remained  worked on educational materials, on organizing working women, and on supporting  strikers suchas those at Cunningham's Drug  Stores.  In 1971, eight women came from Southeast Asia to meet with women's liberationists,  Marcy Cohen  Margo Dunn  Betsy Meadley  Dawn Carrell  Ellen Woodsworth  Cathy Walker  Charlotte Bedard  Mary Trew  Bonita Beckman  Mary Mathieson  Barbara Hicks  Maxine Schnee  Dodie Weppler  Hannah Gay  Gwen Hauser  Vicki Goodman  Colette Malo  This poster (below) appeared on  the Winter 1969 (Vol. 1, No. 2)  issue of The Pedestal. It was used  to publicize the Abortion Campaign which began on February 14  and ended on the Monday following Mother's Day, May 11,1970.  The first pro-choice march in  Canada was held on Valentine's  Day. It went from Lost Lagoon in  Stanley Park to the Hotel Vancouver, where about 100 people  listened that evening to a male  doctor describe the tragic consequences of botched abortions and  the need for further legislative  change, and changes in practice  on therapeutic abortion committees.  US women married to soldiers, and peace  activists to discuss ways to end the Vietnam  war. Because the women from .Southeast  Asia weren't permitted to enter the United  States, meetings were held in Vancouver  and Eastern Canada. Women who had been  Women's Caucus activists worked in coalition with others to make this important conference for 400 women possible.  But by that time, the Women's Caucus  was really over. Women had taken up revitalizing the Women's Rights Committee of  the NDP. Others worked on what was to  become the Status of Women Committee of  the BC Teachers Federation. Still others joined  women who'd begun what is now the Vancouver Status of Women.  ThePedestal, the Women's Caucus'news-  paper, carried on publishing for a while.  Some women formed A Woman's Place, a  women's centre which midwifed the Vancouver Transition House, Vancouver Rape  Relief, and The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective, among others.  The energy of the Women's Caucus  helped to sustain the first feminist and  woman-centred union in Canada, the Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of  Canada (SORWUC), and many other early  organizations of the Women's Liberation  Movement.  In the intervening 20 years, many other  organizations and groups of women began  the Women's Liberation Movement time and  time again. It began somewhere yesterday,  and will begin somewhere today. Then, as  now, women working together worked to  change the world. We have learned much in  the last 25 years, and much remains to be done.  Frattces Wasserlein studies and teaches  history, and has written some, too.  w\»?-$m ■-  mil  :■*-*''<  Ifp1^   LEI  1  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Arts  Lee Su-Feh:  Dancing on  an edge  by Cynthia Low   CHARACTER OF DUBIOUS  MORALITY  A performance piece by Lee Su-Feh  Dancing on the Edge,  Vancouver, September 1992  When the lights go on, there's a woman  in a red Mao suit with a bob hair cut, kneeling on the floor at the back of the stage. (  Hanging frontstage, with a spot light directed at them, are a slinky sequin-encrusted,  low cut, beaded, red cocktail dress and a  matching pair of very red, very high-heeled  shoes. Let's say, the kind of outfitone sees in  Hollywood movies or Jackie Collins novels.  The woman turns her head and inhales  deeply through her nose—you see her nostrils flare. She performs a sword routine,  which makes me think of propaganda films  generated by Chinese governments. At the  same time, she tracks the source of the  smell...ah...it's the dress. She cautiously approaches and inspects the dress with her  olfactory senses, and then the lights go down.  This is the first part of Lee Su-Feh's  performance, Character of Dubious Morality,  presented this fall by the Vancouver festival,  Dancing on the Edge. A three-part piece  about the seduction of the East by the West,  Film review. Toward Intimacy:  Character deals with the lure of the West, the  disappointments and humiliations and consequent reclaiming of traditional values—in  a non-traditional way.  In the second part, Lee appears clothed  in the dress and shoes, and she tells us the  history of the dress. It was worn by her in a  Hollywood movie, in which she takes off the  dress and dies. At this point, Lee begins to  writhe and squirm across the stage, periodically repeating "I took off the dress and  died." As she moves, she slowly takes off the  dress, until she is naked. She goes offstage—  tossing her hair! It's a funny sequence, reflecting the roles that Chinese women are  relegated to in mainstream media.  Finally, Leeappears in monkattire complete with shaved head, kneeling with her  back facing the audience. She drips red ink  onto the white paper suspended from the  ceiling. Her body, her arms and hands crea te  a dance of shadows on the paper, images  that look contorted yet full of grace. The  dance closes with the dramatic act of her  writing on her head with the vibrant red ink.  The piece deals with Lee's personal experiences and reflects on the different relationships she negotiates in contemporary  culture. Her work in the mainstream entertainment industry, as a Chinese woman performance artist, is limited to stereotypical  Lee Su-Feh  portrayals of Chinese women—like most  artists of colour, she has few choices in the  type of work available in dominant cultural  productions.  In this piece, Lee uses mainstream images and redefines them to expose the obvious contradictions inherent in stereotypes—  the Chinese woman as eternal virgin, silent,  sweet and innocent; the Chinese woman as  exotic sexual object; and so on. These characters are not victims. She gives her characters strength and the power to be self-reflective.  Lee tackles the issue of western coercion  in a new and interesting way. The part in  Clmracter where the young woman is "seduced" by the scent of the dress is a witty  metaphor. Character also makes us think of  how the lure/lore of the West is very real in  Asia. The West is portrayed as glamorous,  desirable and trouble free in the media and  many people in Asia become eager to travel  and/or move to North America to be part of  the American dream, a Western ideology  sold rigorously by the media worldwide.  The reality, of course, is very different; there  are huge personal and political costs for  Asians who move to North America.  The ideas in Lee's performance piece  are presented in a cohesive way that is entertaining, though the piece isn't long enough.  In the end, Lee's characters come to terms  with multiple layers of identities. The scene  in which Lee begins as a monk in a traditional position and ends with Lee dripping  ink onto her shaved head, emphasizes the  unorthodox manner in which she establishes  her "own place." This is the optimistic  image of the end.  Character is full of opposing personalities and dubious characters, which are actually parts of a whole. In all, Lee successfully  portrays some of the dilemmas that exist for  Asians in the diaspora.  Cynthia Low is a potter.  An intimate look at sexuality  by Marnie Hall   TOWARD INTIMACY  Directed by Debbie McGee  Produced by Nicole Hubert  NFB Studio D production  December 5,1992  "Sexuality is not earned through good  deeds, nor is it lost as the result of an injury  or illness. Every person, regardless of sex,  age or disability is a sexual being."  - T7ie Source Book for the Disabled  Toward Intimacy is one of the first comprehensive documentaries I have seen that  talks about the sexuality of disabled women.  The film looks at four women who share  their sexual experiences with us, and the  .  problems they face as a result of their dis-  •  abilities. Both heterosexual and lesbian relationships are touched upon.  Helen Spurrell is physically disabled  and a wheelchair user. She shares her experiences of love, sex and marriage. Gail St.  Croix describes how a disabled women's  support group and a loving partner helped  re-build her self-esteem. Amethya Weaver  fights for acceptance on two fronts—as a  lesbian and as a deaf woman. Barbara Celu  Amberston, who was isolated as a child  because of her visual impairment, talks of  the challenges of raising four sons as a single  mother.  Some common areas of difficulty all  four women express are struggles with low  self-esteem, bitterness due to isolation and  loneliness, and general anxiety around not  being accepted by their partners. The latter  *L 4   Amethya Weaver and Cary Brown  It's a rare, inspiring, positive portrayal  of disabled people.  comes up especially when the women talk  about having sex for the first time.  I found this film a pleasant change from  the usual negative images. It's a rare, inspir  ing, positive portrayal of disabled people.  Having mild cerebral palsy myself, I have  not experienced difficulties and adversity  such as this, and so, in most instances, I  found it hard to identify fully with the  women. But I admire the strengths and courage demonstrated so clearly in Toward Intimacy. Whatever our relative able-bodiedness,  it is important for all women to see such a  movie. We can all learn about the challenges  we face in all our sexualities through understanding the specific challenges disabled  women face. A pioneering video such as this  may open the door for further discussion  and research on challenged sexuality. I'd be  happy to see more positive steps being taken  towards making it easier for us in our desire  to live and love.  With this freedom, disabled women will  gain more self-confidence, and will be better  able to deal with the consequences of our  decisions, more receptive to new ideas, more  capable of initiating positive changes in our  lives for our personal growth.  Toward Intimacy is the first step down a  long road towards reaching an understanding of our own uniqueness, and learning to  accept our individual differences. I believe  the sooner a disabled person accepts her  particular disability, the sooner she will be  able to make the necessary adaptations toward living a better life. Toward Intimacy  gives four women a chance to help others to  that better life.  The NFB and DisAbled Women's Network  (DAWN) are co-sponsoring a screening of'Toward Intimacy on December 5 at 1:30 pm at the  GS Strong Centre at 4255 Laurel Street, Vancouver (at Oak and King Edward). Call 666-  3838 for more information, or call the TDD  number, 681-1932 and ask for 666-3838.  Marnie Hall is a member of DAWN.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Arts  Celebrating the arts:  Women in preview  by Kathleen Oliver   Now nearly five years old, Vancouver's  Women in View Festival has become one of  the highlights of January's entertainment  calendar. As the only festival of its kind in  Canada—combining a multi-disciplinary  showcase for work in the performing arts  initiated by women with an educational and  professional development component—  Women in View has a respected place among  Vancouver's yearly of fering of arts festivals.  Growing seems to be the trend at this  year's festival, which has expanded from the  downtown Eastside location of previous  years to include new venues in the East  End—Josephine's Coffee Bar and the Vancouver East Cultural Centre. In addition, to  celebrate the fifth anniversary, there is more  programming than ever.  This is a preview sampling of what's in  store for the festival, which runs January 22-  31. Detailed information is available in the  Women in View programme guide.  The festival kicks off with an opening  concert on January 22, featuring Jane Siberry  and an all-star band of women musicians,  including Linda Kidder and Sue Leonard  (drummer and backup vocalist respectively  for k.d. lang), Spirit of the West's Linda  MacRae, and others. There's no telling who  might drop in to do a song or two, so this  should be a hot night.  Saturday, January 23 features a daylong symposium co-presented by, Simon  Fraser University's Women's Studies Department. The topic is "Re-Presenting  Woman: New Constructions of Fema le Gender." Participants will discuss the negative,  reductive images of women we absorb from  the dominant culture and look at the more  River Sui, Wai Gein and Leslie Komori in Fast Life on a Lazy Susan  ...Hardcore Memories, a series of monologues ...is  "guaranteed to blow your dental dams off."  Cheechoo's experiences in residential  schools, and Taxi Karma and The Dissident, a  two-part monologue from San Francisco's  Canyon Sam. Sam's work is based on her  experiences as an Asian-American travelling and working in Tibet.  Members of the group who brought  Heavenly Alarming Female [see Kinesis, Nov/  92] to the Vancouver East Cultural Centre  this past October will be presenting Fast Life  on a Lazy Susan, a performance using taiko  drumming, video, movement and music to  explore issues of cultural identity as they  emerge in rituals around the preparation  and consumption of food.  Toronto's Sheela Shakespeare portrays  sixteen different characters in Speaking the  Dark, a radical re-telling of the Book of Job  from a woman's point of view.  Radical dyke playwright Audrey Butler, from Toronto will be presenting her  show Hardcore Memories, a series of monologues which she promises is "guaranteed to  blow your dental dams off."  empowering ways women have chosen to  reflect our own images back. Among the  panelists will be Montreal video artist  Marusia Bociurkiw, Mediawatch's Shari  Graydon, Vancouver writer/artist/activist  Haruko Okano, Toronto playwright/per  former Monique Mojica, and feminist historian Joy Parr.  Other educational events.include informal networking sessions—to be held at  Josephine's—on various topics of interest to  women working in the arts. The lineup of  workshops also caters to a variety of tastes,  offering opportunities ranging from creating a play with your child, to drumming to  dance therapy, to "embodying the voice"  with Toronto voice specialist Michele  George.  Sheela Shakespeare in Speaking the Dark  CHRONIQUE FEMINISTE N° 42  Matheuses  Les filles seraient-elles moins douses que les garcons en ma-  th^matiques? Leurs performances seraient-elles infeneures?  Manifesteraient-elles moins de gout pour cette discipline?  Le numero 42 de «Chronique Feministe* interroge les theories  a propos de l'infenorite* des filles et des femmes en math£ma-  tiques; il fait connaltre les rdsultats d'enquetes sur les performances des jeunes dans cette discipline; enfin, il rend visibles  des femmes «oubliees» ou meconnues et donne la parole a des  mathematiciennes.  Le n°: 200 FB - Abonn. 5 n°: 700 FB par mandat postal inter national (comm.: MP/42) Universite' des Femmes - la, Place Quilelel  1030 Bruxelles - Til: 021219.61.07  Betsy Warland  Four days of festival performances  (January 28-31) will be preceded by three  nights of playreadings (January 25-27), featuring work by Betsy Warland, Hilary  Peach, and a tribute to the late BC playwright, Betty Lambert, author of Under the  Skin and Jennie's Story.  Favourites from previous festivals, such  as the Cabaret Stir-Fry and Reading Writers  programs, have been expanded this year.  There will be four different programs for the  Cabaret at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, and there are four programs of reading  writers, including Betsy Warland, Margaret  Hollingsworth, Audrey Butler, J.A. Hamilton, and C. Allyson Lee.  Featured at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre are Path with No Moccasins,  Canyon Sam in Taxi Karma  The lineup of  workshops [ranges]...  from creating a play with  your child to drumming.  HHHHHHHI  Storyteller NanGregory, whose Shadow  in the Lily Field was a hit at last year's festival,  returns this year in a collaboration with  choreographer Evelyne Germain. Prairie  Rainbow/Lueur sur la Prairie is a bilingual  blend of dance and theatre inspired by activists Nellie McClung and Therese Casgrain.  Linda Carson's Dying to Be Thin is a  poignant, first-hand account of one woman's struggle with bulimia, currently being  performed at schools in the Vancouver area.  Dance fans should watch for Dream Rite,  The Colour of My Tongue, Amphibious Tales,  and (One Two) Buckle My Shoe.  Among Vancouver performers performing elsewhere in the festival are Christine  Taylor, Sheri-D Wilson, Suzie Payne and  Brenda Leadlay.  All in all, the festival promises an exciting and cha llenging line-up of performances  and participatory events, putting women's  creative work out there under the lights.  Kathleen Oliver, a regular -writer for Kinesis,  hopes to have found an apartment by the time  this is published.  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Arts  Challenging theatre:  Search for  a lair  by Cynthia Low  IN THE FACE OF HUNGRY LIONS  Written by Taien Ng  Directed by Remick Ho  1992 Fringe Festival, Vancouver  In The Face of Hungry Lions is fast paced,  issue-packed theatre. As a Chinese woman,  I was excited to see a performance initiated,  written and performed by mostly  Asian women—performers were Margaret  Cheung, Kamilyn Kaneko, Taien Ng, Karen  Rose and May Zhu.  The play is made up of a series of personal recollections of women from various  generations in different time frames. We  hear stories from "the old country" about  the sexism towards women, young and old,  as well as the stories of contemporary young  Asian Canadians in the diaspora.  In one composition, an ageless immigrant woman talks about the trials of living  in a new environment—the trials of my  mother, and our mothers—the bitter taste of  sacrifice. It is the voice of intense isolation  from extended family living continents away,  and of the immediate, yet equally intense  The vignettes often deal with... how Asian women  are defined as hypersexual or as non-sexual.  Hungry Lions is a heavy piece, with  issues of race, gender, sexuality and identity  running throughout—perhaps too much. In  the course of the play, a lot gets raised, yet  isn't dealt with satisfactorily at all.  alienation from her own children, who are  blind to her circumstances. It is a powerful  and moving piece, giving voice to the women  often invisible in our streets and overlooked  in our personal lives.  an Women Writers  KITCHEN   TALK  edited by Edna Alford & Claire Harris  WHETHER they love IT or hate it, escape to it or  from it, women talk about the one place that both  entraps and "empowers" them—the kitchen. In  this collection of Canadian women's poetry, prose, interviews  and oral transcriptions, talk from the kitchen goes public.  Here women tell the whole story, reinterpreting this significant part of their fives.  Featuring writings by over eighty Canadian women, including Margaret Atwood, Sharon Butala, Daphne Marlatt, Alice  Munro, Gabrielle Roy and Jane Rule.  Published by Red Deer CoUege Press  Paperback, $18.95, ISBN 0-88995-091-1  BEWILDERED  RITUALS  by Sandy Shreve  IN HER second collection of poetry, Sandy Shreve  leads us on a journey through the small acts that make  up our daily fives. Her skilled use of language and clear  vision help reveal the beauty and pain, the humour and confusion in the familiar world around us.  Sandy Shreve is Departmental Assistant for Women's  Studies at Simon Fraser University. Her first book, The Speed  of the Wheel Is Up to the Potter, was published in 1990.  Published by Polestar  Paperback, $12.95, ISBN 0-919591-95-7  Available Now in Bookstores Everywhere  orco/z/ac/RAiNCOAST Books  112 East Third Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C., V5T 1C8  (604) 873-6581 • 1-800-663-5714  RAINCOASTI  (r  IB 0 0 K Si  Kamilyn Kaneko in In the Face of Hungry Lions  Another piece has Ng playing the 'Susie  Wongesque'prostitute, waiting for her white  sailor to take her away to the wholesome life  in the white world. She uses some of the  many racist stereotypes of Asian women to  deal with issues of identity for Asian women.  When a "sweet innocent-looking Asian  girl" starts talking about her desirability and  of her need for sexual satisfaction, as she  pulls at her clothes and touches herself, you  become conscious of the boundaries that are  being crossed.  The vignettes often deal with the white  male gaze and how Asian women are defined as hypersexual or as non-sexual. Our  identitiesareessentializedandcommodified  by influences outside and reinforced by a  dominant world view. The characters in  Hungry Lions are strong and resilient, defining their own identities in the innocuous  shells constructed by oppressive systems.  While I was watching Hungry Lions, I  got the impression the play had been written  for a white audience because it focused on  manipulating white stereotypes and expectations. Rather than using this oppositional  strategy, (focusing on whiteness,) Hungry  Lions could have offered so much more. It  would have been more meaningful for Asian  women such as myself had it attempted to  engage and connect with Asians directly.  What comes through in Ng's piece, however, is the influence of black women writers  such as Ntozake Shange, who wrote For  Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide  When the Rainbozv is Not Enuf and other  African-American feminist playwrights. The  works of Asian feminist playwrights are still  relatively inaccessible and not widely distributed but that is changing.  More and more Asian feminists are beginning to access cultural production, and  Ng and Ho's play, In The Face of Hungry Lions  is very much a part of that growth. The play  is excellent in that it's very much at the  forefront of such work. It is important because it is affirming for other Asian women  participating in such work, and it also reflects the plurality of Asian-Canadians in  cultural and political spheres.  I'd like to see more projects by Asians,  especially women, be presented in the community. In a discussion with the author and  producer, I heard—again—how the promotion and logistics of presenting such a piece  is as much work as the production itself. The  promotional material and distribution of  information on Hungry Lions was done by  group members without much assistance  from the organizers of the Fringe Festival—  as with mainstream arts organisations, where  works by and about people of colour receives little attention because they are seen  as "culturally specific" and not appealing to  a wider audience.  Hungry Lions took on that challenge at  the Fringe this year and the hard work of the  Asian women artists in the show paid off—  for me.  Cynthia Low is a potter.  .—   FOR  Feminist  THE0RY&  ITERATURE  r a r t a c u s  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B 1 H6 TEL. 688-6138  new and  gently used books  Feminist  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Arts  Comedy at the Cultch:  Clinton gets an A  by Noel Currie  KATE CLINTON  Presented by the Vancouver Folk Music  Festival  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  October 25  I had no intention of seeing comedian  Kate Clinton when she came to Vancouver  in October until I was offered the chance to  review it for Kinesis. I'd seen Clinton before,  at the Vancouver Folk Fest and at G AYL A!,  a celebration of women's culture during the  Gay Games. I enjoyed those performances—  just not enough to fork over the almost $20  admission price. Also, I find her humour to  be too dominated by US politics.  Enough Vancouverwomen thoughtoth-  erwise to pack the Cultch for both shows on  a Sunday evening. As she made her way  onstage, this self-described "recovering  Catholic" and former English teacher reminded me of the Mrs. Graham of my adolescent fantasies, with a better haircut.  Clinton began by thanking us all for  coming out. This opening revealed her impressive timing—she left only the briefest  pause for cheers and laughter before explaining that, if we had not responded in this  equally predictable fashion, she would have  had to revise all her material.  Clinton began by  thanking us all for  coming out.  The early part of the show consisted  of Vancouver-based humour, revealing  Clinton's familiarity with the city and its  stereotypes. Her long-standing relationship  with the Vancouver International Folk Festival provided the context for this segment,  which she began by commenting that the  festival producers could increase profits by  "ticketing the child within." However, her  suggestion that the Folk Fest introduce "bra  nights"—a San Francisco lesbian bar phenomenon in which women baring their bras  It seems that in Canada we're better off than  women in the States: we have The Company of  Strangers, they get June Allison for Depend  Undergarments.  get free admission—garnered an even more  appreciative response.  My main complaint with the performances I've seen before is that Clinton devotes  too much joke time to American politics. In  this show, one week before the American  presidential election, it's understandable that  some of her material was devoted to this  theme. (One crowd favourite: a Clinton-  Gore ticket with Kate and Lesley rather than  Bill and whatshisname.)  The English teacher within Clinton was  surely at play in the simultaneous grammatical and political analysis of the overuse  of the word 'family,' as in "family values."  Clinton reminded us that the Democrats  started the process which has transformed  what was once "a nice little noun" into an  "overused adjective" meaning the opposite  of us—feminists, lesbians, single moms, and  so on. Later on, she proposed reclaiming the  word for a woman-specific context, such as  "family-sized box of tampons."  But in this show, she paid less attention  to specifically American politics and more to  Canadian political realities, particularly the  recentconstitutional referendum, which took  place the day after her show, or politics  affecting the North American continent as a  whole. For me it was here that Clinton's  political humour and analysis were at their  best.  Under the general heading 'Conspiracy  Theories,' she linked Oregon's Measure 9  (the referendum on the Oregon ballot which,  if passed, would have forced public schools  to teach that homosexuality is a sin), Susan  Faludi's failure to mention the word 'lesbian' even once in her 500-plus page book  Backlash ("like Mary Daly, with statistics"),  and the Canadian referendum—a plot to  keep our minds off the North American Free  OCTOPUS BOOKS  1146 Commercial Drive  Vancouver  604 253.0913  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  Monday-Saturday  11:00 am-6:00 pm  315 Cambie Street Vancouver, BC  V6B 2N4 (604)684-0523  Celebrating Menopause  The Change»Coming Into Our  Fullness'Women of the Fourteenth  Moon»The Menopause Self Help  Book'The Silent Passage  all available now  1988 West 4th & Maple  Vancouver, BC V6J 1M5 (604)733-3511  Trade Agreement (NAFTA). Clinton even  proposed her own version of the 'trickle  down' economic theory NAFTA is based on:  jobs trickle down further and further south,  for lower and lower pay.  I enjoy Clinton's humour most when  she's dealing with lesbian or feminist cultures, or the ways lesbians and feminists  inhabit mainstream culture. Referring to  "American Gladiators"—a late-night TV  show in which v real-life' contenders play  semi-to-ridiculous sporting games against  the steroid consuming Gladiators—Clinton  expressed her desire to go "a couple of  rounds" with Ice, one of the show's resident  musclewomen; she's practising her Q-Tip  jousting techniques.  ...the Canadian  referendum—a plot to  keep our minds off the  North American Free  Trade Agreement...  Clinton is skilled at reading her audience and following several trains of thought  at once, developing themes which get the  most response, but pulling backor abandoning them when she senses she's losing her  audience. Even more impressive, she makes  it look easy. An example of this would be the  line she walked between PMS jokes and  bantering with womenintheaudienceabout  menopause.  Aging was a definite subtheme for the  evening, with talk of a secret society of older  women taking over the world (we should be  so lucky) as well as the lack of roles available  to older women in media. It seems that in  Canada we're better off than women in the  States: we have The Company of Strangers,  they get June Allison for Depend Undergarments.  Clinton wrapped up the show with a  joke that exemplifies her trademark "humour," or feminist humour, defining the so-  called "hearings' trashing Anita Hill and  confirming Clarence Thomas' Supreme  Court nomination as "a circle jerk for the  ethically challenged."  While this was far from a tough room to  play—my sense was that the audience was  prepared to appreciate anything she said—  Clinton evidently enjoyed the evening as  much as the audience did.  Noel Currie is a first-time Kinesis writer  living in Vancouver.  WOMEN'S WORK  SCREEN PRINT,  We give to the Community  that supports ui  • Women Positive  • Earth Friendly  • Community Economil  Development  • Equality Rights  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Arts  Book review: The Cracks:  Embracing  the T  by Nancy Goldhar  THE CRACKS  by Anne Dandurand  translated by Luise von Flotow  Mercury Press, 1992  I confess I felt like the perfect reader for  Anne Dandurand's The Cracks. I love reading what this writer likes writing—random  and wry verbal outpourings. For the woman  reader who, like myself, needs female text as  badly as her nightly scalding hot bath, you  await the embrace: "...the intimate and secret pleasure of unearthing unknown work-  gems from the pages of my dictionaries! It is  only here, amid the lines, with the words,  with you, that I survive. That I'm revived  and survive. And live. Yes. That's it. Writing  as an ultimate gesture of love."  I have complete patience for this woman  writer's sensitivity. And I don't mind if she  admittedly lies to me in the process. She  surprises even me, given my selective acceptance of post-modernist excess. With this  novel, I am willing to make—what do not  feel like—allowances. I devoured with delight the episodic journal entries, representing the central T of the novel, the unnamed  Montreal woman.  Dandurand questions the way truth is  spread throughher spoof of academe—footnotes are strewn throughout the personal  journal cum fiction, and her admitted lies to  her entrusted and apparently loved, yet often forgotten reader. Also through the use of  footnotes, she acknowledges other appreciated authors; addresses her critics regarding  her works; pauses to fill the reader in on  necessary pieces of previous information;  and performs other flying acts of footnoting  feat.  Just what "the cracks" mean, I don't  know. Let it fall through.  cracks in these 'sacred'  closed systems of thought  heard around the world  (Betsy Warland, "the breasts refuse")?  We don't realize it is a cat that just  walked across her back when we meet Chapter Two. And later, "Rolled up in a smooth  ball within easy reach, Chapter Two waited  patiently." Like a cat to a ball of yarn, this  text paws at entwined ideas of life and writing—what they can and can't do.  What life can and can't do—"Life: this  troubling lie."—is the first epigraph to the  novel. And what the limitations of writing,  and truth, and self, and love are, are the  spiralling concerns in this book, fragmentation, chaos, memory, the momentary and  the human, and alas the humour borne of  these—are the other themes and commitments in this book.  "Life:  this troubling lie."  To play critic: I think my readerly momentum might have sagged a little in the  middle—maybe something was happening  to me in my real life on those days. Mostly,  my reader-response was open. Amid sensations of cold (Montreal snow ice winter), of  hot ("skin like melting caramel"), of wafting  French perfumed names ("Valeriane Dahlia  Jacinthe Odile Violette Melisse Gentiane'  and commentary, story, questions, complaints, jokes and details of abortion; rape;  tracheotomy; men; sex; love; politics; art;  poverty; dreams; insomnia; nightmares;  cigarettes; asthma; despair; pleasure; nostalgia; writing; a mother named Marguerite;  and the re-naming of foster children  ("Caroline-the abyss-the trench" "Lucie-  Maximum Mistrust" "Odile-my Trembling  fountain" "Josepha and Jesula-Vesuviusand  Etna"), I relished the read.  Also, if you drown reading Nicole  Brossard, dive into Dandurand as an alternate plunge into the Quebec women writers  scene. During my last trip to Octopus Books  in Vancouver to check out the Women's  Studies and New Fiction Shelves, looking  for Betsy Warland's Proper D(eaf)initions, I  noticed Dandurand's Deathly Delights and  Three by Three (2 is her twin sister Claire De  and 3 is Helene Rioux) and I discovered  another book on the shelf: Michele Mailhot's  Death of the Spider, my next read.  Nancy Goldhar is a Vancouver teacher and  writer.  by Christine Cosby  (A'S  Wd.   ' &°ok&  %"'     Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 11pm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  1221 i^hurlowCat Davie), Vancouver, B.C.  Tel:(604)669-1753 or  Fax:(604)685-0252  Attention book lovers! Paging Women is a regular preview of recent titles which may  be of interest to Kinesis readers. These books are worth checking out. And if you happen to  be interested in writing a review for Kinesis, we welcome writers. Call 255-5499 for more  information.  Polite to Bees by Diana Hartog. From the mythic to the moth, Hartog looks to the sea, the  suburb, the forest and the garden next door to create engaging contemplations of human and animal  life. This collection ofpoetry is adelightful and instructive study ofa world where naturekeeps taking  its unnatural course. (Coach House Press, Toronto 1992)  Nothing Mat(t)ers: a Feminist Critique of Postmodernism by Somer Brodribb. In her  new book, Brodribb looks at postmodernism from a feminist perspective and finds it misogynist and  worthless. Brodribb takes on Levi-Strauss, Sartre, Nietzsche, and Foucault, among others, and finds  their postmodernist work to be just another form of patriarchal politics in the academic world.  However, rather than clxallengingpostmodernists in their own male terms, the author creates a new  feminist language. (James Lorimer & Co., Toronto 1992)  The "Patricia" Album and Other Poems by Colleen Thibaudeau. This is a collection of  previously unpublished in book form poems by Thibaudeau. Spanning four decades of writing, the  collection attests to the timeless creativity and deeply-rooted sensitivity of thepoel. It's a thoughtful,  compelling book of memories and reflections based on Thibaudeau's rich experiences and colourful  ancestry. (Moonstone Press, Goderich, Ontario 1992)  Blue Mind's Flower by Janet Read. This is Read's first book of poems. Her poems move  easily, yet eerily, through surrealistic landscapes of images, symbols, and historical realities to  become places of exile and discovery, revealing transient yet transcendent patterns of meaning.  Places and events transform themselves, sliding forward and backward in time, forming pivots  around which meaning turns, revealing itself. (Moonstone Press, Goderich, Ontario 1992)  The Struggle for Social Justice in British Columbia: Helena Gutteridge, the Unknown Reformer by Irene Howard. Helena Gutteridge was a socialist and feminist whose vision  helped to shape social reform legislation in BC in the first decades of the 20th century. Howard  chron icles Gutteridge's life and involvemen t in the social causes of her time—for suffrage, for jobs for  the unemployed and union recognition, for the minimum wage, and for low-cost housing. Among  other struggles, Gutteridge was the first woman ever elected to Vancouver city council in 1937 and  she left behind a rich legacy of social and political reform. (UBC Press, Vancouver 1992)  A Chorus of Stones: the Private Life of War by Susan Griffin. Griffin offers a radical  rethinking of the nature of war and gender, and the illuminating in terplay between private suffering  and public tragedy in her latest book. She sets the drama of war and peace against the continual  struggles played out in our own personal lives—the conflicts between truth and lies, secrecy and  revelation, testimony and denial—demonstrating that an investigation into the life of war is  inseparable from an exploration of the individual and private realm. Using diaries, biography,  interviews, art, literature, psychology and historical documents, Griffin reveals a moving self-  portrait of a civilization wavering between self-destruction and survival. (Doubleday, New York  1992)  One Woman Army: the Life of Claire Culhane by Mick Lowe. In a life that has spanned  most of the twentieth centu ry, Claire Culhane has played a part in many of the headline-making social  struggles of our time—the Spanish civil war, the women's movement, the FLQ crisis, the war in  Vietnam, and the BC prison riot of 1976. Her current campaign for prison abolition stems from an  on-going personal and political struggle against authority. Culhane is living proof that even in these  cynical and dispirited times, one person can still make a difference. (Macmillan Canada, Toronto  1992)  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Bulletin Board  d    t h  i  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum  of 50 words. Groups, organizations and  individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, nonprofit objectives. Other free notices will  be items of general public interest and  will appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8(+$0.56 GST) for the  first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (+$0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof and must be  prepaid. Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication.  Note: Kinesis is published ten times a  year. Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  All submissions should include acontact  name and telephone number for any  clarification thatmaybe required. Listings  will not be accepted over the telephone.  K/nes/sencourages readers to research  the goods and services advertised in  Bulletin Board. K/hes/scannotguarantee  the accuracy of the information provided  nor the safety and effectiveness of the  services and products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6. For more  information call 255-5499.  Call about our  excellent ad  rates!  255*5499  WANNA (at I INVULVtU r  With Kinesis'? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writers' meeting on Tues, Jan 5 at 7 pm  at our office, #301-1720 Grant St. If you  can't make the meeting, call 255-5499. No  experience necessary, all women welcome.  NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  The Not Just Another Page Collective welcomes all First Nations women and women  of colour who are past, present and possibly  future Kinesis volunteers to our next meeting on Thurs, Jan 28 at 7:30 pm. For info on  location and to arrange childcare subsidies,  please contact Agnes Huang at 875-1640.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women. VSW  volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise  funds, answer the phone lines and help to  connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and  other exciting tasks! Come to Committee  meetings: Resource Centre Mon, Dec 14  and Jan 18, 6 pm; Finance/ Fundraising,  Tues, Dec 15 and Jan 19, 5:30 pm: Publicity, Thurs, Dec 17 and Jan 21, 5:30 pm;  Programming, Wed, Dec 16 and Jan 20,  5:30 pm. The next volunteer potluck and  orientation will be on Wed, Dec 9 and Thurs,  Jan 21, 7 pm at VSW, #301-1720 Grant  Street. For more info, call Jennifer at 255-  5511.  NEW YEAR'S AT VSW  Attention all VSW and Kinesis volunteers!  Come ring in the newyear with us on Thurs,  Jan14at7pmatVSW,#301-1720GrantSt.  DEC 5 VIGIL  Women Against Violence Against Women/  Rape Crisis Centre invites you to join us at  our4th annual Vigil on Sun, Dec6at 4:30pm  at the north entrance of the Vancouver Art  Gallery (Georgia St) as we remember and  mourn the millions of women who have died  as a result of male violence. Sign language  interpretation will be provided. For more  info, call 255-6228.  JEWISH FEMINIST CONFERENCE  A weekend of culture, scholarship, and celebration will be held on Feb 19-21 in Toronto. Theconference will explorethethemes  of Jewish feminism, historical and contemporary issues, Yiddish women writers, and  Jewish women's creativity. $75 includes  Shabbat dinner, Sat. breakfast, lunch and  all events. Forfurthur info, contact Women's  Educational Resource Centre, O.I.S.E., 252  Bloor St West, Toronto, M5S 1V6 or phone  (416) 923-6641, Ext. 2244.  CULTURAL RESPONSIBILITY  A weekend of presentations on the struggle  against cultural appropriation. The Asian  Lesbians of Vancouver present a dialogue  on power, responsibility, and censorship in  the arts on Sat, Nov 28 4-6 pm at 101 Powell  St. Info 688-8399. A presentation on the  appropriation of Aboriginal spirituality will be  given by Celeste George and Theresa Tait  on Sun, Nov 29 4-6 pm at 1155 West  Georgia.  SEASONAL POTLUCK  Hot Flashes Women's Cafe invites you to  join them for a potluck dinner on Fri, Dec 18  6-10 pm, 106 Superior St., Victoria. Bring  your own cutlery, plate, pot and luck.  HIMAIMI bANNbKJbb  Reading at Octopus Books Dec 18 by the  Toronto-based poet/activist/academic.  Sponsored by Rungh Cultural Society. For  more info, call 876-2086.  ART SALE BENEFIT  Gallerie Publications, feminist publishers of  books by women artists since 1988, hosts a  celebration and benefit art auction at  Josephine's Cafe-Gallery, 1716 Charles St  (off Commercial Dr). The show and sale  opens Dec 7 and continues through to a  party and auction Dec 13,1-4pm. For more  info call 929-8706.  BENEFIT FOR JOINT EFFORT  Vancouver women prisoners' rights group is  having an auction with live entertainment  and lots of prizes at La Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr, Dec 20, 2-5 pm. Those interested in donating prizes and for more info,  call 254-6460.  WOMEN ARTISTS  Women Artists are invited to come to Deep  Cove Cultural Centre with photographic  documentation of their work on Sat, Jan 9,  1-4 pm. Diane Rae Wazny will facilitate a  discussion group. Come and share your  ideas and concerns. For more info, call 929-  8706.  WESTERN FRONT  "distance of distinct vision", an installation of  photo-text drawings and an artist's book by  Laiwan will be presented by The Western  Front, 303 E 8th Ave, Nov 10-Dec 18.  Opening Tues, Nov 10 at 8 pm.  % ¥ Jf)  WWII  WW;  w  VM! |» IN  TKffitt M  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  TESS PAYNE  Video In presents Tess Payne from Toronto.  A lecture, screening and discussion of narrative practices in her work will take place on  Dec 10 at 8 pm. $3 members, $4 non-  members. A workshop on writing with narrative forms will take place on Dec 12,1-4 pm.  $8 members, $16 non-members (sliding  scale/please pre-register). Video In, 1102  Homer St, Van, BC, V6B 2X6. Tel 688-4336,  Fax 688-1642.  SOUTH ASIAN DANCE  Le Group De La Place Royale presents  "Making of Maps", a double bill by Shobana  Jeyasingh Dance Company with music by  Michael Nyman, Christos Hatzis, R.A.  Ramamani and Alistair MacDonald. Premiere Sat, Dec 12 and Sun, Dec 13 at 8 pm,  Sun mat at 3 pm. Arts Court Theatre, 2 Daly  Avenue, Ottawa. $15 adults, $13 students  and seniors. As part of their Creative Process series, Le Group de la Place Royale will  present choreographer MenakaThakkerwith  monitor Shobana Jeyasingh atthe Arts Court  Theatre Dec 17-19 at 8 pm. $11 adults, $9  students and seniors. Info and reservations  for both events, call (613) 235-1492.  POETRY  Women in View presents "Poets Against  Violence" on Fri, Dec 4 at Josephine's, 1716  Charles. Doors 6:45 pm, start 7:30 pm. $5  WIV members, $7 others. For info and  reservations, call 685-6684.  MUSIC FOR MIDWIVES  A benefit for a home birth entitled "Music for  a Midwife" with Aya, Marcus Musely and  Edith Wallace, will take place at Josephine's  on Sat, Dec 5. $10 Advance tix (limited  seating) or call 738-5868. Doors at 7:15,  show at 8 pm.  A rULL MOON  Finewomyn Production hosts a full moon  ritual and potluckwith ritualist, musician and  author Rashani on Wed, Dec 9 at 6:30 pm  at Josephine's. $8-16 (sliding scale) and  potluck dish. Call 253-7189.  WINTER SOLSTICE  Josephine's will host a winter solstice benefit for Sue McGowan's band, Aggie's Rock  on Fri, Dec. 18, door 7:45 pm. Featured will  be Sue, Jacqui Parker- Snedker, Carol  Weaver and Sharon CosteUo. $5-10. Advance tix required.  OPEN STAGE  Women are invited to sign up ASAP to  participate in an open stage at Josephine's  on Sat, Dec 19, door 7:15 pm. Limited to 6  performers, $1-3 atthe door.  NEW YEAR'S BASH  Friends in the Valley (Gay/Lesbian Support/  Social Group) is hosting a dinner/dance in  Abbotsford. Not just for couples - all are  welcome. For details call 1 -850-1368. Come  and help us ring in the new year!  LESBIAN MURDER MYSTERIES  The premiere of a new videotape'The Dead  Man Was a Woman", a murder mystery  gender bender set in the Vancouver lesbian  bar scene around 1965, and an artist talk by  Cornilia Wyngaarden will take place on Fri,  Jan 29 at 9 pm at Video In, 1102 Homer St,  Van. For info call 688-4336.  NAFTA  Help organize opposition to NAFTA (North  American Free Trade Agreement). Women  to women global strategies and education  on NAFTA's effects on women and on the  environment will be discussed on Jan 9 at  7:30 pm at Britannia Community Centre. For  info call 430-0458. Public Hearings on  NAFTA will be held on Nov 30 and Dec 1 at  Delta Place, 645 Howe St. Testify, speak  out, and join the demonstration on Dec 1 at  12 noon. Co-sponsored by the Action  Canada Network. For more info call 736-  7678.  GROUPS  WOMEN IN VIEW  The 5th Annual Women In View Festival is  Jan 22-31. Volunteeropportunities are available in production, publicity, hospitality, front-  of-house, box off ice, and other areas. To be  a part of the celebration of women in the  arts, please contact Charmaine at 685-6684.  VLC  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection at 876  Commercial Drive is open Tues and Thurs  12-7, Sat 12-5. They are understaffed so  please call before coming down, or call to  volunteer. VLC offers lay counselling, job  and housing info and lending library. Join the  Women Writer's Group if you wantto inspire  or become inspired. For more info, call Carol  at 255-1620. April's Dance Workshop is a  new non-sexist approach to dance instruction, on the first Sun of each month. $10-15  (sliding scale), call April at 684-5347. Dec is  amnesty month at the VLC library. Bring in  overdue books and avoid late fines. From  Jan, fines will be 10 cents/day. A list of  women with overdue books will be posted in  the office.  ABUSED BY DOCTOR?  TAG (Therapist Abuse Action Group) is  committed to stopping abusive doctors. TAG  meets once a month to discuss reasonable  and effective strategies for change and increasing public awareness. If you have ex-  GROUPS  perienced abuse by a physician ortherapist  and want to take action, call 255-6228 for  details about the next meeting.  NATIVE CENTRE  The Native Women's Resource Centre of  Toronto offers a variety of counselling and  support services and ongoing cultural and  recreational activities. All services are initiated and run by and for Native women. For  more info, or to become a member, write to  245 Gerrard St East, Lower Level, Toronto,  M5A 2G1 or phone (613) 963-9963 or fax  (613)963-9573.  WOMEN AND WORDS  The West Coast Women and Words Society  is about to undergo some changes. The  1992 Board has made 2 important resolutions. First, to strive to become an anti-  racist, anti-classist organization, and secondly, to hire a part-time coordinator by mid-  1993. This will be an affirmative action hiring  for women of colour and Aboriginal women.  We need volunteers. If you are interested,  please call Diane at 733-2375.  NEW IN THE VALLEY?  Contact Friends in the Valley (Gay/Lesbian  Support/Social Group). Dances, video nights,  etc. are happening in the Abbotsford area.  For info, call 1-850-1368.  GALE-BC  GALE- BC's next regular monthly meeting  will be on Dec 9 at 7:30 pm at the British  Columbia Teacher's Federation building.  SUBMISSIONS  LINKING LESBIANS  Lynx is a correspondence club for lesbians  wishing to make contact with other lesbians  Submissions Wanted:  Canadian/New Zealand Lesbian Anthology  Short stories, biographical writing, B&W artwork and  other creative submissions depicting aspects of lesbian  experiences of colonialism-including colonization of  indigenous cultures and of women's bodies-are sought.  Women of colour are particularly encouraged to submit  work. Anthology to be co-edited by Beth Brant and  Cathie Dunsford.  Send SASE with your submission to  Press Gang Publishers, 603 Powell St.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada V6A 1H2.  Deadline: March 31,1993.  Call or write for more info: (604) 253-2537  now available  on video &  laserdisc!  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS CLASSIFIEDS  across Canada. For info on joining, write and  enclose a 42 cent stamp to Lynx, P.O. Box  4759, Station E, Ottawa, K1S 5H9.  LESBIAN EROTICA  Submissions of visual art, fiction, poetry,  Haiku, creative non-fiction, interviews, performance art, and recipes are now being  accepted for "Graphic Details." This anthology explores the different ways women of  colour create, think and act on erotic fantasies. Deadline Dec 30. Send entries to:  Makeda Silvera or Leleti Tamu, Sister Vision  Press, PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto,  M6H 4E2.  ART IN THE MARCH  Celebrate our different voices with Banners.  Individuals and groups are invited to March  or participate in a number of different ways,  with their "Banners" at the Calgary International Women's Day March on Mar 6. Banners are anything you can wear, push, pull,  carry, or perform. All banners will be exhib  ited for a period at public venues in Calgary.  For a participation package, please write Art  in the March, c/o 1203 Baldwin Cres SW,  Calgary, T2V 2B6 or call (403) 252-9704.  RESISTANCE  Resist, an editorial collective of lesbian and  bisexual feminists, is welcoming submissions of fiction, poetry, and non-fiction for 2  anthologies. The theme is lesbian and bisexual women's experiences of and resistance to heterosexism and homophobia/  lesbophobia. Send typed double-spaced  material to Resist, Women's Press, #233-  517 College St, Toronto, M6G 4A2. Include  a SASE if you want your work returned.  Deadline Jan 1.  SOUTH ASIAN WOMEN  Diva, a South Asian quarterly, is calling for  contributions to an anthology featuring writings and art work by women of South Asian  origin. Poems, short stories, oral histories,  testimonies, journal entries, sketches, photographs, slides, paintings are all welcome.  Deadline to receive manuscripts is Jan 15.  Mail to Fauzia Rafiq, Diva, 427 Bloor St  West, Toronto, M5S 1X7. Fax (416) 778-  7040.  ASIAN PACIFIC LESBIANS  Sister Vision: Black Women and Women of  Colour Press is publishing an Anthology of  Writing and Artwork by Asian Pacific Islander Lesbians and Bisexual Women. Send  fiction, poetry, essays, interviews, short  plays, autobiography, journal entries, photographs, prints, drawings, photos of sculpture or paintings, etc, about sexuality, activism, racism, homophobia, relationships,  immigration, identity, erotica, disability,  biculturalism, family issues, art - our lives  by Mar 30 with SASE to Sister Vision Press,  P.O. Box 217 Station E, Toronto, M6H 4E2.  Please write if you have special needs or  questions.  A WOMAN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: New counselling,  educational and consulting service on the  North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian  affirmative counselling, workshops, support  groups and information. Areas of specialization: low self-esteem, depression, anxiety,  communication, relationship difficulties, addiction, sexual abuse recovery, coming out.  Lou Moreau, registered counsellor, 922-  7930.  EXHAUSTED? TENSE?  Jin Shin Do body/mind acupressure. Receive gentle deep release of physical and  emotional stress, fully clothed in a safe .  healing environment, offering respect and  honour to women with regard to any issues  our healing may involve. Our bodies remember our experiences. Feminist-mom-  survivor and certified practitioner. Call Lisa  at 685-7714.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  All-women's Caribbean beachfront guest  house: beautiful, spacious LF-owned guesthouse on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Tropical gardens, pool,  large private guestrooms, sumptuous meals,  massages & crystal healings. Room rates:  $330 single; $440 double per week. Call our  Toronto friend, Susan at(416) 463-6138  between 9 am-10 pm.  HOUSING  How much do you need to buy your own?  What will your monthly payments be? How  much of a downpayment is necessary?  Where can you afford to buy? Today interest  rates are the lowest they have been in 25  years. If you are thinking about buying or  selling, let me put 15 years experience to  work with you: Linda McNeill 298-0795,  Rennie and Assoc. Rlty. 298-8777.  "LOVE" ADDICTIONS  Untangling the "love" addictions: sex, romance and relationships. Meeting our intimacy needs in healthy ways. Do you find  yourself struggling in repetitive, harmful relationships? In this group, you will identify  your intimacy needs and begin to realize  how they are not being met. Free yourself  from obsessions with sex, romance and  dysfunctional relationships! Call Eleanor  Brockenshire, BHEc, MSW, 669-0197. Eight  sessions beginning Jan. $ 25/session. Sliding scale.  COUNSELLING NOW  Experiencing difficulties? Feminist counselling in a supportive, confidential atmosphere. For crises, personal growth, parent/  teen issues, coming out and life passages.  Individuals, couples, families. Sliding scale  fees. For free consultation call Eleanor  Brockenshire, BHEc, MSW at 669-0197.  ROBIM GOLDFARB rmt  Registered   Massage   Therapist  Approach Massage Therapy CJ  ^r=Jp=Jr=Jr=Jf=Jr=Jr=Jp=Jr=^r=Jr=lp=lr^If^  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE   |  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN       |  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  Director Trinh T. Minh-ha will be in attendance at the premiere  of Shoot for the Contents on Fri, Dec 4, 7:30pm at the Pacific  Cinematheque, 1131 Howe. For more info, call 688-FILM.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  SITKA CO-OP  Sitka Housing Co-operative is a 26 unit  housing complex which was built six years  ago. Our purpose is to provide housing for  sole-support women with environmental allergies. Located in the East End of Vancouver, we are near shopping, schools and  community centres. Participation in the operation of the co-op is required of all members, as well as share purchase. We are  presently accepting applications from women  who require two, three or four bedroom  units. For application forms please write:  Membership Committee, Sitka Housing Coop, 1550 Woodland Drive, Vancouver, BC,  V5L 5A5.  POLITICAL ECONOMIST NEEDED  The Institute of Political Economy invites  applications annually from senior scholars,  women and men, to teach some aspect of  political economy at the graduate level as a  Visiting Professor for a 2-12 month period.  The applicant should have a record of internationally recognized published scholarship,  and offer work of an interdisciplinary character attracting students from several disciplines. Applications in any calendar year by  Dec 31, to the Director, Institute of Political  Economy, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S 5B6.  Carleton University is committed to equality  of employment for women, Aboriginal peoples, visible minorities, and disabled persons. Interested persons fromthese groups  are encouraged to apply.  SOLSTICE GIFTS  Women's Work Shirts make great Solstice  gifts. 'Amazon' and 'Goddess' designs will  be available at Totally Bazaar at Celebrities  on Dec 12 & 13. Cozy hand-dyed sweats  printed with Celtic Petroglyphs are one of  the many styles offered by Starprint Designs  (of Women's Work Screen Print) at the  Wearable Art Show at Cecil Green UBC on  Dec 5,11 -5pm and at the City Square Craft  Fair, 12th and Cambie, Dec 17-24. Our  studio is also open for sales 9:30-5pm, Mon-  Fri at 261 E 1 st St, N Van near the Seabus.  WRITER NEEDS BOOK  Do you have a copy of Fireworks: The Best  of Fireweed (Women's Press 86/87) you  would be willing to give or sell to Cy-Thea?  If so, please call me at 875-1543.  SHIATSU  Give someone the attention they deserve.  Shiatsu gift certificates- an hour of undivided attention, compassionate touch, days  of relief and renewed energy. Phone Astarte  251-5409.  SEX ADDICTION  Are you curious about sex addiction? Sexual  secrets and sexual acting out prevent intimacy. As a registered Professional Counsellor with personal experience of this addiction, I'm committed to educating and supporting people to heal. For brochure and  free initial session call Carol Vialogos 731 -  0758. Serious calls only.  EMPLOYMENT  Part-time Co-ordinator of volunteers needed  for Big Sisters' Indo-Canadian Outreach  Project in Surrey. Applicant must speak  fluent Punjabi or Hindi and English. Experience and/or training in working with children/teens, volunteer coordination, group  facilitation and some counselling desired.  Salary $1146/mo, 12 month contract position. Send resume to A. Montani, Big Sisters, 34 E12th Ave, Van, V5T 2G5 by Jan 8.  PERSONAL COUNSELLING  Affordable therapy for those seeking a safe,  supportive atmosphere to work through difficult personal issues or explore their own  growth. I have worked with gestalt, hypnotherapy, bodywork, hakami, dreams and  bring a feminist perspective to my work.  Sliding scale available. Darlene 254-3758.  PATRICIA DUBBERLEY  B.A., M.A.  Counsellor  • Healing Issues  ol Dysfunctional  Families and Abuse  Telephone: (604) 733-4523  • Enhancing  Relationships and  Sell-Esteem  #201 -2515 Burrard Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 3J6  • Individual, Couples.  Family and Group  Therapy  1716 Charles Street Vancouver 3C V5L2T5 & (604) 2S3-3142  smoke free cappuccino bar    (Sr   light vegetarian meals  <Q art&crafts   (J gifts & music it   pool table  Open Tuesday -* Sunday  Womyn's Open Stage       <-j^  December 19* '92        %P  Book your Special Event with Us  DECEMBER 1992/JANUARY 1993  27 jgTUDIE LIBRftRY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  | 226b EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VflNCOUVER. BC   VbT 1Z8  EVERYONE'S DOING I  £k    f    ^  i  join us. BmrASUB.  3sed      If you can't afford the full amount for  Kinesis subscription, send what you can  Free to prisoners  Orders outside Canada add $8  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  «,  (includes Kinesis subscription) J  Q$30 +$1.40 GST  3  3  a.  ", I00t  111  HHHi  ——            o  ^^==  *  toon-