 September 1990 WHAT'S WRONG WITH PAY EQUITY?  CMPA $2.25  ^  Roaring crowds:  The Gay Games in review  \ Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next Writer's Meeting is  Wed. Sept 5 at 7 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Marsha Arbour, Rhoda Rosenfeld, Ginger Plum, Joni Miller,  Christine Cosby, Nancy Pollak, Lori Friesen, Jan Pelle-  tier, A.AIi-sa Nemesis, Jackie Brown, Maggie Roy, Gwen  Bird, Susan O'Donnell, Sim-  mah Black, Esther Shannon,  Sudesh Kaur, Claire Fowler,  Lotus Miyashita, Chris Meyer,  Sonia Marino  FRONT COVER: Photo by  N.J Pollak  EDITORIAL BOARD: Gwen  Bird, Nancy Pollak, Michele  Valiquette, Terrie Hamazaki,  Christine Cosby  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Jennifer Johnstone,  Chau Tran, Lyn MacDonald  ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  OFFICE: Jennifer Johi  Chau Tran  instone,  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  tbe; responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $30 or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make submissions. We reserve the right  to edit and submission does  not guarantee publication. If  possible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication;  news copy: 15th; letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  12th.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and  an LC-800 laser printer. Additional laser printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing by  Web Press Graphics, Burnaby  BC  00^  Sergia Galvan brings news about women in the  Dominican Republic 11  Wasn't it a party? 12  A story of disability, pregnancy and birth 18  INSIDE  ~ww  Abortion Coalition: big changes 3  Difficulties with Repro. Tech. Commission 3  Nasty plant makes nasty exit 4  Gutless response to housing crisis 4  Unionizing at the teachers'unions 5  FEATURE  Gay bashing in Montreal  5  by Susan O'Donnell  Pay equity: limited, dangerous 7  by Debra J. Lewis  Romania: this is somebody's child 10  by Millie Strgrr  Spoken and unspoken: Words Without Borders 15  by Christine Morissette  Gems at a floundering fest 17  by Lorraine Chan  Frank Chickens: in review 19  by Jean Lum  A lighthearted lesbian frolic 20  by Bonnie Waterstone  REqMARS  Movement Matters 2  What's News? 6  by Linda Choquette  Commentary 9  by Rachel Andrews  Letters 21  Bulletin Board 22  compiled by Donna Dykeman  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  Women, 301-1720 Grant St,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  of  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association.  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  KINESIS Movement Matters  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX>NC*^^  ^XXNXX^NXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^^  Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Let's tie  up Parliament  In continuation of the protests against  the budget cuts to the Secretary of State  Women's Program, a banner project is being organized across the country.  All women's groups and interested individual women are invited to produce a  protest banner to illustrate the truth about  women's lives. The banners will be collected regionally, then forwarded to Ottawa  in time to "tie up" the parliament buildings  during the Third Commonwealth meeting of  Ministers Responsible for Women's Affairs  from Oct. 8-11, and to coincide with the  twentieth anniversary of the Royal Commission on the Status of Women.  Banners should be made from strong fabric, measure four feet high, and have your  group's name on it. The Vancouver Status  of Women is collecting banners from BC:  please send your BC banner in by September 15th. For a detailed brochure or more  information, contact Jennifer Johnstone at  VSW 255-5511. For information about collection points in other parts of the country,  contact Alice de Wolff at NAC, 344 Bloor  St. W., Toronto Ont. M5S 9Z9 (Tel: 416-  922-3246)  Community projects  in EI Salvador  The centre for Cooperation with El Salvador, a non-profit, non-partisan organizar  tion, recently opened an office in Ottawa to  support badly needed community projects  in El Salvador.  In association with the centre, a group of  women in Vancouver have formed Women  Care, a committee to look for support for  a women's project. They plan to work  i«S\de  £\c*e \\de yd© vC\« d«  This column—Inside Kinesis—first appeared in our June 1989 edition, but the  idea for it came out of a meeting the Editorial Board held in March of that year with  Vancouver's Women of Colour Group.  The Women of Colour Group had sought  a meeting with the Editorial Board to discuss ways in which Kinesis could be more  for women of colour. Both before and after this meeting, the Board met to discuss  what it would mean to be an anti-racist paper. We made a few tangible moves, some  based on suggestions made by the Women  of Colour Group. We developed a Volunteer  Kit: a kind of who-what-where-when-why  of Kinesis. The Kit also included a Bias  and Language Sensitivity Guide which examines the sexism, racism, classism, ableism  and ageism embedded in the newswriting  traditions of the mainstream and (all too  often) the alternative press.  We started the Inside Kinesis column as  a means of reporting on our own current  events, and we made information about our  monthly news writers' group more accessible to our readers by running a notice in  Bulletin Board—even we forgot to advertise in Kinesis.  There were editorial changes. We now use  the byline "As told to" whenever an article  is based on an interview. Women of colour  had suggested this as a means of making  the subject of interviews (the woman whose  voice was to be heard) more visible.  with the Association of Salvadorean Women  (ADEMUSA) and the University of El Salvador in developing a health clinic that will  provide medical care and preventative information for about 750 women and their families.  The Vancouver group is looking for support for the project. They are also planning  a women's tour to El Salvador in November. The tour is being coordinated with the  Women's Office of the University of El Salvador and will coincide with Semana de No  Violencia Contra La Mujer—a week of activities in San Salvador being organized to  protest violence against women.  Tentative dates are Thursday Nov. 15 to  Monday Nov. 26. For more details contact:  Myra Johnson, 12-404 East 43rd Ave., Vancouver, BC V5W 1T4. Tel: 325-1094  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated over the summer months:  Betty Baxter • Mary E. Billy • Florence Bishop • Margaret Black • Jennifer Bradley •  Robin Brown • Sandra Bruneau • Wendy Chappell- Ivey • Linda Choquette • Jo F. Coffey • Judith Crawley • Inez Curl • Holly Devor • Ellen Dixon ♦ Ardelle Dudley • Jo Dun-  away ♦ Barbara Elliott • Barbara Eyles • Rebecca Frame • Ellen Frank • Eira Friesen •  Keith Fryer • Stan Gabriel • Maura Gatensby • Carole Gerson • Patricia Gessey • Teresa  Gibson • Ann Goldblatt • Jill Gould • Barbara Grantham • Clarissa Green • E. Hamazaki  • Aphrodite Harris • Michele Hopkins • Alison L. Hopwood • Rowena Hunnisett ♦ Karen  Hunsen • Suzanne James • Pamela Jay * Faune Johnson • Nola Johnston • Angela Kelly  • Florence Koeleman • Penney Kome • Inger Kronseth • Lorraine Kuchinka • Barbara  Kuhne • Pat Landrecht ♦ Mary E. Lane ♦ S. Ledingham • Susan Lewis • Elenore Lindahl  • Vett Lloyd • M.K. Louis • Glenda Macpherson • KeUy Maier • Catherine Malone • S.J.  Matheson • Mary McKenna ♦ Louise McLean • Carlin Miroslaw • Margaret Mitchell •  Geraldine Morley ♦ Myrtle Mowatt • Cynthia Nagel • Karen Nordlinger • Laura Parkinson • Susan Penfold • Brenda Pengelly • Tracy Potter • Barbara Pulling • Elinor Rat-  cliffe • M.A. Read • Pega Ren • Stuart Rennie • Ronni Richards ♦ Janet Riehm ♦ Laurie Robertson • Paulette Roscoe ♦ Rosemarie Rupps • Catherine Russell • Sarah Sample  • Mary Schendlinger • Patricia Schwartz • Eva Sharell • Jeanne Shaw • Gillian Smith •  Helen Sonthoff • Elf Stainsby ♦ Eunice Stronach • Johanna Teboekhorst ♦ Sarah Tessaro  • Susan Thompson • Mildred Tremblay • Michele Valiquette • Janet Vesterback • Helen Walter • Philippa Ward ♦ Christine Waymark • Jill Webb • Shelagh Wilson ♦ Mary  Winder ♦ Mary Woo Sims • Meredith Woods • Susan Wortman • Katharine P. Young ♦  Cecilia Yung  When editing articles, we change common phrases and words that are unawarely  racist, ableist or classist. As feminists, we  are mindful of how sexist English usage is  and of the challenge of creating strong, non-  sexist styles of writing. We also accept the  challenge of writing while mindful of racism,  ableism and classism.  For stories about women of colour, we  try to find a woman of colour reporter. Because Kinesis has historically been a paper  where the editor, production workers, writers and readers are predominantly white  women, there are relatively few women of  colour at the paper. We believe that must  change, which means Kinesis must change.  Women of Colour are organizing at Kinesis. On Monday, September 17, Terrie Hamazaki and Gwen Bird welcome all  women of colour interested in volunteering  at the paper. This informal meeting is at  7 pm at our office, (#301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver) and is open to all volunteers  past, present and future. For more information, call Terrie at 321-0575 or Gwen at 255-  2460.  Another new development at Kinesis:  The Board has decided to hold an evening  planning meeting each month, in order to  devote more time and involve more people in the paper's processes. Volunteers  are invited to attend the Writers Meeting  September 5th, 7 pm in our offices. This will  be the time to perform the "post-partum"  evaluation of the last issue and conceive  the next issue. Story line-ups, photo assignments, graphic concepts, and news tips are  all part of the process of the birth of Kinesis and we welcome volunteers to take part.  It is time for sorrowful goodbyes to some  Kinesis volunteers. Tarel Quandt, Lisa  Schmidt, Shelly Quick and Susan O'Donnell  are moving to the other side(s) of Canada.  They have all helped tremendously with the  paper over the past months/years and we  have really appreciated them—and we will  miss them. But who knows, you may soon  see bylines from our Halifax Bureau.  All is not sad 'though. Kinesis managed to grab some new volunteers and to  them we say welcome and "there's no escape, we have your phone numbers." Writing for the first time are Diane Dupuis,  Yvonne Peters and Rachel Andrews. Wielding X-acto knives and other creative acts for  the first time are Lotus Miyashita, Simmah  Black, Lori Friesen, Jane Pelletier and Cer-  rolyn. Wielding a decrepid outdated computer program for the first time was Ginger  Plum—temporary typesetter for this issue  while Joni Miller was on holidays.  And last, but certainly not least, we welcome Chau Tran—VSW's new Bookkeeper  and Circulation Coordinator. Chau is taking on some of the most important behind-  the-scenes responsibilities at Kinesis.  Women of  Colour  Caucus  Want to write a story?  Design a graphic? Snap a picture?  Sit on the Editorial Board?  We welcome all Women of Colour  interested in volunteering at Kinesis.  Our first meeting is on  Monday, September 17  At 7 pm at #301-1720 Grant Street  (at Commercial Drive)  Open to all volunteers past,  present and future.  For more information,  please call Terrie Hamazaki at 321-0575  or Gwen Bird at 255-2460  KINESIS  September 90 /////////////////////^^^^^  News  Abortion coalition  "Feminist, woman"  criteria dropped?  by Nancy Pollak  On September 16, the BC  Coalition for Abortion Clinics  (BCCAC) will consider a restructuring proposal that will  eliminate "feminist" and "woman"  from the criteria for serving on its  steering committee.  Under the present structure,  11 of the steering committee's 20  positions (a   50 percent-plus-one  formula) must be held by female representatives from feminist  groups or groups whose main focus  is pro-choice. The other nine positions are open to individuals of either gender.  Under the proposed new structure, any representative from any  member group may form the 50  percent-plus-one majority. The individual positions will remain unchanged.  The proposal is being put forward by the steering committee—  not all of whom agree with its details.  The September meeting will  also consider a new basis of unity  for the three-and-a-half year old  coalition, one which will shift the  BCCAC's focus from establishing feminist reproductive health  clinics—to a broader, more diffuse  pro-choice agenda-  No problem to date  This debate about the composition  of the steering committee is one of  several the BCCAC has faced. At  its inception, feminist groups such  as the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective and the Vancouver Status of Women argued against any  individuals serving on the steering  committee because of their lack of  accountability.  Thompson,    Roseanne   Mitchell,  and   Will   Offley   (who   has   re-  Wendy Frost was part of the  original re-structuring committee  struck last year (it eventually  merged with the steering commi-  tee) and supports the proposed  changes. According to Frost, the  committee's proposal to eliminate  the "feminist" criterion for groups  arose for a number of reasons.  "There was no consensus on  what constituted a 'feminist'  group," said Frost. "Some said  it was an "autonomous" women's  group, but where did that leave  women's committees in unions, or  women's committees in student  groups? "  Frost also referred to practical  difficulties. The steering committee always had trouble filling the  slots allotted for women's and pro-  choice groups. "Women's groups  are in crisis, and they're having  a hard time finding someone to  serve," said Frost.  As well, the BCCAC is striving to be a broad-based coalition. One argument for eliminating the feminist criterion is that  the present structure, in the words  of the steering committee, sets up  "two levels of political qualification for participation in the BCCAC," a concept the committee  evidently finds problematic.  The steering committee believes  that removing the guarantee of  feminist leadership will not diminish that leadership. "We couldn't  see what the threat would be,"  said Frost. "There hasn't been a  problem to date."  The BCCAC membership may  not agree to eliminate the feminist criterion. At a general meeting  last February, the idea of reducing  At a general meeting last February  the idea of reducing the feminist  majority... ran into heavy opposition.  Others argued that individuals supplied an important source  of energy and broadened the  coalition's base. In the end, the  fledgling coalition embedded into  the steering committee structure a  feminist—and female—majority.  The BCCAC steering committee has had only two male members in its history. The current committee consists of representatives from Rape Relief, the  NDP Women's Committee, the  Canadian Federation of Student's  Women's Committee, the Canadian Congress of Women, the  Communist Party Women's Committee, and the India Mahila Association.  Individual members are Wendy  Frost, Jackie Larkin, Jackie Ainsworth, Helene Wizotski, Liz Bennett,   Janet     Vesterback,     Joy  the feminist majority to one third  (from one half-plus -one) ran into  heavy opposition.  Eliminating the "woman" criterion for the steering committee  should also get a rough ride. Kim  Zander, the Communist Party  Women's Committee representative on the steering committee,  disagrees with the proposal. "I believe the leadership must remain  with women and that it must be  enshrined in the structure," said  Zander. "And why should we fear  saying that? It's going to be the  women anyway."  Zander has no problem with  dropping the femimst criterion but  beheves the BCCAC needs to attract women from other organizations: "Women in trade unions,  women in community groups—we  need  them and  they need us."  Maintaining the woman criterion  is one way to enlist their participation.  In its proposal, the majority of  the steering committee describes  the existing restrictions on men  "as a mistake, and another attempt at a structural solution to a  (potential) pohtical problem."  Frost beheves that women's—  and feminist—leadership of the  BCCAC can be ensured by other-  than-structural means. "Our basis of unity, our program—those  are the ways to [maintain feminist  leadership]," said Frost.  Basis of unity  The proposed overhaul of the basis  of unity reflects the BCCAC's pohtical work in the last year—and  its difficult experience setting up  Vancouver's Everywoman's Health  Centre (EWHC).  The current basis of unity held  "the establishment of women's reproductive health clinics throughout the province " as the coalition's primary aim, with an interim goal of a Vancouver abortion  chnic adhering to "feminist concepts."  In a nutshell, the new basis  of unity calls for the BCCAC  to build "a broad-based pohtical  movement which undertakes pohtical action and public education  and which assists in establishing  abortion services for women."  The shift from clinic-building  to movement-building comes at a  time when the BCCAC can claim  to have acheived the first, and to  have assumed leadership of the  second.  "We ought to do pro-choice  work wherever we can," said  Wendy Frost."This will give us the  scope to provide different levels of  support to all kinds of abortion  services."  Kim Zander sees the evolution  of the BCCAC into the pohtical  sphere as "crucial ... there is a  real demand for us to take up the  issues." The coalition gained two-  thirds of its 1,500 members last  summer—during Chantal Daigle's  crisis. (The BCCAC also has 50  member groups.)  Zander also cited the immense  toll of setting up the EWHC:  issues around structure, staffing,  power dynamics between the two  bodies, and money. "The BCCAC  does not have the resources to set  up other chnics," said Zander. As,  well, the Lower Mainland-based  coalition should not consider itself  the expert on what other regions  in the province require.  Frost and Zander see the proposed basis of unity as one in  which the BCCAC can lend expertise to other groups seeking to establish chnics, but makes it clear  the coalition's work is mainly to  lend support to any abortion service which is accessible and supportive of women's choices.  Vancouver's annual Gay Pride Parade was boosted this year by  thousands of out-of-town visitors, courtesy of the Gay Gar  Pictured above are some vocal locals.  Commission rife  with problems  by Vera Ritt  Women's groups have growing  concerns that the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies is inaccessible, disorganized and unlikely to fulfill its  mandate.  The Vancouver Women's Reproductive Technologies Coalition,  which formed this spring to coordinate the efforts of Vancouver  feminists wishing to address the  Commission, says women are getting delayed, different—and often  discouraging—information from  the Commission about its activities and deadlines.  In particular, the VWRTC is  concerned that the July 31, 1990  deadline for informing the Commission of an intention to appear  at its hearings was poorly advertised and simply too early.  "Women's groups operate on  shoe-string budgets and rely heavily on volunteer work," said  VWRTC spokesperson Catherine  Martell. "Most find it necessary to  suspend activities during the summer. We need more time to prepare presentations for the Commission." Martell added that some  women waited six weeks or more  for information from the Commission.  The Commission's chair, Dr.  Patricia Baird, responded to the  VWRTC's concern in a letter on  July 25: "H July 31 causes undue problems, we are prepared to  discuss alternative proposals ...  No one who wishes to address the  Commission will be turned away."  In hght of the Commission's  schedule of public hearings, it is  hard to imagine how that will  be. Beginning in September, the  Commission will travel for three  months, with mainly one-day stops  in various cities. Vancouver, Victoria and  Kamloops  (or Prince  George) will each get a day of the  Commission's time (November 28-  30). The VWRTC, which consists  of over 15 groups and individuals,  could easily take up the Commission's schedule of 14 presenters a  day, each allotted 20 minutes.  The VWRTC has been frustrated in its efforts to find out how  the Commission will decide who it  will allow to appear. (The Commission will accept written briefs  from any group or individual.)  On August 1, the Commission  held a by-invitation theme consultation in Vancouver to discuss the definition of reproductive  health. Invitees included women  from the DisAbled Women's Network (DAWN), the Quebec Association of Women's Centres, and  feminist groups from Hahfax and  Winnipeg. An uninvited observer  from the VWRTC found the meeting unfocused and the atmosphere  among the Commissioners "ripe  with dissension."  (The Commissioners (see Kinesis November 1989) come from  a variety of pohtical perspectives,  from anti-choice to feminist.)  There also appear to be problems with the Commission's research program. Dr. Susan Mann-  Trofimenkoff, a respected feminist  historian at the University of Ottawa, was appointed Director of  Research and Evaluation earlier  this summer and resigned soon after for unspecified personal reasons.  Sylvia Gold, a former president of the government-appointed  Canadian Advisory Council on the  Status of Women (CACSW), replaced Mann-Trofimenkoffin mid-  August. During Gold's term at  CACSW, turnover and unhappi-  ness among researchers was high.  The VWRTC welcomes newcomers to its next meeting,  Sept. 12 at 6:80 pm at #301-  1720 Grant St.  KINESIS  September 90 Nasty plant makes nasty exit  by Diane Dupuis  After ten years, the Levolor  blind assembly plant in Burnaby  has closed and is relocating in Alberta.  The move results from a breakdown in contract negotiations between the company and its recently unionized employees.  The International Woodworkers  of America (IWA) Local 357 represents the 120 workers who were  certified earlier this year. Eighty of  the workers are women (approximately 50 are single parents) and  many are immigrants.  The workers decided to unionize because of intolerable working  conditions including harassment of  photo by Doon* Hcnningson  Gutless response to  housing discrimination  by Susan Prosser  In July the Social Credit government introduced Bill 51, legislation intended to deal with one of  the major issues in BC's housing  crisis: discrimination against families with children.  In fact, Bill 51 will saddle these  families with an appeal process  which is unwieldy, time-consuming  and legally faulty. As well, the Socreds have failed to address other  root causes of the crisis, such as  the lack of rent control, demolition  of affordable housing and discrimination based on income.  Bill 51 amends the Residential Tenancy Act (RTA) to disallow discrimination against renters  with children, in some cases. However, the BC Human Rights Act  (HRA), which fails to prohibit discrimination on the basis of age,  family status or income, remains  unchanged.  Laura Stannard of the Vancouver Tenants Rights Coalition sums  up the major problem with Bill 51:  "What raises the eyebrows of tenant groups, human rights groups  and children's advocacy groups is  that the RTA has never had jurisdiction over discrimination in  housing. Discrimination in housing  on the basis of race, rehgion, gender and physical disabihty has always been covered by the Human  Rights Act."  Why did the government fail  to amend the HRA and bring  it into Une with the Canadian  charter? Government spokesperson Ian Fisher of Labour and Consumer Affairs would not comment  in Minister Norm Jacobson's absence, saying simply, "I'm not a  lawyer. I can't advise you."  Under the amended act, a family refused housing because they  have children would file a complaint under the RTA at the Human Rights Council "as though  it were nled...under section 5 of  the Human Rights Act." Section  5 does not mention discrimination  on the basis of age or family status  which, in Stannard's view, "leaves  a legal loophole the size of Minister Norman Jacobson's house."  An even greater concern is  that pursuing a discrimination  complaint could take up to two  years because the Human Rights  Branch lacks the Residential Tenancy Board's powers of expediency  and its power to grant an order of  Ostensibly, Bill 51 prohibits discrimination by landlords against  tenants with children, but it contains several exemptions: buildings  designated for seniors, for disabled  people and any building which the  Lieutenant Governor might decide  to exempt, are not required to accept families with children. Parents with disabled children and  disabled parents will be particularly vulnerable.  Mark Tatchell of the Human  Rights Branch readily admits  there are uncertainties with interpretation. For example, in the  Downtown Eastside of Vancouver,  the age requirement for seniors'  buildings is 10 years lower than the  limit the new legislation exempts,  and it is unclear how the legislation will impact there.  As Karen Gallagher, Director of  Housing Services for the YWCA,  says: "Either it is illegal to discriminate against families or it is  not: the inclusion of this gigantic  loophole suggests that it is not."  Finally, according to Bill 51,  tenants will now have 24 months,  rather than the present one  month, to vacate premises where  the birth or adoption of a child  causes them to exceed the occupancy of those premises. This  amounts to business as usual: for  24 months the baby is protected  by law, but then it is abandoned  into the above morass.  Bill 51 will come into effect  on September 1 and groups hke  the Tenants Right Coalition and  the BC Pubhc Interest Advocacy  Centre will watch closely as the  first complaints are filed. Tatchell  says they cannot anticipate the degree of landlord compliancy, but  chances are the government's shck  ad campaign has fooled everyone  except the landlords into believing  it's serious about dealing with discrimination against children and  parents as tenants.   the women by male supervisors.  Intimidation tactics, including  verbal abuse and physical threats,  were common. Worker Sharon  Berryman cites one example: "The  plant manager smashed a head  rail over one woman's desk and  scared the hfe out of her." Another  woman was severely reprimanded  for taking time off for a doctor's  appointment.  The plant ran on a point/quota  system: workers were paid according to the number of pieces assembled during their shifts. H someone was late or made a mistake she  would be penalized points which  would come off her quota and thus  lower her pay. There was never a  set wage.  The union's proposal for a first  contract included a set wage and  an elimination of compulsory overtime. Berryman says, "We just  wanted to be treated hke human  beings."  Turnover at the company was  high. Berryman was 25th (out of  120) on the seniority hst after  working at the plant for just four  years.  MA Local vice-president Joe  LeClair said while there is nothing  to prevent companies from moving out of the province, "there is a  need to promote legislative penalties for employers who do this. It is  not acceptable that companies can  shut down."  LeClair describes Levolor's owner, Canadian Window Coverings, as a turnaround company  which has made "gunny sacks  full of money" off their workers.  CWC has plants in Toronto and  Montreal. LeClair thinks the company was concerned that workers  in those plants would unionize if  Women Unite:  Vancouver was successful and they  didn't want to deal with that.  A company spokesperson said  no one was available for comment.  A previous attempt to unionize  (with the Teamsters) in 1988 was  also squashed by management.  The BC Federation of Labour  is bringing a motion at their next  meeting to declare Levolor products 'hot.' The motion is expected  to pass.  The IWA has instituted a placement committee to find jobs for  the Levolor workers. (So far four  have found new jobs.) A severance  package has also been negotiated  including one and a half week's  We just want  to be treated  like human beings  pay for every year of employment,  remaining on the company's medical plan for four months and any  other monies owed to the workers.  LeClair said, "it is costing them a  fortune to do this."  Says Berryman: "I think the  union did everything it could. The  company did not want a union  and wouldn't have negotiated with  any union. They told us beforehand that if we joined a union they  would leave. We have no regrets  about unionizing."  Take back  the night  by Anne Dolina  In 1978 an ad hoc group calling themselves the 'Fly By Night'  CoUective organized the first Take  Back The Night in Vancouver.  Women came to a beach in the  West End dressed in witchy costumes, carrying an effigy which  they set alight. They were protesting violence against women on the  streets of this city—and the fact  that women are never safe from  sexist attacks.  We have marched in many parts  of the city over the years—from  new Westminster to KitsUano. Always colourful, always loud, we  ask no man for permission to walk  in the street—no pohce "protection" and no government permission. We come out of our kitchens  and bedrooms—out from behind  locked doors. Our rage and our  coUective voices have echoed the  screams of many women.  In this time of anti-feminist  backlash, we hope that many  feminists—old and new—wUl gather on September 21 at 7:30 p.m.  in Oppenheimer Park (at PoweU  St. and Jackson St. in Vancouver) to renew ourselves and remind  the world that violence against  women, from murder and rape to  the exploitation of our bodies for  profit, must end.  Since 1981, Vancouver Rape  ReUef and Women's Shelter and  other member groups of the Canadian Association of Sexual Assault  Centres have coordinated Take  Back The Night marches from  coast to coast and in the US on the  third Friday of September.  Bring your banners, bring your  noisemakers, bring -your friends.  Women Unite—Take Back The  Night.  4 KJlNbSIS  September 90 NEWS  ///////////////////^^^^^  Getting bashed  in Montreal  by Su;  i O'Donnell  Determined not to be sUenced, Montre'al  lesbians and gay men are mobilizing public  support for their fight against the brutality of Montre'al pohce. A series of confrontations have taken place in Montreal streets,  including one that turned violent when city  poUce officers forcibly broke up demonstrators gathered to protest the brutality of pohce officers who raided a lesbian and gay  party mid-July.  Patrizia Tavormina of Lesbians and Gays  Against Violence (LGV) told Kinesis the  Montre'al lesbian and gay community wUl  not tolerate any more pohce brutality. Referring to the pohce raid that sparked the  protests, Tavormina said: "This time they  hit on the wrong group of lesbians and  gays."  The raid occurred at 4:30 am Sunday,  July 15, when Montreal pohce crashed a  party at a downtown warehouse, claiming  they were responding to a complaint about  the noise. (A few days later, poUce admitted  no such complaint was made.) When pohce  found alcohol on the premises and no permit to seU it, they ordered the 300 party-  goers to leave.  One man tried to return to the buUding  to retrieve his jacket and was met with a  pohce nightstick. Pohce reinforcements arrived. About 50 officers—half of whom had  removed their name badges in direct violation of regulations—started marching on  the crowd assembled outside.  Taunting the party-goers with cries of  "tappette" (fag) and "bitch," some officers  hit them with their nightsticks and slammed  their faces against the sidewalk. Others  threatened to shoot anyone who tried to  run away. Pohce arrested eight people (two  at gunpoint) on various charges and injured  fifty.  Later that Sunday, 400 people gathered  in protest outside a pohce station in the  Gay ViUage. The protesters had three demands: the withdrawal of aU charges; an inquiry into the pohce brutahty; and lesbian  and gay participation on a pohce committee that consults with minority groups. A  pohce spokesperson assured the group that  their demands would be considered and responded to at noon the foUowing day. The  crowd dispersed.  The next day, about 300 protesters gathered outside another downtown pohce station to await the response. Shortly after  noon, when it appeared that no response  was forthcoming, the protesters moved to  the street, sat and formed a hnked circle,  blocking traffic.  Pohce responded by sending out a riot  squad of about 70 officers from three stations. Again, many of the officers had removed their identification badges; some  wore latex gloves.  Montrealer Ming Dinh, in her official  complaint to the Montreal Pohce Commission, described what happened next: "The  pohce marched toward the demonstrators  and began by throwing their belongings  aside. I watched as they pounded unresisting demonstrators with their clubs before  dragging them away to the wagons or to the  station. I saw demonstrators who were resisting being moved, by holding on to each  other, beaten on the shoulders, arms, body  and groin area before being dragged apart.  Some of the demonstrators who were at  tempting to get up on their own were repeatedly beaten down with clubs before being aUowed—or dragged—up.  "I saw people staggering away from the  square doubled over or rubbing injured  arms and shoulders. A few were screaming.  Some women were dragged away by their  hair, and I saw people who were talcing pictures get shoved and beaten.  "After clearing the square, the pohce proceeded to clear the street leading to it by  pushing and shoving innocent bystanders  and demonstrators alike, hitting with their  nightsticks if anyone complained. As we  were herded down St-Mathiew toward Ste-  Catherine, we encountered a Black woman  heading toward the metro. She was jabbed  in the stomach without warning by a policeman. Surprised, she cried out: "I can  walk wherever I want to." The policeman's  response was to hit her again and again,  without saying anything, untU she turned  around and walked back the way she came."  This time, pohce arrested 48 people and $  125 were injured. Back, head and groin 2  injuries were common, as were disloca- ■§  tions, sprains and abrasions. Twenty sought K  hospital treatment; two were hospitalized t  overnight. Some of those arrested sustained 1  their worst injuries in pohce custody.  Please see LGV page 6  WARNING: Montre'al lesbians will fight police brutality  Teachers' unions  Office workers organize  by Jean Rands  Employees of local teacher unions in BC  have met opposition from some teacher-  employers in their bid to unionize and, as  a result, had to withdraw their certification  appUcation last spring.  The employees have joined the Union  of Teachers' Federation Employees (UTFE)  which already represents approximately 120  janitorial, clerical and technical employees  of the BC Teachers' Federation (BCTF) in  Vancouver.  WhUe the employees of the BCTF have  been organized for almost ten years, employees of local teachers' associations (affiliated to BCTF) have no union representation. Each of BC's 75 school districts  has a local teachers' association, a union  which represents teachers in negotiations  with that school board. The majority of  these associations are too smaU to hire clerical staff. There are 28 teacher unions that  have offices and employ support staff on a  regular basis.  In most of these, there is only one clerical worker (caUed secretary, office manager,  or executive secretary) who works closely  with the elected fuU-time president of the  teachers' union. The teachers hold elections  annually, so the clerical workers' immediate  supervisors—and often working conditions,  job descriptions and procedures—are subject to frequent change.  "We began organizing mostly because  there's no job security without a union,"  said Cathy Brugge, who works in the Maple  Ridge Teachers' Association office.  "There are women out there who are  completely alone, with no one to back them.  We need a union so we can stand up for ourselves and for each other. Some of us have  good benefits, while others have none at aU,  and some have very poor working conditions. We need a union contract so that everyone concerned wUl be treated fairly."  The employees began organizing shortly  after the teachers unionized themselves in  1988. A majority joined UTFE, and the  union appUed for certification May 8, 1990,  under Section 40 of the Industrial Relations  Act which aUows for coUective bargaining  with multiple employers.  Under this section of the Act, unanimous consent of aU 28 employers must be  given or the Industrial Relations CouncU  wUl reject the union appUcation. Before the  Labour Code was changed in 1984, consent  of a majority of employers would have been  sufficient to aUow a vote of employees. It's  not surprising that Social Credit labour law  makes it difficult for women office workers to  organize, but it's disappointing that other  union members seem prepared to use such  a law to prevent their own employees from  winning union rights.  One-third of the employers refused consent which meant the appUcation would  have faUed. Consenting employers were:  Central Okanagan, Abbotsford, Langley,  Surrey, Richmond, Vancouver Elementary,  Vancouver Secondary, Maple Ridge, West  Vancouver, PoweU River, Greater Victoria, Saanich, Cowichan, Nanaimo, Alberni,  Courtenay, CampbeU River, Vancouver Island North, and Shuswap.  Those who did not consent were: Vernon,  Kamloops, ChiUiwack, Delta, Burnaby, Coquitlam, North Vancouver, Prince George,  and Sooke.  BC teachers have long supported the concept of unions for themselves and for other  employees. They have also supported the  ideals of the rights of women and have vigorously pursued those ideals internaUy, at  the school level and within their own union,  the BCTF.  ExternaUy, the BCTF Status of Women  Committee has actively participated in programs to promote the rights of women in aU  aspects of their hves. It is hoped that the  concern which teachers have been expressing for fair, equitable treatment of women  in general wiU now extend specificaUy to the  democratic right of their clerical employees  to seek union representation.  The teachers' association employees have  not given up. They have formed a sublocal  of UTFE and elected an executive. This faU,  they wUl have another organizing drive and  they are confident they wUl again sign up a  strong majority of local association employees.  They hope that by getting information  out to teachers they wiU succeed in convincing aU 28 teacher unions who have employees to consent to the multi-employer unit  this time.  Organizing 40 workers in 28 offices  scattered across the province is a difficult and expensive proposition. If you  would like to help out with costs like  conference calls and mailings, please  send a donation to UTFE Sublocal  Organizing Fund, c/o Cathy Brugge,  Sublocal President, 81279 Dewdney  Trunk Road, RR 7, Mission, BC V2V  6H5. For more info, call Cathy at 462-  9952.  Jean Rands is active in the UTFE.  KINESIS  September 90 Across Canada  WHAT1 S NEWS?  by Linda Choquette  Damages  awarded for  abortion firing  An employer has been ordered to pay  damages of $2,400 to a young woman who  was fired because she decided to have an  abortion. The BC CouncU of Human Rights  ruled in July that Donna Dodd was discriminated against on the basis of her sex.  Dodd, who had worked for Coquitlam's  Helping Hands Agency for eight months,  told the councU she learned she was pregnant in June 1988, decided to seek an abortion, and asked her employer for two weeks  off. Nettie Helgason, who runs the home-  making agency, asked Dodd to consider continuing her pregnancy and putting the baby  up for adoption.  "I went home, thought about it and decided to stick to what I was going to do in  the first place," Dodd testified. The next  day she told Helgason of her decision by  phone, and that evening Helgason came  to where Dodd was working, and told her  "what you are doing is murder." Dodd was  never called in for work after that.  Helgason testified that she had "no problem with Dodd's work," and that relations  had been amiable untU the incident.  Dodd, now 20, said she has had no luck  finding work in the past two years, partly  because of the trauma of the firing. "You  can't do that to people," she said.  Motherhood  costs too much,  holds women back  Motherhood sets women back in their careers and makes them vulnerable to poverty,  the National CouncU of Welfare says. It  warns that Canada's population wUl continue to decline unless famiUes receive more  support from government.  "Given the enormous cost of motherhood  for most women, it is amazing that so many  of them continue to have chUdren," said a  report on women and poverty released mid-  August.  Louise Dulude, a former president of the  National Action Committee on the Status  of Women, wrote the report. Dulude hsted  chUd-care responsibiUties, labour market inequities, marriage breakdown and widowhood as the main causes of women's poverty.  In 1987, women made up 59 percent of  Canadian adults hving in poverty, the same  proportion as in 1975.  The report cited the lack of low-  cost chUd-care, discrimination by employers against mothers and spouses who don't  help in chUd-rearing as reasons why mothers must limit their paid work to part-time  or part-year.  "A very large proportion of women who  have chUdren stiU leave the labour force for  relatively long periods, and many of those  who return take part-time jobs," said the report. "This cannot faU to have very damaging consequences for their capacity to earn  a decent hving and become financiaUy independent."  Calling for a "complete transformation" in Canadian attitudes to parenthood,  the council urged the Canadian Radio-  Television and Telecommunications Commission to enforce guidelines on sex-role  stereotyping in media where women tend to  be depicted as sex objects or care-givers and  men who care for chUdren as "ridiculous" or  "saintly."  The report also recommended more government money for chUd-care and the full  indexing of family aUowance payments.  More misogyny  as judge uses  polar bear logic  In a June ruhng, yet another Northwest  Territories judge revealed his misogyny by  giving a man a hght sentence for assaulting his wife because she wore, in the judge's  opinion, a provocative t-shirt.  "Women are extremely upset by the concept of provocation by what someone is  wearing being a justification of assault,"  said activist Lynn Brooks.  "This was hke being punched in the gut,"  said Brooks, chairperson of the YeUowknife-  based Society Against FamUy Abuse.  In the judge's opinion, wearing a t-shirt  depicting cartoon polar bears having sex  could imply "at least the possibihty of sexual perversity and promiscuity."  Wearing the shirt "could be understood  by the other spouse as an imminent threat,"  that the woman might commit adultery,  said the judge.  The woman, Joann Oakley, put the shirt  on after she and husband Wayne returned  home from an evening out. He demanded  she take the shirt off, she refused, and he  assaulted her.  Judge Mark de Weerdt fined the man but  said he would have considered a jaU term  had Joann Oakley not worn the shirt. The  Crown wUl appeal the decision.  This is the second NWT judge to be  involved in controversy in a case of violence against women. Last December, judge  Michel Bourassa told a reporter that rape  in the North is not as bad as rape in southern Canada.  **$&  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you - proofreading  Kinesis.  Please call  Sleeky long-haired  foxes bite back  at brewery bull  A summer advertising campaign by Mol-  son Breweries has been derailed by femimst  groups whose complaints have moved the  Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) to puU  posters from the subways. The poster, part  of a campaign entitled "Canadian WUdlife"  shows a woman in a halter-top, holding a  can of beer. The caption reads, "the rare,  long-haired fox."  The ad concept was introduced in a television commercial that used a Canadian  wUdlife theme featuring men as a moose, a  wolf and a loon, and a woman as a fox. "The  fox is an attractive creature with sleek hair  and lovely colouring," is one of the statements made in the Molson advertising copy.  Responding directly to a complaint from  MediaWatch, TTC's marketing manager  agreed that the posters were sexuaUy exploitive and in violation of new TTC guidelines.  Molson stated the ads may be used elsewhere in Canada where alcohol advertising  on public transit is permitted.  WorldWatch  cites deaths from  illegal abortions  A new study released in July estimates as  many as 200,000 women die each year from  Ulegal abortions. The Washington-based  Worldwatch Institute says that restrictions  on pregnancy termination do not curb abortions, they only cause more deaths.  According to the report, titled The  Global Politics of Abortion, 50 miUion  abortions—half of them Ulegal—are performed around the world each year.  LGV from page 5  Since the arrests, LGV organizers have  worked around the clock to keep the struggle in the public spotlight. The largest  demonstration was held July 29, when 2,000  supporters raUied in sweltering 34-degree  temperatures outside the main pohce station in Old Montreal and marched to a  park frequented by many lesbians and gay  men. SoUdarity demonstrations were held  the same day in Toronto, Washington and  New York.  To date, Montre'al pohce officials have  not made a public statement about the violence but a pohce internal investigation  is underway. LGV is considering legal action against the City of Montreal and is demanding inclusion on the agenda of the PoUce and Community Relations Conference  in Montreal in September.  LGV is soliciting funds for their expenses and for the legal fees of those  charged. Their address is: LGV Legal  Fund, c/o Centre communautaire gais-  lesbiennes de Montreal, C.P. 476, succ.  C, Montreal H2L 4K4  "A moral smokescreen effectively obscures the huge public-policy, health, human-rights and social costs of restrictive  abortion pohcies," said the report's author  Jodi Jacobson.  Abortion should be a legitimate family-  planning component "instead of making it  a crime," said Jacobson. In countries where  legalized abortion is included in family-  planning, abortion rates drop rapidly.  When abortion is legal, it is the fourth  choice among types of birth control—after  female sterUization, intrauterine devices  (IUDs) and oral contraceptives. But where  contraceptive methods are inadequate, because of poor information, religious or supply reasons, abortion is the most used birth  control method.  The Worldwatch Institute is an independent research group financed by private  foundations and United Nations organizations  More bucks for  men, more  jobs for women?  In a plan to increase the presence of  women in senior management positions,  two of Canada's largest daily newspapers—  owned by Southam Newspaper Group  (SNG)—have decided to partly tie managers' salaries and advancement to the efforts they make in the recruitment, development and promotion of women. However, and sort of quota system was expUc-  itly ruled out.  The concept could become pohcy at aU  16 SNG dailies across Canada. It is being  tested at The Gazette in Montreal and the  Ottawa Citizen.  The plan is one of 10 recommendations  made by a task force on women's opportunities launched in 1988. The task force,  struck to probe barriers to women's advancement within SNG, revealed a serious  lack of women in senior positions.  Other recommendations in the report say  SNG should:  • ensure short hsts for promotion and recruitment to senior management include  at least one woman  • establish or support on-premise or nearby  day- care  • circulate a pohcy statement declaring its  commitment to "fuU equahty of women"  • appoint a full-time equal opportunity coordinator  The Gazette's Joan Fraser, who co-  chaired the task force, said she is "extremely  pleased," and called the compensation tie  "clearly one of the core recommendations."  Commenting on the lack of a quota system, SNG president RusseU MiUs acknowledged that the compensation recommendation could end up as a meaningless token,  but said he was determined not to let that  happen.  John Fisher, president and chief executive officer for Southam Inc. which owns  SNG, expressed what he called a "personal  view," stating "I'm somewhat reluctant to  accept something that is a force feeding, to  work for any sort of ratios...I think we want  to level the playing field, not tip it the other  way for the catch-up."  Sources: Globe and Mail; Vancouver  Sun  KINESIS  September 90 NEWS  x>^^^^^^^^^^^^  Pay equity  Limited, even dangerous, response  by Debra J. Lewis  Everyone supports pay equity. Or so it  seems. Polls show that the majority of the  population supports it. Popular magazines  proclaimed it as the "working women's issue of the eighties." Most provinces have  some form of pay equity legislation or program, and even BC's Social Credit government has announced that pay equity is on  the agenda for the pubUc service.  However, an increasing number of feminists are criticizing pay equity programs as  a limited—and even dangerous—response  to women's unequal pay. In Canada, the  term 'pay equity' has come to mean a very  specific kind of reform. Although it is just  one possible response to the broader issue of  wage discrimination, in recent years it has  eclipsed other strategies.  Many women's hopes are raised by the  promise of pay equity. And, indeed, some  women do get some money from pay equity schemes. But pay equity programs do  not meet women's demands for equal wages.  They may, in fact, limit future possibilities for organizing women around the issue  of wage discrimination. To understand why,  we need to be clear about what pay equity  What Is Pay Equity?  All pay equity programs to date have five  characteristics in common:  1) They are proactive programs.  Proactive means that employers are required by law to take action to implement  a pay equity plan. Previous legislation to  address wage discrimination (such as the  Canadian Human Rights Act provisions for  equal pay for work of equal value) have  been complaints-based; that is, individual  employees (or their unions) have been required to identify discrimination and make  a complaint.  2) They are based on a comparison  of job content and require some form of  job evaluation. Comparison of job content  is done by assessing the skiU, effort, respon-  sibUity and working conditions in male and  female dominated job classes. This means a  job evaluation plan must be used. Job evaluation plans are generaUy extremely compU-  cated, and often controUed by management  consultants. Using them assumes that it is  both possible and desirable to determine the  "value" of work as a basis of pay. It also assumes (wrongly) that historicaUy there has  been a rational means through which male  wages have been determined, and that it is  only necessary for women to fit ourselves  into this rational system.  4) They are phased-in programs. Pay  equity programs take years to implement.  In ah existing legislation, the shortest time  period for employees to receive their final  wage adjustments is six years—two years to  determine and implement a job evaluation  plan and four years to phase in wage increases. For other workers, the time period  may be much longer.  5) They claim to end gender-based  wage discrimination in the workplace.  3) They address wage discrimination  only within individual workplaces. Pay  equity programs only consider people who  work for the same employer when making  comparisons. While there is some variation  in how employer is defined, people who work  for different employers cannot be compared.  Although feminists who support pay equity programs often speak of them as only  a first step toward addressing wage discrimination, many others (including governments who pass the programs, the media,  pay equity consultants and others) most often present pay equity as the solution to the  Then there's wage equity...  by Anne Harvey  Wage Equity means closing the wage  gap between women and men.  Pay Equity is one method of closing the  wage gap. It means using job evaluation to  close the gap. Wage equity—as a strategy—  means simply closing the gap.  Pay women more.  There's power in those words and anti-  feminists know it. Wage equity, systematically eUminating the 20 percent wage gap  which social statisticians can show is the  result of gender discrimination, would lead  to a fundamental restructuring of society. A  feminization of society. A profound shift in  our value system.  H we earned more money (and welfare  rates were indexed to the average wage),  daycare would be easier to arrange. Women  who suffer violence in the home would not  be blocked from leaving because of financial  considerations. There would be less incentive for employers to keep us in boring jobs.  Pensions would be higher because they are  hnked to wages. We'd have more energy to  lobby for choice and for feminist education  in schools.  H we win wage equity, men wUl lose financially relative to women, and status and  power relations wUl change.  In absolute dollars, men wUl not lose. In  social benefits, they wUl gain, as we aU wUl.  Most family units now, whether heterosexual or gay, need two incomes to pay for rent  or mortgage. Wage equity wUl mean families  with chUdren, whether they include one or  two adults, wUl hve above the poverty hne.  So how do we get wage equity? We're going to need legislation: wage equity legislation.  Who's going to get us that legislation?  Now there's a question.  Individual unions might have some success bargaining wage equity for workers in  particular industries. Health care workers  in the hospitals for example, have a good  chance of making progress.  The BC Federation of Labour (BCFL)  however, has not moved on this issue, and  no action wUl be taken unless there is pressure from women trade unionists in the next  few months.  The big white coUar union, the BC Government Employees Union has decided that  legislation—any kind of equity legislation—  would interfere with their bargaining rights.  So despite the fact the BCFL passed a resolution at its 1988 convention to "form a  community/labour coaUtion to educate and  lobby for pay equity legislation..." nothing  has been done to begin a lobby.  The provincial New Democratic Party  has taken a position in support of equal  pay rates, but they have not decided how or  when they would bring this about. For the  NDP to implement legislation we wUl need  a large public lobby to offset the heavy pressure they wUl surely feel from big and perhaps smaU business, as soon as they say the  words wage equity.  The Socreds have announced they wUl  bring in a pay equity pohcy. We can expect  it not to have any substance and to apply  to a very narrow group of women. They wUl  use it to try and buy the women's vote in  the next election.  If we are going to win wage equity, we  need a lobby of feminists from the women's  movement and the trade union movement  to raise the issue in the next provincial election.  You can join in the lobby by contacting: Anne Harvey - 438- 3148. She is I  the former president of the Office and I  Technical Employee's Union  problem—that is, once we have done a pay  equity program, the problem is solved and  wage discrimination is a thing of the past.  What's Wrong With Pay Equity?  Despite the limitations of pay equity programs, many women have supported them  as a first step in addressing wage discrimination.  But is it such a good first step after aU?  Some feminists are realizing that there are  at least four good reasons why we should rethink pay equity and develop other strategies for addressing wage discrimination.  The first problem with pay equity is that  it is a procedural reform. This means that  pay equity describes a process but promises  no result. So once a job evaluation is carried out and wage adjustments are made,  pay equity can be said to be accomplished—  whether the results are good, bad or indifferent. Trying to criticize the results of procedural reform afterward is rather Uke trying to nail jeUo to the waU. If nothing is  promised, it is difficult or even impossible  to criticize when Uttle is dehvered.  A second problem with pay equity is that  it is based in a comparison of job content. It is, supposedly, to assess the "value"  of men's and women's work and make wage  adjustments accordingly. But people—male  or female—have never been paid "according to the value of their work. Why should  women have to prove that we logicaUy fit  into a system that isn't logical to begin  with?  Furthermore, compeUing women to be  compared to a male standard of value  means that questioning that standard becomes impossible. Pay equity is not the only  reform for which the women's movement  has faUen into this trap. Increasingly, feminists are realizing that when men define  the norm and women are expected to fit in,  women's reaUty gets lost. Some gains wUl  be made for those women who are most hke  men. But when women differ—through the  work we do in the paid labour force, through  domestic labour, or through our responsi-  bUity for chUdren—the gains are generaUy  marginal or non-existent.  Another problem with pay equity is that  it divides women workers. We often hear  of how pay equity can divide women and  men. But, frankly, to me that's a secondary  concern. Far more insidious is the way it  divides women. Pay equity programs offer some limited gains to groups of women  workers who have some degree of relative  power—large groups of unionized women. It  provides a way of buying them off. There is  some debate about how many women are  left out, either because they are completely  excluded or because they cannot use such  legislation effectively.  But there is no doubt of who these women  are—women in small workplaces, the lowest  paid women, immigrant women and women  of colour: the very women who most need  to be included.  The fourth problem with pay equity  that it completely relies on bureaucrats  and technical experts for implementation.  Women are expected to give control over  to the experts. The women who pay equity should benefit become invisible and  certainly demobUized.  Furthermore, the fact that pay equity  is a bureaucratic and technocratic reform  means that it is very expensive. It's costing  literaUy miUions of doUars and thousands of  hours across Canada—time and money that  are not avaUable for other strategies. And  that's the final beauty of pay equity for governments and employers. Playing the pay  equity game simply consumes so many re-  See PAY page 8  KINESIS ^ NEWS  Yes, Virginia  Computers make us  sick and stressed  by Kinesis Writer  In March, 1990, researchers at the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) recommended that the electromagnetic fields  emitted by most computer monitors be designated "probable human carcinogens," a  classification currently shared by the pesticide DDT, dioxin and PCBs.  However, WiUiam Farland, Director of  EPA's Office of Health and Environmental  Assessment, ordered the researchers' recommendations deleted from the report. The  study only suggested and did not prove a  causal Unk, and Farland felt it was "inappropriate" to designate electromagnetic  fields (ELF) as a carcinogen "at this time."  Yet a recent editorial in Macworld  (a computer industry magazine) claims  that extremely low frequency magnetic  emission—the ELF radiation common to  most office VDTs—could become one of  the most troublesome issues for information  technology in the coming decade.  The debate over video monitors and  health risks began soon after computers appeared in workplaces in the 1970s. Since  then researchers, workers (mainly women)  and manufacturers have argued over findings that suggest a Unk between magnetic  radiation and cancers, birth disorders and  other health problems.  Yet another display terminal hazard has  been uncovered by researchers at the University of EvansvUle in Indiana: the connection between women afflicted by headaches  and tension at work and the high frequency  squeal emitted by their computers.  Caroline Dow, one of the EvansvUle researchers, first suspected a hnk when she  was working in a computer laboratory at another university. "These computers bugged  RAY from pay 7  sources that there's very Uttle left for anything else.  Re-Seizing The Issue  I must admit that I often despair about  the future of action on wage discrimination.  Despite some discussion of the need for a  model that is defined by the results, not the  process, httle progress has been made. We  seem trapped inside a framework that forces  women to compare job content and accept  the male standard as the norm. Pay equity has overshadowed other strategies that  could dehver much greater gains for the  women who need them most desperately—  hke a campaign for hvable minimum wage,  for example. And there is currently no nontechnical, non-bureaucratic method for action on wage discrimination.  There are two possible responses to aU of  this. The most common response so far has  been that, since pay equity is the only game  in town, we have to play it. But it wUl be a  huge loss for women if we allow pay equity  to remain the only game in town; if we let  it consume aU the resources we have at our  disposal; if we accept that pay equity is the  And Opening Soon  The Annex  Our Electronic  Publishing storefront  670 Commercial Drive  Telephone: 253-3153  issue and not just one possible solution—  and a limited, even dangerous solution at  that.  The alternative is for women to re-seize  the issue. We need to get out of the box that  says comparing job content is the only way  of addressing wage discrimination. We need  solutions that don't abandon those women  who need them most. And we need strategies that mobihze women, rather than teU  them to put their trust in the experts.  At a conference on pay equity this spring,  one speaker said that the practice of pay equity shows that as a reform it is less radical than supporters had hoped, and less  radical than opponents had feared. But we  have learned that women's economic situation in general, and women's wages in particular, need a more radical response. It's  time to re-think pay equity, to develop a  new agenda on wage discrimination, and to  mobUize women around it.  Debra Lewis is the author of Just Give  Us the Money: A Discussion of Wage Discrimination and Pay Equity published by  the Women's Research Centre. Send  $9 (plus $1.50 handling) to the WRC,  #101 2245 W. Broadway, Vancouver,  BC V6K 2E4  me," said Dow. " I was very, very strung  out. Sometimes I could hear it, sometimes  I couldn't." Her suspicions deepened when  she and her co-workers observed fatigue,  headaches and irritability in women students working with classroom computers.  Dow co-conducted a study in 1987 which  revealed that clerical workers exposed to a  conversation-level sound tended to speed up  and double their errors. " Those are symptoms of high stress," said Dow who pointed  out that women are especiaUy vulnerable to  the squeal from a VDT because women hear  high-frequency sounds better than men.  A study last March showed that women  are affected by the noise even when they do  not consciously hear it.  Avoiding this high-frequency squeal from  computers is nearly impossible at this stage,  since the sound is present in almost aU  North American computers.  DeaUng with low-level magnetic radiation is also problematic. However, it may  be possible to minimize exposure by sitting  at least 60 cm (2 ft) from the front of the  monitor and 122 cm (4 ft) from the sides or  back of a co-worker's monitor.  ^ ^^   Stationery & Office Supplies • Artists' Materials • Copying • Facsimile • Electronic Publishing  ^^5?    1460 Commercial Drive • Ph 255-9559 • Fax 253-3073  3 KJlNbbl J   September 90  Call for Submissions  TRAUMA/SURVIVAL  Deadline: January 15 1991  Trauma means ordeal, disaster, loss, collapse,  its causes ranging from illness, plant closures,  separation, rape, and death to war, genocide,  and the breakdown of the planet's life-support  systems. Grief and chaos follow in its wake,  yet most individuals and many communities  learn to survive, adapt, even flourish.  TRAUMA/SURVIVAL will be a group exhibition  encompassing all media. The curator. Avis  Lang (managing editor of Heresies: A Feminist  Publication on Art and Politics), wishes to  include performance, video, and film as well as  work appropriate to a gallery setting.  The exhibition is open  to British Columbia women artists and  is planned for the fall of 1991.  Please send a maximum of 25 slides/photographs  or 2 videotapes, plus statements, proposals,  outlines of work in progress, resume, SASE etc.  Detailed guidelines available on request.  WOMEN   IN   FOCUS  849 BEATTY STREET        VANCOUVER  (604)682-5848  V6B 2M6 ////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^  Commentary  Prouder and prouder  What roadblocks are really about  by Rachel Andrew  I was a white person once. Or at least I  thought I wanted to be. I grew up in a white  school with white best friends. My grades  were good and I felt different than other  kids from my reserve. Maybe a httle better. I kept thinking this way for quite some  years. Well at least until I found out for myself.  When I scored the highest mark on three  District Math exams and averaged 99 percent, it never occurred to me that maybe  I didn't get any formal recognition because  I was from the Mt. Currie reserve. I know  that my white classmates got plenty of attention when they did well.  In my early teens I always commented,  "I hate Mt. Currie, it's full of drunks, girls  get pregnant at 13, there's too many break-  ins, I can't wait to get out of here." One  day my mom told me off. "You never see  the good things happening here," she said.  "Our people are getting better. More people are sobering up and less girls are having babies. I think you just don't know what  being Native is really about."  After I graduated, I decided to go to  college and take Creative Writing. I kept  on writing "Indian stories." I realized that  I wanted to be recognized as part of our  unique culture. As I learned more and more  about the Lil'wat ways I became prouder  and prouder of who I was. I went to sweat  lodge ceremonies, Stein Festival meetings,  hstened and talked to people about the old  ways and I hstened to our hand drummers.  Sometimes I would sit there and feel a  shiver starting from the bottom of my spine  and moving outwards through my whole  body. It balanced me emotionally, physically and spiritually.  I'm now 21, and I hve with my boyfriend.  I've been home from college for half a year.  I would talk about land claims with my  mother and father, who was Chief for eight  years. I fully supported the Stein Valley Festival, but I never really hke to think about  land claims too seriously. It just seemed hke  a cause that always went nowhere.  It was the entire reason I was frustrated  with all the people on my reserve. Everyday  they woke up knowing that they were forced  to hve in an area, a "reservation," that they  wouldn't have chosen for themselves. My  boyfriend Dean used to say, "reserved for  highways, trains, airports and power hnes."  When I thought about what could be the  core to all the problems Native people have,  I soon realized it came from what the white  people did to us. There were 50,000 people hving in our Lil'wat territory once. Now  there's 1500. The white settlers traded blankets to our people. But our people didn't  know that the blankets were contaminated  with small pox. Thousands and thousands  of people died.  We became a weaker people. Every time  I think about it a ball of hate spits out from  me to the people from Pemberton. Sometimes I feel sorry for white people because  they seem so lost in their materialism and  capitahsm; sometimes I hate their guts for  doing all the things they did to the Native  people.  My parents were put in residential  and my father could only speak Indian. He was seven years old when he was  shipped to Kamloops. Everytime he spoke  a word of Indian they beat him. I hate the  Catholics now. I hate the priests for abusing boys and girls and starting the chain of  sexual abuse amongst our people. That also  leads to alcohol, drug, wife and child abuse.  We've been hving in this white shme ever  since the white man stepped foot on our  land. And can you beheve we welcomed  them with open arms? We fed them during  the depression. "Our people didn't have no  Depression," someone told me. "The white  people almost starved, so we fed them."  My dad told me that we never signed  any treaty stating that we were giving up  any of our land. We were never forced to  or agreed to. Every tree on every logging  truck that passes my house, I thought, belongs to our people. It should never have  been cut from the grounds that we call sacred. There's a huge scar on the mountain  in our front view from our home. I was  told that there were burial grounds and pic-  tographs there that the loggers clear cutted  through. The logging companies were informed of this but do you think they cared?  White people claim to have all kinds of  solutions for the Native people. There is  only one solution that will work. What is  ours is ours. If you want this world to be  saved then put your support into all Native  land claims because we are the people who  are going to save it for you. Forests cannot  be harvested. They do not grow to be 50  feet in one year. The animals have almost no '  place to go. Many are becoming extinct. We  are afraid to eat our traditional foods because we fear the pesticides and other toxics  that have gotten into the animals and fish.  I want to have children. I want to eat  fish and deer and berries. I want to swim  in our rivers and travel to our most sacred  grounds. I want to be able to drink clean  water and breath good air. I want to be able  to sit in the sun and not worry about skin  cancer. But most of all I want to be proud  of who I am. I want to be able to say, "I am  from the Lil'wat Nation."  white people and their ways of hving. We  would have to wake up and stand up to be  the people we once were.  I was watching the evening news when I  saw that the Indians in Quebec had put up  a road block because white people wanted  were going to finally stop being shoved  around and start standing up for our rights.  It started with the poorest people. The  people on welfare who hved day-by-day, hating it. Tension dropped and the feeling of  strength awakened when our hand drum-  U/L'tV/AT   NATION  BloLKAVB  to build a golf course on their land which  had a burial ground on it. A few people  from Mt. Currie already had an information  roadblock on Lilloet Lake road. The next  night I watched the news again and saw that  the pohce had started shooting at the blockade. This made me sick. "Holy shit. Some-  mm+mm*m$m0mm  If you want to know what's going on  then...educate yourself on the environment,  land claims, history of white settlement  and history of Native people.  Dean would talk about his frustrated  feehngs towards white people and the way  they've treated us and our land. I would get  tired of hearing his grievances every time  we were on a long drive together. Finally  after an argument about what Mt. Currie  should do and after we called each other a  few names, I yelled at him, "Don't ever talk  to me about land claims again unless you're  going to do something about it. You have  no right to criticize until you do something  about what's going on." The truth was that  I felt the exact same way as he did, but I  was hoping it would all go away.  My neighbour told me that the Indian  people were just all asleep. Lulled by the  thing big's going to happen. Do you know  what's going to happen? Roadblocks are going to go up all over now," I said to Dean.  Thank God I was right. The next evening  the people from my reserve put up a roadblock. Dean and I went over that night.  There was a fire in the middle of the road  and people were standing around it, talking. The night was warm and everyone was  under the blanket of stars. There was a httle bit of tension in the air.  Everyone knew about the roadblock in  1975 and some people spoke about it. Everyone seemed to feel, oddly enough, happy.  I now realize it was because we knew we  mers began singing. We all knew who we  were and why we were there. We felt hke we  were finally allowing ourselves to be Lil'wat.  Elijah Harper spoke at the Stein Festival  in Tswassen this year and told us that the  Meech Lake Accord did not have any concern for the Aboriginal people. How can a  society such as the French cry discrimination and then turn around and do it in their  own backyard? I recently received a letter  from Quebec saying that the KKK were involved with trying to stir up some trouble between the pohce and the roadblocks  there. You all saw the effigy of an Indian on  the news. You can't deny what is happening. Canada prides itself on being a multicultural society, a society that offers equal  opportunity to all people. All except the  Native, French, gay and other so-called minority groups.  I will tell you that our roadblock has  brought nothing but good news for us. We  can now stand and fight for what is ours.  Now we are on our way up the ladder. It is  a peaceful and nice atmosphere at the roadblock site. We drum, sing, talk and get to  know each other again.  If you want to know what is going on then  my advice to you is educate yourself on the  environment, land claims, history of white  settlement and history of native people. Not  the histories your white people wrote for  you—you've all learned that—but the Native side of the story. Come and see for yourselves.  Rachel Andrew is of the Lil'wat Nation. She may be contacted at P. O. Box  71, Mt. Currie, B.C. VON 2K0  KINESIS International  Romania  This is somebody's child  by Millie Strom  Twenty-four years ago a despot gained  control of an East European country and  turned fetuses into "the property of the  state." Romanian dictator Nicolai Ceaus-  escu, in an effort to increase his country's  population from 22 million to 30 million by  the end of this century, relegated women to  the role of modern-day handmaids.  Abortion, birth control and sex eduction  were forbidden. The 1966 anti-abortion policy was enforced by Ceausescu's "menstrual  pohce" who randomly monitored women's  cycles for signs of pregnancy. Women risked  imprisonment nine months later if a baby  was not delivered. Only women over 45 with  five children under 18 years of age, and  those whose hves were endangered, were  permitted abortions.  Ceausescu's pohcies also severely restricted heat and electricity to a few hours  in the evening, and 80 percent of food products were exported to reduce the foreign  debt. Linda Mezejewski, a Fulbright lecturer in a Romanian university in 1985, observed not only the poverty, but the bleak  mud and concrete coloured, hghtless envi-  The orphans are  not nobody's children  —the majority have  mothers and families.  ronment. She described it as "a world constructed to be asexual, carefully designed to  extinguish any hint of human capacity for  eroticism." Pornography was banned, but  "it was no feminist victory, but rather a sign  of control."  In order to avoid patriotic motherhood,  birth control was smuggled in and illegal  abortions were procured. According to an  official of the Bucharest Medical Hospital, at least 1,000 women a year died of  botched, illegal abortions in the capital city  alone. Passive infanticide pushed the mortality rate so high, the government delayed  birth registrations for a month in order to  avoid documentation of the deaths. "Orphanages" were filled with children abandoned by mothers who struggled to main-  tain the rest of their families. In the few  years before the revolution, Ceausescu permitted the selling of some babies for adoption to Israeli, German and French parents,  again, to help with the debt.  Nicolai and Elena Ceausescu were executed in the December 1989 revolution and  the Council for National Salvation became  the provisional government.  Some of the first changes were to legalize  abortion, permit birth control, turn on the  heat, process visas, and stop the exportation of food. But the orphanages remained  full of children.  These orphans have grabbed the public  attention. Olivia Harrison, Yoko Ono, Linda  McCartney and Barbara Bach Starkey  (whose husbands were the former Beatles)  are raising money through their Romanian  Angel Appeal project. However, the title  song of the album, Nobody's Child, is erroneous and misleading. The orphans are  not nobody's children—the majority have  mothers and families.  Enter the Romanian Orphans Support  Group of Canada, a BC-based group of married couples intent on bringing Romanian  children to Canada to fill the vacancy that  infertility has left in their hves.  Media headhnes portrayed the group's  efforts as: "Mission to save orphans," and  "Mercy trip to Romania;" in other words,  they were heroes. No one could help but feel  happiness as Mark Biech and Coreen Biech  displayed their newly adopted nine-month  old Romanian baby, Catlin when they returned from Romania this summer.  This altruistic image is a microcosm of  society's attitude towards adoption. And a  closer look at the efforts of the Romanian  Orphans Support Group will illustrate the  misogynistic nature of adoption practice.  Instead of separating these children from  their mothers, siblings, families, culture and  country, the money generated by the support group could assist mothers to keep  their families together. While North Americans abhor the horrific conditions in the  orphanages—some children were infected  with the AIDS virus by dirty needles used  during blood transfusions—we do not seem  to react to the horrific conditions the children's mothers and families hved in during Ceausescu's regime.  None of the medical supplies brought by  the Romanian Orphans Support Group contained contraceptives. At a meeting I attended this summer, the group's founder,  Sonya Paterson was queried by a prospective parent who was concerned about the  Don't  be shy  At Kinesis, we know that  writing is a brave act,  availability of babies now that motherhood  was not mandatory in Romania. Paterson  rephed, "Don't worry, the supply [of babies]  won't dry up yet because birth control will  take awhile to become readily available."  Preventing this tragedy is not one of the  aims of the group.  The Biechs addressed the Romanian Orphans Support Group recently to help other  parents on their "adventure to Romania."  Mark Biech made it very clear that to get  cooperation one must tip a lot. Tipping in  Romania does not mean in currency but  rather in products—shampoo and soap are  particularly in need.  birthmother and family, Biech quickly responded: "Well, we'll deal with that when  he's grown."  Perhaps an attractive feature of adopting  a foreign baby, such as Romanian Catlin,  is that the birthmother is so far away. The  country's pohcies have been changing from  week-to-week regarding adoption, and it is  unhkely there will be records to open for a  reunion, let alone for a birthmother to afford to travel to North America in search.  This is unfortunate for adoptees, particularly those adopted at an early age who have  no memory of their history. Jan Lutke, chair  of the Society of Special Needs Adoptive  Biech also advised not to drive to the  birthmother's home in a rented car when  seeking her signature on the adoption  papers—she would know you were a foreigner. Said Biech, she may not want her  child leaving the country or would ask for  monetary compensation for her loss. "This  would be seen as buying babies, and well,  we can't do that."  When asked by adoptee and adoption-  reform filmmaker, Chana Fay Aldrich,  about Catlin maintaining contact with his  Parents (a BC-based group) has said: "It's a  hollow feehng. They have a dual history—a  curiosity that can't be satisfied can become  Women artists discuss their v  and ideas in this beautiful a  thought-provoking publicati.  Subscribe!  4 Issues a year-$24  Gallerie Publications  Box 2901 Panorama Drive  North Vancouver, B.C.  Canada V7G 2A4  Romanian mothers may end up with  some extra cash and goods, but that will  not make up for the loss of a member of  their family. When the best interests of  the mother—to keep her family intact—are  given validity, then we will see an end to the  syndrome of "nobody's children." Adoption  will cease to provide children for couples,  but rather provide homes for children.  i . 1146Commercial* 253-0913  .i  , KINESIS  September 90 International.  Dominican Republic  The traffic in women  by Sergia Galvan  edited & transcribed by Jill Bend  The Hermanas Conference in Harrison Hotsprings (July 6-8) had an  agenda of powerful voices: sisters bringing news of their political movements  in Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean and Canada, to link and contrast  them. This month, Kinesis carries the  message of Sergia Galvan, an activist  from the Dominican Republic. In upcoming months, we will bring more coverage of the Hermanas Conference.  Sergia Galvan has worked for the  last 12 years designing women's programs and women's production co-ops  in the Dominican Republic. As part  of the Dominican Centre of Educational Studies since 1982, she has  headed up the educational program of  the National Peasant Women's Confederation (CONAMUCA) which, with  10,000 members and 600 local branches  nationwide, is the country's largest  women's organization. She also works  with the Dominican-Haitian Women's  Movement (MUDAH), which groups  Haitian women migrant workers periodically employed in the Dominican sugar  harvests.  Galvan is a founding member of the  Dominican Republic Black Women's  Collective. The collective is currently  preparing alternative activities to the  celebration of the "discovery" (conquest) of America, slated for 1992,  and has published the book Women and  Racism in the Dominican Repubhc.  There is little known about the traffic in women which has made more  than 10,000 Dominican women captive  in brothels in different European countries, after having signed on to emigrate  to jobs as domestic workers or entertainment personnel.  In the Caribbean area, you see the evidence of the most brutal violations of human rights and of the violent robbery of the  social, economic, ethnic, and cultural history of the people. It is the landing-pad of  groups of people who were relocated from  their original lands and forced to develop a  new identity on the basis of being whipped.  The Caribbean has been considered one of  the most important regions from a strategic  point of view because of the economic interests held there by the USA—direct investments of over $15,000,000,000.  Equally crucial are the maritime routes  that cross the Caribbean area from the  Panama Canal. These routes, in war times  or in confiictive times, are converted into  supply routes for the military. From 1809  to 1965, the US realized 214 interventions  and aggressions. In total, there are 16 US  military bases in the Caribbean, 7 military  bases in Puerto Rico, and 9 installations of  their reserve army.  It is very difficult for us to find answers to  this situation in the Caribbean because the  US does all that it can to maintain a separation and eliminate communication between  the islands, and communication between the  Caribbean and Africa If you want to go to  Puerto Rico, which is only 25 minutes from  Sato Domingo [capital of the Dominican Republic], you need a US visa. To go to Cuba, "g j  you will have problems because then you  will be accused of communism.  Between Haiti and the Dominican Re- 3 1  public, which are the two parts of the same ||  island, all economic and pohtical plans and  education programs are designed to further  the separation and rivalry between the two  peoples.  At this moment, there is a plan of great  significance for all the Caribbean region—  the celebrations of the 500th anniversary of  the supposed "discovery" of the Americas,  which we don't call a discovery but rather  the first intervention in the Americas. It  bothers us that they try to present this occasion as a meeting between two worlds, and  that the entire Caribbean is hke a mixture  of "cafe con leche," coffee with milk.  This is their way of trying to erase the  few remnants left of our African roots. It is  a way of giving validity to colonialism, and  we still have colonies of Enghsh, French, US  and Dutch dominion.  This is their way...  to erase the remnants...  of our African roots.  In spite of all these problems, women of  the Caribbean have tried to do their best to  overcome the situation and this goes back to  the time of colonization when Black women  aborted as a protest, as a rejection of colonial domination because they were pregnant  from the rapes of the colonial aggressors.  As in all the Latin American countries, women are affected in the worst way  by the conditions. In the Caribbean, 67  percent of women are illiterate. There is  a very high rate of unemployment, and  women are forced into the lowest part of  the productive scalc.the "informal economy." In the Dominican Repubhc, 25 percent of economically-active female population works as domestic servants or, as an  extension of women's work in the home, as  street sellers or textile industry workers.  One of the most alarming examples of  our economic phght is the commercialization and sale of our bodies—the traffic in  women. It is a commerce organized by a  strong network, normally with the support  of the governing class. In Curacao, there  is a site where trafficked women are taken  called Campo Alegre (Happy Camp). It is  a famous spot. The government of Curacao issues all the required entry visas to  these women, knowing that they are being  trafficked to prostitute themselves in these  places.  Other women are trafficked or sold to the  military bases of the US (for example, in  Puerto Rico) to satisfy the sexual needs of  the soldiers. Other women are tricked into  thinking they will work as domestic help  or go to work as dancers. They are taken  to Europe, usually Holland, Switzerland or  Italy. When they arrive in these places, they  discover that they are not really going to  such work but are being forced to prostitute  themselves.  Their documentation is taken away from  them, they are locked up in a room or house  somewhere, and they really have no other  means of leaving. They don't speak the language, feel completely helpless, and have  no legal route out of these countries. They  must remain there until some organization  or individual helps them to leave.  I want to read the testimony of a trafficked woman whose story, thanks to the  help of some women in the Netherlands who  helped her escape, we are fortunate to have:  "They took about 20 or more of us  women to Italy, Germany and Greece.  They told me, when I was tricked into  doing this, that I would be taken to work  as a maid in a hotel. They took us to this  cabaret and, if we didn't want to work  in the cabaret, they gave us injections of  drugs or pills and then put us to work  doing everything. When they see that a  woman is lazy or can't deal with all the  "work" of accommodating 5 or 6 men in  the same night, they give her an injection of a drug called jobina. This drug  produces a sensation in the woman so  that she doesn't lose the desire to con  tinue making love and, when she gets to  a point where she is almost fainting, then  they take the men away and they lock her  into a room where they give her a tranquilizer. In this way, they give her time  to recover herself."  Another situation in the Caribbean, also  very dramatic, is that of the "illegal voyages." Thousands of women, because of unemployment or low wages, are forced to go  to the US or other countries in search of  jobs. In 1985 in the Dominican Repubhc,  women were asphyxiated in the cargo room  of a boat they were locked aboard en route  to the Dutch isles of San Martine.  One of the most tragic abuses is that if a  woman begins to menstruate, in the majority of cases, they are thrown to the sharks  in the open sea. The sailors who run these  small boats beheve that if there is blood on  the boats from menstruating women, then  it will attract the sharks and they will all  die from shark attacks. So, they prefer to  throw these women in the sea.  The women's movement is very recent  in this region, since 12 years. The feminist  movement is also very recent and really exists only on the bigger islands—Dominican  Repubhc, Haiti, Puerto Rico, Jamaica and  San Bizet. The most important intent has  been the creation of a network that can  move forward together.  The Caribbean women have much grief  that the people of Latin America do not  know what is happening in the region; they  don't know how many islands there are, and  they don't know how many or which languages we speak. If I travel to Mexico or  Peru or Columbia, this information is also  new for the Latin American women. They  don't know the Caribbean reality although  we form part of the Latin American context.  To conclude, I want to say as a Caribbean  woman, as a Black woman, that I think we  are making significant advances in eradicating these walls, these separations that exist  not only in the Caribbean but also in relation to Latin America as a continent.  Sergia Galvan  KINESIS ^  C«w jww beUeve the roar of the crowd?  by Esther Shannon  18 Hours To Go: Friday Night, August 3rd  The lounge at the Lotus Hotel is normally a quiet place to have a beer and banter with  the drag queens. The real lesbian action takes place in the downstairs bar where the permanently pre-orgasmic disco music indiscriminately pounds everyone whether they are  too hot to touch, too cool to dance or just hopelessly enthusiastic.  The night before the Gay Games, with the line-up to the downstairs bar stretching  around the corner, the lounge was packed. I don't think there are many who would argue that a lesbian bar can feel hke the coldest place in the universe but that night it felt  hke a scene from the Deviants Welcome Wagon Convention. You hardly settled into your  seat, before you were shaking hands with almost delirious dykes from Nova Scotia to  Hawaii, from Houston to Berlin.  Midge, a stocky, older woman with her blonde hair styled in a very new look, is a  Houston pool player. She looked hke a certain kind of pool player. The kind who suggests a little side bet on the game, "Just to keep it interesting." The kind who will probably buy you a beer because after just four or five interesting games you find your pockets areN£mpty and Fm not talking about the ones on the pool table.  When I asked Midge whether she was going for the gold. She took a long drink of her  Canadian beer, swung right around in her chair, to give me the full benefit of her dead  serious look and drawled, "You got that right." I didn't argue.  Midge said she came to Vancouver to have fun, take in the Gay Games and get to  know some Canadian lesbians. But she wanted me to know she had a mission to win the  gold. She had played pool in the 1986 Gay Games and had gone home with a bronze.  That was okay but for a Texan, Midge said, it was nothing to brag about. In fact, she  hardly ever mentioned it.  It's a long way from Houston to Vancouver, but not if you know where you're going  every step of the way.  A Job That Had To Be Done  Celebration 90: Gay Games and Cultural Festival had a taghne that often didn't get included in the event's endless promotional materials. The taghne announced a 'Celebration of Individual Triumph and Courage.'  lesbian  games  For Vancouver's lesbians and gays, finding the courage to participate was often an individual triumph but more powerfully it was also the courage of a community battling  overt homophobia- In the weeks before the Games, most news reports in the local media  focused on one angle: How worried were the Games' organizers about event security? Security was an issue because the fundamentalist Christian campaign against the Games  had legitimized homophobia to an unprecedented degree. It is alright to hate faggots and  dykes because God the Father is one hell of a gay basher. Praise the Lord.  I don't know how many lesbians I talked to who confessed, as I did, to realizing that  something could go frighteningly wrong during the Games. That someone, who would  later be found to be "crazy," was also in training, pumping up on hatred and looking for  a target.  I am not concerned with establishing whether this fear was valid or rational—we are  all accustomed to having our fear dismissed as irrational. Rather, let us simply note that  in civilized, peace-loving Canada, Games organizers, the gay community and law enforcement agencies saw the necessity to mount a massive security operation to protect gays  and lesbians during the Games.  " Hundreds of people served time as security marshals protecting participants at every venue from BC Place Stadium to neighborhood baseball fields. The Games Security  Committee held meetings with local pohce, organized orientation sessions for volunteers  and produced handouts and stickers educating fans and athletes alike on personal safety.  The bill for walkie-talkie rentals alone must have been astronomical.  We did the job because it had to be done. We might wonder when the heterosexual  community would recognize the work they need to do.  Outrageous Gaydom: Saturday, August 4th  Almost propelled to BC Place Stadium, Vancouver athletes arrived by bus, skytrain, on  foot or by car from points all over the city. Dressed in our sporty Team Vancouver sweat  suits with identity badge accessories, we were met by dozens of caught up in the excitement, blue-shirted security guard volunteers at the stadium entrance and directed to the  marshalling area at Gate B.  On the rush along the stadium walkways, athlete after athlete skidded up to the parapet which over-looked Gate B.  Beneath us in glorious, outrageous gaydom, cheering, clapping, chanting and carousing, spread hundreds of lesbian and gay athletes from all over the world. The Pope was  there beaming and bowing and bestowing blessings upon all. The Gay and Lesbian  Marching Bands of America were there, tuning up their instruments and crashing their  cymbals to add to the uproar. Square dancers, clog dancers, hne dancers and Native  dancers were there jumping and jiving their way into the stadium. Everyone was reveling  in their first taste of the upcoming week of gay and lesbian nation.  For all those years, months and weeks of organizing, training and practicing, Vancouver had been waiting for all of them in a way we didn't understand until the first moment we saw them, waiting for us. That's when the Gay Games truly came home to Vancouver athletes.  Can you beheve the roar of the crowd?  Living The Politics of Lesbian Pride  A friend of mine told me about catching some of Vancouver Co-op Radio's coverage of  the Gay Games and getting a politically-correct earful from two British lesbian participants. The Brits were over to play soccer and drill the locals on the pohtics of the  Gay Games. According to them, the Games were nothing more than an appalling white,  middle-class North American spectacle. My friend, who's no slouch herself when it comes  to pohtical analysis, knew these earnest criticisms were valid but she kept thinking,  "They're missing the point."  Gay Games organizers are at pains to keep "pohtics" out of the Games, whose guiding philosophy is one of inclusion, regardless of age, race, abihty, sex or sexual orientation. Vancouver gays and lesbians, particularly after the all-out assault from the Christian fundamentalists, kept public debate on the Games' shortcomings to a minimum.  When you come right down to it, we all wanted to have a party, a party unhke any  other celebration Vancouver had ever seen. But in the midst of that party, many gays  and lesbians were caught up for the first time in hving the pohtics of gay and lesbian  pride every day. Perhaps they only had to find the nerve to wear their Gay Games t-  shirt to the corner store or use their Gay Games bus pass on the local transit; perhaps  they told their co-workers what they were doing on their vacation or their sister why  they were going to Vancouver.  Some of these decisions may seem hke small stuff to the politically pure, somewhat  hke amateur sport to the highly-paid professional athlete. But as any professional will  tell you, practice makes perfect. In one way or another, all of us at the Gay Games were  practicing at taking pride in our hves and our community.  Eventually, capital 'P' pohtics will erupt around the Games. Too many vital issues, including race, class and male-female power imbalances, are being confronted by gay and  lesbian communities for it to be otherwise. I only hope when we get to that stage, we'll  all be doing our personal best at inclusivity.  90 Miles An Hour: August 6th  "Volleyball is a power game. When the ball is coming at you at 90 miles an hour,  you only want to protect yourself, but you have to stay in control, you have to hit  the ball."  At Bonsor Community Centre, three women's games are going simultaneously when  I arrive. Occasionally I can hear the squeak of sneakers on the shiny hardwood floors or  the slap of a ball being served but mostly my ears are repeatedly pounded by the booming slams the ball makes as it whistles from the spiker's fist through darting and diving defenders to the gym floor. The force of the ball is so great you almost feel its impact could rip open the floor but of course it only rebounds, sometimes up to the ceiling  rafters 50 or 60 feet above. From time to time a defender manages to keep a spiked ball  in play, earning a burst of applause from the astonished fans.  As luck would have it, I happen to arrive at Bonsor just as the home town's best  hope for a gold medal, the Vancouver Team, are beginning a game against a Los Angeles team. This early in the tournament, both teams still have lots of energy, but Los Angeles has a httle stutter in the feet, a split-second hesitation that sends them to the ball  just a httle too late. You have to know and go (or not go) in the same instant otherwise  the whole complex web of interaction breaks down, the team falls into parts. Vancouver  wins decisively two games to none.  On the next court, an aggressive Long Beach team also puts on an impressive performance. Vancouver and Long Beach fought through a gruelhng week-long schedule of  games and met in the gold medal contest on Friday night. Long Beach won the gold, the  home town dykes won the silver.  How The Media Got The Message  Games media workers, whether paid staff, board members or volunteers, worked hard behind the scenes trying to ensure the Games coverage was tolerant. They deserve a lot of  praise from the lesbian and gay community.  When I talked to Alex MacGillvery, one of the Vancouver Sun's editorial writers,  about what led the Sun to write a positive editorial on the Games, he mentioned some  of these people. He said the Sun's Editorial Board had met with the Gay Games Board  and had been impressed with their openness and sincerity.  MacGilhvery said the Sun "...thought we should accept the fact that gays were always with us and would always be with us and we should try to emphasize tolerance. We  should welcome these people."  Province editorialist Bill Clarke "suspects" his newspaper is ahead of the community with its editorial in support of the Games. But, said Clarke "... homosexuality is, to  use a cliche, coming out of the closet and society will have to deal with it. It can't be ignored."  The Sun's daily coverage on the Games focused on a range of issues and included interviews with a cross-section of the community. The Province's coverage wasn't as extensive but they covered the highlights and did it well. Local television and radio stations also devoted a lot of attention to the Games and their coverage was equally positive.  Response from their audiences was pretty predictable. The anti-gay cadres penned  four or five letters to the Sun, complaining that the coverage suggested they be tolerant  of queers. BCTV's Barry Thompson said viewers were about two thirds opposed to any  coverage of the Games and one third supportive."No one is in the middle on this issue,"  he said.  The positive media coverage during the Games went a long way to undermining public  homophobia, which always works most powerfully when we are silenced. And then there  are those whose first step to an open lesbian or gay identity may have come because they  read a Games story in their local paper. Never underestimate the power of the mass media.  Of course, lesbian and gay organizers will have to make sure our issues are not shelved  now that the Games are over. But the positive relationships that Games media workers built with local media should prove to make that job just a httle easier in the future.  Never underestimate, and always give thanks for, the power of a hardworking organizer.  see next page  KINESIS  September 90 intinued from previous page  Cheerleaders From Hell: August 8th  The Cheerleaders from Hell made only one documented appearance during Gay Games  III. A motley and hysterical crew, dressed in funeral taffeta and polyester mau-maus,  wearing purple fright wigs, smoking cigars and modelling pig noses, they snaked into the  Prince of Wales gym just after the whistle opened play on the long awaited basketball  showdown between the Vancouver Furies and the San Francisco Slammers. All of them  admitted, sourly, to being bounced from cheerleading squads from one end of the country  to the other.  Ostensibly knowledgeable hometown fans, the Cheerleaders' idea of a supportive cheer  was "Let's do brunch," and "Make basketball a contact sport." With typical cowardice they rejected a suggestion to put on a half-time show, warning all and sundry:  "We don't take orders from butches."  Backed by such destructive hometown support, the Vancouver Furies, their concentration shattered, met a sad fate at the hands of the Slammers. A close fought match disintegrated into a rout as the Furies were slammed 75 to 49. This heartbreaker, marking  the Furies' third straight loss, pushed the team into the consolation round of the tournament.  / tell her she's fantastic. And we both know,  I got that right.  Despite their dejection, the Furies, gracious competitors to the end, refused to even  chastise the Cheerleaders from Hell. One valiant athlete said: "Well, gee, I dunna know,  we worked awful hard out there. Did you see the basket I got." The Furies coach, visibly distraught at the wanton destruction of such a high-powered team, told this reporter:  "These players are all high scorers in my heart. I know they can put this squeaker behind them. They're really a great bunch of girls."  A parting shot from the Cheerleaders From Hell: "Dunk if you love Jesus."  In Which Personal Best Breaks Even  The 1988 Seoul Olympics made a profit of $500 million. The Olympic logo, owned by the  International Olympic Committee (IOC) was rented out to 1988 corporate sponsors for  $120 million.  The six cities bidding on the 1994 Olympics will spend $70 million dollars on their  campaigns. H Toronto should win the Olympic Games, the final price tag to stage the  event would be $2.5 billion.  Only 20 percent of Canada's national Olympic team are women. At the 1988 Seoul  Olympics there were 165 events for men, 72 for women and 14 for men and women.  Thirteen out of 14 athletes who participate in the Olympics never win a medal.  Because winning Olympic gold is seen as everything, both by the countries sponsoring Olympic teams and by the athletes themselves, performance enhancing drug use is  increasingly suspected of being the rule rather than the exception among Olympic competitors.  m,\WtqamP!s  14l\lNb Jl J   September 90 ^~*  The Gay Games operated on a budget of $2.2 million. Early reports of a $250,000  profit are exaggerated, although organizers expect to break even. The event was estimated to have generated $20-30 million of spending in the local economy.  Almost 8,000 athletes from 28 countries registered to participate in 29 sports, 43 percent of these were women. An estimated 20,000 supporters came out to participate in the  Games related activities. By the end of the Games, 2,650 people had volunteered their  time. Over 5,000 visiting athletes and participants had been billeted by the local community.  Gay Games organizers work hard to promote the philosophy that is the corner stone  of amateur sport, that the successful athlete is one who achieves her or his personal  best. The promotion of amateur sport was a founding philosophy of the modern Olympic  Games.  The Marathon: August 11th  On the last day of the Gay Games, when most athletes and fans are blurry-eyed from  the rigors of a week-long sporting and party extravaganza, the marathoners gather at  Stanley Park at 6 am. Because runners can suffer de-hydration and calcium depletion, an  early start—sparing the runners from the heat of the day—is vital. Shortly after 7 am,  the runners move out, beginning the lonely mental and physical obstacle course that is  the marathon. At the 12 mile mark some runners have to pull out of the race. Most are  the victims of lactic add build-up in the muscles, a condition that causes severe muscle  cramps.  By 9:45 am, excitement is growing at Second Beach. Two hnes of cheering supporters stretch past the finish hne to applaud everyone who goes by. Pretty soon the runners  with the fastest times will be completing their races.  Three hours, five minutes and .9 seconds after she moved out with the other runners,  San Diego's Debbie Chaddock, the 1986 gold medal winner, crosses the finish Une to win  the women's gold medal.  "I never felt so awful in my hfe," is Chaddock's first comment on the race. And then  between gasps of breath, she laughs.  For several hours, runners continue to cross the finish hne to the appreciation and  cheers of the spectators. The marathon is the final sporting event of Celebration 90: Gay  Games III. The long run, which began at the close of Gay Games II in 1986, is over.  A Week The Whole World Seemed Gay  Behind the gigantic stage set up for the Closing Ceremonies, thousands of athletes  gather for the last time. In contrast to the tumultuous energy and excitement of the  Opening Ceremonies, we are quiet as we wait to march past our friends and lovers, fans  and supporters for the final uproar—the farewell, until New York in 1994.  As I'm cruising through the Houston team looking for Midge, I hear a yell and there  she stands, waving me over. So I ask her, "How did you do?" and she's grinning as she  points to the silver medal hanging around her neck. I'm thrilled and impressed and I tell  her she's fantastic. And we both know, I got that right.  The Tuesday night after the Gay Games, I packed up my gym bag and set out to play  basketball at Trout Lake. I got there a httle late and the other regulars were already  fooling around and shooting warm-up baskets. One of them, still lacing up her sneakers, asked me, "How goes it, now that the Games are over?" We talked a bit about how  it was to have a week when the whole world seemed to be gay. And how it was different  now, you had to put away that instinct to kiss your girlfriend just whenever and wherever it occurred to you. Yes, it was different.  We played four pretty fast-paced games of basketball with no substitutes, since only  ten of us showed up that night. At the end of the evening, as we sat catching our breath  and changing our socks, one woman said she was really happy to get out to the gym.  And we ail agreed, it felt good to be playing basketball, really good. The women  are better fighters  by Joni Miller  In my six years as a karate competitor, I've never been to a friendlier meet than the  Gay Games Martial Arts competition. Competitors came from as far away as Berlin, and  were a mixture of seasoned competitors and beginners. They represented diverse styles—  karate, tae kwon do, kung fu, tai chi, poekeUan, ju jitsu. Seminars held before the competition included aikido and judo. It was the first time Martial Arts were included in the  Gay Games.  "The spirit was very, very good. A lot of friendliness—a lot of tolerance to refs," said  Teresa Gillote, a 3rd degree black belt tai kwon do instructor from Philadelphia. Gillote  has been training for 12 years.  "It was certainly a legitimate tournament," said Amy Valentine, who practises Chen  style Tai Chi Chuan in Portland, Oregon. "It was really tough competition and fair  judging. It looked hke a tournament, everyone was doing tournament things and then I  looked around and thought 'We're all gay and lesbian.' It felt wonderful."  Christina Biadje, a tae kwon do instructor from New York, found the competition invigorating and very challenging. "I've never been with a bunch of women that were so  good," she said. "I think that lesbians maybe take it [martial arts] more seriously. They  have less trouble doffing off the expectations that society has of women, because they've  already done that work."  In a reverse of most tournaments, women outnumbered men. There were more women  black belts than I've ever seen in one room. "The women are better fighters," one male  black belt remarked.  Martial Arts competitions have two main categories: kata or forms, and sparring.  Kata/forms are performed individually. Competitors are judged on focus, accurate technique, power and spirit. Gloves and other protective gear are used during sparring.  Matches are timed and ruled by referees.  "It was incredibly diverse, which was real intimidating to the judges," said Linda Ki-  noier, chief instructor of the Feminist Karate Union in Seattle, Washington. Kinoier is an  experienced tournament referee and has been practising karate for 17 years. The Feminist Karate Union is an all-women's school about to celebrate 20 years of operation.  "Karate has basically been my hfe," she said, "It's the thing I feel hke I've accomplished.  It's the place that I come to centre myself."  One of the most unusual styles present at the tournament was poekeUan kung fu.  PoekeUan forms combine the grace of dance and the power of martial arts. Pracitioners  leap, faU to the ground and make hissing noises.  "PoekeUan comes from Indonesia and is ancient," said Jessica Dube, a practitioner  from Portland, Oregon. PoekeUan has only entered North America in the last decade.  "The quality of the movement is based on four animals—tiger, monkey, snake and crane.  We take the spirit of the animals as weU as the physical movements. It is flowing hke a  soft style, but very combatitive."  One moment stands out for me. I was with four other black belts from various styles,  judging a coloured belt event. A woman came out on the floor to perform her kata. As  she approached the row of judges, it was clear she was terrified. Her eyes were moist  dams about to burst. Teresa GiUote motioned the woman closer. "Just relax, take it  easy," she said. The other judges joined in, offering encouragement and advice. The competitor relaxed, took a deep breath and announced she was ready to go on.  At a straight tournament, this woman probably would have been disqualified.  "We were great today—but we'll be dynamite in '94," GiUote concluded. "Martial arts  is definitely here to stay."  Spoken and unspoken  words without borders  by Christine Morissette  "We are the explorers of a new terrain in a world without borders. We are creators of our lives, of our communities."  So states the official program for Celebration 90 in describing Words Without Borders,  the hterary gathering held in conjunction with Gay Games III and Cultural Festival last  month in Vancouver.  There, lesbian and gay Uterary tradition was explored, analyzed, argued, praised and  promoted by nearly 60 authors, editors and publishers over a five day period. Panels,  workshops, luncheons, presentations and readings—aU provided a forum for writers and  readers to reveal and redefine the boundaries of our worlds.  Lesbian and gay writers make their hves—and our worlds—more real through fact and  fiction. They write from the experiences of their communities, and they write what we  need to hear. Their voices become our voices and together, in the cooperation of writing  and reading, we break our sUence.  But do our voices speak together? Do we speak "words without borders?" Although  attending the Literary Festival of Celebration 90 was, for me, exciting, stimulating and  empowering, and although our rich hterary tradition and future was in evidence, I felt  at times an unwilling and uncomfortable witness to worlds and words within borders.  Despite the appearance of such buzz-words as "diversity," "community" and "spirit of  openness," it was the unspoken words that struck a deeper cord: ethnocentrism, racism,  sexism and lack of access.  Item: According to the program, "Celebration 90 brings together writers from  around the world."  According to the Festival's Who's Who of almost 60 participants, only seven were  from outside of North America, and aU used EngUsh as their hterary language.  Although the Festival was preceded by an unlearning racism workshop, and one  panel—From the Outside Looking In—dealt with racism in our communities and in our  writing, less than one-third of the participants were people of colour. And after hearing  Mohawk poet Beth Brant say that white writers should examine why they create characters of colour, in another panel a white gay male writer stated with some pride and not  a httle arrogance that he writes Black male characters because he hkes to have sex with  Black men.  e next page  KINESIS; continued from previous page  Item: Lesbians and gay men were almost equally represented. The differences lay  not in the numbers, but in the motives for writing and in the level of analysis.  New York writer Sarah Schulman observed that men teU stories, anecdotes, but rarely  go further. In virtually all of the panels I attended, that was the case. Almost without  fail, lesbian writing seemed to be a poUtical act, whereas gay men's writing seemed devoid of any pohtical analysis, with the exception of writing on AIDS. And it was in a  panel on AIDS that a gay playwright, responding to a comment about the controversy of  lesbians working in ADDS activism, said with dismissal and impatience, "I don't understand how aU this [lesbian and gay division] got started anyway."  Item:   Celebration 90 promotional material stressed the idea of inclusion for participants and observers.  Although individual workshops and panels were reasonably priced from $6 to $14, this  was reasonable only if you wanted to attend one or two. H you wanted to attend two  each day, you'd have to have more than spare change. And what if you had chUdren to •  care for? Not only was there no shding scale, but there was no cluld care available.  In terms of accessibiUty for the disabled, none of the sessions I attended was sign  language interpreted, and only one of the workshop venues was wheelchair accessible.  ShamefuUy, the one panel that Gahano Island writer Jane Rule attended was in an auditorium with several sets of stairs, and Rule moves about in a wheelchair.  Certainly the Literary Festival of Celebration 90 was a unique and important event,  the largest gathering of lesbian and gay Uterati ever held in Canada. I hope it wUl happen again. I need to hear our stories, and I need to know how writers teU them. These  stories—my stories—help to keep me out, and keep me open. But to truly write words  without borders, aU our ways of speaking and experiencing must be in evidence, and aU  our voices must be heard.  Challenging Analysis and Insights  Having said all of that, I am obUged to acknowledge some of the panels which provided  the most chaUenging analysis and insights.  Banning Our Words focused on censorship, both from the outside world and from  within our own communities. We learn an early lesson as lesbian and gay people: that we  are punished for speaking out, and so we keep sUent to survive.  Toronto writer Dionne Brand said "Homophobia takes us to the waU so often that it  prevents us from being deeply critical" and ultimately prevents us from seeing our own  (self) censorship.  We are censored by Canada Customs when they seize lesbian and gay hterature at the  border and we are censored by granting agencies when we let them determine what and  when we wiU write. Brand caUed censorship "an abberation of free speech," one that undermines our experiences and alters our perceptions.  Strategies for dealing with censorship were varied. Jane Rule urged us to support the  Writers' Union and the CivU Liberties' Association, but not the legal system: "the law is  no place for us to go." Brand said we need to make our own culture, rather than fight for  inclusion in the dominant culture; this "keeps our integrity [and] secures our humanity."  And Sarah Schulman felt chaUenged by certain kinds of censorship. "To ban a book is to  celebrate it," she said, "to ensure its fame."  photos by Andrea Lowe, Jan  A Her/History of Our Own provided perspectives on self-evaluation and the creation  of lesbian archives. H we have been taught, both as women and as lesbians, that our hves  are not of value and that nothing we have to say is of any importance to anyone, then we  do not come easUy to the idea of a femimst re- evaluation of history—to herstory. But  we need to write ourselves into history in the same way that we have written ourselves  into Uterature.  Carol Seajay, publisher of Feminist Bookstore News in San Francisco, said: "The  people who have no history have no future." It isn't enough that we Uve our history; we  must also record it to ensure our survival. Salt Spring Island poet Daphne Marlett reminded us that our current sense of lesbian history has been influenced by this feminist re-evaluation of history as a whole , and that with it has come the recognition of a  unique kind of psychic survival. "The crazy women are the keys to lesbian history," Marlett said. "Recognizing our foremothers is the essence of lesbian history, and it is essential to recognize in ourselves our historical foremothers and our contemporary foremoth-  One woman who is writing our history as we hve it is Alison Bechdel of Minneapolis,  creator of the comic strip Dykes To Watch Out For. Bechdel refers to herself as a lesbian cartoonist. "I can't separate my lesbian identity from my work," she said. "They're  interdependent." She calls herself a "propagandist," and beheves it's important to see  yourself in the world around you. "Seeing people is incredibly chaUenging, an act of  "Homophobia takes us to the wall so often that it  prevents us from being deeply critical"  —Dionne Brand  •4k   r   J**  s KINESIS  0ames  love," Bechdel explained. She wanted to create loveable women who love other  so that we could see ourselves, love ourselves as women.  What started this cartoonist on her way to becoming the chronicler of sisterhood  soap-opera? As a cluld, Bechdel realized that in cartoons, men were portrayed as people,  and women as female people—"other," sexual props for male characters. She was sensitive to this and outraged by the unfairness. As a result, she disassociated herself from  being a girl and, consequently, her drawings only featured male characters. Bechdel drew  cartoons before she could read. In high school, drawing was "a catharsis, an energy release," she said. In coUege she used unlined paper in her classes so that her class notes  wouldn't interfere with her drawings.  Bechdel says she came to terms with being a woman only after she realized she was a  lesbian. And in fact, she apparently drew herself into existence, since untU that point she  had been unable to draw women from her imagination , unless they were lesbian. It was  when she "found it possible to draw a woman," she said, "that it was possible to be a  woman."  Bechdel's characters are drawn from her hfe, from our community. They are women  we have loved, have struggled with, have gossiped about. They are us. And we are lovingly drawn, with aU our crises and contradictions. In Dykes To Watch Out For, text  and subtext, conversation and body language fiU the page with both the fularity and the  dUemmas of our personal and poUtical Uves.  Bechdel began her cartoon career in 1983 with two drawings in Womannews, a feminist newspaper in New York. Today her work is carried in 26 lesbian and gay pubUcations in North America. She succeeds in telling our stories with a loving blend of irony  and compassion, with a resonance that rings true to our ears. V///////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////S////  ////////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////////^^^^  Arts  Montreal  Gems at floundering fest  by Lorraine Chan  The Sixth Montreal International  Festival of Films and Videos by Women,  June 6-16: Attending this festival was a  Uttle Uke going to a party and discovering  everyone had already left because of a bad  smeU. Attendance was low, except for a few  screenings. The energy was definitely flat.  Missing were the usual elan and excitement  of women-centred events.  The muggy Montreal streets in June are  a parade of the righteously hip and politically active, but few were slapping down  their piastres to see the festival offerings.  Word had it that Montrealers were generally festivaUed out and that, specificaUy, the women's community was pissed  off. There was a petition tacked up at  venues protesting the exclusion of lesbian  work. There were complaints about the  lack of Canadian films. The programming  was Western/Euro-centric and contained  a ridiculously token number of works by  women of colour and Third World women.  Other paying customers just thought there  were too many dogs for their money.  This festival is one of the largest showcases for women's films and videos in North  America. And it's the only women's film  festival that Telefilm Canada wUl fund.  For these reasons, it's critical the Montreal  women's festival finds out what its constituents want and need, and show the right  thing.  It was unfortunate the screenings were so  poorly attended because, despite its floun-  derings, the festival did offer some exceUent  work among the 100 plus films and videos.  Here's a smaU sampling:  SONG OF EXILE  As a sometime Hong Kong film goer, I  found Song of Exile a welcome rehef from  the usual fare of melodramas and costume  action-pics. It was somewhat strange to  be sitting there, an anglophone, with my  kitchen-sink French and Cantonese, watching a Mandarin-language film translated by  French subtitles. I stiU got the story, however, and enjoyed it immensely.  WeU-acted and beautifuUy shot, this is  the most recent film from Ann Hui, Hong  Kong director of The Romance of Book  and Sword. This semi-autobiographical  drama poignantly explores a mother and  daughter relationship within the context of  Sino- Japanese history.  Hueyin is a London graduate who returns to Hong Kong in 1973 for her sister's  wedding. Immediately, she and her mother  begin bickering over which dress, which  hairdo—small misunderstandings that are  underscored by years of bitterness.  Through flashbacks, we learn that  Hueyin's mother, Aiko, is Japanese. She  had met Hueyin's father, an interpreter, in  Manchuria when China recaptured the area  from Japan. They married. WhUe he worked  in Hong Kong, Aiko Uved in Macao with his  parents.  As a chUd, Hueyin prefers her doting grandparents to her sUent, lonely  mother, the despised Japanese daughter-in-  law. Hueyin chooses to remain in Macao  rather than accompany her parents to Hong  Kong. The adult Hueyin recaUs only happy  times of running through sun-drenched gardens and eating special treats prepared by  her grandmother. Her mother remembers  the betrayal of her own chUd.  Their slow reconciliation comes only  when Hueyin, after returning from London,  travels with her mother to Japan. There  Hueyin is the outsider and she begins to understand what her mother might have experienced. At the family shrine, her mother  remarks to Hueyin, "It's funny, you're my  daughter. You come from my body, but you  don't resemble me at all."  This moment marks the beginning of  their abihty to speak honestly to each other  and their acceptance of each other's differences. In a tender, funny moment when they  are sitting in a Japanese bath, Aiko admits  to her daughter that she finds Chinese food  tastier the Japanese food, the same comment that had infuriated her years before  when make by Hueyin's grandparents.  From Kiyoko's Situation  The voyage aUows Hueyin and her  mother to come to peace within themselves  and with each other. The film ends with  Hueyin's visit to her grandfather's deathbed  in China during the aftermath of the Cultural Revolution. Her grandfather exhorts,  "Don't lose hope in China. I'm old, but  you're young."  Song of Exile spoke to me equaUy of  diaspora, the effects of war and the immutability of Chinese identity. Hui tells an  epic tale, but refreshingly through the eyes  of women.  A NICE ARRANGEMENT  This 11-minute drama from talented British  filmmaker Gurinder Chadha zings with fast,  witty dialogue and in-jokes. As in her  previous documentary I'm British But...  (shown at the In Visible Colours Festival  last fall), Chadha articulates the hybrid cultures of British-South Asians.  The film centres around the big day of  Meena's wedding. AU the relatives have  gathered around to admire "a real Indian  bride."  An uncle shoulders his ubiquitous video  camera; aunts gossip about Meena's friend,  Sita, the divorcee. Women tell each other to  move over, "You're crushing my sari."  Everyone's happy except Meena who's  having a few last minute doubts. She has  chosen to marry within her Hindu community, although she's in love with a Mushm  man. The film offers no resolution, only a  glimpse of the dUemma that Meena faces.  When asked about the plot, Chadha  firmly corrected the white questioner who  suggested that the film is about forced marriages in Indian families. "This isn't at aU  about the horrors of feudal, arranged marriages. Meena does exercise choice. She decides to do what her family wants. Person-  aUy I think she's stupid," she said with a  laugh.  Chadha explained that she wanted to  look at the kinds of difficult choices she and  other Black women have to make. "I want  to address our understanding and consoU-  dation of what we are as second-generation  sons and daughters hving in Britain."  My only disappointment is that A Nice  Arrangement is too short. We have to  leave the wedding party before it's over.  KIYOKO'S SITUATION  Kiyoko's Situation is about wanting to  paint too much and mother too httle.  Japanese video artist Mako Idemitsu takes  on her favourite subjects—rigid gender roles  and sexist oppression. Past works such as  Hideo, It's Me Mama, Great Mother  series and The Marriage of Yasushi  criticize the traditional expectations for  Japanese women to excel as sUent, submissive, super mothers and wives.  Kiyoko is a frustrated artist whose  mother, husband and mother- in-law aU forbid her to paint. Kiyoko turns to drinking  in her desperation. She's told that she's selfish. It's unnatural to waste time on herself  when there's a cluld and a husband to take  care of.  Kiyoko continually looks at her reflection  in the video monitor. She applies make up  to her face on the screen. She drapes herself  over the monitor. But she remains separate  and alienated from that electronic self.  The video screen reviews Kiyoko's past,  constructing and reinforcing her proper role  as wife and mother. Idemitsu's work brings  home sharply the enormous pressure families and society exert upon women in Japan  to conform to the norm.  THROUGH THE WIRE  This documentary keeps you on the edge  of your seat and the information it delivers is hke a punch to the gut. Through the  Wire's subject is pohtical prisoners and  their treatment in the US judicial system.  Director-producer Nina Rosenblum combines interviews, dramatizations and TV  footage to tell the story of how the US government treats its "daughters gone wrong."  In 1986, three women with radical-left affiliations became the first inmates of the Female High Security Unit (HSU) at a federal  prison in Lexington, Kentucky. They had  been convicted of non-violent crimes.  Confined to this subterranean prison  within a prison for nearly two years, they  Silvia Baraldini, Susan Rosenberg and Alejandrina Torres in Through The Wire  See FILM page 18  KINESIS s,""m"e .^^J^^^^^^^^^  Arts  Disability: rethinking 'choice'  PAST DUE:  A Story of Disability,  Pregnancy and Birth  by Anne Finger  Seattle: The Seal Press, 1990  by Yvonne Peters  couraged and indeed prevented from becoming pregnant. Thus the right of reproductive choice must not only include the right  not to reproduce but must also include the  right to reproduce.  As weU, the existence of an ever increasing array of prenatal testing techniques  ifest itself untU weU into adulthood. The issue of choice thus becomes an issue of choosing whether or not to participate in prenatal testing, and then choosing what to do  with the information.  Finger's greatest concern relates to the  choices confronting women who undergo  The struggle for disabihty rights and  women's equahty rights have aU too often  been divided into two separate and unique  struggles. However, these divisions begin  to diminish when women with disabihties  teU their stories and describe their struggle  to overcome discrimination and oppression  perpetrated by sexist, ableist society.  What we discover is that there are many  common threads between the struggle for  equahty by the women's movement and the  disabihty rights movement which should be  used to foster solidarity rather than divi-  Anne Finger is both a feminist and disabUity rights activist. At age three she contracted poho and as a result now walks with  a cane. Her particular interest is reproductive rights and how they relate to women's  rights and disabihty rights.  Her book is an autobiographical account  of her pregnancy and the birth of her son.  However, Past Due is much more than a  personal recounting of pregnancy and birth.  The book provides some thoughtful insights  into the pohtics of reproductive rights and  the personal struggles which reproductive  issues can precipitate. In particular, the  book deals with issues such as abortion,  home births, caesarean births and the use  of reproductive technology.  The central issue in the book is the  author's struggle to develop an analysis  of reproductive rights which respects both  women's rights and disabihty rights. For example, Finger suggests that we may need  to rethink what is meant by reproductive  choice. Typically, there are some women,  such as disabled women, who have been dis-  gives a whole new meaning to the phrase 'reproductive choice.' Prenatal testing is not  only capable of detecting "defects" in a fetus but can also identify a predisposition to  a particular condition which may not man-  FILMfrom page 17  were subjected to 24-hour camera surveU-  lance, frequent nocturnal wakings, brutal  strip searches and conditions of extreme  sensory deprivation. They were denied fresh  air, sunUght and human interaction and  were kept isolated in rooms painted blind-  ingly white.  Susan Rosenberg, a member of the May  19 Communist Organization, is an antiwar activist and supporter of radical Black  movements.  She was sentenced to 58 years for possession of weapons and explosives. This is twice  the average given for first-degree murders.  Alejandrina Torres, of the radical Puerto  Rican-independence movement FALN, received 35 years for seditious conspiracy  to bomb a US military instaUation near  Chicago.  SUvia Baraldini was sentenced to 43 years  for conspiracy and racketeering in connection with the prison escape of Black militant  Assata Shakur. She drove the back-up car.  Rosenblum compares these terms to the  three-year sentence given to Ku Klux Klans-  man Don Black, who was released after  23 months for weapons possession. (Similarly an American man recently convicted of  bombing an abortion chnic received a seven-  year sentence.)  The Kentucky unit is beheved to be using experimental methods of breaking down  prisoners. The film graphically shows how  the HSU took its toU on the three women,  causing mental and physical deterioration.  Baraldini, who developed cancer in Lexing  ton, sums up the purpose of the experiment:  "They made it clear to us that we could  stop the torture any time if we renounced  our poUtical behefs...The object of the experiment was to make us lose our defiance  and become mentally incapacitated."  Although visibly weakened by the conditions of her imprisonment, Torres passionately declares in her interview that, "They  wUl never, never break my spirit."  FoUowing a federal suit launched by the  women's lawyers and the American CivU  Liberties Union, the Lexington facility was  closed down. However, an appeal overturned this ruhng stating that a prisoner's  pohtical behefs and associations are a legitimate basis for placement in a control unit.  The Bureau of Prisons is now buUding 16  new prisons, many with units hke those experienced by the three women.  In 1988, the women were moved into  other facUities: Rosenberg is currently in  a Washington, D.C. jaU; Torres at federal  prison in Pleasanton, CA; and Baraldini in  a New York City correctional centre.  Also in 1988, the Bureau of Prisons  opened a new "high risk" federal women's  prison in an isolated area of Marianna,  Florida, where it wUl be more difficult  to monitor, mobUize citizen protests and  launch any htigation. This new prison has  the same conditions as Lexington.  Through the Wire is available from International Telefilm, 1200 W. Pender  St., #201, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 2S9.  Telephone: 685-2616  prenatal testing. As an advocate of the pro-  choice movement, a worker in an abortion  chnic and a woman, who at one point in her  hfe chose to have an abortion, Finger clearly  supports a women's right to choose.  Nevertheless, she worries that the decision to abort a "defective" fetus is fre-  vwenm  :iHmHjiP>ms:m  quently based on information which is  steeped in discriminatory and stereotyped  attitudes about disabihty. Moreover, the  abortion of "defective" fetuses tells people  with disabihties that to have a disabihty is  to have a Ufe not worth Uving.  The choice in this instance is further compounded by the lack of support services for  parents with disabled chUdren and a society which tends to ignore and exclude people with disabiUties. Also, questions such as  whether or not it makes a difference if the  disabihty wUl cause extreme pain and early  death must be considered.  Clearly, the issue of choice arising from  prenatal testing has no easy answers. However, Finger argues that these issues can  only be resolved by feminists and disabUity  rights activists working together.  IronicaUy, Finger had to confront her own  fears and anxieties about having a chUd  with a disabihty. Due to a prolonged birth  which began at home and ended with a caesarean section in hospital, Finger's son ran  the risk of being brain-damaged and ultimately disabled. Her struggle to cope with  this possibility reveals how vulnerable we aU  are to the quest for perfection and the desire to reproduce healthy babies.  In hght of the recent appointment of the  Royal Commission on New Reproductive  Technologies, whose hearing wUl take place  this faU, Anne Finger's book is timely. Despite being an easy read—can be read in  an evening—Finger's book raises many difficult issues and gives the reader a lot to  think about.  As a woman with a disabihty and a  femimst, I was pleased to find an author  who endeavoured to develop an analysis  which respects both feminist and disabihty  rights perspectives. The book is a must for  women interested in the issue of reproductive rights.  Yvonne Peters is the national Coordinator of the Canadian Disability  Rights Council  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  VANCOUVER INTERNATIONAL FILM FESTIVAL  September 28 - October 14, 1990  INFO 738-4567  WOMEN FILMMAKERS FORUM  THE cinematheque  PARADISE THEATRE  PARK THEATRE  RIDGE THEATRE  STARLIGHT CINEMA  Free programs available at theatres, libraries and usual outlets September 15  • Tickets at Ridge Theatre September 17 •  3 KINESIS  September 90 Arts  //////////////////////^^^^^  Spirited soprano  + Gravelly alto  = Frank Chickens  by Jean Lum  Frankly, I didn't know what to expect of  the Frank Chickens and their performance  at Vancouver's 13th Annual Folk Music Festival. I had no famUiarity with their work.  Frank Chickens, was that a version of  chicken katsu deep-fried and chopped up by  a chef named Frank to the melody of the  Top 40 chart-topper of the week?  It turns out that the Frank Chickens  are two Japanese women based in Tottenham, England. Eight years ago Kazuko  Hohki shed her feathers as a chUd psychologist and found/ed herself a Chicken.  Atsuko Kamura, a Chicken since 1988,  helped form Polka Dot Fire Brigade, a  Tokyo all-women's punk band. The daring duo's goal, as stated in the Festival  program, is "to create a subversive world  where East meets West at street level. The  Japanese culture we represent is Ninjas not  Samurais, sleazy bars not elaborate restau-  rants...strong women not sweet geishas."  The Frank Chickens appeared on stage in  colourful short robes and leggings accompanied by a succession of non-life-threatening  equipment difficulties. Hohki was a good-  humoured and entertaining host in spite of  this. The audience chuckled, the stagehand  ran about hke a chicken with his head cut  off.  Did the Frank Chickens arrive on that  stage through the lengthy toils of musical  education? Says Kamura, in an interview  with Kinesis, "Not especially, but I started  some local band about ten years ago. During  rehearsing our band I did learn a bit how to  play bass guitar...or how to be singing, but  that's aU just only my own way."  Speaking of singing, Kamura croons their  original lyrics in a husky, graveUy alto  that sounds enjoyably mismatched against  the easy-listening/disco-y pre-recorded pop  tunes of Karaoke.  Hohki sings in spirited soprano. Of  her musical background she recaUs: "In  Japanese culture we have to learn music.  Like how to read music and aU that business, Beethoven and the Fifth Symphony...I  never dreamt me singing on a stage." She  arrived in England during a period which  provided fertUe ground.  "I came to England twelve years ago,"  says Hohki, "and that time was briUiant.  Not that briUiant, but it was a Labour government and lots of subsidy was going on to  art and art education...Straightaway I became involved with a musicians' and experimental performers' organization called London Musicians' CoUective, and I could go to  adult education class to learn."  How is it being Japanese and female  in the British music scene? Hohki laughs:  "When we started, which was in 1982, we  exploited that to the maximum. Because  we are Japanese, we are very hip that  time in 1982—especiaUy in London—and  we are women, so we became poUticaUy  right...And the people thought going to see  Frank Chickens is ideologically sound, very  hip thing to do. We became kind of phenomenon there, and now Frank Chickens is  settling, in a more substantial way. We are  more ourselves, but stiU it's quite difficult  in the business side, the creative side is not  that difficult."  So, who is their audience these days?  Hohki guffaws, "Mostly kind of right on peo-  pie."  A highhght of their show was, in Hohki's  words, their "highly disciplined choreography." Their dance is an eclectic combination and re-interpretation of martial arts,  maybe kabuki (traditional Japanese dance),  mime, maybe Saturday Night Fever, goof-  \dilderne$fr  \0cft\etv  J4ikiru -H"ip© -for lOerwerv -f# <2*0c*tz_  -ftz^ +V»e, £arV^y Play And hgal  vOe, are, ofper'ma  opportunities •£*■ tfone^ -r»  erpzr\e*c&, ■*& wMderreSS ^coA-frer \r\ a. safe-  Atmosphere.. These -trips Kill  fc^ a*.p\craMot& of-  r«cla«u*s °*. C0*«ec*c*§- 10HK +*e &*■*. o*3 gacbj  oVnzs. (M qoo\ is-to be ace«s&,bv^ -te as, ^cm as  P«6,b\e- iOz, pw^e^pw^it^peria-fe^.ftBS,  *steto*ce, ictth. cwidtao^.akiii cWiop,*atr, *,-eivxhi.  •ne.xSax'c ar.a co»*uM»\i5»\«Xip, ■—>        ' <-5  Otv^ Cvcr <x*Q pWJu ire +*£> Vocds lOVK W§\  For mfo. registration, or to help out, can or write us at: V.O.V. Box 54fl. Tofino. BC.  VCR 2Z0 (604)725-3230 Attn: Carolyn May or Catherine Berry. Donations of time,  money, and equipment are greatly appreciated.  Kazuko Hohki and Atsuko Kamura  ing around, and having fun. Their performance was very theatrical. Hohki comments, "There are lots of good underground  theatres in the 60's and 70's in Japan—Uke  the one called Red Tent—and it's big influence by Brecht...mixing low culture and  popular song and sometimes very pohtical  message in it. And they were very good,  very energetic. And they kind of influenced,  in some way, Frank Chickens."  Although the Frank Chickens grapple  with many issues in their songs, including  racist images, sexist stereotypes and maU-  order brides, the sometimes groggy microphone hindered my abihty to functionaUy  comprehend them. Also, my scant know!-,  edge of Japanese culture was not always  helpful when trying to decipher and place  their actions into context. However, some of  the things which sounded intelligible to me  were very funny and direct.  Of their artistic influences, it wasn't surprising when Hohki reveals: "Now, it's Gary  Larson [the Far Side cartoonist]...he's brU-  Uant...I reaUy respected Andy Warhol, Marcel Duchamp and Joseph Beuys, but Gary  Larson is far better than any. And Matt  Groening, he's briUiant. American's cartoons, they are very good. I am sorry to  say something good coming from America."  Kamura has been formed By a contrasting  group of influences. "When I was a teenager  my favourite pop singer was David Bowie  but actuaUy I was influenced by Japanese  butoh dancer."  I inquired about the artistic scene for  artists of colour in their adopted homeland and about organizations that try to  bridge such people. I was surprised and disappointed to- hear about the lack of cross-  cultural unity. Hohki says, "There are Black  artist newsletter and things Uke that, but  Japanese are not reaUy included there, Uke  we don't get any invitation for example,  so we kind of don't take much notice of  it. Probably we get more events women-  oriented." Kamura adds: "It's very difficult  to find out the whole idea of the scene, it'  so divided."  Finally, why has Hohki quit her day job  to do this? "If you don't want to work in  a normal business...don't want to get up  at eight in the morning, you have to do  something else, and this is kind of the most  handy thing to do."  The Frank Chickens are fierce and funny.  Beware if you're chicken-hearted: these  clever Chickens bite.  BOOK MANTEL  ^  Under New Management  EXCELLENT SELECTION OF OVER 40,000 GENTLY USED BOOKS  Feminist • Literature • Philosophy • Poetry • General Selection  10 % DISCOUNT  WITII TfflS AD  20% DISCOUNT WITH  TALID STUDENT CARDS  Open Tuesday - Wednesday, 10 am - 6 pm.  Thursday - Sunday, 10 am - 9 pm. Closed Mondays.  1444 Kingsway, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 2R5  879-2247   WOMAN OWNED AND OPERATED  KINESIS Such foolishness  Lighthearted lesbian frolic  THE FAIRY PRINCESS AND  THE PRINCESS FOOL  by Nora D. Randall  directed by Jackie Crossland  by Bonnie Waterstone  H you never could quite identify with the  traditional fairy tale princess, Nora Randall  and Jackie Crossland of Random Acts have  a new .story for you. The Fairy Princess  and the Princess Fool, written by Randall and directed by Crossland, is the light-  hearted lesbian frolic that ran during the  Gay Games in Vancouver.  With two princesses, a fire-breathing  dragon, a wise mule, two newscasters, a  scribe, hve music and a large quantity of  props, this is the first fuU-scale production  for Random Acts. RandaU and Crossland  The cast: Martina Griffiths, Nora Randall (front), Karen White, Lesley Wyatt, River  Light (middle), and Roseanne Johnson (back)  said "Mostly we do one and two women  shows but in honour of the Gay Games we  wanted to do something bigger to celebrate  our sexuaUty." Many women came forward  to help and the production became "a community event."  The Fairy Princess and the Princess  Fool is good for a laugh: the night I attended, the audience laughed from beginning to end. The basic storyline? A princess  is castle born, amid much to-do. The  same day, a baby dragon is also born and  forced from her home into the castle moat.  The princess is spoUed and pampered; the  dragon lonely and bitter. Through a series of events, the Fairy Princess—older but  not yet wiser—ends up trapped alone (except for some goats) inside her castle. The  dragon has burned down the drawbridge  and threatens the Fairy Princess every time  she approaches the castle waU.  This proves to be good for the Princess.  She learns to be self-sufficient. Soon we  see her planting garlic, washing clothes by  hand, fixing things.  And, yes, there's a love story: a wandering princess, the Princess Fool, and her  trusty companion, Mongo the mule, come  upon the princess locked in a castle guarded  by the fierce dragon.  Sounds traditional, except for the  der.  And  except for  the  fact  thai  Fairy Princess is not languishing away, s.  is shoveling goat manure and scrubbing  clothes. And except for the fact that the  Princess Fool hves up to her name and is  far from being a dashing hero.  Foraging the Fringe fest  by Kinesis Writer  The Vancouver Fringe Festival wUl roU  through the Mount Pleasant neighbourhood  again this faU—September 6—16, to be exact. Featuring over 550 performances at 10  indoor venues, the Fringe offers advance  tickets at $8 a pop this year (tU Sept. 1)  from #15-2414 Main Street, 11 am to 8 pm  or by telephone: 853-3646. (At the gate, tix  are $7.)  This year's Une-up, Uke previous year's,  offers Uttle for the feminist audience:  by our reckoning, women are the playwrights/creators in less than 20 percent of  the shows offered. We have, however, puUed  together-.the foUowing Ust (our apologies to  anyone we've missed). The fuU program is  avaUable around town.  Dancing in the Garden...Like Momma  On the twentieth anniversary of her sister  Angel's suicide, Laura is haunted by her  sibhng's shadow and forced to confront the  truth of their shared history. Written by  Elizabeth Dancoes, performed by Kandra-  mas Theatre CoUective.  Maharani and the Maple Leaf A one-  woman show that focuses on the conflicts  that arise when traditional values of East  Indian culture colUde with hfe in Canada. A  series of vignettes with a mixture of pathos,  humour and passion. By Veena Sood.  Side Saddle The Sensible Footwear Theatre Co. is back with lurid tales of treachery, lust and revenge. Find out what happens when a dispossessed rancher, a demure  widow and a faUed whore are flung together.  A Characters Cabaret In a basement  club in New York City strange things hap-  pen. Meet Kathy the cosmic comic, take a  flight with LoueUa Layover and catch Lorna  CampbeU, the cow queen of country music.  By Lindsay HUI.  Shades of Contrast Diverse solo dances  of modern works ranging from the so-  ciaUy conscious to' the pure and simple  joy of movement. By two independent  dancers/choreographers, Dorothy Anderson  and Jacquehne Taylor.  Green's Keen—Drown Brown Lots of  futuristic elements on the planet Zorfu combine with large bunraku-style puppets and  rear screen projections to offer a light-  hearted yet thoughtful plea to protect our  environment. By Wendy Passmore.  Lifeafterbirth Described as a hilarious  show describing joys, frustrations and upheavals experienced from pregnancy during  early motherhood. Moira Keefe and the Domestic Rep. Co.  The Rules Nowadays A mix of song and  poetry with feminist perspectives in a world  where friendships, love, chUdhood and aging  are of as much concern as violence, racism  and poUution. With the Euphoniously Feminist and Non-performing Quintet, Helen  Potrebenko and Sandy Shreve.  Smoke Damage: A Story of the Witch  Hunts Five women journey back in time to  the witch hunts, the forgotten holocaust of  the 16th century. Here they encounter betrayal, reincarnation, rock and roU ... and  themselves. By Banuta Rubess.  Lunchroom An emotional play examining  the aspirations of Indo-Canadians and the  obstacles and discrimination they encounter  whUe trying to Uve and work in Canada.  Produced by the Vancouver Sath CoUective.  Romp in the Briars The first independent offering of dancer/choreographer Cori  Caulfield: "She makes bloody communion  with blackberry bushes and the wind ..."  He, She and 3 This frightening play explore the hypocrisy of people who criticize  torture and then unwittingly endorse the  torture of someone else. By Maria Irene  Fornes.  Boy Meets Girl. Girl Meets Elvis Playwrights Danette Boucher, Robin Platte and  Donna Tunney "just wanted to do a play  about sex ... and Elvis."  Karen White gave an exceUent performance as the Fairy Princess. On stage and  in character for the entire play—from baby  to independent woman—White brings an  authenticity to a wide variety of emotions,  including petulance, resignation, frustration, determination, curiosity, and of course,  faUing in love. When she sees the Princess  Fool approaching the castle, the clothespins  faU right out of her mouth.  The Princess Fool is a comic character  and Lesley Wyatt's mobUe face and dramatic gestures got a lot of laughs. Wyatt  can really hold the audience's attention. In  one of my favourite moments, Mona the  scribe comes upon the Princess Fool bawhng  her head off over the Fairy Princess. Waning, Wyatt suddenly grabs Mona's leg and  lavishly buries her face in it.  Nora Randall is typecast as the scribe  and provided the continuity of the storyline-  -not an easy task. Her talent for understatement shone in this role.  Mongo the mule was a part that  needed more development. The character  could have been the lesbian friend of the  Princess Fool—and lesbian friendship is  multi-dimensional. But Mongo remained  one-sided, and as an animal wiser than her  mistress, a stereotype. River Light played  Mongo, a mother duck, and the dragon.  While aU the women join to make the  dragon, River Light was most consistently  the dragon's voice. I had difficulty distinguishing between her three characters. A  certain beUigerence characterized them aU.  And what were newscasters doing in a  fairy tale? Roseanne Johnson and Martina  Griffiths moved the action along with their  snappy comments. Their timing was good  and the incongruence was often hUarious:  "We're coming to you tonight from inside  the dragon..."  An important aspect of this play was the  make-believe atmosphere.  It's a fairy tale, full of wonder, a place  where magic happens. The music, by Jacqui  Parker-Snedker and Carol Weaver, was an  essential ingredient in creating this ambience.  British pantomimes—extravagantly dramatic renderings of fairy tales and chUdren's stories—have been transformed in recent years by lesbian theatre companies in  London, England, who parody these plays  with all-women casts. Random Acts gave  Vancouver audiences a taste of this kind of  wUd and wonderful parody with The Fairy  Princess and The Princess Fool.  ARIEL  BOOKS  SALE  20    %        OFF  ALL THE LOVELY  LESBIAN  STOCK  serr5 -  e  20 l\| lN L JI b September S .^•X^V^iVyVVO^/Z^^/W^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  A few things  need clarifying  Kinesis:  This letter is more than a httle bit late—  my hfe is just now settling down, and I  can actuaUy find time to read things. I am  writing in response to Nancy PoUak's article in your May, 1990 edition regarding the  fight against cuts to the Women's Program  ("Feminists in spirited resistance...").  The article was very good, and very thorough, but I feel I must clarify a few things.  I was one of two women representing  Newfoundland at a meeting with Secretary  of State Gerry Weiner in Montreal. The article stated the representatives were chosen  by Judy Wright, director of the Women's  Program; this was certainly not the case  in Newfoundland where the representatives  were chosen by the Women's Centres.  My second point is that Weiner's representatives did not tell us the night before the meeting that national groups would  not be discussed. It was during the actual meeting that the issue of national  groups was first raised, and we were told  at that time that meetings with representatives of national groups were in progress.  This turned out not to be the case, but we  made the rather unfortunate mistake of be-  Ueving them. They were very effective in  their attempts to isolate the groups from  one another. Because we were not aU meeting together, it was difficult to assess what  was real and what wasn't. A lesson for next  time...  Thirdly, the group that attended the  meeting in Montreal was under intense pressure. We had no intention of "negotiating"  on behalf of the groups, but we were in  a position of having to say something. It  was clearly understood by everyone, however, that anything that came up during  the meeting would have to go back to our  respective provinces for further discussion.  The proposal that we arrived at did not  "veer sharply from the demand for fuU  restoration of funding," nor were we "negotiating an end to federal responsibiUty."  "1  4  !  The proposal, in fact, demanded funding reaffirmation of federal responsibiUty, and demanded funding at the previous year's levels, which was significantly more than we  had asked for in the first place.  After that painfuUy long battle, there is  stUl so much left to do. I remain inspired  by the energy and soUdarity displayed by  women across the country. These things wiU  keep us strong when we begin to fight this  battle aU over again.  Best wishes.  In sisterhood,  T. Mackenzie  St. John's, Newfoundland  When patriarchy  is threatened  Kinesis:  Non-native womyn everywhere in Canada  should think seriously about the impUca-  tions for them of our governments' behaviour towards the Aboriginal peoples.  The clear message is "we wUl tolerate no defiance of our rule over you, nor wiU we deal  with you as responsible, autonomous adults.  And, if you refuse to remain subservient,  passive, and quiet, we wiU use force against  you." As indeed they have done in the past.  The behaviour of patriarchy is consistent;  under pressure it merely shows more clearly  its true, and violent, nature.  The Natives of North America, and in  particular Native womyn, have always been  treated as incompetent chUdren at best, at  worst, sub-human beings to be shunted off  onto 'useless' land and beaten, kUled, jaUed,  and revUed when they get out of hne. This is  uncomfortably simUar to the way aU womyn  have been treated from time immemorial,  and stiU are in large and smaU ways: physicaUy, psychologically, emotionaUy.  The present outrageous situation at Oka,  Quebec has more to do with patriarchal  control than with land claims or even Aboriginal right. Eariier, we had the immoral  performance of the PM and his cohorts over  the Meech Lake fiasco. We should not be  surprised at this latest example of what  happens when patriarchy is threatened by  its supposed slaves.  rfe.  Clyde Wells' crime was to violate the  Old Boys' Club's first rule, soUdarity; EUjah  Harper's primary role in defeating Meech  could be conveniently ignored since, as a  Native, he's not in the Club. Now, however,  the 'slaves' are rising and cannot be ignored.  The response is official sUence whUe the poUce are sent in.  Womyn can expect no less, a fact speUed  out in Montreal and daily in rising rape  statistics and other violence against us and  our chUdren, if we escalate our demands for  basic freedoms and selfhood. Both Native  groups and non-native womyn must prepare  for an escalation of violence against them.  For both, the only solution may weU be  complete refusal to participate any longer in  this society—a declaration of unUateral separation with the high price that wiU exact.  But which is worse? slavery and begging  or the possibiUty of seU-determination and  dignity. We are not helpless, hopeless, and  without resources of our own. A large number of Aboriginal people seem to have made  their decision about which is worse. When  wUl womyn as a group do as much?  Sincerely,  Eva Durance  Penticton, BC  Extremely  surprised  Kinesis:  On behalf of the West Coast Domestic  Worker's Association (WCDWA), we would  Uke to respond to your article titled "Common denominator is anger" (June, 1990).  We wish to inform you how extremely  surprising it was for us to read about ourselves in a paper. No one in our Association  has been asked about this, nor did we ever  receive a caU about this.  We feel so bad that readers of your pubhcation have been given false information.  For your information, our members come  from different nationaUties. We organize  ourselves to work towards the improvement  of our working conditions. We give support  and friendship, disseminate useful information, and work to change laws that are not  fair to domestic workers. We feel our organization is carefuUy set up to give our members as much power as possible over their  situations.  As women's work, domestic work is often  invisible, undervalued and underpaid. Even  when we are paid for this work, we often experience long hours, low pay, sexual harassment, and invasion of privacy.  Under the foreign domestic movement  program, we come in on visas which require us to hve and work in a particular employer's home. We are totaUy isolated, especially in our first months. When our place  of work and residence are dependant on our  immigrant status, aU aspects of our Uves  here are totally under the control of our employers and that puts us in a very vulnerable situation. Our organization attempts to  help women from many nationaUties to deal  with the problems they experience in this  situation. We hope that this wiU give you a  better sense of what our organization i  It's so unfortunate that in the issue we  were not given a chance to express who we  are and what we do. But we think its not  too late for your readers to be correctly informed. We would Uke Kinesis to include  in its September issue an interview of some  of the women involved with the WCDWA.  Sincerely,  Mary Banasen  for WCDWA  Vancouver, BC  Editor's note: Kinesis will run an interview with the WCDWA in a future  issue.  Thanks for a  refreshing piece  Kinesis:  We want to thank Jean Lum for her article which appeared in the June issue of  Kinesis ("Layers of passion and pain"). It  was a very refreshing piece of painstakingly  dedicated journalism based on independent  analyses on the heart of the matter at hand.  Like Jean, we have also been waiting a  long time for the coming of this great event  which heralds a novel possessing the velocity and magnitude of Disappearing Moon  Cafe by Sky Lee. Now after half-a-Ufetime  of hovering and hankering for works that  depict the abstract rawness and intensity  of humanity, we are to a high degree appeased by the exceUence of this major work  of literature which graces the beauty and  pathos of Ufe, outreaching to the summits  of grandeur.  We also want to comment on Jean's perplexity over the Chinese coUoquiaUsm in the  usage of the phrase 'a wolf's heart and a  dog's lung.' The essence of the quote becomes clear, if one defines the heart and  lung as the vital organs inherently appertaining to aU higher creatures. In this instance, Sky Lee imbibes into that hne the  dominant characteristics that are generaUy  ascribed to the heart of a wolf as the traits  synonymous with prowhng and incalculable  fierceness, and a dog's lung as the counterpart traits of the heartfilled misgivings of a  dog-in-the-manger.  Once again, thank you very much,  John Lee and Shirley Chan  Vancouver, BC  m  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C., V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday-Saturday 11:00-5:30  ER^l  p^J  KINESIS, Bulletin Board  READ THIS  AU Ustings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubUc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis .  Classified are $8 for the first 50 words or  portion thereof, $4 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. DeadUne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wUl not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issue—  come to the Writers Meeting on Wed.  Sept. 5 at 7pm at our office, #301-1720  Grant St. If you can't make the meeting,  call 255-5499. No experience necessary,  all women welcome.  MARK YOUR CALENDAR  The Vancouver Status of Women is holding its Annual General Meeting on Wed.  Oct. 17 at 7pm at our office, #301-1720  Grant St. All members and prospective  members are urged to attend, so mark  your calendars today. Call 255-5511 for  more info.  WOMEN OF COLOUR CAUCUS  Women of Colour are organizing at Kinesis and we welcome all volunteers past,  present and future to an information  meeting on Monday, Sept. 17 at 7pm  at #301-1720 Grant St. For more info,  please call Terrie Hamazaki at 321-0575  or Gwen Bird at 255-2460.  THE BANNER PROJECT  Every women's group across Canada is  being asked to produce a protest banner.  In October these will be collected and  taken to Ottawa to form one huge banner big enough to "tie up" the Parliament  Buildings. See "Movement Matters" on  pg. 2 for details.  WALK FOR LIFE '90  The Vancouver Persons with AIDS Society's 4th annual walkathon for AIDS  awareness and services will take place  Sun. Sept. 30 on the Stanley Park Seawall. Breakfast and ceremonies in Ceper-  ley Park at 9am, walk at 11am, with  concert and barbecue to follow. All proceeds to PWA support programs. Call  688-WALK (688-9255) for more info.  BACK TO THE SOURCE  "The Carved Stones Suite," works by Pn-  ina Granirer, will be shown at the Sandstone Studio, Page's Marina, Gabriola Island, until Sept. 30. Call Gabriola Island, 247-8931 or Vancouver, 224-6795  for more info.  TAKE BACK THE NIGHT  Sept. 21 gather in Oppenheimer Park at  the corner of Powell St. and Jackson St.  in Vancouver at 7:30pm. Social following  march. Wheelchair pushers and childcare  available. Call 872- 8212 to preregister or  for information.  05  WRITERS READING  Join the Burnaby Writers' Society for  their 1st literary reading of the season,  Sept. 23, 1:30pm, Burnaby Art Gallery,  6344 Deer Lake Ave. Admission free, everyone welcome. Call 525-7915 or 291-  9441 for more info.  INSIGHT '90  Edmonton's Third Annual Women's Film  and Video Festival will feature Canadian  and Australian works, including animation and experimental videos, and workshops. Oct. 19-21. For info about tix &  childcare, contact In-Sight, 2nd fir., 9722-  102 St., Edmonton, AB T5K 0X4 or call  (403) 424-0724.  WOMEN'S DINNER DANCE  "Together Again," WPBC's Women's  Dinner Dance, happens Sept. 8. Doors  at 6:30pm, dinner at 7pm. Tix $12 members, $15 non-members. For more info,  call Lois or Rita at 437-3965.  WOMEN WAITING  A series of 10 large paintings depicting  pregnant women, will be shown at The  Lateral Gallery, Women in Focus Arts and  Media Ctr., 849 Beatty St., Sept. 6-Oct.  4. Opening Wed. Sept. 5 at 8pm, with  artist Joy Zemel Long in attendance. Call  682-5848 for more info.  TRADES EXPLORATION  BCIT Trades Exploration Program for  Women starts Wed. Sept. 19, 6:30-  9:30pm. This 14 wk. course, taught  by women, will familiarize women with  trades so that they may make informed  career choices in these areas. Cost: $100.  Location: Burnaby Campus, BCIT. Contact Coordinator, Women in Trades at  432-8233 for more info.  FREE TRADE CONFERENCE  "Free Trade: The Mexican Connection,"  sponsored by the BC Federation of  Labour, will take place Thurs. Sept. 27  at the Westin Bayshore. Featured speakers include Dave Barrett and Marjorie Cohen. Registration: $25 (includes lunch).  Call 430- 1421 to register or for more info.  SALVAIDE WALKATHON  Walk together toward a new El Salvador.  Join the annual Salvaide Walkathon Sat.  Sept. 29 around the Stanley Park Seawall. Registration 8:30am, Ceperley Picnic Area. Guest speakers, prizes, Salvadorean music and food. Proceeds to development projects and rural villages in El  Salvador. For pledge forms and info call  Diane at 254-4468.  WOMANCARE 1990  A forum on women's health, will take  place Oct. 11-12 in Winnipeg, Manitoba. The first in a series of annual forums  presented by the Women's Health Clinic  will focus on women and mental health  and post partum stress. Keynote speaker:  Susan Penfold. Cost and registration info  through: Women's Health Clinic, 3rd fir.,  419 Graham Ave., Winnipeg, Man. R3C  0M3.  WOMEN'S HEALTH, GLOBALLY  The Third International Women and  Health Meeting will be held in Manilla,  the Philippines, on Nov. 3-10, 1990.  The theme this year is "In Search of  Balance Perspectives and Global Solidarity for Women's Health and Reproductive Rights." The conference is being organized this year by women's organizations in the Philippines. For more information, contact Celilia Diocson in Vancouver (604) 464-7859.  MtjsMirawM  THE FRINGE & S.H.E.  PRODUCTIONS  present The Rules Nowadays, a blend of  poetry and song with feminist perspectives on a world where love, friendship,  childhood and aging are of as much concern as war, violence, racism and pollution. A show of laughter and tears, rage  and caring, featuring: The Euphoniously  Feminist and Non-Performing Quintet,  with Nina Cole (flute and piano) and  Sue Malcolm (bass); and poets Helen  Potrebenko and Sandy Shreve. Shows are  at The Main Dance Place, 2214 Main St.;  Tues., Wed., and Thurs., Sept. 11, 12 &  13; 7:30-8:30pm nightly. $5 - employed,  $3 - under/unemployed.  WORKING WITH RITUAL ABUSE  SURVIVORS  Working with ritual abuse survivors—an  introductory workshop will take place in  Nanaimo on Oct. 12. Topics include:  identifying survivors; working with alcoholic and addict survivors; special skills  for working with survivors. Facilitators  are Daniella Coates, Executive Director of  TRAANS (The Ritual Abuse Awareness  Society) and Cheryl Hughes and Maureen McEvoy, therapists in private practice with survivors. For further info or to  obtain a registration form, write to Maya  House, 6731 Auldes Rd., Lantzville, Vancouver Island, BC VOR 2H0 or call 390-  2100. Deadline: Oct. 4th.  THE TRIALS OF EVE  is a limited edition book by Vancouver  artist Pnina Granirer. It explores in visual  and poetic form the history of woman  based on the ancient story of Adam and  Eve. A series of drawings will be on show  at Hycroft, the University Women's Club  in October. The book is available from  Gaea Press (224-6795), 4557 West 4th  MAKING CONNECTIONS  A conference exploring the connections  among addictions, childhood traumas  and eating disorders. Organized by the  Nat'l Eating Disorder Info Centre in  Toronto. Oct. 24-26. To register or more  info call (416) 340-4188 or write to: CW  1-328, 200 Elizabeth St., Toronto, Ont.  M5G 2C4  FEMINIST COUNSELING  The Feminist Counseling Association  meets on the 2nd Tuesday of each month  at Daphne McKeen's office, 2nd floor,  3590 West 41st Ave. at 7:30pm. On  Sept. 11, Monica Carpendale, an art  therapist in private practice will discuss  using art as a therapeutic approach.  NATURAL BIRTH CONTROL  Throw away your pills and learn the Ovulation Method of natural birth control  at the Van. Women's Health Collective.  Next class in mid-Sept. For info call 255-  8284.  WEST COAST EAGLES HEALING  RETREAT  with Shirley Turcotte. September 27-  30, 1990 on Gambier Island. A retreat  designed for survivors who have already  done some work around sexual abuse issues. The cost of $350 includes food, accomodation and transportation. For registration or further information call Penny  Wardell at 875-0779.  THIRD ANNUAL GALA  Victoria Status of Women and Hot  Flashes Cafe are gearing up for the social  event of the season. The 3rd annual Lesbian Dinner Dance, Sept. 29, will feature  Key Change. Tix on sale Aug 1 at SWAG;  all out-of-town tix must be purchased before Sept. 14. Dinner/dance $30, dance  only $12. Mail cheques/money orders to:  SWAG, #320-620 View St., Victoria. BC.  TALES OF SEDUCTION  A new anthology by the lesbians who  brought you "Dykeversions". Now accepting submissions for a seductive,  sexy and humourous fiction and non-  fiction anthology. Send short tales of  your best seduction, best line(s), most  bizarre approach, or the seduction you're  still waiting for to: Tales of Seduction,  Women's Press, 517 College St., Suite  233, Toronto, Ont. M6G 4A2. Deadline:  Feb. 28, 1991.  GROUPS  KARATE FOR WOMEN  Self defense, fitness, confidence. All  women's karate club seeking new members. Shito-ryu karate taught by a female black belt. Tuesdays & Thursdays, 7  pm, Carnarvon Community School, 16th  & Balaclava. Observers welcome. Call  Joni: 734-9816; Rose: 737-0910 or Mi  ica: 872-8982.  SUPPORT GROUP  For women going through our criminal/civil justice system and who have  been survivors of sexual assault as children. Please call Diana at 530-8265 between 7-10pm.  LESBIANS WITH CHILDREN  Weekly support group at Vancouver Lesbian Connection, 876 Commercial Dr.,  Tuesdays 9:30-11:30 am. Break isolation,  discuss the issues (custody, access, relationships), have a coffee. Free childcare at  Eastside Family Place. If possible, please  pre- register for childcare through VLC,  254-8458, or Susan, 254-9164.  CCEC Credit Union  Serving cooperatives,  community businesses,  & the non-profit sector.  ► Lower interest rates on  loans to societies and  cooperatives.  ► Operating loans.  ► Mortgages.  ► Term deposits.  ► Chequing accounts and  other banking services.  •      II     J |  2250 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9  1 pm - 7 pm  10 am -1 pm  254-4100  A1NESIS  September 90 ////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  bulletin Board  GROUP SIG ROUPS  MISSING PIECES THROUGH  ADOPTION  is a national organization that provides  support for those who have been separated by adoption. The S. Vancouver  chapter will meet Thurs. Sept. 20, South  Van Family Place, 7595 Victoria Dr.,  at 7pm. Birthparents, adoptees, adoptive  parents and others welcome to meet on  third Thursday of each month. Info: Millie Strom 255-0255.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre is looking  for women volunteers to do rape crisis  work. Training begins Sept. 26 and runs  10 weeks (Wed. 7-10pm and Sun. 11am-  5pm). Childcare and transportation costs  provided. WAVAW strives to be anti-  racist, anti-classist and anti-homophobic.  Call Terrie 875-1328 for info.  WOMEN & AIDS  HIV-POSITIVE WOMEN'S DROP-IN.  At the Vancouver Women's Health Collective (255-9858), #302-1720 Grant St.  Call Bridget (AIDS Vancouver) at 687-  5220 or Jackie (PWA Society) at 683-  3381 to find out more.  TO YOUR HEALTH  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective needs volunteers. Our next training  will begin in October. Join us and learn  more about women's health issues. Please  call 255-8284.  WOMEN IN TRADES  Meets the last Saturday of each month,  2 pm, in LI of the Brittania Comm. Ctr.  Library, 1661 Napier St. All women are  v>'»lcome.  MEDIAWATCH  A national feminist organization concerned with stereotypical, degrading and  violent images of girls and women in the  mass media, works to improve and diversify these images through lobbying, education and advocacy. Speakers Bureau  Training & other volunteer opportunities:  call Kristin Schoonover 731-0457.  SUPPORT GROUP  Support Group for Womyn Healing  from sexual abuse. Leaderless, non-  judgemental, confidential, supportive atmosphere. Prefer womyn who are in  or have done therapy. Meeting Tuesday  evenings. Leave first name message 251-  4233.  TO YOUR HEALTH  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective needs volunteers. An opportunity to  be involved in women's health issues.  Please call 255-8284.  EX-INMATE SUPPORT  A support group for women who have  been in psychiatric hospitals is being held  every Fri. from noon to 1:30pm at the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre, 44  E. Cordova. 681-8480.  CLASS F ED  CERTIFICATE IN WOMEN'S  STUDIES  The Women's Studies Program at Simon  Fraser University now offers a Certificate  in Women's Studies. This certificate provides students with a combination of academic training in Women's Studies and  practical training in community work on  behalf of women. It is of particular interest to those wanting to become involved,   ;  as well as for those already involved, in   '  promoting the well-being of women  in   .  the community. Program requirements in-   ,  elude completion of about 10 courses (31   .  credit hours) and a 13-week practicum.  Call 291-3593 for further details on the  program and admission requirements.  PRESS GANG PRINTERS  A feminist collective print shop, is needing 2 collective members this fall to fill  the positions of full-time small press operator and bookkeeper/production worker  (will consider two part-time). We need an  experienced bookkeeper but will consider  a printer trainee. Please send resume by  Sept. 12 to 603 Powell St., V6A 1H2  AIKIDO CLASS  Multi-level women's class in Aikido runs  every Friday 6 to 7:30pm at Trout  Lake Community Centre, 3350 Victoria. Learn falls, rolls, blocks, neutralizing techniques, and how to use your energy efficiently. Taught by Tamami Ko-  take, second degree black belt instructor.  Beginners welcome. Info: 253-5109  TRY CO-OP LIVING  City View Co-op, a 31 unit building near  Victoria & Hastings, keeps an open waiting list for applications for membership.  Rent for 1, 2 or 3 BR apts, is $467, 589, or  683, plus a (refundable) share purchase.  To apply, send a S.A.S.E. to: Membership  Ctte, 1885 E. Pender, Vane. V5L 1W6.  SHIATSU TREATMENTS  Ready to work on your stuff? Do it with  your body. I work from the basis that our  bodies remember joys, sorrows, fear, frustrations. Unexpressed, these feelings play  havoc in our lives, undermining our true  potential. Using touch, breath, imagery  and body awareness, my Shiatsu treatments help you free unexpressed emotions  and gain clarity. Astarte 251-5409.  WALKING TOGETHER TOWARDS  A NEW EL SALVADOR  SALVAIDE NATIONAL WALKATHON  SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 29  STANLEY PARK SEAWALL  tii  "With your help we can  rebuild our lives,  plant our crops,  open our own health clinics  and send our children to school...  with your help we can  win the peace we all desire."  Registration 8:30am  Co-Sponsored by: Burnaby Municipal CouncB; Bumaby-Kingsway Riding Association;  Comunitas Unitarian Church of Vancouver.  Proceeds to SalvAide Projects For a pledge form please cat 254-4468.  Veena Sood stars in "Maharini and the Maple Leaf at the Vancouver Fringe Festival,  Sept. 6-16. See page 20 for more information  CLASSIFIEDIC LAS SIRED  SALTSPRING RETREAT  Watch the deer browse as you relax on  the deck. Cozy up to the wood stove  and dream a little (wood provided). Escape to Saltspring Island for a weekend  or a week. Fully equipped women's guest  cabin in a country setting. Close to sea,  lakes and hiking trails. $35 single, $50  double. Special rates for week or month.  Call 653-9475 or write Gillian Smith, C85,  King Rd., RR1, Fulford Harbour, B.C.  VOS ICO.   GROUP FACILITATOR/  PEER COUNSELLOR TRAINING  Battered Women's Support Services will  be offering Group Facilitator/Peer Counsellor training in the Fall of this year. If  you are interested in working with battered women and would like to be considered for the training program, call 734-  1574 for an application form. We look forward to hearing from you. Deadline for  applications is Fri. Sept. 7, 1990.  NEW PUBLICATIONS  Strategies for Change: from women's experience to a plan for action (100pp.,  $9) and Keeping on Track: an evaluation guide for community groups (84pp.,  $15) To order these, or to receive a  complete listing of our publications, contact Women's Research centre, 2245  W. Broadway, Vancouver, BC V6K 2E4,  (604) 734-0485  RESEARCHER WANTED  Maya House is a residential treatment  centre for chemically dependant women  We run a holistic program with a feminist orientation. We are looking' for an  MA or MSW candidate who would like  to work with us this fall doing some outcome research. We can pay an honorarium and have some travel funds. Write:  Maya House, 6731 Auldes Rd., Lantzville,  Vancouver Island, BC VOR 2H0. Attn: Susan Strega. Tel: 390-2100  READ LESBIANEWS:  Monthly events, information, ideas from  Victoria's lesbian feminist community.  Sample issue/back issues $2 each. Yearly  subscription (mailed in plain lavender  wrapper) $18. Cheques to Debby Gregory, LesbiaNews, PO Box 5339, Station  B, Victoria B.C. V8R 6S4.  FEMINIST AND LESBIAN BOOKS  Canada's largest selection in English  and French: literature, theory, spirituality, incest, film, erotica and more. Just  write for our free annotated catalogue.  L'Androgyne Bookstore, 3636 St. Laurent, Montreal, Quebec H2X 2V4. Tel:  (514) 842-4765  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKERY  Try our new fruit  scones — blackberry,  blueberry, raspberry &  strawberry — plus our  regular whole wheat,  cheese, ham &  cheese, and raisin  scones. Jalapeno  scones available on  Fridays & Saturdays.  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  A part of CRS Workers' Co-op  HOUSEMATES WANTED  Three mature, non-smoking lesbians looking for two more lesbian housemates to  complete our lovely, spacious Kitsilano  home. We are looking for housemates  who will have the energy and commitment to live communally. As we already  have two cats, we are unable to accept  any more pets. The two rooms for rent are  $300/mo, not incl. utilities. Rooms are  available Sept. 1. For more info please  call 737-0910.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Our all women's Caribbean beachfront  guesthouse awaits you. Beautiful, LF  owned Spanish style villa on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic  Small tropical gardens, oceanside pool,  spacious comfortable common areas with  large balconies and magnificent ocean  view. Private, large, airy guestrooms,  sumptuous meals & drinks, relaxing massages & healing crystal readings. Room  rates: $330 single; $440 double per week.  For reservations call our Toronto friend,  Suzi, at (416) 462-0046 between 9am-  10pm.  KINESIS. LI61Z8SRL 4/91  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST HALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC   V6T 1Z8