 3pec5orl £o!iecficms Se?ial  cK APRIL 1999 Are you a good citizen?...pg 11    CMPA $2.25 KINESIS  #309-«7? E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-7508  Email: kinesis@web.net  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meetings are on Tues April 6  and Tues May 4 at our new office,  309-877 E. Hastings St. Production for  our May 1999 issue is from Apr 20-  27. All women welcome even if you  dont have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller,  Kelly Haydon, Agnes Huang, Jenn Lo,  Laura Quilici, Amal Rana,  Colleen Sheridan (on leave),  Ellen Woodsworth  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Nancy Pang, Bernadette Phan  Tracey Palmer, Leanne Johnson,  Dorcas Wilkins, Lin Khng  Monica K. Rasi, Robyn Hall, Fatima  Jaffer, Jehn Starr  Marketing: Jenn Lo  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Production Coordinator: Amal Rana  Designer: Jenn Lo  Canadian? Who's Canadian  March 25, 1999  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  * DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Inside  KINESIS  ^News About Women That's Not In The Dallies  News  Canada's reworking its immigration and citizenship laws 3  by Agnes Huang  The Vancouver Lesbian Centre says goodnight 4  by Wei Yuen Fong  Suprise, surprise: women and youth shafted by UI "reforms" 5  by Agnes Huang  "Paul Martin, get your thiefing hands out of our UI coffers" 6  by Barb Byers and Beth Smillie  Features  Poisonous potatoes in PEI, and other GE stories 9  by Sharon Lubchuk  A biotech riddle for you 10  Why a World March for Women in the Year 2000? 15  from information prepared by the March organizers  First Filipino-Canadian Women's National Consultative Forum 16  Filipino youth take on racism 16  by May Farrales  Understanding the context behind Filipino migrant workers 17  by Joy Sison-de Guzman  We, the women of the world demand: 18  from information prepared by the World March organizers  Centrespread  Are you a good Canadian citizen? Test your knowledge 11  with "official" information from the Department of Citizenship and  Immigration, and "real" information from the illegal aliens at  Kinesis  Arts  Review of Tamai Kobayashi's exile and the heart 19  by Denise Lin Khng  Queen Latifah says "Ladies first" 19  reviewed by Mary Logan  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Letters 4  What's News 7  compiled by Leanne Johnson and Fatima Jaffer  Movement Matters 8  compiled by Dorcas Wilkins and Amal Rana  Bulletin Board 20  compiled by Trena White  c/ot some, ne.u/s   -for us?  Then, come to our  Story Meetings...  the first Tuesday of every month  at 7:00pm  at 309-877 E. Hastings St  Next Meetings:  April 6  May 4  Or call us at (604) 255-5499  What happened to our UI benefits  ^N  (   (|     I  >      ill  ptfA  \  &v A'  One potato, two potato ..  "As we go marching, marching..." 15 As Kinesis goes to press, we ask our  readers who have citizenship status in  Canada to reflect upon their rights and responsibilities as "Canadians." Many of us  know the rights accorded to us as citizens  of Canada, but how many of us know the  corresponding reponsibilities?  Indeed, how many of us are aware that  we, as citizens of Canada, have the responsibility to "eliminate discrimination and injustice?" Interesting isn't it, given that there  is so much discrimination and injustice in  Canada.  As Kinesis goes to press, a few of us  spent part of the day at a memorial service  for a young woman. She was 17-years old;  Two-Spirited, from the Nuxalk and  Kwagiutl Nations, and living in the inner  city of Vancouver. On a Saturday night, she  hung herself.  Do people like Kari Simpson of the  Citizens Research Institute, who regularly  spew anti-homosexual rhetoric, honour  their citizenship responsibility to "eliminate  discrimination and injustice?" Do representatives in federal and provincial governments which continue policies aimed at the  assimilation and genocide of Aboriginal  peoples in Canada take seriously their responsibility as citizens to "eliminate discrimination and injustice?"  As Kinesis goes to press, we remember  Rajwar Ghakal and eight members of her  family, all of whom were murdered by  Ghakal's estranged husband on April 5,  1996 in Vernon, BC. Did the RCMP officers  in Vernon, who quite possibly could have  prevented 10 deaths if only they had followed the Attorney General's Violence  Against Women in Intimate Relationships  Policy, take seriously their responsibility as  citizens to eliminate the injustice of violence  against women?  If the answer is "no" to any of these  questions, then those who failed in their  responsibilities as "Canadians" should be  asked to turn over their citizenship cards.  As Kinesis goes to press, we urge all of  you who have the privilege and security of  citizenship to act on your responsibility to  "eliminate discrimination and injustice."  We dedicate this issue to Clarissa  Jonella Hunt, to Rajwar Ghakal, and to all  other women who have faced discrimination and injustice because the citizens of  Canada were irresponsible.   miF  |jfi   nmrfr.^J  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members of VSW, renewed  their memberships or subscriptions to Kinesis, or who made donations during the month  March.  Catherine D'Aoust * Shannon Ash * Christopher Gainor * Thresa Healy *  Jacqueline Luce * Alex Maas * Catherine McNeil * Debra Parks * Carol Pettigrew *  Linda Shuto * Debra Sutherland * Shelagh Wilson *  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Helen Babalos * Wendy Baker * Merlin Beltain * Lissa Geller * Jody Gordon *  Erin Graham * Tamara Knox * Barbara Lebrasseur * Valerie Raoul * Linda Shuto *  Sheilah Thompson  Many thanks also to the following women and organizations for supporting this  year's tenth annual Recommending Women fundraising gala through their ticket purchases, donations or sponsorship:  Veda Abu-Bakare * Sherry Baker * Barbara Curran * Louise Debruijne * Joan  Flood * Noga Gayle * Erin Graham * Ali Grant * Noma Horner * Audrey Johnson *  Naomi Katz * Karen Kilbride * Andrea Lebowitz * Heather Leighton * Ursula Litzcke  * Myrtle Mowatt * Eha Onno * Marion Poggemiller * Catherine Revell * Gale Stewart  * Elaine Young * BC Federation of Labour * Coffey Millier & Co. * Leslie J. Muir Law  Corporation  Moving?  Let us  know!  Name:  New Address:.  .Fax:  Phone:    e-mail:    KIN6SIS;#309-877 €. Hastings St., Tel:(604)255-5499;Fax:(604)255-7508  TGIS [thank goddess it's Spring]!!! The  first "official" day of Spring brought with  it sunshine and much needed inspiration  within Kinesis. With not a raindrop in sight  and blue skies everywhere, we couldn't  help having some fun with our April issue.  When in dire need of comic inspiration, the  women at Kinesis know that we can always  count on... our esteemed federal government, of course.  Originally, we wanted to use an image  of her august majesty, the Queen of England (and of Canada). But thanks to some  timely intervention by one of our volunteers [TGIB: thank goddess for Bernadette!],  we realized it might not be prudent, or for  that matter legal, to manipulate Queenie's  image. What a let down.  Have no fear! We found alternatives.  Given the recent activity (fervour?)  around immigration (or dis-immigration),  we decided it was time to test the "Cana-  dian-ness" of our readers. So grab a comfy  chair, a reliable pen and those all important grey cells and see how well you do on  our very own, made-to-order Kinesis citizenship test [see pages 11 to 14.]  This month's fun and fabulous issue  would not have been possible without the  creativity, energy and support of our amazing volunteers. We would like to extend  effusive thank-you's to all of them, especially Bernadette Phan and Tracey Palmer  whose illustrations appear in the  centrespread, the back cover, and all over  the place... We would also like to extend a  warm welcome to some of the new voices  that have made their way into this month's  issue. Welcome to Mary Logan, Barb Byers,  Beth Smillie, Sharon Lubchuk, Lin Khng,  May Farrales and Joy Sison-de Guzman.  The beginning of Spring always conjures up immediate associations: flowers in  full bloom, longer days and, of course,  Spring cleaning! In order to usher in the  months before Summer in a proper manner, we've decided to have a Spring cleaning party on Saturday, April 17th from noon  to 5pm. So, if you're feeling energetic and  want to help transform the production  room into a well-oiled, well-organized Kinesis producing machine, then join us. And  of course, we do plan to havemuch much  fun... there will be music, dancing, laughs,  lots of silly-ness, and maybe (hopefully) a  BBQ. So come on down.  Oh and don't forget... We are also planning on having a benefit party sometime  in October to celebrate 25 years of Kinesisl  More reasons to parteee! If you want to help  out with the organizing—and we do need  help, lots of it—give us a jingle.  Amidst all this fun, we don't want you  to forget that we'll be back in production  for our May issue from April 18 to the 25?  Drop by. Who knows? We might even let  you doodle on the Queen's photo. If that  doesn't do it for you, try out one of our  story meetings on the first Tuesday of the  month—next ones: April 6 and May 4th.  One last thing before we sign off... we'd  like to re-welcome Amal Rana and Jenn Lo.  Remember, six months ago, we introduced  Amal as our new Production Coordinator  and Jenn as our new Designer and Marketing Coordinator? Well, back then, they had  just started on contract positions. Now that  their contracts have ended, we ecstatic to  say that "a decision was made" and they  are now at Kinesis as permanent part-time  staff. (Now we can bug them all we like,  and they can't tell us off.)  Over the past half-year, Amal has been  being like "Nancy Drew" and searching out  all the particulars on our lovely volunteers  at Kinesis—such as their addresses, birthdays, signs, pet peeves... and their height  when they got their Canadian citizenship  (Bernadette was four feet tall.) As well as  building up the Kinesis volunteer base (and  finding ways to entertain women in the  production room), Amal has been busily  working with Rita Dhamoon and other  members of VSW's Volunteer Development  Committee to develop an overall volunteer  program here at #309-877 East Hastings  Street.  As for Jenn, she certainly has revolu- j  tionized the look of Kinesis. Nowadays,  scattered across the pages of each and every  issue, readers find boxes, fun fonts, and all  kinds of funny shapes and shades. Jenn is  having lots of fun—sometimes too much  fun—making the pages look pretty and  checking out all our clip art options. Jenn's  also been working on building up our advertising and distribution revenues, which  are in need of help. And she's been spotted, at least once every month, running  around with a gang! (The Kinesis Marketing Gang, that is.)  We were going to spread gossip about  Amal and Jenn, but we decided not to because we're too shy... and because we know  they'd get us back twice as hard. But, if you  do want to know the real truth about what  they do around here (and elsewhere)... you  know where to find us. In the meantime,  hello again to Amal and Jenn. We look forward to the next six... years?!  Well that's all for this month, inside  Kinesis. Till next month, happy Spring  cleaning... and don't forget to take some  time to relax and leaf through this issue.  KttSlS JNIews  RI^HT   OP IAH0M$ fE!?\  AWLT  * <ft5.0o  STUDENT  REFUGEE $ °ftS.  Immigration legislative review in Canada:  On the road  again ...  by Agnes Huang  "My bags are packed, I'm ready to go..."  That's the tune many people living and  working in Canada will be forced to lament  if the federal Liberal government follows  through with its "new directions" for immigration and refugee policy.  Outlined in Building on a Strong Foundation for the 21st Century: New Directions  for Immigration and Refugee Policy and Legislation, the Liberal's proposed changes to  Canada's Immigration Act will deny fundamental rights to many people who come  to Canada, particularly women and people of colour.  While acknowledging that there are  some positive changes being put forward,  Awy Go of the Metro Toronto Chinese and  Southeast Asian Legal Clinic says that,  overall, the problems outweigh any of the  positive changes.  Go says she is disappointed that, while  the government proposes to extend the  right of people to sponsor their same-sex  or common law partners, it does not  broaden the family class category to include  members of a sponsor's extended family.  The Women's Coalition on Immigration and Refugee Issues based in Vancouver is calling for a more realistic definition  of the family that would include all those  with whom the sponsor has a "relationship  of interdependence." This is similar to a  model used in Australia.  The Coalition is also calling for the  elimination of sponsorship agreements,  which require sponsors to be financially  responsible for those sponsored. The Coalition's Zara Suleman says sponsorship requirements open many women up to all  kinds of abuse and leaves them vulnerable  to state sanctions if they "break" the sponsorship agreement.  Nandita Sharma, also with the Coalition, says one of the most troubling aspects  of the government's immigration proposals is its stated intent to facilitate a greater  number of people entering Canada as "temporary foreign workers." People in this category—most of whom are women and people of colour—will be allowed into Canada  only for their labour, and will not be accorded any of the rights given to permanent residents or landed immigrants.  It is precisely because the government  can determine the conditions under which  "temporary foreign workers" work that the  Liberals are promoting this category. "Temporary foreign workers" are legally required to work at a particular job, for a  particular employer, in a particular part of  the country.  "If they do not meet or change any of  these conditions without written permission from an immigration officer, they face  deportation," says Sharma. In contrast, the  Canadian government cannot, by law, force  Canadian citizens or permanent residents  to work wherever and in whatever capacity the government wants.  Essentially, the government is creating  two tiers of admittance—one for people to  with rights, and another for people without any rights. "Temporary foreign workers' form an indentured labour force in  Canada," says Sharma.  Women's groups have also raised concerns about the Liberal government's proposals related to the discretionary power  of immigration officials, the appeals processes, and enforcement of legislation.  For example, the federal government  has proposed restricting the use of discretionary power by immigration officers to  accept applications on humanitarian and  compassionate (H&C) grounds. Many  H&C cases involve people who have had  their refugee claims turned down, people  who've overstayed their visitor visas, lesbians and gays, and people who came to  Canada "illegally" and have been living underground for a long time.  Awy Go says there is no reason for the  government to limit H&C applications.  "The majority of people who apply for  H&C are denied," says Go. "There's no rationale for this other than to cut people off  from perhaps the only way they can normalize their status in Canada."  The feds are also proposing to restrict  the right to appeal, particularly for those  deemed as "criminals" However, many  activists, including Sedi Minachi of the Vancouver Status of Women, raise questions as  to how such "labels" will be determined.  Of particular concern is that immigration officials will be given more power to  go to a foreign government to get information on immigrants in the name of "national  security."  "This will mean that a lot of people  who never should have been declared a national security risk will be seen as one," says  Minachi. "At the same time, the federal  government wants to restrict the avenues  of appeal.  The direction the Liberal government  is heading in terms of refugee legislation is  all linked to Canada's foreign and trade  policies, says Go. For example, Canada  would never openly recognize China as a  refugee producing country because Canada  wants to to do business with China. "This  means Canada will not have overseas refugee offices in China, so the only option for  Chinese people is for them to come to  Canada—that is, to apply inland—to make  a refugee claim.  Ironically, regarding the determination  of refugees, the federal government seems  to hold the notion that those who are overseas are "genuine" refugees, while those  who somehow find their way into Canada  are "queue jumpers" and not real refugees.  This is a big assumption to make.  For inland refugees, this explains the  proposal that would require them to make  a claim within 30 days of arriving in  Canada. The danger is that many people  who flee their home countries and come to  Canada may not be aware of all the procedures and grounds for applying for refugee status, such as gender persecution or  persecution based on sexual orientation.  The government is also trying to eliminate the right to make multiple claims for  refugee status. Go says the feds are working on another assumption: that multiple  claims mean false claims. However, there  is a high success rate—50 percent—on multiple claims, which indicates that the initial claim was valid in the first place.  Go says these proposals are all being  driven by an enforcement agenda and a  desire by the government to deport people  as fast and "efficiently" as possible without regard for their circumstances in  Canada.  So much for upholding the responsibility of citizenship to "eliminate discrimination and injustice."  APRIL 1999  ktyE^I  US News  Resources for lesbians in Canada:  VLC closes its doors  by Wei Yuen Fong  The party's over... The first and only centre for lesbians in Canada is closing its  doors after 13 years. On March 31st, the Vancouver Lesbian Connection will vacate the  space it has occupied since opening in September 1985 at 876 Commercial Drive.  When the VLC was started, the main goal was to get lesbian groups together in one  centre and to create a focal point for the lesbian community. Women worked for more  than a year and a half before the doors of the centre opened, doing benefit dances, supporting other groups, and working out the VLC's Basis of Unity.  Last September, the VLC put out a call for more women to join its Coordinating  Collective to ensure the continuation of the centre and that its direction meets the needs  of the community. Despite the efforts of several committed women to staff the centre,  fundraise and continue to provide programs, the VLC faced many obstacles to keeping  the centre running in a meaningful way.  The Board which took over the centre's operations in 1996 has had to deal with  increased competition for fundraising dollars, a lack of casino revenues due to new  gaming regulations, high staff and volunteer turnovers and a resulting lack of continuity in programming, and struggles to be inclusive to all queer women.  Members of the Vancouver Lesbian Connection at the 1997 International  Women's Day rally in Vancouver  Throughout its herstory, the VLC has been an active part of Vancouver's lesbian and  gay, and later queer, political landscape, providing a space for women to drop-in, meet  and organize, information and referral services, and peer counselling. The centre has  run various self-help and support groups, coming-out groups, a youth group, and a  lesbian moms group. The VLC was also involved in organizing special events—like the  "Under the Rainbow" youth conference, a Winter Toy and Food Drive, and art openings—and engaged in various other community education, outreach and political action  projects. It has also supported community volleyball and softball teams.  The VLC Coordinating Collective wishes to thank all the women who have come  forward in response to their calls for volunteers and the many women who have given  their time and energy over the years to provide services for women and keep the centre  running.  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 1N4  (604) 669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Letter  Noticed the absence too  Dear Kinesis,  Thank you for your indefatigable efforts; whenever I present a paper at a  conference outside Canada, I mention Kinesis at least once as an example of the  wonders women can create by working together.  In your most recent issue, one line prompted me to put my response in  writing. In your story on the vigil held for Poonam Randhawa [March 1999,]  you said, "Notably missing from the crowd were individual women and women's groups whose faces and banners are often seen at other events...."  It reminded me of the time Sunera Thobani visited the university where I  teach. She came soon after she was elected President of NAC [the National Action Committee on the Status of Women.] I was there for the same reason. I was  there when her predecessor Judy Rebick had visited a year earlier when the  head of our national women's organization speaks, no matter who she is, I  make every effort to be there.  For Judy Rebick, there was a standing-room-only crowd in our largest auditorium. For Sunera Thobani, who was brilliant as usual in her total grasp of  facts and figures, the audience consisted of a mere handful of people: six or  seven from the Immigrant Women's Association, four or five First Nations women  and men, five or six women students, and about six faculty members, of whom  three were born in India (two men and myself), and one of the white women  was from the host-department. Consider what this means when I add that we  have 20 faculty members who teach Women's Studies courses, 3,000 women  students, and a strong Women's Studies programme.  I have other such entries in my anecdotal data file.  I mention this not only to share my frustration but to ask what we can do to  bridge the gap between white feminists and non-white feminists here in Canada.  Uma Parameswaran  Winnipeg, Manitoba  #>■  PRAIRIES OFFICt  233 10 SI. NW Calgary, AB T2N 1V5  |   Ph: (403) 283-2871 Fax: (403) 283-2275  800-276-3847 ehaug@web.nef  Overseas Position  CUSO is currently recruiting Canadian volunteers with professional  experience in women's organizing, social justice, social welfare  and adult education for two year placements with local women's organizations in Ghana, Thailand and Chile. CUSO supplies  health benefits, travel to posting, language training, and a basic  living allowance. If you are interested, please check out our web  page at www.cuso.org or email our office in Calgary:  ehaug@web.net News  Women's access to unemployment insurance in Canada:  El, El...  No!  by Agnes Huang  Shocking news out of Ottawa today...  "UI changes hit youth, women" screamed  off the front page of The Globe and Mail.  Did this revelation appear in February  1996 when federal Finance Minister Paul  Martin announced the overhaul of the unemployment insurance system in Canada?  No. This news followed a report released  by Human Resources and Development  Canada (FIRDC) more than three years later  on March 18,1999.  The monitoring report, required under  the 1996 legislation, shows that the number  of women who were able to successfully  claim UI—or EI (employment insurance) as  the Liberals call it—benefits had declined  by 20 percent since the changes, as compared to 16 percent for men. The figures  for young people were even more dramatic—the number of people under 25 who  were able to collect UI dropped by 27 percent, compared to just eight percent for  middle-aged workers.  When questioned on the findings by  his own ministry, HRDC minister Pierre  Pettigrew said he wasn't prepared to act  until he knew the reasons behind the decline in women's claims.  Beth Smillie, coordinator of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour's (SFL) UI  Campaign, laughs at suggestions that the  government doesn't know "why." Unions,  women's organizations, unemployed  workers and others had all predicted this  outcome ever since the Liberal government  started gutting Canada's social programs  in 1994.  "No one should be surprised by the  conclusion of the report, least of all the federal government," says Smillie.  The changes to the UI Legislation in  1996 were supposed to make it easier for  women and young people to access the  system, but quite the opposite has happened.  Under the old system, anyone working less than 15 hours a week in a single  job did not qualify for benefits, but they also  did not have to pay premiums. Now, such  workers pay premiums, but many are unable to accumulate enough hours to qualify  under the new benefit system. Under the  old system, workers had to accumulate 300  hours (or 12 to 20 weeks) to qualify; now  they have to accumulate 700 hours in one  calendar year (or 45 weeks).  The new hours requirement is even  more stringent for people who are considered to have a "minor attachment" to the  labour market—that is, those who do not  have a long history in the paid labour force.  Such workers are required to work 910  hours within a calendar year in order to  qualify for EI benefits. Many who fall in  this category are students and women who  have recently entered the paid labour force  after their children turn school age.  "It comes as no surprise that the  [HRDC1 report says the reforms have  achieved their objective of saving money  and encouraging individuals to stay longer  in jobs," says Joan Grant-Cummings, president of the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women. Those savings have  "You have only worked 677 hours. Do not pass go.  Do not collect UI. Go get a job!"  been gained off the backs of those who are  often in most need of the support system:  part-time workers.  Instead of helping unemployed people, the Chretien government is "banking"  on them—taking money from the UI account to reduce the federal deficit, says SFL  president Barb Byers. She points out that,  although the federal government has not  contributed a dime to the UI program since  1990, it has robbed the fund of more than  $20 billion in surplus revenue over the last  five years [see page 6.]  The increase in the accumulated hours  requirement makes it particularly difficult  for women who work part-time between  having babies to qualify, especially if they  have their children close together.  HRDC's monitoring review did not  assess the number of women who qualified for maternity benefits under the old  system but not tho new system. In fact,  HRDC says calculating such figures would  be "too expensive." However, the Canadian  Labour Congress was able to do the calculations using HRDC's own data and found  that 12,000 fewer women qualified for maternity benefits in 1997 (the year the changes  took effect) than in 1996 (when the old rules  were still in place.)  One woman who was denied both  regular and maternity benefits because of  the changes to the UI policies has turned  her case into a constitutional challenge.  Kelly Lesiuk was living in Brandon,  Manitoba with her husband and two-year  old daughter in August 1997 when her husband accepted a job in Winnipeg. Lesiuk  stayed in Brandon, continuing to work  part-time as a registered nurse at Brandon  General Hospital, in order to sell their  house. It wasn't until March 1998 that  Lesiuk and her daughter were able to move  to Winnipeg. By that time, she was four  months pregnant.  When she arrived in Winnipeg, Lesiuk  applied for regular UI benefits, only to be  informed that she fell short of the 700 hours  needed to qualify; she had worked 677  hours. After several frustrating conversations with EI staff and a recounting of her  hours, the conclusion remained the same.  Lesiuk then inquired about changing  her application to sick leave, which is the  first step in applying for maternity leave.  The EI staff told her it didn't matter; she  still needed 700 hours.  Neither she nor her husband were  aware the rules had changed. "We assumed  that the UI system—our safety net—would  be there when we needed it," says Lesiuk.  "We realize that we made a very costly assumption." Lesiuk was forced to return to  work just six weeks after her second child  was born on October 12,1998.  Ironically, the last time she applied for  UI benefits—when she was pregnant with  her first child—Lesiuk had worked less  than half as long as this time around. In  1995, when only 300 hours were required  to receive UI benefits, Lesiuk had worked  part-time for a year-and-a-half. She easily  qualified.  Between her first pregnancy and this  request for leave, she worked part-time for  two-and-a-half years, but that was not  enough to qualify her for UI benefits. "I just  figured I'd worked twice as long, so it was  the farthest thing from my mind that I  wouldn't get it," says Lesiuk.  Lesiuk did try and find work at two  hospitals in her area in Winnipeg. One hospital said it wasn't taking anyone except  internal applicants, and the other told her  to come back in the month when they are  hiring summer relief positions.  Even if Lesiuk had found work as soon  as she arrived in Winnipeg, it would not  have been a simple matter of making up  those missing 33 hours, because eligible  hours are counted by calendar year. The  bulk of her insurable hours were accumulated in 1998, not 1999. Lesiuk says the only  way she could have qualified for EI would  have been if she found full-time or near full-  time work.  As far as EI officials were concerned,  there was nothing Lesiuk could do. In fact,  she was told there was no sense in appealing because EI was not going to change the  rules for her.  That didn't stop her, though. She talked  to someone at the Manitoba Nurses Union  who referred her to the Community Unemployed Help Centre, who then put her in  touch with a lawyer at the Public Interest  Law Centre of Manitoba. From there, the  legal challenge began.  Lesiuk's claim alleges that the EI Act  violates the Charter of Rights and Freedoms  in that it discriminates against part-time  workers, most of whom are women, because they often can't get enough hours to  qualify for UI benefits.  Although she lost the first stage of the  appeal before a board of referees, she did  receive a sympathetic ear. "Under the old  legislation, the claimant would have been  covered for employment insurance. It is  truly unfortunate that with the bringing in  of the new legislation the very people that  this legislation was to protect is hindering  them from EI benefits," the board wrote.  However, the board said it did not have the  jurisdiction to rule on constitutional matters.  Lesiuk has since received a grant from  the Court Challenges Program to allow her  to take her case further, to federal court. A  hearing will likely be held early in the Year  2000.  Despite juggling family and work commitments, Lesiuk feels it is important to  pursue the constitutional challenge. "Having gone through this myself, I know what  a crappy thing it is," she says. "I couldn't  help but think other people are going  through this and that something should be  done. I was hoping to bring it to the government's attention."  The question is: Why hasn't the government been paying attention all along?  KINESIS News  The Liberal's unemployment insurance legislation:  The biggest heist of all  by Barb Byers and Beth  Smillie   A recent report in the  Globe and Mail suggests federal Finance Minister Paul  Martin is hurt by the growing public perception that  the Chretien government has been  HSl^^ stealing money  ibbbbeW       from the un-  employ-  ment   insurance  fund.  Had  Canadians  known  the minister was  sensitive to  public criticism, many (including the one  million      unemployed    who    no  longer qualify for ben-  I   efits) would have made  more time in their day to  hurl invectives at Martin  changes to UI.  It was Ontario Premier  Mike Harris who made headlines  when he accused Martin of being a  thief who was stealing money from  the UI fund. Since Martin has "borrowed" more than $20 billion from  the fund over the last five years, it  could be argued that Harris was practising  "restraint" in his description.  The Liberal heist of the UI fund began  with the party's election in 1993. As part of  its overhaul of Canada's social program, the  government announced plans to "modernize" the unemployment insurance program.  Created in 1940, the UI program was  designed to provide income support to  Canadians during periods of unemployment. The fund, which is financed through  premiums paid by working Canadians and  employers, generates about $19 billion a  year, making it the largest social program  operated by the federal government. (The  government hasn't contributed a cent since  1989).  Instead of restoring benefits to the  unemployed, Paul Martin and the Liberals  began banking on them by cutting benefits  and creating surpluses in the UI account.  In Martin's first budget, the unemployment  insurance program was cut by $2.4 billion  a year. Changes also were introduced that  required people to work longer to collect  benefits, reduced the benefit period and cut  payments.  At a Canadian Press club dinner in the  spring of 1994, Prime Minister Jean  Chretien warned people who trade  "paycheques for unemployment and sit at  home drinking beer that they were going  to be in for some changes."  Now, after five years of Liberal "reform," the majority of unemployed Canadians no longer qualify for benefits. Nationally, 36 percent are eligible for coverage,  down from 87 percent in 1990. In Saskatchewan, the percentage is even lower. In 1997,  for example, 19,000 of the province's 30,000  unemployed did not qualify for benefits  under the UI program, which the Liberals  renamed Employment Insurance in 1996  when it enacted more cuts. Those who do  qualify receive lower benefits for fewer  weeks.  As Kevin Hayes of the Canadian Labour Congress (CLC) points out in a recent  edition of [the Canadian Centre for Policy  Alternatives'] The Monitor, the UI program  is at the heart of the Chretien government's  fiscal strategy. By reducing UI benefit payments from $18 billion in 1993 to $11.8 billion in 1998, the government has created  enormous surpluses in the UI fund, which  Martin has "borrowed" to balance the  books. "If the UI account is pulled from the  I .eft out in the cold  In January, the Canadian Labour  Congress released some statistical  analysis that proves "reforms" made  by the federal Liberal government to  the unemployment insurance system  (or as the feds call it,"Employment Insurance") have hurt unemployed  people in Canada.  Called "Left out in the cold," the  series of stastical information is based  on Statistics Canada data over a 10  year period, which the CLC purchased. The figures presented in the  CLC's 100-page document are broken down by region, province and  riding, and by gender and age.  The CLC found, for example, that  the portion of unemployed women  receiving UI benefits was 70 percent in  1989, but only 37 percent in 1996. For  men, the situation wasn't much better  with the percentage dropping from 77  to 40 percent. When the statistics concerning unemployed women are broken down by age categories, they reveal an even more disturbing situation,  particularly for younger women. For  women in the 15 to 24 age bracket, the  numbers went from 49 percent in 1989  to 15 percent in 1996. (It should be noted  that the 1989 figure is already extremely  low to begin with.)  As a strategy for bringing this information to the attention of politicians  and the public, the CLC sent out the UI  stats related to each election riding to  the members of parliament representing those constituencies. (Ask your MP  what he/she thinks about the UI situation.)  For a copy of" Left out in the cold,"  contact the Canadian Congress of  Labour at 2841 Riverside Dr, Ottawa,  Ontario, KIV8X7; tel: (613) 521-3400;  fax: (613) 521-4655. "Left out in the  cold "can also be downloaded from  the CLC's website: http://www.clc-  ctc.ca. (Warning: you need or will  have to download Adobe Acrobat  3.0 in order to access the website.)  government's revenue and expenditures,  there is no federal budget surplus," Hayes  points out. [See box below.]  Although the government is required  to repay the UI money it borrows with interest, Finance Minister Martin had been  planning to amend the EI Act this winter  to allow the government to keep the surplus. Public opposition and "thieving" accusations appear to have thwarted those  ambitions.  According to the recent report in the  Globe and Mail, government polls show Canadians disapprove of Martin-the-thief's  handling of the UI account and want the  government to establish a separate UI fund.  (The CLC and all four federal opposition  parties also have been calling for the creation of an independent UI commission.)  Apparently, it was this disapproval  rating that prompted the Finance Minister  to lower UI premium rates in December (a  move coincidentally demanded by big  business) and abandon plans to amend the  UI Act—at least for now.  The CLC and federations of labour are  co-ordinating national and provincial campaigns to restore our unemployment insurance program so it provides adequate benefits to the unemployed, workers on maternity and child care. The labour movement is adamant that UI funds must not be  used to pay the federal deficit, to give tax  cuts or to finance training for non-UI claimants. Labour representatives also want to  discuss the repayment of the $20 billion.  But Finance Minister Martin remains  tight-lipped about repayment. Nor is he  discussing plans to restore benefits to the  unemployed.  Until restitution is made the "thief" reference may be the kindest description Martin should hope for.  Barb Byers is President of the Saskatchewan  Federation of Labour. Beth Smillie is coordinating SFL's UI campaign. This article is reprinted from Briarpatch, February 1999.  iiiiniiiinri  MJllJMJAIM.EHIHll  Outside Lower Mainland  Victims Information Line  660-9382  1-800-663-1441  1-888-795-6111  1-800-563-0808  1-888-606-LIVE (5483)  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  Discounts/or  book clubs  Special orders  welcome  KINESIS What's News  by Leanne Johnson and Fatima  Jaffer  Down and out in BC  It seems the government of British  Columbia will try and do anything to restrict the rights of those in need of financial assistance. Under regulation 12 of the  BC Benefits (Income Assistance) Act, individuals with an outstanding warrant are  no longer eligible for income assistance.  This regulation came into effect April 1,  1997. Prior to receiving any financial aid,  the claimant must first deal with their outstanding warrant.  Sound reasonable? What if the warrant  is from another province? The government  has come up with a contingency plan. If  the warrant is from another province and  the individual cannot afford to return there  to deal with the charges, then they can receive aid if they sign a waiver stating that  the charges be waived to British Columbia  for a guilty plea.  What's wrong with that? They may  actually be innocent.  Regulations passed by the provincial  government should not undermine our  rights under the law. Canada's safety net is  being used as to snare the most financially  vulnerable in this province. Regulations  like this one, are a violation of our constitutional rights.  As a result, Judy Parrack of BC Public  Interest and Advocacy Centre (BC PIAC),  Carol Rosset of the Community Law Clinic  and David Mossop of the Community Legal Assistance Society have commenced  three separate legal challenges on behalf of  clients, which will be heard together. The  legal challenge is based on five grounds,  including that it is beyond the statutory  power of the province and that it violates  that Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  The hearing is set to be heard on April  12th at the BC Supreme Court in Vancouver. It is scheduled for six days.  For more information contact Judy  Parrack ofBC PIAC at (604) 687-3044.  Historic vote in Qatar  Women in Qatar went to voting polls  for the first time on March 8. Six women  also ran as candidates—a first as well.  Thousands lined up for hours to vote  for 29 reps on the new central municipal  council. Women voters turned up in greater  number than men at many of the constituencies in the capital, Doha.  In the end, the six women candidates  were defeated. Parliamentary elections will  be held later this year.  Italian feminists  furious: Part II  For the last two centuries, poets have  been trying to define the true nature of love.  It looks like the Italian judiciary will take  over for now.  Italian feminists were outraged by a  court ruling that a man who makes unwanted advances to female staff cannot be  charged with sexual harassment as long as  he is "genuinely in love with the object of  his affections."  This ruling dismissed a claim for compensation by a woman who said she was  forced to leave the engineering firm where  she worked because her employer's sexual  advances had become intolerable and  caused her to become ill. The firm refused  to issue her severance pay and she then  sued for compensation. Her former employer claimed he was in love with her and  lost his head, and the judge ruled in his favour.  Even the Italian media has dubbed the  decision a "charter for lecherous bosses."  A month earlier, Italian women took  to the streets following another misogynist  court ruling. The appeal court ruled that a  woman cannot be raped if she is wearing  tight jeans, since their removal requires a  "measure of cooperation and consent." The  court overturned the conviction of a driving instructor for raping his 18-year old student who was wearing jeans.  Demonstrations in the streets were full  of women wearing tight jeans and carrying signs that said they were "protected  from rape" by wearing the jeans.  Diplomat allowed to  hit his wife  After talk of diplomatic immunity, the  Japanese consul-general based in Vancouver, Shuji Shimokoji, admitted in court to  hitting his wife, Kazuko Shimokoji. The  consul-general received an absolute discharge after pleading guilty to assault in  provincial court in Vancouver.  Police laid charges after the staff at the  Vancouver General Hospital alerted them  when Kazuko was admitted for injuries  that included a black eye and bruises. The  lawyer for the defense stated, "She  [Kazuko] didn't want the charges laid and  after they were laid she wanted them  dropped." (Sound familiar?)  After the charges, the consul-general  was recalled to Japan. Reports circulated  that Shimokoji told police that wife-beating is the Japanese way. Expressing outrage  at this remark, Japanese Prime Minister  Keizo Obuchi stated, "Even between husband and wife, it is never allowed to express feeling through violence."  However, recent statistics contradict  the prime minister. A survey released last  May by the Tokyo metropolitan government—the first ever in the nation—revealed  that one-third of the 1,183 women surveyed  in long-term relationships said they had  been battered by their husbands or boyfriends.  To stress the realities and counter the  myths of violence against women, the Japa-  nese-Canadian Citizen's Association  (JCCA) is holding an information forum on  domestic violence in Vancouver on Saturday, May 8 from 9:30am to 4:00pm at the  JCCA, 511 E Broadway. The forum will be  conducted in English and Japanese. The fee  is $10 and includes lunch. For pre-  registation or for more information, contact  Mariko at (604) 451-4122 or Judy at (604)  876-9858.  A first contract for  McDonald's?  Well, not quite yet.  Last month, the 85 mostly teen-aged  employees at the McDonald's restaurant in  Squamish, British Columbia voted 100 percent in favour of a mediator's recommendations for a first contract. However, the  franchise's owner, Paul Savage, has refused  to accept the mediator Jim Breckenridge's  proposals.  Last August, the McDonald's in  Squamish became the first of the fast-food  multinational's 15,000 chains to unionize  thanks to the efforts of two young women,  Jennifer Wiebe and Tessa Lowinger. The  employees are represented by the Canadian  Autoworkers Union. [A similar bid by the  Teamsters to unionize a McDonald's in Montreal recently failed.]  Breckenridge's recommendations include a 10 to 30 percent wage increase, and  setting up boundaries for discipline, while  ensuring regular employee performance  and wage reviews. '  McDonald's has been fighting the union every step of the way, forcing a strike  vote in December. Savage lost a bid to have  the Labour Relations Board rule the vote  illegal. Expect another strike vote soon.  National standards  for welfare  Women, especially single mothers, are  most dramatically affected by differences  between welfare programs from province  to province, according to a broad three-year  review of welfare programs in Canada.  The lack of national standards for welfare programs means that a single mom in  Alberta is considered "employable" when  her youngest child is six months old, while  in BC, the same mom would not be required  to work outside the home until her child is  seven years old.  The review, conducted by University  of Western Ontario associate professor  Carolyne Gorlick and her assistant Guy  Brethour, also looked at what supports,  such as child care, are offered. The study  found that training and employment services are more limited now, and there are  fewer long-term support programs or educational opportunities. However, again,  that depends on which province you live  in. While some provinces emphasize learning and trahiir.g, others such as Ontario and  Alberta (which have Conservative governments) have opted for "the quickest route  to a job," says Gorlick.  The report says federal cuts to transfer  payments are most directly to blame for  reduced benefits, tighter restrictions and  fewer opportunities for women. In 1995,  Ottawa gave $18.5 million to the provinces  for eduction, health and social assistance.  In 1998, transfer payments stood at $12.5  billion. The federal budget in February has  upped that amount by $11.5 billion over  several years, but earmarked the funds for  health care.  Women hatred or  "crime of passion"?!  More than a thousand people in the  Yukon signed a petition to ban a defence of  "provocation" in cases of femicide  (woman-slaughter), prompting a Yukon  MP to introduce a private members bill in  parliament to eliminate such defences last  month.  NDP MP Louise Hardy says her bill  was in response to the public outcry following the Klassen case. Ralph Klassen was  given a mere five years in prison for strangling his estranged wife Susan, first with  his hands, then with a knotted pillow case.  He claimed he was driven to kill her in rage  when she "taunted" him about his infertility and mentioned another man.  The Klassen case was one case among  many that received mainstream media attention where men killed their wives,  claimed they were provoked, and received  lighter sentences. Repeated lobbying by  women's groups prompted the Justice Minister Anne McLennan to intiate a federal  review of the 109-year old provocation defence.  The Criminal Code defence can reduce  an intentional killing from murder to manslaughter if it can be proven that the crime  was committed "in the heat of passion."  The defence comes from times when the  death sentence could be given for murder,  and a killer could get reduced sentences in  three circumstances—a sudden falling out  between men; a husband discovering his  wife in the act of adultery; or a father catching someone sodomizing his son. Today,  while murder carries a mandatory life sentence with no eligibility of parole for ten  years, there is no minimum penalty for  manslaughter.  The review of the "provocation defence" was introduced by Justice Minister  Anne McLennan in the form of a discussion paper, which was mailed out to anti-  violence groups, some women's organizations, legal bodies, and other  "stakeholders." The deadline for responses  was early March.  Hardy says she despairs of the Liberals doing anything about the defence, despite the review. "I'm not about to let this  go by the wayside waiting for what the Liberals do, because this time they aren't doing anything about this defence," she says.  The discussion paper points out a potential disadvantage of banning the "provocation defence" in such cases is it will not  permit "battered women's syndrome" to be  recognized as a factor in cases where  women kill their abusive partners in delayed response to repeated abuse.  But in reality, the defence has not generally been allowed to be used by women,  apart from a handful of high profile cases  which also resulted in a huge anti-woman  backlash. As well, a 1997 review of 115  women in prison who argued provocation  found the defence was unsuccessful more  often than not, and women do not in fact  benefit from the defence.  Another rationale for maintaining  provocation as a defence, according to the  discussion paper, is that the law recognizes  that "all human beings are subject to outbursts of passion and anger, which may  lead them to do violent acts."  Possible amendments to the Criminal  Code listed in the discussion paper include  limiting the provocation defence only to an  unlawful act, so it cannot be used as a defence against "mere insults," or by a man  whose wife is having an affair, or in any  spousal killings at all.  The results of the review will come  down after the Supreme Court hands down  its ruling next month in the Bert Stone case,  which deals with the defence of provocation. Stone got a four-year sentence for stabbing his wife 47 times with a hunting knife,  because he claimed she wouldn't stop "nagging" him on a car trip in 1991.  BC Attorney General Ujjal Dosanjh was  lobbied by women who sent over a thousand letters to intervene in the case. He  appeared in court last summer to argue for  a heavier sentence for Stone.  [Sources: The Long Haul, The Province,  The Kelowna Daily Courier, The Globe and  Mail, The Vancouver Sun, various emails  and stuff in our heads.] Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Amal Rana and Dorcas  Wilkins  HIV+ woman facing  deportation  An HIV positive woman is under a  deportation order after her request to stay  in Canada on humanitarian and compassionate grounds was rejected.  The woman came from Haiti in 1991.  She is the single parent of a seven-year old  child born in Canada. In 1993, she became  ill and was diagnosed as being HIV positive. Currently, her health is stable because  of the treatment and drugs she received  through a local hospital in Ottawa.  Her physician has stated that without  her medication the woman would die. A  Canadian doctor working in Haiti has written that the access to adequate medical support and treatment for HIV/AIDS is "extremely limited, if available at all." He adds  that in addition to AIDS a very serious risk  for HIV patients in Haiti is tuberculosis,  which is endemic in the country.  Her son has special needs, which are  being addressed in Ottawa. It would be  difficult for him as well if he is forced to  accompany his mother to Haiti. They have  no relatives there who could care for him,  and it is likely that he will be orphaned.  Primarily because of her medical condition, the woman has not been able to find  much paid work. However, she has been  active as a volunteer with a number of organizations.  In January, Citizenship and Immigration Canada rejected her application to be  allowed to stay on humanitarian and compassionate grounds. Pending a review of  this decision, the Federal Court has  "stayed" [put on hold] the removal order.  One of the grounds for granting the stay  order is that the woman would suffer irreparable harm if returned to Haiti.  There is no guarantee that the Federal  Court will overturn Immigration's deci  sion. If the application for judicial review  is successful, the woman is likely to face  immediate removal to Haiti. It is estimated  that the Federal Court will make its decision within a few months.  Her advocates at Community Legal  Services in Ottawa are calling for the minister of immigration, Lucienne Robillard,  to exercise her ministerial discretion and allow the woman to stay in Canada. They are  urgently calling for people to write to the  minister to ask her to reconsider her department's decision to deport this woman. It is  important to state in your letter that this is  an appropriate case for the minister to exercise her discretion.  Address your letter to the attention to The  Honourable Lucienne Robillard, Minister of  Citizenship and Immigration, Jean Edmonds  Building, South Tower, 21st Floor - 365 Laurier  Avenue West, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 111.  Then send your letter to Glynis Ellerington,  Community Legal Services, 422-1 Nicholas  Street, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N7B7. All letters  will be submitted to the minister in one package. For more information, call (613) 241-7008  or email: comlegal@sympatico.ca  Women's health  conference in 2001  At the plenary of the 8th International  Women's Health Meeting (IWHM), it was  unanimously agreed that Canada should  host the next conference. Now, plans are  underway to secure full participation of a  diverse representation of women all across  the country.  The 9th IWHM will take place in the  Year 2001 at the York University campus in  Toronto.  A Canadian National Planning Committee has been formed including Shree  Mulay from McGill University, Marilyn  Wilson from the Canadian Abortion Rights  Action League, Penny Ballem of Children's  and Women's Health Centre of BC in Van  couver, Karen Seabrooke of InterPares, and  Vuyiswa Keyi of the African Women's  Health Network.  The Centre for Research in Women's  Health, Women's College Hospital and  York University through the Centre for  Feminist Studies and the Centre for Health  have taken the responsibility to provide the  necessary infrastructure support for the  meeting.  Toward that end, a small seed-grant  has been secured from Women's College  Hospital and Janet Maher has been retained  to put together the initial grant applications  to support a central co-ordinating office.  A couple of preparatory meetings have  been held in Ottawa with more than 100  women each. During these meetings, the  theme for the conference has emerged. It  will be "Racism and its Impact in Women's  Health," with a particular focus on displaced, refugee and immigrant women.  In the following months, the necessary  committees will be struck and the planning  committee will be set up as well as an email  address. The organizers also hope to produce a bi-monthly newsletter to keep everyone informed.  Support is needed in giving feedback  and developing ideas for the meetings  agenda. Also help is requested in identifying potential sources of funding.  For more information, contact Karen  Seabrooke at ksea@web.net or (613) 563-4801,  Penny Ballem at pbalem@w.womenhosp.bc.ca,  or at (604) 875-2960; Shree Mulay at  SMULAY@VHMED.LAN.MCGILL.CA; or  Marilyn Wilson at caral@caral.ca or (613) 789-  9956.  Same-sex domestic  abuse  Janice Ristock is a lesbian and feminist  who has been doing education and research  on abuse in lesbian relationships for the  past nine years. She is a community activ-  "I think one reason  why there are vast  numbers of women  not involved in  the women's  movement is  because people  don't act until their  arses are burning."  from the Everywoman's  Almanac, Women's Press  ist and Women's Studies professor at the  University of Manitoba. The research has  been funded by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and the Lesbian  Health Fund.  She will be in Vancouver during the  month of April 1999 to continue her research as part of the first Canadian multi-  site study on abuse in female same-sex domestic relationships.  Ristock will be interviewing women  who identify as having been abusive as well  as those who have been abused. All women  (lesbian, bisexual, Two-Spirited,  transgender, queer or heterosexual) who are  currently in, or who have been involved in  a relationship with a woman which involved abuse are encouraged to participate.  All interviews will be confidential.  She will also be gathering information  from counsellors and other social service  providers about the support women in abusive same-sex relationships receive.  The voices of women who've experienced woman to woman abuse must be  heard in order to understand the violence  and to initiate change.  For more information or to set up an interview call (604) 688-9299 from April 3 to  28, and for the confidential voice mail of Janice  Ristock.  cram  c^iedt/te/'  m\\\\\\\mm  Massage  Therapy  Craniosacral  Therapy  736-1910  315-2150 West Broadway,  V6K 4L9  Vancouver, BC  STITCHED  FABRIC BANNERS  MADE TO ORDER  Sima Elizabeth  Shefrin  [604] 734-9395  RECOMMENDING WOMEN X  FUNDRAISING RAFFLE  Great Prizes to be Won!  Trip for two to Jasper aboard VIA Rail Passenger Trains Valued at  $1500  Two nights accommodation at the Coast Hotel in Whistler Valued at  $450  1999 Fringe Festival Super Pass Valued at $500  A Charlescraft bread maker courtesy of The Bay  Also theatre tickets, gift certificates, and much, much more!  $3.00 each  2 for $5.00  Tickets available at  VSW, Women in Print, Liberty Thrift Store  or Call 255-6554  Draw Date:  Thursday, April 15, 1999  Speaking Out For Safe and Respectful  Health Care for Women  COMMUNITY  HEALTH ADVOCATES  There are 10 Volunteer Advocates helping women in  various communities of the Vancouver/Richmond Region.  SPECIAL THANKS to our partners who provide  safe space and support for the Advocates:  so South Vancouver Neighbourhood House  so Richmond Women's Resource Centre  so UBC Women's Centre  so South Asian Women's Centre  so Downtown Eastside Senior Centre  so Multi-Cultural Family Centre  so The Centre  so Women with Disabilities Health Action Group  ! The Vancouver Women's Health  i    Collective supports women in  making their own decisions  about their health care.  (H  Visit the InfoCentre at  #219-1675 W8* Ave  Call for Information & Hours  736-5262 Feature  Food, health, safety, and genetic engineering:  Poisonous PEI potatoes  by Sharon Labchuk  Prince Edward Island has always been  known for its potatoes, but rampant uncontrolled growth has turned the Canadian island province into a potato monoculture.  One out of every six acres of all land on the  island is devoted to potato production-an  increase of almost 70 percent over the past  10 years.  Despite calls by an increasingly  alarmed public for controls on further expansion of the industry, the destruction  continues as forests and hedgerows are torn  down to create more potato land.  The provincial Liberal government  paved the way for the massive Irving empire to open a giant potato processing plant  in 1996, to augment the Irving's smaller existing plant.  The Irvings own land, lease more land  and contract growers to provide the two  processing plants with one billion pounds  of potatoes a year. Wendy's, one of Irving's  best customers, buys close to 200 million  pounds of frozen fries a year for its fast food  outlets. Grocery stores sell frozen PEI potatoes under Irving's "Cavendish Farms"  label.  In Canada's most densely populated  province, most rural residents live near potato fields and it's not uncommon for fields  to run right up to backyards. Rural schools  are islands in a sea of potato fields, with  pesticides sprayed only feet from some  playgrounds. Even town folk have no protection from the sprays. Municipalities allow potato farming on land within towns,  and other smaller villages are completely  surrounded by potato fields.  For many PEI residents, it's impossible to escape drifting pesticides. Potato producers are not required to notify nearby  residents of spray schedules, or even to disclose which poisons are sprayed.  For the last few years, Agriculture  Canada has advised PEI growers to spray  fungicides for blight every four days. If  you've ever seen a tractor hauling a sprayer  with booms extended, it's a fearsome sight-  so frightening that some people grab the  kids, pull the clothes off the line, shut the  windows, and go away for the day. Sadly  though, they return to a poisoned environ-  ment-their homes and property covered in  toxic spray drift.  Vapours from evaporating pesticides  can hang about for days after spraying,  which means that on a four-day spray  schedule there is little relief from the toxic  effects all summer.  Potato producers are supposed to wear  protective gear, including a respirator,  when spraying pesticides and their clothes  are to be washed and dried separately from  the family laundry. Depending on the pesticide used, sprayed fields are not to be  re-entered for up to seven days. Yet potato  producers and government have no concern for children playing in yards and living in homes that adjoin these poisoned  fields.  An American study found that farm  homes within a quarter mile radius of  sprayed fields had levels of pesticide in the  household dust that were higher than levels to which children would be normally  exposed in food and water.  But if government and industry have  no respect for Island residents, they do take  notice when the tourists start to complain.  One US visitor wrote to an Island newspaper, "I am cutting short my visit and would  not care to come again. The unpleasant  chemical taste in my mouth has not left  since I arrived on the Island."  The three most widely used pesticides  on PEI potatoes—chlorothalonil, mancozeb  and metiram—are classed by the US government's Environmental Protection  Agency as probable human carcinogens.  Mancozeb and metiram both rapidly degrade to form ETU (ethylene thiourea), a  carcinogen of some concern that has also  produced birth defects in experimental animals and caused damaging effects on the  thyroid.  And if that's not scary enough,  mancozeb and metiram are both considered  hormone-disrupting     ^^^^^^^^^^^  Clraon Party rt»|IM«i fl«—«* ****/*  Through an Access to Information request, the Green Party of Canada has discovered that,  over the past 1 O years, biotechnology companies and agricultural researchers have conducted  more than 4,200 field trials in Canada using genetically altered crops.  Saskatchewan is leading the provinces in allowing such tests with 1,500 field trials. Alberta conducted 1,070 and Manitoba 683 trials. Thirty-five trials have been conducted in PEI  and 46 in Quebec. Newfoundland is the only province which has not allowed any trials to be  conducted.  The federal government has been touting Canada as a place to do such field trials especially among members of European Union, where biotech companies and researchers regularly face militant opposition.  Many environmentalists worry that genes from genetically altered crops will escape into  other related species and cause, "genetic pollution." Another concern is that modified crops  will result in more food allergies and undermine organic farming.  The Green Party is calling for a ban on the agricultural genetic experiments.  fSource.The Globe and Mail, March 19. 19991  chemicals. These  kinds of chemicals  affect the endocrine  system of both humans and animals by  disrupting the  body's natural hormonal balance and  causing damage  even at incredibly  low concentrations.  In humans, declining  sperm counts, escalating rates of breast,  testicular and prostate cancers, and the  increasing incidence  of childhood hyper- ^^^^^^^^^^^  activity and learning  disorders are just a few of the effects being  studied in the context of hormone disruption.  About 29 different insecticides, in more  than 100 formulations, can be sprayed on  potatoes in the Atlantic  provinces. Endosulfan is  a high use insecticide in  the same class as DDT. Besides being a hormone  disruptor, it is strongly  linked to breast cancer.  Imagine having this poison sprayed next to your  home! Indeed, on PEI  some intensively farmed  areas are known by locals  as "cancerbelts."  Another insecticide,  parathion, is banned in  over 14 countries and  classed by the US Environmental Protection  Agency as a Category I  toxin, the most deadly category of substances.  It's a potent neurotoxin that is easily  absorbed into the body, and has also been  linked to a variety of acute and chronic  health problems, including reproductive  and hormone-disrupting effects.  Canada has approved parathion for  use on potatoes and the Atlantic provinces  are allowing its use, despite provincial government authority to restrict any pesticide.  Potatoes are ready to harvest when the  tops die down naturally. However, there's  nothing natural about chemically-grown  potatoes. The pesticide diquat, suspected  of causing birth defects, is sprayed on the  plants to kill down the tops. And finally,  potatoes that are to be stored over winter  are treated in the warehouse with a pesticide to inhibit sprouting. A PEI potato, destined for someone's dinner, undergoes as  many as 20 applications of pesticide.  Besides long-term health effects like  cancer, pesticides cause immediate effects  that make life miserable for anyone exposed  to drift. Cold and flu-like symptoms are  typical of mild poisoning.  Health professionals are generally unaware of the effects of pesticides, and a doctor wouldn't normally consider pesticide  poisoning when a  —i^^^^^m—^m     patient complains  of nausea, cramps,  headache, memory  loss, nosebleeds,  sore throat, respiratory problems ot  dizziness.  Nor would it be  usual to attribute  the onset of environ-  mental illness to  pesticide exposure.  But Dr. Mark  Cullen, former head  of Occupational  Medicine at Yale,  says that an acquired intolerance  ■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■i Q£ common environmental chemicals, with symptoms involving multiple organ systems, can follow  a toxic exposure like insecticide poisoning.  The agriculture industry blames  non-farming rural residents for pesticide  conflicts. If non-farmers would stay in cities where they belong, then there would be  no problem, they rationalize. This anthro-  pocentric (human-centred) outlook that  views nature as a resource, a commodity  to be exploited, ignores the inherent rights  of other species to exist outside of their usefulness to humans. In our industrial society, it is acceptable for other species to be  destroyed for jobs and economic gain.  Outside of observations by nature lovers, we really have no idea how the massive increase in pesticide use is affecting PEI  wildlife. No studies have been conducted,  but people say they see fewer and fewer  birds every year, and fish kills are becoming all too common. Remember the deformed frogs found in Minnesota ponds a  see POTATOES next page  A PEI potato,  destined for  someone's dinner,  undergoes  as many as  20 applications  of pesticide.  KhNESIS Feature  from POTATOES previous page  few years back? The story made news all  around the world as scientists speculated  on the reasons for the horrible mutations.  Canadian scientists have been studying frogs in ponds next to potato fields in  Quebec for some time now. The Royal Ontario Museum's Centre for Biodiversity and  Conservation Biology announced that the  Quebec studies have demonstrated for the  first time the links between frog deformities and DNA damage, and suspected acute  and chronic exposure to agricultural chemicals.  And researcher Dr. Martin Ouellet,  who examined nearly 30,000 frogs in another study, the largest in Canada, openly  points to pesticides as the  cause of the grotesquely deformed frogs he sees in Quebec ponds.  Cornell University researcher Dr. David Pimentel  estimates that 672 million birds  are annually exposed to pesticides and that 10 percent-67  million birds-are killed. Few  registered pesticides are more  lethal to birds than the i  carbofuran. Described by wildlife experts  as "the black plague of pesticides,"  carbofuran is widely used on PEI.  The Canadian Wildlife Service of Environment Canada objects to carbofuran's  use on potatoes, saying that available data  clearly demonstrates bird kills in field  edges. Many organizations, including the  World Wildlife Fund and the American Ornithologists' Union, one of the world's largest associations of professional ornithologists, have called for a ban on carbofuran.  Yet its use, and that of other bird-killing pesticides, continues on PEI. The birds are considered to be of no commercial value, and  therefore dispensable.  The anti-pesticide movement on PEI  suffered a set-back last spring with the passage of provincial "Right To Farm" legislation. After several years of intense campaigning by activists against the escalating  use of agricultural pesticides, the  right-wing anti-environment PEI Federation of Agriculture drafted the legislation,  handed it to the government and said,  ecticide  "Pass it." Without offering any opportunity  for public discussion or debate, the Conservative government rammed the bill  through as quickly as it could.  The bill seeks to intimidate people who  have complaints about "normal" farm  practices, such as pesticide spraying, and  to hinder their access to the law. Islanders  must now pay a fee and appear before a  farmer-dominated board with their complaints. The board may dismiss a complaint  at any point if, in its opinion, the complaint  is "trivial, frivolous or vexatious." Complaints about "normal" farm practices will  automatically be dismissed.  After a ruling has been made, complainants are forced to wait a  further 60 days before the law  can be used to seek an injunction or compensation for damages. By this time, the kids, the  livestock or the guests at the  bed-and-breakfast will have  already been poisoned.  The agriculture industry  is backed by government, the  Irvings, and the chemical industry. Environmental activists are denounced as liars and fear-mongers. Com-  plainers are dismissed as hypochondriacs  and troublemakers. And years of propaganda from the chemical industry have  convinced growers that pesticides, "used  properly," pose no danger to the public or  the environment.  For many Islanders, potatoes and  french fries no longer represent a fast food.  They stand for corporate power, greed, poison and sickness.  Sharon Labchuk has been involved in the PEI  environmental movement since returning to  live on the Island with her two young children  eleven years ago. She is coordinator of Earth  Action, a radical activist group organized  around the Deep Ecology philosophy. You can  contact her at: Earth Action, 81 Prince Street,  Charlottetown, PEI, CIA 4R3; tel: (902)  621-0719; email: slabchuk@isn.net. This article was previously published in the February  1999 issue of the Canadian Centre for Policy  Alternatives' The Monitor and in Natural  Life magazine.  Rnunriiip-allJhG-fimp&Jnr-  Monsanto and friends  Most Canadians are unaware that  an increasing amount of food on our  grocery store shelves comes from  plants that have been genetically altered to be resistant to herbicides.  Monsanto leads the pack with its  Roundup   Ready  soybear  Roundup  Monsanto's trade name for glyphosate,  the company's top selling product and  one of the most popular herbicides in  the world.  Monsanto pitches the Roundup  Ready plants as a way to reduce herbicide use. Growers normally spray  fields with Roundup before plants begin to grow. With herbicide resistant  crops, growers can wait to spray until  both crops and weeds have sprouted,  supposedly making better use of the  herbicide.  But Monsanto's alleged interest in  pesticide reduction has more to do  with increasing corporate profits than  anything else. Half the company's operating income is from sales of  Roundup, but next year Monsanto's  patent expires and growers could start  buying cheaper generic glyphosate  frorr  ufa.  So  > de-  Monsanto has spent millions  velop plants that are resistant to  Roundup and that can be grown only  by farmers who sign contracts with  Monsanto, agreeing to use the  Roundup brand of glyphosate.  There are concerns that these mutant plants will pollinate wild relatives,  creating herbicide resistant superweeds  and ultimately increasing herbicide use  and toxicity. Foods once considered  safe to eat by people with allergies  could become lethal to them with the  introduction of foreign genes. Roundup  Ready soybeans contain genetic ma  terial from a cauliflower virus, petunias, and  soil bacteria.  Soybeans are found in more processed  foods than most of us imagine. More than  60 percent of all processed foods, such as  ice cream, margarine, breads, cereals, pasta,  soy sauce and tofu, contain soy. We have  no way of knowing which foods contain  the genetically altered soybeans and what  effects these foods may have on our health  because Monsanto lobbies hard to keep it  that way by opposing mandatory labelling.  [Although difficult to prove since labelling is not required, the Canadian Consumers Association says that 40 percent  of our food products have been genetically altered in some way. It is suspected  that SO percent of canola crops, 1 5 percent of corn crops, 30 percent of soybean  crops and 20 percent of potato crops  grown in Canada have been genetically engineered. "At least 34 genetically modified crops have been approved for sale in  Canada as food products or use in livestock feed for import purposes only."  {Common Ground, March  1999)]  Lefs not forget the consequences of  releasing Roundup into the environment.  Glyphosate is acutely toxic to animals, including humans. Residues of glyphosate  have been found on a variety of fruits and  vegetables and have persisted in soil over  a year. Lettuce, barley and carrots, planted  a year after glyphosate treatment, contained  residues at harvest. Glyphosate reduces or  damages populations of creatures like beneficial insects, fish, birds, earthworms, nitrogen-fixing bacteria and beneficial soil  fungi, and increases the susceptibility of  plants to disease.  Organic agriculture and safe natural  methods of plant breeding make the risks  associated with Roundup Ready crops unacceptable.  - Sharon Labchuk  : "Afew anri imprnveH"pntatnes rmirtefty nf Mnnsantn  jX Why did the chicken cross the road  faster than ever before?  (See page 22 for the answer.)  • The first product of genetic engineer-  • ing  sold   on   Canadian   grocery  store  • shelves was the NewLeaf potato in 1996.  • This  potato is created  by the chemical  • giant Monsanto by inserting genes from  • a  common  soil  bacteria  called   Bacillus  • thuringensis (Bt)  into  popular commer-  • cial varieties of potatoes: Russet. Burbank,  • Superior, Atlantic and Shepody. Bt is toxic  • to Colorado potato beetles, causing their  • digestive tracts to be destroyed when they  m nibble on potato leaves. The idea is that  • growers can eliminate insecticide sprays  • for this insect-amounting to one or two  • sprays per season. The potatoes in a typi-  • cal monoculture setting will still endure  • about 1 5 or 20 applications of pesticides  • for other insects, diseases and weeds.  •  « At first glance, the NewLeaf might  • seem like a good thing. Who could argue  « against pesticide reduction? But organic  • growers stand to be severely penalized  . by what some people are calling the de-  • struction of a "public good" by Monsanto.  • Bt sprays have been  used sparingly for  • decades by organic growers and backyard  • gardeners to kill outbreaks of unwanted  Garden insects have n  oped resistance to Bt because  so infrequently. But ins  major problem for industrial agriculture.  The sheer magnitude of chemicals thrown  at insects ensures that sooner or later, the  only insects able to survive are those that  develop resistance.  Now, with thousands of acres of Bt  saturated potatoes being grown, everyone, including Monsanto, agrees that it  is only a matter of time before Colorado  potato beetles become resistant to Bt,  rendering useless one of the few approved  biological sprays for organic growers.  Monsanto thinks the NewLeaf potato has  a lifespan of about 30 years while other  reckon three to five years is the  Consumers, too, are wary of these  biotech potatoes. All parts of the potato  plant, including the edible tuber, contain  the foreign bacterial genes. The research  to prove that these potatoes are safe for  human consumption simply hasn't been  done, says Margaret Mellon of the Union of Concerned Scientists.  But the deeper problem is that this  technology is simply another attempt to  prop up industrial agriculture. Ifs the new  silver bullet for promoters of monoculture,  now that chemical pesticides and fertilizers are seen for what they really are—destroyers of the Earth. Biotechnology does  nothing to advance the cause of long term  sustainable food production as does organic agriculture. Rather, it perpetuates factory farming costly inputs, unnatural foods,  soil depletion and corporate control of  the food system.  NewLeaf potatoes are now grown  commercially in all three Maritime provinces. In 1 998 PEI grew 4243 acres. New  Brunswick 1,73 1 acres and Nova Scotia  1 2 1 acres. PEI growers under contract to  Monsanto shipped NewLeaf seed potatoes to Ukraine last year. Monsanto has  applied for registration in Canada for two  more biotech potatoes: NewLeaf Y and  NewLeaf Plus. The new products will contain Bt genes as well as other foreign genes  to control potato viruses.  - Sharon Labchuk  KINESIS How do you rate as a citizen of  How do you rate as a citizen of Canada?  JtiOW  Sanada?       t r  o you rate as a citizen of  fc&H&ida?  This booklet belongs to:  Welcome to Canada.  Bienvenue au Canada. How  would you like to become a  citizen? Well, not so fast... you  need to take a written test first.  And to help potential "new  Canadians" out, Citizenship  and Immigration Canada  (CIC) developed a book  called, "A Look at Canada." It  has information on the symbols of Canada, Aboriginal  peoples, the different regions,  and making laws. And to really help you get prepared,  CIC has included a list of 196  study questions. But be  warned, not all the answers  can be found by reading "A  Look at Canada."  As we perused through the  book, we asked ourselves:  How many people who received their Canadian citizenship as a "birthright," can correctly answer all the questions  asked of potential "new Canadians?"  We also asked: How many  "citizens" know the real history of Canada—the one that  has been omitted, silenced  and rewritten? We decided to  make up our own Kinesis citizenship test, which has some  of the federal government's  questions and some of ours.  Give it a whirl. (The answers  are on page 14... Hey, no peeking!)  We'll start you off with a  few questions from the official  "Look at Canada:"  A. List four rights Canadian citizens have?  B. Name six responsibilities of  citizenship?  C. What will you promise when  you take the oath of citizenship?  And now, here's a question from our real "Look at  Canada:"  D. When did women in Canada  get the right to vote in federal  elections?  (The answers to these  questions can be found on the  centrespread pages.)  Ready for more? Then turn  the page...  But first, we want to say  that, as a feminist publication,  we don't believe in patriarchal  grading systems; we believe  in self-evaluation. So... if you  think you scored high enough,  give yourself a hand. Then, fill  in your name on the certificate  below, cut it out, (frame it if  you desire,) and hang it on  your wall.  Congratulations, you are  now a citizen of Kinesis, and  are accorded all the rights and  responsibilities of writing,  proofreading, illustrating and  layout. See you in the production room!  mssmmssmmBBB^ #  ^j|  Certificate            $iM$m  vk               Certificat  "f     IS  m                   ^e  IKinesis Citizenship       "SSSfisso  W      Citoyennete SKinefoise  This is to certify that  Ce certificat atteste aue  is a JKinesian Citizen under the provisions of  est eitogen kineeois aux termes de la £oi sur  the JKinesian Citizenship J%ct and, as sueh,  is entitled to all the ri0hts and privileges and  is subject to all the responsibilities, obligations  and duties of a UCinesian eitizen.  la eitogennete kinecoise, a ee titre,jouitde tous  les droits et privileges et est assujetti(e) a tous  les devoirs, obligations et responsabilites d'un  eitogen kineeois.  At   -  h f\     £j                                                          Secretary oj production  Secretaire de production  "  *  i ' .--.»---'.' '-■' A look at Canada"  by Citizenship and Immigration Canada  What are the three main groups of Aboriginal peoples?  Why are the Aboriginal peoples of Canada working to be self-  governed?  Why did early explorers first come to Atlantic Canada?  Who were the United Empire Loyalists?  Which group of people were important in the building of the  Canadian Pacific Railway?  What did the federal government do to encourage people to  settle in the Prairie provinces during the early 1900s?  List each province and territory and tell when each one joined  Confederation?  8. What does Canada Day celebrate?  9. What is the part of the Constitution which legally protects the  basic rights and freedoms of all Canadians?  (l 0.     Who has the right to enter and leave Canada at will?  11. Who has the right to be considered first for a job in the  Federal government?  12. What does equality under the law mean?  (13.) Write the first two lines of Canada's national anthem?  (14J From where does the name "Canada" come?  (15.) Which animal is the official symbol of Canada?  (16.) What are the names of the Great Lakes?  (17.) What do you mark on a federal election ballot?  18. What do political parties do?  (J9.) What does it mean for a political party to "be in power"?  (20.)    What is the name of your Lieutenant-Governor or  Commissioner?  a. Citizenship Right?   Under the Canadian Charter of  Rights and Freedoms, Canadian citizens  are guaranteed the right to:  mi Be a candidate in federal and  provincial/territorial elections.  rm Learn in either official language.  cm Apply for a Canadian passport.  mVote in federal and provincial/  territorial elections.  m Enter and leave Canada freely.  b. Citizenship  Responsibilities  As Canadian citizens, we share the responsibility to:  ©Vote in elections.  oWork to help others in the  community.  o Care for Canada's heritage.  o Obey Canada's laws.  o Express opinions freely while  respecting the rights and freedoms  of others.  id Eliminate discrimination and  injustice.  [If this last responsibility was enforced, a lot of people would  be required to turn in their citizenship cards.}  A "real" Look at Canada  by the "illegal" aliens at Kinesis  ^\K* «TKf#%  ^ENNE***  21. When did Canada introduce its first Citizenship  Act, and under which federal department was it  administered?  22. Who was the first woman to own and edit a  newspaper in Canada?  23. What did the United Empire Loyalists bring with  them to Canada during the War of American Independence?  24. How many First Nations are there in British  Columbia?  25. What is Nunavut?  26. Which ship was turned back by the Canadian  government near Burrard Inlet and sent back  to India?  27. What is the modern-day "Head Tax" imposed  by the government on all people entering  Canada?  28. What is Emily Murphy best known for?  29. Has slavery ever existed in Canada?  30. What is the real name of the people referred to  as Shuswap Indians?  31. What group of Canadians were interned during  the Second World War without legal proof or  reason?  32. Name the Six Nations, and where are their  territories located?  33. Who was the first Black woman appointed as  judge in Canada?  34. What is the only way by which women can  enter Canada to work in domestic caregiver  capacities?  35. Who was the first woman lawyer in Canada?  36. Who was the first Aboriginal woman to become  a lawyer in Canada?  D. So, when did women get the vote?  The Military Voters Act gave the vote to women nurses  serving in the war. The Wartime Elections Act extended the  right to vote to wives, mothers, sisters and daughters of men,  alive or dead, who had served or were serving in the  Canadian or British military or naval forces.  The Women's Franchise Act [WFA) gave the vote to white  women who were British subjects. Excluded were: Chinese,  "Hindu," Japanese, Native "Indian" women, and women married to non-eligible voters.  The WFA was amended to remove racial barriers from  Japanese, Chinese and "East Indian" women. Excluded were:  Native "Indian" women.  The WFA was amended to allow Native "Indian" women to  vote if they disentitled themselves from the benefits of being  "status Indians" under the Indian Act  The WFA was amended to allow the wives of Native "Indian"  veterans to vote. (Native "Indian" veterans had the right  to vote since the earlier part of the century.)  The WFA was amended to allow all "status Indian" women to  vote, including women.  [compiled by Susan Tarshis for the West Coast LEAF (the Women's Legal  Education andAction Fund).]  wmm:  "»^  Oath of Citizenship  / swear (or affirm) that I will be faithful  and hear true allegiance to Her Majesty,  Queen Elizabeth the Second,  Queen of Canada,  Her Heirs a?id Successors,  and that I will faithfully observe  the laws of Canada  and fulfil my duties as a Canadian citizen.  $  The federal government has introduced a new Citizenship Act, which is currently in second reading in the House of Commons. It proposes to change the  Oath to "strengthen the sentiment of loyalty to Canada and respect for its  laws and values." The new Oath would include additional pledges to "respect  our country's rights and freedoms;" and "to defend our democratic values." And the answers are...  "A Look at Canada"  (italics are ours)  1. First Nations, Inuit and the Metis.  The group we once called "Indians" are  now known as "First Nations." Funny  then, why is there still a Department of "Indian" Affairs?  2. To regain control over decisions  that affect their lives. How come they  "lost" control in the first place?  3. To fish and trade with the Aboriginals. They make it sound like such a friendly  encounter.  4. British settlers from the United  States who pledged loyalty to England  in the 1700s and fled to Canada. What did  the United Empire Loyalists bring with  them? [See Question 23.]  5. In the late 1800s, thousands of Chinese came to British Columbia to help  build the Canadian Pacific Railway.  Help? We didn't know there was such a  thing as "indentured" help!  6. The Federal government offered  land at cheap prices to three million people from Europe and Britain. Did they ask  the people whose land it was if that was OK  first?  7. Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick  and Nova Scotia joined the Confederation in 1867. Manitoba and Northwest  Territories in 1870. British Columbia in  1871. Prince Edward Island in 1873. Yukon Territory in 1898. Alberta and Saskatchewan in 1905. Newfoundland in  1949. What's the newest territory in  Canada?.[See Question 25.]  8. The anniversary of the Confederation. In 1992, indigenous people across  Canada held their own July 1st "celebrations" of Canada Day—or rather, actions  marking 500 years of resistance to colonization. (Remember that little ditly: "In  1492, Columbus sailed the ocean blue.")  9. The Charter  of Rights  and -  Freedoms. However, having a wallet full  of cash (and a safety deposit box-full of  RRSPs or ownership of a newspaper conglomerate) gives even better protection.  10. A Canadian citizen. Although,  nothing is mentioned about who has the  right to enter and leave Canada at will without being harassed. And if the Liberal government gets its way in terms of changes to  the Immigration Act, it will be more difficult for people—read people of colour, also  know as "the immigrants"—to move in and  out of Canada. Among the feds' proposals  is that permanent residents be made to carry  special ID cards as proof of their"legal status" to be in Canada and as a way to monitor their movements. Hey, aren't "mobility  rights" guaranteed under the Charter?  11. A Canadian citizen. Are there actually any jobs to be had? Hasn't the Liberal government been gutting the federal  public service?  12. Every Canadian has an equal  right to the protection and services of the  police and courts. Note: there is no men  tion that every Canadian has an equal right  to be protected "from " the police and courts.  13. O Canada! Our home and native  land! / True patriot love in all thy sons  command. Stop, stop... the first two lines  are already problematic enough.  14. In the early 1500s, Jacques Carrier  used a First Nations word for village,  "kanata," to refer to the whole country.  It is interesting that the Immigration Department doesn't feel it is important to mention which First Nation's language "kanata"  comes from. Perhaps, they don't know (or  care) ?  15. The beaver. All the other animals  in Canada have no legal status.  16. Lakes Ontario, Erie, Superior,  Michigan and Huron. Which ones extend  across Canada's "border" with the US and  are subjected to the polluting ways of American companies (not to take away from the  polluting ways of Canadian companies)?  Ha, it's a trick question. They all have connections to the US and in fact, Lake Michigan is not in Canada at all.  17. An "X." But make sure you stay  within the lines or you'll spoil your ballot.  18. The official answer is: They hold  meetings where they discuss their ideas  and opinions. They develop plans for  what they would do if their candidates  were elected to form the government.  We'll leave the real answer up to you.  19. It means that they are elected to  run the government and make the decisions. It also means they have the opportunity to set up their friends with cushy patronage jobs and lush government contracts.  20. First of all, do you know what a  Lieutenant-Governor or Commissioner is?  Hint: it is different for each province, so we  won't waste space with the answers.  A "real" Look at  Canada  21. The first Citizenship Act was proclaimed on January 1,1947 and was administered under the Department of  National War Services. Before then, people were either British subjects, naturalized Canadians (born in Canada), or aliens (enemy or non-enemy).  22. Mary Ann Shadd Cary, a Black  feminist and activist, started The Provincial Freeman in 1852 in Toronto. She wrote  numerous articles on women's rights, informed Black women of suffragist meetings in Canada and the US through her  newspaper, and wrote "A Plea for Emigration to Canada West," a treatise informing Blacks in the US on the benefits  of emigrating to Western Canada. She  was also active in the Underground Railroad.  23. Slaves. White colonists loyal to  Britain who fled the American "colonies"  brought their Black slaves when entering Canada. This shows that the United  Empire's offer of freedom for Blacks was  a tactic used by the British aimed to  weaken the American colonists' position,  rather than a true concern for slaves'  emancipation. In addition, Black free  Loyalists who entered Canada and expected a land where they could exercise  their liberties were deceived: they were  denied land, or given poor, small plots,  denied the right to settle in towns, and  left to fend for themselves in a hostile  white population.  24. Thirty-nine. Some of the First Nations in BC are: the Tsimshian, Gitxsan,  Tahltan, Kwakwaka'wakw, Nuu-chah-  nulth, Halq'emeylem, Wet'suwet'en,  Tsilhqot'in, Okanagan, Squamish and  Nuxalk.  25. Nunavut is the eastern part of the  Northwest Territories that has finally  been given back to the Inuit, who had  never entered any treaty agreements  with the federal or provincial governments. Nunavut will officially become a  territory on April 1,1999.  26. The Komagata Maru. In 1914, the  Canadian government forced a ship of  Sikh and Muslim immigrants to turn  back to India. The passengers of the  Komagata Maru were not permitted to  land, even after waiting for two months  in the Vancouver harbour deprived of  provisions. Canada had a law that no one  could enter Canada unless they had arrived on a continuous passage—that is,  the vehicle of passage cannot stop anywhere along the way, such as for refuelling (or a pee break). Continuous passage  was impossible to do from India. The  federal government also refused to let  the members of the local South Asian  community provide food or provisions  to the immigrants, in effect starving the  passengers. On the way back to India,  many more died of starvation. Many  were also killed as anti-colonist agitators  by the British when they docked in India.  27. In 1995, the Canadian government slapped on a $975 Right to Land  Fee on all people entering Canada,  whether independent or sponsored immigrants, refugees, or temporary workers. This fee is not levied on Canadians  born abroad.  28. Emily Murphy is best known for  being one of the "Famous Five," five  women who forced the Canadian government to recognize women as "persons" under the law (the 1927 Person's  Case), and as the first woman to be appointed Police Magistrate in the British  Empire. However, she should be best  known for her extreme racism, particularly towards Chinese people in Canada.  Her book, The Black Candle, published in  1922, increased virulent anti-Chinese  sentiment by accusing Chinese men of  "luring" white women into opium dens.  Her widely-disseminated, racist views  on criminality and vice was responsible  for the drafting of the Exclusion Act in  1923, which prevented Chinese immigration into Canada.  29. Yes. As early as 1686, Black slaves  were "imported" into Nova Scotia from  various places, including the other colo  nies. The Imperial Act of 1790 provided  the most important legal protection of  slavery by the British in order to encourage immigration into British North  America (BNA). Britain permitted free  importation into BNA, the Bahamas and  the Bermudas, of "all Negroes, household furniture, and utensils..."  30. Secwepemc. The Secwepemc  peoples live on lands situated within an  intricate network of tributaries and lakes  formed by the confluence of the Fraser,  Thompson and Columbia rivers (around  Kamloops, BC).  31. Canadians of Japanese ancestry.  Twenty-two thousand Japanese-Canadians were stripped of their rights, uprooted, and interned in substandard  camps during the WWII, despite the fact  that no Canadian citizen of Japanese ancestry had ever been found guilty of  sabotage or disloyalty towards the Canadian government.  32. The Cayuga, Oneida, Onandaga,  Mohawk, Seneca and Tuscarora. Their  territories cover parts of what became  Ontario, Quebec and New York state.  33. Corrine Sparks. In 1987, she was  appointed as a judge in the family court  of Nova Scotia. In 1997, Sparks—then  still the only African Canadian judge in  the province—made "history" again  when a case she had ruled on was hauled  up to Supreme Court of Canada on  charges that Sparks had made "biased"  comments. Sparks had acquitted a Black  youth accused of assaulting a police officer. She ruled that the Crown did not  put forward sufficient evidence. She also  commented that police officers sometimes have a tendency to overreact when  dealing with persons of colour. The Nova  Scotia Supreme Court reversed the acquittal, saying Sparks' remarks might  lead some to think she was biased. The  Court of Appeal agreed. The Supreme  Court of Canada disagreed and upheld  Sparks' decision.  34. The Live-In Caregivers Program  (LCP). Under the LCP, domestic workers are compelled to work and live for  two years in their employers' homes under a contract drawn between the worker  and the employer. This opens domestic  workers up to exploitation and abuse.  Changing employers or reporting abuse  can jeopardize a woman's chances for  gaining permanent residency in Canada.  The LCP requires women to complete  their two-year live-in work within three  years, and women must obtain a Record  of Employment from their employers.  35. In 1897, Clara Brett Martin became the first woman lawyer in the British Empire. She was also anti-Jewish, and  abused her position to perpetrate hatred  against Jewish people. She called upon  the Attorney-General's office to prevent  Jewish people from owning property,  and tried to render all property contracts  made by Jewish people null and void in  Ontario.  36. Delia Opekokew. In 1979, she was  admitted to the Bar in Saskatchewan, and  in 1983 to the Bar in Ontario. Feature  World March of Women in the Year 2000:  The countdown begins  June 4,1995. A crowd of 15,000 assembled in Quebec City to welcome 800 women  who had spent 10 days marching across the  province to protest against poverty. The  march was barely over when the question  was raised: when will the next one be?  The idea to organize a World March of  Women in the Year 2000 originated among  women activists in Quebec. They tried out  their brainchild in a workshop of French-  speaking women at the NGO Forum in  Beijing [held just prior to the 4th UN Conference on Women.] The response was enthusiastic.  Three years later, on October 17,1998,  200 women from 60 countries came together in Montreal for an International Preparatory Meeting. Women discussed the  demands they want to bring to international  attention [see page 18] and collective actions that could be taken between now and  October 17, 2000-the big day. Out of the  meeting, an international liaison committee was also created.  The World March of Women in the Year  2000 is an action to improve women's living conditions. More precisely, specific demands centre on issues of poverty and violence against women.  The entire project will be developed  and supported by a process of popular education. Three levels of action have been proposed. First, there will be an action demonstrating women's mass support of the  overall demands through signing support  cards. Secondly, women's movements in  each country will organize national actions  that will present demands reflecting their  realities and priorities. Finally, a global  demonstration will be held. The actions will  begin March 8, 2000 and end October 17  (the International Day for the Eradication  of Poverty,) 2000 with the world rally.  The world we live in  We live in a world where many forms  of injustice reign. The year 2000 is around  the corner and intolerable social inequity  is deeply entrenched: between women and  men; countries of the North and South, East  and West; among the people within coun-  tries-between rich and poor, young and old,  cities and rural communities; between human beings and Nature.  We live in a world that has witnessed  spectacular technological and scientific  developments, substantial increases in industrial and agricultural productivity, and  a communications explosion. Nonetheless,  billions of people are without work and  without even basic access to food, safe water, housing, health care, education, culture,  information, energy sources, and transportation. Everywhere now we experience the  paradox of people becoming more impoverished in societies that are becoming progressively more wealthy. Women are the  majority of those being crushed by this  skewed development.  We live in a world whose dominant  economic system, neoliberal capitalism, is,  at its core, fundamentally inhuman. It is a  system governed by unbridled competition  and characterized by privatization, liberalization, and deregulation. It is a system  entirely driven by the imperatives of the  market and where full expression of basic  human rights is subordinated to the laws  of the marketplace.  We live in a  world still largely  dominated by the  partriarchy, reinforced by economic  inequality and insecurity and violence  against women that  is still universally  present in the form  of wife battering,  sexual assault, genital mutilation, and  systematic rape in  war-time. This is the  fate of millions of  women.  We live in a  world undergoing a  crisis of identity, values, programs, and  social cohesion; a  world where culture  is in a state of shock,  causing us to lose  our bearings and  provoking a retreat  into religious sects  and fundamentalism, racism, sexism, ___^____^__  intolerance,    and  homophobia. This crisis bars productive  dialogue between people of different cultures, denying us access to one of the greatest assets of humankind: our diversity.  We live in a world being ravaged by  75 "low intensity" armed conflicts that are  decimating populations and straining the  budgets of the nations involved while filling the coffers of the arms industry. It is  women who in large part suffer this violence.  We live in a world where the draining  of natural resources and the destruction of  the environment are killing our planet and  imperiling future generations for the benefit of industrial polluters. And it is women  who in large part suffer the consequences  of this false growth.  We live in a world where governments'  obligations to their citizens are abandoned  before the dictates of the marketplace, now  organized as an unelected supranational  power composed of huge international institutions that sprang up after the Second  World War: the International Monetary  Fund (IMF), the World Bank (WB), the  World Trade Organization (WTO), the Organization for Economic Cooperation and  Development (OECD), and various regional trade deals. This supranational force  imposes its anti-deficit creed on governments in the form of structural adjustment  programs in the South, social services cuts  in the North, and the projected Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI).  The world we want to  build  The World March of Women in the Year  2000 aims at eliminating neoliberal capitalism once and for ail-everywhere on the  planet. This involves far more than reforming the existing system; it means creating a  new system based  We are marching to  give birth to a  world based on  sharing the spiritual and material  wealth of humanity  so that every  woman and man  has the means to  make a living and  make a living  worthwhile.  on alternative solutions proposed by  women and social  movements locally,  nationally, and internationally.  The World  March of Women in  the Year 2000 aims  to bring down the  patriarchy and  eradicate all forms  of violence against  women—everywhere on the planet.  We want to enter the new millennium knowing that  we can change the  world, rendering it  more humane and  peaceful. We will be  marching peacefully because we  want to reaffirm the  value of human life  as a central priority  and to make global  mmmmm—m——mma—m    solidarity a reality.  We are marching so that in the next millennium, our fundamental freedoms, indissociable from our  human rights and undeniably universal in  nature, are implemented once and for all.  We are determined in our belief that all  human rights are interdependent and that  the values of equality, justice, peace, and  solidarity will predominate.  We are marching to demonstrate that  the active participation of women in political, economic, social, and cultural life is the  starting point for liberating ourselves and  our communities; too often we are excluded from decision-making on questions  that directly concern us.  We are marching to end all forms of  discrimination and violence against  women, children, and the most vulnerable  segments of the population. We are marching to consolidate actions, based on principles of cooperation and sharing, aimed  at instituting crucial changes.  We are marching to give birth to a  world based on sharing the spiritual and  material wealth of humanity so that every  woman and man has the means to make a  living and make living worthwhile.  How to get  connected  The World March of Women in the  Year 2000 is not an organization or an  agency (with a legal status or a charter) with members. It is a project for collective action in which women participate actively. Non-governmenta! women's organizations, women's committees of mixed groups (women and  men); mixed organizations that do not  have a women's committee but where  women are taking the leadership for  the March, are invltea to join. (Please  note that, for the time being, we are  only letting groups join which means  that women cannot do so individually.)  Groups interested in joining the  campaign are asked to send in a signup coupon avciable on the March's  website, or from thQ coordinating office  in Montreal.  World March of Women  Federation des femmes du Quebec  110 rue Ste-Therese. #307  Montreal, Quebec  Canada H2Y 1E6  Telephone: (1) 514-395-1196  Fax: (1)514-395-1224  E-mail: marche2000@ffq.qc ca  Web Site: http://www.ftq.qc.ca  The Canadian Coordinating Committee is made up of  twelve national organizations:  Canadian Association of Sexual Assault Centres  Canadian Labour Congress  Canadian Research Institute for the Advancement of Women  DisAbled Women's Network  Federation nationale des femmes canadiennes francaises  InterPares  Metis National Council of Women  National Action Committee on the Status of Women  National Anti-Poverty Organization  National Organization for Visible and Immigrant Minority Women  Native Women's Association of Canada  National Organization of Immigrant and Visible Minority Women  KINESIS Feature  Anti-racism activism in the Filipino-Canadian community:  Youth take the lead  by May Farrales  May Farrales is a member of the Philippine Women Centre of British Columbia and  ofUgnayan Kabataang Pilipinosa Canada/Filipino-Canadian Youth Alliance. She recently  made a presentation on the panel, "Systemic  Racism and Immigration," at the first Filipino-  Canadian National Women's Consultative Forum held in March in Vancouver [see box.]  Below is an excerpt from her speech.  Being a young Filipino woman in Canada  can be a very confusing experience. Yet, while  our experience puts before us many obstacles  and challenges, many of us have found inspiration, strength and true meaning in our efforts to unravel this confusion through service  to our community.  As we try to comprehend the present  situation of our community in Canada, we  should realize that our community cannot  be separated from what is happening in the  Philippines. As the economic and political  crisis in the Philippines intensifies, we also  see the intensification of the out-migration  of millions of Filipinos [see page opposite.]  Because of its lack of basic industries  and its feudal distribution of land, the Philippines has been left too fragile and feeble  to absorb and support its ever-expanding  labour force. As a result, the Philippines has  a long-standing practice of exporting its  people.  As for myself, I was born in Canada  and raised here. My parents migrated from  the Philippines in 1973. My experience as a  Filipino-Canadian youth in trying to deal  with the challenges that this poses for me  echoes many of the stories of other young  Filipinos.  On systemic racism  We are affected by both personal and  systemic racism. As young Filipinos, we all  have our own painful stories of experiencing direct personal racist attacks—from the  name-calling to being physically beaten up  because of our skin colour.  Collectively, as a community, we also  grapple with racism. Not only do we ex  perience personal forms,but even harder to  grapple with is systemic racism. The systematized oppression of our community is  perpetuated by government policies and  institutions and invades practically every  aspect of our life—economic, political, cultural and social.  Given the harsh  impacts of racism on ^^^^^^TM"""^  our lives, in  Ugnayan, we see it as  our responsibility to  try and understand  systemic racism, its  root causes, and how  it is affecting our  community.  In the area of  education, the school  system proves to be  a bastion of systemic  racism. We see racism existing at various levels—the  school curriculum  broadcasts  Eurocentric histories  and values, ignoring ^^^^^^^^^^^  the contributions of  the Filipino community to the development  of Canada, and the issue of racism is not  adequately addressed in the schools.  There are the painful stories of newly  arrived Filipino youth being belittled by  racism in an education system that tells us  we're not smart enough or good enough  for Canada, by not properly accrediting  them for the education they have received  in the Philippines, and bumping them  down grades upon their entry into the  school system.  On anti-racism work  Combatting systemic racism through  education is one way in which we in  Ugnayan are fighting the racism that is damaging our community. We are continually  engaged in educating ourselves, other Fili-  Combatting  systemic racism  through education  is one way in which  we in Ugnayan are  fighting the racism  that is damaging  our community.  pino Canadian youth, and other Filipinos  in our community about racism, and how  we can come together to fight against it.  We have regular workshops and studies on systemic racism. We also held a conference under the theme, "Unveiling the  Myths of Racism," in May 1997, which  gathered over 30  ^^^^^^^^^mmm    youths of colour and  challenged us to  share our experiences with racism  and to take action as  marginalized youth  of colour.  We've produced a facilitator's  handbook on how  to conduct anti-racism education work.  And our Youth of  Colour Combating  Systemic Racism report serves as a  strong resource that  allows the stories of  Filipino youth and       our experiences to  be heard, our analysis to come out, and provides us with a  blueprint for community action.  A large part of our work also involves  linking up with youth of colour and other  marginalized and exploited sectors of Canadian society, so that we may act in coordination against racism and racist incidents. Last May, 14 Filipino youths were  brutally attacked in Squamish, BC by a  group of 30 white youth. As others turned  their eyes away from this incident and  blamed the horrific and pre-meditated attack on a stew of ignorance and boredom  on the part of local youth, we took action  and called for an immediate investigation  into the incident as a racist hate-crime.  We responded immediately with a  statement, denouncing the claim by  "prominent citizens" in Squamish that racism was not an instigator to the heinous  attack. We were able to have the position  of Filipino youth clearly stated as newspaper, TV and radio media broadcasted our  position across the province. As a result, the  incident could not be easily swept under  the rug.  We also brought out the reality of racism that Filipinos face during last year's  "Communities Against Racism and Extremism" rally in Surrey that mobilized a  broad number of people. From this, we  were able to gain support for our campaign  from other community groups.  And finally, we launched a petition and  letter writing campaign to the Attorney  General of BC, who also happens to be the  minister responsible for multiculturalism  [and immigration] in the province. Yet,  apart from contacting us, no other positive  action has been taken by the government.  We have held a youth of colour sharing in order to address this incident and to  further deepen our analysis of racism. We  have also held a community forum for Filipinos in Vancouver to begin discussing the  issue of systemic racism and its attacks on  our community. Through all these efforts,  we managed to gain local, national and  even international support for our call for  justice for the youth of colour who were  attacked.  Through these means, we are actively  engaged in encouraging the Filipino community to speak out and share their stories  and experiences, painful as they may be,  for the sake of the future of our community. It is important for us as youth to hear  this history, to share our experiences, to  understand our roots, and to understand  what our community is going through. It  is important for us to be active in changing  and improving our place in Canadian society and to move towards our community's genuine equality in Canada.  The first Filipino-Canadian National Women's Consultative Forum  More than 100 delegates from British  Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario and  Quebec gathered together March 11 th to 14th  in Vancouver for the first Filipino-Canadian  National Women's Consultative Forum.  Hosted by the Philippine Women Centre of  BC, the forum included plays, workshops,  panel presentations and discussions on issues that revolved around human rights, labour and migration, systemic racism and immigration, and violence against women.  Sectoral workshops for young women and for  migrant workers were also held to underline  the specific issues being faced by these two  groups.  Ironically, but not surprisingly, almost  none of the Filipino women employed as domestic workers in Vancouver could attend.  "They couldn't get the day off," says Maita Santiago, one of the forum's organizers.  The goals of the forum were to share information and deepen delegates' analysis about  Filipino-Canadian women's history, experiences,  current situation and needs. Delegates came up  with a very detailed action plan that encompasses recommendations and strategies at the  local, national and international levels. One key  discussion centred on Canada's Live-in  Caregiver Program (LCP) and the Philippine  government's Labour Export Program (LEP).  Participants called for both the LCP and the LEP  to be scrapped.  Among the international guests who came  to the forum were several women from the Philippines: Liza Largoza-Masa with GABRIELA, an  umbrella organization of women's groups, Joy  Sison-de Guzman from Migrante International, and Coni Ledesma from New  Patriotic Women. Also attending was  journalist and activist Ninotchka  Rosea, who is now based in New York.  To close the forum, delegates  paid tribute to peasant women, indigenous women and many others who  have made a great impact on their  lives. With a small purple candle  hand, each woman explained the story of the  woman they were honouring and placed it on  an imaginary world map depending on where  the woman lives or had lived. By the end, the  dim room was bathed in the warm glow of candles, which were on the floor in two groups-  one depicting the Philippines and the other North  America. This was a fitting end to the forum as it  :^srs~^~  illuminated the many sacrifices, struggles and  contributions Filipino women have made, especially in Canadian society.  For more information about the forum,  contact Maita Santiago at the Philippine  Women Centre, 451 Powell St, Vancouver,  BC, V6A 1G7; tel/fax: (604) 215-1103; or  email: pwc@ netcom. ca Feature  Forced migration and the commodification of labour:  The Philippines  experience  by Joy Sison-de Guzman   Joy Sison-de Guzman is the acting vice-  chairperson ofMigrante International, an international alliance of patriotic organizations of  Filipino migrants and their families based in the  Philippines. She presented at the workshop on  "Labour and Migration" at the Filipino-Canadian Women's National Consultative Forum in  Vancouver.  The Philippines, being a semi-feudal  and semi-colonial society, has a perennial  and worsening unemployment problem.  The majority of Filipino people are left in  abject poverty. Imperialism, bureaucrat capitalism and feudalism have kept the country  from achieving genuine national industrialization.  These same conditions have left the Filipino people with no option but to look for  better opportunities abroad. The massive  out-migration to other countries is proof of  this. Hence, the kind of migration we have  in the Philippines is actually "forced" migration.  A new dimension of this "forced" migration came as a result of worsening economic, political and social conditions in the  country. This new dimension is what we call,  the chance of the National Democratic Front  (NDF) for recruitment. The NDF is an underground movement of 17 allied organizations waging armed struggle for national liberation and democracy in the Philippines.  More remittances and revenues  The main attractions of the LEP are the  foreign exchange remittances and other revenues. Since the early 1980s, the LEP has become an industry. In fact, it has become the  top-dollar earner for the country—something that is very much needed to propel the  "economic development programs."  According to the Philippine Overseas  Employment Administration (POEA)—the  Philippine government agency tasked to  oversee the systematic export of labour—  about US$2.17 billion was generated by the  government on remittances of migrant workers from 1982 to 1985 alone. Under the  Aquino regime, 1986 to 1991, US$5.98 billion was remitted through legal banking  channels. Under the Ramos regime, a total  of US$16.68 billion was generated from remittances of migrant workers in a period of  four years (1992 to 1995).  Cheap and expendable labour  Migrant  workers are a  when  they're displaced from their land.  "the commodification of labour." People are  treated as products to be bought, sold and  exchanged at the whim of the ruling class.  The state plays a big role. The US-  Marcos dictatorship adopted the program of  promoting and encouraging labour migration. This state policy is what we know as  the "Labour Export Program" (LEP). The  LEP is meant primarily to generate super  profits for the country's ruling class and to  serve as a solution to the rising unemployment problem in the cities and countryside  and the growing revolutionary movement.  To a large extent, the LEP acts as a deterrent to social and political unrest. Secretary of Labour Bias Ople in the Ferdinand  Marcos administration admitted that the underlying agenda of the LEP was to stem the  tide of political unrest by the growing  number of poverty-stricken constituency. A  former top official of the Labour Department  was more candid when he said in a Senate  hearing that the export of labour diminished  ^^_. of  cheap labour  for advanced  capitalist countries. However,  the need only  appears to be  for jobs in  which labour  conditions are  often unattractive—the "3-  Ds," as they  say: dirty, difficult and dangerous. Contract workers  and illegal mi-  "grarits can therefore be found in construction work, domestic work, low-level jobs in  factories, and in agriculture.  When imperialism started breaking up  production processes and began farming out  these labour-intensive, export-oriented and  polluting industries to various parts of Asia,  some form of industrialization occurred in  these areas. The so-called newly-industrialized countries (NICs) began importing cheap  labour in the form of semi-skilled and service-oriented workers. As a consequence of  the government's LEP, the Philippines has  become one of the major sources for this type  of labour force.  Underdeveloped countries are left in an  inferior position on the bargaining table, and  in order to remain competitive, succumb to  the dictates of the labour market, especially  when it comes to wages, benefits and rights.  It is also important to note here that the  economic crisis in developed countries, and  even in NICs, easily places migrant workers  in very vulnerable positions, for they are the  ones easily replaced or laid off, their wages  and benefits (if ^^^^^^^^^_  ever given) are Members and volunteers  easilyjeopardized. dur,n9 dosing of Forum.  In many parts  of the world, the trend is towards increasing  the number of Filipino women migrating—  whether on contract work or as immigrants.  The percentage of female migrants in relation to male migrants is on the rise. In some  countries, female contract workers make up  as much as 80 to 90 percent of the total  number of Filipino contract workers.  The Philippine government's LEP reinforces the commodification of Filipino  women. Filipino women contract workers  are employed mainly in jobs that are considered "women's work"—domestic service,  entertainment and prostitution. A significant  number have also migrated overseas as  wives [or mail-order brides] of foreign men.  The POEA's shift towards caregiver programs is a response to additional requirements for domestic helpers stipulated in the  contracts of receiving countries like Canada.  In Europe, 90 percent of the 500,000 Filipino  women migrants there are in domestic work.  In Hongkong, Singapore and Malaysia, the  situation is similar. In Canada, one-third of  migrant Filipinos are domestic workers.  Low wages, difficult working conditions and excessive recruitment fees continue  to plague many migrant workers. In addition, more countries have instituted double  taxation that further diminishes the hard  earned wages of workers. Many women  migrants are being de-skilled by working in  domestic service and through non-recognition of qualifications. This is true particularly  in Europe.  Restrictions on immigration  In many countries, immigration policies  covering migrants are being tightened as a  strategy of coping with recession and rising  racism. Japan has now limited guest workers to only six-month visas. Despite the increasing number of undocumented workers  in Europe, European governments have remained strident in refusing to move towards  regularizing their status in these countries.  Visas are becoming more limited to very specific jobs. Aside from family reunification and  spousal visas, Canada is now only granting  visas for domestic helpers and nurses.  The rise of neo-fascism, deepening recession and ethnic conflict in Europe have  also resulted in escalating aggression and  violence directed at migrants in Europe. This  serious backlash has created fear and concern among the Filipino community in many  countries in Europe.  Violence against women  Reports of violence committed against  Filipino women migrants are becoming more  common. InAustralia, Filipino women's organizations have identified 20 women whose  deaths have been linked to their spouses or  partners. In Bahrain, about 80 percent of welfare cases reaching the office of Philippine  Labour Attache are abuses against women;  75 percent against domestic helpers. In Malaysia and Singapore, advocacy organiza-  with the Philippine Women Centre,  tions are monitoring three severe cases of  physical and sexual abuse.  Increasing forced migration  The increasing number of women migrating can be seen in the desire of advanced  capitalist countries to accumulate more capital through super profits and to address the  inherent crisis that they themselves created.  The continuing advancement of technology  for increased production resulted in the automation and computerization of major industries. This has caused severe unemployment amongst the local workers.  Meanwhile, labour-intensive production is farmed out to less developed countries in order to rake in more profits from  the cheap labour and cheap raw materials.  The vacuum created by the involvement  of more local women in the labour force  pushed host governments to relax immigration policies and import foreign labour for  domestic work. Such is the case in  Hongkong, Singapore and Canada. But as  the crisis of monopoly capitalism ensues and  trade and investment barriers are dismantled, walls and restrictions are put up on the  migrants. The institution of the "Live-in  Caregiver Program" (LCP) here in Canada  is one proof of this.  Migration versus commodification  Migration per se is not the problem. In  fact, migration is a right—the right of people to choose where to live and work. It only  becomes a problem when people are left with  no option but to live and work elsewhere  because there aren't adequate opportunities  to live decently and humanely in their home  countries.  This is why it is important for us to grasp  two points: First, semi-colonial and semi-feudal conditions in the Philippines are the root  causes of out-migration; and second, the  commodification of humans and their labour  is the problem, not migration.  Women asserting their rights  Women migrants must assert their rights  and work for equal treatment and protection.  However, the most important role is to get  organized and participate in the struggle of  the Filipino people to eradicate the fundamental problems of Philippine society which  have caused our miseries.  Uniting with the struggle of the people  in the Philippines is not just a matter of citizenship status. Compatriots abroad, be they  citizens or not, legal or undocumented, can  participate in the Philippine struggle by involving themselves in the issues, and helping them understand the root causes of the  current situation.  So let us actively work for and persevere in raising the consciousness, in organizing and mobilizing our compatriots for the  national democratic struggle of the Filipino  people.  Mabuhay kayo!  [Photos courtesy of the Philippine Women  Centre. ]  APRIL 1999  KINESIS  17 Feature   World March of Women in the Year 2000:  What do we want?  To &LZ/1ZA/ATB-  1. That all States adopt a le&al  framework and strate6-zes aztled at  eLzhznatzng- poverty.  States must implement national anti-  poverty policies, programmes, action plans  and projects including specific measures to  eliminate women's poverty and to ensure  their economic and social independence  through the exercise of their right to:  • education;  • employment, with statutory protection for work in the home and in the  informal sectors of the economy;  • pay equity and equality at the  national and international levels;  • association and unionization;  • property and control of safe water;  • decent housing;  • health care and social protection;  • culture;  • life-long income security;  • natural and economic resources  (credit, property, vocational training,  technologies);  • full citizenship, including in  particular recognition of civil identity  and access to relevant documents  (identity card).  • minimum social wage  States must guarantee, as a fundamental right, the production and distribution of  food to ensure food security for their  populations.  States must develop incentives to promote the sharing of family responsibilities  (education and care of children and domestic tasks) and provide concrete support to  families such as daycare adapted to parents'  work schedules, community kitchens, programmes to assist children with their school-  work,^ cetera.  States must promote women's access to  decision-making positions.  States must ratify and observe the labour  standards of the International Labour Office  (ILO). They must enforce observance of national labour standards in free trade zones.  States and international organizations  should take measures to counter and prevent  corruption.  All acts, pieces of legislation, regulations  and positions taken by governments will be  assessed in the light of indicators such as the  human poverty index (HPI), introduced in  the Human Development Report 1997; the  human development index (HDI), put forth  by the United Nations Development Programme; the gender-related development  index (including an indicator on the representation of women in positions of power)  discussed in the Human Development Re  port 1995, and Convention 169 of the International Labour Organization particularly as  it concerns Indigenous and tribal peoples'  rights.  2. The URGENT ZffPLE/IENTATZON OF  flEASURES SUCH- AS THE. ToBZN TAX, REVENUE FROtl THE. TAX WOULD BE PAZD ZA/TO  A SPECZAL fund:  • earmarked for social development;  • managed democratically by the  international community as a whole;  • according to criteria respecting fundamental human rights and democracy;  • with equal representation of women  and men;  • to which women (who represent 70  percent of the 1.3 billion people living  in extreme poverty) would have  preferred access.  • investment of 0.7 percent of the rich  countries' Gross National Product  (GNP) in aid for developing countries;  • adequate financing and democratization of United Nations programmes  that are essential to defend women's  and children's fundamental rights,  UNTFEM (UN women's programme),  UNDP (United Nations Development  Programme) and UNICEF  (programme for children) for example;  • an end to structural adjustment  programmes;  • an end to cutbacks in social budgets  and public services;  • rejection of the proposed Multilateral  Agreement on Investment (MAI).  3. CanCeLLatzon of the Vest of all  ThZRD WoRLD COUNTRZES, TAKZN6- ZA/TO  ACCOUNT THE PRZNCZPLES OF RESPONSZ'  BzLZTV, TRANSPARENCY OF znfor/iatzon  AaiD ACCOUNTabzLzt/.  We demand the immediate cancellation  of the debt of the 53 poorest countries on the  planet, in support of the objectives of the Jubilee 2000 campaign.  In the longer term, we demand cancellation of the debt of all Third World countries and the setting up of a mechanism to  monitor debt write-off, ensuring that this  money is employed to eliminate poverty and  further the well-being of people most affected  by structural adjustment programmes, the  majority of whom are women and girls.  y. The zhplejientatzon of the 20/  20 FOR/IUlA BETWEEN DONOR COUNTRZES  AA/D THE RECZPZENTS OF .ZNTERNATZONAL  AzD.  In this scheme, 20 percent of the sum  contributed by the donor country must be  allocated to social development and 20 percent of the receiving government's spending  must be used for social programmes.  5. A NOAT/IONOLZTHZC WORLD POLZTZ'  CAL OH&-AAIZ-Z-ATZOAJ, WZTH- AuTHORZT/ OVER  THE ECOAJOffV AND E6-ALZTARZAN AA/D DEMOCRAT zc represent atzon of all coun-  TRZES ON EARTH- AA/D EJ2UAL REPRESENTAr  TZON OF WOflEN AND I1EN.  This organization must have real decision-making power and authority to act in  order to implement a world economic system that is fair, participatory and where solidarity plays a key role. The following measures must be instituted immediately:  • A World Council for Economic and Financial Security, which would be in charge  of redefining the rules for a new international financial system based on the fair  and equitable distribution of the planet's  wealth. It would also focus on increasing  the well-being, based on social justice, of  the world population, particularly  women, who make up over half that population. Gender parity should be observed  in the composition of the Council's membership. Membership should also be comprised of representatives of the civil society, for example NGO's, unions, etc. and  should reflect parity of representation between countries from the North and South.  • Any ratification of trade conventions  and agreements should be subordinated  to individual and collective fundamental  human rights. Trade should be subordinated to human rights, not the other way  around.  • The elimination of tax havens.  • The end of banking secrecy.  • Redistribution of wealth by the seven  richest countries.  • A protocol to ensure application of the  International Covenant on Economic,  Social and Cultural Rights.  6. That the embargoes and block-  ADES-PRZAjCZPALLV AFFECTZN6- WO/IEN AND  Chzldr en-znposed av the. hator powers,  on /ianV Countrzes, be LzfteD.  To ZLZ/IZA/ATB.  ALL FOK/1S OF  NZrkZNZT WOtlEJV,  we. d&iaajd:  t. That governments claiming to be defenders of human rights condemn any authority—political, religious, economic or  cultural—that controls women and girls, and  denounce any regime that violates their fundamental rights.  1. That States recognize, in their statutes  and actions, that all forms of violence against  women are violations of fundamental human rights and cannot be justified by any  custom, religion, cultural practice or political power. Therefore, all states must recognize a woman's right to determine her own  destiny, and to exercise control over her body  and reproductive functions.  3. That States implement action plans,  effective policies and programmes equipped  with adequate financial and other means to  end all forms of violence against women.  These action plans must include the following elements in particular: prevention;  public education; punishment; "treatment"  for attackers; research and statistics on all  forms of violence against women; assistance  and protection for victims; campaigns  against pornography, procuring, and sexual  assault, including child rape; non-sexist education; easier access to the criminal justice  system; and training programmes for judges  and police.  A. That the United Nations bring extraordinary pressure to bear on member states to  ratify without reservation and implement the  conventions and covenants relating to the  rights of women and children, in particular,  the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the Convention on the Elimi  nation of All Forms of Discrimination  Against Women, the Convention on the  Rights of the Child, the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of  Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All  Migrant Workers and their Families.  That States harmonize their national  laws with these international human rights  instruments as well as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Declaration on  the Elimination of Violence against Women,  the Cairo and Vienna Declarations, and the  Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action.  5. That, as soon as possible, protocols  be adopted (and implementation mechanisms be established):  • to the International Convention on the  Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination  Against Women;  • to the Convention on the Rights of the  Child;  These protocols will enable individuals  and groups to bring complaints against their  governments. They are a means to apply international pressure on governments to force  them to implement the rights set out in these  covenants and conventions. Provision must  be made for appropriate sanctions against  non-compliant States.  6. That mechanisms be established to  implement the 1949 Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Persons and of the  Exploitation of the Prostitution of Others,  taking into account recent relevant documents such as the two resolutions of the  United Nations General Assembly (1996)  concerning trafficking in women and girls  and violence against migrant women.  7. That States recognize the jurisdiction  of the International Criminal Court and conform in particular to the provisions defining  rape and sexual abuse as war crimes and  crimes against humanity.  ft. That all States adopt and implement  disarmament policies with respect to conventional, nuclear, and biological weapons. That  all countries ratify the Convention Against  Land Mines.  9. That the right to asylum for women  victims of sexist discrimination and persecution and sexual violence be adopted as  soon possible.  The next two demands were supported by  the majority of women present at the meeting on  the condition of a country-by-country adoption  process. Some delegates were not in a position to  be able to commit to publicly defending these  demands in their country. They remain an integral part of the World March of Women in the  year 2000. Over the next few months names of  adopting countries will be added.  10. That, based on the principle of equality of all persons, the United Nations and  States of the international community recognize formally that a person's sexual orientation should not bar them from the full exercise of the rights set out in the following international instruments: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the International  Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, the  International Covenant on Economic, Social  and Cultural Rights and the International  Convention on the Elimination of All Forms  of Discrimination Against Women.  It. That the right to asylum for victims  of discrimination and persecution based on  sexual orientation be adopted as soon as  possible.  kSTeIi  IS  APRIL 1999 Arts  Tamai Kobayashi's exile and the heart:  Precise and sensual  by Lin Khng  EXILE AND THE HEART  by Tamai Kobayashi  Women's Press, Toronto, Ontario, 1998  Tamai Kobayashi's exile and the heart  brings us the lives of two lesbian, activist  women of colour and their families, and  raises intriguing questions about home  (where is it?), assimilation (how much is  enough?), homophobia, and difficult family ties. Set in North America and Japan,  Kobayashi focuses on the lives of Gen  Tanaka and Kathy Nakashima, as they  piece together the fragments of their lives  by understanding their exiles, tracking their  journeys, and negotiating both love and  friendship amidst changing landscapes of  history and memory.  Threaded through this complex interweaving of stories is the women's sense of  cultural exile. Kobayashi writes, with quiet  intensity, of the small moments when each  woman realizes that her Japanese past is  erased and irretrievable. In "Wind", Kathy  Nakashima, attempts to light incense at her  father's grave in Alberta, but cannot remember the Buddhist ritual for doing so.  "She fumbles with the matches—before or  after prayer?—incense, offerings to the  gods. Namu amida butsu. Is it blasphemy  when you don't believe?"  Exile is inherent in Kathy's life, a belief that is echoed by Kathy's mother,  Norma, who returns to Vancouver to face  a deserted lot that was once her home on  Powell Street. Norma's choppy and toneless words betray her emotion as she recounts how her family had burned everything Japanese in order to be considered  loyal Canadians, "That night we took our  English names. We became different people."  Even Gen, a first-generation  Japanese-Canadian, cannot escape the realization that Japan, the land of her childhood, remains only a romantic illusion of  home. She steps into the everyday rituals  in Japan, she says, "as a stranger across  years and language."  At the core of Kobayashi's stories is a  sadness, a sense that the women will never  end their search for home—it must be reconstructed with every retelling of departure, with the leaving of friends and lovers, with every death, and with every new  journey taken.  What is equally compelling in  Kobayashi's stories is the women's pain  around assimilation into mainstream society. In one scene, Gen recalls how she hurt  Kathy by teasing her about her  un-Japaneseness: "Once I teased her about  being so tall. I said, Three generations of  anglo food and boom, the sansei had  sprouted like beans. She got so mad. Like I  was calling her some kind of fake, some  kind of failure."  The constant and muted questions  of loss pervade Kobayashi's stories and  surface in unexpected moments, as  when Naomi Chiba, Gen's friend, remarks that losing words of her native  tongue is similar to losing parts of herself.  Although the characters cannot  escape from questions of cultural displacement, they find home-their  heart's rest-in each other: as friends, and  if they're partners, as lovers. Kobayashi has  created a sharp, yet humorous, portrayal  of lesbians of colour activists at the  front-and-centre of her text, infusing it with  the details of IWD marches, collective meetings and relationships between women in  a tight-knit community. It's refreshing—  and affirming—to read about women who  are concerned and active as feminists.  What I most love about this book is  how vividly Kobayashi conveys the simple physical joy of being loved: the warmth  of the water as two lovers swim in the river,  the joy of morning when a woman makes  breakfast while waiting for her partner to  wake up. "Kathy's footsteps near as Gen  closes her eyes/touch/and Kathy finds her,  warmth along hollows of hips and thighs,  hand stroking the small of her back, and it  is today, this morning... Kathy, her body  humming in time to the beginnings of the  afternoon."  Fluid and rich, Kobayashi's prose also  has a quiet simplicity that imbues each  scene with the clarity of a still-life. The ordinary/extraordinary poetic moments in  the lives of the women are conveyed with  details that make Kobayashi's prose warm,  precise, and sensual.  The politics, clarity and sensuality, and  the portrayal of women as activists, make  exile and the heart a unique and joyful read.  This year, Lin Khng is getting the feminist education she didn't get in university.  Revelations of a strong woman:  Latifah says  "ladies first"  reviewed by Mary Logan   LADIES FIRST: REVELATIONS OF A  STRONG WOMAN  by Queen Latifah with Karen Hunter  William Morrows and Company  New York, New York, 1999  "To every woman who has ever felt less  than royalty"  - dedication in Ladies First  Queen Latifah's autobiography is absolutely a "must read" kind of book, particularly for young and adolescent women  with body types not validated by mainstream media. Latifah gives an honest account of what it is to rise to dignity and  self love when so many odds are stacked  against you and of the power of the human  spirit, as she searched to identify, claim and  courageously live her true self.  At 19, Latifah became the first female  solo rapper to have a major record deal.  Since then, she has gone on to win a  Grammy, star in a television show and several movies, and set up her own record label, Flavor Unit Entertainment.  Latifah is just as I thought she might  be, from seeing her in performances over  the years. What comes through is the  strength of her lyrics and her form, yet still  she has a warm gentleness. She shows  young people how to follow their dream,  trust in their intuition, and not take "no"  for an answer.  As a mother of four AfroCaribbean  Canadian daugthers, I have had to tune in  to find more positive and affirming images  of Black women from all walks of life to  help them in shaping their identity. When  Latifah came on the scene in the 80s, we all  went, "Wow, who is she?"  We like her. I watched as my second  daughter Amber, a tall, robust, athletic, and  beautiful young woman going through all  the usual adolescent awkwardness reinforced by media "norms," blossomed with  confidence as she saw so much of herself  in Queen Latifah. Amber still admires her  today.  Thanks Amber for giving me the book.  Two truly remarkable women.  KINESIS §  BEST  OF THE  ALTERNATIVE  PRESS  Looking for an  adventure in your  magazine reading?  Order a sample copy of the best of  Canada's other press by simply filling  out the request form.  With over 25 years of journalistic  experience, ALTERNATIVES is the most  widely-read environmental journal in  Canada. Thought-provoking articles go  beyond band-aid solutions to consider  concrete alternatives for a wide range of  environmental issues. Look to ALTERNATIVES for reports, opinion pieces, and  reviews of eco-books.  ARTICHOKE is Western Canada's visual  arts magazine and winner of the 1996  Western Magazine of the Year Award for  editorial excellence. Launched in Calgary in  1989, ARTICHOKE sustains a critical  dialogue about visual arts in BC, Alberta,  Saskatchewan, and beyond. Each issue  features reviews, interviews, and profiles  documenting careers, politics and trends.  BRIARPATCH is Canada's award-winning  magazine, providing an alternative view on  issues and event in Canada and the  world. Essential reading for activists  interested in politics, unions, the  's rights and  al affairs. We publish articles  m media won't touch.  Principled. Radical. Independent. For over  30 years, CANADIAN DIMENSION has  been a place where activists can debate  issues, share information, recount our  victories, evaluate our strategies for social  change. Our pages are open to all  progressive voices- debate makes the  movement stronger.  And it makes for lively reading!  Insightful, informative, inspiring,  CANADIAN WOMAN STUDIES is an  indispensable resource for the feminist  reader. We publish material that bridges  academia and grassroots activism.  Women's diverse voices from across  Canada are featured in each thematic  issue. Upcoming: Women and Education,  Mothers and Daughters, and a 20th  anniversary issue.  You're going to love HERIZONS, the  Canadian feminist magazine that delivers  the scoop on issues inside the Canadian  women's movement today. The latest legal  rulings affecting women, provocative  interviews, health, new issues and  debates. HERIZONS has it all. Plus satire,  tons of reviews, and plenty of news at a  News with an edge from Indian Country  and traditional knowledge from the  source. The award-winning magazine THE  NATION is a bi-monthly that has broken  all the industry's rules. Starting with two  borrowed computers and a $1000 ad, it  has grown into one of the leading voices  of Canada's North.  Economic crisis sweeps Asia. General  strikes challenge the cuts in Ontario.  Unemployed workers demonstrate in Paris.  The world has become a terrain of crisis  and struggle. Every two weeks, SOCIALIST c  WORKER analyses this terrain and argues  for a way to fight back.  SOUTHERN AFRICA REPORT- for  trenchant commentary and perceptive  analysis on the latest events in Southern  Africa! SAR has provided 12 years of  isistently informed analysis on the region':  political and economic developments.  Published quarterly by w  Each issue of SUB-TERRAIN is a  stimulating fusion of fiction, poetry,  commentary and visual art from Canada  and abroad. Voted one of the two "Best  edited-in-Vancouver magazines with few  pictures, lots of good words." - Georgia  Straight, Best of Vancouver 1997.  Publishing a new front-line of writers  since 1988.  Alternative journalism that doesn't flinch.  With THIS MAGAZINE, the recognized  leader in alternative journalism, you get  genuinely fresh takes on Canadian politics,  culture and the arts. You get writing that  takes on neo-con myths with wit,  personality and attitude and award-  winning investigative journalism that the  mainstream won't touch.  THE COUNTRY CONNECTION  illuminates country life through heritage,  cultural, artistic, pro-nature and outdoor  themes. Stories, maps and photography  are dedicated to the restoration of natural  ecosystems, the preservation of heritage  buildings, and the nurturing of low-impact  lifestyles. A great see-and-do guide for  nature lovers and rural adventurers.  Vegan friendly.  \ a tu ru/ Life  NATURAL LIFE is Canada's alternative  newsmagazine- in print and on the  Internet at <www.life.ca>. Founded in  1976, we are now Canada's widest-  ranging source of information and  inspiration for reinventing how we live...  in our communities and on our planet.  Always honest, always provocative, always  slightly ahead of our time.  Begin your  reading  adventure  here...  FUSE MAGAZINE provides a door to  cutting-edge activities in the art and  cultural communities shaping our world.  Investigating why the work is being  produced, FUSE covers visual art,  performance, film/video, multimedia and  more. One of the only magazines  exploring in depth the political aspects of  art making and the ways art  fits into our lives!  WE INTERNATIONAL brings a brand new  face to the 21 st century with reviews,  interviews, art, essays and humour.  Independent and 22 years old, WE  (formerly Women and Environment^ is an  eco-feminist quarterly that prides itself on  its world readership and representation,  and ground-breaking research on women's  global and community realities.  Who's being exploited? How should we  live? Who will save the Earth? Find out  what's really going on with NEW  INTERNATIONALIST, a five-time  Alternative Press Award winner. From  endangered species to child labour, each  month Nl takes a radical look at a specific  theme. We examine all the angles to put  you squarely in the picture.  GEIST is home to the Honourary  Canadian Awards, the Trans-Canada  Phrase Book, the Canadian Mall Writing  Competition, the Who the Hell is Peter  Gzowski survey, and the very best in story,  picture, essay, memoir, crossword, toon,  and little-known fact. In print since 1990.  "A publication that is, in this country,  inimitable."- Toronto Star  POV is Canada's cutting-edge magazine  on the culture, politics, art and business of  independent documentary film and  television. POV also covers a diverse range  of work from features and shorts to video  art through lively analysis and timely  criticism. Published three times per year.  %   REQUEST  ^ FORM  m  To place your order, please:  i 1 / Indicate the magazine(s) you wish to receive.  Artichoke Briarpatch  Canadian Dimension  Fuse Geist  Natural Life The Nation  POV Socialist Worker  Sub-Terrain This Magazine  Alternatives  Can. Woman Studies  Country Connection  Herizons  New Internationalist  S. Africa Report  WE International  • 2/ Fill out your name and address.  '  telephone  ' 3/ Calculate your payment. The first magazine you request  | costs $5.00, each additional magazine is $2.50. For example, if  ( you order three magazines, your payment would be $5.00 + 2  > x $2.50 = $10.00. GST is included.   "  | orders, IIP to international orders. Plei  y order payable t<  ) 4/ Mail this form with your payment. Send to: Chaos  ► Consulting-BOAP, PO Box 65506, Stn F, Vancouver, BC, V5N  » 5K5. Please allow 4 to 6 weeks for delivery. For inquiries  ' only (no orders), e-mail chaos@axionet.com or  | fax:(604)875-1403.  SIS Bulletin Board  read    t h i s I     INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety and  effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Kinesis, #309-  877 E. Hastings Street, Vancouver, BC,  V6A 3Y1, fax: (604) 255-7508, or email:  kinesis@web.net. For    more  information call (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All women  interested in what goes into Kinesis—  whether it's news, features or arts—are  invited to our Story Meetings held on the  first Tuesday of every month at 7pm at our  office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. The next  meetings are on Apr 6 and May 4. For more  information or if you can't make the meeting  but still want to find out how to contribute to  the content of Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. New and experienced  writers welcome. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you want to learn to do referral and peer  counselling work, at VSW we are offering  a great opportunity to women interested in  volunteer work during the day. Come  answer the phone lines, talk to women  who drop in, and help connect them with  the community resources they need. For  more information call Shana at 255-6554.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  VOLUNTEER NEWSLETTER  Are you a volunteer at VSW or Kinesis? If  yes, please feel free to make contributions  to our new monthly "Volunteer Newsletter."  The newsletter is for us—for all VSW/  Kinesis volunteers—and will be a place for  updates on committee work, gossip,  recipes, things for sale/barter, a calendar  of events, and whatever else volunteers  want to put in. There's a box at #309-877  E. Hastings St. just waiting for your  submissions. If you want more info contact  Amal Rana (Kinesis production coordinator) at (604) 255-5499 or Rita Dhamoon of  the VSW Volunteer Development Commit-  tee at (604)255-6554.   KINESIS MARKETING GANG  Interested in being on the hottest new  committee at VSW? Then check out the  Kinesis Marketing Gang. We're looking for  women who have experience or are  interested in advertising and marketing.  The Marketing Gang works as a collective  to strategize on innovative ways to  promote and raise the profile of Kinesis.  The gang meets monthly. Training and  support will be provided by Kinesis  marketing coordinator Jenn Lo. Call her at  (604)255-5499.  EVENTS  PICKETING CAPERS  The Basmati Action Group (BAG) in  Vancouver will be picketing the Capers  store at 2285 W. 4th Ave every Saturday  in April from noon-2pm. BAG has  launched an international boycott against  Rice Tec, a US-based corporation that has  "patented" Basmati rice. Patenting of life  forms increases corporate control over the  world's food supply. Many stores in  Vancouver immediately agreed to take  Rice Tec products from their shelves, but  Capers has refused to support the boycott.  For more info email BAG at basmati-  action@sfu.ca or phone Nandita or Allison  at 255-4910.  INQUIRING MINDS WANTTO KNOW!        JOANE CARDINAL-SCHUBERT  Do you ever wonder how the pages of text  in the newspaper you're holding get lined  up so neatly? Want to know what the fastest  way to get wax off your hands is? How  about all the cool things you can do with a  scanner? Does thinking about the right dot  pattern keep you up at night? Or do visions  of rubylith enter into your dreams? If so,  then you definitely need to come down and  help put Kinesis together. Just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper, and all your questions  will be answered. We'll be in production for  our May 1999 issue from Apr 18-25. Come  and join us. No experience is necessary.  Training and support will be provided. If this  notice intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-  5499. Childcare and travel subsidies  available.  FEMINIST FUNDRAISERS WANTED  VSW is seeking enthusiastic, energetic and  creative women to join the Finance and  Fundraising Committee. If you enjoy raising  money for a great cause, organizing events,  or just want to have fun, call Audrey at  (604)255-6554 today!  Two Decades, an exhibit of works by  Joane Cardinal-Schubert will be at the  Surrey Art Gallery until May 23. One of  Canada's foremost contemporary First  Nations artists, Cardinal-Schubert's multimedia exhibit includes pieces from her  1970s drawing series, 'The Great  Canadiana Dream," which portrays the  unsung First Nations heroes of Canada,  particularly those from southern Alberta.  The gallery is located in the Surrey Arts  Centre, 13750-88th Ave, Surrey, BC. For  gallery hours, call 501-5566.  OSTEOPOROSISWORKSHOP  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is hosting a workshop on the benefits of  massage therapy and physiotherapy for  people dealing with osteoporosis on Sat  May 8, 11 am-1 pm at the VWHC Women's  Health Information Centre, 219-1675 W.  8th Ave. Pam Fichtner, RMT, and Kristin  Campbell, BSc PT, are presenting.  Reservations are encouraged as space is  limited. A $3 donation is suggested. To  register, call (604) 736-5262 and leave a  message.  FULL FRONTAL READING  Carmen Rodriguez and Marilyn Dumont  will be giving a Full Frontal reading on Fri  Apr 23, 8pm at the Western Front, 303 E.  8th Ave. Rodriguez is the author of and a  body to remember with, and Dumont is the  author of Really Good Brown Girl. The  reading is presented by Front magazine.  Admission by donation. For more info call  (604) 876-9343.   EARTH DAY FILM  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is showing Who's Counting, a film on New  Zealand economist and politician Marilyn  Waring on Thurs Apr 22 at the VWHC  Women's Health Information Centre at 219-  1675 W. 8th Ave. A discussion about  feminism and the environment will follow.  Admission by donation. Call Kristin  Campbell at (604) 736-5262 for more info.  BENEFIT CONCERT  Vancouver's leading lesbian and gay  musical performers are joining forces to  form Unison '99, a benefit concert at Christ  Church Cathedral in Vancouver (Georgia at  Burrard), on Sat Apr 10 at 8pm in support  of the Victoria Lesbian Seniors Care  Society. Performers include: A Vancouver  Women's Chorus, The Rainbow Concert  Band, The Rainy City Gay Men's Chorus,  The Vancouver Lesbian and Gay Choir and  The Vancouver Men's Chorus. Tickets are  $15 and are available in Vancouver through  Little Sister's Book and Art Emporium, and  in Victoria through the Victoria Lesbian  Seniors Care Society. For more info call  (604) 515-5566.   CHILDREN AND DOMESTIC  VIOLENCE  The BC/Yukon Society of Transition Houses  is hosting an International Conference on  Children Exposed to Domestic Violence in  Vancouver Oct 27-29. The focus of the  conference is on integrating research,  policy, and practice. Among the conference  presenters will be Helen Dempster of the  Society and local counsellor Val Oglov, with  other presenters from across Canada and  the US. To register, or for more info, call  (604) 669-6943 or email  hdempst@istar.ca.  LAIWAN'S MACHINATIONS  Machinate: a projection in two movements  by Laiwan will be exhibited at the Video In  Studios, 1965 Main St, Vancouver from Apr  29-May 15. Using 16mm film, video, audio,  sculptural assemblage and the internet,  this installation poetically explores our  consciousness of "body" in relation to  analogue and digital mechanisms. Born in  Harare, Zimbabwe of Chinese parents,  Laiwan is an interdisciplinary artist and  writer currently living in Vancouver.  Laiwan's first video work, Remotely in  Touch, (1998) signaled her departure from  still to moving image and into researching  the signification of digital media. Machinate  will be her first installed collection of  investigations into technologized consciousness, phenomena and presumptions. Opening reception is Thurs Apr 29 at  8pm. For more info call (604)872-8337.  MARILYN BOWERING  Marilyn Bowering's new book Human  Bodies collects the poems from the latter  half of this award winning poet and novelist's illustrious career. Marilyn has won both  the Pat Lowther Award and the Ethel  Wilson BC Book Prize. She will be reading  from this new collection on Tues Apr 6, at  7.30pm at Women in Print, 3566 W 4th  Ave, Vancouver. For more info, call (604)  732-4128.  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE WORKSHOP  The Japanese Canadian Citizens Association's Human Rights Committee is holding  a bilingual (English and Japanese) information workshop on domestic violence in  Vancouver Sat May 8, 9:30am-4pm at the  JCCA Centre at 511 E. Broadway. The fee  is $10 including lunch. For pre-registration,  call Mariko at (604) 451-4122, David at  871-9472 or Judy at 876-9858.  DIONNE BRAND  Dionne Brand, winner of the Governor  General's Award for Poetry and the Trillium  Award in 1997, will read from her new  novel, At the Full and Change of the Moon,  on Fri Apr 16, 7:30pm at Women in Print,  3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. The novel is  told through the intimately interconnected  stories of Marie Ursule's descendants—a  history of dispossession. Admission is free.  For more info, call (604) 732-4128.  MONA FERTIG & KATE BRAID  In honour of National Poetry Month, Mona  Fertig and Kate Braid will be reading on  Tues April 20 at 7:30 pm at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. Fertig's  most recent publication, Sex, Death &  Travel, is about delicious sensuality,  startling grief, tropical heat and travel.  Braid's most recent book of poetry is  Inward to the Bones, an account of an  imaginary relationship between Emily Carr  and Georgia O'Keeffe. Admission is free.  For more info, call (604) 732-4128.   GAIL SCOTT  Gail Scott will read from her most recent  novel, My Paris, on Tues May 11 at 7:30pm  at Women in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave,  Vancouver. My Paris is a hypnotic, evocative novel about a woman who falls obsessively and fatefully in love with the city of  Paris—its sights and sounds, and its  contradictions. Admission is free. For more  info, call (604) 732-4128.   WOMEN'S SPIRITUALITY  CONFERENCE  The Sudbury Sexual Assault Crisis Centre  is hosting a women's spirituality gathering  on May 18-19 in Sudbury, Ontario. The  guest facilitator at the gathering, Making it  Real: Grounding Spirit in Action, will be  Starhawk. For more info, contact Violet  Lanthier at violetl@vianet.on.ca.  MIDWIFERY WORKSHOP  The North Shore Women's Centre is  hosting an introductory workshop on  midwifery on Fri Apr 9 from 10:30-  11:30am at the Centre on 944 W 16th St.  in North Vancouver. The presenter, Mitra  Fatemi Anaraki, will discuss the differences  between midwifery in Canada and Iran,  and will discuss the birth and delivery  process. Admission is free, and no registration is required. For more info call (604)  BREAST HEALTH & BREASTFEEDING  The Vancouver Women's Health Information Centre is hosting a workshop on  breast health and breastfeeding on Sat  Apr 10, 11am-1pm at the Centre, 219-  1675 W 8th Ave. Pam Fichtner, RMT, will  talk about general health and Juliette  Smith, a trained breastfeeding counsellor,  will talk about the pros and cons of  breastfeeding and some of the common  problems that can arise during the  breastfeeding relationship. Reservations  are encouraged as space is limited. A $3  donation is suggested. To register call  (604) 736-5262 and leave a message.  KINESIS Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  GROUPS  GROUPS  COMMUNITY LAW OFFICE  WORKSHOP  The North Shore Women's Centre is  hosting two presenters from the North  Shore Community Law Office on Fri Apr 16  from 10:30-11:30am at the Centre on 944  W. 16th St. in North Vancouver. The presenters will discuss the services the law  office offers, including advocacy, legal aid,  counselling, and tenants' rights. Admission  is free, and no registration is required. For  more info call (604) 984-6009.   MEDITATION AND RELAXATION  WORKSHOP  The North Shore Women's Centre is  hosting meditation and relaxation workshops on Fri Apr 23 & 30 from 10:30-  11:30am, at the Centre, 944 W. 16th St,  North Vancouver. Mahvash Shariat Panahi  will give a history of meditation, and will  lead participants through a 15-20 minute  meditation exercise. Admission is free, and  no registration is required. For more info,  call (604) 984-6009.   MUSICTHERAPY  Sue Baines, a local music therapist and  music therapy educator, will lead a workshop entitled, Introduction to Music Therapy  for Health and Well Being on Wed Apr 14  from 6:30-8:30pm at the North Shore  Women's Centre, 944 W. 16th St, North  Vancouver. The workshop will cover a  broad spectrum of music therapy techniques, including music for relaxation and  music with other creative arts. To reserve  your seat or for more info call (604) 984-  6009.  BREAST CANCER  An information session on breast cancer  will be held at the North Shore Women's  Centre, 944 W 16th St. in North Vancouver,  on Fri, May 21 from 10:30am-12:30pm. A  representative from the Canadian Breast  Cancer Society will discuss issues such as  the prevention and detection of breast  cancer. A doctor will be available to answer  questions and conduct private breast  exams. For more info call the Centre at  (604) 984-6009.  WINE, WOMEN AND SCIENCE  The Society for Canadian Women in  Science and Technology presents its first  SCWIST Off-Line! Wine, Women and  Science on Thurs Apr 15 people are  welcome to the YWCA from 7-9pm in room  5 for a discussion and panel on Women  and Technology. For more info call Nikki  Skuce at the Resource Centre (604) 895-  5814.  LEADERSHIP PANEL DISCUSSION  A panel discussion, Women at the Heart of  Leadership: Sharing Stories of Success,  Challenge, and Change, will be held on  Tues Apr 6 from 3:30-5:30pm at the Sty-  Wet-Tan Hall, 1985 West Mall, UBC (First  Nations Longhouse). Three successful  leaders will be highlighted: Dr. Martha  Piper, President of UBC; Wendy Grant  John, Former Musqueam Chief and  Current Associate Regional Director  General of Indian and Northern Affairs; and  Susan L. Yurkovich, General Manager of  Public Affairs of Cantor Corp. For more info,  contact the First Nations House of Learning at (604) 822-8940, or the Wcmen  Students' Office at (604) 822-2416.   MEMORIAL MARCH  Tha South Asian Workers Against Violence  Coordinating Committee is sponsoring a  rally at the Langara Student Union building  in Vancouver in memory of Rajwar Gakhal  and her family .murdered by her ex-  husband Mark Chahal on April 5, 1998 in  Vernon BC. You are invited to take part in  the South Asian tradition of wearing white.  The march will meet at Main and 50th on  Sun Apr 4 at 1:00 pm then march to  Langara College. For more info call the  South Asian Women's Centre at (604)325-  6637.  GROUPS  WOMEN'S OUTDOORS CLUB  The Victoria Women's Outdoors & Activity  Club has organized three upcoming  activities. Sun Apr 11 at 11:00am: brunch  at the San Diego restaurant in James Bay  followed by a walk around the harbour;  Sun Apr 18 fr.om 11:00am: meet at the  Spot for a bike ride on the Galloping Goose  trail; and Sun Apr 25 at 9:00am: meet at  the Spot for a two-hour hike on Saltspring  Island. For more info contact Kanaice Scott  at (250) 812-5751 ore-mail  vwoac@yahoo.com.  BUILDING BLOCKS  Building Blocks Vancouver offers information and support for Spanish-speaking,  Vietnamese and Aboriginal women living in  the Grandview Woodland area expecting  their first baby or with newborns under  three-months old. The program has a great  team of Home Visitors to assist women. For  more info call MOSAIC at (604) 254-9626  local 403 or the Vancouver Aboriginal  Family and Child Services at (604) 251-  4844, local 311.  WOMEN ABUSE SUPPORT GROUP  A support group in Vancouver for women  abused by women is available for lesbians,  dykes and bisexual women through  Battered Women's Support Services.  Emotional support, legal information and  advocacy, safety planning, and referrals  are offered. The group is free and confidential and onsite childcare is available. For  more info call Sarah or April at (604) 687-  1867.   GODDESS ART SHOW  Calling all Goddess Artists. Are you  interested in being involved as an organizer or participating artist, or know someone who might be, in a huge show of  Goddess Art for the year 2000? The plan is  to organize a major show in Vancouver,  combined with multiple bus tours of 3-5  days throughout different parts of BC. For  more info contact Mary Billy, Box 2047,  Squamish BC, VON 3G0; tel: (604) 892-  5723; or email: mbilly@sea-to-sky.net.  Donations to help with postage and phone  calls are appreciated.  RAPE RELIEFVOLUNTEERS  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Volunteer training sessions are  held Tuesday evenings. For more info and  a training interview call (604) 872-8212.  COMPULSIVE EATING SUPPORT  A drop-in support group for women with  issues of compulsive eating is held twice a  month at the Eating Disorder Resource  Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital, Room  2C-213, 1081 Burrard St, Vancouver. Drop-  in times are 7:30pm to 9pm every 1st and  3rd Wednesday of the month. Facilitated  by Colleen Hyland and Cynthia Johnston.  For more info call (604) 631-5313.  SHAKTI  Shakii (meaning "strength") is a self-help  group in Vancouver for South Asian women  who have experienced the psychiatric  system. The group meets every 1st and  3rd Saturday of the month 1-3pm at South  Vancouver Neighbourhood House, 6470  Victoria Dr. Join the group for outings,  discoveries, peer support, relaxing massage. Participation is free. For more info  call Helen (604) 733-5570 (for English) or  (604) 682-3269 box 8144 (for Punjabi,  Hindi and Urdu). Sponsored by the Vancouver/Richmond Mental Health Network.  SATRANG  If you are into drama, theatre sports, etc.  and feel strongly about issues affecting  South Asian women, come and check out  the South Asian Theatre & Networking  Group. Satrang is about enthusiasm and  having fun with your creativity in a positive  scene. Meetings are every Monday from  3:30 to 5:00pm at the South Asian Women's Centre at 8163 Main St. Vancouver.  For more info call Anu at (604) 592-0013 or  Sonia at (604) 325-6637.   MENOPAUSE AWARENESS GROUP  The Surrey Women's Centre is sponsoring  a Menopause Awareness Group which  meets the 4th Monday of each month for  informal discussions around menopause  issues. The group starts at 7:30pm and will  be held at the centre. For location or more  info call Janet or Sharon at (604) 589-  1868.  SUBMISSIONS  HEALTH NETWORK  The Canadian Women's Health Network  invites submissions for its quarterly  newsletter, Network. If you'd like to contribute or want to suggest a topic we should  cover, please contact the  editor at news@cwhn.ca. Or contact her at  CWHN Network, 203-419 Graham Ave,  Winnipeg, MB, R3C 0M3, or visit the  CWHN website at www.cwhn.ca.  tel:(204) 94-5500   ART SHOW SPACE  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has opened its space to women artists.  Shows will run for 4-6 weeks under  contract guidelines. The Collective will host  an opening, and provide some advertising  as well as hanging materials. For details,  leave a message for Christine Campbell or  Tamara Flick-Parker at (604) 736-4234.  J tiff tiff  The answer to the riddle on page 10  [6661 'SI qojew 'aaujAOJd dm:eojnos]  js>p!;swn.ip ejouu  omj :bhoa pub 'do|8A9p sepsnuj 'jeedde  SJ96U!J p9MB|0 'LjSjUBA SJ9U.JB9} :nns9j  au.1 soAjqaie jo s6ujm 6u|do|9A9p  9L|} 0}U| }! 6UUJ9JSUBJ} pUE SUS^OjUO  |o s69| eu,j u| punoj Anewjou 9U96 ei|}  6u|>)b; uaaq 9abu. 'ub6o-| lu|oo|biai jo  Aq pe| 's;snueps 9U.1 |ooups iBopg^  PJBAJBH LUOJJ SJ99U|6u9 D|19U96  oj s>)ubu.i 's69| jnq sbu. mou \\ gsneoag  3/A/o.Lje r\oT//^*s'  "Rer-SOMRCJET QUt*X>&  They're going fast. This hot little resource  guide is packed with all kinds of useful  information on child care, Segal  assistance, employment and training, |  housing, welfare, services for First    |  Nations women, freebies and cheapies  and more! To get your free copy, pick one  up from our office during office hours, or  send us a self-addressed stamped  envelope with $1.50 return postage on it  (send a large size envelope please).  Organizations can place an order for  multiple copies by phoning VSW at  (604)255-6554. We ask organizations to  contribute $2.00 per copy toward the  cost of the guides.  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  #309 - 877 E. Hastings; Vancouver V6A3Y1  mm  m Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  PRIDE IN ART  The Pride in Art Society in Vancouver  invites submissions of art and short stories  for this year's queer art exhibition, which  will take place from Jul 29-Aug 15 at the  Roundhouse Community Centre, 181  Roundhouse Mews. Submissions will be  accepted from May 29-Jun 6. Send entries  to Pride Art Exhibition 1999, c/o Robert L.  Hong, 103-1065 Burnaby St, Vancouver,  BC, V6E 1N9. For more info contact by  email: robbieh@direct.ca or tel: (604) 683-  3884.   FILIPINA NURSES  Are you a Filipina nurse who came to  Canada under the Live-in Caregiver  Program? The Philippine Women Centre is  gathering the experiences of Filipina  nurses who enter Canada as domestic  helpers. By sharing experiences, participants can identify what the systemic  barriers are that prevent them from developing to their full potential in Canada. One  strategy is to begin the process of getting  collective recognition for the education and  skills Filipina nurses bring to Canada. For  more info about this research project or the  PWC's Nurses' Support Group, call Maita  or Mayette at (604) 215-1103.   API WIMMIN AND GIRLS  Are you a wimmin or girl of full, mixed or  partial Asian or Pacific Islander origin?  Have you always wanted to see your  work—be it poetry, art, recipes, rants,  fiction or non-fiction—in print? Fire Moon!  Asian and Pacific Islander Wimmin's  Alliance, wants to print your stuff for its  zine. All submissions can be handed into  the Simon Fraser University Women's  Centre, c/o Janet. Submissions are  accepted on an ongoing basis. For more  info call (604) 291-3670 or email:  boun@sfu.ca.  SEXUAL ASSAULT  Published by the Montreal Health Press,  a women's collective, producing quality  books on health and sexuality for 30  The most up-to-date information on  sexual assault: how to handle an assault,  prevention, the social context.  1997 EDITION  New information on  ♦ Pregnancy and  STDs resulting  from an assault  ♦ Partner assault  ♦ Dating violence  ♦ Abuse of people  with disabilities  No other  resource offers  the combination u  of personal and practical information,  an understanding of why sexual  assault happens and ways to work for  positive chanet  Send $5.00 (cheque or money order)  to:  Montreal Health Press Inc.  P.O. Box 1000  Station Place du Pare  Montreal (Quebec) Canada  H2W 2N1  Tel.: (514) 282-1171 Fax: (514) 282-0262  E-mail: mhpmontreal@msn.com  WM.m.mi>mumimm,  ABUSE OF PARENTS  A group of women in Nova Scotia is  collecting information about the abuse of  parents by their teenage children. They  hope to publish a booklet for families which  includes reading lists for professionals and  parents, and ideas for what groups,  including support groups of parents, can  do to help themselves and their communities. The group is looking for any research,  resources or projects on this issue. To  share info or for more details about the  booklet, email to  barbara.cottrell@dbis.ns.ca.  WOMEN.WORKAND  COMPUTERIZATION CONFERENCE  This is a first call for papers on women,  work and computerization for the 7th  International Federation of Information  Processing (IFIP)Conference to be held in  Vancouver Jun 8-11 2000. For further info  call Ellen Balka, School of Communication,  SFU or email ebalka@sfu.ca .  4TH BC CONFERENCE ON  ABORIGINAL WOMEN &WELLNESS  Deadline for submissions to Conference on  Aboriginal Women & Wellness concerning  The Legacies We Leave Our Children is  Jun 1. For more info email  elaine@cehs.ubc.ca or call (604)822-  4965.  CLASSIFIEDS  SAME-SEX ABUSE RESEARCH  If you are a woman (lesbian, bisexual,  transgender or heterosexual) living in  Vancouver and surrounding areas, and are  interested in participating in a confidential  interview about your experience, please  call(604)688-9299 from Apr 3-28 (ask for  confidential voice mail for Janice Ristock).  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call (604)876-6390.  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Housing Co-op has one, two and  three bedroom suites for $565, $696, $795  per month and refundable share purchase.  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Participation required. Please  send a business size SASE to Membership  Committee, Cityview Housing Co-op, #108-  1885 E. Pender St, Vancouver, BC, V5L  1W6.   SPINSTERVALE  Work exchanger(s) wanted at Spinstervale,  on Vancouver Island. Three hours a day for  cabin and food. Opportunity exists in salad  business for local farmer's market. Apprentice also needed to care for goats. Or, rent  cosy cabins for $7.50 nite/person. Contact  Box 429, Coombs, B.C.V0R 1M0; call (250)  248-8809 or email:  sunshine@macn.bc.ca.  WE NEED A COACH  Coach wanted for fun-loving, lesbian  recreational softball team in the Mabel  League, Vancouver. Contact The Wombats,  (604)709-3654.   SOFrBALL PLAYERS WANTED  Players wanted for recreational lesbian  softball team with the Mabel League. Some  ball-playing experience and a sense of  humour required. Please call (604)254-  1607.  SUSAN CROWE  Juno nominated singer-songwriter Susan Crowe will launch  her new CD a pilgram's mirror on Sunday April 25 at 8:00pm.  Crowe has been quickly making a name for herself on the  Canadian folk scene—from the moment she released her debut  CD, This Far From Home, in 1994, Crowe was hailed by critics  and peers alike as a songwriter with rare talent. In 1996,  Crowe's second CD, The Door to the River, earned another  round of rave reviews on the home front and the international  arena. In launching a pilgrim's mirror, she will be accompanied  by mandolin virtuoso John Reischman, bassist Brent Gubbels  and other musical friends. For tickets or more information, call  Ticketmaster at (604) 280-3311. Tickets are also available at  Highlife Records, Black Swan Records and Little Sister's.  Paula Clancy, b.a.  Certified General Accountant  Auditing  Accounting  Financial Planning  Income Tax Services  for  Organizations  Small Businesses  and Individuals  Tel: (604)215-1720  Fax:(604)215-1750  pclancy @bc.sympatico.ca  LEGAL REPRESENTATION  AND MEDIATION  SERVICES  in:  labour and employment law  human rights,  civil litigation  public interest advocacy.  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWYERS  Melinda Munro and Clea Parfitt  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778 (ph)        689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  KINESIS LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL. U B.C.  VANCOUVER BC   V6T 1Z8  •J ••»•■•• ■■•••■■•■■■■•■■■■■»»  >rM 'yyj'rM T M T M T yl Mr\Mu^rMc\^c\M^M trtfvMi'^ '^WrM^rMfiMfl^YiM  >^*&L*L*L*L*L*L*L*L*L*L*L*L*jf.  »>>>>>>>>>>>>J  ■JfJfJfiM