 FEBRUARY 1997     Attempted sabotage of IWD... pg4     CMPA$2.25 Inside  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5490  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on aft aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meeting is Mon Feb 3 at 7 pm  at Kinesis. Production for the March  issue is from Feb 19-25. Ati women  welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  wendy lee kenward (on leave),  Agnes Huang  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Dorcas, Rachel Rosen, Mariene del  Hoyo, Judy Miller, Centime Zeleke,  Faith Jones, Winnifred Tovey, Caitlin  Byrne, Fatima Jaffer, Shannon e. Ash,  Agnes Huang, Rita Wong, Joanne  Namsoo, Glenna Forrest, Leanne  Keltie, Dorothy Elias, Persimmon  Blackbridge, Carol Read, Dana  Putnam, Elaine Fonseca, Nikola Marin  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Co-ordinator: Swee Sim Tan  Typesetter Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Janisse Browning,Makeda Silvera at  the Black Education Project and art  work by Jan Wade. Photos by Agnes  Huang, Claire Prieto and Roger  McTair and Cheryl Bellows  PRESS DATE  January 28,1997  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  FEBRUARY 1997  News  Anti-poverty activists pan Family Bonus 3  by Shannon e. Ash  Active resistance to APEC thwarted by police 3  by Rachel Rosen  Vancouver women mobilize around IWD 5  by Fatima Jaffer  Domestic worker wins sexual harassment case 5     IWD organizing in Vancouver..  by Agnes Huang  Features  A critique of multiculturalism   A conversation with Himan Bannerji, Annie Xuan Clark,  Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Sook C. Kong, Nancy Pang  and E. Centime Zeleke  Breast cancer survivors and supporters meet in Orillia   by Jennifer Mac Lean  Black History Month  Strategies and challenges in documenting history 11  by Jocelyn Boyd, Claire Prieto, Addena Sumter-Frietag  and Jan Wade  The importance of history 12  by Janisse Browning, Lorena Gale and E. Centime Zeleke  Decolonizing the curriculum 14  by Yvonne Brown as told to Charmaine Perkins  Resources of Black women's histories 15  Arts  Audre Lorde: The Body of A Poet 16  by E. Centime Zeleke  A chat with Renee Rodin 17  with Margaret Dragu  Asian American writer, Shirley Geok-Lin Lim 18  a conversation with Sook C. Kong  Review of Judith Finlayson's Against the Current 20  by Janet Nicol  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6  compiled by Joanne Namsoo and Caitlin Byrne  What's News 7  compiled by Shannon e. Ash, Carol Read and Rachel Rosen  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Andrea Imada  Himani Bannerji..  Yvonne Brown.  Kinesis & the Vancouver  Status of Women are moving!  As of March 1,1997, our address is:  Suite 309, 877 East Hastings Street  Vancouver, BC  V6A 3Y1  Next month's Kinesis will announce any changes  in phone and fax numbers  Renee Rodin., As Kinesis goes to press, BC premier  Glen Clark is out and about heaping praise  on his government's programs aimed at  reducing child poverty, he and Human Resources Minister Dennis Streifel have also  been busy trying to convince other provinces to buy into their plan.  But, anti-poverty activists aren't being  fooled into believing that, in fact, the NDP's  Family Bonus for low-income families really amounts to any real bonus, especially  for single mothers and people on welfare  [see story, page 3.]  Clark's very public support of the direction his government has been taking  around welfare and child poverty seems  timed to coincide with the NDP caucus'  review of "BC Benefits." The review, being  led by Culture and Tourism Minister Jan  Pullinger, will likely give the NDP's welfare "reform" package high marks, and it's  already clear what Clark thinks.  The review is expected to be released  sometime in early to mid-February. Anti-  poverty activists had called on the NDP  government to hold a public hearing on BC  Benefits, but they were denied. Instead,  they were told the review committee would  meet with some advocates for people on  welfare, but not with people living (or trying to live) on welfare.  So because the NDP jammed on giving poor people a chance to voice their  opinions on BC Benefits, the WHOA Coalition (Workfare Hurts One and All) and  End Legislated Poverty organized their  own public hearing at the Carnegie Centre  in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside.  The forum, held in mid-December, involved more than 30 speakers-including,  people receiving social assistance, single  mothers, anti-poverty advocates, union  representatives, and so on~who made presentations during a five-hour period (followed by a skit and supper).  WHOA and ELP recorded the proceedings, and prepared a package based on the  recorded comments by participants. They  then submitted the document to the review  committee. Needless to say, BC Benefits  received two thumbs down. To get a copy  of the document, call WHOA at (604) 536-  2886.  Speaking of community mobilizing  ...Vancouver feminists are continuing to get  ready for IWD this year, not having been  dissuaded by the attempts of some anti-  choicers to disrupt organizing efforts [see  story, page 5.]  Aboriginal women plan to be a big part  of this year's FvVD—even though they're  not represented in numbers on the IWD  organizing committee. As Kinesis goes to  press, we received a notice of Aboriginal  Women's Day celebration on IWD. The organizers of the event are asking for finan  cial donations to purchase materials to create an Aboriginal Women's Flag, and to  cover transportation costs. They are also  looking for Aboriginal women to volunteer  or help organize the celebration. Call Mabel  Nipshank or Namaste Marsden at Crabtree  Corner at 689-2808.  More on women's organizing...the annual Valentine's March through Vancouver's Downtown Eastside is coming up.  Each year, women and men gather in the  are to remember the lives of women—most  of whom are Aboriginal women—who  have died violent deaths in the area.  This year, about 10 women from the  Downtown Eastside are being trained to  carve a totem pole, which will be erected  in Crab Park. As Kinesis was going to press,  we had not heard whether the totem pole  would be completed by February 14th.  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  memberships or donated to Vancouver Status of Women in December and January.  Judith Burke * Shauna Butterwick * Brenda Carbonell * Betty Carter * Karen  Clark * Shira Cohen * Diana Craig *Louise De Bruijne * Tanya De Haan * Marilyn  Derooy * Elsie Devita * Emma Dickson * Mary Frey * Jeanette Frost * Marianne  Fuller * S. P. Fuller * Heather George * Linda Griffiths * Elizabeth Harris * Agnes  Huang * Jam. Ismail * Faune Johnson * Nola Johnston * Salme Kaljar * Linda Kemp  * Olga Kempo * Valerie Laub * Deborah Lerose * Ursula Litzcke * M. K. Louise *  Kathleen MacRae * Alex Maas * Jennifer Mansell * Wendy Matsubuchi * Monica  McGovern * Kathy McGrenera * Sara Menzel * Diane Mercy * Margaret Mitchell *  Sarah Murdoch * Lou Nelson * Denise Nereida * Jan Noppe * Lafern Page * Laura  Parkinson * Marilyn Pomfret * Geraldine Pratt * Shawn Diana Preus * Josephine  Rekart * Louise Richare * Harley Rothstein * Christina Schut * Connie Skinner *  Margaret Slight * Judith Snider * Verna Splane * Veronica Strong-Boag * Gisela  Theurer * Hilda Thomas * Shelagh Wilson * Brenda Wong * Erin Zinn * Confederation of Canadian Union - BC Council * L'Hirondelle Financial Services * POCO  Businesswomen's Association * Stowe Ellis Barristers & Solicitors  And a special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and  Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Wendy Baker * Nancy Duff *Barbara Curran * Jody Gordon * Erin Graham *  Barbara Karmazyn * Sadie Kuehn * Barbara Lebrasseur * Lolani Maar * Sheilah  Thompson * Elizabeth Whynot  VSW also thanks all those responded to our plea to save the Single Mother's Resource Guide with donations and letters of support. Because of your help, a new, updated issue of the Guide will be available for distribution at the end of April. Thanks  very much to the following agencies whose substantial contributions will greatly assist  our efforts:  Legal Services Society * The Law Foundation of BC* The Vancouver Foundation  * The Vancouver Sun Children's Fund * Human Resources Development Canada -  Job Creation Partnerships  We'll keep you posted, and yes, we will  bring you pictures next month.  Here's something we just received  as we were going to press...Feminist  filmmaker and activist (and now writer)  Bonnie Sherr Klein will be launching  her very first book (written in collaboration with Persimmon Blackbridge),  Slow Dance: A story of stroke, love and  disability on Tuesday, February 4th, from  7:00 to 9:00pm at the Vancouver Public  Library. Klein will also be reading at this  year's Women in View festival. For details, check out Bulletin Board, page 23.  Well, that's all for this month as Kinesis goes to press. Enjoy this month's  special features for Black History  Month. Have a happy Chinese New  Year...especially you oxes. See you  around.  Happy new year...according to both  Christian and lunar calendars! The gals at  Kinesis are convinced this one is going to  be bolder, brasher and more bodacious than  last year—in terms oiKinesis content, production antics and women's organizing for  social, economic and political change!  We started off the Christian new year  well-rested, with lots of enthusiasm and  many new volunteers! And as we approach  the end of lunar new year—February 7 is  Chinese New Year and this year is the Year  of the Ox, which means a hard working  year for all signs—we're hard at work on  what will be the second last issue of Kinesis at our current location.  Yes! Kinesis...and the Vancouver Status  ofWomen and Aquelarre...are moving! We  will be vacating our #301-1720 Grant Street  location a few days before the end of February. Our next issue however will still be  produced at our current space. It will be  the last to be produced on the (Commercial) Drive!  Beginning March, we will be moving  to a brighter, bigger and hopefully healthier  building on East Hastings Street between  Campbell and Hawks [see address on contents page]. Our new neighbourhood finds  us in an interesting combination of zones—  the Downtown Eastside, Strathcona,  Chinatown and the East Side.  If you want to know more, or  would like to help VSW/Kinesis pack,  move, paint [in bold and brash colour]  and/or unpack, please call VSW at 255-  5511 or Kinesis at 255-5499. We'd love  to have your help, support, ideas and  company!  Meanwhile, back at the (Kinesis)  ranch, we'd like to announce a new addition to Kinesis' volunteer core—Editorial Board member wendy lee  kenward had a baby boy, who she has  named Sky! Wendy is on a leave of  absense from the Ed Board until life settles back down to just plain chaotic!  Meanwhile, we'd like to say a formal  "Congrats wendy!"  We'd also like to congratulate new  writers in this month's issue. Thanks for  your contributions to: Rachel Rosen,  Annie Xuan Clark, Jennifer MacLean,  Lorena Gale, Jocelyn Boyd, Claire Prieto  and Jan Wade.  Thanks also to new women wielding X-acto knives and proofreading  pencils: Elaine Fonseca, Carold Read,  Glenna Forrest and Dana Putnam.  Seeking hardworking  Oxes  to move  heavy boxes.  You know who you are: conscientious, reliable, tough and  fun to hang out with. Kinesis  is moving this February to  new offices on Hastings  Street. Since 1997 is the Year  of the Ox, we especially welcome Ox volunteers (born in  1937,1949,1961,1973, 1985,  & 1997). However we would be  grateful for the help of Rats,  Monkeys, Sheep and all the  other signs. For more info, call  the Horse at 255-5499.  FEBRUARY 1997 News  Child poverty in Canada:  Family bonus bogus  by Shannon e. Ash  In mid-January, Canada's social services ministers were busy proposing a plan  to address child poverty that many anti-  poverty activists say may, in fact, leave  many poor children in Canada even worse  off.  The provincial ministers and federal  human resource minister Pierre Pettigrew  met in Toronto to discuss establishing a  national child benefit program. The program being proposed would receive federal and provincial funding and be delivered by the provinces. The details of the  benefit and the amount of money to be contributed to families living in poverty have  not yet been decided. Child poverty advocates say that at least $2 billion a year would  be needed for there to be any significant  reduction in the number of children living  in poverty.  In 1989, Parliament passed a resolution  to eliminate child poverty in Canada by the  year 2000. But since then, the level instead  has been rising, so that, now, one in five  Canadian children—more than 1.4 million—live in poverty.  On the day of the ministers' meeting,  BC's minister of human resources (formerly  social services) Dennis Streifel issued a  press release praising his government for  taking the lead in bringing in a child benefit program. Last year, the provincial NDP  government introduced its Family Bonus  program, which Streifel claims is "widely  recognized as an excellent model for a national child benefit."  The Family Bonus was part of the  NDP's BC Benefits welfare changes, which  also included cuts to the level of income  assistance. In touting the Family Bonus,  Streifel suggested a national child benefit  could be "the social policy landmark of the  1990s, much like medicare is considered the  most important social advance of the  1960s."  However, anti-poverty advocates give  the provincial government's program a  much less glowing review than Streifel. "BC's  single parents on welfare are outraged that  the BC government is purposely creating the  impression that its Family Bonus helps poor  children on welfare," says Linda Moreau of  End Legislated Poverty (ELP), a coalition of  over 40 groups in BC. "The BC Family Bonus makes tens of thousands of BC children  poorer and forces their parents to take jobs  that keep them in dire poverty."  ELP says the government is paying for  the Family Bonus—and other programs  like work-to-welfare (workfare)—through  money "saved" from its cuts to welfare  rates. "The BC government funds at least  part of the Family Bonus by robbing payments to families on welfare," says Moreau.  She adds that the BC government is  also misrepresenting the Family Bonus as  being a benefit to single mothers on welfare. Streifel states that the $103 per month  per child Family Bonus is available to low-  income families with dependent children,  adding that 70,000 of the 200,000 families  receiving the bonus are on welfare.  While the Family Bonus does provide  up to $103 per month per child to low-income families, including families on welfare, that amount is then deducted from  their welfare cheques—negating any "bonus" to them.  As well, single mothers on welfare  have seen their provincial sales tax credit  ($50 a year per child) abolished, and the  amount of money they can keep from any  part-time employment reduced. Previously,  they could retain $200 a month plus 25 percent of any additional earnings. Now, single mothers can only keep 25 percent of  those earnings, leaving them in a worse  situation if they receive welfare and work  part-time.  Along with the Family Bonus, the BC  government made a new rule that single  parents on welfare must take "suitable  jobs" once their youngest child is seven  years old. Alberta forces single parents to  look for work when their youngest child is  six months old.  Reducing the "depth" of child poverty  (not eliminating it) is just one objective of a  child benefit program. Both Streifel and  Canada's other social service ministers  have stated as an objective of the program,  "luring parents off welfare" and making  "work a better deal than welfare."  However, they do not say whether this  will be done by making welfare less attractive or unavailable, or by improving working conditions and wages. Looking at their  previous track records, the former seems  more likely.  ELP's Moreau challenges the assertion  that work is necessarily better than welfare  for single-parent families. She says the  Family Bonus makes minimum wage  jobs "suitable" because it will bring up  a single parent's income to a welfare  level—a single mother with two children  working full-time at minimum wage, with  the addition of the Family Bonus, could  earn the same amount as she would on  welfare. The family will still be living well  below the poverty line.  "The stress of a full-time paid job, erratic [or] unsuitable childcare, sick children  and living in poverty can destroy families,"  says Moreau. She also points out that raising children in poverty takes time: cooking from scratch; sewing; going to rummage sales.  Low-income parents also often work  in the home and as volunteers at their children's schools, which can increase support  for children and reduce the deprivation  they feel from living in poverty. But this  unpaid work—most of it done by women—  is not valued in the government's programs.  ELP says a child benefit that wou Id help  low income children would give children  on welfare more money and raise minimum wages, so people are paid fairly by  employers. It would also not be funded by  cuts to people on welfare, and would enable families to get out of poverty  Anti-poverty activists express some  concern that only a token amount of money  will be put into programs to reduce child  poverty, as a pre-election ploy by the federal government. Remember, we are still  waiting for a national childcare program.  Shannon e. Ash is a regular, aging contributor  to Kinesis.  Active resistance to APEC:  Bike cops topple tents  by Rachel Rosen   On January 7, an ad-hoc group of 30  activists—Active Resistance (AR)—gathered to set up a tent city in Vancouver to  protest against APEC, the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation. The tent city was part  of a series of actions to be held over four  days, involving speakers, discussions, and  an information sharing board and library.  AR's tent city was timed to coincide  with the Asia Pacific Parliamentary Forum,  one of the official meetings of APEC nation  government leaders. It is a prelude to the  APEC Leaders' Summit to be held this  November in Vancouver.  As activists began setting up their tent  city in front of the Waterfront Hotel, where  the forum was taking place, a squad of bicycle police descended on them. The police told AR members they could not set  up the tents because they would block people trying to pass by.  According to Suzanne Baustad, one of  the activists, the police were across the  street from AR's protest site, waiting to take  action when the tents went up. "The security was intense. The police were there  when we got there," Baustad told Kinesis.  "They parked on top of our tents and called  for a van to seize our stuff. They refused to  let us put up what they called "structures,"  and voice our protest."  The Active Resistance tent city was  planned as an opportunity to talk about  "the neo-liberal agenda, 'free' trade, and  APEC." The actions were intended to emphasize the grassroots opposition to global  economic restructuring to the politicians,  bureaucrats, business leaders and media.  Although the tent city was stopped by  the police, the protestors refused to be dissuaded. Active Resistance took its message  underground into the malls. For the rest of  the day, AR members leafletted, spoke and  carried out their planned program inside  the Waterfront Hotel Shopping Mall. Most  people were receptive to the information.  Organizers of Active Resistance and  other anti-APEC groups see the tight security surrounding the Parliamentary Meeting as an indication of what will increasingly happen approaches the Vancouver  APEC Leaders' Meeting.  Active Resistance's tent city...Unfortunately, the police took it down  before we could get a photo.  According to Elsa Pang of the NO! to  APEC Coalition: "The police presence at the  tent city shows that the high numbers of  people resisting APEC are causing concern  for the cops. The more supportive and active the community is in organizing against  APEC and imperialist globalization, the  stronger we are."  She adds that: "If we become active  like the ten thousand protesters did at the  Philippines' [APEC leaders' summit] in  1996, the more we will be able to resist the  oppression and the silencing that goes on."  For more information about anti-APEC  actions in Vancouver, call Active Resistance  at (604) 251-9914 or the No! to APEC Coalition at (604) 215-1103.  Rachel Rosen is a member of the No! to APEC  Coalition.  FEBRUARY 1997 News   International Women's Day organizing:  Man-handled by anti-choicers  by Fatima Jaffer  There is an unprecedented amount of  interest in International Women's Day  (IWD) organizing in Vancouver this year—  not all of it welcome.  Almost 40 women attended the first  meeting of the annual ad hoc IWD Committee meeting in November. It is the largest number of women to join the Committee since 1992, when IWD celebrated 500  years of resistance by indigenous women  in the Americas and attracted a number of  First Nations women and women of colour organizers.  "The attendance has been amazing,  with between 30-35 women attending every  meeting," says Julie Kubanek, who has  been representing Vancouver Rape Relief  and Women's Shelter on IWD Organizing  Committees for the last three years.  "This is the first year since I got involved that the format of subcommittees  has worked. The diversity and numbers has  also sparked off all kinds of debates and  discussion about political issues. It's very  exciting."  Kubanek thinks the interest in IWD this  year was sparked by a highly successful  event last year, where an information fair  attracted more than 1000 women and the  participation of more women's organizations than in recent years. She attributes the  unusual levels of sustained interest in IWD  organizing this year to a "disruption at the  first meeting, designed to do just the opposite.  "There was a disruption meant to sabotage IWD. It seems to have brought women  together and made them more determined  to organize IWD all the way to the end,"  says Kubanek. Younger women, in particular, have taken ownership of IWD organizing because "they seem to feel they are  on the cutting edge of something."  Kubanek is referring to unwelcome  attention that put IWD organizing on the  cutting edge at its meeting in November  17 at the Vancouver Status of Women's offices off Commercial Drive. The meeting  room was already packed with women  squashed together on couches, chairs, the  floor, or standing in corners, when two  women well-known for their anti-choice  politics and harassment tactics showed up  for tne meeting.  The anti-choice women, Cecelia von  Dehn and Peggy Holland, were instantly  recognized by some IWD organizers as  women who had tried to disrupt last year's  IWD. Under the name PRICE (Patients  Rights, Informed Consent & Ethics), the  women had set up an information table at  the IWD information fair. Their display  consisted of anti-choice pamphlets linking  abortion to disease and breast cancer, alongside models of foetuses and wombs.  When asked to leave the information  for the women from PRICE had refused unless police threw them out. IWD organizers, realizing the women had planned to  provoke an incident with police and attract  media attention, chose to ignore the  women. IWD participants walking by the  table and angered by PRICE'S material  spontaneously picked up pamphlets, only  to deposit it in recycling bins. When the  materials ran out, the PRICE women left.  At that time, von Dehn had been further identified by pro-choice activists from  the BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics  (BCCAC) as the woman who had bought  the house next door to Vancouver feminist  abortion clinic, Everywoman's Health Centre. The house is used by members of Campaign Life Coalition—a national anti-choice  group to which von Dehn also belongs—  for regular prayer vigils, protests and harassment of the clinic's clientele and workers.  Kim Zander is a spokeperson for the  Everywoman's. She says the anti-choicers'  focus this past year on IWD is along the  lines of "other gadgets and antics the anti-  choicers have used to try to harass us." She  cites anti-choice harrassment tactics using  the Freedom of Information Act and  targetting the BC College of Physicians and  Surgeons, doctors and researchers at  Everywomen's Health Clinic, the funders  of pro-choice research projects, and even  using violence against women providing  security to those attending BCCAC events.  Zander says that while women's organizing "haven't been targetted with the  same force that abortion clinics have, it's  inevitable" that anti-choicers turn their attention to events like IWD. "The anti-choice  have not won any rallying points with the  threatening campaigns they've had outside  clinics. When they come up against so  many brick walls, they begin to look for  fresh targets."  Meanwhile, at the November IWD  meeting, the two women were  asked to leave as soon as they identified themselves as members of  PRICE. The women refused, citing  the call for IWD volunteers in Kinesis' community bulletin board  that states "All women welcome"  as the reason they should be allowed to participate. They were  told that IWD is a feminist—and  therefore pro-choice—event, attempts to escort them out failed, as  they refused to leave.  "The most important thing for  me is that it reminded us that the  struggle for women's equality includes the struggle for reproductive  rights," says Cenen Bagon of the  Committee for Domestic Workers  and Caregivers Rights and the National Action Committee on the Status of Women. "That is why the  anti-choice can never be part of our  IWD nor of the women's movement as a whole."  The PRICE women then seated  themselves outside the meeting  room and began to photograph the  IWD organizers through the glass  windows of the meeting room. Von  Dehn also held a tape recorder,  which she used to tape the women  asking her to leave.  Inside the meeting room,  women were alarmed. According  to a statement by Claire Robillard,  an IWD organizer who was present  that night, "many [of us] felt very  vulnerable, in particular women  who may be at risk should their  Women on the march, IWD 1996  identities and activities become known to  the general public, certain groups or even  their families." The women started covering the glass windows of the meeting room  with cardboard.  The photographing and tape-recording  are seen as deliberate attempts to disrupt  the meeting and intimidate those present.  Says  Zander, "It seems they were com  pletely prepared to play a game. How  many people would legitiminately go to a  meeting, claim they legitimately were interested in the issues being spoken about,  and come armed with cameras and tapes  and things like that in order to prove that  someone was trying to keep them out? It  Continued on page 5  Be A Star At Kinesis  Your horoscope shows your personal qualities  make you a perfect volunteer for Kinesis.  T Aries: Have big visions.  Work in circulation—and  visualize Kinesis on every  newsstand in the country!  ft Taurus: Stubborn.  As a newswriter, you won't give  up until you've gotten that all-  important quote.  II Gemini: See all sides of the  issue.  The most important quality in a  reporter (but tends to slow down  the collective process).  ©Cancer: Creative.  You'll really care what colour is  on the cover each month.  cflLeo: Love to be in the limelight.  See your name in Kinesisl  TO Virgo: Detail-oriented.  Proof-reading your forte.  OLibra: Good at handling  stressful situations.  Deadlines don't faze you.  Tib Scorpio: Outer calm, inner  passion.  Makes a fair and discriminating  /Sagittarius: Restless and  optimistic.  You won't be satisfied until  you've thought up the perfect  headline.  V3 Capricorn: Steady and reliable.  Experience the glow of moral  superiority that comes from being  a regular Kinesis contributor.  «w Aquarius: Eccentric.  You think you're eccentric? Try  working at Kinesis.  MPisces: Flexible.  You can do it all—writing editing,  proofreading and production!  Call 255-5499 to find out how to volunteer at Kinesis.  FEBRUARY 1997 News   Domestic worker wins sexual harassment case:  Giving courage to others  by Agnes Huang  A domestic worker in Vancouver has  won the highest ever compensation award  from the BC Human Rights Council  (BCHRC). In mid-January, the Council  awarded Leonida Guzman $6,500 in injury  to her dignity, feelings and self-respect for  having to endure months of sexual harassment at the hands of her employers' son.  She was also awarded over $1,000 in lost  wages.  Three years have passed since Guzman  first filed her complaint, and so when the  decision finally came down, Guzman says  she was surprised. "I can't believe I won; I  didn't expect it."  When she first took action in 1993,  Guzman became the first domestic worker  in Canada ever to charge an employer with  sexual harassment under human rights legislation. Guzman's case was fought on the  grounds she had been discriminated in the  course of her employment and on the basis  of her sex.  Guzman says she decided to challenge  her employer because she wanted to help  other domestic workers, and give them the  courage to fight against abuse by their employers and for them to know they do have  rights as human beings. "If I didn't pursue  it like that, then other nannies may think  [employers] can abuse all nannies," she  says.  Indeed, it was Guzman's courage that  inspired another domestic worker in Van  couver, Wilma Singson, to take action  against her employer for sexual harassment. When the BCHRC decided in  Singson's favour last spring, she became the  first domestic worker in Canada to win a  sexual harassment suit against her employer [see Kinesis April 1996.]  Guzman was employed as a live-in domestic worker for a couple and their two  sons from February 1992 to June 1993. Over  a three-month period, she was sexually harassed aggressively and repeatedly by the  couple's 13-year old son. When she reported the harassment to her employers,  the most they did was to tell the boy to  apologize to Guzman.  After the sexual harassment started  happening, Guzman says she stopped going out as much with friends, and couldn't  confide in them. "I didn't tell my friends  because I was so ashamed to share this information; I was afraid they'd leave me,"  she says.  In holding the parent liable for their  son's actions, the BCHRC ruled that they  had failed to meet their legal duty as an  employer to provide Guzman with a work  environment free from harassment. The  Council accepted that the boy's conduct  "detrimentally affected the complainant's  work environment and offended her dignity as a woman."  The Council says the level of the award  "serves to compensate for the high degree  of aggression and deep emotional distress  and humiliation suffered by the complainant."  Catherine Sullivan, the lawyer who  represented both Guzman and Singson,  says Guzman's victory is significant for two  "If I didn't pursue it  like that, then other  nannies may think  [employers] can  abuse all nannies."  —Leonida Guzman  reasons. "One, it has general significance  because it is the highest ever award given  by the BC Human Rights Council for damages to self-esteem and self-confidence,"  says Sullivan. "And two, it also has precedent value for other domestic workers  who challenge abuse by their employers,  and sends a positive message to them that  there is some protection available to them."  Charlotte Ensminger, a lawyer with the  West Coast Domestic Workers Association,  adds that.the Council's judgment is important because it acknowledges the vulner  ability of domestic workers because of their  live-in and immigration status.  Guzman had asked the BCHRC for  $15,000 in compensation, which her lawyer Sullivan says is reasonable, considering a $10,000 award given to an Ontario  man for mental anguish after he was required to take a urinalysis test by his employer.  While in BC, there does not exist  anymore a cap on the maximum amount  that can be paid out for pain and suffering,  the highest award previously given in any  human rights case was $5000.  For non-unionized women facing  sexual harassment in the workplace, the  human rights route is the only recourse for  them. Currently, there is no civil law that  allows a woman to sue for sexual harassment, and judges have been reluctant to  rule on such matters in civil court.  Still, Sullivan thinks domestic workers  should try and go the civil law route and  get a larger settlement, which would be  more reflective of the severity of the harassment they face.  For Leonida Guzman, she is proud of  what she did, and hopes her actions will  encourage and give strength to other domestic workers.  Agnes Huang is a Chinese feminist activist living in Vancouver.  International Women's Day organizing:  Continued from page 4  doesn't make sense unless your intention  right at the beginning is to make a stink  about it."  Meanwhile, since the IWD Committee  space was being loaned by VSW and no  VSW representative was present to ask the  PRICE women to vacate the space, the IWD  Committee decided after a brief debate to  call the police. The PRICE women continued taking photographs of the women, as  well as of VSW's hallways and staff offices.  A woman using the computer in one of the  offices tracked down a VSW staff member  on the telephone and informed her that the  situation seemed to be getting "dangerous."  When IWD organizers began to realize the voices of the women at the meeting  could easily be heard through the walls and  that, as Robillard put it, "the momentum  to organize had been lost due to the overall fear and dismay at the intrusion of the  PRICE women, they decided to end the  meeting and reschedule another. The police had been called a number of times and  it seemed unlikely they would come.  As the decision to disband was being  taken, VSW's Information Coordinator  Agnes Huang and a member of VSW's  Coordinating Collective (myself) arrived.  They asked the PRICE women to leave  VSW's premises and were told "We are  waiting for the police." The VSW representatives cancelled the call to the police,  informed the PRICE women they had done  so and asked them again to leave.  By that time, women from the IWD  meeting had started to leave VSW. The  PRICE women left, but remained in the  hallway outside VSW's offices, continuing  to take photographs of the women leaving  VSW.  "Women were sad and afraid. We  should have all left at the same time, instead of having just a few women leave  alone at the end," says Narges Johanbakish,  who represents the Iranian Women's Voice  on the IWD Committee. "These women just  want to do damage to us. We should stay  strong and together."  In retrospect, Johanbakish was right.  The PRICE women were still standing outside VSW's doors when the last five or six  IWD organizers, who had stayed behind to  clean up, left VSW. According to Robillard,  there was an attempt to get the film from  von Dehn's camera, which failed after a  brief struggle. "At no time did anyone try  to or in fact do harm to the PRICE women,"  says Robillard in her statement to police.  When I went to look, I found the two  PRICE women in the hallway. One was talking to the police on a cell phone. After ascertaining that the two women were all  right, the VSW representatives locked up  the offices and left.  When the police arrived the next morning, VSW's Huang was told the PRICE  women were attempting to file assault  charges against IWD women they allege  had "attacked" them outside VSW's doors.  The police have since collected statements  from all the women involved but no  charges have been laid.  Shortly after the incident in November,  REAL Women, a fundamentalist Christian,  anti-choice organization, released a press  statement titled "Zero Tolerance, Feminist  Style." The document, which identifies von  Dehn and Holland as members of REAL  Women, is a thinly disguised attack on the  violence-against-women movement in general and VSW in particular. It asserts that  VSW representatives were responsible for  the alleged incident, and incorrectly states  that VSW "sponsors" IWD and that most  of VSW's funding comes from government  grants.  In fact, the IWD Committee is a coalition of volunteers—individual women and  representatives from various feminist organizations. VSW does not contribute any  funding to IWD, nor is IWD funded by any  government monies. The IWD Committee  relies on private donations to events.  In a counter statement issued in December, VSW outlined their (non) relationship to IWD, and stressed that neither members of VSW's staff nor Coordinating Collective were involved in nor witnessed any  alleged acts of violence. VSW dismisses  "this blatant attack by REAL Women" as  "clearly an attempt to advance its own anti-  choice, right-wing political agenda." The  feminist organization also threatens legal  action against media or individuals that  publicize unfounded, incorrect information  about VSW.  To date, only right-wing and Christian  newsletters and magazines have picked up  the REAL Women's press release, including BC Report, Campaign Life Coalition's  The Interim, the Christian Weekly and Christian Info News. Headlines include "Manhandled by feminists," and "Pro-Lifers not  welcome." The right-wing Vancouver radio station, AM 1040, also invited von Dehn  and Holland as guests on a show. Most of  this media continue to incorrectly identify  VSW as the sponsors of IWD and call for  withdrawal of government funding to an  organization that promotes "intolerance  and violence." Not surprisingly, all the stories portray von Dehn and Holland sym- ^  pathetically, identifying von Dehn as a "60-  year-old grandmother recovering from  bruises and sore ribs."  Only Christian Info News bothered to  incorporate VSW's statement. It also reported that von Dehn has filed a complaint  against VSW with the BC Council of Human Rights, and that, since November, Von  Dehn has called and written to VSW's city,  provincial and federal government funders  to demand VSW's funding be pulled.  VSW received concerned phone calls  from funders which but only the City asked  for a meeting, after City officials appeared  satisfied with the 25-year-old feminist or-     -**.  ganization's position.  Meanwhile, IWD 1997 organizing goes  on. Several meetings have been held since  November. Organizers have confirmed a  March 8th rally will be held at the Vancouver Art Gallery. Women will march to the  Vancouver Public Library, where there will  be an information fair with tables, speakers, workshops and food. Later that  evening, the annual women-only IWD  dance will be held at the Maritime Labour  Centre. For details, catch the March issue  of Kinesis.  Fatima jaffer is a regular writer for Kinesis and      ** J  sits on VSW's Coordinating Collective.  FEBRUARY 1997 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  (women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  | typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  by Joanne Namsoo and Caitlin  Byrne   Book on poor-bashing  Jean Swanson, former vice-president of  National Anti-Poverty Organization  (NAPO) and a staff member of End Legislated Poverty (ELP) in Vancouver, is writing a book to expose poor-bashing in  Canada and to enable people to challenge  the practice. Swanson says the possible title might be: Pity and hate: why poverty still  exists in the second richest country in the  world.  As Swanson has no money for travelling in order to meet and gather anecdotal  information, she is asking people to help  her by being her eyes and ears across the  country—looking out for poor-bashing by  politicians and the media, and hooking her  up with people who can tell her about their  experiences. Swanson says she expects the  book to be written over the next two years.  Topics will include: The causes of poverty in Canada and what it means to low  income people; the history of scapegoating  and the corporate agenda towards the poor;  and what the public is doing to fight against  poor-bashing.  There will be an emphasis on interviews with low income people who have  experienced poor-bashing and with those  who are dealing with and challenging it.  The book will be written for the general  public, and will also be useful as a reference for students and teachers of social  work, sociology and education, people in  the social services system, low income people and social policy advocates.  *** Swanson would appreciate any mate  rials to be included in the book, such as  anecdotes, newspaper clippings and /or  responses to them, names of people who  would be good to interview, cartoons, pictures, headline collages that could be used  in her book.  Send submissions to Jean Swanson: 52-  3550 Adanac St, Vancouver, BC, V5K 4Y5.  For more information contact ELP at tel: (604)  879-1209; fax: (604) 879-1229.  Women for Women in  ^    Afghanistan  Women for Women in Afghanistan, a  newly-formed solidarity group based in  Canada, is working to provide support for  women struggling for survival and dignity  in Afghanistan and in refugee camps. The  group would like to hear from others who  are already involved in this work, or who  would like to know more about what they  are doing.  The group writes that the nearly 20  years of civil war in Afghanistan have resulted in massive abuses of human rights.  Warring factions using weapons supplied  * '.-*• by several other countries have killed, tor  tured and 'disappeared' many Afghan civilians.  Women and girls are treated as the  spoils of war, and are raped by armed  guards at will. Schools for girls have been  closed and women, the majority of whom  are now widows, have been forbidden to  work outside the home.  Hundreds of thousands of women  have fled their homes seeking safety in Pakistan and Iran, only to end up in severely  under-equipped refugee camps, many of  which are controlled by one or the other of  the warring Afghan factions.  The group plans to undertake a  number of projects in support of Afghan  women, including: collecting supplies for  refugee camps, public education in Canada,  and pressuring the Canadian and other  governments to ensure the safety and dignity of women in Afghanistan.  For more information about the group,  contact them at PO Box 204, Dunnville, Ontario, N1A 2X5; tel: (905) 774-8091.  In search of new board  members  Bridge Housing Society is a non-profit  women's organization in Vancouver committed to building affordable and safe housing for women. The Society is currently  looking to expand its board and have new  members get involved in the next phase of  development of their current project: a 47-  unit housing complex for single women in  Vancouver's Downtown Eastside. The new  complex will also house the Downtown  Eastside Women's Centre.  Women who have a strong interest in  this type of project and who can commit 1-  2 hours per week to it are urged to contact  Bridge Housing Society. Experience in the  Downtown Eastside, non-profit housing,,  anti-poverty issues, First Nations women's  issues or in fundraising would be a bonus.  In addition, the society is forming a list  of women who would like to apprentice on  the construction site and a list of women  actively working in the trades. These lists  will be forwarded to our contractor.  Bridge Housing is also still actively  fundraising for the project and is seeking  donations for its capital campaign.  If you are interested in participating in  the project, making a financial contribution,  or finding out more about Bridge Housing Society, call (604) 251-1978.  Diverse City pamphlet  launched  Asian communities in Vancouver  joined together last December to denounce  discrimination against lesbians, gays, bisexuals and transgender people with the  launching of the pamphlet "Facing Out Together."  The pamphlet was designed as a support resource for East and Southeast Asian  communities. In order to reach a wide  range of people in the Asian community,  the pamphlet is available in Korean,  Tagalog, Japanese, Vietnamese, English and  Cantonese. The pamphlet is the third initiative of Diverse City, a project organized  by ASIA: the Asian Society for the Intervention of AIDS [see Kinesis, April and June  1996].  "Our vision is twofold," says project  coordinator Man Chui Leung: "to promote  awareness of sexuality for lesbians, gays,  bisexuals and transgender people; and to  provide information for their families and  friends." Leung adds that "[the pamphlet]  is for those who would like to understand  these issues and to find ways to show support."  For those working with Asian communities this resource can serve as a cross-cultural learning tool towards understanding  some of the cultural barriers around coming to terms with one's sexual orientation.  One example cited is the title "Facing Out,"  which addresses the concern of losing face  in the community when someone "comes  out."The pamphlet also gives "coming out"  a more family-centered focus, by including  family and friends in the "coming out"  process.  For more information about "Facing Out  Together," contact Henry Koo at ASIA: 507-  1033 Davie St, Vancouver, BC, V6E1M7; tel:  (606) 669-5567; fax: (604) 669-7756; email:  asia@mindlink.bc.ca.  Bubble zone law  appealed, again  The provision of abortion services to  women in BC remains in crisis. Although  women won a major victory last fall when  BC Supreme Court justice Mary Saunders  overturned the earlier acquittal of anti-  choice protester Maurice Lewis on charges  of violating the province's Access to Abortion Services Act [see Kinesis, November  1996], the matter was not put to rest. A  month later, Lewis announced he would  challenge Saunders' decision at the BC  Court of Appeal.  The coalition of five women's organizations—the BC Coalition for Abortion  Clinics, Everywoman's Health Centre, the  Elizabeth Bagshaw Society, BC Women's  Hospital and Health Centre and West Coast  Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  (LEAF)—which intervened at the BC Supreme Court level says they again plan to  make a legal representation at the appeal.  But the coalition says it is in need of  financial contributions from pro-choice  people to support their case. While most  of the work defending abortion rights is  done by women's volunteer labour, the coalition says there are substantial costs involved in a battle of this scale. Any contribution made will go directly towards funding the next level of appeal.  Anti-choice groups have already  launched their latest public campaign  against the access to abortion legislation.  On December 13,1996, Dr. Dolores Grier,  founder of Black Catholics Against Abortion and Vice-Chancellor of the Catholic  Archdiocese of New York, spoke in Vancouver, on the invitation of the Catholic Civil  Rights League, to raise funds for the  Church's appeal of Saunders' decision. The  event attracted 1300 people. The Catholic  Church and a number of other anti-choice  groups were also granted intervenor status at the BC Supreme Court hearing.  It is critical that Justice Saunders' decision be upheld and that pro-choice groups  be able to intervene in the appeal. We must  put a stop to the harassment of women and  abortion providers once and for all.  Please make your cheques payable to  LEAF and mail them to: BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics, 219-1675 W. 8th Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6J1V2. For more information about  the case, call: (604) 736-2800.  Weaving The World  Together  Anew video based on the Peace Train  across Europe and Asia and the NGO Women's Forum in Beijing in the fall of 1995 will  be released in early March.  Weaving The World Together, produced  by Victoria feminist activist Theresa  Wolfwood, is a video of sights and sounds,  ideas and inspiration from around the  world. The video documents the Peace  Train journey Wolfwood took along with  200 women from 40 countries. The group  stopped in Helsinki, St. Petersburg, Kiev,  Bucharest, Sofia, Istanbul, Odessa and  Almaty to meet with women's, human  rights, peace and environmental groups.  The video also provides a record of the  NGO Women's Forum. Weaving The World  Together shows women in action in many  countries and gives information on the  myriad of events happening everywhere to  carry the spirit of the Forum beyond Beijing  and towards a new century.  The video is 60 minutes long and costs  $30, which includes postage and handling.  All proceeds will go to support women's  groups in Canada and abroad.  To order a copy or for more information  contact the Barnard-Boecker Centre Foundation, 1022 McGregor Ave. Victoria, BC, V8S  3T9.  Asian Heritage Month  Festival  The first Vancouver Asian Heritage  Month Festival (VAHMF) will take place  over the month of May. The festival's main  goal is to bring Asian-Canadian history,  arts, and culture out from the margins, and  raise the visibility, profile and awareness  of pan-Asian (from Turkey to China to India to Japan) artists.  The organizers believe it is important  to create an atmosphere for Asians from  different communities to work together, to  forge artistic and social links among our  selves and between our respective groups.  As a result, all these will generate a different type of cultural dialogue, community  linkage, social visibility, and an outreach for  new audiences for these events.  Some of the events and performers  confirmed to date include: a South Asian  film screening hosted by the Atish Network, a Hong Kong Film Festival put on  by the Chinese Cultural Centre, the  Strathacona Chinese Dance Company, and  an exhibition at the Vancouver Art Gallery.  Other groups planning to participate  in events include: the South Asian Women's Centre, ASIA: Asian Society for the  Intervention of AIDs, Monsoon: Asian Lesbians and Bisexual Women of Vancouver,  and the Japanese Canadian Citizens Association (JCCA).  Currently, VAHMF is calling for ideas  and events to be programmed during the  festival. All individuals, already existing  groups, or organizations for Asian peoples  are welcome. As well, the organizers are inviting artists and performers to submit  work or participate in a number of events.  [See Bulletin Board for details].  For more information about VAHMF call:  (604) 667-1755; fax: (604) 254-9948, or write  to: PO Box 127-1472 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, BC,V5L 3X9.  FEBRUARY 1997 What's News  compiled by Carol Read, Rachel  Rosen and Shannon e. Ash  VAJC wins court case  with LSS  Last month, as Kinesis went to  press...the Vancouver Aboriginal Justice  Centre (VAJC) was preparing to take Legal  Services Society of BC (LSS) to court, after  LSS pulled the centre's funding.  Kinesis is happy to report that in mid-  December, the VAJC won an injunction  against LSS, and has had its funding  restored...at least for the remainder of its  current funding agreement.  The VAJC is the only legal aid clinic  run by and for Aboriginal peoples in the  Lower Mainland. In early November, LSS  told the VAJC it was cutting its funding, for  reasons it said were purely contractual. The  contract termination was to have taken effect on January 3rd, but LSS also said it  would withhold any further payments immediately.  The centre went to court for breach of  contract. The judge agreed and ordered LSS  to reinstate funding, and pay monies owed  to the VAJC since the termination order  went into effect. The day after the decision,  the VAJC received a cheque, by courier,  from LSS.  The judge also ruled that LSS had to  enter into arbitration with VAJC to determine the status of their future funding relationship. For now, the funding arrangement between the two groups will continue  until May 4th. As Kinesis goes to press, an  arbitrator has yet to be appointed.  Few stalkers affected by  tougher legislation  A new study concludes that the justice  system is not treating stalking as a serious  offence. Since the criminal harassment law  was passed three years ago, more women  are pressing charges, but few men are being fully prosecuted.  The law was passed after a number of  highly-publicized cases of women  were killed by their former partners after  periods of systematic stalking.  The report, prepared for the federal  justice department, looked at 601 stalking  cases. Ninety-one percent of the accused  stalkers were men, and 88 percent of the  targets were women. The researchers found  that 58 percent of stalking charges were either withdrawn or stayed by Crown attorneys—a considerably higher rate than for  most other crimes. About 30 percent of  charges were dropped when the accused  signed a peace bond, and 20 percent were  dropped unconditionally.  Of those who were found guilty or  who pleaded guilty to criminal harassment  (35 percent of the accused), 72 percent received only probation. Twenty-four per  cent received a jail sentence, most for less  than three months. The maximum sentence  under the law is five years.  Even those with a previous criminal  record, or a record of violence against the  same or other woman, or of breaching court  protective orders did not necessarily get a  longer sentences.  The researchers say they were particularly concerned that three-quarters of the  accused were released from custody before  trial, even though many had a history of  breaching prior court orders and were reported to have been violent with their partners in the past.  The report identified several "serious  barriers" to the law's effective use, including: insufficient police resources devoted  to investigating stalking, insufficient Crown  attention to preparing cases, a lack of adequate services for victims, and gender bias  within the system.  The report also suggested there may  be an overemphasis on psychological  motivations for harassing behaviour, versus other motivations related to power relations between men and women and the  "presumption of entitlement to control over  the lives of partners or former partners."  Federal Justice Minister Allan Rock has  introduced two amendments to the law,  which would make a stalker who kills his  victim automatically guilty of first-degree  murder, and would increase the sentence  of a stalker who violates a protective court  order. The amendments are now awaiting  final approval by Parliament.  Anti-choice constable's  sentence appealed  Two pro-choice activists in Vancouver  are appealing a five-day suspended sentence handed down to an anti-choice police constable. Last June, following a Delta  (BC) Police investigation, a public inquiry  found that Constable Steve Parker illicitly  used police department computers to  search for information on six license plate  numbers of cars belonging to staff and patients at the Everywoman's Health Centre—a free-standing abortion clinic—  through the police department's computer.  The appeal request launched by Marg  Panton, a former employee of Everywoman's and Will Off ley, the centre's  former volunteer security coordinator, is  currently before the BC Police Commission.  The two claim the police investigation and  the public inquiry did not examine all the  evidence or follow all the leads. For example, they say Parker's alibi was that his  mother took down the six license plate  numbers of cars whose occupants seemed  to threaten her. Parker's mother was in Ireland at the time of at least one of the license  plate searches. Both of them are involved  with the fundamentalist anti-choice group,  Campaign Life Coalition.  Moreover, police did not investigate  any links between Parker and other illicit  license plate searches. They also did not  check to see whether the over 3,000 license  plate searches Parker conducted as part of  his job matched the license plates of pro-  choice activists or staff and patients at abortion clinics.  Parker received a five-day suspended  sentence because police told the inquiry he  could not be demoted. In fact, as a constable second class, he could have been demoted to third class. He has now been promoted to a constable first class.  Parker currently faces new charges of  discreditable conduct, as six more illicit license plate searches by him have been uncovered. The Delta Police are conducting  an internal inquiry into these latest  searches.  Lesbians and gays  barred in Thailand  A new policy in Thailand is threatening to prevent lesbians and gay men from  becoming teachers. In late December, the  Rajabhat Insitutes Council, the governing  body of Thailand's teacher training colleges, "decided to bar homosexuals from  enrolling in 36 colleges nationwide for fear  they will set a bad example for students  who go on to teach."  The Rajabhat Institutes Council says  they will enact the ban on lesbian, gay and  transgender enrolment for three years,  starting in the 1997 academic year. They say  that, in the year 2000, it will be reviewed if  it causes conflicts. According to Charoon  Chularp, secretary general of the Council,  all parties have agreed to the ban because  they believe that teachers must have the  respect of students and the public.  The Council's decision does not appear  to have resulted from government policy  on homosexuality and there are no indications that institutions outside of the public  education sector, plan to bring in anti-homosexual policies.  Thai activists say the ruling sends a  clear message that the country's leading  and prestigious educators see gays, lesbians and transgendered people as problems  that need to be "contained if not eliminated." The Bangkok Post reported that the  deans of all the faculties of education of the  country's universities will consider a similar ban on admitting lesbian, gay and  transgendered students to university education courses.  Thailand does not have legislation outlawing discrimination on the basis of sexuality, so any student barred from entering  Thai teachers college on this basis has no  legal recourse.  To express concern and call for the immediate rescinding of the Rajabhat Institute's ruling contact: HE. Mr. Sukavich Rangsitpol,  Minister for Education and Chairman  Rajabhat Institues Council, Ministry of Education, Ratchdamnoen Road, Bangkok, Thailand. Fax (662) 282-9241. Email:  iemisc.moe.go.th.  Anti-choice bombs  away  The new year began in the United  States with a bombing at an abortion clinic,  which was followed by two more bombings.  In Tulsa Oklahoma, terrorists fire-  bombed the Reproductive Services Clinic  on New Year's Day. Then, just two weeks  later, two more bombs went off at the back  of the same clinic. No one was killed or injured by the explosions, and damages were  minor  In Atlanta, on January 16, a bomb exploded on the ground-level abortion clinic  in a five-store office building. The Atlanta  Northside Family Planning Services clinic  was destroyed. Later that day, as emergency  crews attended to the incident, another  bomb in a trash bin in the parking lot exploded. The second blast injured six people.  The bombings occurred the day before  anti-choice protesters gathered in the Washington, DC area to hold a number of activities, including the second annual "White  Rose" banquet in honour of anti-abortion  terrorists in prison. Their activities, held  over a six-day period from January 17 to  22, coincided with the 24th anniversary of  the US Supreme Court decision in Roe vs.  Wade, and the inauguration of President  Bill Clinton.  The bombings and protests come at a  time when there are increasingly violent activities by anti-choice extremists.  Korean labour rights  under attack  Korean workers are continuing a general strike which began on December 26,  despite government efforts to suppress it.  The nationwide strike and anti-government  protests are in response to a labour bill the  ruling party unilaterally pushed through  parliament.  The majority New Korea Party (NKP)  passed a number of bills, including the labour bill, in the absence of opposition mem- jr  bers early in the morning of December 25.  The opposition was notified by fax five  minutes before the session began, at 6:00  am. The NKP members arrived and left in  chartered buses, according to one source.  Under the new labour law, employers  can arbitrarily lay off workers, increase  their work hours, and replace striking employees. Starting in the year 2000, more than  one union will be allowed to operate in each  workplace, and employers will no longer  pay wages to those who are "exclusively  engaged in union activities."  A spokesperson for the Korean Employers' Federation said the new law was *  designed to "help advance the competitiveness of the nation's industries." The passage of the bill is seen as a result of South  Korea's entry into the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development  (OECD), which the unions and opposition  parties opposed.  The strikes are being led by the Korean  Confederation of Trade Unions (KCTU) and  the Federation of Korean Trade Unions  (FKTU). According to the KCTU, the government has begun a crackdown on the  unions. Public prosecutors have issued  summons to 40 union leaders, claiming the  strike is illegal.  The KCTU has issued a letter asking  for international solidarity, calling on other  unions to hold rallies or pickets outside Korean diplomatic missions. Solidarity rallies  were reported in a number of countries, including Australia, in January.  At the same time [in mid-January], the  Canadian government was sponsoring a  trade mission to Asia, including a visit to  Korea. While on the mission neither Prime  Minister Chretien nor any of the provincial  premiers raised the issue of labour rights.  Woman jailed for  marrying woman  In Tumpat, Malaysia, a woman was  sentenced to 27 months in jail for impersonating a man in order to marry a woman.  Last month, Magistrate Ahmad Bazli sentenced 21-year old Azizah Abdul Rahman  to two years in prison for cheating by impersonation, and three months for using another person's identity card, after she pled  guilty to the charges.  The court was told that Azizah, a Thai  citizen who is a permanent resident in Malaysia, used the identity card of a young **••  man to fake her identity in order to marry  Rohana Mat Isa, who is 20. The two women  married on October 12.  Her gender was discovered during a  test at the Kota Baru Hospital when Isa's  father became suspicious of his "son-in-  laws" gender.  After the test, Rahman fled to Selangor  where she was arrested on December 20.  Sources: PeaceNet, Alternative Media Network, Vancouver Cooperative Radio, Pro-  Choice News, the Bangkok Post, the Globe and      ^  Mail, the Vancouver Sun, and various sources  through e-mail and the internet.  FEBRUARY 1997 Feature  A conversation with HimaniBannerji:  Feature  Multiculturalism is...anti- anti-racism  by Himani Bannerji, Annie Xuan  Clark, Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer,  Sook C. Kong, Nancy Pang,  E. Centime Zeleke   Himani Bannerji was invited to research  and write about multiculturalism in Canada  for the University of British Columbia's Faculty of Education last year. She currently  teaches at the department of Sociology at York  University in Ontario, on issues of feminist  theory, gender and colonialism, and race and  class. Bannerji is also a feminist activist and  writer, who has published two books of poetry,  a children's novel, and short stories. She co-  authored and edited Unsettling Relations: The  University as a Site of Feminist Struggle,  edited two books of essays, Returning the  Gaze, on racism, feminism and politics, and  Writing on the Wall. Shortly before Bannerji  returned to Toronto, where she is based, she invited a number of women associated with Kinesis/or a potluck dinner. The following is excerpted from a long, tape-recorded conversation held that night.  Himani Bannerji: I was surprised how  powerful an issue multiculturalism is in  Vancouver. When I hear about multiculturalism in Toronto, someone is making  fun of it or is receiving multiculturalism  monies through the Ministry of Citizenship.  It doesn't seem as much a part of governing and administering a province or city as  it is here. Here, even universities have  chairs for multiculturalism, and education  departments actually have stated mandates  on doing multiculturalism work. It seems  much government money, institutional energy and administration is sunk in that pot  of multiculturalism. It's quite fascinating.  In terms of real politics, this business  of multiculturalism seems to be supplementing something. Was there an attempt  for a while at doing anti-racist work, an attempt that got governmentally and ideologically subverted to an agenda of  multiculturalism? What does multiculturalism allow us to see or not see?  The Reform Party, for example, does  not have any room for multiculturalism.  When I first came to Vancouver to work on  the issue of multiculturalism, I thought it  was in important issue because, if the Reform Party doesn't want it, there's got to  be something good about it. I didn't think  it was an issue of anti-racism versus  multiculturalism but instead how to give  multiculturalism more teeth.  The more I saw multiculturalism at  work though, the more I realized it's not  going to take us very far. In fact, I believe it  might even produce a strange politics that  will make talking about anti-racism extremely difficult. I have even heard non-  white people who practise multiculturalism institutionally and administratively  saying things like "anti-racism silences people!" Obviously they perceive anti-racism  work as something quite antithetical to  multiculturalism.  People initially demanded anti-discrimination and social equality, not protection of culture. People asked the government to protect their jobs, read their  accreditations from their countries of  origin differently, or change immigration  policies—things that would make life bearable for them.  But we have supplemented talk of social inequality with talk of cultural protection from the government based on the assumption that governments can protect culture, as though people do not change in any  environment, and each community has an  identifiable set of unchanging characteristics.  I went to the University of Northern  BC to talk about safety in terms of gender,  race and homophobia, and how these forms  of violence politically add up to fascism.  Afterwards, I attended a two-hour workshop on mental health by representatives  of BC Mental Health. I listened for two  hours to people talking about diagnoses,  prognosis, treatment, intake, and other  service delivery issues. It gradually became  clear, as the morning went on, that people  are being trained. They have a body of "experts" from within communities who give  the government, the Ministry of Multiculturalism or whatever multicultural society is working in the area, a list of appropriate characteristics that designate the  cultural profiles and necessities of each  community. These experts are all ethnic,  non-white people.  People can  understand each  other beyond  language when there  is respect and  support of their  struggles, or  criticism of the  inequalities they  face.  There seems to be complicity within  our communities. Certain groups of people who are considered experts give a kind  of designatory set of identity markers or  characteristics. These are then taken seriously by the ministries and various bureaucracies, which develop policies out of  the advice. The fact that it comes from the  experts allows them to say, "We didn't invent it. Your community said this is your  community profile."  So what we get, let us say, is 12 characteristics that codify South Asians, 11 for the  Chinese, 15 for the Filipinos, and so on,  until you get a codified list of categories  and identity markers from which training  programs are devised. Front-line service  workers are taught those characteristics and  they use it, often in good faith. At no time  is the word racism mentioned. At no time  do people talk about how racialization happens. It is assumed there is something  called "core ethnic cultures" with core characteristics. There may be some who don't  fit these characteristics—you, me or her. We  become exceptions or deviations or results  of westernization. We are not "authentic."  After categories of authenticities come  into being and people are trained to use  them, a real person comes to those service  agencies with x-number of problems, feeling out of it or unemployed or depressed.  The intake worker, who has been "culturally sensitized," interprets the person according to those 15 core characteristics.  Underlying the core characteristics of  all communities is a simple paradigm of  tradition versus modernity. There are "pre-  modern" societies and "modern" societies.  European societies are considered modern,  dynamic and changing. They have been  credited with having that dynamism so no  one says, "Let's look at the German community and see how they are frozen into  these ethnic characteristics." They won't  say that about Eastern Europeans currently  coming into the country so it is clearly not  an issue of being English- or non-English  speaking. The primary assertion is that  European societies are dynamic, able to  adapt, learn technology and various ways  of modern life. The pre-modern or traditional societies, being "traditional," are frozen. They do not evolve, do not have an  internal dynamism but have settled characteristics. Based on this, there begins the  arrangement of third-world peoples into  smaller and smaller categories, into very  essentialized kinds of identities.  They are also big on the criteria of authenticity though, so if you're different,  you're not authentically South Asian. If  you were authentic, you would be  patriarchalized, submissive, know how to  cook—you'd basically be very passive in  everything.  I think the intake worker's reading relies on this even though no one states this  explicitly. No one says the way these characteristics are defined for an ethnic community shows that ethnicization is  racialized. It's racialized because this isn't  just a cultural essentialism but biological  essentialism, like somehow third world  people cannot or do not move.  So when a woman comes into some  service delivery place feeling depressed,  nobody looks at why she is depressed in  terms of her job, her life, rent she pays, the  social treatment she receives. Instead, they  immediately point to what is internal that  would make her prone to depression.  I heard this kind of lesson being taught  all morning at that mental health conference. They told workers to be culturally  sensitive and counsel her in these ways then  send her off to take drugs, because what  really makes her depressed cannot be  talked about, cannot be politicized, cannot  in any way be dynamic or active. So give  her Prozac, Valium or whichever depres  sant or anti-depressant. If people have  severe problems, diagnose them as schizophrenics , put them on lifelong medication  and talk about chemical imbalances in the  brain.  That's how the attention slips completely away from the world the woman  currently resides in or the history she has  experienced. It becomes her fault, her illness, her responsibility—the culturally sensitive worker, however, attempts to adjust  her to living with this reality and perhaps  coping with it by taking medication that  allows her somehow to exist. That's how  the delivery of service adapts or utilizes  these kinds of notions of authentic communal identities.  The problems continue to multiply,  however. By this time, the person may be  upset and stressed out to the point where  she is clinically ill. Consequently, some researcher comes along to study this behaviour, again making a set of generalizations  out of it. It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. Then someone says, "They are prone  to these kinds of illnesses," which again is  fed back into the cultural talk. It's a cycle.  Fatima Jaffer: And then those of us  who are trying to work against what's happening to us have to deal with picking up  the pieces and working with the damage  that is being done. We know so many of  these women, South Asian, East Asian,  Black, who have gone through that cycle.  They're part of our community and we end  up having to figure out how we're going  to deal with people who've been told, and  then start to think, they're mentally ill. At  the same time, we don't have the resources  to handle the situations. The cycle gets bigger and bigger and involves all our energies.  Sook C. Kong: This is how oppression  continues. The pattern of inaccuracy and  rigidity continues, as does the cycle of  knowledge production, of so-called "cultural sensitivity," which in fact is insensitive because it's so rigid and frozen. So the  powers that be and whoever has some  power along the chain—whether it's the  front-line worker, the bureaucrats who  come out with these identity markers or the  government—perpetuate what they believe  to be viable knowledge, but what is actually not viable because it's so rigid. They  keep sustaining themselves and continue  to act on a pile-up of inaccuracies.  If people are really committed to aiding social change and equality, and treating people as fully as human beings, not  doing anti-racist work is like starting at the  wrong end of the pole .  Bannerji: I find I have to do a lot more  thinking and reading to even begin to get a  hold on what multiculturalism does because it's so benign and it's presented in  such a hospitable, helpful language. Whatever the top bureaucrats may have had in  mind, a lot of frontline workers are extremely sincere in the way they want to do  this work. They really do mean it when they  say, "You have to learn to be respectful to  other people's cultures." These workers are  most often white women but even when  This state is in a legitimation crisis. It is a state  that grew up on the basis of occupying  people's land and is continuing to do so  without coming to terms with it.  they are non-white, what they do not ask  themselves is, "Would one say that about a  white patient?" Would they say, "Well, be  culturally sensitive, find out what the Yorkshire culture or Scottish culture or Ukrainian culture is about and read this woman  according to that?"  This is how "othering" people and  forms of difference are created and become  active. By definition, this woman of colour  is so "other" that practical, commonsensi-  cal language cannot be used to talk about  her experience. She's talking about 12 hours  a day in a factory doing piece work and  the service worker doesn't want to talk to  her about it.  Anyway, at the end of this talk [at the  mental health conference], they asked me  what I thought. I said, "Scrap your lists.  You're not going to be able to become an  expert on China, it would take you 20 or  more years to do it. Same with South Asia  or the Caribbean. You don't have the time  and it is not necessary. Try being practical,  commonsensical, critical and respectful.  Instead of saying, "This is her culture," listen to what she's saying and try to fit it into  how you would listen to your mother complaining about living a certain kind of life.  People can understand each other beyond  language when there is respect and support  of their struggles, or criticism of the inequalities they face.  It appears to me that the delivery of  health, jobs or welfare is not the goal of the  status quo. The goal is to administer and  govern people according to certain prescriptions and stabilizes fixed identities.  In the end, the service deliverers are  dealing largely with poor people. Middle  class people are not the ones sitting in government hospitals getting this kind of service delivery support. And, in the case of that  BC mental health conference, it is about  women. So we're talking about management of race, class and gender.  Multiculturalism is management  through racialization. A welfare state is not  a people's state but a form of social management, whereby the welfare state needs  certain kinds of social issues to become a  state. It is everyday life that has to be  brought into governing.  The way to penetrate civil society is  through the lives of women and children  and things like mental illness, which are  actually not within labour or taxation law  nor corporate or property law. You become  a hegemonic force by encroaching and  weaving people's daily lives into the state's  apparatus until everyday life becomes a  matter of state administration. It becomes  an ideological governing insofar as it is  about relations and management of power,  and practical insofar as it is a tool for administration.  The question then is, how are these so-  called "communities" constructed? We  talked about self-appointed leaders of communities. Who gives them the support? The  state. Look at the political parties—Liberal,  NDP and Conservative. These are the people with whom our community leaders  seek to integrate. Our leaders, who are the  experts, also command massive bloc votes  of people and represent power blocs for any  one of these governments.  Annie Xuan Clark: You're right to say  that people who practise multiculturalism  are often well-intentioned and really do  seem to want to understand, but I think the  difference between multiculturalism and  anti-racism is that multiculturalism focuses  on the "other" and on trying to learn about  all these different cultures, whereas anti-  racism focuses on the person who's learning it and how they contribute to racism in  this country.  Bannerji: The question of anti-racism  is that the word "anti-" makes people more  critical. I mean, as soon as you say "anti-  racism," you are assuming there is racism,  which then assumes there must be some  work towards anti-racism. It is much more  a language of process, of  conflict and of struggle.  When you say culture or  multiculturalism, you immediately make it seem as  though it is in the community. It's not about culture per  se. Because multiculturalism  doesn't use racism as a point  of departure, it loses that  critical edge. So multiculturalism is actually liberal  pluralism.  Jaffer: I have heard you  talk before about why, in the  1970's, multiculturalism became such an important issue. I'd never explored the  history of multicultural politics before. I think that is the  most fascinating part of your  project.  Bannerji: It's not going  to be very welcome. But I  have realized that Canadian  state formation is very incomplete. To begin with  there is a state within a state  in Canada. The liberal democratic Canadian state enshrines within itself a colonial state. Canada is actually  a territory-occupying colonial state that has continued  from so-called non-liberal  days to now. Think about it—all of the governing of indigenous people, of First Nations affairs, is done within a different state  jurisdiction than the rest of the citizens of  this country. Yet this so-called state of  Canada is trying to become a liberal state,  a pluralist state.  In every country where bourgeois or  liberal democracy prevails, issues of class,  gender, tribes, caste, and so on that fracture it. Canada is complex. It is a white settler colony that is trying to go through the  growth pangs of becoming a liberal democratic state. It has this other state inside its  body, and that state will remain there until  it settles its debt with the First Nations people, with whom the settler state is locked  in combat.  If you want to neutralize the claims of  the First Nations people or of the French  people, it is really useful to use immigrants  who are not French, and indigenous people, who are not immigrants, as a wedge to  support the claim for the plural liberal  democratic state. So you can say to the  French, "You think you're unique but  you're not. There are other immigrants and  other cultures in this country." Suddenly a  state that does not even care for culture per  se begins to use a cultural argument to neutralize demands and arguments of people  who share in the state formation.  This state is in a legitimation crisis. It  is a state that grew up on the basis of occupying people's land and is continuing to  do so without coming to terms with it. It  fought a war with another European population and has them in a semicolonial state  called Quebec. How can that be legiti-  Himani Bannerji (at left centre) with (clockwise  from top) Sook C. Kong, Elaine Vieira, Nancy  Pang, Fatima Jaffer and Viola Thomas.  mized? Canada also has this indentured labour history of bringing in immigrants essentially to reproduce the working class.  The fact remains that we are seeing a  country with crises of legitimization and  citizenships. Do you know how many gradations and hierarchies of citizens exist in  this country? There is the base community  of First Nations people. Then there are the  indentured people and their descendants  that are now second-level citizens. There  are now people coming in from third world  countries who are another level of citizens.  You may formally give citizenship to these  people, but in real political terms, they are  not powerful bidders in the political market.  You don't just have to look at non-  white people to examine the hierarchies of  citizenship. Look at the way white women  are treated in Canada. Look how their  wombs are hostages of the state, so that  Lucien Bouchard can campaign about  white French women having to reproduce  the French race. Look at the use of Catholicism to control women's wombs. If a white  woman, who is foremother of the white  race so to speak, cannot even give permission for a surgical operation on her own  body, how independent a citizen is she?  Citizenship is a set of steps and stages. If  this is true of wives, mothers, daughters  and members of white society, why is it not  ten times more so for others who have been  left or pushed even more out of the political process?  These are the people who can become  substantially problematic in the development of a liberal state, especially when you  want to have a fully developed social state  with a moral hegemony. In that case, why  wouldn't multiculturalism serve as the best  ideological device through which to accomplish this mission? It allows you to silence  some people, to organize others, to penetrate the deepest aspect of everyday life  in society and it even allows you to make a  list of what the cultures of those people are.  This is all very different from saying  "There is racism here, and we have to fight  against it." There can be no admission of  anti-racism if we can't get the state to admit, in a really serious, solid administrative way, the presence of racism in this society.  Multiculturalism gives people an  "out" [a way] to avoid dealing with the hierarchies of citizenship and the question of  state formations in Canada. This is why,  having started by being much more warm,  cuddly and forgiving of multiculturalism,  the more I read and the more I thought, the  more I began to realize anti-racism and  multiculturalism inhabit completely different platforms and would lead us to different political results.  Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Sook C. Kong,  Nancy Pang and E. Centime Zeleke are feminists of colour based in Vancouver. Annie Xuan  Clark lives in Seattle.  FEBRUARY 1997  FEBRUARY 1997 Feature  Canadian women and breast cancer:  it  Together to an end"  by Jennifer MacLean  This past November, 88 breast cancer  survivors, scientists, medical professionals  and corporate representatives met outside  Orillia, Ontario to discuss what they considered to be the most important issues surrounding breast cancer. Conference participants, almost half of whom are breast cancer survivors, also talked about forming a  national coalition to lobby on behalf of  women suffering with the disease.  The "Together to an End" conference  followed several monumental breakthroughs that recognized the battles women  fight with cancer and with a system that  fails to meet their needs. In 1992, the federal government held an inquiry into breast  cancer research, funding and treatment  through the Sub-committee on the Status  of Women. In 1993, the national forum on  breast cancer in Montreal brought together  700 delegates to determine a course for the  Canadian Breast Cancer Research Initiatives (CBCRI). And in 1996, the link between women's health issues and the environment was explored at Vancouver's "An  Ounce of Prevention" women's health forum [see Kinesis June 1996].  In the opinion of breast cancer survivor and conference organizer Pat Kelly,  these initiatives needed a strong followup  which would focus the efforts of breast cancer organizations and "bring all our messages and fundraising efforts together  to...leverage our influence, impact on availability of treatment options and reduce  breast cancer mortality across Canada."  Kelly is the founder of PISCES, a support  group for women with breast cancer based  near Hamilton, Ontario.  In recent years, disparities between the  provinces with respect to breast cancer detection, treatment, education and support  have become alarmingly evident. While  British Columbia has experienced a 21 percent drop in breast cancer mortality rates  for women ages 50 to 69 between 1973 and  1994, the Maritimes and Ontario have only  seen a drop of two to three percent. And  while Manitoba, Saskatchewan and Quebec saw a drop of 15 to 16 percent, Alberta  has had an increase in breast cancer mortality of three percent during the same time.  To some extent, these figures are being  blamed on inconsistent implementation of  new medical technology. At the same time,  it is obvious that certain ethnic and geographic groups within Canada's female  population do not have equal access to the  available resources.  Mortality, detection & prevention  Reducing mortality within the next  decade, improving early diagnosis in  younger women, making links between environmental toxins and breast cancer, and  stabilizing funding for research were  among the top issues discussed at the conference. At the end of three days of open  format discussion, the group compiled a  book of proceedings outlining possible  courses of action for further activism and  recommendations for women trying to reduce the risk of cancer in their own lives.  Breast cancer is no longer believed to  be a mature woman's disease. In recent  years, there has been a noted increase in  the incidence rate among younger women,  which many say can be partially explained  by improving methods of cancer detection.  Early detection is considered to be the greatest way to reduce mortality, as the effectiveness of any treatment regime is higher for  women who have not yet progressed into  advanced stages of the disease.  The fact that early detection begins on  an individual level led to several recommendations. The group concluded that by  informing girls about breast health through  a variety of sources at younger ages, two  things will be accomplished: ongoing education will encourage young women to take  responsibility for their own health and, in  the long run, will increase their chances of  surviving breast cancer or other serious  health problems.  As important to the reduction of mortality as early diagnosis is prevention. From  birth, the human body is under constant  siege by a variety of environmental factors,  and how we interact with those elements  is fundamental to the lives we lead. Food  is considered by most researchers to be the  greatest source of exposure to potential carcinogens such as estrogen chemicals. These  chemicals mimic natural estrogen in the  body, disrupting regular endocrine function  and encouraging abnormal cell growth.  In its proceedings, the group noted that  reducing consumption of fatty animal  products, fish and dairy products can limit  exposure to carcinogenic substances.  Women can also benefit from a fibre-rich  diet, which may help prevent artificial  estrogen from being absorbed during the  digestion process. Avoidance of plastics  (which often contain estrogen chemicals)  for food storage or preparation, is also recommended.  In addition to relying on their own  medical expertise or personal experience,  the conference participants referred often  to the 1995 Ontario government report on  the primary prevention of cancer when discussing mortality and prevention issues. In  addition to making recommendations re-  Painfully obvious was the fact  that many more minutes will  pass and many more women will  die before things change.  garding diet, exercise, tobacco and alcohol  use, the report suggests that pollution prevention be integrated with industrial policy  to reduce the risk of occupational or environmental exposure to carcinogens. The  report calls for the "sunsetting" (gradual  phasing out) of what they call "persistent,  bioconcentrated toxic substances that are  known or suspected carcinogens."  To supplement preventative measures  and broach the issue of funding scarcity, the  group suggested the incorporation of breast  cancer initiatives into already existing organizations. With breast cancer affecting  one out of every eight women in Canada  today, it is not difficult to find a survivor in  almost any community or organization.  These women and their loved ones could  gain improved access to education and support services through the workplace,  schools or social agencies. This, in turn,  could keep communities with small  populations or limited finances, which often represent the "missed" parts of the female population, from falling through the  cracks in our health care system.  The road ahead  While the conference did produce tangible results, the parting thoughts and feelings of the participants varied greatly.  Forty-two of the event's participants were,  or are, presently battling breast cancer. Several of the women questioned how the conference would have differed if all the delegates had been survivors.  Others thought that the 14 corporate  sponsors, among them Avon Canada and  Zeneca Pharmaceuticals, should have been  invited to observe rather than participate  in the proceedings. While the corporate  dollar is becoming increasingly important  in the face of government funding cutbacks,  many women believe that corporate agendas may undermine efforts to find the best  answers to the many questions surrounding breast cancer. Many women question  the ethics of pharmaceutical companies  funding research projects, while on a more  personal note, others say the "look good  feel great" marketing of cosmetics to cancer victims is an opportunistic continuation  of outdated views of beauty.  Nevertheless, many women left the  conference with an optimistic, if cautious,  view of its proceedings. "It is impossible  for me to say yet how [the results of the  conference] are going to go out into the  world," says Chris Sinding, project coordinator for the Breast Cancer Support  Network for Ontario and one of the founders of the Breast Cancer Prevention Coalition. "But there are excellent opportunities," she claims, "for things to happen in  this country with respect to breast cancer."  The opportunities she speaks of include the upcoming federal election. In  addition to influencing the federal environmental protection act which comes up for  debate in parliament in February, the group  hopes to have women's health issues on the  table as a fundamental election issue. There  is also a world breast cancer conference in  the works for the summer of 1997 in Kingston, Ontario.  At the close of the conference, the delegates held hands and observed a moment  of silence for all women who live with or  have lost their lives to breast cancer. Painfully obvious was the fact that many more  minutes will pass and many more women  will die before things change. In some ways,  the "Together to an End" conference helped  define the face of breast cancer advocacy  in Canada. In a race against time, a group  of dedicated individuals has opened the  door to the long hard battle ahead.  Jennifer MacLean is a freelance writer and researcher living in Orillia, Ontario.  about missing the date!  Don't forget...  Book your ad space for the March International Women's Day issue  Deadline to book space:  Monday, February 17  Telephone: (604) 436-3825  FEBRUARY 1997 Feature   Special feature: Black History Month:  Uncovering the truths  February is Black History Month. In acknowledging that the stories and histories of Black women in  Canada told from their own perspectives are almost totally absent in literature on Canadian history, school  curricula and the media, Kinesis devotes six pages of this issue to discussions about the project of recording  Black women's histories.  In our centrespread feature, Janisse Browning, Lorena Gale and E. Centime Zeleke talk about the importance of history and link the understanding of one's own history to the struggle for liberation. In her conversation with Charmaine Perkins (page 14), Yvonne Brown talks about the need to undertake a decolonizing project  if we are to be able to know the truths about Black women's lives. And in reviewing Sonali Fernando's A Body  of A Poet, Zeleke talks about the importance of recognizing the contributions of women like Audre Lorde,  without deifying individuals. This issue also includes a resource list of some of the films, videos and books  created by Black women about their sisters in the struggle.  To start off this special feature, four Black women from different parts of Canada- Jocelyn Boyd, Addena  Sumter-Freitag, Jan Wade and Claire Prieto—talked to Centime Zeleke about the work they do in uncovering,  documenting and sharing knowledge of the histories of their communities. Below are excerpts of their comments.  Jocelyn Boyd  Jocelyn Boyd was born in Nova Scotia and  raised in Montreal. She has been back living  in Halifax, Nova Scotia for the past 15 years.  She currently works as the provincial director  of UNICEF Nova Scotia and has worked in a  home for children of colour. She was also involved in the Black United Front of Nova  Scotia, an organization no longer in existence.  She is currently working on producing an anti-  racism kit which includes, among other things,  I met onel9 years old woman. She had  a grade seven education, yet she couldn't  read the word "dog." When I asked her  how she got to grade seven [without being  able to read], she said, they just kept putting  her through.  One thing I did during the course was  teach them as much Black history as possible. A lot of them didn't even know how  Blacks had come here to Nova Scotia and  were really surprised to find out we'd been  here for a long time and we'd made major  contributions to Nova Scotian history.  started being able to get work [outside the  home] in offices. Black women couldn't [get  those kinds of jobs], so cleaning white people's houses was the only source of labour  available to them.  Makeda Silvera, hair braiding at the  Black Education Project  Blockorama1975  Ancestor Spirit—Fish Woman, by Jan Wade, 1994  documentation of the histories of Mi'kmaqs  and Blacks in Nova Scotia.  One project I was involved in until  June 1995 was as an instructor/tutor for  Black single mothers. Most of them were  on welfare and as a result of a different  education system for Blacks here in Nova  Scotia, many of them didn't have basic literacy skills.  At one point, there were segregated  schools in Nova Scotia. Probably in the late  60s, early 70s, segregated schools were discontinued. Since then, the practice [of the  school system] has been to say, "Don't  worry whether the Black kids are taught  anything, because they're not going anywhere anyways."  Another project I'm involved in is a  Black History supplement in the Daily  News, one of the newspapers here in Nova  Scotia. This year, our theme is: "Making It:  Contributions and Achievements of the  Black Community." In past supplements,  we've highlighted the prominent people  within the Black community. This year I felt  it would be good to highlight the "everyday" people.  One article is on women who work  outside the home. Black women have made  a big contribution to their families and in  general, because Black women often found  jobs easier than Black men. In the article,  we talk about Black women who were  "charwomen." [At that time ] white women  Addena Sumter-  Freitag  Addena Sumter-Freitag is a seventh generation African-Canadian,whose roots are in  Truro, Nova Scotia on her mother's side and  Colombia, South Carolina on her father's side.  She grew up in Winnipeg, Manitoba and now  lives in the Northwest Territories. Sumter-  Freitag is an accomplished playwright, having  won Theatre BC's National Playwriting competition for Stay Black and Die. She is also  the co-creator o/Women of Colour's Voices,  a theatre piece which brings forth the stories of  five women of colour and their experiences with  racism, sexual abuse, and the church.  I started out as a professional actor and  [I remember] going to auditions where  they'd say, "I'm sorry there's no Black  women in this play, "and it's a play with  12 women. Being passed over for roles reminded me of how Black women have been  passed over and over in their own country,  as if they weren't here.  I started thinking that...if this world  were destroyed and somebody found  records of television shows and magazines,  they'd think Canada was a country of all  white people only. It made me realize, we  have to tell our stories and be heard.  [For me] it started with Stay Black and  Die, which chronicles the history of Black  Canadians in Winnipeg, and reveals the racial and social climate of the 1950s, 60s and  70s in Canada. Those were the times when  Topsy and Little Black Sambo were regular  classroom reading, and a source of shame  for Black children. Those were the times  when being Black meant getting spit on and  beat up daily by gangs of racist kids.  Our history is one of segregated movie  theatres, where Blacks were allowed to sit  in the balcony only; where we were not allowed in certain restaurants, nightclubs,  beer parlors, and other public places. It is  shocking and sad, and because all this is so  silenced, we must document our history. In  that way we can become visible.  I'm working on a project right now  called, Where Are You Really From? The first  thing people say to you when you're Black  is: "Where are you from?" When I tell them  Winnipeg, they say, "No, where are you  really from? Like from Jamaica?" Because  you're Black, people think they have the  right to ask that. And it's not out of honest  curiosity; they're being condescending in  some way. This made me really look at  where am I really from.  Jan Wade  Jan Wade is a Vancouver mutimedia and  performance artist. She grew up in a racially  mixed family within a Black community in  Hamilton, Ontario. Wade has exhibited her  work in number of group and individual shows,  including most recently: Tales of the Invisible Woman and Soul Kitchen. Last year, she  went to Whitehaven, England, where she and  a friend set up a performance and installation  piece called, Jazz Slaveship's Witness I Burn,  about the last slave ship to leave England and  its relation to her family's history.  A lot of Black history is bleak and painful, and therefore we don't want to look at  it. But I'm for keeping those histories because we all have something to learn from  history, [especially after] centuries of having our history denied us.  I went to Whitehaven and ended up  building an ancestral altar in a warehouse  owned by the Jefferson sisters, whose ancestors were directly linked [to the slave  trade.] Whitehaven was the last coastal port  town in England that sent a slave ship to  Africa to pick up African people and take  them to the "new world". They actually  ended up taking this particular shipment  of slaves to Virginia which, though I didn't  know it at the time, was where my great  grandfather and great grandmother were  born.  My friend Vanessa Richards, who is a  poet and performance arist, came up from  London and we worked on the piece together—my installation altar piece and her  performance piece, which pertained to the  histories of those people. We held a ceremony and performance, which incorpo-  FEBRUARY1997  11 The importance of documenting histories:  The wisdom in our communities  by Janisse Browning, Lorena Gale,  E. Centime Zeleke   Three Black women living in Vancouver—  Janisse Browning, Lorena Gale and E. Centime  Zeleke—got together in mid-January and talked  about, among other things, the representation  of Black people's histories, the importance of  documenting our own histories, and the need  to understand history as part of the struggle  for liberation and within the context of global  capitalism.  Janisse Browning is interested in aural  history documentation. She has done several  projects, including Some Johnson Family  Stories: From Slavery to Present in 1993, in  which she interviewed some members of her  family in southern Ontario. Browning was also  involved in the organizing committee of an oral  history workshop/conference held in Vancouver, sponsored by the UBC Museum of  Anthropolgy and the Storytelling Society of  Vancouver.  Lorena Gale is an actor, writer, director,  wife, mother, performance artist. In relation to  Black history, she has written a play, called  Angelique (about the life and words of Marie  Joseph Angelique). She is also in the process of  writing a personal and family history piece,  called Je me souviens: memories of an expatriate Anglo-Montrealaise-Quebecoise  exiled in Canada.  E. Centime Zeleke is a writer, poet and  broadcaster on Coop Radio. She is creating an  audio piece that traces the political and personal history of her family in Ethiopia, as well  as her own passage to Canada. Through this  piece, she will construct an imaginative (and  possible) Ethiopian-Canadian identity for herself.  janisse Browning: For me, Black History  Month has been a time of reconciling the  lack of attention that's been paid to the histories of peoples of African descent, on the  North American continent in particular. It's  a time when we can actually acknowledge  what's been done to people of African descent globally due to the transatlantic slave  trade, while also acknowledging that it is  not our only history. Our history doesn't  begin with slavery; it goes much farther  back.  It's important to acknowledge women's histories because women's histories  have often been overshadowed by men's  histories, and that's true of Black History  Month. Things have been changing, but it's  been a slow process. Usually the people  who get the platform to speak are men.  That's why works like Dionne Brand's book  on oral histories of working Black women  [No Burden to Carry: Narratives of Black working women in Ontario, 1920s to 1950s] are so  important. Brand acknowledged that  women have always worked inside and  outside the Black communities and that this  work has contributed to society at large as  well as to our own communities.  I was going to ask you about your  work, Lorena. Why were you compelled to  start documenting the life of Marie Joseph  Angelique, and what does she represent for  you in the context of Black history in  Canada?  Lorena Gale: Marie Joseph Angelique  was a slave in Montreal who in 1734 was  accused of setting a fire which destroyed a  large portion of the city. She was hanged  for the assumed offence. When I began to  develop an interest in Black history 20 years  ago, there were very few books written specifically on Black Canadian history. The few  books that had been written were not available through the education or library system. That sort of information wasn't made  available to a general public, let alone to a  Black public that couldn't afford to buy it.  I was intrigued by the notion of there  being a history of Black people in Canada.  I had assumed, as the rest of the society  assumed that our history began after the  second world war. And this was even with  the knowledge that my own grandparents  were born here. It still didn't make sense to  me that their being here had anything to  do with a greater thing called history.  The first time I became aware of a historical relationship of Black people and  Canada was through a book called, A History of Blacks in Canada by Henry Winks.  The book is a collection of dates and times  with few details about events. There were  some intriguing bits of information, and  one of them was that in 1734, a Negro slave  had set fire to the city of Montreal and died.  When I sought to illuminate that one  sentence of history I found it was virtually  impossible because, there were no other  records relating to this woman.  People in  Canada have a  myopic vision  of what  oppression is  and of what  struggle and  resistance are.  Centime Zeleke  I had to look to the history of the  world to supply me with some answers  about Marie Joseph Angelique. What  started off in Montreal in 1734 took me  down along the eastern seaboard and  out back across the Atlantic to Africa and  then into Europe, and to an understanding that the history of Black people, even  that one tiny incident, is a history of the  world.  Slavery was part of a world history  integral to European economies. The  same things I studied in university and  college vis-a-vis European and North  American history were connected either  directly or indirectly to the slave trade.  It intrigued me that somebody  could do something that would be recorded but be considered of so little consequence. Nowhere in second-hand  source material do you hear her being  quoted—as having any voice or any relationship to her act. There is documentation of what people thought about what  she did, but not what she had to say.  Because I was so angry at world history for having created Marie Joseph  Anqelique and yet not illuminated her, it  forced me to single-mindedly pursue her  words. Only after going around the world  trying to rebuild her story did I actually find  some documents. What she had to say was  recorded by the king of France's governor,  based on his examination of Marie during  the thing they called the trial. I listened to  her words and found they were closer to  what I had thought about her than anything  that history had documented.  The woman I discovered isn't exactly  the woman I think the Black community  wants to believe she was. She's not that...  Browning: She's not a role model?  Gale: No, she is not. Marie Joseph  Angelique says she was not, a revolutionary, a downtrodden slave who set fire to  her mistress' house to enact some great revenge or seek personal justice. What her  story is to me is an example of the poor  relationship we as Black people have with  the law on this continent. From the beginning, we were always guilty for being Black  and that was our only guilt. I think this is  why she was hanged and why nobody was  interested in anything she had to say.  If s the same relationship in many ways  as with the slave-master, and that's why I  think Marie's story needs to be out there  publicly. It shows Canada's participation in  a slavery it denies having any part of. According to Canadian history books, you'd  think Canada's only relationship to slavery was the underground railroad. Nope.  Canada bought and sold 'em. James McGill  had about 14 slaves himself and Canada's  founding fathers were in there like a dirty  shirt.  Zeleke: For me, having moved to North  America from Ethiopia via the Caribbean,  the one thing I notice as a young person  here is the fact that we live in a really  ahistorical society. I think there's a conspiracy to silence history, and many people live only in the present day so they don't  have to remember what happened even just  yesterday.  This allows people to talk about being  "oppressed" because somebody doesn't  like the shirt they're wearing, as opposed  to having an understanding of the types  of oppressions people have been going  Janisse Browning  through for centuries. People in Canada  have a myopic vision of what oppression  is and of what struggle and resistance are.  Many people are caught up in some really  narrow struggles which aren't linked to a  larger vision of what it means to be human.  My interest in history is different from  the two of you because I immigrated to  Canada from Ethiopia. I'm interested in the  first wave of emigration out of Ethiopia in  the 1970s due to a Marxist coup. For the  first time in Ethiopia's history, a lot of people left and came to North America. I'm interested in what our relationship is to Ethiopia and in the kinds of role models we can  create for ourselves.  Living in a racist society, we're demeaned as Black people and we're not even  considered Ethiopian anymore. I'm interested in what it means for us to become  "Black people," and how that process leads  to where we forget we're Ethiopian.  The project I'm working on is about  going back to Ethiopia and talking to my  relatives, particularly my aunts who've  never been married, have adopted children,  chosen to be companions to each other, and  work together. I'm interested in the kinds  of choices they had in their lives and why  they made those decisions.  I also want to know how they have created this lesbian existence, even though  they would never identify as lesbian or be  included in a queer history. But they should  be role models for me. How do I, as an out  lesbian in Canada who's from Ethiopia,  find role models for myself, and how do  other people from my generation find role  models for themselves.  Gale: With my children's and nieces'  generation, they have no sense that what  they experience is a historical experience.  If they're not in a politically enlightened  environment—which most people aren't  in—they tend to internalize oppression. But  if they understood that what they are experiencing is what their parents, grandparents, great-grandparents experienced, and  that it is directly connected to slavery which  set down the rules for relationships between Black and whites on this continent—  then maybe it would provide them with  some source of strength with which to continue. But, there's a fear of history. When I  was first looking into Marie Joseph  Angelique, I asked my mother about his  tory and she said, Why can't you just leave  the past alone?  Zeleke: I don't think this fear of history  is something that's necessarily particular to  Black people. Often whatever history we  do get about Black people comes in little  commodified versions, like on TV, which  you can consume in half an hour. I think  there's a conspiracy against literature, art  and speaking out; we live in a really anti-  storytelling society.  Browning: Millions of African people  were stripped of their identities and told  they were good for nothings. These are  some of our ancestors. We're still living  with that legacy. Many of us have been trying our best to move on, but there are systems in place which benefit people who  want to maintain economic superiority.  My interest in history, and particularly  Black history has a lot to do with the environment I was brought up in. If people in  my family and community didn't remind  each other constantly that we are a people,  that some of us have been in Canada for at  least six, seven generations and have contributed to society in many different ways,  then we might believe we're good for nothing.  Black women's histories, and Black histories in general, are quite nebulous because "Black" is a definition that was imposed on us historically. We come from different ethnic groups and some of us are  more recent immigrants and some of us are  from mixed heritages, so Black history is  very complicated.  Gale: Black. Yes. Black is a North  American or European construction. Black  history is a history of being a construct,  [laughs] It only exists as a comparative, an  adjective. I'm Black only as compared to  somebody who's white or who chooses to  identify themselves as white. Black is also  a socio-economic political experience, and  one doesn't necessarily have to be of African descent to be "Black" in this society.  I've found the years I've spent immersed in researching history to be the most  empowering experience in my life. Nobody  can tell me I'm not anything anymore because I understand who I am. I think a lot  of Black people, because of the history of  oppression, have internalized racism.  As I get older I see it not as the external oppressor and me— whether that oppressor is male or white or a number of  things. For me, it has to be about what I am  willing to accept. I have to liberate myself  from oppression. I am not liberated.  Browning: I was involved in an oral  history project funded through a government agency in Ontario and a Black historical museum I was working for at the  time. The project involved interviewing different elders in my community who have  lived in the same area all their lives. One of  the interviews I did was with a great aunt  of mine, Edna Grayer. She's in her mid-80s  now. Great Aunt Edna told me that she was  a midwife and that she had helped deliver  over 30 babies. She was very proud to say  she never took a nickel from anybody. She  wasn't trained through a midwifery program and she wasn't paid.  Hearing her story was amazing. I  didn't know we had midwives in our families because nobody talked about it. That's  part of the history of the area that has not  been acknowledged. It's just been seen as  work women do, when in fact many men  and women wouldn't be here if it weren't  for women like my aunt Edna.  As young people, we sometimes take  for granted all this wisdom we have in our  communities—women who know what  kind of herbs to give each other when  they're in pain and help raise each other's  families. That's part of history, but I never  got that information from a textbook because it isn't considered history.  Zeleke: Lorena, the last thing you said  was that you are not liberated, that you liberate yourself. I think that's an interesting  statement, which could be potentially revolutionary but also potentially dangerous.  Gale: Why?  Zeleke: Because we then become responsible for something [slavery/ racism]  that has nothing really to do with us.  Gale: I know I live in a racist society I  don't have to read a history book; I just have  to walk outside the door. But, ultimately, I  have to live my life. So what am I going to  do? Am I going to allow racism to arrest  the development of my life or am I going  to push against it and get to where I want  to go. We cannot hold onto [racism]. Every  time we validate it, they win because it  stops us cold in our tracks. Well, I'm sorry  you're racist, but that's your fucking bad  time in life; I'm moving on buddy. Get outa  my way. If you're not gonna get outa my  way, fine I'll go around you, 111 go over you,  I'll go under you, but you are not going to  stop me from getting to where I want to  go-  Zeleke: But it doesn't stop people from  being racist. If a Black woman is walking  down a road and a white man decides to  knock her down, even if she's keeps saying to herself "I'm going to get past this  man," he's strong and he can knock her  down no matter what.  Gale: Is she going to stay on the floor  or is she going to get back up and keep on  going?  Zeleke: The point is she got knocked  down, and sometimes when you get  knocked down, your feet get broken, your  arms get broken. If we're talking about racism, it's systemic; it is about white systems  knocking Black people down. I don't think  trying to live one's own life is the same as  liberation.  Browning: This is just an example of  why it is so important to talk about Black  history because there have always been different approaches to liberation, different  factions like the Nat Turners, the Malcolm  Xs and the Martin Luther Kings, Harriet  Tubmans.  My experience is not the quintessential Black experience. Just because I'm a  seventh generation Canadian, it doesn't  mean I'm Black history incarnate [laughter]. There are people with more immigrant  experiences and people who come from  more economically privileged backgrounds  who might have a different perspective on  what Black history is.  I think it is important to emphasize  that if we start from what we know and  move out from there then we can learn from  each other. One month out of the year is  not going to do me justice for learning  about Black history; it's a lifetime process.  Zeleke: So here we are in 1997 and Black  History Month has been happening in  Canada for about 20 years. We've been saying we gotta start talking, telling our stories. In the larger scale of things, 20 years is  not that long, so indeed it is just a beginning. At the same time, it has been going  on for 20 years and I'm wondering where  we are going with this.  In a sense I do think what you're saying Janisse is important—we do need to  hear everybody's story and hear different  strategies for our survival. However, being  the millenial pessimist I am, I'm wondering what it means to be Black and talking  about Black history in the midst of such  intense globalization.  I think it's important not to be relativist in terms of thinking all these stories are  great. We also need to look at what some of  the concrete strategies are within the context of a global capitalist system. I'm not  just interested in history because it makes  me feel better. I think there are larger agendas at work, and I'm wondering how do I  or my community survive within this larger  context.  Browning: Some people would ask,  "What is the point of having Black History  Month anyway?"! see  history as being  I believe in the  power of the  individual to  create change.  just one person living her life according to  her truth at that moment. If I were to speak  to all the Black people in the world, I'd say,  Do what you do as an individual and do it  your best and through your heart.  The individual has to take some responsibility and once you are awakened,  you can understand how to act collectively.  That individual knowledge will enable you  to subvert racism in some way. This is what  I mean about liberating oneself. They did a  real number on our heads—they don't even  have to put up barriers anymore; they're  already in our minds. They're sittin' on  some beach sippin' martinis, being served,  while we're battling it out in our own  minds.  Browning: I think the more we exchange information with each other, not just  locally but globally, the better equipped  we'll be to improve the status of whole  communities as well as ourselves as individuals. I see this struggle for gaining and  regaining humanity and liberation as a collective struggle, and as a struggle that's ongoing.  Zeleke: In terms of what I've been  taught as an Ethiopian person, there's no  something we're always going to nave iu  learn from in order to understand where  we're going. If we don't learn from the past  strategies our ancestors used in order to  survive, we'll just be constantly reinventing  the wheel. But focussing only on history  can distract us from doing some of the political work that needs to be done in the  present.  In the context of globalization of  capitalism...that's also important because  people of African descent have been  marginalized in that whole discussion.  Gale: I believe in the power of the individual to create change. I don't believe that  change has to be a huge explosive revolutionary thing with flags waving and fists  flying. When I think of all the major changes  that have occurred, they grew out of the  smallest acts of courage, from the most  unlikely revolutionaries.  I don't think Rosa Parks thought when  she sat down tired at the front of the bus  that she was going to spark a decade of  change, violence and negotiation. She was  sucn tning as making an individual choice.  My parents can't understand concepts like  getting to know myself or taking time out  to find out what I need to know. They can't  understand concepts like individual path.  For them, no choice is an individual choice;  all our choices are informed by our history  by the socio-economic-political environment.  I think that is why history is really important because history is part of that whole  spectrum of things that informs whatever  present day reality you're living in. It also  sheds light on the systemic environments  because systems are built up through history. I think it's really important to always  be aware that within the context of those  histories and systems, you're not an individual. If we're going to talk about liberation, then liberation as an individual  doesn't make any sense to me. If it's just  about liberating the individual, then I'm not  interested. Feature  Decolonizing the curriculum:  Memory and re-memory  by Yvonne Brown as told to  Charmaine Perkins   Yvonne Brown is an educator, scholar, activist and advocate living in Vancouver. She  currently works at the Teacher Education Office al the University of British Columbia. Recently she sat on the Vancouver School Board  for a three-year term. She is a single mother  who raised three kids, and says that Black History Month is really a testimony to the strength  and contributions of our mothers and grandmothers.  Charmaine Perkins had the opportunity  to talk to Yvonne Brown about the documenting of Black people's histories and the teaching  of those histories in the school system. Perkins  is involved in education from both sides of the  lectern.  Charmaine Perkins: Black History  Month is a time to reflect on our past, how  far we've come and where we are today.  Can you talk about the importance of history in the work you do?  Yvonne Brown: History is really important because, as they say, one who does not  know one's history is doomed to repeat it.  Everything has conspired so that Black people do not know our history. For most of  us, the school has not been a place to learn  it. The history we have acquired from our  perspective has mostly come from our  elders who have passed down their memories. As well, over the last 30 years, within  the Pan-African anti-colonial and liberation  movements, we've had scholars documenting and publishing our histories.  Perkins: In the field of education, what  are some of the changes that have been happening in terms of curriculum development?  Brown: In terms of Black people, there  aren't many changes really. The re-inscription of imperialism, colonialism and empire has been the basis of curriculum reform, as far as I'm concerned. Look at the  Integrated Resource Packages [the new curriculum materials for public schools in BC,  which replaced the Year 2000 initiative]  published in 1996. For the language arts,  for example, we see the same old texts that  have been there for 40 years or more, like  the "classics": Sounder, In the Heat of the  Night, To Kill a Mockingbird...All of these  books present images of quiet, suffering,  dociie Black folks who are reviled and persecuted by white folks, but also delivered  by them.  Perkins: Yes, just like in the two movies that have come out recently: A Time To  Kill and Ghosts of Mississippi. Once again,  we see who gets to be the hero.  Brown: In terms of curriculum change,  I would like to see the day when we choose  texts that represent Black people as agents  and people of courage—people who have  shown the world what it means to fight for  freedom, who have been at the cutting edge  of what justice means, and who have provided the bedrock for much of civil society. Black people's resistance to bondage  and servitude and shackled slavery has  pushed the boundaries of what it means to  be free, and poked holes into the platitude  about equality and about all men being  born equal.  Perkins: I guess that's one of the things  we still don't see in the school curriculum:  this whole concept of liberation and struggle.  Brown: That's right...and Black people  as agents, as exciting, intelligent and capable of strategizing. They tell us there was  no great slave rebellion, and that we were  so inferior we didn't even know to fight this  shame, this loss.  Reading Black people's scholarship,  we become aware of the extensive bondage [we've been subjected to]. We're talking about an existence where you begin by  defining a whole people as being outside  of the human race, then you uproot them  from their cultures and transport them into  plantation slavery, where they became the  property of the owners.  And even at the point where the people fought for and won their "freedom,"  they still weren't free because those repressive laws were still inscribed. I'm referring  to things like the fugitive slave bills, where  it was possible to live in a so-called free  state but where the police were free to catch  you. There was a whole industry around  keeping Black people in servitude. This  didn't only happen to Black people in the  US; it happened to those brought to the  Caribbean as slaves, as well.  It took Black people fighting in the  Civil War and further fighting through the  courts for us to gain constitutional changes  that would guarantee our rights as citizens.  But even so, Black people have to continue  fighting for their legal status. For us, we  know agency because we've had to exercise it when we were completely enveloped,  encircled and contained as a people.  Part of the way of subverting agency  of African/Black people is the tacit collusion among all institutions to representAf-  rica as a basket case and all African leaders  as nincompoops. All this is designed to  obscure the complex historical and economic exploitation of people [the Atlantic  slave trade], minerals and land.  Perkins: It seems that what is crucial  and still needs to be done is undertaking a  decolonization process. This is something  you return to a lot in your work.  Brown: All that I do in education, I call  the decolonizing project. I have come to  realize that the legacy of the last 500 years  of European colonialization is alive and  well, and that it is possible for you to go  through your whole schooling and never  have to learn about the destructive effect  of the so-called "civilizing" mission of Europe.  If you look at high school social studies and language arts curricula, the word  "colonization" hardly ever appears. If you  take a course in what they call, "comparative civilization" (which is supposed to  have replaced Western Civilisation), you'll  find that nowhere in the textbook is there  mention of the "civilizing" mission of Europe.  People don't even know what colonization is because the narratives they are told  carefully omit and curtail any discussion  of the atrocities which Europe committed  against the so-called lesser breeds. And  foremost among the lesser breeds were Africans. It didn't matter which European  colonizing country it was—Britain, France,  Portugal, Spain, Holland, and so on—they  all had the same goal to deprive African  people of their humanity.  The stories we've been told in school  are narratives of "adventure, fun and  glory." The horrors of displacement, dispossession and genocide of indigenous peoples  have been carefully hidden. The wholesale  theft of large tracts of land in Africa, Asia  and North America was done in the name  of kings and queens, and thus never regarded as theft. Cries from indigenous people for reparations for damages and theft  are viewed as preposterous.  For any curriculum change to happen,  the curriculum designers have to face this  whole civilizing project and begin to permit themselves to tell some different stories.  Perkins: It gets back to the point that  we do have a reponsibility to remember  and really know our histories.  Brown: Yes. I'd like to talk a little bit  about [African-American novelist and  Nobel laureate] Toni Morrison's notion of  remembering. In her novel Beloved she deliberately plays with the unique quality of  remembering that Black people have to do.  In particular, she plays with linguistic nuances.  She talks about "remember," as we  write it, as one word. Then she hyphenates  "re-member," as in putting back on the  limbs and parts of the bodies, the African  bodies that were wrenched apart by slavery. So it's remembering in the sense of  physical body re-membering, and in the  sense of cultural re-membering, putting the  culture back together and becoming a  "member" of the culture again. She then  talks about memory, and then goes further  to emphasize "re-memory"—this is remembering as far back as Black people go in the  What Morrison offers in Beloved, I  think, is an important message for us because the act of remembering, the act of  history and recording history is not an ordinary act.  Perkins: Do you want to add anything  else?  Brown: One other thing I would like to  talk about is making connections with First  Nations people. In my work, I do look at  the broad scope of colonialism to point out  that Africans were just part of a larger picture, which also swept up peoples in Asia  and North and SouthAmerica.  I see many parallels between the enslavement of Africans in the "new world"  and internal colonization of First Nations  people here in Canada. In terms of building meaningful solidarity, I see great possibilities between [Black people and First  Nations people] if we can also decolonize  our minds and be open to how much collective trauma we share as a result of that  colonizing experience.  Perkins: Yes, I know that sometimes it's  difficult to make those connections and  learn to be allies with other people who  share similar experiences.  Brown: Part of it is that the "divide and  conquer" strategy has left us in this place  Yvonne Brown  of competition about which one of us is  most or least favoured. Black folks are least  favoured; everybody agrees on that. But  after Black folks, there's a fight to see who's  next on the hierarchy. I know that First  Nations people have fared pretty badly  down at the bottom with Black folks, but I  think we have been suspicious of each  other. As we do advocacy and scholarship  in terms of justice, law enforcement, the  curriculum and equity issues, we see that  our situations are not the same but are strikingly parallel.  I think part of what we fear with allies  is that one will wipe out the other's agenda.  That is something we have to be careful of,  that we don't reach out and sweep away  other people's oppressions.  I also have been reaching further to  make connections with progressive white  folks. As I try to deal with my rage at historical injustice and how it plays itself out  in the continued oppression of Black people, locally and globally, I have had to work  very hard to overcome my rage and not  generalize against all white folks.  Perkins: I think that's an important  point you brought up about rage because  oftentimes there is no space in which to  express it. It is never seen as appropriate.  Brown: That's right. And that rage is  pervasive and ever-present. I think there is  something legitimately called "Black rage."  And it's so powerful that at times you can  taste it, smell it and feel it. I think it accounts  for much of what other people see as "spontaneous" violence. But to me it's not. And  so that rage is perceived as dangerous, but  it can also be—if you analyze and understand it—the most powerful engine for  movement -building.  It's unrealistic to think we're going to  be purified, free of rage. But we can set our  political agendas so that we build enabling  solidarities among ourselves, among men  and women, as well as with progressive  white folks. That's the kind of vision I have  when I reach out, because otherwise, rage  and the collective trauma combined could  lead me to become oppressive.  14  FEBRUARY 1997 Feature  Uncovering the truths:  Continued from page 11  rated a lot of the different histories we had  learned about while we were in the towns  [around Whitehaven.]  I think [doing the project was] ultimately rewarding because it really does  personalize those histories and make them  very relevant to your present and day-today life. I learned a lot on an intellectual  level about myself and my place in history,  and about history being very personal stories passed on from generation to generation.  Initally I started out as a visual artist,  coming from a very Eurocentric traditional  style [thanks to] the Ontario school system.  If African art was at all touched on, it was  just about looking at some scupltures and  saying, "aren't they interesting and great."  There were all kind of things that influenced me in terms of the folk art. [When  I was young,] I would spend summers in  Detroit with my aunt and uncle and not see  a white person for months. I would see  people making their own signs for their  shoe repair shop—because they didn't have  a lot of money, they had to do their own  advertising.  And when I would read my grandmother's issues of Ebony magazine, with  all those fashion spreads and drawings of  people wearing those really incredible  flamboyant clothes, I'd see amazing hairdos [and women with] names like Queen  of the Nile. I just loved those things because  it was a real Afrocentric aesthetic that really didn't pertain to my exposure in eve  ryday white culture. It was something I felt  was really mine.  All of those things, plus humour, come  into my art work. I've always loved the  humour in Black culture; it's wicked and  funny, but there's a lot of pain there too.  Over the last ten years, I've totally  embraced all of those things, and decided  to be myself wholly, as opposed to trying  to fit into some sort of accepted art practice or cultural mode of expression. In a  way, I'm a baby taking my first teetering,  tottering steps, and learning everyday, in  all kinds of ways, how to evolve in that  whole mode.  Claire Prieto  Over the past 16 years, Claire Prieto has  produced and directed a number of documentaries as part of Prieto-McTair Productions.  Among her films are: Some Black Women;  Black Mother, Black Daughter; and Home  to Buxton. Prieto lives in Toronto and has a  wonderful 17-year old son named Ian, who  loves the Fugees. In the Spring 1983 issue of  Fireweed: A Feminist Quarterly, she and  Roger McTair published a series of photographs—Images of Black Women—of  women active in Toronto's Black community  between 1974 and 1976. More recently, Prieto  worked as the program producer of the New  Initiatives in Film (NIF), Studio D, National  Film Board, which provided support for women  of colour and First Nations filmmakers. NIF  ended in June 1996. She is currently the Cultural Diversity Producer, Ontario region, for  the NFB.  My documenting work began when I  was at Ryerson [College in Toronto] studying radio and TV Most of the small pieces I  did for school had to do with what Black  people were doing in the city.  A lot of work was happening here at  that time [mid-1970s]. For instance, I did a  slide show on an organization called the  Black Education Project. It came out of the  need for kids coming from the Caribbean  to have some kind of connection into this  society, and some explanation [about  Canada] and information about themselves. Both Roger [McTair] and myself  would go out and take pictures at community events. We weren't being paid by anybody; we just wanted to make sure those  images were recorded somewhere. I've always felt that if nothing's down, if you  don't have the pictures, then it's like, "did  this happen?"  [Researching histories] was a very personal thing—you were getting in touch  with individuals all the time who had been  involved with the community through  older organizations, and trying to convince  them to speak to you, which was sometimes  difficult. What was needed was a level of  trust where people will say things to you  they wouldn't normally [say publicly], or  give you materials that they had, like letters, pictures.  I did a project for a Black resources and  information centre. We talked to older people in the community and recorded those  interviews on tape. They talked about their  lives, things they did, who was around the  organization, the kinds of struggles they  went through, the strategies they used, and  some internal politicking. [We also recorded] any visual information they had,  shooting the slides of them for safe keeping, to keep those images alive.  Unfortunately, the Black resources and  information centre collapsed and now I  don't know where any of that material  went. [Information] needs to be stored  somewhere, such as in a library, where people over time can come and access the information. I think it most important to have  an ongoing history.  In terms of young people looking to  do this [kind of project], I would say  number one, documenting histories is very  important work; number two, it has to be  done and shown in a variety of ways.  Sometimes we get caught up in what's  the right way of doing the work, but I think  we need to be looking at all the forms of  documentation, whether it's a song, a music video, a paper, a film, a cartoon, whatever. Every person, every project expands  the actual written and kept history.  It is very important not to just look at  the piece you're doing, but at the broader  vision: how it affects people all over the  country in all kinds of ways that sometimes  you never know about because you're not  walking around behind them.  RESOURCES OF BLACK WOMEN'S  HISTORIES  The following is a list of some of the  films, videos and books documenting aspects of the lives and histories of Black  women in Canada.  Films and videos:  BLACK MOTHER, BLACK DAUGHTER  Directed by Sylvia Hamilton and Claire  Prieto  National Film Board, 1989  HOGAN'S ALLEY  Directed by Andrea Fatona and Cornelia  Wyngaarden  Video Out, 1994  HOME FEELING: STRUGGLE FOR A  COMMUNITY  Directed by Jennifer Hodge and Roger  McTair  National Film Board, 1983  HOME TO BUXTON  Directed by Claire Prieto and Roger  McTair  McNabb & Connolly, 1987  LONG TIME COMING  Directed by Dionne Brand  National Film Board, 1993  MAIGRE DOG  Directed by Donna James  Atlantic Independent Media, 1990  MYSELF, YOURSELF  Directed by Jennifer Hodge  Mobius Media Corporation, 1981  OLDER, STRONGER, WISER  Directed by Claire Prieto  National Film Board, 1989  REMEMBER AFRICVILLE  Directed by Shelagh Mackenzie  National Film Board, 1991  SISTERS IN THE STRUGGLE  Directed by Dionne Brand and Ginny  Stikeman  National Film Board, 1991  SOME BLACK WOMEN  Directed by Claire Prieto and Roger  McTair  Available at the University of Toronto  Audio Visual Library, 1976  SPEAK IT! FROM THE HEART OF  BLACK NOVA SCOTIA  Directed by Sylvia Hamilton  National Film Board, 1993  STRAIGHT    TALK:    INTERVIEWS  WITH WOMEN OF COLOUR  Directed by Nicole Thompson  Video Out International Distribution,  1991  THIS ALIENATION  Directed by Nicole Thompson  Video Out International Distribution,  1992  Books:  THE BLACK CANADIANS: THEIR  HISTORIES AND CONTRIBUTIONS  by Velma Carter  Reidmore Books, Edmonton, Alberta,  1989  THE BLACK WOMAN IN CANADA  by Rella Braithwaite  Westhill, Ontario, 1977  NO BURDEN TO CARRY: NARRATIVES OF BLACK WORKING WOMEN  IN ONTARIO FROM THE 1920'S TO  THE 1950'S  by Dionne Brand  The Women's Press, Toronto, Ontario,  1991  HARRIET'S DAUGHTER  by Marlene Nourbese Philip  The Women's Press, Toronto, Ontario,  1988  REGULATING CLASS PRIVILEGE: IMMIGRANT SERVANTS IN CANADA,  1940'S-1950'S  by Patricia Daenzer  Canadian Scholars Press, 1993  SOME BLACK WOMEN: PROFILES OF  BLACK WOMEN IN CANADA  by Rella Braithwaite and Tessa Benn-  Ireland  Sister Vision Press, Toronto, Ontario, 1993  SHADD: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF  MARY SHADD CARY  by Jim Bearden and Linda Jean Butler  NC Press, Toronto, Ontario, 1997  SILENCED: TALKS WITH WORKING  CLASS WEST INDIAN WOMEN  ABOUT THEIR LIVES AND STRUG  GLES AS DOMESTIC WORKERS IN  CANADA  by Makeda Silvera  (second edition) Sister Vision Press,  Toronto, Ontario, 1991  WE'RE ROOTED HERE AND THEY  CAN'T PULL US UP  by Peggy Bristow, Dionne Brand, Afua P  Cooper, Sylvia Hamilton and Adrienne  Shadd  University of Toronto Press, Toronto,  Ontario, 1994  Cover from Sisters in  FEBRUARY 1997 Arts  Sonali Fernando's k Body of a Poet;  Tribute pure poetry  by E. Centime Zeleke  A BODY OF A POET  Written and directed by Sonali Fernando  Produced by Barbara Nicholls and  Meena Nanji  Distributed by Women Make Movies  New York, New York, 1995  British filmmaker Sonali Fernando's A  Body of a Poet is a beautifully filmed tribute  to Audre Lorde.  Audre Lorde is often considered the  "mother of Black feminism." She was a prolific poet and essayist, a lesbian, mother and  activist. Just prior to her death in 1992 due  to breast cancer, Lorde was named state  poet of New York.  Since Lorde's death there have been a  number of projects to remember, commemorate, and sometimes, immortalize  her. A Body of a Poet commemorates Lorde  without heroicizing or immortalizing her.  Rather, Fernando's film reconstructs an  imaginative biography of Lorde's life that  is neither documentary nor drama.  Fernando's film is not a retelling of  Lorde's life story as it happened or through  a genealogical account of who Audre Lorde  was related to, how, and when. Rather A  Body of a Poet looks at the broader themes  that informed Lorde's life, such as her sexuality her politics, her inter-racial relationships, her positions as professor and activist.  From that, Fernando creates a story  that is more hers than it is Lorde's. Yet, in  so doing, she effectively shows that the  themes in Lorde's life are themes that recur again and again in all Black women's  lives.  When reviewing A body of A Poet, it  would be a mistake to not mentionA Litany  for Survival, another biographical film on  Audre Lorde's life. Directed by Ada Griffen  and Michelle Parkinson, A Litany for Survival was also released in 1995. While Litany  is visually very stimulating to the point of  being poetic, it relies heavily on archived  footage—it is real life documentation full  of fervour and "movement" talk.  A Body of a Poet on the other hand is  pure poetry. The few moments there are of  "movement" talk—involving a discussion  among women of colour—are done poorly  and distract the viewer from the more sensuous feel of the rest of the film.  While A Body of a Poet may not push  the viewer toward immediate action, it certainly will lull you into a contemplative  state. However, it is moments of intense  contemplation that are needed if our various movements are to be propelled forward.  The problem with the type of idolization that happens in a film like A Litany for  Survival is that it sets up a dynamic where  the viewers see the film's subject as existing outside of their own lives. Even though  the viewer may initially be more inspired  by such heroicism, the question of "how do  I become that which I see on the screen," is  left unanswered.  A Body of a Poet opens with black and  white shots of the skyscrapers in New York  city—the landscape of Lorde's wrought existence. Burgeoning out from this landscape  is a Black woman's muse proclaiming:  "We have lived and we have conquered demons from the core of hottest  hell/carried babies in tortured wombs-  barefoot on sodden earth/yet America's  history only holds our shadows, silhouettes  shimmering, dark and pure."  With stirring images and words, without wasting much time and being too didactic, Fernando places us right into the  physical, political and historical context of  Lorde's life.  The entire film goes on like this. Narrated almost entirely through poetry, the  film flips back and forth between black and  white, colour and sepia-toned images of the  various aspects of Lorde's life.  While these images are dramatizations  of Lorde as a child, in hospital with cancer,  cruising at a party, making love, et cetera,  the dramatizations always seem to exist on  a more symbolic, feeling level. Further  more, the images do not seem to belong  only to Audre Lorde's life, but could also  be the history of many Black women's lives  in NorthAmerica.  The poetry used to narrate the film is  the poetry of African American poets  Ta'shia Asante and Malkia Cyril and an  African Canadian poet Suzette Mayr. By  using the poetry of women who continue  to write in the same vein as Lorde,  Fernando again avoids heroicizing Lorde.  Instead, the viewer realizes that Lorde was  part of a larger community of women  whose work goes on.  Disappointing in A Body of a Poet is  Fernando's need to explain the more experimental parts of the film through a dialogue between six women of colour who  are preparing a memorial for Audre Lorde.  The dialogue is poorly done and rather than  conveying a community of women carrying on the same work as Audre Lorde, the  women end up appearing like caricatures.  Fernando should steer clear of the realistic, and stick to what she does well, the  poetic.  There is a scene in the film in which a  woman of African descent says "she loves  Black women," while holding a South  Asian woman in her arms. In doing this,  she is including SouthAsian women in her  notion of Blackness.  When I first viewed this scene I was  bewildered. However, it became clear that  what was implicit in this woman's Black  politic was not some notion of blackness  based on biology, but on an opposition to  white supremacy. None of this is unusual.  For a long time, now, people of colour in  Britain, who are anti-racist, have chosen to  identify all people of colour as Black.  Recently, I have been thinking that the  term "Black" is no longer politically useful  in the context of North America. It seems  to me that Black once implied a politic: a  politic whereby a group of people who had  been kept outside, of even the margins of  society, were not just fighting to get inside  the margins but were challenging the configurations  that made the society. Nowadays though, it seems that  Black politics consists mainly  of creating and maintaining  a Black bourgeoisie.  I would therefore like to  abandon this whole notion of  Blackness, the way it has  developed in NorthAmerica.  However, I do not have much  choice in being black, considering we live in a society that  g - doles out privileges based  upon the racialization of the  body.  What the film A Body of  a Poet makes clear is that the  work Audre Lorde did and  the communities she was involved in were very much in-  terested in articulating a  broad politic.  It was therefore refreshing to view A  Body of a Poet, as it reminded me of a  historical moment in NorthAmerica where  activists saw the necessity to have Blackness mean something else besides the  racialization of the self. It was also refreshing to view a film by a South Asian artist  about a Black woman that steers clear of  narrow racializations, but at the same time  does not overlook the specificities of the African American experience.  A Body of a Poet will be presented in  Vancouver at the Pacific Cinematheque, 1131  Howe St. on Sunday, February 9th, 7:30pm.  The screening is part of two nights of films and  videos by and about Black lesbians and gays,  organized for Black History Month. For more  information about the series, see Bulletin Board  this issue or call (604) 688-FILM.  E. Centime Zeleke is a Vancouver based Ethiopian writer and activist. She is curating the  Black lesbian and gay film series at the Pacific  Cinematheque.  Bad  Habits  featuring  The Rainbow  Concert Band  Nadine Chambers  & Sister C  naughty guests  nasty secrets  gags & drag  Saturday  March 8th  Wise Hall  1882 Adanac St.  doors 7:30 show 8pm  Tix $13  §Harry's  (off Commercial)  & Little  Sister's  Concession Tix:  290.0556  Dramatization of Audre Lorde as a young girl—Cute!  FEBRUARY 1997 Arts  Interview with Shirley Geok-Lin Lim:  Writing a sense of self  as told to Sook C. Kong  Shirley Geok-Lin Lim was born in Malacca, Malaysia. She left Malaysia in her mid-  205 and moved to the United States on a  Fulbright scholarship to do her doctorate in  English. Since then, she has been teaching in  community colleges in New York and is currently a professor of English and Women's  Studies at the University of California, Santa  Barbara.  Lim is an award-winning fiction writer,  poet and critic. Among her publications are:  Crossing the Peninsula and Other Poems,  which won the Commonwealth Poetry Prize  for Best First Book in 1980, and The Forbidden Stitch: An Asian American Women's  Anthology, which she co-edited with Mayumi  Tsutakawa and Margarita Donnelly.  Shirley Lim was recently in Vancouver to  read from her recently published memoirs,  Among the White Moon Faces: an Asian-  American Memoir of Homelands, published  by The Feminist Press, City University of New  York. The book was also published in Singapore by Times Publishing International, with  the subtitle: Memoirs of a Nonya Feminist.  While in Vancouver, Lim also met with a  group of Asian Canadian writers and activists. Following the gathering, Sook C. Kong  had a chance to interview Lim. Kong is currently writing her doctoral dissertation on  Asian Canadian women writers.  Sook C. Kong: I'm going to ask you three  related questions. How did you become a  writer? What does the act of writing mean  to you? And can you tell us whether you  see significant differences in the various  genres of writing you have done, for example poetry, short stories, and scholarly  essays?  Shirley Geok-Lin Lim: Three big questions. How did I become a writer? I guess  most people become writers because they  begin as readers. Growing up when I did,  there weren't many other recreational alternatives and I had a pretty unhappy childhood. Reading was a huge solace, retreat,  escape. I was a really obsessive reader.  Somewhere along the line, I had a sense  I should write about things I knew rather  than read about things I didn't know. I  wanted to write my own voice, my own  community. Maybe that's the difference between a writer and a reader: a reader takes  in and the writer imagines, constructs her  own writing space. Your other question  was...  Kong: What does the act of writing  mean to you?  Lim: There's something really ontologi-  cal about writing. It's an act by which I  come into being, by which my sense of  myself gets imagined.  In terms of the differences in genre, at  a certain point, writing is writing. But I  think because I am a scholar I do have a  sense that writing is not simply self -expression. Writing is also a craft. It is something  you can learn and master. But it's not  enough to think of it as a craft, like a carpenter building a table. There is a certain  quality of beauty and truth to writing—  these are very hard terms for me because  they have been overused and abused.  I do believe that when I'm writing, I  am trying to work towards achieving my  own sense of what is literary, beautiful, and  truthful. And so, whether I write poetry,  fiction or a memoir, these are some of the  attributes I have in mind.  The genre I enjoy least is scholarly writing. I am pleased when I am able to do a  piece of academic writing and when people find it useful. I think I have this mission of recovering writing that has not been  looked at. One of the things I've been doing for a number of years now is looking at  women's writing—Asian women's writing  especially—that has been neglected. I write  about these works so that these women's  achievements are given the proper historical location and significance.  In terms of poetry, that was my first  form of literary expression and is the most  primal for me. It's deeply related to emotionality and to my struggle with making  meaning out of my life as well as creating  beauty out of words that fall apart on you.  With fiction, I have to admit that I get  a great deal of joy in the play and invention of fiction. Fiction is like this huge area  I can explore at will. It doesn't have this  strong sense of rigour and inevitability that  poetry has for me. And of course I've just  written this book of memoirs...  Kong: Yes, I was going to ask you to  tell us a little bit about the process of writing Among the White Moon Faces.  Lim: The process was very much related to a sense of audience. I would never  have written it, if it had not been requested  of me. I had written a number of academic  essays that were semi-autobiographical because I believe a politics of location has been  a useful academic question for women and  especially for women from countries other  than the West.  Florence Howe from The Feminist  Press had asked me to write a book for a  series called 'Cross-cultural Memoirs." I  did not want to do it. There are many reasons I think an Asian woman would refuse  this kind of request, [such as] a fear that  you will get your family upset because  you're telling family secrets.  I did not want to write a memoir that  was simply an enumeration of my  "achievements." That's terribly boring. I  know a lot of male memoirs do that—how  I became a general or president—and I  wasn't interested in that kind of story. I also  did not feel I had the time, luxury or social  resources.  But Florence pursued me. After three  years I gave in. One reason I gave in was  that she thought the memoir would be very  useful for women from Malaysia and Singapore. As an older woman who has gone  through certain struggles, I had to think  about what I could share with these women  that would help them. I realized that when  I was growing up, and even into my thirties, there were very few models for me.  Kong: And are you satisfied with White  Moon Faces?  Lim: I don't know what you mean by  satisfied. It's finished. The memoir does do  a number of things. It brings out a more  Shirley Lim (right) with Sook Kong  theoretical, critical, self-conscious and political location than one would expect from  a straightforward memoir and that's because of my years of looking at literature  as an object of study.  Kong: So what has the feedback been  like so far?  Lim: I was completely surprised at how  popular the book was in Malaysia and Singapore. Times [the Singapore publisher] ran  out of books and had to do a second printing within three months. This is really very  rare because books don't sell that well in  Malaysia and Singapore, except for textbooks.  I got very good reviews and a lot of  young and not-so-young Malaysian and  Singaporean women told me the book mirrors a reality in their lives. They don't read  the memoir as a literary work; they read it  as a transparent work. This was gratifying  for me because when I was writing it, I had  to decide if I would write it like [Maxine  Hong Kingston's] Woman Warrior, and do  a partly mythological, very postmodernist  take, where the line between historical truth  and fiction becomes blurred. I decided to  write a conventional memoir where I  would do historical research and there  would be no question that I was recording  something that was a social, historical reality.  I strongly believe there is a political history in Malaysia that needs to be written  down and that I come from a community  which has been silenced: Chinese  Malaysians. In the last twenty, thirty years,  Malaysia has become so much of a Malay  dominant society that Chinese Malaysians  have kept a very low, if not absent, profile.  I wanted the memoir to speak for a community that has been involuntarily absented from Malaysian cultural politics. So  I made the decision [of how to write the  memoir] deliberately because I didn't want  people to say, Oh, you can't tell if this is  truth or if this is myth. Then it wouldn't  have that political force I wanted it to have.  Kong: Now my questions are going to  shift back to this part of the world. The term  Asian-American appears in the subtitle of  your memoir. What does that term mean to  you and can you comment on some of the  problems associated with the label in general and in its specific use in White Moon  Faces?  Lim: Actually I wanted Asian-American to appear without the hyphen because  the way it is used in the US [with a hyphen],  it's an identity marker that has its own history of evolution. Asian American without  the hyphen underlines a political stance  that this is not a hyphenated community  but a community that has its own integrity,  drawn from cultural resources coming over  from Asia.  But The Feminist Press insisted that the  hyphen was the grammatical way to go  because it serves as an adjective in the subtitle. We finally arrived at the idea that if  you were talking about Asian American as *  a noun it would exist without the hyphen,  but when it was used as an adjective, then  there was a hyphen. As I expected, I've been  getting some flack from Asian Americans  who have said, We've worked so hard to  dehyphenate the term!  By choosing Asian-American as one of  the terms in the subtitle I was deliberately  inserting what I think is one of the major  thematics that emerges from the memoir: a  story of immigration from Asia to the US.  It also had to do with the writing process. I wrote the first half in a year. The  memoir stopped when I left Kuala Lumpur  after May 13th [1969, when race riots broke  out between Malays and Chinese people in  Malaysia]. Florence called me back after  two months and said she wouldn't publish  it because it didn't have "America" in it,  and this was for a cross-cultural series. She  didn't realize that for me you couldn't get  more cross-cultural than Malaysia.  I told her I wasn't sure I could do it  because I didn't feel that psychologically I  was ready to deal with my American experiences, even though I had been in America  for as long as I had been in Malaysia. In a  way, she forced me to think about my  American experiences, and it was useful,  productive.  When I wrote, I could always "go  back" to Malaysia, but it was hard to deal  Continued on next page  FEBRUARY 1997 Arts  Interview with Shirley Geok-Lin Lim.  Continued from previous page  with being in America because it was still  a process. There was no closure, no settlement. And this really forced me to deal with  myself as an American.  The second half is very different in feeling, even in terms of language. I'm glad  Florence made me do it because it's made  me claim this identity I have been performing and working on for over twenty years,  but which I've never really openly claimed.  Of course so much of my formation of self  and identity is Malaysian, and in that way  I will always also be Malaysian.  Kong: Are there tensions within yourself about being Asian and being American, and can you address this in relation to  what you said about performing identity?  Lim: I don't feel any tensions at all,  frankly. I feel great politically, especially  when I turn back to Malaysia, whether  physically or intellectually.  Of course, I feel the tensions in America  in terms of the politics—reactionary politics, race politics—so as a political creature  I feel the tensions of different types of political systems. But in terms of conflicts between [beingAsian and being American], I  think I have a number of skills that enable  me to feel confident and "at home" in different kinds of cultural spaces.  Kong: Regarding the cultural spaces in  the US...why is there no tension for you?  Lim: I do feel tensions but not in terms  of being Malaysian American. The tensions  I feel in the US are the tensions that all people of colour in white America face, not just  Malaysian Americans.  Kong: Different forms of violence inform your memoir in one way or another.  In the first half, one of the major themes is  the formative influences of family violence.  What do you think is the most crucial thing  for anyone desiring to break the cycle of  family violence?  Lim: If s very difficult, you know. When  you are the object of domestic violence as a  child, you learn it in the body. So when you  grow up, your sense of the way to respond  to the world is to respond as the body  teaches you, and what your body has  taught you is what people have done to  you. So when you hear about the cycle of,  for example, child or sexual abuse, you  wonder how they can do this when they've  been the object of it. It's very simple. They  do it because they have been the object and  because the body learns that this is the way  to be.  It's very hard to unlearn something  you- body has learned. It's a very deliberate and slow process, and it has to be very  conscious. Education is the only way out,  but even that is not enough. It's like an alcoholic. There is no such thing as a recovered alcoholic; you're an alcoholic for life;  you can never drink otherwise you will go  right back to it.  I think that's the same with violence.  Once you've been the object of violence you  always have this propensity for violence  and you just have to learn to keep control  of it. If you can't control it, your children  will repeat it.  Kong: Which is what you emphasize  in the second part of your memoir.  Lim: Yes, it was a hard part for me to  write. It's so much easier to write about the  wrongs people did to you.  Kong: It was such a breakthrough moment for me as a reader.  Lim: Really? Why?  Kong:  Because   I  could imagine some of  the decisions  that may have  been weighing  on your mind  as to whether to  write about this  or not. Right?  And as you said,  it's easier to talk  about     wrongs  done to you rather  than to examine  your own wrongs—  so I was very moved.  Lim: I don't  know if my son has  read this book. It has  been a long time, of course, since I smacked  him. But I do know that I was really terrified about that. Here I am, a highly educated, highly sophisticated woman, and I  could not stop myself.  Kong: Would you share with our readers some of the milestones in your coming  to consciousness as a feminist as well as  your long struggle for individual and systemic social justice?  Lim: Well, you know the strangest thing  about feminism is that a lot of Western  women seem to think that feminism begins  in the West. But if you've ever spent any  time in Asia, you know that for centuries  Asian women have had to be very strong  in order to survive. So feminism has always  been a practice in Asia as far as I'm concerned, even if it has not been theorized.  Growing up as an only girl in a family full  of boys, I had to be a "feminist" to survive.  Coming theoretically to feminism is a  different question and that was pretty recent. I would say that's been happening  from the late 70s. But even now, I'm sometimes a little bit uncomfortable at the real  disjunctures and gaps between theoretical  feminism and feminism in practice. It seems  to me that a lot of theoretical feminists don't  ever deal with the origins of feminism: the  social and political realities. You can endlessly theorize feminism, but if you don't  realize that feminism is a social political  practice that puts the rights of women there  with the rights of men, then there's something wrong with your theory.  I have not worked the way that a lot of  other women have worked for justice in the  world. Maybe as I get older I'll be able to  spend more time—it's a very weak excuse.  One of the reasons women have not  been able to further our causes recently is  that we haven't been able to organize as a  group successfully. The lack of organization  is one of our major weaknesses.  For young women who want to go into  feminist work, I would ask that when they  go to university, they not do a degree in  English but a degree in political science or  social work because these are the areas that  teach them to think about women's issues  in a structured, organized way. A great deal  of my work has been to explore the world  of fiction, imagination and poetry. It's important for my students to have at least that,  but maybe not as important as grassroots  activism.  Kong: Where do you place yourself  these days? Do you see yourself in  diaspora?  Lim: A great  many people of  colour, especially  those in North  America who are  recent immigrants, or children of recent  immigrants,  have multiple  locations. Depending on  the situation,  one begins  to identify  oneself  slightly differently which  is really how identification  works. It's very rare that someone identifies himself or herself in one way and never  changes. That kind of person is usually intolerant, narrow, unimaginative, and sometimes dangerous. If you're a white Christian and nothing else but a white Christian,  then you see the whole world just as a white  Christian and that's frightening.  I think this kind of multiply situated  identity is something that many of us do  now. So when you ask me how I define myself, I say it depends. When I go back to  Malaysia and Singapore, I am someone returning rather than just visiting. In the US,  I identify myself as an Asian American.  Kong: Will you tell us something about  the work you have been doing in various  American community colleges and now in  UC Santa Barbara?  Lim: The community college is a wonderful space for opening up higher education to students who could not afford it otherwise. Students can go and take courses  for $100 or so, which is still a lot for poor  working students, but it's do-able. I think  community colleges are an attempt to break  down the elitism and isolation of higher  education and make it accessible to working class students, and also to students who  have in some way not been able to succeed  in an elitist system.  In my 17 years teaching in community  colleges, I worked very hard to empower  the students, to give them the tools of literacy and critical consciousness so that they  could succeed.  In some ways, I have to say, I am not  unhappy that I left the community college;  it's a lot of work and it's grinding work.  Now I've moved from one extreme to another, from a "ghetto" community college  [in New York] to a very exclusive, expensive research university. There are lots of  students there who are deprived, but it's  different types of deprivation: deprivation  of diversity of imagination, of intellectual  openness.  I teach a course on women of colour  writers. There are 75 students in this course,  and I feel I really have to be very prepared  and have all my arguments in hand. Most  of the students are young white women.  They're there so they must be willing to listen, but they have a lot of suspicions and  hangups. I do take very seriously my position as a teacher not to make propaganda  but to get them to think and read and be  open. It's really hard work being a teacher.  Kong: Especially trying to teach a  course on anything of colour because you  keep running up against the issues.  Lim: My graduate students tell me  they'd rather teach Shakespeare than ethnic literature courses because no one questions why they are reading Shakespeare.  They just accept that Shakespeare must be  valuable. But when you teach ethnic American literature there are all these questions:  Why are we reading this novel; this is a bad  novel.  One of my students told me that teaching ethnic American literature is like a  landmine—it can blow up in your face at  any moment. There will always be students  who are cantankerous, who feel you are  being politically correct. It's just much more  difficult to teach that kind of work.  Kong: Nevertheless, it's an important  struggle. What are some of your current  writing projects? You mentioned to me you  were working on a novel.  Lim: Yes, I'm finally finishing a novel I  started 18 years ago. It's two years older  than my son. That might be the reason why  the novel is 18 years old. I'm almost finished with it; I've got maybe ten more pages  to write but I haven't written in the last four  months because I've been too busy doing  different things.  Kong: What is it about?  Lim: I started because I had wanted to  write a kind of East-West romantic relationship that was not a typical East-West romantic relationship. I knew that I wanted  to write about a Chinese Malaysian woman  and a white American Peace Corps guy  and it would begin around May 13th in Malaysia. This Chinese Malaysian woman  would have her heart broken by this guy  who would return to the US, and he would  come back to claim a child from her. In  many ways it was like a reworking of  Puccini's Madame Butterfly, but I wanted it  to be different in that when he went back  she wouldn't be this weak helpless Asian  woman, but a strong successful professional woman. I guess somewhere in the  back of my mind was the sense of rewriting of the master narrative, so that the white  American male learns that the Asian  woman is not a victim, not oppressed.  Kong: Lastly, would you share some  words of encouragement or support with  women who are struggling to survive violence and other oppressions, and with  women of colour who are writers or struggling to be writers.  Lim: Yes. I'm just going to repeat that I  think it's very important to organize. I do  think that finding community, finding support is very important. Secondly, I think that  it is beholden on older or more successful  women of colour to reach out and help the  women of colour who are younger or who  have not yet made it. I think we owe this to  the community and we must not forget it.  To women of colour who want to write,  you have to understand that it's going to  be a tough struggle; there is no real easy  promise of reward. When I was speaking  in Detroit recently some young women  asked me about becoming a successful  writer. I asked them, How important is  money to you? If it's important, don't do  it. How important is being with other people to you? If it's important, don't do it.  When you want to be a writer, there are  certain costs. And I asked them to ask themselves if they were willing to pay these  costs.  18  FEBRUARY 1997 Arts  Interview with Renee Rodin:  Rhythms of everyday life  as told to Margaret Dragu   Renee Rodin was born and raised in Montreal, Quebec. She came to the west coast in  the sixties where, as a single parent, she raised  her three children. In the mid-eighties she began R2B2 Books in Vancouver, along with its  weekly reading series which she hosted for eight  years. She has recently been the literary events  curator at Vancouver's Western Front.  Her writing has appeared in numerous periodicals including Canadian Women's Studies, Westcoast Lines and the Capilano Review.  Her visual work, usually photo-based, has been  shown in many galleries and her piece in the  group show "Fear of Others/Art Against Racism" was chosen to tour North America in  1990.  Bread and Salt, her first collection of writing and images, was published in November  by Talonbooks, Vancouver. It is 112 jam-packed  pages of not-to-be-missed "prosaics" that are  funny, touching, incisive and true.  Margaret Dragu chatted with Rodin after her successful Vancouver book launch last  November. Dragu has enjoyed a long career as  a performance artist and choreographer, and has  presented her work internationally in many  venues. She is also a writer, filmmaker and  video artist. Margaret Dragu and Renee Rodin  have known each other and become friends over  the past eight years.  Margaret Dragu: What is poetry?  Renee Rodin: It has to do with a certain  kind of compression of thought and /or  feeling. And a certain kind of language.  Usually figurative. But I am going to stop  dwelling on these arbitrary categories. Stop  being oppressed by form.  Dragu: Have you been oppressed by  form?  Rodin: I have been oppressed by everything, my dear, [laughter] But with writing, I am oppressed by form only when I  try to shove the words into a shape rather  than letting the form flow from the words.  Dragu: Reading Bread and Salt makes  me think of the word "improvisation."  There are incredible riffs and rhythms in  your writing which feel as playful as jazz  improvisation. I am thinking  especially of pieces like  "Fiend de Siecle" (the Crowning Glory), "Separation Anxiety" and "Keeping House".  Rodin: I don't see the  writing as much as I hear it. I  am always listening for the  rhythm—the beat. The line  endings have to do with  breath. The natural pauses of  breathing.  Dragu: You describe this  book as "prosaics." What are  prosaics?  Rodin: Most of the pieces  are short stories using the language of the vernacular, almost like talking about subjects that are prosaic, meaning considered ordinary,  usual, which is the definition  you get from the dictionary.  But because of the form I use,  they enter the realm of poetry.  So I invented the term prosaics to describe  them.  Dragu: So prosaics are a combination  of form and context. Does your writing celebrate the everyday world?  Rodin: All the everydayness of everyone's life is part of their poetry. Everyday  life embodies all kinds of experiences. All  experiences.  Dragu: Even death. You have poems  about the deaths of young and old people  in your book. You use actual names. These  people really died.  Rodin: Most of the pieces in the book  are funny because that is one of my survival mechanisms. But I wanted to pay a  tribute to some friends who recently died.  The older people died of "natural causes"  but the younger ones died accidentally, or  from overdose, or by suicide. These were  (and are) terrible tragedies. I was surprised  when I looked back at the manuscript to  see how many references there were to war.  In my Gulf war piece..  Dragu: "Engulfed."  Rodin: Yes. I talk about the use of the  term "casualties." But whose death is ever  casual?  Dragu: We tend to think only certain  people's deaths are important—like political leaders.  Rodin: Or when an American soldier  is killed overseas, it is construed as an important death. But everyone's life and death  is important. And never casual.  Dragu: You have a lot of very personal  writing about your family. Even photos.  Rodin: Every family has its own mythology Those are the stories that last. That  stick. I worked with influences and impressions I got when I was young. My mother  is in quite a few of the pieces blending old  stories with the present because, for me,  "politics" is an extension of family. Same  kind of dynamics. And it is also about the  present. Now, it is about my being in the  middle: having an elderly parent and be  ing a parent and dealing with the  transformations and changes around  all of that.  Dragu: The stories and the politics are not just about your family. It  is also about your neighbours, too. I  really like "Law (n) Order" which is  about you, your neighbours and your  infamous uncut front lawn of weeds!  (laughter)  Rodin: I almost called my writing "anthropoetry" instead of  prosaics because I write about the  neighbours and the street politics...  Dragu: ...and raising kids on welfare-  Rodin: ...just—the dance which  we all do between the public and the  private...  Dragu: Like in "Separation Anxiety."  Rodin: Yes...I start off talking  about long distances with my father  in Montreal but I end up talking about  what I see on the streets on Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver.  Dragu: How did you choose which  pieces to put in the book? I assume there  are a lot more prosaics in your computer's  hard drive or in the drawer of your desk.  Rodin: I chose the pieces I thought people could relate to, pieces which would  generate an emotional and/or intellectual  response. The language I use is very direct.  Most of the pieces are presented very simply. That's my style.  Dragu: "Quantum Sleep" was the only  one I found hard to understand. But I look  forward to reading it again and again,  which is the luxury of owning a book.  Rodin: That's just about the only piece  that is not "reality based." No clear narrative lines. It comes from dreams. It is more  abstract. A collage of images.  Dragu: It is almost filmic. You are a  visual artist, too. I remember your mixed  media piece in the group show "Fear of  Others/ArtAgainst Racism." You used text  and photography for that  piece. And you have photos in  Bread and Salt, too.  Rodin: But it's not a photography book, (laughter) I  started writing and using a  camera when I was a kid. I use  photography but I am not a  photographer. I just use a camera as a vehicle to get images.  Dragu: I have heard you  perform your poetry for years.  You are a very good performer.  I have also enjoyed your  broadsheets and letters-to-the-  editor. Also, I know you have  done radio. So what made you  decide to publish a book?  Rodin: A writer who had  seen my work in literary and  art magazines said, I think you  have enough to make a manuscript. It had never occurred to  me! Also, I have no confidence.  But it took just one person's  comment to make me feel that,  yes, it actually was a possibility. The right  timing is crucial, too.  Dragu: Because you were ready.  Rodin: But it is amazing what support  can do. I got tremendous support from my  family and friends.  Dragu: How did you feel when you  first saw the book? Unwrapped the first one  from the box delivered from the printer?  Rodin: Mortified! (laughter) I was horrified, repulsed, and disgusted, (more  laughter) Because I am 51 and because the  work had to be wrenched out of me...  Dragu: ...wrenched?  Rodin: Well, I did a tremendous lot of  re-writing—right down to the wire—before  I let the manuscript go. That is why I have  been joking that I was going through a "cae-  sarian delivery in menopause", (laughter)  Oh, but when that book came out, not only  didn't I bond with it, I was disgusted by it.  And I was shocked I felt that way. I didn't  expect this intense revulsion and self-loathing.  Dragu: What was the self-loathing  about?  Rodin: Just an emotional response.  Suddenly feeling totally exposed and vulnerable. The day after I saw the book for  the first time, I was part of a group reading. I mentioned how I was feeling to several of the writers. They laughed and  laughed because they all had similar reactions when they first saw their books. I felt  so much better to find this out. I was starting to feel like some kind of unnatural parent.  Dragu: Because you didn't bond with  your baby the right way? (laughter)  Rodin: Yes!  Dragu: How did you get through that  stage? It is over, isn't it? (laughter)  Rodin: Oh, yes. Time helps. Getting a  little distance. At some point, you have to  relinquish control and trust the book will  have its own life. You have to respect the  readers and their separate relationship with  the book.  FEBRUARY 1997 Arts  Judith Finlayson's Against the Current;  Life on the job  AGAINST THE CURRENT:  CANADIAN WOMEN TALK ABOUT  FIFTY YEARS OF LIFE ON THE JOB  by Judith Finlayson  DoubleDay Canada  Toronto, Ontario, 1995  by Janet Nicol   The obstacles and challenges women  in the paid workforce have experienced in  the last half century are charted in Judith  Finlayson's highly readable and enlightening collection of oral histories, Against the  Current: Canadian Women Talk about Fifty  years of Life on the Job.  The 93 interviews taken together portray women in the workforce moving  "against the current," leaving a carnage of  fractured identities, bitterness and regrets  but also a sense of strength, pride and perseverance. Finlayson divides the interviews  into 12 chapters, each representing different occupational categories: education;  healthcare; manufacturing, construction  and engineering; natural resources and  transportation; and arts and entertainment;  among others.  The reader may recognize some of the  interviewees such as CBC radio host Vicki  Gabereau, prisoner rights activist Claire  Culhane and Betty Baxter, the first lesbian  to run for federal office. Finlayson tries to  represent Canadian women across regional,  racial and occupational spectrum, but her  interviews still focus on women in professional/middle class occupations.  Finlayson is a journalist and a writer  living in Toronto. Her biographical note in  the book states that she has written extensively on women's issues and has a long  involvement in the women's community as  a volunteer.  In her all too brief introduction—the  data is rich enough to expect more analysis—Finlayson states that she was  interested in capturing the  history of women  and    the  depth of change in women's lives in the last  half century, a period when the number of  full-time women in the labour force rose  from 25 percent in 1951 to 60 percent in  1995. Finlayson has astutely tapped an obvious social revolution and has some of its  participants who lived the history, tell it.  However, while she does mention some of  the social and political changes that occurred during this period affecting the status of women, Finlayson still could have  expanded more on the importance of the  women's movement and feminism and  their impact on women's lives.  The value of these stories includes the  fact that all the women interviewed,  whether conservative or radical in politics  and lifestyles, have unique insights: they  bring a "third eye" into the perspective of  the workforce. They have the characteristics of outsiders: being alienated "strangers  in a strange land" and having an understanding of the "bottom rungs."  In the past and still for some in the  present, women have been less likely to  carve out a career path, accommodating a  personal family life (the needs of both the  partner and children) with their work  plans. Many of the women interviewed  describe their work as a place laden with  hurdles and talk about male gatekeepers  reluctant to let women in. Academic  Bernice Shrank commented that "it was  painful to accept that people who didn't  even know me were prepared to block me.  I discovered how to circumvent certain men  and how to get published with great difficulty."  Women who entered the paid labour  force in the late 1940s and 1950s describe  the limitations and prejudices they faced.  Women teachers had a separate staff room  from men, for example, and universities  excluded women students from com-  _     mon rooms. Joan Baril, an Ontario  ps      teacher, recalls in the 1950s: "Teach-  t =1|     ing, like nursing, was seen as a profession for bright school girls. Few  went to university. Those who  weren't as bright went into clerical."  She also talks about attempting to mobilize women  to demand changes at a time  when some weren't yet  comfortable being assertive. Baril recounts that  at a staff meeting she  tried to lead other  teachers in a "revolution" against the  i      principal on an is-  j|     sue, but her fell      male colleagues  "fell into a fit of  giggJing; Prot>  IjppI      ably because  the situation  was       so  stressful."  Finlayson  does include accounts  of women in the 40s and 50s  who moved into jobs beyond what  was considered typical "women's work."  However it is the constrasts she presents  of these women's experiences with contemporary women's which points to the inroads women have made. For instance, a  33 year old surgeon, identified as Dr. X,  states that 40 percent of her medical school  graduating class in the late 1980s was female. But she adds, the problems are far  from over, indicated by her desire to speak  anonymously about her work experiences,  as did three other interviewees who felt  their present job would be jeopardized if  they revealed their names.  The number of incidents of sexual harassment and discriminatory hiring and promotion far outnumber the "men supporting women" stories, but take heart, there  are some. Most of the women interviewed  who experienced harassment or discrimination did not launch grievances, illustrating the hardships involved in legal confrontations and the stamina of women who do  file complaints.  History also played a role, with the  advent of the feminist movement of the  1970s providing one crucial dividing line.  Up until the 1960s, for example, women  were more likely to rely on informal female  networks to get out of unjust situations.  Jessie McCartney-Filgate, a single mother  in Ontario, got another clerical job through  women friends rather than complying with  her employer's request for sexual favours.  She says, "there were lots of women like  that and I don't know what we would have  done without each other."  About 10 percent of the interviewees  are women of colour. Racism created additional challenges for them. Marie Hamilton, from Nova Scotia, says she chose teaching in 1929 as a profession because the nursing school wouldn't take Black women.  "They said if I was the only one, who would  board me," Hamilton recalls. Hamilton  taught for 25 years without interruption  and had six children. "Black people support each other so childcare was never a  problem," she said. After retirement, Hamilton took university courses and now, at  age 82, teaches a course at the post-secondary level.  Phyllis McAlpine, a university department head with a 30 year academic career,  recalls "playing the game" by her male colleagues' rules. "I often had to deny my female reactions," she states. Marguerite Hill,  an Ontario doctor, notices that female doctors generally are more concerned about  their patients as people. "They don't hustle them through the office as fast as the  men, a fact that has been proved statistically," she states. In her interview, Dr. X says  that while she promoted an equal relationship with nurses, she felt others in the profession were critical of this because "it implies nurse care more than surgery, helps  patients."  Some of the women interviewed rejected "playing the game" and established  or joined organizations which integrate  their values. Anne Ross works at a birth  control clinic in Winnipeg where staff treat  the clientele "as a total entity—physically,  emotionally and socially." The clinic staff  makes connections with the politics of their  All the women interviewed, whether conservative or radical in  politics and lifestyles,  have unique insights:  they bring a "third eye"  into the perspective of  the workforce.  community and engage in advocacy work  as part of their tasks. Yvonne Manzer made  a dramatic work transition which included  working for an escort service in Nova Scotia  to her current employment in a transition  house for abused women. She also lives in  a housing co-op and works in a women's  collective. "Finally," she says, "I feel my  personal life and my work are integrated."  Nancy Morrison, a BC lawyer, makes  the observation that in her early days of  practising law, her female clients' grievances were related to income and property.  Once these rights were better established,  women began a second wave of grievances  related to harassment and assault. And  Mary Eberts, an Ontario constitutional  rights lawyer believes "women are cursed  with that sense that we're not good enough.  It starts from our earliest days. You can  never do enough to overcome the feeling  that you've been born second class."  Most women interviewed persevered  in isolation rather than as part of a collective or movement. A few contrasting stories do emerge however. Cathy Mulroy  worked in the steel mills in Ontario from  an early age. She states a union strike when  she was 23 made her a "woman."  Women in male-dominated jobs, union  and non-union, describe lots of harassment.  Kate Braid, working as a carpenter in BC,  says the hostile male treatment on the job  is like "a ton of feathers." It's not the first  guy or even the tenth or the one hundredth  remark, she says, "Its the 1000th time you  hear it that you just want to pack it in."  Mary Black of Ontario was working in sales  in the 1970s when one of her male colleagues stuck an "A" between the L and Z  on her car license plate, forming "LAZY".  "I kept washing it off and someone kept  putting it back on; no wonder that my two  daughters are feminists today," she says.  Against the Current deepens our appreciation of the contributions of the community of Canadian women who through their  overt efforts or simply their very presence  have altered the workplace. As the author  observes, progress sometimes follows a  "two steps forward, one step back" pattern.  Still, this book proves that every woman's  story counts.  Janet Nicol entered the paid workforce in the  1970s as a feminist organizer with SORWUC,  the Service, Office and Retail Workers Union  of Canada. She currently is a public school  teacher and a freelance writer living in Van-  FEBRUARY1997 Bulletin Board  read   t h i si     INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our next Story Meeting  Mon Feb 3 at 7 pm at our office, 301-1720  Grant St. For more information or if you  can't make the meeting, but still want to  find out about writing for Kinesis, give  Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499. No  experience is necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  March 1997 issue is from Feb 19-25. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  HELP US MOVE  The Vancouver Status of Women and  Kinesis will be in a new home March 1st.  Moving is scheduled to take place during  the week of Feb 24-28. We apologize that  VSW will be closed to the public during  those dates. We will re-open at our new  space, #309-877 E. Hastings St, on March  3rd at 9:30 am. We are looking for women  who are available to help us pack, move  and set up in our new office. We also need  a one-ton truck, boxes, moving dollies, etc.,  to assist us with the move and to cut our  expenses. We will also be accepting  donations of used, but still usable, furniture  (comfy couches and chairs, shelves and  tables) to bring our new office to life.  Anyone interested in donating their  services, their trucks or furniture items,  please call or fax Audrey at (604) 255-5511  between 1-5pm Mon-Thurs.  VSW PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE  Women are invited to join Vancouver  Status of Women's Programming Committee to plan an event called, "How Politics  and Elections Affect Women's Daily Lives."  Also, VSW is looking for women interested  in being a facilitator for our communication  skills and awareness program. Come join  us and share with us your thoughts on  women's issues and community organizing.  For more info about VSW's programs call  or fax Ema at 255-5511.   FUNDRAISING FOR VSW  VSW's Fundraising Committee invites the  particpation of women interested in raising  funds and planning events for a non-profit,  feminist organization. The next meeting will  be held Tues Feb 11 at 6pm at VSW, 301 -  1720 Grant St. Please call or fax Audrey at  255-5511 to confirm your attendance or for  more info.  ANTI-RACISM WORKSHOP  VSW is hosting a two-part Anti-racism  Workshop for women working in women's  organizations. The event will take place  over two days, tentatively scheduled for the  last week in March and first week of April.  Stay tuned for further details. To assist us  in planning for the event, we encourage  interested participants to contact Ema by  phone or fax at (604) 255-5511.   VOLUNTEER ORIENTATION  Due to our office move, VSW's February  volunteer orientation will be cancelled.  Women interested in volunteering at VSW  are encouraged to call us a 255-5511. The  next orientation will be held Thurs Mar 20,  7pm at our new office #309, 877 E. Hastings (between Campbell and Hawks).  Sunera Thobani  Ruth Wynn Woodward Endowed Chair  Women's Studies Department  Simon Fraser University  will be speaking at 8:00 p.m.  Wednesday, March 5  Selling Women Short:  How the Canadian  Government is  Undermining Women  Globally  at Harbour Centre Campus  B.C. Gas Cinema, Room 1800  Coffee available in foyer at 7:30  Childcare reimbursement will be available.  BAD HABITS CABARET  Bad Habits: A Benefit Cabaret for Positive  Women's Network features the Rainbow  Concert Band with Nadine Chambers,  Sister C, naughty guests, nasty secrets,  gags and drag Sat Mar 8, 8pm at the Wise  Hall, 1882 Adanac, Vancouver. Tickets are  $13 and can be purchased at Harry's off.  Commercial and Little Sister's. Concession  tickets available. For more info call (604)  290-0556.   POMELO PROJECT  The Pomelo Project, a Vancouver-based  collective of Asian Canadian artists, writers  and critics, presents City at the End of  Time: Hong Kong 1997, a series of art  exhibitions, readings and public talks  engaged with Hong Kong culture, and  featuring artists and writers from Hong  Kong, Canada and the US. Participants  include Rey Chow, Jamelie Hassan, Rosa  Ho, jamila ismail, and Mary Sui-Yee Wong.  Feb 11-16 at Access Gallery, Artspeak  Gallery, Foto-Base Gallery, Helen Pitt  Gallery, Vancouver Art Gallery, SFU  Harbour Centre. For more info call (604)  254-6042 or (604) 602-9507.   BEIJING PHOTO EXHIBIT  The Vancouver Association of Chinese  Canadians and the Burnaby Art Gallery  are sponsoring through women's eyes, an  exhibition of photographs, collages and  video of the NGO Forum at the Fourth  World Conference on Women. All work is  by BC women who attended the Forum in  China in 1995. The exhibition runs until  Mar 9 at the Burnaby Art Gallery, 6344 Deer  Lake. For more info call (604) 291-9441.  TRAFFICKING IN WOMEN  Jyoti Sanghera, an activist, professor, and  chair of the Global Alliance Against  Trafficking in Women, will be speaking on  Globalization, Trafficking in Women, and  Strategies for Resistance. The presentation  is part of the Grassroots Women's Discussion Group. Fri Mar 14 6:30pm at the  Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell St, Vancouver. Attendance by donation. For more info  call (604) 215-1103.   LESLEY BURKE PHOTOS  Run Don't Think, a solo photo show by  Lesley Burke, will be opening on Thurs  Feb 6, 7pm at the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre Gallery, 1895 Venables St. The  show runs through Feb 22. Gallery hours  are 1-6pm Mon-Sat. For more info call  (604)251-1363.   QUEER VALENTINES  Out West Performance Society presents  the third annual Queer Valentines, a  celebration of queer sexuality. Lineup  includes Ivan E. Coyote, Ruth Mcintosh,  Karen X. Tulchinsky and Terrie Hamazaki,  and more. The event is a fundraiser for Out  West, Vancouver's queer professional  theatre company. Fri Feb 14, 8pm at  Harry's off Commercial at 1716 Charles St.  Admission by donation.  EATING DISORDER WEEK  Eating Disorder Awareness Week runs  from Feb 3-9 to raise awareness about  anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa,  compulsive eating, dieting and body image  problems. Events in Vancouver include the  EDAW Kick-off at Performance Works,  1218 Cartwright St (on Granville Island)  Mon Feb 3,at 7:30pm. The event includes  dance, poetry, songs, and speakers, as  well as a panel discussion. Free admission,  with donations appreciated. Feb 7 is  Fearless Friday... A day without dieting  and the three Capers Whole Foods  Markets will be accepting donations of your  "thin" jeans and other clothing for the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre. You  can also drop off donations at the DEWC  at 44 E. Cordova St from 10:30am-5pm.  For a full list of EDAW events contact the  Eating Disorder Resource Centre of BC at  631-5313 in Vancouver or 1-800-665-1822  inBC. '  SPIRIT OFTIBET  The Museum of Anthropology at UBC in  Vancouver is hosting the Spirit of Tibet  series Tues evenings and Sun afternoons  from Feb 16-Mar 4. The series is planned  to coincide with Losar, the Tibetan New  Year, and Uprising Day, the commemoration of political prisoners and victims of  human rights abuses in Tibet. Programming includes Tibetan music and dance  demonstrations, food samples, art displays  and a film screening. For more info call  (604) 253-4653.   FREEDOM ON MY MIND  Radical Women in Seattle is screening  Freedom on My Mind Sat Feb 22,8pm, as  part of Black History Month celebrations.  The film chronicles the dramatic story of  sharecroppers and young civil rights  workers who challenged the racist system  in Mississippi in the 1960s. Free admission.  At the New Freeway Hall, 5018 Rainier Ave  S. in Seattle. Southern BBQ dinner at  6:30pm for $8. Wheelchair accessible. For  more info, rides or childcare call (206) 722-  6057 or (206) 722-2453.   SZUMIGALSKI AND ST. GEORGE  Two Saskatoon writers bring their Governor  General's Award-winning collaboration of  paintings and poetry, Voice, to Vancouver.  The work features small, powerful—and  even horrific—paintings by Marie Elyse St.  George with inventive and vital poetry by  Anne Szumigalski. Wed Mar 5, 7:30pm at  Women In Print, 3566 W Fourth Ave. For  more info call (604) 732-4128.  \\w     WU IT  II          * Coming  it             Out  i|          **■ Grief and  Loss  j  I         * Relationship  jn             Issues  Emma  Tigerheart  M.S.W.  LF  TV  m        * Childhood  e|             Trauma  I         * Family  J            Issues  COUNSELLING  THERAPY  CONSULTATION  m             Sliding  J              Scale Fees  Call  J                 Inquiries  327-4437  HrltJ /f*?~ *HJk  li             Welcome  Vancouver, bc  FEBRUARY 1997 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  1  GROUPS  1  SUBMISSIONS  CHRISTINE DEARING  Women In Print's series of talks by local  feminists brings Christine Dearing from  The Women's Legal Education and Action  Fund (LEAF) to speak about "Making  Canada a More Equal Place for Women," a  discussion about LEAF'S work to uphold  provisions for women under the Canadian  Charter of Rights. Tues Feb 25,7:30pm.  Women In Print, 3566 W. Fourth Ave in  Vancouver. For more info call (604) 732-  4128.   CCLOW WORKSHOP  The Canadian Congress for Learning  Opportunities for Women (CCLOW) is  hosting The Janus Project: New Learning  Technologies & Women, a two day workshop to unveil and discuss recent research  findings, Mar 21-22 in Montreal. Keynote  speaker is Heather Menzies, author of  Whose Brave New World? The Information  Highway and the New Economy. Registration is $50 with some travel and  accomodation bursaries available. Registration deadline is Feb 28. For more info,  contact CCLOW at 416/699-1909, or by  email, cclow@web.net  SUZO HICKEY  Let Me Go Down in the Mud, a series of  paintings by Suzo Hickey, will be exhibited  at the grunt gallery in Vancouver until Feb  15. Hickey's paintings explore the intersection of lesbian motherhood, aging and  popular culture. The gallery is located at  116-350 E. 2nd Ave. For gallery times call  875-9516.   MAKING DOCUMENTARIES  Filmmakers Peg Campbell and Moira  Simpson will give a lecture on the "Style  and Technique in Documentary Films:  Designing the Look, Texture and Sound" on  Wed Feb 26 from 7:30-9:30pm. Their  presentation is part of a free film and  lecture series hosted by Capilano College  and will be held in Room CE148, 2055  Purcell Way, North Vancouver. For more  info call Margaret Denike at 984-4953.  DRAG-KING & QUEEN CABARET  A special Valentine's Day Drag-King &  Queen unity ball/cabaret will be held Fri  Feb 14 at the Western Front, 303 E. 8th  Ave, Vancouver. Doors open at 8pm.  Proceeds will go to Zampro cultural events  for Black History Month and the Western  Front. Audience participation and dressing  up highly encouraged. Tickets are sliding  scale $5-15 and are available at BurcuYako  Funk, 2545 Main St, or at the Western  Front. For childcare call (604) 876-9343.  BLACK LESBIAN FILMS  Two nights of films and videos by and  about Black lesbians and gays will be  presented for Black History Month at the  Pacif c Cinematheque, 1131 Howe St. The  series "Poetic Body" will be screened on  Sun Feb 9, 7:30pm and will feature,  among others, Dionne Brand's Listening for  Something and A Body of a Poet, a tribute  to Audre Lorde. On Mon Feb 10, 7:30pm,  the series "Our Tools" will include Buseje  Bailey's Blood and BD Women by Inge  Blackman.  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  +  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-4128  welcome  Fax      604 732-4129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  WAVAW TRAINING  WAVAW—Women Against Violence  Against Women Rape Crisis Centre in  Vancouver—is seeking new volunteers for  training beginning in mid February.  WAVAW offers extensive training in counselling, crisis intervention, advocacy, and  unlearning oppressions. WAVAW wants the  collective to reflect the diversity of our  community. WAVAW encourages all women  to join our training. For more info call (604)  255-6228 or TTY 258-0110.   GRASSROOTS WOMEN  The Grassroots Women's Discussion  Group holds monthly meetings to share our  experiences and make the connections  with the global context and taking action.  Next meeting is Sun Feb 9,6:30pm at the  Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell St. Call Mable  at (604) 215-1103 for more info.   LIBERTYTHRIFT  Liberty Thift is looking for volunteers to  work at their store, located at 1035 Commercial Dr, Vancouver. The store is run by  the WELL Society (Women Embracing  Lives of Liberty), a non-profit organization  dedicated to providing women and their  children with resources to help them live  lives of liberty and independence, free of  violence. Various volunteer opportunities  available to suit your interests and time  schedule. For work on Saturdays, call  Aldona at 255-3087. For work weekdays,  call Lystra at 255-3087.   BRIDGE HOUSING SOCIETY  Bridge Housing Society, a non-profit  women's organization committed to  building affordable and safe housing for  women in Vancouver, is looking for new  board and committee members. The  Society's current project, construction of a  47 unit housing project in the Downtown  Eastside, is fast proceeding. Bridge  Housing is looking for women who are able  to commit to 1-2 hours a week. Additional  experience in the Downtown Eastside, nonprofit housing, anti-poverty issues, First  Nations women's issues or fundraising  would be an asset. For more info call (604)  251-1978.   LESBIAN AND GAY LIBRARY  Out on the Shelves, a lesbian and gay  library at The Centre (formerly known as  the Gay and Lesbian Centre) has expanded both its collection and hours. 3500  items now available for borrowing. Library  hours are weekdays: 3:30-9:30pm and  weekends from 6:30-9:30pm. 1170 Bute St,  Vancouver. For more info call (604) 684-  5309.   LESBIANS EXPLORING  RELATIONSHIPS  A 12-week group for lesbians will look at  the themes of control, intimacy, power,  sexuality, physical and emotional abuse,  endings, loving, and caring in lesbian  relationships. Begins early Feb at the  Surrey Women's Centre. Call Fran for more  info at (604) 589-1868.   VOICES WORKSHOPS  VOICES for Survivors Support Society is  holding alternative therapy workshops for  survivors of childhood sexual abuse.  Introduction to Chinese Medicine with  Chinese medical doctor Janet Yew will look  at the emotional, spiritual and physical  healing potentials of Chinese acupuncture  and herbal medicine. Thurs Feb 13,7-9pm.  Creative Movement with dance therapist  Sunita Romeder will show how movement  can be used to express, process and  release information and memories which  are held and stored in our bodies. Wed Feb  26, 7-9pm. Both workshops will be held at  the VOICES office at 27A-250 Willingdon  Ave, Burnaby. Admission by donation.  Childcare subsidies available. Call (604)  298-4516 for more info or to reserve a spot.  WOMEN'S LEGAL CLINCS  Battered Women's Support Services and  the UBC Law Students Legal Advice  Program are co-sponsoring free legal  clinics for women on Tues Feb 4 & 25 and  Mar 4 from 6:30-8:30pm. Please call the  UBC Law Students Legal Advice Program  at (604) 822-5791 to make an appointment.  LEAPING LESBIANS  Over 50? Leaping lesbians—wanna act,  wanna dance, wanna strut your stuff?  Looking for other older lesbians interested  in doing a skit at the International Women's  Day event in March. Strictly non-professional and fun. Meetings ongoing. For date,  time and place, call Garbo (604) 520-0703.  HYSTERECTOMY SUPPORT GROUP  A support group for women who have had  hysterectomies will be held Monday  evenings (for six weeks starting in late  January) at the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective, 219-1675 W. 8th Ave. Call (604)  736-4234 to register.  QUEER MOMS  A support and/or discussion group for  queer moms is being planned for this  spring by East Side Family Place and the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection. Interested  women are asked to fill out a survey to let  the organizers know what you want in a  group. Surveys available at the VLC and  East Side Family Place. For more info, call  Allison at the VLC, (604) 254-8458 or Janet  at the East Side Family Place, (604) 255-  9841.  VLC CLOTHING EXCHANGE  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is  holding a clothing exchange on Mon Feb  24 and Mar 31 from 5:30-8:30pm. Bring  clean stuff in good condition and take what  you can use. Open to all women. 876  Commercial Dr. For more info call (604)  254-8458.   WOMEN AND HEALTH  Struggling with life issues? In need of a  safe space and a compassionate ear? The  Vancouver Women's Health Collective is  offering free counselling. Call (604) 736-  4234 to schedule an appointment.  WOMEN AND DOCTORS  Have a health concern? Looking for a new  doctor? Do you want good health information? Call the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective Information Centre at (604) 736-  5262.   FREE LEGAL ADVICE  The UBC Law Students' Legal Advice  Program offers free advice in neighbourhood clinics throughout the Lower Mainland in BC, including two special legal  clinics for women. The program will run in  the evening until Mar 21. Advice is offered  on many subjects, including small claims,  landlord-tenant disputes, welfare, UIC,  WCD, employer-employee relations, and  uncontested divorces. For clinic times and  locations, call (604) 822-5791.  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN, M.Ed.  Reg. Clinical Counsellor  Relationship Therapy  Individual Counselling  Integrative Body Work  Oak & 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867  VISUAL ARTS  Vancouver Asian Heritage Month Festival  organizers are calling for submissions for  any shows or works by artists of Pan-Asian  descent. Non-juried selection for exhibition  in various venues through the month of  May. Submissions need not be thematically  Asian-based. Send one written page of  proposed work, an artist statement and  any other pertinent information to Judy  Lee, AHM Facilitating Group, 1347 E. 20th  Ave, Vancouver, BC, V5V 1P4.Deadline is  Feb 15.   ITALIAN WOMEN'S ANTHOLOGY  An anthology by Italian and Sicilian women  to reflect ourselves out to other Italian and  Sicilian women and provide a forum for  critical discourse about location and  identity within Italian culture is in the works.  Submissions of poetry, theory, oral history,  fiction, drama, photography, artwork,  autobiographical pieces, narratives about  growing up/being Italian and Sicilian are  being accepted. Deadline is Apr 30. For  more info, call (416) 539-0535, fax (416)  651-5101 or write to Italian Women's  Anthology, Women's Press, 517 College St  #302, Toronto, ON, M6G 4A2.   DANCE/PERFORMANCE ART  Dancers and performance artists of Pan-  Asian descent are invited to participate in  events during Asian Heritage Month (May)  in Vancouver. Dance applications are  available at the Dance Centre. For more  info call Nashreen Dhalla (604) 667-1755,  Marni Respicio (604) 873-2046 or Anabel  (604) 733-1279. Deadline is Feb 15.  COMEDY NIGHT  Actors and actresses of Pan-Asian descent  are invited to participate in a Theatre  Sports Comedy Night during Asian Heritage Month (May) in Vancouver. Gain  exposure, have fun, win prizes. Audition not  necessary. Send photo and CV to confirm  participation to the AHM Facilitating Group,  3523 W. 33rd Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6N  2H3. Deadline is Feb 15.   WORKSHOP FACILITATORS  CCLOW is looking for a national team of  workshop facilitators for its new publication  Making Connections: A Literacy and EAL  Curriculum from a Feminist Perspective, a  learning-centred resource that addresses  the pressing issues of women's lives and  accomodates women's ways of learning.  Facilitators will attend two meetings and  carry out four workshops in their region.  Application deadline is Feb 28. For more  info and an application contact Dianne  Palachik or Bernnitta Hawkins at CCLOW,  47 Main St, Toronto, ON, M4E 2V6; tei:  (416) 699-1909; fax: (416) 699-2145; or  email: cclow@web.net.  HOT & BOTHERED  Submissions are being accepted for Hot &  Bothered, an international anthology of  queer sex/desire-driven short short fiction.  Stories must be 1000 words or less and  can be funny, sad, hot, complicated,  poignant, tragic, hilarious, lyrical,  sensual...Deadline is extended to Apr 30.  For guidelines, send self-addressed  envelope with Canadian stamps or international reply coupon to: Hot& Bothered c/o  PO Box 100, 1036 Odium Dr, Vancouver,  BC, V5L 3L6, or email to kxt@aol.com.  BISEXUAL WOMEN  A bisexual woman studying psychology  and women's studies at Simon Fraser  University is seeking bisexual women as  participants in a study of sexual identity.  Involves completing a one hour long  questionnaire. Confidentiality assured. For  info or to volunteer call Dana at (604) 879-  5438 or email brunansk@sfu.ca.  FEBRUARY 1997 Bulletin Board  LESBIAN ETHICS  Lesbian Ethics, a journal for radical lesbian  thought and politics, is seeking articles on  the "Nature of Lesbian Connections." Our  lives are not 'like everyone else's' though  we live under malearchal structure. What  are the rhythms, the cycles that form our  uniquely lesbian lives/relationships? What  patterns do you see in your life and the  lives of lesbians you know? Canadian  guest editor. Send submissions to 3045  Robie St #65, Halifax, NS, B3K 4P6.  ESSAY COMPETITION  The National Association of Women and  the Law (NAWL) announces its Eleventh  Annual Essay Competition with the theme  Access to Justice: Moving from Words to  Action. All students at recognized post-  secondary Canadian institutions are  welcome to apply. Papers may be written in  either English or French, must be 2,500-  10,000 words, submitted on 8 1/2x11"  paper, typewritten and double-spaced. At  least three copies should be sent. Prizes  are $500, $300 and $100 for 1st, 2nd and  3rd place. Send submissions to: NAWL,  604-1 Nicholas St, Ottawa, ON, K1N 7B7.  For more info contact NAWL at (613) 241-  7570 or at the above address. Deadline is  May 31.   BREAST CANCER CONFERENCE  The first World Conference on Breast  Cancer will be held in Kingston, Ontario  Jul 13-17,1997. Delegates from around  the world will be discussing a wide range  of topics. For those interested in attending  or presenting, or for more info, phone the  conference office at (613) 549-1118.  FILM/VIDEO  Video In Studios is accepting film/video  submissions for a program of student work  to be screened for Asian Heritage Month  (May) in Vancouver. Preview copies must  be on VHS. For more info call Winston Xin  at (604) 872-8337 or Mo-Ling Chui at (604)  341-7359. Send preview copies to AHM-  Student Video Show, c/o Video In Studios,  1965 Main St, Vancouver, BC, V5T 3C1.  Deadeline is Feb 15.  WOMEN IN VIEW FESTIVAL  The 9th annual Women in View Festival will unveil an  intoxicating mix of theatre, music dance, literature and  cabaret.The four-day festival, running from February  20 to 23, will showcase 49 events in nine venues.  For the first time, the festival will feature a First Nations Performance Series. Margo Kane will revive her  performance of Moonlodge [see photo above left],  about separation, repatriation and cultural rediscovery.  As well, Denise Lonewalker will be performing her  dance, Tribute to Anna Mae Aquash [see photo above  right], about the life of Anna Mae Aquash, an activist  with the American Indian Movement, who was murdered by the FBI. Other highlights will be readings by  Jeannette Armstrong, Eden Robinson and Marie Hum-  ber Clements, and a cabaret style show by Pamela Bob  and Jessie Peter.  Among the other features at this year's festival will be  Addena Sumter-Freitag performing her play, Stay Black  and Die, and a reading by Bonnie Sherr Klein from her  new book, Slow Dance: A Story of Stroke, Love and  Disability.  For a full schedule of performances, contact Women In  View at (604) 251-1650.Tickets are available by phone at  (604) 606-6428, or from Harry's off Commercial and  Women In Print.  Photos by Alistair Eagle and Laiwan.  WebWeaver  Internet guide, researcher, trainer  Ann Doyle, MLS  Tel: 604-254-8462  Email: ann_doyle@mindlink.bc.ca  URL: http://mindlink.net/ann._doyle  CLASSIFIEDS  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.   WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For more info call 876-6390.  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Co-op has one, two and three  bedroom suites for $565, $696, $795 per  month and refundable share purchase.  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Please send a business size  SASE to Membership Committee, Cityview  Housing Co-op, 108-1885 E. Pender St,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 1W6.  CLASSIFIEDS  PRO-CHOICE PRESS  Subscribe to Pro-Choice Press, the BC  Coalition for Abortion Clinics' quarterly  bulletin with news and information on the  fight for abortion rights. $10 per year for  individuals; $25 for groups—includes  membership in the Coalition. To subscribe,  write to 219-1675 W 8th Ave, Vancouver,  BC, V6J 1V2; call (604) 736-2800; or fax:  (604) 736-2152.  CLASSIFIEDS  for membership on the committee, plea  contact Faye White at (604) 775-1869.  WOMENFRIENDS  WomenFriends Music Spring Fling: A  weekend of creative inspiration for women  of all ages, stages and styles will take place  from Apr 11-13. Workshops, jamming,  dance, singing, drumming with Loretta  Joseph, or just relax in the hot tub! Fully  catered! At Camp Alexandra, Crescent  Beach. Cost is $150-260 sliding scale. For  more info call Penny Sidor at (604) 251-4715.  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  EMPORIUM  Celebrating our brand new location at 1238 Davie Street  Come visit us at our new store with over twice the space and fully  wheelchair accesible. Check out our large variety of books, magazines, cards, music, calendars & much much more.  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver B.C. V6E 1N4  Internet Address:www:lsisters.com  Telephone (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662 Fax 685-0252J  CARETAKER REQUIRED  Lesbian couple wanted as live-in hosts/  caretakers of women's guest house in  Tofino beginning Mar 1. Older women  especially encouraged to apply. Preference  will be given to drug and alcohol-free  candidates. Please call (250) 725-3230.  WOMEN'S HEALTH ADVISORY  COMMITTEE SEEKS MEMBERS  The Vancouver/Richmond Health Board is  inviting nominations for the Women's  Health Advisory Committee. This committee is to provide the board with advice on  health policies and plans that will improve  the health status of women in the health  region. If you are interested in the work of  the committee and/or in being considered  M[IIIM Ml  Sangam Grant R.P.C.  REGISTERED PR0FFESSI0NAI COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  whet tie music changes se dees the dance...  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  FEBRUARY 1997 ■rrn 'twh isgb w?z  — HID RNJWTWMd AHHHSn  Bu*WA!T...  You c&h OIL A I   tlte Loll Jmj  jliopprng rUJH!  Out) &  GIFT SUBSCRIPTION  KWE5I5.  f $1.40 GST D Bill me  Two years ONew  D$36 + $2.52 GST D Renewal  Institutions/Groups D Gift  D$45 : 33 15 GST D Donation  D Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount $  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30 +$1.40 GST  Address.-   Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6