 fc\JUNE 1997      Aborigina^drnlaten apprehended... pg5    CMPA$2.25  INESIS  . News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  Women living with  fibromyalgia  Refusing to  be silenced  in the federal  election  Coming out  on thoughts  about Ellen  A change in  government: what  now for British  feminists? KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is June 3,1997 at  our new office, 309-877 E. Hastings  St. Production for the July/August  issue is from June 17-25. All women  welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism, classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  wendy lee kenward, Agnes Huang,  Sook C. Kong, Rachel Rosen  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Rachel Rosen, Fatima Jaffer,  Winnifred Tovey, Dana Putnam,  Leanne Keltie, Marlene del Hoyo,  Dorcas, Anne Webb, Sook. C. Kong,  El Apostol, Kelly Preston, Christine  Thompson, Carol Read, Persimmon  Blackbridge  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson, Chrystal  Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Coordinator: Swee Sim Tan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Tien Wee and Susanna Tarn talk with  Fatima Jaffer (not pictured) about  fibromyalgia [page 10].  Photo by Kuan Foo.  PRESS DATE  May 28, 1997  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Inside  KINESIS  ^^News About NX/omen That's Not In The Dallies  News  Women refuse to be silenced in federal election 3  by Agnes Huang  British feminists ponder future under Labour government 4  by Selina Todd  B.C.'s child apprehension system targets Aboriginal children 5  by Viola Thomas, Sheila Neiman and Marion Dubick  The fight for justice continues in Peru 6    Women take on the Liberals..  by Smita Patil  Centrespread  Women and disabilities: living with fibromyalgia 10  by Fatima Jaffer, Susanna Tarn and Tien Wee  Arts  What do these women think about Ellen? 13  by Faith Jones, Karen Martin, Winnifred Tovey, Wendy Frost and  Audrey Johnson  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 7  compiled by Leanne Keltie, Dana Putnam and Sook C. Kong  Movement Matters 9 & 14  compiled by Sook. C. Kong and Dorcas  Letters 15  Bulletin Board 16  compiled by Kelly Hay don  Apprehension of Aboriginal children  Stay in the HOOP  Women and fibromyalgia 10  Don't forget Kinesis and the Vancouver  Status of Women have moved. Our new  address is:  Suite 309-877 East Hastings Street  Vancouver, BC   V6A 3Y1  Our telephone and fax numbers  will remain the same:  Kinesis: (604) 255-5499  VSW public line: (604) 255-5511  Fax: (604) 255-5511  Thoughts on Ellen's coming out 13 As Kinesis goes to press, the federal  election is in its final days. And the winner  is...well, looks like it won't be women.  Despite a lot of effort by women's  groups across the country to raise the issues of greatest concern to women, our  voices and issues were shut out by most  political candidates and by the mainstream  media.  PM Jean Chretien had a big hand in  silencing women with his refusal to participate in NAC's nationally televised leaders'  debate. Not just once did the prime minister rebuff women, but twice—the second  time when feminists tried to raise the issues directly to him at a Liberal gathering  in Vancouver [see page 3.] His handlers  whisked him past the strong showing of  women who were trying to get the prime  minister to address some very critical issues—like violence against women, poverty, public pensions, and funding to women's groups.  Ironically, the mainstream media also  lamented the lack of serious airing of issues, while never admitting their role in  keeping these issues buried.  Speaking of the media's control of  what people see, hear or read about...just  before the election, a number of bills were  before the Senate for final passage to make  them into law. Some got through; some  didn't.  One bill that did pass was Bill C-46, an  amendment to the Criminal Code on disclosure of women's personal records in  sexual assault trials [see What's News, page  8.] Feminists had fought had hard to ensure some protection (and justice) for  women, whose lives and innermost  thoughts are being hauled into the courtroom at the snap of any defence lawyer's  fingers.  Prior to the Senate vote, there was  some concern that Bill C-46 would not get  approval, as Liberal Senator Anne Cools,  who tried to block the passage of the child  support bill had vowed to do the same to  Bill C-46. Women's groups across the country sent letters of support for the legislation to Justice Minister Allan Rock and to  members of the Senate.  Although the amendment isn't as  strong as anti-violence activists had called  for, it is regarded as a significant step (given  the current climate to discredit women who  file sexual assault complaints) towards protecting the rights of women.  The mainstream media had its opportunity to highlight the passing of Bill C-46,  and to let women know that if they do file  complaints of sexual assault or abuse, they  shouldn't have to deal with having all their  personal records opened up and paraded  by Crown lawyers, judges, defense lawyers,  before the men who sexually assaulted  them.  But instead the media chose to totally  ignore that Bill C-46 was about to become  law. When the bill did come into effect on  May 12, again the mainstream media was  silent on the matter. Of course, as soon as  there is a constitutional challenge to the legislation by a man accused of sexual assault—and there will-be without doubt—  the mainstream media will likely make it  the top story of the day.  Speaking of the mainstream media  brings to mind the corporations that run  them.  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed  their subscriptions or donated to Vancovuer  Status of Women in May.  Kate Braid * Annabelle Cameron *  Merle Campbell * Margaret Coates *  Sharon Costello * Mary Hackney * Jane  Keeler * Ursula Kernig * Tiffany Lapierre  * Dorothy Lillies *Jacqueline Levitin *  Sheila McFadzean * Adrienne Montani  * Denise Nadeau * Jan Noppe * Nora  Randall * Linda Shuto *Gladys We  A special thanks to our donors who  give every month. Monthly donations assist VSW in establishing a reliable funding  base to carry out our programs, services  and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks  to:  Wendy Baker * Nancy Duff * Mary  Frey * Jody Gordon *Erin Graham *  Barbara Karmazyn * Barbara Lebrasseur  * Lolani Maar * Gale Tyler  This year's eighth annual fundrasing  event, Recommending Women was a tremendous success. Thanks to the following  supporters who helped make it happen.  Sharon Belsito * Tania Belsito *  Cecilia Boisier * Kim Bolan* Pam Bush *  Jane Clapp * Barbara Curran * Megan  Ellis * Elizabeth Fortes * Noga Gale *  Ieke Geise * Carole Gerson * Penny  Goldsmith * Hannah Hadikin * Joey  Hartman * Agnes Huang * Connie  Hubbs * Lorri Johnston *Jennifer  Johnstone * Jennfer Jordan * Kao Kaori *  Sadie Kuehn * Claire Kujundzic * Yukie  Kurahashi * Susan Lambert * Andrea  Lebowitz *Judy Lynne * Dave Martin *  Leslie Muir * Melinda Munro * Jen Plaza  * Emily Reid * Valerie Raoul * Araceli  Saltzman * Esther Shannon * Elizebeth  Shefrin * Linda Shoto * Veronica Strong-  Boag * Suzanne Summersgill * Anna  Terrana * Sunera Thobani * Penny  Thompson * Anne Tyler * Racheal We *  Mary Woo-Sims * BC Federation of Labour * BC Woman Magazine * The Fringe  Festival * Full Bloom Flowers * International Conference Services * Osteoporosis Society of BC * Umberto Management  Limited * VanCity Credit Union * West  Jet Airlines * Women In View Festival  "Corporate Canada has never had it so  good..." is how an article in the Globe and  Mail's on May 13 began. It looked at how  profits of the 200 biggest companies in  Canada hit a record high of $6.9 billion in  the first quarter of this year.  In fact, things are getting better and  better for corporate Canada and rich people, and worse and worse for women and  poor people—essentially the majority of  people in this country Another example...as  Kinesis goes to press, we hear the Bank of  Montreal has surpassed its previously  record-high profit level.  Women's groups aren't "having it  good" these days, especially given the  funding cuts coming our way from Status  of Women Canada [see Kinesis, May 1997.]  One women's organization already hurt by  funding cuts is the Alberta Status of Women  Action Committee (ASWAC). ASWAC recently sent a letter to sister organizations  saying they have been forced to close their  offices in Edmonton and Calgary because  they didn't receive an adequate amount of  funding from SWC this year. We are sad  when any feminist organization has to shut  down, and Kinesis sends its congratulations  to AWSAC for 21 years of work in the women's movement.  There's a story we wanted to include  in this month's issue oiKinesis, but weren't  able to complete: two recently formed  groups in Vancouver advocating for the  rights of children and adults who have interacted with the foster care system held a  rally on May 13 outside the Family Court  Building. CIRCLE and Healing from  Within called the rally to address the question of "What is really happening to our  children in government care?"  The speakers raised different actions  that need to be taken, especially by the provincial government. One proposal is for the  establishment of a Canadian Children in  Care Council as a place for children in foster care to turn to when no one listens. The  organizers also asked people to sign petitions, one of which asked the BC Attorney  General to set up a specific payment schedule for lawyers to represent children from  ages 12 to 18 who are in foster care.  To get in touch with the organizers to  find out about current campaigns and future actions, call CIRCLE at 254-9636 or  Healing from Within at 254-1389.  Before we wrap up, we have a few announcements that came in just before we  went to press:  The Vancouver/Richmond Health  Board is holding a conference on Saturday,  June 7, from 8:30am to 4pm for lesbians,  gay men, bisexuals and transgendered people to explore health issues affecting their  communities and to direct the formation of  the new Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and  Transgender Health Committee. The conference is at St. Paul's Hospital. For more  info, call Jazmin Miranda at 873-1803.  Another exciting event takes place  June 20 and 21. The United Native Nations,  in collaboration with the Roundhouse  Community Centre is holding a number of  readings and performances featuring people of colour and Aboriginal artists, in recognition of National Aboriginal Day. The  UNN's Viola Thomas says they are still in  the process of setting things up, but they  already have confirmation from Japanese  Canadian writer Joy Kogawa. For more information about the event, call the UNN at  (604)688-1821.  Time for our monthly "weather report," where we look at what's been happening "insideKinesis." We've experienced  fairly mixed weather over this month. Most  dramatic was the coming of hurricane  FedUp, otherwise known as the federal  elections. The hurricane hit late April, but  lasted throughout May.  Hurricane FedUp shook up the production room, sending Kinesis editor, part-  time staff and volunteers into a maelstorm  [sic] of activity, setting up shelters for  women threatened by killer hails from  heavy Reformist clouds. We also got caught  up helping, alongside volunteers from  other organizations, to direct women  through smelly PC fogs, liberally strewn  with Liberal bogs.  Forecasters at the Feminist Networking Group weather station are anticipating  the hurricane will blow over by early June.  However they say we could be in for continuing stormy weather, on-and-off over the  next four years, with occasional monsoons  followed by sunny breaks.  All in all, Kinesis withstood the ugly  weather and made it to press, albeit 24-  hours later than scheduled and four pages  thinner than our regular 24-pagers. But rest  assured, Kinesis volunteers have now been  armed with umbrellas and gum boots  (some have hip waders) and will determinedly rough it through the following  month to bring you our regular special  Summer double issue! So bear with us. We  live in BC but we ain't scared of a little Reformist rain!!  We have a few thank you's to say this  month.  First, thanks a zillion to Yasmin Jiwani  of FREDA (Feminist Research, Education,  Development and Action Centre) who was  so impressed with some of the articles in  our last issue that she put two of them on  the FREDA web site. So if you have access  to the internet, you can now read Emilie  Coulter's piece on women's objections to  Status of Women Canada's restructuring of  women's funding, as well as speeches by  Yasmin, Agnes Huang, Fay Blaney and  Bonnie Agnew on violence against women.  The web site address is: http://www.  harbour.sfu.ca/freda. Remember to down-  case everything.  Finally, thanks to the many volunteers  who helped put this month's issue together.  Special thanks to new voices in this month's  issue: Sheila Neiman (page 5), Karen Martin and Audrey Johnson (page 13), Kelly  Haydon (Bulletin Board) and Susanna Tarn  and Tien Wee (centrespread). If you'd like  to help write the news that is not in the  dailies, call Agnes at 255-5499. No experience necessary. Come check out your local  feminist newspaper at the following story  meetings: Tuesday, June 3rd for the July/  August issue, and Tuesday, August 5, for  the September issue.  Big thanks also to El Apostol, the newest face (and helpful hands) at Kinesis' Production HQ. If you'd like to check out our  collection of tried and tested Xacto knives  and brand new repro blue pens, call Agnes  at 255-5499 to volunteer on our next issue. News  Women and the federal elections:  Cutting through  the crap  by Agnes Huang  Never mind we had less than 24 hours  notice. The excited crowd of feminist activists camped outside a restaurant in Vancouver 's Chinatown was determined to be  heard by Prime Minister Jean Chretien.  Tuesday, May 27: it was 7:30 in the  morning, but that didn't matter to the more  than 60 women in front of the Floata Chinese Restaurant. Chretien had flown into  town for a Liberal Party breakfast gathering to lend support to Vancouver East candidate Anna Terrana. We were there to hold  him accountable for the hardships many  women face because of his government's  failed social and economic policies.  We were also there because Chretien had already  snubbed women by refusing  to participate in the nationally  televised leaders' debate  sponsored by the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) [see box.]  The protest action, organized by the Lower Mainland  Feminist Networking Group  (FNG), almost didn't happen.  It was by accident that the  FNG found out about  Chretien's arrival—andthat  was just the morning before.  An incredibly quick mobilizing effort resulted in a  strong presence of women,  with placards, leaflets (in English and Chinese) outlining  some of the issues, and  chants. Media reported that  the demo was the largest protest Chretien had faced yet.  But apart from a brief  mention that a protest happened, the mainstream media  didn't acknowledge that feminist activists were behind the  action, nor that we were raising critical issues such as violence against women, universal childcare,  the federal government's fiduciary responsibility to Aboriginal women, the devastating impact of cuts to social programs, racist immigration laws, and so on.  We were kept behind barriers, off to the  side and out of a wide sidewalk corridor  created between the street and the front  door of the building. (Jean Chretien would  be passing through this corridor to get into  the restaurant.) As Liberal supporters arrived at the building, we called on them to  think about the range of issues and how  they affect women.  Other groups also showed up at the  Floata to put their own issues to the Liberals. There were animal rights activists,  members of Greenpeace, supporters of the  CBC, and other social justice activists with  their new release: Jurassic Parliament (a  video on how the Liberal government has  set social programs back 65 million years.)  Just about ten minutes before the Liberal bus arrived with Chretien, a horde of  young Liberals (almost all, men) flowed out  Libera! premise; kept  Anna Terrana: I promised to  send my constituents a newsletter a month...and I delivered.  into the sidewalk corridor—the corridor the  RCMP insisted we stay out of—yelling their  support for "Anna" (Terrana). Liberals  tried to drown out our voices and put on a  media show so the prime minister looked  like the most popular guy in town.  The RCMP were happy to oblige the  Liberals in their charade. As women moved  stop us though: we continued to pepper the  prime minister with recitations of his government's regressive policies and its broken promises.  His handlers pulled Chretien through  to the building, pushing women aside as  they passed. Again, the prime minister had  snubbed women, not even acknowledging  our presence or that we had critical reasons  for being there that morning.  Women who participated in the protest were exhuberant. We had organized  and mobilized in an amazingly short time,  More than 60 women showed up at Liberal Party gathering for Jean Chretien in Vancouver to  hold him accountable for his government's regressive policies and broken promises.  into the corridor, the RCMP pushed and  shoved us. A number of women were  grabbed by the arms and shoulders and  swung back.  By the time Chretien made his descent  from the bus, we were fully blocked from  any access to him by a row of RCMP in front  and a crowd of Liberals at the back. It didn't  and we had made our point to the prime  minister: that 52 percent of this country cannot be ignored.  The protest was just one of the election strategies spearheaded by the FNG.  The FNG, a coalition of individual feminists and feminist organizations in the  Lower Mainland, has been meeting  NAC's debate on women's issues: another Liberal promise broken  a cabinet minister. Fry argued NAC was  at fault for not checking out her availabil-  Jean Chretien refused to attend NAC's  leaders' debate on women's issues. In his  place, he promised to send a cabinet minister. Hedy Fry agreed to do it.  This is what NAC had thought was  settled as it continued preparations for its  May 26th nationally televised debate on  women's issues.  But just over a week before the event,  NAC heard from Fry's campaign manager  that she could not attend—she was committed to participating in an all-candidates  meeting in her riding.  NAC insisted that either Fry attend or  the Liberals keep their promise and send  ity, even though NAC had a letter confirming her participation.  In the end, the Liberals sent Maria  Minna, a backbencher from Toronto. (The  NDP's Alexa McDonough was the only  party leader who attended.)  The televised debate on women's issues was the first one held in 13 years.  NAC says it is pleased with how the debate went. More than 500 women showed  up to hear candidates respond to questions around childcare, poverty, and violence against women.  regulary to network, discuss issues and  analyses, and plan strategies and actions.  In mid-May, the FNG held a forum for  women to raise questions to some of the  political candidates running in Vancouver  Centre and Vancouver Easjt. The FNG  choose to invite candidates from the major  political parties running in the province.  The strength of the women's movement can be seen in the fact that nine of 10  candidates invited showed up. (Vancouver  Centre Conservative candidate Victoria  Minnes was the only one who refused to  attend.)  Among those who participated was Hedy Fry, Secretary of  State for Multiculturalism and  the Status of Women. Many  women were appreciative of the  fact that Fry had the guts to show  &e;t ffcugli oh tlie  electioH tre.il  Woman: "Do you consider dead women to be a  special interest group,  too?"  Reform candidate: "We  consider all Canadians to  be equal."  up. Most of the questions were  directed at her, and she was  called to account her government's record on women's issues.  The room was filled with  more than 200 women, anxious  to raise their issues and pose  their questions. Ameasure of the  success of the forum was the range of  women who attended. Alongside longtime  activists in the women's and labour movements were many who said they'd never  been to a federal political meeting on women's issues. Among them were women living in poverty, Aboriginal women, women  of colour and women with disabilities.  At times, the exchanges between audience and candidates were very spirited,  but that added to the desire and ability of  many women to participate Most felt comfortable enough to express their opinions  whenever they needed to.  At least 25 questions were put to candidates, meeting one of the goals of the forum, which was to ensure women had the  most opportunity to speak and be heard.  Even so, the three hours allotted was not  enough to cover the gamut of questions  women had.  Agnes Huang works at the Vancouver Status  of Women, which is a member of the Lower  Mainland Feminist Networking Group.  Thanks to Fatima Jaffer for her input.  JUNE 1997 News   National election in Britain:  Feminists take on the "New  Labour" challenge  by Selina Todd   Eighteen years of Tory Government  ended abruptly for Britian on May 1st,  when voters queued at the polls to give the  Labour Party their biggest electoral landslide since 1945. The ecstasy felt across Britain at the result is hard to imagine if one  has not lived there for the last eighteen  years. Centre-left broadsheet The Guardian  described the atmosphere on May 2 as: "the  population going wild British style...some  thought about making eye contact on the  [subway]." For Britain, this is a carnival  atmosphere.  Conservative rule inflicted successive  blows to the British women's movement  and the country's labour movement. Local  government cutbacks caused the closure of  women's centres and the decline of community resources. Cuts to welfare, under  both Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister  from 1979 through 1990 and her successor,  John Major, deliberately discriminated  against single mothers.  The Tories' right-wing agenda has had  clear repercussions for British feminists.  Unity and strength within the women's  movement has crumbled in the face of such  hostility. Women have fought hard to retain the few remaining community resources, with little time for national initiatives or active debate. The existence of local women's groups or publications has  become a rarity.  Yet, after the first celebrations to mark  the end of Conservative rule have died  down, few feminists and left wingers will  unreservedly welcome new prime minister Tony Blair. Over the last decade, the  Labour Party has also felt the effects of the  shift to the Right. Successive party leaders  have ditched Labour's more socialist policies, a strategy which culminated in a revision of the Party's constitution two years  ago. The previous historic commitment (not  always honoured by past Labour Governments) to work for a more equal division  of wealth and labour was replaced with a  clause stressing the importance of family  values. This apparent attempt to capture the  BENEFIT AUCTION!  SUNDAY, JUNE 22, WESTIN BAYSHORE, 1PM  TO SUPPORT PREVENTION SERVICES FOR WOMEN  Over 400 marvellous auction items including a four day/three night,  luxury fly-in vacation on breathtaking Stuart Island with gourmet meals,  round trip flight and guided fishing at Big Bay Marina/Coval Air; four  days/three nights and dinner for two at the South Thompson Inn  overlooking the beautiful South Thompson River; six days/five nights at  the Pinnacles on Silver Star Mountain; four days/three nights, all meals  and guided horseback riding at Goat Mountain Lodge in Golden; five  days/four nights at beautiful Pimainus Lakes; and wilderness, luxury,  skiing, golf, lakeside and oceanside vacations at Whistler, Tofino,  Victoria, the Gulf Islands, Vancouver Island, Kootenay Lake, Okanagan  Lake, Kimberly, Fernie, Sechelt, Clearwater, Cowichan Valley, Duncan,  Campbell River, Armstrong, Qualicum Beach, and over 60 lakeside and  oceanside vacations throughout BC; hot air balloon rides; a Pitney  Bowes laser fax machine; hand knotted Persian carpets; a dinner cruise  for up to 70 people for a birthday, wedding or party; an Electrolux  vacuum; theatre, symphony, opera, concert and movie tickets;  restaurant meals; furniture & appliances; music, dancing, Tai Chi,  karate, golf, flying, scuba diving and tennis lessons; legal services; a  hot tub rental; travel gift certificates; Elvis Stojko autographed shirt;  antiques; jewellery; cruises; skippered sailing; rafting; bedding; clothing;  fitness memberships & equipment; housecleaning; a Mason sewing  machine; haircuts; futon; hardware; sports tickets; massages; books;  and wonderful art from Toni Onley, Marc Chagall, Norval Morrisseau,  Robert Davidson, Anne Meredith Barry, Gordon Smith, Joan Miro,  Christopher Pratt, Ken Danby, Norman McLaren, Daniel Izzard, Pat  O'Hara, Tony Scherman, James Fenwick Lansdowne, Diana Zoe Coop,  Jacques Hurtubise, Barbara Conder, Kanaginak Pootoogook, Robert  Bateman, Audrey Capel Doray, Arturo Secunda, Susan Point, Christian  Knudsen, Sam Black, Sylvia Safdie, John Esler, Don Jarvis & MORE!  Admission free.  Wonderful bargains. Absentee bids accepted.  Viewing 10am; live auction 1pm.  Proceeds to support prevention services fox-pelvic inflammatory disease.  For more information & catalogue: PID Society: (604) 684-5704  The government's emphasis on family  values—and the apparent pressure on  women MPs to conform to the image of  bright young career women or glamorous  mothers—demonstrates a lack of any deep  understanding of women's needs.  right-wing's philosophy by so-called "New  Labour" has alienated many feminists.  What does a new Labour government  offer British women? The Labour Party and  the British media have stressed the fact that  the number of women MPs has now doubled. New Secretary of State for Health,  Harriet Harman, claimed that this would  drive forward policies on childcare and opportunities for women at work.  However, as Margaret Thatcher demonstrated, while encouraging more women  to enter politics is positive, it is no guarantee of feminist policy making. Labour's  commitment to retain Tory public spending limits suggests welfare spending will  not be increased. The government's emphasis on family values—and the apparent  pressure on women MPs to conform to the  image of bright young career women or  glamorous mothers—demonstrates a lack  of any deep understanding of women's  needs.  However, Labour's pragmatic moderation reckons without the popular demands for more radical policies which are  likely to arise in the next year. Despite cutbacks and despair, many British women  have taken a stand on left-wing causes the  parliamentary wing of the Labour Party has  chosen to ignore. For example, in the 1980s,  England's Greenham Common airbase  housed nuclear weapons, but it also was  the site of a huge women's peace camp  which proved instrumental in closing the  base. "Women Against Pit Closures" was  formed by women in mining communities  during the 1984-85 miners' strike. The  women won support from the labour  movement and beyond and continue to  campaign for their communities and the  trade unions. Women in Northern Ireland  have spoken out against British imperialism and human rights abuses. Across the  United Kingdom, there exist other, disparate but politically aware, women's networks, which are demanding an end to reactionary policy making.  The British women's movement, like  the country's labour movement, may not  be at its strongest at present, but it has  shown itself resilient. Now, for the first time  in eighteen years, there is a possibility of  making progress. Instead of concentrating  simply on ousting the Tories, British feminists can turn to campaigning and debating once again. This is a process likely to  be reflected in the labour movement and  will have implications not only for the new  government, but also for the status of women's rights and progressive thought in Britain.  The immediate future for the women's  movement in Britain remains far from rosy.  The need for better child care, increased  access to education, protection for workers, and safeguards for immigrant women  are the tip of a huge iceberg. However, for  the first time in a long while, the future at  least has the potential for excitement.  Selina Todd is a British feminist and trade unionist currently living and working in Vancouver on a summer student exchange program.  SINGLE MOTHERS DAV IN THE PARK  The Vancouver Status of Women  wants to acknowledge all the women  who volunteered their efforts and all the  people who made donations to our Single Mothers' Day in the Park. The event  was a great success. More than 150  mothers and their children came to  Grandview Park on a hot and sunny Sunday in May to celebrate Mother's Day.  Women and children got to enjoy live  music, speeches, games, face painting,  and great food.  Thank you very much to the volunteers:  Alice Kendall, Rachael Mulloy, Helen  Babalos, Jehn Starr, Melissa Udy, Sarah  Good, Florence Hackett, Diane LeClaire,  Lyn Graham, Claire Robillard, Gloria  Pavez, Agnes Huang, Erin Graham,  Margaret Akulia, Addy Kgomo, Jane  Clapp, Kathryn Wahamaa and her band.  Thanks also to those who donated  food, facilities and their services:  Eastside Family Place,Circling  Dawn, Uprising Breads Bakery, Horizon  Distributors, East End Food Co-op, Que  Pasa Mexican Foods, Canadian Springs  Water Company, Ives Veggie Cuisine,  Scott Paper, Planting Seeds Project,  Renato's Pastry Shop, and Vito's Pastry  Shop.  VSW knows that we couldn't have  done this event without your generous  support. News  Apprehension of Aboriginal children in BC:  Cultural genocide continues  speeches by Viola Thomas, Marion  Dubick and Sheila Neiman   Aboriginal children are being taken  from their families and communities and  placed in non-Aboriginal care at increasingly alarming rates. According to figures  from December 1996, across the province,  there were almost 2,250 Aboriginal children  in government care.  On May 26, the Aboriginal Women's  Action Network (AWAN) held a rally in  Vancouver's Eastside to raise awareness  about and to protest against the disturbing  trend in the apprehension of Aboriginal  children. Over 100 people, Aboriginal and  non-Aboriginal, attended the rally—many  of whom had their own stories of being  placed and abused in the government'^  system of care.  AWAN was founded in November  1995 by a group of urban Aboriginal  women who began meeting to discuss concerns of inequality and exploitation in the  workplace. The underlying concern expressed by many of the women was that  Aboriginal women did not have a strong,  united feminist group to represent them.  The women decided to form a collective to  address such concerns as: family, violence  and spousal support; lack of representation  at the treaty tables; fetal alcohol syndrome  and addictions; cuts to social programs;  and child apprehension.  In its mission statement, AWAN says  the collective fights for equality, stands for  justice and envisions change. In particular,  the collective works to confront the social  ViolaThomas  structures, institutions and individuals in  positions of authority that participate in the  cultural genocide of First Nations people  in Canada.  With regards to apprehensions, AWAN  says that well over half of all children in  the care of the Ministry for Children and  Families are of Aboriginal descent, and  since the ministry's inception last year,  those figures have continued to rise. AWAN  believes the ministry has actually stepped  up the process of taking Aboriginal children  away from their families and communities.  Women with AWAW say they also have information that indicates there has been a  50 percent increase in the apprehension of  Aboriginal children since the ministry began.  AWAN and other Aboriginal activists  point to the current system of treating Abo-  JUNE 1997  riginal children in government care—in  which Aboriginal children are removed  from their families and communities and  placed in non-Aboriginal foster homes—  as a continuation of cultural genocide. The  provincial government has always claimed  that there is a lack of Aboriginal foster  homes. However, Aboriginal activists say  that the government refuses to provide resources for Aboriginal agencies to outreach  into Aboriginal communities to find foster  homes for Aboriginal children in the ministry's care.  AWAN says that while hundreds of  Aboriginal children are apprehended, the  rally was sparked by a particular case, that  of Ada Prevost. Prevost gave birth to a child  on May 8. The day after birth, the Ministry  for Children and Families apprehended her  baby, Shylandd, on the grounds that the  child was likely "to be physically harmed  or neglected, that the parents are unable or  unwilling to care for this baby and she  therefore needs protection."  Prevost was told that Shylandd was  apprehended because she was born drug-  addicted, even though there was no documentation that she was. Prevost's grandmother says that her granddaughter has  dealt with her addiction and that she was  clean and sober prior to and during her  pregnancy. AWAN says that the "official  documentation" only states that the attending doctor claimed that Prevost was "uncooperative" during her labour, and that  the father has "no fixed address."  Viola Thomas, president of  the United Native Nations  (UNN), says that at the end of the  day, the apprehension of Aboriginal children is just part of the systemic discrimination against Aboriginal people. "It's unreal the  paternalism and the superiority  people feel over our lives. We  should have the right to control  the self-determination of our people and our children," says Thomas.  At the May 26 rally, a number  of Aboriginal women and men spoke  about their own experiences in the  foster care system, and their work to  challenge and change the system. Below, Kinesis presents the speeches  given at the rally by three women who are leaders, advocates and activists for the rights of  Aboriginal women—Viola Thomas, Marion  Dubick and Sheila Neiman.  Thomas, as well as being president of  UNN, an organization which represents off-  reserve Aboriginal peoples in BC, is also a member of the board of the Vancouver Aboriginal  Child and Family Services. Dubick works at  the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre, and  Neiman works at New Dawn Recovery House  for Women, the only recovery house in Vancouver for women.  Viola Thomas:  Prior to European contact, our people  had social forms of control that were much  more sophisticated than the British legal  system...and now, we continue to fight for  Rally at Grandview Park organized by the Aboriginal Women's Action  Network  the rights of our children to maintain their  cultural identity as Aboriginal children of  the First Nations of this province.  Look at the meaning of the word "family." Where does that come from? The Latin  word, "familia," which translates into  "households of slaves." That's the symbolism of the word "family" in the British system. And that's how they view our children: as property.  We have to reflect on where this began  and how. It began in 1852 when they introduced the Indian Act into our nations which  destroyed our self-definition of who we  were as citizens of diverse Aboriginal nations of this country.  It began when the province decided  they had jurisdiction over our children. It  began when the federal government chose  to ignore their traditional obligations to our  children and to our families off-reserve. It  began when they decided to brutalize our  families. It began when they interpreted the  best interests of the child to not mean that  they have a right to their heritage as an  Aboriginal child.  In 1991, Canada became a signatory to  the United Nations Convention on the  Rights of the Child. That convention recognized the importance of children being  raised within their culture and maintaining their identity by demanding the signatories take into account the importance of  the cultural values of each people for the  protection and harmonious development of  the child.  Aboriginal children are five times more  likely than non-Aboriginal children to be  in care. In the 1960s, it was well-known in  the Canadian establishment that there was  a scoop-up of our children. In 1955, there  were 3,433 children in care in BC Less than  one percent, or 29 children, were Aboriginal. By 1964, that jumped to 34.2 percent,  or 1,446 Aboriginal children.  What we are witnessing today is that  the argument that [apprehension] is in the  best interests of the child. I would suggest  to you that it's in the best interests of government to continue these paternalistic  laws.  The Royal Commission Report onAboriginal Peoples provides a breakdown of  how much money the province of BC con  tributes towards the imprisonment and the  justice system for our children and our  families. In 1995, $99.7 million was allocated by this province to crirninalize our  families.  The issue today is how the courts have  twisted the rights of our families and of our  women, who have been denied the civil and  human right to be able .to care for our children in a culturally appropriate manner  and to access the support services that they  rightfully deserve. We are tired of having  social workers play the role of baby-  snatchers.  We challenge both levels of government to live up to their fiduciary obligations to our children and families.  All my relations.  Marion Dubick:  My condolences to the parents. I was  born in 1955, right when the big scoop was  going on. If you were Aboriginal, then [the  government said] your parents did not  know how to look after you.  How long are our kids going to be  raised as French Canadians, Black Irish—  anything but First Nations? I was told as a  child not to tell anybody I was First Nations, nobody would know, (laughter) It's  a good thing for me we had mirrors in the  house, (applause)  I was raised in 16 different foster  homes and abused every which way possible. I don't see this as a solution to saving  our children. I see this as a way of breaking  down our people, our culture. I've lost my  culture, I've lost my language, I've lost my  family. All in the name of saving me. Saving me from what? I had a worse time  where they put me than if they had left me.  Why is it that foster parents get paid  way more money than the mothers trying  to raise their kids on their own? (applause)  I don't understand this government at  all. They don't say what's really going on:  we're going to destroy the people of this  land; we're going to steal their kids; we're  going to put them into shitty foster homes  and create jobs for foster parents. Let's be  honest here. This is the way it's been since  they got here. This is the way it still is.  Continued on next page News  Tupac Amaru killed in Peru:  Government repression  continues  by Smita Patil  Over 50 people gathered outside the  Peruvian consulate in Vancouver in April  to protest the shooting of all 17 Tupac  Amaru revolutionaries occupying the Japanese embassy in Lima.  The Tupac Amaru revolutionary movement (MRTA) is only one of several leftist  factions in Peru fighting for social change  and justice for poor people. The 17 members of the Tupac Amaru had been holding  hostages at the home of the Japanese ambassador to Peru since December 17th last  year. The action was an attempt to gain  some bargaining power in negotiations  with Peruvian President Fujimori for the  release of more than 400 men and women  being held in Peruvian prisons on charges  that they are "terrorists" involved with the  Tupac Amaru [see Kinesis March 1997.]  Within a week of the hostage-taking,  the Tupac Amaru freed all but 72 of the 300  hostages. After a five-month standoff—  during which the Tupac Amaru managed  to win some concessions from Fujimori, including humane treatment of the 400 political prisoners—the military stormed the  home of the Japanese ambassador (on April  2nd).  Seventy-one hostages were released.  One hostage died of a heart attack, but it  also appears he had been shot by, many  believe, military personnel. All 17 Tupac  Amaru revolutionaries inside were shot  dead.  Hostages who witnessed the shooting  of the Tupac Amaru said that a number of  them were executed by the military, including the leader of the Tupac Amaru, Nestor  Cerpa. He was shot in the back of the head.  Two other Tupac Amaru members, both  young women, were executed on the spot  as they laid down their weapons and knelt  down to surrender.  Fujimori had been planning to storm  the embassy for a while before it actually  happened. In the several months preceding, the military had been building tunnels  and planting monitoring devices below the  embassy. Many supporters of the Tupac  Amaru say this shows that Fujimori was  not acting in good faith during negotiations. The negotiations appear to have been  used as a stalling method by Fujimori while  he prepared his attack.  Since the storming of the embassy,  many suspected members of the Tupac  Amaru and their families have been arrested, imprisoned, and some killed.  At the Vancouver rally, the Coalition  for Political Action for the Defense of Hu-  Rally at the Peruvian consulate in  Vancouver  man Rights in Latin America issued a statement decrying the "cruel and shameful use  of indiscriminate force" by state forces in  the storming of the embassy.  "The use of violence illustrates the [Peruvian government's] lack of good will in  the negotiating process, and the lack of respect for human lives," organizers said.  Protestors called on the Canadian government to "maintain its humanitarian  stance" and defend human rights and international covenants. Specifically, they  demanded that Canada lobby for a United  Nations-sponsored Special Investigations  Commission to investigate the hostage-releasing action, the creation of an international team to monitor and promote human  rights in Peru and negotiations to find  peaceful solutions to political, social and  economic conflicts.  In closing, organizers urged the Canadian government to maintain an open door  policy and offer sanctuary and refuge for  Peruvians targetted by Peruvian state  forces.  Apprehension of Aboriginal children in BC:  Continued from previous page  You want us to get clean and sober. No  problem. Let's start funding recovery  houses. Let's start opening up detoxes in  the Downtown Eastside, instead of closing  them, (applause) Let's start healing centres  for our people. Our people know how to  heal; we've been doing it for generations.  But the government doesn't give us any  money to start doing this because it might  work. They just steal our kids, keep doing  it until they wreck us.  No more, no more.  All my relations.  Sheila Neiman:  On a daily basis, I work with women  who come to the recovery house. They  come there for healing. As I work daily  with these women, I come to realize that  just about every one of them has been raised  in foster care, and their mothers before  them were raised in residential homes.  I'd like to say to the government: why  is it that you take the children and point a  finger and shame towards this woman  when you give her no service to help herself heal. All you do is treat her like a child,  say you do this and that, and you be a good  girl.  All of the women [at the house] have  requirements to fulfill in order to get their  children back. I know that every woman  tries to access services. But I know there is  a two or three months waiting list for alco  holism counsellors;  there's two or three  months waiting for ...facilities.  Under the province's current welfare  legislation, women  can't get into recovery  homes because the government reduced the  amount of welfare  they're eligible for—all  they can get is $500. Marion Dubick  That's not enough  money to get into the recovery homes. So  now when women try to get into the recovery house, social workers tell them they  can't, "you only get $500." Then they tell  the women to tell us to reduce the rent.  I've seen women fulfill one requirement after another and still have the social  worker say: "That's not enough," because  she didn't do something quite right.  I've seen women so frustrated they're  ready to blow with the energy and the pain  inside them. How can this woman heal  when she has so much to do and nothing  to do it with?  Women can heal. I've seen it. I've seen  women come in with drug and alcohol issues. I've seen that woman put away her  drugs and alcohoLI have seen her cry. I  have seen her heal. I have seen her go to  treatment. I have seen her try to get educa  tion. I have  seen the joys  she gets with  every   tiny  step. And I  have   seen  the   disappointment  she      feels  when    she  tells her social worker  what she's  done and all  she gets is  loaded with  more stuff to  do.  I have a woman here today with her  little one. He's in care. They can only be  here in this park with a homemaker because  that's another thing the government offers  us. They let the mum see the baby but only  with a guard. I've seen some of the reports  that go to the social worker like, "His nose  was running and she didn't wipe it right  away." "He wanted to cross the room with  an apple in his hand." They put this stuff  on women's records, like a "Bad Mum  record."  The woman who was sitting in front  of me has tried for two years to get her little boy back. They had 19 requirements for  her, and she's done every one of them. They  still haven't made a decision whether he  can go home or not. She tried and tried to  get suitable housing—we all know how  difficult that is with the pitiful amount of  money they give us. She finally got a place.  One of the things that got brought up in  court was, "What took you so long? You  weren't making a good enough effort!" This  is the shit we get.  This government says they have a drug  and alcohol program; they say they have  detox. Do you know there's only one detox  centre in Vancouver. The other one's in New  Westminster. At any given point in time,  there's 50 people on the waiting list at the  detox. There is no women's detox in this  city. (There is one for men.) And there's only  one treatment facility in this city for  women. There's one recovery house for  women (New Dawn), and it isn't government funded. And now the government is  telling us to reduce the rent because they're  only giving $500 [in welfare] to women.  We have to keep up the fight. This is  just the first of these gatherings. When we  don't gather together and just hang around  in little groups and complain and cry, nothing gets done.  We can tell the government what it is  we need done. We just need to all stand up  and stand up together.  For more information about the actions to challenge the apprehension of Aboriginal children  and the placing of them in non-Aboriginal care,  contact the Aboriginal Women's Action Network, #309-877 E. Hastings St, Vancouver,  BC, V6A 3Y1; tel: (604) 255-0704; fax: (604)  255-0724.  Thanks to Fatima Jaffer for transcribing the  speeches. What's News  compiled by Rita Wong, Leanne  Keltie and Sook C. Kong   Nicaraguans win round  to protect their rights  Over 3,000 women in Nicaragua  showed up at the doors of the country's  National Assembly in Managua to make a  clear statement that they would not put up  with proposed government legislation that  would severely jeopardize women's rights.  The women organized the demonstration to protest president ArnoldoAleman's  proposal to create a new ministry, the Ministry of the Family, and new laws which  would impose the "nuclear family" as the  only family model recognized by Nicaraguan law. The action coincided with the day  the National Assembly was to vote on the  proposals, April 29.  The strong turnout of women in the  streets obviously put a scare into those inside the National Assembly—the vote was  postponed. Nicaraguan feminists women  declared a victory, at least temporarily. They  were able to convince the Sandinistas who  form part of the opposition to agree to not  support the proposals. And, the activists  add, some members of Aleman's own Liberal Party have said they will "think about  it."  Women in Nicaragua have fought long  and hard to establish and defend their  rights. The autonomous women's movement, made up of various individuals and  non-governmental organizations (NGOs),  has been on the forefront of the struggle to  catalyse awareness of the discrimination  against women and to create laws to protect women against discrimination. They  say that Aleman's proposals violate the  country's laws and constitutional rights as  well as and international agreements Nicaragua has signed.  Grupo Venancia, a Nicaraguan human  rights and feminist collective, reports that  Aleman, "in his overzealous campaign" to  pass his reactionary legislation into law has  abused his country's constitutional laws by  bypassing the legislature, and by ignoring  the usual process of debate and consultation with the groups representing women  and children's rights and well-being.  The new laws against families that  don't fall into the husband-wife-children  model would discriminate against more  than half of Nicaraguan families, which, a  recent national study has shown, fall into  six other family models. By declaring that  procreation is the "mission" of couples,  Aleman's proposals would eliminate women's sexual and reproductive rights which  include family planning.  There will be other consequences if  Aleman get to impose his sexist will,  among which are women's and children's  rights to live without domestic violence. As  well, any individual or organization that  educates and defends their basic rights will  be deemed by the proposed law as a "menace" and as engaging in "act(s) of aggression." This blatant attempt to rewrite Nicaraguan law goes against international convention and law.  Other provisions in Aleman's proposed legislation would absolve men who  commit rape and inflict family violence  from responsibility and accountability on  the most dubious and antiquated grounds  of "'natural' psychological differences between men and women".  Furthermore, Aleman wants to promote heterosexual marriage with his proposed law. This would, of course, discrimi  nate against unwed couples, gay and lesbian couplers, and even all children born  outside of registered marriages.  Among other things, Aleman's proposal violates the Nicaraguan Constitution  which equally recognizes both registered  marriages and common-law ones. Moreover Aleman wants NGOs dealing with  women and children to come under the  proposed Ministry of Family which would  act as governor and co-ordinator over the  NGOs—in clear violation of the rights of  NGOs to remain autonomous.  Women who staged the protest action  say that if the National Assembly, at a later  date, tries to pass these repressive laws,  they will launch a court challenge to test  their constitutional validity.  Grupo Venancia appeals to everyone  to write to their governments and that of  Nicaragua to stop the passage of the highly-  discriminatory legislation. Send your faxes  immediately to: Presidente de la Asembla  Nacional, fax: (505) 228-3039 and to  Cooperacion Externa, fax: (505) 228-1279.  And if it's possible, send copies to Grupo  Venancia, fax: (505) 612-2963 or e-mail  venancia@nicarao.apc.org.ni.  Breast implant survivors  continue to fight Dow  Dow Chemical Company won a ruling in March against women who have become ill from silicone breast implants. The  ruling affects approximately 800 implant  lawsuits against Dow in the state of Michigan, but will not stop lawsuits nationwide.  Women in the United States and  Canada have been launching class action  suits against Dow and other manufacturers of silicone breast implants. The women  point to the implants as the root cause of  many of the health problems they are having to deal with.  "This is the third state where Dow has  been found not liable," says Linda Roth of  the Coalition for Silicone Survivors. "But  we have 47 states to go. We're going to hold  these manufacturers accountable." Class-  action suits in Louisiana opened only a  week after the Michigan ruling.  Silicone gel-filled breast implants have  been at the centre of medical and legal controversy for over five years. Even though  studies have produced correlative data between silicone implants and connective tissue disease, the scientific community remains divided about whether there is a  proven causal relationship between the  two. It is this "gray" area which seems to  have given Dow the advantage in court.  The relationship between implants and  illness is not so "gray" for breast implant  survivors. "How many people have to die  before the so called experts decide it's a  problem?" asks Roth. She and other consumer advocates say they will continue  educational campaigns to discourage  women from ever receiving silicone implants.  [Source: Sojourner, the Women's Forum, May, 1997]  to exist, PVH's CEO, Bruce Klatsky announced his intention to negotiate with the  STECAMOSO union in Guatemala city.  This turn of events follows a series of  internal and international efforts by organizers to improve wages and working conditions in the maquiladora factories, which  primarily employ women. As union leaders held rallies in Guatemala, supporters  in the US also put pressure on PVH, which  has an international reputation for its commitment to human rights.  "Credit must go to the Human Rights  Watch," says Jennifer Hill of STITCH, a  network of Guatemalan supporters.  Klatsky reversed his position toward meeting with STECAMOSA after reading an  advance copy of a Human Rights Watch  report criticizing PVH's intimidation tactics toward union members.  Now that union members can sit down  to negotiate with Klatsky, organizers are  looking forward to using these efforts as a  model for other maquiladora companies.  "People always say you can't organize  (maquiladoras) because women can't stand  up to their bosses," says Hill. "But these  women are leaders, no doubt about it."  [Source: Sojourner, the Women's Forum, May, 1997]  Gays and lesbians win  major reform in  Tasmania  After nine years of community organizing in opposition to Tasmania's anti-gay  law, the Tasmanian legislature finally voted  for its repeal on May 1. This decision marks  the elimination of Australia's last remaining state law banning same-sex relations.  It also marks Australia's compliance with  a previous United Nations' ruling on this  issue.  In April 1994, the UN Human Rights  Committee formally called onAustralia to  protect the lesbian and gay citizens of Tasmania against discrimination and the violation of their privacy rights, by repealing  the law. The Australian federal government  responded by passing legislation to protect  the sexual privacy of its citizens, but until  now the anti-gay law in Tasmania remained  on the books.  Julie Dorf, executive director of the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights  Commission declared: "We are thrilled  about this news and congratulate the Tasmanian activists on their hard work and  long overdue victory. Unfortunately, there  are still over 80 countries in the world with  sodomy or other anti-gay and lesbian laws  on the books. The Unites States alone has  twenty states with sodomy laws."  Women lead labour  fight in Guatemala  After years of union organizing, clothing factory workers in the maquiladoras in  Guatemala have won their first major concession from their employer Phillips Van  Heusen (PVH). In late March, after spending months denying the union's legal right  Policy on Women's  Advancement in  Bangladesh  Bangladesh's Prime Minister Sheikh  Hasina took the opportunity of International Women's Day 1997, to announce the  country's National Policy on Women's  Advancement. The policy seeks to upgrade  the social status of women in Bangladesh  and eliminate all forms of discrimination  between men and women. "Keeping half  of the population degraded renders social  development impossible," the prime minister said.  Under the policy, 16 goals have been  set out, including: establishing women's  human rights; eradicating the persistent  burden of poverty on women; eliminating  all forms of discrimination against women  and girls; promoting political, administrative and economic empowerment of  women; implementing measures to ensure  women's health, nutrition, shelter and  housing; and creating support services for  women.  The National Policy on Women's Advancement was developed as Bangladesh's  response to the United Nation's 4th World  Conference on Women held in Beijing in  September 1995. The policy was put together by government departments and  agencies, led by the Ministry of Women and  Children Affairs, and various non-governmental organizations in the country.  Strategies for implementation include  setting a scheduled time frame for the action plan, ensuring accountability, and  building institutional structures from grassroots to national levels. The National Council for Women's Development will act as  coordinator between different organizations and levels of government.  The prime minister says she hopes that  international organizations, women's  groups, NGO's, and other social organizations will come forward to help implement  the policy, which affects no less than half  of the country's estimated 120 million  population. Resource mobilization for the  project is expected to come from a collaboration between NGO's, UN bodies, the government of Bangladesh and other development partners.  Where are the women in  parliamentary politics?  Some interesting information on the  eve of the federal election in Canada...  A new international study indicates  that female politicians around the world  face poorer chances of reaching power than  they did a decade ago. A study of 179 parliaments by the Geneva-based Inter-Parliamentary Union says women hold only 11.7  percent of all seats—down from the record  14.6 percent in 1988, and barely ahead of  levels recorded in the 1970s.  The study was released earlier this year  on the eve of a major parliamentary conference to promote gender balance in politics. The New Delhi conference was designed to find ways of encouraging women  to enter and succeed in politics, with ideas  ranging from quota systems to financial aid  for female candidates. "Women often shy  away from politics because of a lack of  funds," says Najma Heptulla, deputy chair  of India's upper house.  The greatest setbacks have occurred in  the former Soviet Union, Eastern Europe,  the Middle East and parts of Africa. In  many former Communist states, the rise of  democracy has put an end to parliamentary quotas for women, even though such  seats usually carried little power.  Although the 135-member Inter-Parliamentary Union once suggested quotas for  women in electoral politics, it now argues  that the causes of gender imbalance should  be investigated and addressed first. The  report says the deepest roots of discrimination are found within political parties  themselves, which in 89.2 percent of cases  are headed by men. In the more than 1,000  parties around the world, women were  found to hold fewer than one-third of all  board positions.  Continued on next page  JUNE 1997 What's News  Continued from previous page  found to hold fewer than one-third of all  board positions.  Many people in general are turned off  by the parliamentary politics system says  Veena Nayyar, an activist in India who has  fought for women's quota in parliament.  "Political standards are falling everywhere;  it's not just a gender issue," she says. "Politics has become a game of power for power's sake, and not for service."  Nayyar adds that in South Asia,  women prefer to fight for change at the  grassroots level, through non-governmental organizations such as women's groups  and development agencies.  Christine Pintat, the study's main author, says that quotas are most effective in  countries which also pursue grassroots  changes for women. "Politics reflect what  society is," she said. "You need a change in  society, too."  Canada ranks 21st in the survey, between Uganda and Turkmenistan, with 18  percent of parliamentary seats held by  women.  [Information from the Globe and Mail,  February 14,1997]  HARRISON FESTIVAL  JULY 4 -13  HARRISON HOT SPRINGS  A CELEBRATION OF  WORLD MUSIC THEATRE,  DANCE AND VISUAL ARTS  An intimate little Festival, 1 112  hours east of Vancouver, on the  shores of Harrison Lake  > Art Market - weekends  A juried market featuring many of  BC's finest artisans  > Art Exhibit  A large indoor exhibit with group  and solo shows  > Music in the Plaza  Music from around the world - from  blues to Ukrainian folksongs  > Evening Concerts - indoor  Takadja - west African music & dance  Hart Rouge - chart toppers from  Quebec  Seanachie - Celtic sounds and energy  Fiesta Flamenca - dynamic flamenco  music & dance  Tarig Abubakar & the Afro Nubians  hot. hot pan African soukous band  Swamp Mama Johnson - funky,  sensuous blues  For full program  schedule and details:  e-mail harrfest@uniserve.com  www .echoisland.com/harrfest  Feminists celebrate  victory for women's  equality rights  This May marked the passage of Bill  C-46, legislation which is intended to advance women's equality rights in sexual  assault trials.  The new law, which many feminists  had a hand in drafting, places restrictions  on the disclosure of women's personal  records to men accused of sexual assault  and their defense lawyers.  According to a working group of lawyers, therapists and representatives of  women's and community organizations in  BC's Lower Mainland, Bill C-46 acknowledges the public interest in supporting  women to report incidents of sexual violence and abuse.  The No-disclosure Working Group met  a few days before the bill officially became  a law to celebrate this landmark event and  to strategize for its successful implementation. Among the groups represented were:  DisAbled Women's Network Canada,  South Surrey/White Rock Women's Place,  Women Against Violence Against Women  Rape Crisis Centre, and the Women's Resource Society of the Fraser Valley.  "After years of forceful lobbying, this  is an achievement of [the] national feminist  coalition enterprise that began in 1992 with  the Canadian Association of Sexual Assault  Centres, the Aboriginal Women's Council,  the DisAbled Women's Network and the  Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  in the O'Connor case," explains Bonnie  Agnew of Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter.  [The O'Connor case refers to the trial of  Bishop Hubert O'Connor, accused of sexually  assaulting four Aboriginal women in a residential school in the 1960s. Charges against  him were dropped when the Supreme Court of  BC ruled O'Connor couldn't get a fair trial  because the Crown lawyers had not disclosed  all the personal records of the women requested  by O'Connor's lawyer. The case went all the  way to the Supreme Court of Canada, and subsequently, O'Connor was convicted of two  counts of sexual assault and given a two year  jail sentence.]  The passage of Bill C-46 into law is  critical, many feminists say. Recent Supreme Court of Canada decisions have  more often sided with men accused of  sexual assault than with the women who  have enough strength and courage to file  complaints [see Kinesis, March 1997.]  Yasmin Jiwani of FREDA (the Feminist  Research, Education, Development and  Action) says that "women who have many  records made about them are particularly  vulnerable. These include Aboriginal  women, women with disabilities and immigrant women. Record entries have often  been used to strategically discredit women  so that their experiences of sexual violence  are not believed."  The new law recognizes that indiscriminate disclosure of personal records  IIHIMIIIIMI  Sao gam Grant R.P.C.  MUSTERED PROFFESSIOMAL COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  whet the music chatges se Sees the deece...  may keep women from reporting sexual  assaults to the police and from seeking assistance. Listing eleven examples of insufficient grounds for mandatory disclosure,  Bill C-46 put forward a test to determine  whether personal records will be disclosed  in a court of law.  According to a criminal law professor  at the University of British Columbia:  Christine Boyle, "Bill C-46 promotes both  fair trials for accused persons and equality  for witnesses." Adds private therapist  Maureen McEvoy: "I'm very hopeful  judges will understand that the public in  strongly in support of women's right to be  able to speak about painful things and  know that their conversations will remain  private and will not jeopardize their right  to pursue legal action."  The No-disclosure Working Group  says its met recently to discuss the present  state of the law and strategies to increase  awareness of the impact of disclosure on  complainants.  Among the strategies discussed were  putting pressure on the BC Attorney General to hind legal representation for record  holders to resist subpoenas for women's  personal records, educating Crown Counsel and police about the provisions of Bill  C-46, and regularly monitoring of implementation of the new law.  The perils of cosmetics  Glam girls take note: studies show that  some brands of nail polish (Revlon and  Cutex) contain toluene, also known as methyl benzene, a substance which can cause  headaches, dizziness, nausea and loss of  appetite. Easily absorbed through the skin,  toluene can also affect the hormonal levels, mental functions, the liver, the heart and  the nervous system.  One added caution for women: toluene is difficult to eliminate from the body  if one is overweight, and should not be used  by pregnant women.  (Source: Sister Namibia, March 1997)  Single mothers work  more  Anew survey challenges poor-bashers  who contend that single mothers living in  poverty are lazy and aren't trying to improve their financial situation.  According to a recent report by Statistics Canada, single mothers are much more  likely than other workers to want to work  longer hours. This conclusion is based on a  1995 study of 19,143 workers: Working  More? Working Less?  The survey found that 40 percent of  single mothers would work even more  hours if given the choice, although many  of them already work long hours (paid and  unpaid). Overall, the study found that more  than 25 percent of those surveyed—particularly younger workers, and those with  lower levels of skills and education and in  less secure working situations—would take  on more work if it was available to ease  their financial constraints. Two-thirds of  those interviewed were content with the  number of hours they worked.  Families headed by single mothers are  more likely to experience poverty; hence,  many women are willing to work more  hours to attempt escaping poverty. This was  constant among single mothers in all provinces surveyed, with the strongest preference for more hours occurring in Nova  Scotia, New Brunswick and Newfoundland, provinces with very high levels of  unemployment.  US government restricts  abortions  A United States Senator says he will  lobby hard to get an anti-choice bill passed  unless President Bill Clinton drops his plan  to veto the bill.  Last month, both the US Senate passed  the Santorum Bill (sponsored by Republican Senator Rick Santorum) which bans  intact dilation and extraction (D&E) abortions [The anti-choice movement calls the procedure as "partial birth" abortion.] Immediately following, Clinton renewed his vow  to veto the ban, just as he did last year, on  the grounds that it does not make exceptions for allowing the procedure in the interest of protecting the health of a pregnant  woman, only her "life."  Santorum says he will continue to try  and change the minds of three additional  senators required to override a presidential veto.  If the ban is enacted into law, it would  be the first federal restriction of an abortion procedure since the 1973 US Supreme  Court decision in Roe vs Wade, which upheld a woman's right to choose to have an  abortion.  According to Emma Lewzey in Pro-  Choice News (Spring 1997), the newsletter  of the Canadian Abortion Rights Action  League: "over the past few months, anti-  choice misinformation and inaccurate statistics have all compounded the confusion  that exists about [so-called 'partial birth  abortion']...It is a clash that has reached titanic proportions and is heading up Canada's way."  D&E is a procedure that is used in later  term pregnancies where there is a risk to  the life or health of the mother, or a severe  anomaly in the fetus.  In Canada, late term abortions are rare.  Only .06 percent of abortions are performed  past 24 weeks. The ban that would make  the intact dilation and evacuation procedure illegal in the US in fact prohibits all  D&E methods. The D&E method is used  for second trimester abortions (12-18  weeks) because it is the safest procedure. If  this bill is enacted then American women  seeking abortions in this phase of pregnancy will be forced to use riskier procedures.  Critics of the Santorum bill say that its  enactment will undoubtedly face court  challenges because it is incompatible with  Roe vs Wade and other Supreme Court  precedents. The threat that this ban poses  to US women's reproductive choices is immense. The anti-choice movement that has  pushed this bill through the Senate twice  will continue with its campaign of misinformation, fear, and moral repugnance.  It is imperative to counter the anti-  choice propaganda lobby that has allowed  this ban on safe and necessary abortion  procedures to get so far through the American legislature.  For more information about D&E and  other pro-choice struggles, contact CARAL,  344 Bloor St. W, Suite 306, Toronto, ON, M5S  3A7. Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  compiled by Sook C. Kong and  Dorcas  Philippine Women  Centre wins award  The Philippine Women Centre, located  in the Strathcona community area in Vancouver, has won an award for its "significant contribution(s) to the economic development of the community." Since its founding seven years ago, the Centre has taken  several initiatives to empower immigrant  women through self-help projects and community economic programs: including a  successful catering service, a housing cooperative, a "Paluwagan" or savings circle,  an educational loan program and a store.  The award was presented to the Centre by  the CCEC Credit Union. The credit union  gives out these recognition awards annually.  The Philippine Women Centre also  provides services such as advocacy and  education, support and solidarity, the production of cultural events, skills training,  referrals, networking and fundraising. The  Centre also publishes Centre Update, its  quarterly newsletter.  Film on pioneer Chinese  women released  Under the Willow Tree: Pioneer Chinese  Women in Canada will have its Western  Canada premiere on June 6 in the Lord  Strathcona School auditorium. The National Film Board documentary, directed by  Dora Nipp and produced by Margaret  Wong, chronicles the lives of the first Chinese women who came to Canada, ("Gold  Mountain".) Their brave lives are narrated  via stories their daughters and granddaughters share with Nipp, a Toronto lawyer and social historian.  Mabel Yee, one of the narrators, says:  "I never heard [my mother] complain. Back  then, Chinese women believed that it was  their destiny to endure hardship." Emma  Quon, another storyteller featured in the  film, says: "Our mothers, who all these  years had stayed indoors looking after their  families, came out and stood on street corners selling tags to perfect strangers... they  did whatever they had to do to help the  war effort. I'm very proud of them".  Several of the women featured in the  film also also had their stories published  in the book of oral histories, Jin Guo: Voices  of Chinese Canadian Women (Women's Press,  1992), co-edited by Dora Nipp.  Under the Willow Tree traces history as  far back as 1860 when the first Chinese  women landed in Victoria, BC. As women,  they fought against the various forms of  racism they faced in Canada, while challenging sexism within their own community. By passing on language, culture and  values to their children, these women  helped define what it means to be Canadian.  The Vancouver premiere of the film is  being organized by the Strathcona Community Centre Association to celebrate the  Centre's 25 years of service to the  Strathcona community. The premiere will  also include a reception and discussion  with Nipp, producer Margaret Wong and  Hazel Chong, one of the women featured  in the film.  Under the Willow Tree will also be  screened from June 6 to 13. For tickets, call  the Strathcona Community Centre at 254-  9496.  The film can be purchased as a 52  minute VHS tape from the National Film  Board by calling 1-800-267-7710 in Canada  and 1-800-542-2164 in the United States (order number: C9197 016).  Tunisian refugee seeks  help  Monjia Abidi, a Tunisian refugee in  Britain and chair of "Women Against Torture in Tunisia" is asking women around  the world to pressure the Tunisian government to release her brother immediately  and unconditionally, and to stop harassing  her family. Abidi says that her own ordeal  in Tunisia began in May 1991 when the Tunisian government sent in troops to quell a  protest movement initiated by students and  other Tunisians. Abidi, who was then teaching at the University of Manouba, was arrested three times between 1991 and 1992  and was tortured each time.  Between 1992 and 1994, she was under police surveillance and was ordered to  report to two police stations three times a  week. She was also fired from her university job. Her parents' home was also under  constant surveillance. Because of the stress,  her parents suffered major health problems  such as hypertension and heart attacks.  When the duress became unbearable,  Abidi decided to leave Tunisia. After she  had fled, Tunisian authorities focused their  attention on her family members. In April  1996, Mohammed Habit Hemissi, Abidi's  eldest brother, was tortured and imprisoned after he had returned from attending  Abidi's wedding in London. His wife has  also been tortured.  Abidi is requesting that letters demanding the release of her brother and a  stop to harassment of her family be sent to  the Tunisian President. The case number is  24428/13. For more information, contact  Monjia Abidi, 50 Connell Crescent, London, W5 3BL, or via email: 100637.1271  ©compuserve.com  (Source: Women Envision, Isis International-Manila, February 1997)  Young women survivors  of sexual assault  FREDA, the Feminist Research, Education, Development and Action Centre, in  Vancouver, BC, has published the findings  of a study on the gaps in services for young  women survivors of sexual assault. The  community research project, conducted by  Zara Suleman and Holly McLarty, was  done with the support of the Women  Against Violence Against Women  (WAVAW) Rape Crisis Centre, a grassroots  feminist collective in Vancouver that strives  to end violence in the lives of women and  children.  From their interviews with community  workers, Suleman and McLarty discovered  that young women survivors are treated  differently by various systems and support  organizations: often they are not taken seriously; the validity of their experiences of  sexual assault is often questioned; and there  seems to be an attitude that (young) men  are not responsible for the crimes they commit while young women are irresponsible  and somehow to blame.  A frontline worker observed that  young women survivors are often "not informed of all their options, not assured of  any confidentiality of their stories, and not  believed or respected after the assault." The  same worker says: "Many young women  do not feel safe going to systems such as  the police, medical, court, social services,  et cetera."  Suleman and McLarty also identified  some of the obstacles young women survivors encounter when they need to access  post-assault services. These include lack of  information about sexual assault, possible  services and women's rights. Many of the  young women are no longer in the family  home and are also isolated. For the women  who are still living at home, the obstacles  include privacy in accessing services.  Many community workers interviewed for the study expressed "anger,  outrage and despair at the poor treatment  of young women from systems that are supposed to provide them with counselling  services, food, housing, shelter and other  kinds of support."  The researchers recommend a number  of ways to enhance services for young  women survivors, including the development of services that help advocate for  young women, from the first initial contact  with the medical systems through to the  conclusion of the court procedures. Rape  crisis centres attempt to fill in the service  gaps but do not have the level of funding  required to maintain such service on a consistent basis. Hence, Suleman and McLarty  stress that funding is a priority issue. They  also recommend that service agencies factor in issues such as racism and poverty  when they deliver services to young  women.  Suleman and McLarty's 10-month  study is published as Falling Through the  Gaps: Gaps in Services for Young Women Survivors of Sexual Assault. Copies can be obtained from FREDA, 515 W. Hastings St,  Vancouver, BC, V6B 5K3; tel: (604) 291-5197;  fax: (604) 291-5189; or e-mail: freda@sfu.ca.  Native youth magazine  debuts  The first issue of Redwire, a magazine  for Native youth, hit the streets of Vancouver this Spring. The lively, incisive and  eminently-accessible publication contains  a whole range of contributions by Aboriginal youths on their lives and identities in  contemporary Canada, Aboriginal land  rights, their knowledge of the historical and  current odds stacked against them, their  frustrations and their aspirations.  The writings in Redwire's premiere issue range from essays and interviews to  poems.  Traci, who is Kwaikiutl/Shuswap/  Koutenai First Nations, writes: "What is it  like being an Aboriginal Youth in today's  society? A word that comes immediately to  my mind is frustration. The frustration that  comes from genocide, oppression and  abuse... I am learning to confront and deal  with this frustration. Turn the tables to  strengthen myself, my family, and all our  people". Kristi Deranger, a young mother  from the Dene/Cree First Nations, writes:  "Being a Native Youth in today's society can  have its tolls. For me it's even more complicated because I am a young mother. I  have noticed that there are a lot of stereotypes and we, the Youth are harshly misjudged. But we are all survivors, and we're  gonna do what we can to take back our  land." And Tamara Starblanket, who is  Cree, says: "There are so many doors closed  on us because society does not respect our  voice."  Redwire was edited by Nena Pierre  and Billie Pierre. The first issue is sponsored  by the Vancouver Foundation and produced out of the Environmental Youth Alliance.  To obtain a copy of Redwire or to find  out about submitting pieces to future issues, contact Redwire at the Environmental Youth Alliance, PO Box 34097, Stn D,  Vancouver, BC, V6J 4M1; tel: (604) 873^734;  fax: (604) 877-1355.  New lesbian magazine  Sisterhood Magazine, a new publication  is looking for "womyn-loving-womyn"  across Canada to be its members. The Ottawa-based magazine provides services for  lesbians who want to connect with other  lesbians via "the age old art of letter-writing." (These letters will not be published.)  The folks at Sisterhood are also looking for  poetry, short stories and articles to be published in the magazine.  The goal of the magazine is "to offer  womyn across Canada a chance to socialize and participate within their lesbian  community on a literary level."  For a membership application, write  to Sisterhood Magazine, 2446 Bank St, Suite  402, Ottawa, ON, K1V1A2.  (Source: Herizons, Spring 1997)  Conference on domestic  violence in Asian  communities  The Asian Women's Shelter in San  Francisco, along with a number of other  organizations, is sponsoring California's  first-ever, state-wide conference on domestic violence in Asian communities. The  Gathering Strength '97 conference, featuring  more than 30 workshops, will be held at  San Francisco State University on June 20  and 21. Co-sponsors of the conference are  Narika, Cameron House, Nihonmachi Legal Outreach, and the Department of Women's Studies at San Francisco State University.  The mission of the conference is to:  raise visibility of and increase community  response to domestic violence in our Asian  and Pacific Islander (API) communities;  foster deeper discussion and understanding of domestic violence; document problems of and solutions to domestic violence  in our API communities; faciliate networking among advocates and activists; and develop new ideas and strategies together.  If you are interested in attending the  conference, call the Asian Women's Shelter's conference hotline at (415) 751-9711  ext #3.  Movement Matters continues on page 14 What is fibromyalgia?  Fibromyalgia (FM) is not a new phenomenon, although it has received very little public attention. Over 90 percent of people who have FM are women. It is a life-  changing condition that often leads to loss  and changes of job, poverty and/or isolation. Contrary to mythology, FM is not just  found in the Western hemisphere and has  nothing to do with fibroids. It has been  around a very long time and was called fi-  brositis. For a while, FM was treated almost  as a strain of rheumatic arthritis. More recently, FM has been confused with Chronic  Fatigue Syndrome (CFS).  In fact, FM is a chronic pain syndrome  involving widespread musculoskeletal  pain, fatigue, sleep disturbance and other  symptoms. The name "fibromyalgia"  means pain in the muscles and the fibrous  connective tissues, such as the ligaments  and tendons. FM is referred to as a syndrome, which is a set of signs and symptoms that occur together in combinations  and intensities that vary from person to  person. "Syndrome" is also used for disorders that medicine can't find a particular cause for—and therefore no cure, like  CFS and AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.)  Recently, FM has also been described  as a nervous system disorder. This is because signals of pain are sent to the brain  along nerves. The thin gap between two  nerves is bridged by a neuro-transmitter, a  particular chemical substance which signals pain to the brain. Research shows that  people with FM have a higher level of Substance P, the particular neuro-transmitter  that jumps when our muscles signal pain  to the brain.  Diagnosis: FM is diagnosed when a  doctor or rheumatologist conducts a test  that finds pain in 11 of 18 specific tender  points on the body [see graphic]. As well,  there has to be at least three months history of widespread pain. Numerous other  symptoms are also present, though not everyone experiences the same combinations  and degree of symptoms. These include:  non-restorative sleep; cognitive disorders;  lightheadedness; dizziness; depression,  anxiety attacks; emotional mood swings;  personality changes; heart palpitations;  chest pain; allergies; weight change, usually gain; severe PMS; carpal tunnel syndrome; dry eyes and mouth; cold hands  and feet; hair loss; irritable bladder syndrome; face and jaw pain; irritable bowel  syndrome; and unexplained rashes and  itching.  Treatment: There is no "cure" for FM.  There are different treatments, including  drug therapies (amitiiptyline, Flexerial,  Prozac, etcetera); physical therapies (mas  sage, chiropractic, physiotherapy, exercise,  etcetera); and alternative therapies (from  acupuncture and reflexology to herbal and  vitamin remedies, such  as malic acid, magnesium, St. John's  Wort, and vitamin B, etcetera).  See your health  practitioner for  therapies that  could work for  you.  Women and disabilities:  Figuring out fibro  Adapted from The Three Graces after Baron Jean-  BaptisteRegnault, 1793, Louvre Museum, Paris  by Susanna Tarn, Fatima Jaffer, and Tien Wee  Women make up 90 percent of the hundreds of thousands of people across  the world who live with a little known, yet increasingly common syndrome  called fibromyalgia (FM). Susanna Tarn is one of them. She represented  Kinesis at the First International Fibromyalgia Conference for Western  Canada (FIF), titled "Fibromyalgia: What you need to know," held in Vancouver in March. It was organized by the BC Fibromyalgia Society. Tarn  shares her thoughts on the conference in the following conversation with  Fatima Jaffer, a lesbian feminist with FM and a regular writer for Kinesis,  and Tien Wee, who lives with Susanna (and therefore FM). Tien attended  the conference.  Susanna Tarn: I first started to feel FM pain in 1986.1 went to a doctor and he said,  "Oh, just lift weights. You need exercise." I wasn't diagnosed with FM until much later,  around 1995.  Jaffer It's common to get doctors who don't take women seriously, and basically  make you feel it's your fault if you're in pain. It's that time-old issue of women having to  prove to everyone it's not just in our heads. It has taken me a long time since getting  diagnosed to believe I have a disability and that it's real.  Tarn: Not enough doctors right now believe FM is real, even though numerous studies are published on FM all the time. Even when they accept its existence, they can't cure  it so most don't want to deal with it. The responsibility of taking FM seriously falls almost entirely on individuals.  Jaffer So apart from recognition of it, the biggest things about FM are the pain and  the tiredness...  Tarn: Yet, it's not just "pain" and "tiredness." I get really annoyed when I talk about  FM with people and they say, "Oh, maybe I have it." Or you can't make it to some event  and someone says, "Well, I'm tired too! I'd like to not go too but I'm going." I'm like,  "Hello?? We're not talking about the tiredness you feel at the end of a long day, but tiredness where you are not able to get out of bed for days on end; not able to think." The pain  is also qualitatively different.  Jaffen Yes, I've come across that kind of disrespect, which is the most frustrating  part of h aving FM. I try to tell people about how you live with pain all the time—you can  stretch, you can move, you can twist your body around, you can sit or lie down or  stand...yet nothing relieves the pain. And it's excruciating. But it seems to be beyond  people's understanding, even in women's spheres, because they haven't heard of it.  Tarn: Another key symptom is non-restorative sleep, where one can sleep for maybe  12 hours and still not feel rested. People with FM tend not to reach what is called delta  sleep, which is where muscle regeneration takes place. This perpetuates the pain cycle  because the less sleep we get, the more pain we feel; the more pain we feel, the harder it  is to sleep.  Jaffen If we don't learn to manage sleep, muscle stiffness and ultimately damage  occurs, and some women with FM end up needing walkers and wheelchairs to get around.  Tarn: At that point, it's harder to get back your health. One speaker at the FIF conference talked about how it is important for pain to be identified sooner so it can be treated  sooner. This is why it is important to talk about FM publicly. The intent is not to make  everyone rush out and think they have FM, but to be aware of the symptoms, because  there are not many doctors who take this seriously.  Jaffen The effect FM has on our cognitive faculties surprised me. I thought FM was  doubly cruel because it tends to affect people in occupations like ours—journalism and  law.  Tien Wee: In fact, that's not true. Research has shown there was no particular personality types or occupations particularly at risk for FM.  Jaffer: That's good to know. The worst effect on my life as an activist, working at a  women's centre and volunteering for a feminist newspaper is the "fibro fog," where my  mind stops working. I can't think of what to say, absorb any information or even remember what I was thinking. Everything that came so easily to me before is now laborious,  difficult and much more time-consuming.  Tarn: In my job as an articled student [lawyer], in the space of one day, I would get 20  phone calls and have 20 tasks to perform at the same time. It was getting more and more  difficult. At first, I attributed it to just being tired, but eventually I had to leave my job. I  constantly have to remind myself it was not because I was bad at my job.  Other symptoms include depression, anxiety attacks, emotional mood swings and  personality changes. Those actually are obvious responses to living with FM in a world  that's not supportive of people with disabilities.  Some symptoms appear gradually over time, so initially I found I could force myself  to go on and ignore all the pain. I would go to work and just carry on. It took a long time  to stop imposing my will on my body and to realize that when all of me hurts, that is  probably when I am healthiest, because I am in touch with my body and its pain.  Jaffer: An important lesson I learned came from a book on chronic pain, where the  writers explained how we should accept and face chronic pain syndromes as part of our  lives, because accepting what you have can actually be the cure, so to speak. You start  listening to your body and living in a way that improves the quality of your life.  Tarn: I am constantly looking forward to a time when I'll be better. Then I realize that  that very hope is my downfall. I become more focussed on "fixing" it and getting better  than on making FM part of my life.  Jaffer: A notable aspect of FM is that 90 percent of people with FM are women. It  makes sense because we have exceptionally, and specifically stressful lives in a sexist  society.  Tarn: Our bodies react to many levels of stresses, emotional, physical, sexual. I know  from my experience that those of us who have suffered trauma are more likely to have  physical manifestations of our stress. Not everyone who survives abuse gets FM, but a  lot of us tend to get it.  Jaffer: I guess that means healing FM and other conditions has to be a holistic thing.  For me, that translates to my relationship with activism. I relate the sources of my pain to  activism, but I also connect my healing to my activism. Without the struggle for social  change, there can be no healing.  At a conference I attended, a Chilean woman with FM talked about how, in the  1970s, she put a lot of herself into organizing around the struggles in Chile. She said now  she's sick and has rethought a lot of things. She told us we need to talk about our health;  we need to stop trying to save the world; we need to start trying to save ourselves. An  Aboriginal woman responded, saying, "Some of us don't have a choice. We have to fight  back because that is our everyday, immediate survival." For me, it has to be a balance of  those two places...  Tarn: ...or more like an integration of the two. Listening to our bodies is, in some  ways, the most radical, revolutionary, subversive thing we can do. I believe in integration  because I think we have to understand the connections between problems and that everything is connected in some way to your body. My health has huge implications for my  work and the way I look at people around me. It is not a secondary thing. It's wrong to  imagine that you don't care about the world because you're focussing on your body.  There's a dangerous bi-polarization that's happening in the women's community—all  this giving until it hurts. What the hell is that? In reality, paying attention to your body is  not a surrender and it's not selfish. There is no conflict in integrating your personal well-  being and your work.  Jaffer: Did the FIF conference raise those kinds of issues?  Tarn: Not really. I don't attend many conferences anymore, partly because having  FM makes me feel more vulnerable and unsafe in the world. My energy is at such a  premium, I'm not willing to lightly lose it, so I avoid situations where I may have to deal  with racism. But in the end, I went to the conference because it was a forum to bring  attention to FM. I only attended one day of the conference. Most of the speakers, the —  "experts"—seemed to be from the USA. As I expected, I learnt about treatment strategies,  but not really anything about the realities of our lives.  Jaffen Who was in the audience?  Tarn: Well, considering the conference was two full days long and cost $200 a person  to attend, the response was overwhelming. About 250 people showed up. A lot had FM  or knew someone who did. There were a few doctors. The audience seemed to be predominantly middle and upper middle class and mostly women. The experts on stage  were mostly men. There were very few people of colour, maybe four or five.  Wee: The price of admission was prohibitive, considering many people with FM  don't work and if they do, it's only part-time.  Tarn: I think there were quite a few representatives from organisations that paid for  people to attend. We were encouraged to stand, stretch, lie down or walk around when  we needed it, but we were packed so tight, there wasn't room to do anything. Still, they  tried to make us comfortable.  Wee: I saw quite a few women with walkers.  Tarn: We saw five speakers on the first day, each taking turns presenting. It took a lot  of energy and concentration to consume that much information. One of the speakers was  a woman specializing in exercise. She talked about the importance of exercise not meant  to hurt but to relax, and about the differences between exercise for fitness and exercise to  deal with FM. She said it is important to stretch, but just enough to feel the resistance, not  like other people who stretch until they hurt. Imagine a hoopskirt from your neck downwards. We should not stretch beyond this hoopskirt. Anything in excess of that causes the  muscle micro-trauma and we don't get enough delta sleep to regenerate our muscles. For  example, when we were asked to raise our hands if we had FM, we were told not to raise  them above our heads because it would cause muscle-trauma.  It was great to get information about breaking the cycle of pain, where the last thing  you want to do is exercise but without exercise, you get even more pain. She talked about  starting off slowly—maybe one minute a day on a treadmill, and then adding another  minute every three weeks—not that I'm about to pay four bucks at a gym to do one  minute on a treadmill. She also had special instruction videos for sale. In fact, there are a  lot of things we could buy that would be so good for us, but most of us can't afford them.  Wee: It's difficult that so much of what can help costs so much, just when you are  least able to afford it.  Tarn: Yes. For example, there was a trade show attached to the conference where  there were books and stuff like body wedges and fitness balls for sale. Someone told me  their company sells largely to chiropractors' offices and massage therapists. Everything  cost a lot. For example, you could buy a $600 electrical impulse thing to wear in your ears  that gives shocks to energize you.  However, taking a walk around the block is cheap and can be helpful. But since  people with FM get our pain in different places, walking may not work for some.  There was only one speaker that day with FM himself, and he had the most practical  suggestions for living with FM. For example, he talked about things like the pain that  comes from having to tie a tie. He says he doesn't untie his tie, just slips it on. That's a  useful tip for avoiding muscle trauma.  J after: Overall, was there any talk about women's pain or our experiences being  different from men's, or any mention of why FM overwhelmingly affects women more  than men?  Tarn: No, not at all.  Jaffen So it was stripped of any political or gender content?  Wee: Yes. And in fact, there was no mention of class or poverty issues. The person  with FM who has been making a $100,000 a year or is married to someone who makes  that kind of money is going to have an intensely different reality than the woman with  FM who's been working in a factory for 16 years. FM has an everyday, every minute  impact on the realities of people living in poverty. Sometimes Susanna does not sleep at  night and it's hard to distinguish whether that has to do with worrying about paying the  bills or the pain. Those issues are interconnected and cannot be separated from the FM.  Tarn: Tien and I often joke about if I were still working in my stressful job but making  lots of money, would that be better stress than financial stress?  Jaffer. Well, having money gives you more options of ways to deal with stress. You  could go someplace warm to get away. You could also seek alternative therapies. People  often say, "Are you seeing a homeopath, or naturopath...?" Well, hello? These things cost  Continued on next page  Keep the arms where they belong  Stay in the  HOOP Feature  Continued from previous page  money. If you were working before, chances are you've lost your job and have to face the  fact that: "Hey, I'm not going to have the car or the bank savings I thought I was going to  have," or "I'm not going to be able to support my mother, especially when she divorces my  dad," and "I'm going to die alone. " Things like that.  Tarn: Another striking thing was that, although the purpose of the conference was to  share information about FM, I'm not sure if the organizers were effective in ensuring that  happened. I attended as media, representing Kinesis. But I didn't see a lot of other media  there. I also didn't get packages of information about the speakers, like the other attendees.  How did they expect information to be disseminated? The Vancouver Sun ran a story on the  conference before it was held, but I haven't read or seen anything else in the mainstream  media about the conference since.  Jaffen A big issue for people with FM is day-to-day stress. I gather that wasn't talked  about much at the conference?  Tarn: Again, not really. I think the issue of support is really key. When you're in pain,  you find you have to eliminate things around you which add to that, like friends who are  complete jerks. You don't need to come home after hanging out with someone feeling totally stressed out.  Jaffer: Losing people in my life who were causing me stress has been the most painful  part of living with FM, as has losing the opportunity to contribute politically because you  just can't be there to the same extent as before. You know, the giving until it hurts stuff.  But I realize making new friends and finding new interests also takes enormous amounts  of energy. It's now actually stressful for me to spend time with people I don't know well or  to absorb new information. I also find spending energy getting to know someone can backfire. What if that person decides she's not going to make a space for you in her life? What  happens when she realises you're always going to have FM, that it's not just a two or three  month phase. You end up having wasted energy and they move on after having merely  "visited" the way you live.  Many times, you don't have a choice about losing people—f reinds, co-workers, whatever. You'd like to give more or do something, but you can't force someone to accept some  part of yourself. So friends you thought cared about you drop out of your life because you  don't expend the same energy you used to and you're not the same person anymore. Your  friends are being asked to accept another "you" and they sometimes choose to reject this  "different" person.  Tarn: But they are looking at the surface. It's about not understanding that you don't  have the energy anymore to stay up late all night at parties or attend four-hour meetings  threetimes a week. We live in a world where people think their needs are the same as other  people's. It's like saying, "I'll hang out with you not because I like you, but because you  make me feel good. Once you stop fulfilling that purpose, you lose the reason for being  "friends."  Jaffer. Many women give to the point where they run around after people, put a lot of  energy into making them feel good, things like that. I limit people like that in my life now.  Tarn: During a conversation with a woman, she suddenly "got it!" I was trying to  explain to her that I was having a good time with her, but I had timed my visit because I  knew how draining it would be. I was being witty and entertaining and all the things we  are when we hang out with people. It was taking a lot of energy. Suddenly she said, "You're  using all your energy and then you're going to go home with your body tired." That's it.  The reality is, I'm going to go home and be on my back for two days...  Jaffen ...with no energy left to do anything good for yourself.  Tarn: I learned that these glimpses my friends have of me aren't really me: they're me  when I'm pushing myself. How can you get someone to understand your pain and your  fatigue when they see you only when you're living it up?  Jaffen That's true even within the women's movement. People treat me like I'm just  like them all the time, and I feel like I can't say anything because I act like I'm just like them.  -A woman-owned and operated business specializing in defensive driver training.  Learn to drive regardless of age or previous experience;  overcome driving fears.  Reasonable rates. Call El Apostol.  Become a confident and safe driver with an experienced instructor.  Tie MA fflfW  Charming, one bedroom, water-view cottage  FOfc u/omEti  100 ft from walk-on beach and nature trails  Ifl SUflflV SOUTH EMD OF GflBTcJOLA ISLflMD  N/S $500.00/week.  tel: 1-250-247-7477  http ://nanaimo. ark.com/~tignamna  "I relate the sources of my pain to  activism, but I also connect  my healing to my activism.  Without the struggle for social  change, there can be no healing."  - Fatima Jaffer -  Then, when I ask them for consideration, they're reluctant to give it to me. So I blame  myself.  Tarn: When I make a commitment to do something, I find the energy to do it. I will  be functional and effective. I'm not going to sacrifice that. What I need is people to  understand that I've chosen to put energy into that commitment. It doesn't come like it  does for others. They only see me once a month and when they see me, I look great  because I've prepared for that moment. I want them to look beyond that.  Jaffen Exactly. I see it as not asking to change the rules, but to change the entire  game. We've heard from single mothers, women of colour, Aboriginal women and  women with disabilities for years that the way things are structured doesn't work for  us. It's not about individuals changing, but about systemic change, including the way  we do things at women's centres.  But the resistance goes back to that thinking of: "If I don't experience it, it doesn't  exist." If I don't experience racism, I can't fight it. But you're living racism too, on the  other side. You can choose to recognize my reality even if you don't experience what I  experience. You can be my ally.  Tarn: Sometimes I imagine I'm in an autobiographical movie. You pick the one or  two things that sort of define you. At this moment, FM is a key part of my identity. I  would shoot footage of all the times I am in pain, retching at the sink and that kind of  stuff. I feel I have to show what FM is like before people realize it's real. I wish I could  make that movie and show people so they would know.  Jaffen That's it. You have to make the movie for people to care. Facts alone don't  cut it. We live in a capitalist world, built on hierarchies. That means, we accept that  someone always has to be at the bottom. That is how we treat each other. Tough luck.  Nothing's going to change to accommodate you. But I don't want to be the only one  changing to fit "reality." I want everyone to shift and change and all our realities to be  centre.  Tarn: It's a process. We have grown so much through talking to each other about  past abuse. Some of us can now hear each other on those things. But with FM, I feel like  I still have to prove it, define it. It's ridiculous for people to need evidence that I feel  bad. On the other hand, I don't want to sit in a room with women saying, "I'll show you  my trauma and you show me yours."  Thanks to Selina Todd for transcribing.  British Columbia  Other Canadian FM groups include:  Fibromyalgia Society has free  Fibromyalgia Support Group of  information handouts on FM. It  Calgary  also offers a newsletter, informa  196 Bow Green Crescent NW  tion on treatment programs in  Calgary, Alberta T3B 4R8  BC, how to set up self-help  Phone:(403)247-5017  groups, and listings of books  and videos.  Fibromyalgia Association of  P.O. Box 15455  Saskatchewan  Vancouver, BC  P.O. Box 7525  V6B 5B2  Sakatoon, Saskatchewan S7K 4L4  Tel: (604) 540-0488  Phone: (306) 772-6979  Fibromyalgia Self-help Support  Fibromyalgia Support Group of  Group in Vancouver, BC.  Winnipeg, Inc.  Contact: Wendy Snelgrove at  825 Sherbrooke Street  (604) 732-8764  Winnipeg, Manitoba R3A 1M5  Meetings are held first Wednes  Phone: (204) 772-6979  day of each month from 1-  3:30pm at St. Philips Anglican  Ontario FM Association  Church, 3737 West 27th, in the  250 Bloor St. E.  Fireside Room.  Suite 901  Toronto, Ontario M5W 3P2  Phone: (416) 967-1414 Arts __  A whole season later, Ellen DeGeneres comes out on TV:  What took you so long?  a conversation between Karen  Martin, Wendy Frost, Faith Jones,  Winnifred Tovey and Audrey  Johnson   During the production of this month's issue of Kinesis, an informal conversation broke  out in the office among a number of women.  The topic of conversation: Why of course, their  reactions to Ellen's coming-out circus. The conversation included lesbians and straight  women, Ellen fans and women who had never  seen an episode of Ellen before the coming-out  show.  Karen: I love Ellen because she's intelligent and funny, and she's a good role  model because her character hasn't fallen  into the regular heterosexual female character  type on TV which portrays  women's lives as revolving  around men. She can be  goofy. And the way she  dresses is androgynous.  She doesn't have to be  made up. For me, as a heterosexual woman, it didn't  make any difference to me  whether the character was  heterosexual or lesbian. I  just like what she represents. She's the only  woman on television who dresses like I do.  Wendy: I was amazed at how many  people were talking about it and knew  about it. My straight sister in Ottawa,  phoned me to say, "call me up, I want to  talk to you about the Ellen show, wasn't it  great?" While that wasn't a complete surprise, because she's very supportive about  me being a lesbian, I just don't expect  straight people to notice things in the popular culture that are important to lesbians.  Winnifred: They could hardly fail to  notice Ellen coming out.  Wendy: That's true. But I was surprised that so many straight people wanted  to watch it and gossip about it.  "Because it's a mainstream production, I expected it to be lame. But Ellen's  coming out was dealt with sensitively.  Ellen was really nervous, and I think  half of the lesbian population can relate  to that."  - Sook C. Kong  "Even now, weeks after the episode aired, I still have relatives asking me if I saw the show. These are  the same relatives who have been  wondering about me. Strange but  true, Ellen is actually bringing a lot  of families together, even my own.  They loved the show'. I...Hey I Where's  my toaster oven?"  - Michelle Sylliboy  "I was very cynical about Ellen,  but then both my parents said they  were going to watch the show. I think  Ellen was useful for a straight audience because it made lesbianism accessible to people who would otherwise ignore the issue. It did shift my  parents."  - Centime Zeleke  Faith: I was talking to this girl [at a  youth organization] where I work, and she  told me she'd been watching Ellen  [DeGeneres] and her girlfriend [Anne  Heche] on Oprah. She commented that  Ellen's girlfriend wasn't even a lesbian before she met Ellen. I said, neither was my  girlfriend. I converted her, but I didn't even  get a toaster oven out of it.  Winnifred [girlfriend in question]:  But there were other rewards-  Faith: And speaking of rewards,  what's Ellen's reward in all of this? It's the  same old story about lesbians in the me  dia. We're used  for our shock  value, for titilla-  tion, but what do  we get out of it?  ABC and Disney  completely exploited it for its  market value, yet  Ellen herself has no job security. She doesn't  even know if she still has a job. The show  hasn't been definitely renewed for next  year.  When Ellen first started, I was really  irritated because in the first year they had  all these plot lines about her looking for the  perfect man. It  was totally obvious to me that  she's a lesbian,  and I just  couldn't handle  that she was doing all these stories about being  a heterosexual.  They dropped  that storyline  pretty quick.  And even this  year, when they  were leading up to her coming out, the joke  wore pretty thin.  Karen: I just wanted her to get it over  with. We all know, just come out! They  dragged it out for the entire season. That's  a bit ridiculous.  Audrey: Why does it take a fictional  character to come  out before it becomes an important issue?  Winnifred:  The thing that  was really strange  for me was that  Ellen had to wait  for her character  to come out before she could  come out for real.  Everybody has been treating her as a lesbian for a long time, but it wasn't until they  went through all the hoops with the sponsors and the network and everything, before Ellen, the real-life person, could come  out. And if they hadn't gone through those  hoops, if they had tried and the network  had said forget it—Ellen, the character, isn't  coming out— would the real person have  come out?  Karen: Getting back to the whole economic issue, regular sponsors did pull off  the show...  Winnifred: And ABC refused to run  specifically gay or lesbian ads. They  thought a lesbian cruise line would be poor  taste.  Wendy: They thought we [lesbians]  might want to exploit the audience, and  that wouldn't do.  Karen: There was this woman on the  Oprah show, when Ellen and her girlfriend  were on, who said we shouldn't expose our  kids to sex on television and I just won-  "I thought the terminology was  strange. Is it an American thing to say  'gay,' instead of 'lesbian'? What I liked  more was the 20/20 interview (with Ellen  DeGeneres and her family) after the show  because it dealt with many of the difficult issues of coming out."  - Rita Wong  dered where she'd  been for the last however long.  Heterosexual sex is all over,  everywhere. That's  part of what I  liked     about  Ellen — she  didn't have to  do all that.  Wendy: Let's talk about the actual show. My favourite part was  with her and Laura Dern where  they're both doing their imitations  of Billy Bob Thornton in Slingblade.  It totally captured that thing when you're  just meeting someone and you're attracted  to them and you can goof around and make  each other laugh. And when do you ever  see that between two women on TV or in  the movies?  Karen: I think it was good the way they  showed Ellen with her therapist, coming  to terms with the question: was that the first  time she'd felt those feelings for a woman?  At first, Ellen says yes, then she starts to  realize there were other times too. I think  thaf s really important. I'm not a lesbian but  I think that's what it's probably like, coming to terms with your feelings and getting  comfortable with who you are.  Audrey: I didn't watch the show.  Winnifred: I liked the toaster oven.  Faith: I liked seeing all those Hollywood dykes together. They all supported  each other. It makes you wonder who else  in Hollywood is "that way."  Wendy: Aside from the ones we know  about who aren't  telling...we won't say  who they are because  we could get sued,  but you know who  they are.  Karen: It's also  important for our  children to see diversity in any form on  TV. I think it influences their lives. My  daughter lives in a  neighbourhood where there are a lot of lesbians, so to never see a lesbian or a gay man  on TV is ridiculous.  Faith: You do see  lesbians and gay men  as side kicks, but not  as main characters.  And when they appear, they usually  perform as an aspect  of the main character's coolness. "See  how cool this person  is, he's got a lesbian  friend." How broad-  minded. How liberal. How cosmopolitan.  Then the lesbian character disappears for  the next fourteen episodes. If Ellen keeps  running, they obviously can't make the  main character disappear. Also, the straight  people are not uniformly cool about it.  Karen: The best friend [Paige] is definitely threatened. She's very heterosexual.  "It's quite wonderful that we don't  have to hear about our lesbian and gay  sisters and brothers through the grapevine anymore. That they can actually  come out on their shows is a great step  forward. There was a lot of hype to  boost ratings, and it's nice we're having that effect."  - Jill Stainsby  She thinks their whole relationship was a  lie.  Faith: ...because every lesbian is automatically in love or lust with every straight  woman who crosses her path. This is really an assumption straight women make,  so it's actually quite realistic.  Winnifred: It sort of shows this thing  that people have, this fear that being gay  or lesbian is catching. Like a disease.  Wendy: I think that's not so weird. It's  not as weird as thinking we're born that  way. It seems to me that being exposed to  people who are gay might actually allow  you to explore the possibility that you could  be gay or lesbian. It is catching. But not a  "I found the hype around the  show—all the people having parties  for a fictional character—so bizarre.  So I boycotted it. Of course, I never  watch TV anyway."  - Kelly Haydon  Karen: It allows a person to realize that  there are many sexual possibilities.  Wendy: I wouldn't be a lesbian if it  weren't for the second wave of the women's movement. The social possibility being there enables people to choose, to decide, to try it out.  Faith: No matter how much social  pressure there is not  to be gay or lesbian,  some people always  are. But many of us  would have just  tried to be heterosexual and maybe  not known why we  were so unhappy.  Karen: Just like what Ellen went  through on the show. Trying to be heterosexual but being really unhappy.  Wendy: Although, since a lot of heterosexual women are unhappy, sometimes  it's hard to tell what's causing it.  Karen: Hence Ellen's confusion for so  many years. "I'm a heterosexual woman.  I'm unhappy, this is normal."  JUNE 1997  13 Continued from page 9  Violence research  centres in jeopardy  Five regional centres which conduct  research on violence against women and  children may be forced to shut down unless their funding is extended to them.  Since 1992, Health Canada and the  Social Sciences and Humanities Research  Council (SSHERC) have funded five regional violence research centres in Vancouver, Winnipeg, London, Montreal and  Fredericton. The centres are mandated to  undertake research which can be used to  end domestic violence.  But this vital work may be in jeopardy  as the funding agreement with Health  Canada and SSHERC expires at the end of  this year. The centres are calling on the federal government to ensure continued funding.  Violence against women is endemic in  Canadian society, and according to Statistics Canada, BC has the highest rate, at 59  percent. Vancouver's domestic violence research centre, FREDA (Feminist Research,  Education, Development and Action Centre), has worked since its inception to build  bridges between frontline workers, academics and policy makers. In teaching research skills to community groups, organizing roundtable discussions with policy  makers, and developing public awareness  through writing, interviews and public  speaking, FREDA has continued to raise  issues of violence against women.  According to FREDA's executive coordinator Yasmin Jiwani, "It is imperative  that the violence research centres exist because they're able to monitor policy implementation, provide feedback, and add to  the body of knowledge that already exists  about violence against women and children."  Jiwani points out that the Liberal government recently committed over $800 million towards research in science and technology. Research on domestic violence is  just as critical, if not more so, given the immediate life and death consequences.  FREDA is calling on anyone committed to ending violence against women to  write their members of parliament in support of the re-funding of violence research  centres at similar levels.  For more information contact Yasmin  Jiwani at FREDA, 515 W. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V6B 5K3; tel: (604)291-5197; fax:  (604) 291-5189; e-mail:freda@sfu.ca.  NAPO releases anti-  poverty kit  NAPO (the NationalAnti-poverty Organisation) recently issued a "Poor Bashing" Kit for use during the election and  beyond. Entitled "Opening Our Doors: Respecting Low Income Canadians," the objective of the kit is to raise awareness with  all politicians about the problem of poor  bashing in Canada and to explicitly seek a  pledge from all members of parliament that  they will not poor bash.  The kit consists of a detailed pledge  form, a how-to sheet for politicians on respecting low income Canadians, a page of  popular myths about poverty, and fact  sheets on Canada's economic ills. During  the election, NAPO asked local organizations to use these kits when meeting with  their local candidates. NAPO also followed  Movement Matters  Developing skills in sustainable communities  up with each of the parties in Ottawa to  get the leaders to sign the pledge. [Which  leaders signed was not known before Kinesis  went to press.J  Agreeing to the pledge would commit  politicians to "not prejudge low income  people based on stereotypes, nor assume  that all low income people are to blame for  their poverty; not blame low income people for not being able to find work; not support policies or legislation that create more  poverty in Canada; and address the concerns expressed to me by low income people."  By working at both national and local  levels NAPO hopes to get as many politicians as possible sensitized to the issue.  For more information and for copies  of the kit, call NAPO at 1-800-810-1076.  Bridge Housing Society  for Women  Ground breaking has begun on a new  housing and service centre for the women  of Vancouver's Downtown Eastside. Building affordable, safe housing in the Downtown Eastside is one of the most critical issues for women living in the area.  The Bridge Housing Society for  Women, who for over 20 years has been  spearheading and fundraising for the  project, says it plans to transform a parking lot at the southeast corner of Columbia  and Cordova Streets into a home for 47  women and a support centre for thousands  more.  The seven-storey masonry building  will have thirty-five one bedroom apartments on the top four floors and twelve  fully self-contained sleeping rooms on the  second floor. The roof will feature space for  gardening and socializing, and the ground  floor will be the new location for the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre. The centre will continue to serve the varied needs  of women throughout the entire community, including many who will choose to  live in Bridge House.  Financial support for the project has  been received from the BC Housing Management Commission, Women's Equality,  Social Services and the VanCity Community Foundation. Bridge Housing is in the  final stretch of fundraising for the project;  with six mill already raised and just  $220,000 to go!  The Bridge Housing Society for  Women welcomes your response, suggestions and support. Please write to Bridge  Housing Society for Women, PO Box 4436,  Vancouver, BC,V6B3Z8.  Women and APEC Conference  A coalition of women's organizations  in BC are organizing the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC  (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) to be  held in Vancouver from November 17-18.  The timing of the conference coincides with  the meeting of leaders of the eighteen APEC  member nations.  At the First International Women's  Conference on APEC held in Manila, Philippines last year, a resolution was passed  asking the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women (NAC), a national coalition of women's organizations in Canada,  to hold the subsequent conference.  Throughout this year, NAC and other  women's groups have been organizing the  second women and APEC conference.  In solidarity with sisters in Asia and the  Pacific Rim, conference organizers say they  reject APEC's trade liberalization policies  which promote human rights violations,  erosion of democracy and social justice,  environmental degradation, and increased  impoverishment of women and our communities.  Building on the last year's conference,  the Second International Women's Conference on APEC aims to increase awareness  about the many issues surrounding APEC  which will affect the lives of women in Asia  and the Pacific Rim, and to develop effective strategies to counter APEC's regressive  trade policies.  The organizing coalition invites  women to share their knowledge and experience with us by way of participation  and input into this conference that we are  organizing to counter APEC. The Second  International Women's Conference Against  APEC also is part of the broader plan of the  1997 People's Summit on APEC.  Women are encouraged to lend their  support in a number of ways: by contacting us with your ideas and suggestions,  volunteering or making a donation.  For further information, please contact:  Sunera Thobani,  Women's Studies, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, V5A1S6; tel: (604) 291-  4023; fax: (604) 291-5518; e-mail:  rjiwa@arts.sfu.ca  The next general meetings of the Steering Committee for the conference will be  on June 5 and July 7 at SFU Harbour Centre, Room 2945, 515 W Hastings St, Vancouver.  Discussing alternatives  to psychiatric system  Support Coalition International (SCI),  a non-profit alliance of 50 groups in seven  countries promoting human rights and alternatives in psychiatric system, is hosting  their first public event in Vancouver on  Wednesday, June 11, 5:30 to 7:30pm. The  event will be held in the Windsor Room at  the Hyatt Regency, 655 Burrard St.  SCI, a US-based umbrella group for  psychiatric survivors and their allies has  been working over the last seven years, has  organized diverse actions from government  lobbying to demonstrations, exposing "confidential" reports of drug related deaths in  mental hospitals, and supporting the families of these victims by accessing information and pushing for investigations.  (SCI) is currently focussing on three  campaigns. The first is ending force and  fraud in electroshock, which especially affects women over sixty-five. Another focus  is involuntary outpatient commitment, a  rising practice in many countries where  people who have committed no crime and  are judged to be "mentally incompetent"  to live in the community are nonetheless  forced to take psycho-active drugs, usually  in the form of a weekly shot of a long lasting "chemical straitjacket." Several studies  have shown that Black people in the US are  more likely to be put on outpatient commitment orders and receive higher doses  of medication. SCI's third campaign is a  humorous drive to "Heal Normality."  Co-ordinators Janet Foner and David  Oakes will be hosting the event, with music by satiric folk-rock group the Cognitive  Dissidents.  SPARC of BC (Social Planning and Research Council), in partnership with several other organizations, is holding its ever  popular Community Development Institute (CDI) in Sechelt, BC from July 27 to  August 1.  The CDI is a brings together people of  all ages and sectors for an exchange of information and skills on local leadership for  sustainable communities. Co-op development for women, women and unpaid  work, ecological literacy, youth entrepre-  neurship, social justice and many other  community development issues will be  some of the topics covered through the 78  workshops offered by experienced and  skilled facilitators.  There will also be many opportunities  for learning practical skills and for having  fun: cultural events, music, art, theatre and  a traditional Welcoming Feast at the Sechelt  Potlatch Longhouse.  A limited amount of bursaries will be  made available.  For more information, call Zarina  Mulla at SPARC BC, (604) 736-5576.  "INSPIRING  B I O P I R A C Y  THE  PLUNDER OF  NATURE AND  KNOWLEDGE  by Vandana Shiva  "Vandana Shiva's inspiring book is a  clarion call to preserve the genetic commons against increasing commercial  encroachment and should be widely  read and discused by everyone concerned with the fate of the Earth."  - Jeremy Rifkin  author of The End of Work  148 pp, $13.95 pbk. isbn 1-896357-11-3, April 1997  s^etwfien^hedirias  720 Bathurst St., #404, Toronto, Ont., Canada M5S 2R4  phone (416) 535-99H   fax (416) 535-1484  BOOKSTORES dear   re ade r s  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  Dear Kinesis,  Thank you for bringing forward the  issue of funding changes in Women's  Program that is going to impact on the  work that women's groups across  Canada are doing. The article by  Emilie Coulter in Kinesis nails down  the point very precisely. Women's  groups in Saskatchewan are opposed  to these changes because they  systematically oppose equality for  women while putting this forward as  one of the reasons for change.  The Secretary of State for the Status  of Women [Hedy Fry] confirmed  during her meeting with women's  groups in Saskatchewan that while the  pot of money would remain the same,  new groups would be funded.  Women's program spends $8.1 million  on women's groups and organizations  across Canada. This translates into  approximately 50 cents per woman or  girl. Compare this to the $9 billion  spent on defence this year.  While there is no direct cut to the  funding pool for women's  organizations, funding new groups  without increasing the total budget will  amount to cuts for some women's  groups. Of course, this is going to pit  women's groups against each other,  and contradicts the mandate of the  Status of Women Canada (SWC) to  "enhance the effectiveness of actions  undertaken by women's organizations  to improve the situation of women."  SWC would like to "eliminate the  hierarchy among women's groups," as  one regional program officer said to a  women's group, alluding to groups  that receive program funding. This is  perhaps the agenda of SWC, and the  new criteria would very well help  them eliminate women's groups that  have brought forward the issues that  impact women's full participation in  society.  SWC has devised a new direction in  funding that is out of touch with the  grassroots feminist movement, and is  in fact a whirlpool of bureaucratic  jargon aimed at eliminating those  groups that do not toe the line set by  SWC. The narrow criteria that focusses  on just three areas—improving  women's economic status, eliminating  systemic violence against women and  the girl child, and achieving social  justice—creates yet another hurdle as  JUNE 1997  women's groups will have to compete  to qualify or be left out. The article  very rightly points out that women's  groups "have core administrative  needs and need resources to meet  those needs."  To distract women's organizations  from the equality agenda by focussing  on projects is a way of silencing  women. SWC is developing "indicators  which will allow a program to evaluate  how funded activities advance  women's equality." Aren't these really  well guised control mechanisms that  will serve as deterrents to the  empowerment and progress of  women? This is obvious because where  SWC determines an organization is not  contributing to its own objectives and  activities, it may withdraw funding. It  doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure  out that there is a perception that SWC  can pick and choose who they wish to  fund.  We agree SWC did not hear what  women said at the consultation, and  while they are bickering about the fact  that this funding is neither program  funding nor project funding, but  perhaps both, getting fixated on how  this funding is described is  unimportant. The bottom line is that  groups presently receiving funding  will face cuts. Once again, women who  work for these organizations will be  out of work, and as for pay equity  under SWC's new criteria, well I guess  they figure NGO women do not  deserve to be paid for work of equal  value.  One has only to scrutinize the  document on the new funding criteria  to recognize that women's groups that  receive program funding are on the  brink of elimination. Saskatchewan  Action Committee on the Status of  Women received copies of letters  written to the Secretary of State for the  Status of Women expressing opposition  to the changes. We have always  maintained that women's groups and  organizations need to be core funded,  and that more money should be put  into the program to fund new groups  while continuing ongoing support to  established ones.  Keep up the good work Kinesis and  all you courageous women who never  fear to bring these issues forward.  In sisterhood and solidarity,  Kripa Sekhar  Saskatchewan representative for the  National Action Committee on the Status  ofWomen  Regina, Saskatchewan  Dear Kinesis,  Re: Women and the federal election in  Canada: "Listen to what we say" by Agnes  Huang and "Co-opting our agenda" by  Emilie Coulter, May 1997.  As the Secretary of State (Status of  Women), a feminist, and someone who  is committed to increasing the social  safety net I would like to clarify some  issues raised in the last edition of  Kinesis.  In particular, as a physician, I share  your concern about women's poverty  and its effects on women's health. Our  government's commitment to the  principles contained in the Canada  Health Act is unequivocal. These  principles will be maintained.  Through the Canada Health and  Social Transfer (CHST), the federal  Liberal government is providing major,  continuing and predictable  contributions to the provinces and  territories. We have guaranteed a  minimum cash floor of $12.5 billion  under the CHST and dedicated $150  million in spending through the Health  Transition Fund for pilot projects on  community healthcare, homecare and  pharmacare.  Women's economic condition, their  health and well-being, social justice  and systemic violence against women  have been ongoing priorities for our  government. We have:  • created five Centres of  Excellence for Women's Health;  • directed that all new clinical  trials for drugs include women;  • reformed the tax structure of the  child support system and ensured  standardization and enforcement of  child support payments;  • worked with the provinces and  territories on an $850 million National  Child Benefit system to be outlined  next year. This program will help 1.4  million low income families;  • developed a new Seniors'  benefit under which nine out of ten  single senior women will be better off,  as it will be tax free and fully indexed.  The government's policy to conduct  gender-based analysis (GBA), where  appropriate, is an important stepping  stone to women's equality. With GBA,  federal departments will analyze their  policies, programs and legislation to  take into account the impact on women  and men. GBA was called for in the  Beijing Platform for Action from the  1995 Fourth UN Conference on  Women, is promoted by feminists  around the world, and is being  implemented by countries that are  seeking progress on women's equality.  In part because of GBA, child  support reform is a reality, solutions in  Canada Pension Plan reform will be  fair between women and men,  questions of unpaid work were  included in the 1996 Census.  In March, I announced a new  direction for the Women's Program  that supports the work of women's  organizations and other equality-  seeking groups.  I consulted extensively with  community and national women's  groups before making changes to the  Women's Program. Those consulted  asked us to address the  interconnectedness of women's  equality issues and the diversity of  women to level the playing field for  groups applying for funding, to build  in flexibility to respond to new and  emerging issues, and to continue  consulting and working closely with  women's organizations.  Here are some of the facts about the  changes:  • The budget stays constant at  $8.1 million annually with the  exception of an additional $1.25  million over five years to address  family violence. The focus remains on  women's equality. "^  • Beginning April 8,1998, we will  level the playing field for those seeking  financial assistance by creating one  funding mechanism that will be  applied flexibly to all groups large and  small.  • Operational costs such as rent  and salaries will still be ebgible for  funding related to the Program's areas  of focus and to the needs of the  organization.  • We're moving to make multi-  year funding available beginning next  year. Contrary to popular belief, the  Women's Program criteria have never  allowed funding for more than one  year.  • We are not moving towards a  system of matching funding, in large  part because women's organizations  said it was inappropriate when we  consulted them in the spring of 1996.  I would like to clarify any  misconceptions about the research  fund. On the recommendation of  women's groups we created an  Advisory Committee, which was made  up of women chosen by the peer  group. This committee named all the  women to sit on the Research Granting  Board. I have accepted and confirmed  the appointments of these names. They  will be the ones who choose and define  the research grants.  While we all share the goal of  equality, I don't expect that women in  Canada will ever be in full agreement  as to the best way to achieve it. Our  voices are diverse; we have much  common ground and some differences.  But, SWC is committed to keeping the  lines of communication open and  working to find the common ground.  Yours sincerely,  The Honourable Hedy Fry, P.C.M.P.  Ottawa, Ontario  [Kinesis Editorial Board responds:  Kinesis stands by the two articles we ran.] Bulletin Board  read    this!     INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C V8K 2C8  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our next Story Meetings Tues Jun 3 at 7 pm at our office, 309-  877 E. Hastings St. For more information or  if you can't make the meeting, but still want  to find out about writing for Kinesis, give  Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499. No  experience is necessary. Childcare and  travel subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  July/August 1997 issue is from Jun 17-25.  No experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Thurs  Jun 19 at 7pm at VSW, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For more info, call 255-5511.  Please call before the orientation to  confirm attendance. Childcare subsidies  available.  OPEN HOUSE  The Vancouver Status of Women and  Kinesis invites women who support us to  come to our official open house on Thurs  Jun 5. Drop in anytime between 2-8pm for  a guided tour, complete with refreshments.  Don't forget our new address: 309-877 E.  Hastings St (between Campbell and  Hawks). Of course, you're welcome to drop  by any other time as well (during our  regular office hours, Monday to Thursday  9:30am-5pm) to check our space, our  resources and find out more about the  work we do.  VSW AGM  VSW will host its Annual General Meeting  on Wed Sept 24 from 7-9pm. Members are  invited to come and hear about the exciting  happenings at VSW over the last year, and  vote for a new Coordinating Collective for  1997/1998. There will be a special surprise  for all those who attend. To become a  voting member send $10 to VSW, 877 East  Hastings, Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1. Get  involved in BC's leading feminist organization. Aboriginal women, women of colour  and women with disabilities are encouraged to participate in the work of VSW. Call  Audrey at 255-6554 for more info.  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Disroiiri/s/or  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  Special orders  Voice   604 752-4128  welcome  Fax       604 752-1129  10-* Daily  •   12-5 Sunday  OUT ON SCREEN  Out On Screen, Vancouver's Annual Queer  Film and Video Festival, will be presenting  screenings of It's Elementary: Talking  About Gay Issues in School Sat Jun 21,  4pm and 7pm at the Havana Cafe, 1212  Commercial Dr. It's Elementary takes  cameras into classrooms to look at how  gay issues should be discussed in the  schools, and presents unique perspectives  of school children. Tickets are $4-10,  sliding scale. For more info call 844-1615.  QUEER WOMEN'S PHOTO EXHIBIT  An exhibition and sale of black and white  photographs will be held until Jul 2 at  Womyn's Ware, 896 Commercial Dr,  Vancouver. The photos were taken during a  week of hanging out thinking very public  queer sorts of things by a local queer  women's collective All proceeds from  sales will go to Out On Screen, Vancouver's Annual Queer Film and Video Festival   BARBARA WILSON  Lesbian mystery writer Barbara Wilson will  be in Vancouver to read from her absorbing  memoir, Blue Windows: A Christian  Science ChildhoodTues Jun 3 at 7:30pm  at Women in Print, 3544 W. 4th Ave. In Blue  Windows, Wilson's keen and honest eye  both exposes and celebrates this controversial religion, and in the process, she  writes a beautiful story of childhood, loss,  and faith. Admission is free. Call 732-4128  for more info.  RACHEL PERKINS LECTURE  British radical feminist lesbian writer and  psychologist Rachel Perkins, co-author of  Changing Our Minds: Lesbian Feminism  and Psychology, will give a talk on Fri Jun  13, 7:30pm, at Sitka Housing Co-op, 1550  Woodland Dr, Vancouver. Her lecture is  entitled "Lesbian Therapy, Politics and  Community: A Critique." This event is for  lesbians only. For more info call 871-3096.  HARRISON FESTIVAL  This year's Harrison Festival of the Arts will  be held July 4-13, in Harrison Hot Springs,  BC. The annual festival will feature music,  dance, theatre and visual arts by local,  national and international artists.  Showcased among these will be Difficult  Women, Swamp Mama Johnson and the  female stilt company Mortal Coil. For tickets  and info call (604) 796-3664.   UNISON '97 CONCERT  Vancouver's leading lesbian and gay  musical performing arts groups will give a  benefit concert for youth groups on Fri Jun  13, 8pm at Christ Church Cathedral, 690  Burrard St. The evening will feature A  Vancouver Women's Chorus, Vancouver  Lesbian and Gay Choir, the Rainbow  Concert Band and the Vancouver's Men's  Chorus. Tickets are $13 through Little  Sister's, Harry's Off Commercial, the  performing artists or by calling 878-7887.  Limited number of $8 concession tickets  available by calling 878-7887.  SUPPORT COALITION INTERNATIONAL RECEPTION  Support coalition is a non-profit alliance of  50 groups in seven countries promoting  human rights and alternatives in the  psychiatric system. All are welcome to our  reception on Wed Jun 11, 5:30-7:30 pm at  the Windsor Room, Hyatt Regency, 655  Burrard. Featuring music by the Cognitive  Dissidents. Free. Wheelchair accessible.  For more info, call Support Coalition at  (541) 345-9106 (Oregon) or Diane at 253-  6792, or e-mail dendron@esn.org.  PWN BENEFIT  Harry's Off Commercial will host a benefit  pancake breakfast for the Positive Women's Network Sat Jun 7, 9am-2pm at  Harry's, 1716 Charles St, Vancouver.  Minimum donation of $5. Proceeds will be  used for the Women's Wellness Program to  fund hot lunches, transportation, workshops and child care. For more info call  PWN at 681-2122, ext 200.   MOTHERS ARE WOMEN  Mothers are Women (MAW) want to  develop a process to impress upon  governments the importance of taking into  account the relevance of unpaid work in  public policy. They are inviting women's  organizations to participate in a working  group in preparation for a national symposium in fall 1997. For info contact Evelyn  Drescher, When Women Count Project,  Mothers are Women, P.O. Box 4104,  Station E, Ottawa, Ont, K1E 5B1. Phone  (613) 692-2439, fax (613) 692-1388, e-mail  evelyn.dreescherl.  ANN-ROSEMARY CONWAY  Ann-Rosemary Conway, artist and creation  mystic, will hold an evening of storytelling  and slide presentation called Bringing the  Goddess Home, on Sat Jun 7, 8 pm at the  Howe Sound Inn Banquet Room in  Squamish, BC. Conway's performance  chronicles her journey in search of empowering images of Goddesses in temples in  Egypt, Greece, Turkey, Crete, Malta and  Indonesia. Tickets are $8/$5 at Mostly  Books, Sunspirit Studios, Howe Sound Inn  or the Howe Sound Women's Centre. The  event is sponsored by the Squamish Arts  Council and the Howe Sound Women's  Centre. For more info call Mary at (604)  892-5723 or Joel at (604) 892-1542.  UNDER THE WILLOWTREE  Under the Willow Tree: Pioneer Chinese  Women in Canada will be premiered in  Vancouver on Fri Jun 6, 9pm, at the Lord  Strathcona School Auditorium, 592 E.  Pender St. This poignant documentary  recalls the lives of the first Chinese women  who came to Canada, told by seven  daughters of these pioneers. The screening  will be followed by a reception and discussion with director Dora Nipp, producer  Margaret Wong and Hazel Chong, who is  featured in the film. Tickets are $10 and are  available at Strathcona Community Centre,  601 Keefer St. The film will also be shown  for free Jun 9-13 at the Strathacona  School. For more info and screening times  call 254-9496.  TAMARA TURNER IN SEATTLE  Tamara Turner will speak about her new  book, Gay Resistance: The Hidden History,  at a book party and dinner featuring dishes  from the Alice B.Toklas Cookbook Thurs  Jun 19 at New Freeway Hall, 5018 Ranier  Ave S, Seattle. Dinner is available for a $7  donation at 6:30pm. The book party begins  at 7:30pm. Venue is wheelchair accessible.  For rides or childcare call (206) 722-6057  or 722-2453.  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN, M.Ed.  Reg. Clinical Counsellor  Relationship Therapy  Individual Counselling  Integrative Body Work  Oak & 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  i  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  SAN FRAN FILM FESTIVAL  The 21st San Francisco International  Lesbian and Gay Film Festival will take  place Jun 20-29. Among the films to be  featured are Raquel Cecilia Harrington's  Entwined, Ela Troyano's Latin Boys Go to  Hell, and Kelli Herd's It's in the Water.  Among the works by Canadian women to  be screened are Cat Swallows Parakeet  and Sings by Vancouver-based filmmaker  lleana Pietrobruno and Stolen Moments by  Margaret Wescott. The festival will also  feature a special film clip presentation titled  "Queer Colored Girls: The End of Innocence And The Beginning Of Violence And  Desire," an overview of the work of African  American lesbian filmmakers. For ticket info  call (415) 703-8663   TAMARATURNER  Seattle author Tamara Turner will launch  her new book Gay Resistance: The Hidden  History, in Vancouver, Sat Jun 14, 8 pm, at  Harry's Off Commercial, 1716 Charles St.  Turner's book is a review of the struggle for  sexual freedom from antiquity through the  19th and 20th centuries in Europe, Russia  and America. Turner will read excerpts from  her book and speak on queer and feminist  issues of today. The launch is hosted by  Radical Women. For more info call (604)  874-9084 or 879-2131.   APECWORKSHOP  A workshop about APEC (the Asia Pacific  Economic Cooperation), free trade, and  imperialist globalization will be held Sat  Jun 28, from 11am-5:30pm at the  Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell St. Vancouver. The workshop is open to anyone  interested in learning about how APEC will  affect local communities, its impact internationally and strategies for resistance. Bring  your own lunch. Call to register 215-9190.  ART FOR ALL  Create your own masterpiece on Sun Jun  8, 2-5pm at Gallery Gachet, 88 E. Cordova  St., Vancouver. Experience the joy of self  expression through paint, pastels, collage,  charcoal, and much more. All materials  provided. Admission is by donation. For  more info call April Porter at 687-2468.  SAPPHOWITCHCAMP  Join 40 women in beautiful British Columbia at Loon Lake private retreat for the 6th  Annual Sappho Lesbian Witchcamp held  Jun 30-Jul 5. Sappho is a residential  week-long gathering of lesbians and  lesbian-positive women for workshops,  rituals, singing, drumming, great food, and  the opportunity to learn and deepen our  knowledge and experience of women's  spirituality. This year's facilitators are Ruth  Rhiannon Barrett and Holin "Badger"  Kennen. Fee is $395-500 Cdn; $300-425  US. Some assistance available. Sponsored  by Sounds & Furies. For more info write to  Pat Hogan, c/o Sappho, Box 21510, 1850  Commercial Dr, Vancouver, BC, V5N 4A0  or call (604) 253-2191.   FILIPINO CELEBRATION  The Filipinos of Powell Street (in Vancouver) invite the Filipino community to  celebrate the centennial of the 1896  Philippine revolution against Spain on Sat  Jun 7. The celebration will take place at  Oppenheimer Park at Powell and Jackson  Streets from 9am-9pm, and will feature  Filipino cultural presentations, food,  displays, speeches, mural making, a  basketball tournament, and games and  activities for kids. The day long festivities  will culminate with an evening program at  the Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell St. The  event is free of charge. For more info call  Ning Alcuitas at 215-1103.  PRESS GANG PUBLISHERS  hip/les ijou to celebrate  3 (cE^ABULOUS cS^VeW CROOKS  BEYOND THE PALE  by Elana Dykewomon  "The tale of the Jewish Diaspora has been told many  times before, but rarely with such passion, beauty, and  attention to the intimate lives of women."  Two Ends of Sleep  by Lizard Jones  Rusty is a 30-something lesbian fighting with her  girlfriend and coping with a recent diagnosis of Multiple  Sclerosis. Inventive sexual fantasies are part of the  remedy!  Call Me Crazy  Stories from the Mad Movement  by Irit Shimrat  Irit Shimrat went crazy as a young woman and spent  two years in psychiatric wards.This is the story of her  incarceration, her escape, and the inspiring movement  which is confronting the psychiatric establishment.  f  Saturday, June 14,1997  The Lotus Club, 455 Abbott St., Vancouver  Sponsored by Women In Print &The Lotus  Refreshments «&. Cash bar <&' door prizes <&' Much Fun!  Free Admission. For info call: 876-7787. Wheelchair accessible venue.  DYKEWORDS  Dykewords, readings by local lesbian  writers, is held every second Thursday at  9pm at The Lotus, 455 Abbott St, Vancouver. Thurs Jun 12 features readings by  writers Pat Feindel, Arleen Pare, Nancy  Pollak and Esther Shannon. Admission is  sliding scale $1-4. Everyone welcome. Call  685-7777 for more info.  CELEBRATING CLOWNING  Clownwise is holding a conference,  Nobody's Fool: But Everyone's Laughing, A  Celebration of Canadian Clowning, Oct 2-5  (postponed from June) at Gas Station  Theatre, Winnipeg. The conference will  examine the roots of clowning in community and culture, explore the healing power  of humour in physical, emotional and  mental illness, encourage clowning as a  tool in education and celebrate the skill of  Canada's talented comedic artists. For  more info call (204) 786-1499, fax  (204)786-5644, e-mail clown ©pangea.ca.  EARTHVOICES  The NAAEE (North American Association  of Environmental Education) EarthVoices  Conference—"Youth Celebrating Cultures  Within our Environment"—will be held on  Aug 15-17 at the University of British  Columbia in Vancouver. The conference,  the first youth conference sponsored by  NAAEE is open to youth from ages 14-18.  EarthVoices is representational of all living  beings who share this planet and make it  whole. Through a celebration of diverse  cultural perspectives EarthVoices seeks to  listen and be voices for the Earth. For more  info and to register, phone (604)605-8225;  fax (604) 669-6222; or e-mail  dcbc@sage.bc.ca subject:voices. If you are  over 18 and want to volunteer please call.  EXTERNAL RECALL  Tracing Cultures I: External Recall is an art  exhibit being held until Jul 6 at the  Burnaby Art Gallery, 6344 Deer Lake Ave,  Burnaby. The first of a series, External  Recall, brings together Vancouver artists  Dolleen Manning, an Ojibway from Stoney  Point, Ontario and Haruko Okano, a  Japanese Canadian woman born in the  Fraser Valley in BC. Investigating the  personal, social and political impacts of  crossing cultural boundaries in a very  sensual and visually striking way, these two  women bring a fresh, community based  approach to their work. For info call 291 -  9441.  SISTAH SUMMERFEST  Sistah Summerfest: Womyn of Color Music  Festival will take place June 20-22 in  Darlington, Maryland. This music-spirit  festival honoring and celebrating womyn of  color is sponsored by Amethyst & Indigo  Inc., a national womyn of color foundation,  and features music, dance, art, poetry,  theatre, workshops, political discussions,  great food and wonderful spiritual  connections.For more info and registration,  call 703-685-0634, Box#3, or visit the web  page at http://www.erols.com/sistah.  PID BENEFIT AUCTION  A Benefit Auction for the Canadian PID  (Pelvic Inflammatory Disease) Society will  be held on Sun Jun 22, 1pm, at the Westin  Bayshore, 1601 W. Georgia St, Vancouver.  Proceeds will go to support prevention  services for women. Over 400 items are up  for auction including vacations, furniture,  antiques, art, restaurants, hot air balloon  rides, Persian carpets, fax marine,  vacuum, theatre, movie, concerts, appliances, sports lessons, clothing, dinner  cruises, and services. Admission is free.  Viewing at 10am. Absentee bids accepted.  For more info call 684-5704.  BREAST IMPLANT CONFERENCE  Reflections & Connections: Women, Breast  Implants and Health Care, a conference for  women with breast implants, will be held  Jun 6-8 at the Walter Gage Complex on  the University of British Columbia campus  in Vancouver. The conference will feature  implant consumers, international presenters, local health care providers, workshops, support networks, community  resources and more. Presented by the BC  Women's Breast Implant Centre, BC  Women's Hospital. For more info call (604)  875-2013.   MICHIGAN WOMYN'S MUSIC  FESTIVAL  The 22nd Michigan Womyn's Music  Festival will be held Aug 12-17. Situated on  650 acres, the festival offers plenty of  camping in a village-like setting. The  schedule includes a 6-day women's film  festival, 300 workshops and 3 performance  stages featuring 40 sets of music, dance,  comedy and theatre. Some of the artists  scheduled to appear include: Vancouver's  Sawagi Taiko, the Toshi Reagon Band,  Ulalai, Cris Williamson and Tret Fure, Elvira  Kurt, and Lea Delaria. For tickets or more  info write to WWTMC, PO Box 22,  Walhalla, Ml, USA 49458 or call (616) 757-  4766.  AfdJBook&  .    w     W^    Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street,Vancouver,B.C.,V6E 1N4  (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community Bulletin Board  GROUPS  GROUPS  GROUPS  WOMEN'S LEGAL CLINIC  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver and the UBC Law Students  Legal Advice Program are co-sponsoring  free legal clinics for women until Aug 13 to  be held Wednesdays from 2-7pm. For  more info or to make an appointment call  687-1867.   WOMEN'S FIGURATIVE ART GROUP  A Women's Figurative Art Group will be  held on Tuesdays from 2-5pm at Basic  Inquiry Studio, 5-9Q1 Main St, in Vancouver. The weekly session is designed to  provide a woman-centered, supportive,  cooperative environment for women to  explore their creativity through painting or  drawing the figure. All levels welcome and  encouraged. Cost is $28/month. For more  info call 738-0708.   RAPE RELIEF  Vancouver Rape Relief and Woman's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Training sessions are on Tuesday  evenings. For more info and for a training  interview call 872-8212.   CHILD APPREHENSION  CIRCLE (Children in Really Caring Loving  Environments) is a support group in  Vancouver for parents and children caught  up in the BC government's child apprehension industry. The purpose of CIRCLE is to  provide mutual emotional, intellectual and  practical support; information-sharing and  education regarding parenting skills, legal  proceedings and bureaucratic policies; and  lobbying and educating politicians and the  public for the elimination of the government's child apprehension industry. The  group meets every Sat from 11am-1:30pm  at the Champlain Place Common Room,  3305 E. 58th Ave. Children are welcome.  For more info call Myles Mackintosh at  254-9636.   OUT ON SCREEN  Out On Screen, Vancouver's 9th Annual  Queer Film and Video Festival is currently  seeking volunteers for the following  committees: programming, coordinating  collective, fundraising/grant writing, special  events, venue coordination, and publicity/  advertising. For more info contact Jennifer  Fisher or Ava Samuel at (604) 844-1615 or  fax (604) 844-1698, or drop by the offices  at 408-207 W. Hastings St.   CANADIAN CONSTRUCTION  WOMEN  The Canadian Construction Women, an all-  Canadian association based in Vancouver,  focuses on the promotion and education of  women in construction and related fields.  Dinner meetings are held the 4th Tuesday  of each month, featuring a guest speaker  or a tour of a local construction project or  manufacturing plant. The next meeting is  on Jun 24 at 5:30pm and involves a tour of  a high speed ferry under construction.  Dinner begins at 7pm. The cost is $30 for  non-members, $25 for members. For more  info or to make a reservation call Anne  Mason at (604) 671-8164 or Marg Latham  (604)631-6212.   NATIVE WOMEN INTHE ARTS  Native Women in the Arts is a 3-day event  to be held in the fall, featuring workshops,  performances, readings, displays... If you  would like to be part of the co-ordinating  group for this exciting event, come to a  planning meeting to brainstorm some  ideas. Meeting to be held at the Vancouver  Status of Women office, Suite 309-877 E.  Hastings St, on Jun 4, at 7 pm. For more  info, call Michelle at (604) 251-4621.  CHADD VANCOUVER  Vancouver CHADD (Children and Adults  with Attention Deficit Disorders) is a parent  run organization that offers information and  support on ADD. Meetings are held every  Tuesday of each month from 7-9 pm at  Carnarvon School, 3400 Baclava St.  Suggested drop-in for non members is $3.  The next meeting is on Jun 10 and covers  "What Works in Dealing With ADD."   RADICAL WOMEN  A general Radical Women meeting in  Seattle will be held on Thurs Jun 5, 7:30  pm, at the New Freeway Hall, 5018 Rainier  Ave S. Learn more about their current  activities. Dinner with vegetarian option at  6:30 pm for a $6 donation. Everyone  welcome and wheelchair accessible. For  rides or child care call (206) 722-6057 or  722-2453.   BRIGADE ORGANIZING  International Feminist Brigade to Cuba  organizing meeting will be held the 1 st and  3rd Tuesdays of each month at Douglass-  Truth Library, 2300 E.Yesler Way, Seattle,  7-9 pm. Jointly sponsored by Radical  Woman and the Federation of Cuban  Women, this brigade will consist of up to  60 women and men from several countries.  Brigadistas will travel to Cuba for 10-12  days and finish with a Solidarity Conference in Havana. For more info call (206)  722-6057 or 722-2453.   WOMEN'S CENTRE AGM  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  is holding its Annual General Meeting on  Mon Jun 23, 5pm at the Centre, 44 E.  Cordova St, Vancouver. All women and  children are welcome. The Centre is also  looking for Steering Committee members.  For more info call Marlene at 681-4786 or  Karen at 872-2320.  WISER  Women Involved in Spiritual Exploration  and Recovery in Holistic Health (WISER) is  a support group for women 18 years or  older wishing to explore spirituality and  alternative holistic health forms. The group  meets at the Women's Health Collective,  219-1675 West 8th Ave, Vancouver every  second Thurs, 7-8.30pm. Cost is by  donation (to contribute to space rental). For  info call Chris on 873-3003.  LIBERTY VOLUNTEERS  Volunteers are needed for the Liberty Thrift  Store, 1035 Commercial Drive, Vancouver,  for various hours and jobs, Mon-Sat 10am-  5pm, Sun 12pm-5pm. Liberty Thrift is a  non-profit charitable organization whose  mission is to provide women and their  children with the resources to help them  live lives of liberty and independence, free  from violence. Store profits aid women and  children to live free from violence. Liberty  Thrift is also looking for houseware items-  dishes, irons, kettles, linens, pots and  pans, lamps, radios, blankets—to provide  hampers to help women and children start  over. To volunteer or for more info call 255-  3080.   END LEGISLATED POVERTY  End Legislated Poverty is holding its  Annual General Meeting on Jun 13 & 14 in  Vancouver. Contact the ELP office ASAP if  you need to arrange airfares. If you have  any questions, call Terrie at (604) 879-  1209.  PWN BOARD  The Positive Women's Network in Vancouver is seeking potential Board members to  be elected at its annual general meeting in  June. Women interested in joining the  Board are expected to become familiar with  PWN's mission statement, purposes,  policies and services, and to sit on at least  one of its committees. The priority areas for  Board members this year are HIV-positive  women, legal expertise, fundraising  experience and public relations/communications experience. For more info call  Diana Peabody at 681-2122, ext 200.  VCN VOLUNTEERS  The Vancouver CommunityNet, a community-based internet service provider, is  looking for 10-15 community minded  volunteers to work with community groups  interested in getting online, and to conduct  basic internet introductions. Some internet  and other skills training provided. Interpersonal communication skills a must. Call  Katherine on Mondays at 257-3811 or Ian  at other times at 257-3872.  FEMINIST NETWORKING GROUP  Vancouver feminists are invited to participate in the Feminist Networking Group  (FNG). The group, comprised of individual  feminists and feminists working in women's  organizations, meets monthly to share  information and skills, discuss political  issues and analyses from feminist perspectives, and plan actions and strategies. For  the next meeting date or for more info call  the Vancouver Status of Women at 255-  6554.  SUBMISSIONS  CHILDREN OF EXILE  Carol Camper, creator and editor of  Miscegenation Blues: Voices of Mixed  Race Women, is seeking submissions for  an anthology of women and men of colour  who were raised in white families or  institutions, titled Children of Exile. Essays,  articles, letters, journals, artwork, photography interviews, etc., are welcomed. Send  submissions to Carol Camper, c/o Sister  Vision Press, PO Box 217, Stn E, Toronto,  ON, M6H 4E2. Deadline is Sep 30.   WOMEN'S FILM & VIDEO  The 8th annual St. John's International  Women's Film and Video Festival is  seeking submissions of films and videos  directed, written, or produced by women.  The festival is committed to searching out,  promoting and exhibiting exceptional films  and videos made by women. For more info  and entry forms contact St. John's International Women's Film & Video Festival, PO  Box 984, St. John's, Newfoundland, A1C  6C2; tel: (709) 754-3141; fax (709) 754-  3143; e-mail daninef@plato.ucs.mun.ca.  Deadline is Jun 15.  VISUAL ARTS AWARDS  The Assembly of British Columbia Arts  Councils invites applications for visual arts  development awards. The awards range  from $3000-$5000 and are available for  any visual artists working in any medium,  who are learning new artistic techniques  but are not in school. The deadline is Jun  16. Call Elizabeth Shefrin for info at 738-  0749.  B.C.'s newest full-service law firm  Dahl findlay Connors  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS ^  • A full range of services to meet your business and  personal legal needs  • Free initial consultation  • Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  VIDEO PROJECT PARTICIPANTS  South Asian women who have experienced  or borne witness to child sexual abuse in  South Asian communities are being sought  for participation in a video project on  incestuous sexual abuse of girl children.  The video—The Children We Sacrifice—is  being produced by Grace Poore, a  Malaysian-born South Asian video maker  currently living in the US. Poore is also an  activist working to end violence against  women and girl children. She is looking to  speak with women who were sexually  abused, women who are related to a child  who is or has been abused or advocates  who work with adults who have been  sexually abused as children. For more info  contact: Grace Poore, Shakti Productions,  6-8403 16th Street, Silver Spring, Maryland, 20910-2831, USA. E-mail:  gipooe@aol.com attn: Shakti Productions.  CHINESE LESBIAN STORIES  Submissions, in Chinese (of 4000-20000  Chinese characters) are sought for a book  focusing on the life experiences of Chinese  lesbians and gays living outside predominantly Chinese societies. Stories, essays,  diaries, letters, script, interviews, etc, are  welcomed. Also seeking a woman co-  editor. Contact Alan Li c/o GAT 107-33  Isabella St. Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4Y  2P7 or email ravyeung@chevalier.net.  Deadline is Jun 30.  WHITE WOMEN & COLONIALISM  Participants are needed to form a round  table to investigate the means by which  colonial women in the late 19th and early  20th century may have utilized contemporary notions of human rights and social  justice in relation to indigenous  populations, while in fact advancing their  own personal agenda. The round table will  meet at the International Federation for  Research in Women's History Conference,  to be held Jun 30-Jul 21,1998 at Melbourne University, Australia. For more info  contact Ann Standish or Katherine  Ellinghaus c/o Department of History,  University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria,  3052, Australia. E-mail to  a.standish@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au or  k.ellinghaus@pgrad.unimelb.edu.au  NATIVE YOUTH ZINE  Redwire, a recently formed 'zine produced  by and for Native youth, is putting the call  out for submissions for their next issue.  How sick are you of being shut out and  shut down? How tired are you of having  nowhere to speak? And how ready are you  to speak out and speak proud? Then  submit your non-oppressive, non-discriminatory work (stories/poetry/art/?) to Nena  and Billie, PO Box 34097, Stn D, Vancouver BC, V6J 4M1. For more info call 873-  0616.  xaxx  ijC*-^  s^eV,  A^-t.  c^vcs  quX voiW  Vei^sV? V^asN  tf**  V^c.  o-s...o\s_«_c-i-2£_ :  255-5499  PRESS GANG SPRING BOOK LAUNCH  Vancouver's feminist book publisher, Press Gang Publishers, will  be launching their Spring books on Saturday, June 14 at 8:00pm  at the Lotus Club, 455 Abbott St. Press Gang will celebrate the  release of three exciting new books—Elana Dyewomon's Beyond  the Pale, Lizard Jones' Two Ends of Sleep, and Irit Shimrat's Call  Me Crazy: Stories from the Mad Movement—with readings by the  authors followed by a book signing.  Beyond the Pale tells the remarkable story of women's lives in  Russia and New York between 1860 and 1912, told alternatively  through the eyes of Chava Meyer, who loses her parents in a  pogrom and Gutke Gurvich, a learned midwife. Elana (Nachman)  Dykewomon is the author of the classic novel Riverfinger Women  (1974), one of the first lesbian novels published by a women's  press. She has also written several other books including Nothing  Will Be as Sweet as the Taste and They Will Know Me By MyTeeth.  She is the former editor of Sinister Wisdom, an international  journal for lesbian imagination.  rd Jones' first novel, is  ,     id serious. A cleverly  appealing and quirky narrative about living witi.  disability while negotiating complicated lesbian  entanglements. Jones is a writer, visual artist and  performer. As a member of the lesbian art collective, Kiss &Tell, Jones co-authored The Lambda  Award-winning book. HerTongue on MyTheory.  Irit Shimrat's Call Me Crazy: Stories From ti  Movement is a compassionate, inspiring and hopeful  book which will stop readers in their tracks the next  time they encounter the words "mental illness." Shimrat  went crazy as a young woman and spent two years  locked up in psychiatric wards. She escaped and  subsequently began working within the mad movement opposed to forced psychiatric treatment. Formerly the editor of Phoenix Rising: the Voice of the  Psychiatrized, she coordinated the Ontario Psychiatric  Survivor's Alliance for several years.  The Vancouver book launch will be the first event of the  book tour for the three authors.They will also be appearing in Vancouver, Victoria,Toronto and Seattle this June.  For more information, call Press Gang Publishers (604)  876-7787.  Photos by Susan Goldberg, Suzd Hickey, Elaine Ayres.  CLASSIFIEDS  CABIN ON GALIANO  Cabin on Galiano Island (in the Gulf  Islands between Vancouver Island and the  BC mainland) for rent on weekends or by  the week. Close to ferry, or, if you're coming  without a car, we will pick you up. Call (250)  539-5844.   AFFORDABLE CERTIFIED REFLEXOLOGIST AVAILABLE  R.A.C. Certified Advanced. Professional  and experienced. Experience and enjoy  this natural healing art for better health.  Releases stress and tension and toxins  that have built up in your body. Feel deeply  relaxed, nurtured and a wonderful sense of  well-being. Be good to yourself; you  deserve it. Ask about "specials". For info  and appointment, please call Leta at (604)  291-2019. Treat yourself or someone you  love. Also a great gift idea! Gift certificates  available.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  Roommate wanted to share a 2 bedroom/2  bathroom oceanfront house on the beautiful Sunshine Coast in Roberts Creek. This  is a quiet non-smoking home. Temporary  situations considered. Must be gay friendly.  Available immediately. Sorry, no dogs.  $385/month plus half utilities. Call (604)  740-0614 evenings.  CLASSIFIEDS  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.   LAURA JAMIESON COOP  Laura Jamieson Housing Co-op is accepting applications for 1, 2 and 3 bedroom  units. Monthly housing charges from $559-  821. No subsidy available. Active participation is enjoyable and necessary. Share  purchase ($1500) required. Great eastside  location and wonderful people. For an  application, send SASE to: Membership  Committee, 100-1349 E. 2nd Ave, Vancou-  ver, BC.V5N 1C4.   NEEDTO RAISE MONEY?  Are you ready to act now? Consider this  ethical small home-based business in the  self-development field. No pyramid, no  MLM. Powerful income potential with small  investment. Support and training provided.  Call 1-888-452-2907. Leave a message  and we'll call you back.  CLASSIFIEDS  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.   SHEILA NORGATE  Artist Sheila Norgate announces an  exhibition of new works on canvas, paper  and board at the Vancouver Art Gallery (Art  Rental and Sales Gallery), 750 Hornby St.  Opening Thurs Jun 12, 6-8pm and running  until Jun 26. For more info call 662-4746.  CAR FOR SALE  1983 Nissan Stanza, $1500 obo, driven by  female Scorpio. Five-speed manual, four-  door, spacious interior. Power sun roof,  brakes and steering. Am/fm digital stereo  with cassette. Silvery exterior, grey cloth  interior. 168,000 kms. Very spoiled car,  excellent running condition, needs new  clutch (don't look away I do have a mechanic who will replace it at cost). For info,  call 873-3637. LIB1Z8  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST MAIL, U B.C.  VANCOUVER BC  V6T 1Z8  ^ah  a(£pX't  IfieSlS break.  (^^ecause uauve eazneB it.  Subscribe to$ay\  —  One year D Cheque enclosed For individuals who can't afford the full amount  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Two years □ New Free to women prisoners.  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal Orders outside Canada add $8.  Institutions/Groups □ Gift Vancouver Status of Women Membership  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Name   Add ress   Country   Telephone   Postal code.  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1