 VANCUUVbH LbStflAN TOMllOti .  BOX'NO. 85951 STAT./ F  VANCOUVER, B.C.   V5W 5L4 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 1  Feds stalled by anti-  Depo Provera coalition  by Esther Shannon  Depo Provera, one of the most  controversial birth control  drugs ever produced, may soon  be widely available in Canada,  according to the newly formed  Canadian Coalition on Depo  Provera.  safe. She pointed out that  despite 20 years of lobbying  the American Food and Drug  Association, Upjohn has not  succeeded in gaining approval  of the drug.  Depo Provera is an injectable  form of medrosyprogesterone-  Dr. Ian Henderson, director of the human prescription drug branch at Health and Welfan  Canada, providing his view as to why Canadian women will be happy to use Depo Provera  "Ten years ago, if you were talking to a group about a drug like Depo Provera they wouh  say, "There must be something wrong with a drug that interferes that much with physiology"  But we seem to have crossed over. All sorts of women are now getting it. It is now cultural!.:  acceptable to say that menstruation is a nuisance. I think that it will be a relief to man;  women that they will be able to take a drug that eliminates menstuation.  Our job at Health and Welfare, after Depo is approved, will be to educate women that th i  fact they have stopped menstruating is a natural side effect of this drug and that it is no  unhealthy for their genitals to be in a dormant state. Their genitals will be just like they  were when they were 9 or 10 years old."  A hastily organized demonstrai  approved its bill on street soliciting att  across Canada are strongly opposed to  services, juvenile prostitution and the  pages 4 and 14.  eral government  racted few supporters, however, women  the legislation. For stories on escort  impact of the new law see Kinesis  The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective, a founding member  of the coalition, announced in  November that Upjohn of Canada has applied to Health and  Welfare Canada for approval  to market Depo Provera in  Canada.  Lorna Zaback, a coalition 'Ģ  spokesperson says the Coalition does not consider Depo  acetate, a synthetic progesterone - like hormone which  prevents both ovulation and  mentrual bleeding. A single  injection prevents ovulation  for anywhere from three to  eight months.  Although it is used in over  80 third world countries as  a birth control method, its  use in Canada is supposed to  be restricted to treatment of  cancer of the kidney and  uterus.  According to Zaback, however,  Depo is prescribed to women in  some mental institutions and  to institutionalized mentally  handicapped women to stop  their periods.  "We are worried," said Zaback,  "that these women, and others,  are not receiving the proper  information in order to give  truly informed consent."  According to the Coalition's  press release, problems which  have been linked with long  term use of the drug include  cancer of the uterus, breast  cancer, drastically increased  incidence of diabetes,  severe mental depression and,  after stopping the injections,  irregular or excessive bleeding and temporary or permanent infertility.  Short term side effects include weight'loss or gain,  depression or dizziness, loss  of hair, limb pain and abdominal discomfort and vaginal  discharge.  Depo Provera continued next page  Yukon Lesbians & Gays under attack  by Jan Langford  In early October the minority  NDP government tabled a Human  Rights Act. Currently there is  no Human Rights legislation in  the Yukon save the Fair Practices. Act which applies only  to the areas of accomodation,  employment and the provision  of public services and only  prohibits a limited number  of kinds of discrimination.  The new NDP bill includes protection from discrimination  on the basis of race, colour,  nationality, ethnic background,  religion or creed, age, gen  der or sex, pregnancy, sexual orientation or preference,  marital or family status,  criminal record, political  belief, association or activity and physical or mental disability. The proposed  act also includes an exception clause for affirmative  action programmes and a section on equal pay for work  of equal value.  To date by far the most controversial issue is the  inclusion of sexual orientation  and preference. Ministers and  priests have responded (through  the newspapers and on radio  shows) with the usual objections to homosexuality on the  grounds of sinfulness and degenerate moral behavior.  Others have responded with  the old homophobic myths that  homosexuals are sick, perverse  and would corrupt or molest  children if allowed to be  teachers..To date one anonymous gay man and a few feminists in the women's community  have responded to the homophobic reaction.  It is a tough battle. The NDP  Justice Minister showed his  Video Regulations Backed  Attorney General Brian Smith's  proposed regulations on video  control received overwhelming  support from Vancouver organizations and individuals at  a government sponsored community forum in November.  Smith's proposals, and it  seems certain they will be  adopted by the government,  would ban videos with explicit scenes of sex with violence,  sex with children, with animals and scenes of extreme  brutality and torture. The  regulations would also restrict distribution of so-  called (adult videos) to people  over 18. Video distributors  would have to get government  approval before they could  sell or rent certain videos,  and businesses refusing to  remove videos that the government deems objectionable would  have their business licenses  revoked.  The Vancouver Artists League  (VAL) presented one of the  few anti-regulation positions  at the forum.  Sara Diamond, VAL spokesperson, told Smith that artists  are deeply concerned about  government classification  and regulation.  "In the past, said Diamond,  censorship has arisen out of  classification and censorship has most often been used  against the gay and feminist  and political groups".  Aside from a few individuals  who raised similar concerns,  however, Smith's audience  clearly felt the government  had to do something about objectionable videos.  "Canadians simply refuse to  accept some images in porn",  said Jancis Andrews of the  North Shore Women's Centre.  Citing kiddie porn, rape and  violence Andrews ^challanged  Diamond's fears about censorship and said that "Using  the word censorship implies  that someone's freedom of  speech is being repressed  which, in this instance, is  not the case."  According to Andrews, the North  Shore Women's Centre is pleased  with Smith's move to screen  and regulate videos.  The Vancouver Council of women,  which said they have studied  the pornography issue since  1978, wants Smith to set  standards and create a volunteer advisory board for video  classification.  According to Smith, Mary Lou  McCauseland, currently B.C.'s  Director of Film Classification, will assume responsibility for video screening  and regulation.  Video pom continued next page  lack of commitment to the  cause when he stated publicly  that the issue of homosexuals  teaching in schools was a  "grey area" and that perhaps  the government would have to  make an exception and discriminate under these circumstances .  Another barrier is that a lesbian and gay community, as  such, does not exist in Whitehorse. There are lesbians and  gay men here but for the most  part they are closeted and  not organized. Socializing is  done in small pockets of  closed groups and it is hard  to develop contacts outside  of the group.  The silence on this issue has  been broken and now we (a  handful of feminists)owonder  how to mount a campaign to  support the sexual orientation  and preference clause. So far  we have been writing letters  to the editor of the newspaper  We are considering a public  education forum with a film  and guest speaker. We will have  at least a few months as the  government is planning to set  up a committee to receive public input on the proposed act.  Southern support would aid us  tremendously. The NDP could \  use a shove, in the form of  congratulations, to keep them  on track. You can write Roger  Kimmerly, Minister of Justice,  Yukon Legislative Assembly,  Whitehorse, Yukon.  Any suggestions or support  for our campaign can be sent  to Jan Langford,  Box 5546,  Whitehorse,   Yukon,  Y1A SHY. 2 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  IMSiDE  This months kinesis includes a 16 page  supplement on younger women. The supplement, entirely produced by a group of younger  women, is the second one on younger women  Kinesis has carried. Please see the supplement index for contents.  Escort services 3  Across BC 4  Across Canada 5  International  Reagan  8  El Salvador bombing 9  Transition House 11  Sex and the State   12  Juvenile prostitution 14  Sexual Violence between women 15  Arts  Cultural Biases 16  Under the Skin 17  Rubymusic 19  Night Reading 21  Commentary 22  Letters 23  Bulletin Board 25  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all  aspects of the paper. Call us at 873-5925. Our  next story meetings are Wed., Jan. 6 and  'Wed. Feb. 5 at 7:30 pm at the VSW offices  400A West 5th. All women welcome, even if  you don't have any experience. I  EDITORIAL BOARD: Carol Bierenga, Jan  DeGrass, Patty Gibson, Punam Khosla,  Emma Kivisild, Michele Wollstonecroft.  EDITORIAL GROUP: Libby Barlow, Kim Irving,  Esther Shannon (editor), Isis (production  co-ordinator), Barbara Kuhne, Maura Volante,  Sharon Knapp, Janie Newton-Moss, Cy—Thea  Sand, Connie Smith, Leather Harris, Rosemarie  Rupps.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Elizabeth Shelfrin,  Susan Brownlie, Getchen Lang, Maura Volante,  Emma Kivisild, Libby Barlow, Vicky Donaldson,  Esther Shannon, Noreen Howes, Annette  Kozlowski, Liz Clark, Barbara Kuhne,  Rosemarie Rupp, Joanne, Sharon Hounsell  Kim Irving, Patty Gibson, Isis and Aletta, and  Spike in mind if not in body.  COVERS: front by Melissa Jacques and back  by Elizabeth Shefrin  CIRCULATION/DISTRIBUTION: Judy Rose,  Joey Schibild, Vicky Donaldson, Cat  L'Hirondell, Kim Irving.  ADVERTISING: Jill Pollack, Vicky Donaldson,  Esther Shannon, Isis.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle, Kim Irving.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for  women and to work aptively for social  change, specifically by combatting sexism,  racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 400 A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V5Y1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is  $23/year (or what you can afford). This includes a  subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $15/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not guarantee  publication.  f the Canadian P<  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Video porn from previous page  McCauseland, also at the forum, said  there would be room for exceptions for  historical and documentary films and also  there may for a discretionary category  for artists' films.  Kit Stevensen, who represented Anglican  church women also supported the regulations and said they were necessary because there is a correlation between the  violence people see and do.  Stevensen, however, backed the Artist's  League's call for education which promoted a positive approach to sexuality.  Many of the forum speakers, including  some who identified as Christians, made  a link between pornography and violence  against women.  Kinesis spoke to Women Against Violence  Against Women (WAVAW) for their reaction  to Smith's proposals.  Corrine Murray, WAVAW spokesperson says  WAVAW doesn't believe anyone, regardless  of age, should have access to pornography.  Despite this Murray says WAVAW doesn't  believe Smith's proposals are worthwhile.  "This is an issue," said Murray, "that  should be dealt with under the hate provisions of the Criminal Code."  "As far as we are concerned Smith is  sidestepping the issue entirely," she  said.  Smith has said the province will go so  far as to override the Charter of Rights  and Freedoms, "as a last resort if it  came to that "to defend its video regulations.  Our apologies  In our story 'No Penalty for Sexual Harasser,' which  appeared in November's Kinesis the amount of the award  denied to Kristina Potapczyk was quoted at $150,000. This  is incorrect. The actual figure was $1500.  Fran Hoskins' article in November Kinesis entitled 'Women  Barred From Land Ownership' originally appeared in the  October issue of Environments. We neglected to credit  Environments.  In October's Kinesis the by-line on the article 'Australian  Judy Small Cheers Audience' was Laura Field. It should  have been credited to Louise Field. Our appologies, Louise.  mmS^  publicize your event,  service, campaign, co-op  or business in English  Canada's oldest feminist  newspaper  Call us for rates  873-5925  Depo Provera from previous page  The first indication that Depo Provera  might be approved came in September, when  Health and Welfare Canada published a report on oral contraceptives Entitled Fe-  .male Reproductive Physiology.  The report  concluded that injectable progesterones  are "highly effective contraceptives...  with fewer known risks of adverse side  effects than other highly effective methods of contraception."  Although the report did not mention Depo .  Provera by name, the drug is the only available method of injectable contraceptive.  Dr. Ian Henderson, director of the human  prescription drug branch at Health and  Welfare confirmed, in a Globe and Mail  interview, that the drug received a favorable recommendation and is likely to be  approved for use by December.  Henderson, however, was quickly contradicted by Health and Welfare minister Jake  Epp who said that further research was  needed and that it would be some time before any decision was taken.  The Coalition is asking that Epp make public all Health and Welfare information  about Depo Provera, convene a public  hearing before a review panel of medical  and consumer representatives to assess  its safety," investigate current standards  which allow the use of drugs for non-  approved uses and finally, not approve  Depo until these measures are completed  and until the safety of the drug is completely established.  Epp has rejected the Coalition's demand  for public hearings and has said that  groups can present their arguments directly to Health Department officials.  Dr. Douglas Squires, a spokesperson for  Upjohn, said the company is optimistic that  the drug will be approved for use in  Canada quickly, and with little opposition.  "We do things in a more private way in  Canada, he said. Down there, (in the United  States), as soon as the complaints about  approval started coming in to senators and  congressmen, they had to open up the process. Here, it is really a matter between  us and Health and Welfare."  Unfortunately for Upjohn, the Canadian  Coalition on Depo Provera has different  ideas about accountability in Canada.  1986 KINESIS  WALL CALENDAR  VSW/Kinesis has published its first  wall calendar featuring photographs  of local women's groups. Limited  supply will be available. Advance  orders are now being accepted. Send  $8.75 plus $1.00 for shipping in  cheque or money order to: Kinesis  Wall Calendar, 400A West 5th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8. Include  your name, address & phone number.  KINESIS IS AVAILABLE AT:  VANCOUVER AND AREA:  Agora Food Co-op  Ariel Books  Beckwomans  East End Food Co-op  English Bay Books  La Quena Coffee House  Little Sisters  Mall Book Bazaar  Manhattan Books  McLeods Books  North Shore "/omen's Centre  Octopus East and West  Peregrine Books  Press Gang  Reach Clinic  Simon Fraser Studen Society Bookstore  Simon Fraser University Bookstore  Sparlacus Books  UBCBookstore  Vancouver Women's Bookstore  Vanguard Books  Women's Health Collective  Women's Resource Centre  IN B.C.:  Chetwynd Women's Resource Centre  Everywoman's Books, Victoria  Haney Books, Maple Ridge  NDP Bookstore, Gibson's Landing  Nelson Women'sCentre  Pt. Coquitlam Women'sCentre  Quesnel Women's Resource Centre  South Surrey/While Rock Women'sPlact  Terrace Women's Resource Centre  Unemployed Action Centre, Nanaimo  IN CANADA:  Halifax  Atlantic Nevis  Red Herring Co-op Books  Montreal  A ndrogyny Bookstore  Librairie Alternative  Sherbrooke  BiblairieGGCLlee.  Winnipeg  Dominion News andGifts  Liberation Books  Thunder Bay  Northern Women's Bookstore  Thunder Bay Co-op Books  Ottawa  Globe Mags and Cigars  MagsandFags  Octopus Books  Ottawa Women's Bookstore  Edmonton  Aspen Books  Common Woman hooks  Toronto  A &S Smoke Shop  Book City  Book World  DECBookstore  Lichtman'sNewsS Books  Longhouse Book Shop  Pages  SCMBookroom  The Book Cellar  Toronto Women's Bookstore '  World's Biggest Bookstore  York University Bookstore  IN U.S. A.:  Chosen Books, Detroit, Mich.  I.C.I. -A Woman's Place, Oakland. Ca.  It's About Time, Seattle, Wash.  Old Wives Tales, San Francisco, Ca.  Room of One's Own, Madison. Wise.  NEW ZEALAND  Broadsheet. Aukland  . Women's Bookshop, Christchurch Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 3  ACROSS BC  Escort Services:  An up-to-date way to sell women's bodies  As Kinesis goes to press the  federal government, despite  broad opposition, has passed  Bill C-49 which outlaws "any  communication in a public  place by a prostitute or prospective client for the purposes of prostitution".  In this article  Kinesis  examines Bill C-49 and the  recent upsurge in escort  services, acknowldeged  by many as fronts for prostitution.  by Susan Prasser  In the past year there has been  a huge leap in the amount of  escort service advertising in  the Vancouver yellow pages  I(from 18 ads in '84 to 38 in  '85).  If we examine the phone book  we find that not only has the  number of Escort Service ads  more than doubled, the use of  display advertising has more  than quadrupled. One-third  of the companies use $600-  $900/month ads which are  entered under both escort and  dating services. A single  service's bill to Dominion  Directories could be upwards  of $20,000 annually.  The only criterion an escort  service or any business must  meet in order to list in the  yellow pages is that it hold  a legitimate business lie-,  ence. In the spring of '85  Vancouver police presented a  brief to council which objected to council's issuing  business licences to escort  services. According to the  police, of the eight businesses they investigated, all  were fronts for prostitution.  Police said their concern was  not only with the escort services' 'prostitution' activities but also with the possibility that the businesses  are run by organized crime.  By a narrow vote council rejected a ban on licencing  escort services.  Although escort services are  required to make employee  and client addresses available to the city and to  police, under city by-law,  escort services are treated  no differently than any  other business: proof of  illegal conduct must be conclusive before a licence  will be revoked.  Escort services disclaim  any responsibility for the  actual  activities of the  escorts, (i.e. if it happens, sexual activity is  considered a private agreement between a woman and a  client). This means the  police are unable to act  on complaints that the  services are "living off  the avails of prostitution",  a criminal offense.  While Vancouver has not prohibited escort services,  North Vancouver and Surrey"  are attempting to discour  age them by charging very  high licence fees.  Two articles in a September  issue of the Globe and Mail  examined escort services.  The Globe  interviewed two  women who run thier own  escort services, and got  two different reactions to  the financial aspects of the  sex trade.  not have to pay for the ad  which will be in the books  until August of '86.  "These people are smart,"  Fuller said.  While the advent of Expo  may explain the increase in  escort service ads in Vancouver, it does not explain  a similar increase in other  Golden Girls  Some examples, from the 1986 Vancouver Yellow Pages, of escort services advertising.  Since 1985 the amount of display advertising for escort services has jumped by over  100 per cent.  One, a Toronto woman, said,  "One of the most attractive  features of the business  is that men aren't needed.  This way you can keep all  the money for yourself."  A Montreal woman, however,  also an owner and an escort worker, said she was  considering getting out  of the business because  she doesn't want to pay  Tele direct (the company  contracted to sell and print  the yellow pages in Montreal)  more than $20,000 a year:  "I'm starting to feel Bell  is my pimp," she said.  In Vancouver, B.C. Tel's  Directory manager Bob  Fuller said that many of  the escort services, which  were in business in August when the phone book  went to press, closed almost immediately.  After the phone book was  distributed, Fuller, "speculated" that many of these  companies have formed in  anticipation of Expo. Fuller  pointed out that in order to  have their ad placed in this  year's phone book (i.e. 1986)  they must contract with the  printer in 1985. Once it has  been printed, however, they  close their businesses and  cancel their account with  B.C. Tel. In the spring,  Fuller predicts, they will  re-open their businesses  and their account, in  readiness for Expo. In the  interim 7-9 months they will  cities such as Calgary,  Toronto and Halifax. Have  prostitutes, in reaction to  the amendments to the criminal code on soliciting,  come in off the streets  'voluntarily'?  Bill C-49, which has now  been passed by the Parliament, amends the street soliciting section of the  criminal code. C-49 makes  "communication in a public  place by a prostitute or  prospective client for the  purposes of prostitution",  a criminal offense.  The Canadian Bar Association,  an influential and often  conservative body, strongly  opposes the law as a  opposes the law as a  heavy-handed instrusion  Many women's groups, including the Alliance for the  Safety of Prostitutes and  the National Action Committee  for the Status of Women, have  repeatedly voiced their  opposition to the amendments. Most recently,  Canada's Elizabeth Fry  Society, which has for  many years called for the  repeal of the present  soliciting law, has come  out against C-49.  According to Elizabeth Fry,  the bill would 'increase'  the opportunities for exploitation of prostitutes  and "seems to contravene  'the fundamental freedoms  of expression and association guaranteed by the  Charter of Rights."  Both Vancouver Aldei  Libby Davies and North  Vancouver Alderman Dana  Taylor agree the difficulty in dealing with the  wide socio-economic  issue of prostitution  cannot be a municipal  responsibility. Davies  is opposed to Bill C-49  and voiced concern over  the possible tacit acceptar  of escort services, which  C-49 might encourage, Davies says  there are no federal laws which  enable the city to deal with  escort service 'prostitution'  other than banning the services, and this does little  to address the underlying  issues around prostitution.  According to the Vancouver  Sun,  Alderman Gordon Campbell  believes escort services are  an improvement over street  prostitution. "I think," Campbell  said, "escort services are  clearly a way of clearing  the streets of prostitution.  You can't, on the one hand,  say we want prostitutes off  the streets and, on the other  hand, say there's nowhere they  can go. They (escort services)  are an improvement."  In talking to Kinesis,  Campbell  reiterated his support for  the solution escort services  provide. He believes they  are easier to police and therefore safer for the prostitute,  and also that contact between  a prostitute and her client  is private and is therefore  better than the community  problems of street solicitation.  Campbell supports C-49 as a  necessary step to "protect"  prostitutes and the community.  Marie Arrington, of the Alliance for the Safety of Prostitutes, has said escort services are not a "workable solution" to street soliciting,  because they employ only a  certain class of women.  "What," Arrington asked "happens  to the women who are poor and  can't afford the clothes?  What happens to the women who  are drug addicts who are working to support their habit?  What happens to the children  who are out there working?"  If we tacitly accept escort  services and see them as  an improvement over street  prostitution (because it is  no longer visible) we fail  to address the roots of the  issue. As well, if prostitutes  are forced out of the public view, they are likely to  be more vulnerable. If we  allow politicians to focus  on escort services as a quick  fix for public street solicitation, the 'problem' of prostitution will conveniently  disappear. This is clearly  beneficial to the politicians.  Where is the benefit for the  prostitutes? I Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  conference:  ACROSS BC  BCOFR assesses progress against racism  Multiculturalism, anti-racism  programs and racism towards  B.C. Natives were the high  points of discussion at the  1st conference sponsored by  the B.C. Organization to  Fight Racism (B.C.O.F.R.)  in late November.  The conference opened Friday  with a diverse panel consisting of Ron George—United  Native Nations, Punam Khosla—  India Mahila Association,  Tommy Tao—Chinese Benevolent  Association, Ray Miki, Japanese  Canadian Citizens Association  and Kay Ryan, vice-president  of the BCOFR. Panelist briefly  spoke on their experience of  racism and answered questions.  "Has Racism Changed" was the  focus of Saturday's plenary.  Answers were yes...and no.  Speakers agreed that racism  has changed from the overt  vocal attacks to more subtle  institutional forms that now  .exists in schools, unions and  government agencies.  Mordecai Briemberg, of the  BCOFR spoke on how white  supremacy organizations  and right-wing propaganda  is linked.  He also stressed that anti-  feminist groups, such as  'Real Women', and anti-  abortionist movements are  appealing to racist groups  to forward their cause.  "White supremacy is in every  part of the literate world  and right wing movements" said  Briemberg, "it is not isolated  to groups like the K.K.K.  Fighting against racism is  impossible without fighting  the Right".  With band-aid solutions by  government, such as 'multicultural programs', said  Ed May, formerly of the  B.C. Teachers Federation  (B.C.T.F.), racism has been  ignored. The grants available through these programs  have developed "cottage  industries" that study,  analyze and categorize the  "new minorities", such as  Native Indians. Their  conferences emphasize ethnic  food and crafts and often  separate the groups and their  "All these" suggested May  "were merely substitutes for  action. Thirty years have  passed and multiculturalism  has not rid Canadian society  of racism".  Aziz;Khaki, of the Committee  for Racial Justice said  many immigrants are denied  jobs because "they don't  have Canadian experience".  Khaki suggested that if the  Federal Government could  spend time and money in the  employment and visability  of Quebecoises's, the same  could be done for visable minorities.  June Williams, of the BCTF  spoke on their Program Against  Racism. This is the only program of its kind in Canada.  Williams pointed out that  schools have to listen to  the community of parents, especially those families facing racism. Williams also felt  that staff within the schools  had to be united and committed  to implement changes.  "What has worked to Fight  Racism" .was the focus of the  afternoon plenary. Hayne Wei,  discussing the Vancouver  School Board Race Relation  Program (see Kinesis  Dec. /84)  thought some change had been  made but also said the 10  member non-ethnic committee  did not consult with community or minority groups on  their decisions.  Emma's Jambrosia calling it quits  by Lois Path  Everywoman's Manufacturing  and Moneymaking Association,  a collectively owned and operated jam production business  in'the Kootenays, has decided  to cease operations. In January of 1981, an enthusiastic  group of women got together  with an idea—women start, operate, and expand a business  which would provide job opportunities for other chronically unemployed women. Production actually began in the  fall of 1983.  But troubles began last winter. In January, Emma's Canadian broker for Ontario  and the prairies backed out  of their contract; in June,  a $10,000 a month contract  with a US distributor fell  through. Loss of the contracts  meant that Emma's sales projections and production were  over inflated, leaving them  with lots of jam and few markets.  The collective met for weeks,  considering all the factors  in trying to salvage the business. They were facing soaring fruit and honey prices,  and other material costs were  also rising. Mechanization  would meet increasing market  demands and reduce the product  price over time, but it would  also require a large initial  investment and eventually  result in the loss of jobs.  Costs of major equipment purchases and operating would  have created a working liability of over $100,000.  The decision to close ensured that  none of the women would end up  personally liable for large  sums of money.  Collective members shared some  of their reflections. Karen  White pointed out that the process of reaching consensus  often served to delay important business decisions that  needed to be made quickly.  Heather Gibson added, "inequalities in experience were a continuing difficulty, although  with time, energy, and commitment these could have been  worked out. But time especially is not available in a  business situation because of  cost factors."  Heather concluded by saying,  "If we had changed our structure to a more traditional  business set-up, we might have  been successful, but we were  not willing to compromise to  that-extent...we didn't lose  sight of our goals".  Adoption reform needed  by Diane Johnson  For a woman faced with an unplanned pregnancy, adoption  is sometimes regarded as a  more positive option than  either abortion or single  motherhood. Choosing abortion  is frequently a harrowing experience for women, and  statistics document the poverty, loneliness, and prejudice  likely to be faced by single  mothers.  But the reality of adoption,  as experienced by the natural  mother, is not always easy  either. In most cases the  natural mother is a young  single woman. The decison to  give up her child can be very  difficult, and the emotional  trauma can build after the  adoption and last for years.  Most adoptions in B.C. are  handled through the Ministry  of Human Resources (MHR).  The mother signs a consent form  ten days after the birth, providing information on herself  and the birth father. This information includes a medical  Adoption continued on page 17  Linda Herbert, of the Telecommunications Workers Union  identified various forms of  racism at B.C. Telephone,  from customers not allowing  east Indian phone installers  in her home to employees  posting racist cartoons on  the staff bulletin board.  Herbert said her Human Rights  Committee has been successful  in dealing with complaints.  Sarwan Boal, of the Canadian  Farmworkers Union insisted  that unions should take more  responsibility in exposing  racist government policies  to the public.  Reflecting on the history of  B.C.O.F.R., Andrea Rolls of  the Investigation and support  committee, thought racism  complaints had declined but  the ones coming in have been  more complex.  BCOFR's membership has  dropped said Rolls, suggesting  that fighting institutional racism does not attract the activists that were present when  fighting the KKK (1980-81).  Throughout the conference,  participants expressed anger  at the B.C. government's current racist attacks on the  Haida Indian Nation. {Haida  Indians are leading a nonviolent protest on Lyell Island to protect their Aboriginal title rights.  The Socred  government wants to log this  south Moresby Island that has  been the homeland of the Haida  people for over 7,000 years.  The International Woodworker  Union has supported the Socred  attack,  claiming jobs are at  stake.    If Lyell is logged,   it  would mean 16 jobs for only  24 dyas.    Premier Bennett  has refused to recognize  the Haida 's land rights or  negotiate with them.     To date,  58 Haida Indians  (and N.D.P.  M.P.  Robinson)  have been  charged with contempt of court.)  Ron George of the United Native  Nations stressed that Lyell  Island was not just a struggle  for the Haida People but for  all the people of B.C.  At the close of the conference  regulations were passed in  support and recognition to  the Haida people. The resolutions urged the B.C. government to start negotiations.  In talking with Kay Ryan after  the conference, she expressed  that the energy and committment coming from participants  and the renewal of connections  made this an important conference for BCOFR.  For more information:  BCOFR  Box 835,  New Westminster,  B.C.  V3L 4Z8  To send support to the Haida  Nation:  Council of Haida Nation  Box 589  Massett,  B.C.  VOT 1M0 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 5  ACROSS CANADA  NAC, other groups declare C-62 inadequate  Bill C-62, the federal government's initiative to promote  employment equity for women,  visible minorities and people  with disabilities, has raised  a storm of criticism from  organizations concerned with  equality in employment.  The proposed law is directed  at workers in federally incorporated companies, who  make up about ten percent of  the labour force. If passed  the legislation would require  equal pay for work of equal  value for women and affirmative action for women and  other people who face dis-  cr imina t ion. Employer s  would have to report publicly on their past hiring  records and their future  hiring plans.  In November representatives  from the National Action  Committee on the Status of  Women, the Coalition of  Provincial Organizations of  the Handicapped, the Urban  Alliance on Race Relations,  the National Ethno-Cultural  Council and the Canadian  Labour Congress joined  together in their strong  opposition to the bill.  that included targets and  quotas, as well as increased  government financing for  childcare.  Employment minister Flora  MacDonald defends Bill C-62  and the absence of fixed  targets. "Quotas become  ceilings", MacDonald said,  Their major criticism is that it requires only the  voluntary compliance of the companies.  Black woman going  nowhere with Bell Canada  Lyris Dainton is a black woman  who has worked for Bell Canada  for 11 years. She has won  many awards for top sales performance. Dainton, who had  been hired at entry level, soon  showed she had ambition and  although she was highly  qualified, for six years she  saw fellow workers with less  seniority, fewer qualifications and poorer work records,  promoted ahead of her.  Finally ten of Dainton's fellow  employees instigated a complaint  with the Canadian Human Rights  Commission and went as witnesses to give evidence on her behalf. Within three months she  got a promotion.  "But", says Dainton, "managment  never accepted me. They withheld  information from me vital to  my staff. They barred me from  meetings, so I didn't know  what was going on. I was in  charge of seven people. It  wasn't fair to them."  After a year of this Dainton  dropped back into her old job  as a service rep. She worked  at it for another three years  before she got into sales.  In the three years she worked  in sales, before she took a  leave to have a baby, Dainton  was a top sales representative  and her performance reviews  were excellent. Dainton feels  that Bell never encouraged her  in any way, and she "busted  her butt for them".  She took a two-year leave of  absence to have a baby. Now  Bell refuses to have her back.  Bell says "there is not a  perfect match between Lyris  Dainton and the job". Dainton  is again appealing to the  Canadian Human Rights Commis-  Bell's Information Director  for Public Affairs, M.V.  James, says, "It Bell were  discriminating on the basis  of sex and race, how did  Lyris Dainton get hired in  the first place?"  Dainton's case is a classic  example of the experience of  racial minorities. An extensive study published by  the Urban Alliance, Who Gets  Jobs,  documents pervasive  patterns of discrimination in  the workplace. The study  showed that in Ontario  white people are given three  times the job opportunities  as racial minority persons  with the same.qualification.  Their major criticism against  the bill is that it requires  only the voluntary compliance  of the companies.  Chaviva Hosek, president of  NAC, has said the bill will  not work because it neither  sets hiring goals nor fixes  penalties for non-compliance.  The legislation, said Hosek,  will only create the illusion  that something has been done  and may, in fact set us  back."  Critics also charge that  Bill C-62 is a watered down  version of Judge Rosalie  Abella's royal commission  recommendation on employment  equity.  Abella argued for.stronger  legislation on equal pay  adding that the bill's reporting requirement will  create its own form of pressure on industry. "Public  exposure is one of the real  pressures in society".  The experience American  women have had with affirmative action provides a  useful paralell for Canadian  women.  Judy Lichtman, director of  the Washington based Women's  Legal Defense Fund, says  she's "dubious" about affirmative action programs that  do not have fixed goals for  employers. "In our American  experience" Lichtman said,  "We got no compliance until  there was an enforcement  mechanism".  Law suit brings back wages  Occupational therapists, home  economists, and dieticians in  the public service across  Canada have been awarded more  than $2 million in September  as a pay settlement by the  Canadian Human Rights Commis-  Back wages dating from March,  1978 will be paid to 150-200  members, or former members,  of the Professional Institute  of the Public Service of  Canada.  Salaries for those affected  will rise between 12% and 26%..  In two complaints filed six  years ago the union charged  the federal Treasury Board  with discriminating against  employees in two female-dominated groups on the basis  of sex by paying them lower  wages than five groups dominated by males in the same  specific category.  Jobs were compared on the  basis of skill, effort, responsibility, and working  conditions.  A review of all jobs in the  federal public service is  underway.  Additional material for  Canada stories was taken from  the Globe and Mail, Rites and  The Canadian Rum  Advocate.  The Contemporary Saga of Little Mellon  by Harris Taylor and Terri Roberton 6 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  ACROSS CANADA  Pressure for equality rights grows  by Sharon Hanseil  Terse media coverage, scattered praise and thoughtless  criticism seem to be the  only response to the Equality  for All  report, recently tabled by the parliamentary  Committee on Equality Rights.  The Committee's mandate was to  make recommendations to bring  federal legislation into line  with Section 15 of the Canadian  Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Section 15 states "Every individual is equal before and  under the law and has the  right to equal protection and  equal benefit of the law without discrimination and in  particular without discrimination based on race, national or ethnic origin, colour,  religion, sex, age or mental  or physical disability".  In order to give Canadian  governments time to bring  their existing laws into  line with the Charter,  Section 15 was not proclaimed  until three years after the  Charter took effect. Why  the- Equality Rights Committee  was not initiated within  those three years remains  a mystery.  The Committee's report has  much merit and in some instances breaks new ground.  Many of its recommendations,  however, repeat those made  elsewhere in, for instance,  the Commission on Part Time  Work, the Abella Report on  Equal Pay and Affirmative  Action, and the MacDonald  Commission.  To date, the two recommendations, which have generated  most comment are the Committee's  support for freedom from discrimination on the basis of  sexual orientation and its  support for women in the  military. Other »recommendations include: adoption of  employment equity programs,  the institution of parentalj  employment benefits, revisions to the Canada Pension  Plan to eliminate discrimination against surviving  spouses, as well as a variety  of measures to strengthen  access for mentally and  physically disabled people.  Regarding sexual orientation  the Committee has recommended  that the Canadian Human  Rights Act be amended to add  sexual orientation as a prohibited grounds for discrimination. More importantly,  however, the Committee has  also stated that protection  against discrimination for  gays and lesbians should be  read into the open-ended wording of Section 15 itself.  New Democratic M.P. Svend  Robinson, a Committee member,  explained that this is a very  significant advance for gays.  According to Robinson, the courts  will have to take notice of this  report and will have to decide  whether the open-endedness of  Section 15 would include sexual  orientation.  Although interpreting Section  15 to include sexual orientation would require a judicial process, the fact that the  report is the concensus of an  all-party committee should,  according to Robinson, bear  considerable influence.  The lobby.for gay rights was  massive. Over 30 groups representing gay and lesbian organizations appeared before the  Committee and the majority of  other interest groups also sought  the inclusion of sexual orientation.  Robinson stated, quite  emphatically that "there is  no question that the effect  of that effort moved the  Committee to make those  recommendations".  In its coverage of the report  the mainstream press focussed  most of its attention on the  issues of sexual orientation  and women in the military.  : Nadine McDonnell, of the  Charter of Rights Coalition,  attributes the media disinter  est in the other issues raised  by the report to "charter  fatigue". "The media, " McDonnell  said, "is not demonstrating the  same amount of interest in the  Charter and for them sexual  orientation and women in the  military are fresh topics".  McDonnell and Robinson both  cited employment equity as a  ; priority aspect of the  report.  The report is tabled at an  .interesting time as an employment equity bill (C-62) is  currently before the House of  Commons and is receiving much  criticism (see Kinesis  this  issue). Opposition members are  asking that C-62 be delayed  while the government considers  the Equality for All  report.  The government's response, both  to the report and C-62, has  been evasive. They are under  considerable pressure to give  the report careful thought since  five of the seven Committee  members are Conservatives. If  they delay C-62 there is some  hope the report will be acted  on. It is more likely, though,  that C-62 will be pushed  through, despite its inadequacies  and despite the spirit of  the Equality for All  report.  Certainly the Conservatives  would prefer to avoid the  possibly politically dangerous reaction that supporting  sexual orientation protection  could mean.  Skepticism about the government's intentions mount when  we consider recent government moves to reduce the  personnel and budget of the  Human Rights Program at the  Secretary of State. Such cuts  at a time when the Conservatives should be implementing  the Committee's recommendations  indicate a low priority for  human and minority rights.  The equality rights section  of the Charter and the Human  Rights Act are not meant to  be a mouthpiece for the  rights of the majority. They  are meant to protect minority  groups.  As McDonnell states, "What is  significant about this report  is that it addresses minority  rights".  Now, if only the government  would.  Family  Allowance  Cutbacks  Parents in most parts of  Canada will lose $11.28 in  family allowance payments next  year for each of their children  under 18 if a bill before the  House of Commons becomes law,  a senior Health Department  official confirmed yesterday.  The plan is to eliminate full  cost-of-living protection and  to limit future increases to  rises in the consumer price  index in excess of 3 per cent  a year. Family allowances in  all parts of Canada outside  Quebec and Alberta are $31.27  monthly this year for each  child under 18.  Parents usually would be entitled to a cost-of-living increase  of 4 per cent for 1986, raising  benefits to $32.52 a month.  The high cost of keeping Canadians poor  Estimated social c<  t accounting of unemployment in Canada,  year-end 1982  Lost Production  Lost Earnings  UI Benefit Payments  Social Cost of Unemployment —  Related Stress Indicators  Lost Tax Revenue to Government  Social Welfare |      -  Lost Education and Training,  Depreciation of Human Capital  While unemployment in British Columbia continues to rise,  Bill Bennett tells us not to worry because tourism -  seasonal, minimal wage work at best, is B.C.'s new growth  industry. We thought our readers might like a clear picture of how Canada pays for unemployment.  The table below is re-produced from the Canadian Mental  Health Association's 1983 report: Unemployment: Its- Impact on Body and Soul.  And of course, costs, as well  as unemployment, have risen since 1983.  The table points out' that the 78 billion dollar cost of  unemployment is equivalent to 22 percent of the gross  national product and is three times greater than the  federal deficit.  In 1983, this report, and unemployment in general, received considerable attention. Today the politicians  have moved on to other issues. The unemployed have moved  on as well, to the welfare rolls and the food banks.  Girls under 14 still protected  (CANADIAN PRESS- YELLOWKNIFE)  A law that prohibits men from  having sexual intercourse with  girls under 14 is discriminatory  but does not violate the  Charter of Rights and Freedoms,  a Northwest Territories Supreme Court judge has ruled.  It is the highest level of  court to rule on the matter.  District court judges in Ontario have heard two similar  applications, upholding one  and dismissing the other. In  the NWT case, Edward Victor  Drybones had been charged  under the Criminal Code with  having intercourse with a  girl under 14 who was not his  wife.  250   MORTWERM  VAMcouver, g.c. is Dec/Jan 1985-6 7  ACROSS CANADA  Divorce Act Out of Step with Reality  by Allison Sawyer  Last May Justice Minister  John Crosbie, tabled. Bill C-46  and C-47 in the House of Commons.  The Conservatives were following through on a Liberal initiative in response to much  pressure to bring the divorce  law into the '80's.. Bill  C-46 would be a new Divorce  Act, if passed, and C-47  would become the Family  Orders Enforcement Act.  Bill C-46, the Divorce Act  amendments, has passed second  reading. The Justice Committee  made its report to the House  on October 30th; The report  recommended some amendments  of a minor nature which may mean  that the Bill will not be passed  by the House before the Christmas break on December 20th. If  the government ends the session  rather than adjourning it, Bill  C-46 may die on the order paper  instead of being carried forward  into the 1986 session. Interested women might want to write  or otherwise lobby their MP's  now in support of the Bill and  for changes to it.  The women's lobby thinks it  important to change the Divorce  Act to make it at least reflect  current reality. The proposed  changes barely do that. Much of  the pressure for a new law was  brought so that divorce could  be applied for and obtained  immediately, if uncontested,  without an enforced delay. The  present law requires a three  or five year wait unless the  party is seeking the divorce  on the grounds that the other  committed one of thirteen matrimonial faults.  Bill C-46 requires, instead,  a one year wait unless the  other spouse committed either  adultery or cruelty. Retention  of a waiting period means the  Conservatives continue to see  breakdown of a marriage as  extremely serious in a social  and moral sense and worth  reflecting on for a year.  In fact most people in these  modern times do not base  their petition for divorce  on the no-fault ground of  "three years separate and  apart".  It is more expedient to apply on the grounds  of adultery since, in most  cases, people separate and  have sexual relations with  other people before starting  a divorce action. That is,  since more marriages fail  than thrive, and everyone  is sleeping with everyone  else without regard to  marital status, adultery  as a concept has become  what one calls^it in order  to get a speedy divorce.  Further, since older  judges, usually male, often  have old-fashioned ideas,  lawyers may plead adultery  for the express purpose of  making the judge think that  one spouse's conduct is bad  while the other's, the lawyer's client, is good and  therefore more deserving  of more support or more  property or custody of the  child of the marriage.  Although conduct is no longer  to be considered when weighing these aspects of the proceedings, it may be hard for  some judges to ignore the  evidence.  It would have been  better to omit mention of  adultery and cruelty altogether.  In determining the amount of  spousal and child support,  economics became more of a  factor to conform with the  criteria used in this area  under provincial family law.  Like the provincial law, the  bill spells out that in awarding spousal support, the court  must consider the economic  advantages and disadvantages  experienced by one spouse in  relation to the other as a  result of the marriage and its'  breakdown.  The financial consequences of child rearing  should promote the economic  self-sufficiency of each spouse  within a reasonable time.  Finally the rules about custody in the new Bill articulate the joint financial obligation of both parents and  the fact that custody will be  awarded on the basis of what  is in the best interests of  the child. Again these are  exactly the same rules as are  found in most provincial  family law statutes.  Procedurally, the Bill gives  permission to the provinces  to set their own rules with  respect to the necessity of  appearing in court to obtain  a divorce. A province such as  British Columbia, which is  attempting to improve the  efficiency of the court system,  may well rule that an uncontested divorce may be obtained  simply by filing the petition  and affidavits at the court  registry. This would make  divorce procedure simpler for  petitioners but abuse, such  as inaccurate affidavit evidence,  is more likely.  Another way of reducing the  backlog in the courts is to  require the parties to a contested matter to mediate before  going to trial. This approach  is being used in California  with great success. Bill C-46  shies away from such progressive  ideas and only demands that the  lawyer tell their divorcing  clients about the availability  of conciliation and mediation  services in their community.  Most lawyers do this as a normal  step in advising their clients.  In sum, Bill C-46 fails to live  up to even liberal expectations.  The Conservatives, as we know,  are too traditional, socially  and morally, to be alble to make  the clean break with the past  that a really new divorce law  requires. And anything short of  a clean break does little to ease|  legal problems facing women  under the existing law.  Media Watch spotlights sexism in the media industry  National Watch on Images of -  Women in the Media (MediaWatch) , a national women's  organization, is dedicated to  improving the portrayal of  women and girls in the media.  Our task is twofold: we want  to eliminate sexist and  pornographic images of women  and, as importantly, encourage images that mirror the  diverse and changing roles of  women in Canada.  MediaWatch was founded because  women realized they needed a  unified voice to impress on  advertisers, broadcasters and  government that many people  are opposed to media misrepresentation of women.  MediaWatch acts as advocates and  facilitators for women's  concerns and also provides  resources for individual and  collective action. We do  public education, government  and industry lobbying as well  as program and advertisement  monitoring..  ♦.-'j. •-.",-  For the past two years broadcasters and advertisers have  agreed to control sexism and  sex-role stereotyping by self  regulation. To enable the  public to respond to the industry, MediaWatch produced  and distributed a comment form  people could use to identify  objectionable images of women,  (see insert in this month's  Kinesis).   This past summer MediaWatch  sent a questionaire to the  people who have used the comment form asking for their  feedback on its effectiveness.  The questionaire also sought  information that would indicate the form's impact on  media industries. We wanted  to assess how industry responds  to consumer criticisms of  program and advertising content and whether self regulation is a viable strategy.  This research, which will be  completed in late December,  will be used to improve the  comment form, and as evidence at the Canadian Radio  and Television Commission's  hearings in February.  The hearings, one of which  will be held in Vancouver,  will examine the effectiveness of industry self-regulation. Any group interested in  making a submission can contact MediaWatch.  MediaWatch has a number of  objectives for the upcoming  year. We have added a part-  time publicist to the organization to increase people's  awareness of our service and  the need to fight media sexism. As well, we intend to  concentrate on youth outreach  with a slide show on sex role  stereotyping and a video on  the image of women in rock  videos. Both.these projects  are well underway and will  soon be ready for distribution to elementary and secondary schools, respectively.  We urge women to use our comment form. In Vancouver we  have two current examples of  businesses which have not  been responsive to complaints  about their ads. Sprint Family  Fitness and the Ron Zalko  Fitness Connection both use  sexist or pornographic images  in their advertising. More  consumer pressure would,  we're certain, encourage these  firms to be responsible.  It is worth pointing out that  there has been an upsurge in  fitness advertising aimed at  women. The above businesses,  along with many others, commonly misrepresent women's  fitness needs. Fitness advertising tends to emphasize  that fitness is not for  health  but for increasing  women's total allure  to men.  When using the comment form  remember to include what you  like about the ad/program,  or what you would like to  see along with your criticism.  The comment form can also be  used to commend advertisers  and programmers.  MediaWatch intends to get  more involved in direct contacts with the media indus- .  try. If we can set up a dialogue and educate the industry on the effects of sexism,  positive images may be developed as future advertisements  and programs are developed.  Up until now MediaWatch has  intervened primarily by using the industry guidelines v  and processes. We have recently been re-examining our  approach and we will be considering whether this is  still the most effective  avenue to fighting sexism  in their media.  Our thanks to the many women  who have responded to our  questionaire. You have provided us with much valuable  information and many new  ideas to work on. And, of  course, we have some of our  own. You will be hearing a  lot about MediaWatch in the  future. Our work continues.  If you are interested in  volunteering for MediaWatch  our lower mainland number  is 873-8511.     Our office is  located at 209-636 West  Broadway,   Vancouver. Media   j  Watch's British Columbia  representative is Marilee  McLean,   446 Reid St.,  Quesnel,  B.C.  V2J 2M6 8 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  INTERNATIONAL  Ronald Reagan:  Keeping  the lid on  in America  by Eunice Brooks  On this page and page 9  Kinesis  presents three stories which  point to the American government's suppression of freedom  of information and freedom  of speech.    Harpers, an  American monthly noted for its  'liberal' stance,  has,  in an  article entitled Liberty 5  Under Siege in its November  issue,  examined the moves the  Reagan administration has  made to control information  access and freedom of speech.  The following is a much condensed precis of the  Harpers  article.    Eunice Brooks  1981: David Stockman, White  House budget director, says  that the new administration's  success "boils down to a  question of whether we can  change the habits of a political system." Reagan  tries to stuff a cork in the  Freedom of Information Act,  but there is no public or  political outcry. He fails,  but he does manage.to make  an executive order on December 4 authorizing the  CIA to collect foreign intelligence in the United  States by surreptitiously  questioning the citizenry,  and to make use of local  police in undercover  actions. Getting the government off the backs of  the people is the last  thing this administration  wants despite Reagan's  saying so.  1982: To get the new year  off to a good start the administration stems the outflow of scientific information. Universities are informed that any teacher who  lectures to a foreign student  may be a U.S. Exporter, and  fined for exporting technical  data.  In February Reagan drafts an  order creating a new category  for technical data, the declassification of documents, begun  by President Eisenhower in 1953,  is halted. Publicity for important changes in regulations  governing different government  agencies is deemed unimportant.  The Department of Labour nullifies safety laws and the  Nuclear Regulatory Office suspends some key safety regulations. Neither agency informs  the public of these changes.  Under Executive Order 12291,  White House budget office  clerks are given the power  to determine, under cost benefit principles, whether to  proclaim new regulations  thereby in effect nullifying  acts of Congress.  In November the White House  asks Congress to abolish  the Legal Services Corporation  which provides the poor  with counsel to protect  their rights in court. Congress refuses.  1983: Swinging into the new  year the government announces  that any group, even including the Girl Guides, which  speaks on public affairs will  lose its funding.  The White House eliminates,  or drastically reduces, over  50 statistical programs on  such matters as nursing homes,  labour turn-over, medical  care expenditures. The government says the "free market"  will provide this information.  On March 7 citizens who are  "political in character" are  put within easy reach of  police surveillance. The  FBI is expressly permitted  to infiltrate any domestic  organization in the cause of  "domestic security".  Under Presidential directive  84 all government employees  with access to sensitive  information are required to  Reagan continued on page 18  Additional material for  international stories wat  taken from: Sojourner,Bn  sheet and Inside Asia.  Margaret Randall facing deportation from the U.S.  In October of this year,  the United States Immigration  and Naturalization Service  (INS) denied Margaret Randall  permanent residency status  in the U.S.. The INS used the  authority granted by the  McCarren-Walters Act to  question Randall extensively  about her political beliefs,  her ideas and her intellectual associations. On the  basis of these interviews,  the INS ruled that Randall  was ineligible for permanent  residency status because of  her support of "Communist- .  dominated governments in  Cuba, North Vietnam, and  Nicaragua, as well as her  support of revolutionary  activity in Mexico."  The McCarren-Walters Act was.  a bill passed over the veto of  President Harry Truman during  the McCarthy period.  The INS ruling means that  Randell faces deportation.  Randall, a well known writer,  poet and speaker, is the  author of over 40 published  books, including Sandino's  Daughters.  Randall was born  in New York and remained a  citizen of the U.S. for over  twenty years.  In her early 20s, Randall  moved to Mexico and took  Mexican citizenship in  order to work in the country.  She has lived and worked in  Mexico, Cuba and Nicaragua  and has made numerous speak  ing tours throughout the U.S.  and Canada publicizing the  struggles of people living  in those countries.  Currently, Randall resides  in Albuquerque, New Mexico  and works in the Department  of American Studies at the  University of New Mexico as  an adjunct assistant professor. She is married to a  U.S. citizen and cares for her  aging parents, both American  citizens. One of Randall's two  daughters also lives in the  United States.  In a recent journal entry,  Margaret writes:  October 8...suddenly and  powerfully,  I can see what  this means in terms of a direction in speech and thought  control in which this administration would engage. For  if I am being kept out purely  on the basis of criticism of  U.S. policy  (something not even  officially covered under the  McCarran-Walter Act)...then  if they manage to repeal  abortion legislation,  it  may not only become a crime  to give or get an abortion; it  may become a crime...to hold  an opinion which dissents  from the official line...  A New York Based public interest law group, the Centre  for Constituional Rights, is  sponsoring Randall's legal  case, which is now before the  courts. Despite this the INS  has notified Randall that she  must appear at an INS hearing  in December to show cause as  to why she should not be  deported.  Margaret Randall Legal Defense  Committees are now forming  throughout the United States  and Canada to raise money  and publicize Randall's plight.  If you are able to contribute time or donations to the  Vancouver based committee,  please contact:  Saralee James or Lanny Beckman  c/o The Margaret Randall  Canadian Legal Defense  Committee  2504 York Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  V6K 1E3  Please make cheques payable  to: The Margaret Randall  CLDC.  Tucson 12:  On trial for giving  sanctuary to refugees  by Eunice Brooks  Women make up a majority of  some 60,000 volunteers who  have formed a loose network  known as the Sanctuary Movement, to aid refugees entering the United States from  Central America. Recently 12  church workers have been  charged, by the American  government, with assisting  refugees. The group, known  as the 'Tucson 12', face  charges that carry a maximum  sentence of 30.years for aiding people who are forced to  flee from persecution in countries such as Guatemala, El  Salvador and Chile.  The 'Tucson 12' are only the  most visible of the people  who are aiding refugees.  About 200 churches, synagogues,  and Quaker groups declare  their buildings sanctuaries.  Supporters of the '12' say  they are on trial, not so much  for what they have done by  way of aid, but for bringing  to the attention of the American public situations that  the U.S. government would  rather keep secret.  Every refugee who comes north  with a story is a potential  threat to the American government which actively supports  Central American regimes  which hava a reputation, internationally, for repression  and tyranny.  The refugees can tell of weapons they have seen used, which  are supplied by the U.S. They  can tell of imprisonments without trial, of torture, rape and  murder; crimes sponsored by their  "governments". Iii order to stop  this flow of refugees the U.S.  must break the Sanctuary Movement  Sanctuary continued on page 11 by Pat Hercus  "The planes come every day, morning, afternoon and even in the night. As many as four  planes come to bomb... There's also a plane  we call "Pacencia" (Patience) because it's  very slow and machine-guns and fires flares.  They -come to destroy this area, because  there are no houses left standing."  "The plane drops a liquid fire that disintegrates your clothes...The women fell on  the ground,   their dresses burnt away,  they  were naked and their hair had been burnt  off,  ashes came out of their ears - it  was horrible.  The same happened to the  children.  There were people who didn't die,  but were killed afterwards by the Armed  Forces when they got there.   Women screamed,  'Throw water on me, my body is burning. '"  Vietnam 1972? No, El Salvador, 1985. These  testimonies are from Salvadorean civilians  fleeing the daily bombing that is devastating the countryside. In Canada we get  virtually no information about the bombings  because the North American media is participating in a news blackout about these  attacks.  Since 1983 over 3000 tons of bombs have  been dropped on a civilian population that  lives in a country half the size of Vancouver Island. In 1983 there were 227  aerial attacks. In 1984 this rose to 338.  In July Monique Vezina, Canada's External  Relations Minister, spent two days in El  Salvador. She cited improvements in the  human rights situation in that country as  justification for the resumption of bilateral aid, beginning with $8 million  Canadian dollars.  Although Vezina did not report it, more than  100 bombing attacks were carried out in the  countryside in July. One wonders that Vezina did not hear the bombs and mortars reverberating off the walls as she dined in  the opulent Presidential Palace with Jose  Napoleon Duarte.  A survivor of one bombing attack interviewed by the Christian Science Monitor  describes how they escalated in 1984. "At  firs\ the Air Force dropped bombs that  knocked down trees and houses, killed  people and made 3-meter craters (250-  pound bombs). Then they began to drop  bombs that exploded before hitting the  ground (anti-personnel bombs) and others  that made craters 8 meters deep to kill  us as we hid in our shelters (500-pound  bombs). Now they use the worst bombs  of all - the flaming liquid (napalm)."  The Salvadorean government, with its $1.5  million dollars a day in U.S. aid, is  attempting to destroy the Farabundo Marti  National Liberation Front (FMLN), and to  "drain the sea" of civilian supporters.  U.S. military officials have admitted that  American pilots, have participated in  bombing attacks.  In response, the FMLN has adjusted its  tactics from large-scale operations of  200 or 300 combatants that are easily  spotted from the air, to small operations  using less than 50 fighters.  The bombing primarily affects the civilian  population that lives in the areas controlled by the FMLN, now 40 percent of the  national territory. In the "controlled"  or "liberated" zones the people are trying  to build what they call the "new society".  They have developed locai forms of self-  government, food production collectives  and health and literacy campaigns. Despite  the daily bombings and constant shortages  of educational supplies, illiteracy in the  liberated zones has been reduced from 70  percent (80 percent among rural women)  to 20 percent for the population as a  whole.  The "new society" is being built primarily  by women, children and old people. Most  of the young men and many of the young women  - women comprise 40 percent of the FMLN  troops - are away from the liberated  zones fighting in the FMLN.  What you don't  know about  El Salvador  To escape the bombs it is common for groups  of up to 100 people to hide for as long as  two weeks in underground tunnels. The army  uses trained dogs to sniff out human scent  the tunnels. When people are found  inside, grenades, or small bombs, are thrown  into the tunnels, and survivors are finished  iff with machine-gun fire and machetes.  Sound a lot like Vietnam? The counter-  insurgency tactics used by the U.S. and  the Salvadorean Army today in El Salvador  are similar to those used in Vietnam a  decade ago. One element that has changed  however, is media coverage of these events.  Massacres, like the famous one at My Lai,  were front-page news in the 1960s and  70s while the ones at Suchitoto, San Chico  and Platanares in El Salvador in the 80s  sit in files of the Archdiocese in San  Salvador, or filter up to solidarity  groups in the United States and Canada.  The change in media coverage is deliberate  and reflects lessons learned by the U.S.  in Vietnam. Photographs of naked Vietnamese  children running from napalm attacks  brought the grisly impact of Vietnam into  American living rooms and had a profound  ffect on the course of the war.  Thousands of people filled the streets in  protest against U.S. involvement. Students  held sit-ins and teach-ins, church people  occupied public buildings and letters  poured into politicians' offices from outraged people around the world.  In 1975,  largely as a result of this mass opposition, the U.S. pulled its troops out of  Vietnam and Cambodia.  Major American newspapers, like the New  York Times,  have reporters based in El  Salvador. A review of the Times  coverage,  from the beginning of October to the  middle of November, reveals that bombing  attacks against civilians are virtually  never reported.  Out of 45 days of international coverage,  the nine Times  stories on El Salvador  included two reports of an FMLN attack  on an army barracks, where the target was  five U.S. advisors, and one story about  the breakdown in the process of peace  negotiations begun in October 1984 between  the FMLN-FDR and the government.  Although the FMLN-FDR asked repeatedly  throughout 1985 for a resumption of the  peace talks, the breakdown, according to  the Times,  is due to "a hardening of  the guerrillas' position." The report does  not mention that over 50,000 civilians  have been killed in bombing attacks and  army operations since 1979 or that the death  toll rises monthly in triple-digit amounts.  The other six stories on El Salvador  focussed on the FMLN kidnapping of Presi-   Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 9  dent Duarte's daughter. The moral outrage  that greeted this action suggests that Ines  Guadelupe Duarte Duran was the first woman  ever to be kidnapped in El Salvador. In  fact, over 6000 people have been captured  by the army and security forces and have  "disappeared."  When the deal was struck for Duarte Duran's  release the story was covered by the New  York Times,  Time,  Newsweek,  The Globe and  Mail  and Macleans,  most other dailies and  the electronic media. This was the first  El Salvador coverage by the three newsmagazines in six weeks.  Duarte Duran, her companion and 23 mayors  kidnapped earlier by the FMLN were all  released, unharmed, by the FMLN. On its  part the government arranged for 96  wounded FMLN fighters to be flown to other  countries to receive medical attention and  also released 26 political prisoners.  While Duarte Duran, and the other FMLN  captives, all testified to the good  treatment they received, it goes unreported  that political prisoners are routinely  tortured while in government prisons.  In a taped interview recorded during her  captivity in the liberated zone, where  she was able to move about among the civilian population, Duarte Duran spoke-of bombing strikes that took place near where she  was. She spoke of her great fear and her  understanding of how the rural people feel  about the bombings. This was only the second  time that the bombings had been mentioned  in the press in the six weeks although  there were 700 bombing and mortar attacks  against civilians by the government army  in September and October.  The- Globe and Mail ran the New lo'rk Times  article on November 9. The second half of  the article was omitted, including Duarte  Duran's comments about the bombing attacks.  This brief review reflects a deliberate  policy to black out news of bombings and  the slaughter of civilians in order to  avoid protest unleashed by coverage of  similar events in Vietnam.  Studies made in the U.S. reveal that 2/3  of Americans are opposed to U.S. policy  in Central America. Despite this opposition  the Administration continues to send bombs  and continues to lie to Congress and the  American people. By resuming bilateral  aid to the Salvadorean government, in the  face of well documented and escalating  bombing attacks, the Canadian government  has made Canadians accomplices to the  carnage in El Salvador.  The U.S. Administration has learned some  of its Vietnam lessons well. The lesson  it has not learned is that military might  will not defeat a guerrilla army that is  backed by a large civilian population, and  is determined to succeed.  An old farmer was interviewed in San Antonio Los Ranchos, a village in the liberated  zone of Chalatenango. He said, "I have  lived a long time. All my life I had been  treated worse than a dog. Now I feel like  a real person. Everyone speaks to me with  respect. No, I will never go back to how  things were before. And if Reagan invades,  he'll have to kill us all."  In November a letter was sent by Vancouver  Alderpeople Harry Rankin, Libby Davies,  Bruce Ericksen and Bruce Yorke to Monique  Vezine condemning the resumption of Canadian aid to El Salvador. The letter argues  that the Canadian aid will be used either  directly or indirectly by the Salvadorean  government for its military budget and is  not the economic aid that the people need.  It also says the aid "gives credibility  to a regime which does not deserve it."  Your voice can be added by writing to Vezina  at the following address: Monique Vezina,  Minister for External Relations,  Lester  Pearson Building,  Ottawa, K1A 0G2. No  is necessary. 10 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  INTERNATIONAL  Gay voices break the silence in Mexico  by Wendy Solloway and  Colleen Tillmyn  las TSadres le preguntan  las hijas donde estan  se feuron alia marcha  de orgullo lesbian  Winding our way down the wide  boulevard of the Paseo de la  Reforma in Mexico City, we and  thousands of Mexican lesbians  and homosexuals shouted slogans  like the one above: "Mothers  are asking where their daughters are; they've gone to the  lesbian pride march."  It seemed like many a daughter  was present that day, in June  1984, at the annual gay pride  march. And though many more  stayed home for fear of losing  their jobs and/or severe ostracism from family and friends,  the chanting voices spoke to a  growing movement of lesbians  and homosexuals in Mexico.  The next day we scanned the corner newspaper stand for media  coverage of this momentous  march, but it was as if it never  happened. Finally we discovered,  in one tabloid paper, a series  of photos portraying sensationalist poses of half-clad men and  transvestites.  A Mexican lesbian friend explained "The government, as part of  its campaign on 'moral reform',  forbids periodicals to print  information about homosexuals.  One sees articles from time to  time, but always of a very  superficial nature."  In fact, people can still be imprisoned in Mexico for" being  gay. Homosexuals are not'real  men' by any stretch of the  macho imagination, and if a  woman is not living with either  her immediate family or her  husband and children, she is  immediately suspect...probably  a whore or worse yet...a lesbian.  The Mexican gay and lesbian  movement, which is still a very  young movement, is trying to  change that image. Its first  march took place in 1979 as a  commemoration for the demonstrating students shot the  previous year during the Olympic Games. Several groups have  sprung up since then and have  dissolved for one reason or  another.  One of the first was FHAR.  Beginning as a socialist organization, it soon transformed  into more social than socialist  and soon afterward fell apart.  Likewise, LAMBDA started out in  an activist vein, holding conferences and publishing a newsletter. However it also became  more party oriented, holding  regular dances and charging  fairly steep admission prices,  thereby limiting access.  Hideous incidents of gay-bashing on the streets near the  LAMDA centre aroused members  into action from time to time,  but otherwise campaigning for  gay rights became the work of  only a few organizers. After  political divisions intensified, LAMBDA finally closed its  doors.  One of the few lesbian organizations, OIKABETH, grew as an  offshoot of FHAR. These women  were very clear about their  socialist stance and were determined to be public about  .their beliefs. However, after  a couple of years, OIKABETH  folded as well. Even so, the  marches go on and people do  continue to be active.  In the area of mainstream politics, two 'leftist' parties,  the PRT and the PSUM, have  introduced the topic of gay  rights as a public issue, a  significant accomplishment  within the Mexican political  system. Furthermore, there are  many lesbians working with  women's groups in areas such  as sex education and reproductive rights. This is an immense  task when one considers the  high sterilization rate of  poor Mexican women, the ugly  complications of illegal abortions and the lack of education  concerning women's bodies. In  addition, Fern,  a women's monthly  magazine, prints articles about  or by lesbians occasionally,  although rumour has it that  changes in editorial policy  will make for even less coverage of lesbian issues.  Lesbians and homosexuals in  Mexico clearly face an uphill  battle. Internal ideological  differences hinder the movement's effectiveness in challenging the wide-spread homophobia at large. There are     ,  those who attempt to link gay  rights with human rights in a  larger context—rights of  peasants, workers, heterosexual women and to liberation  struggles. Yet there are  others who seek only to assimilate themselves. One reason  for the latter could be Mexico's  proximity to Central America.  Many Mexicans are grateful  that war has not reached  their doorsteps as it has in  the houses of their Central  American neighbours, and they  don't want to shake Mexico's  fragile state of balance. At  the other end of the spectrum  are those who identify with  the horrible oppression suffered in Mexico by the disappeared, the political  prisoners on hunger strikes,  and the peasants assassinated  for defending their land.  Certainly Mexico's geographical, economic and cultural  circumstances all lend a particular perspective to the  movement distinct from that  of the lesbian and homosexual  movement in Canada. However,  in another sense the commonalities are apparent and ultimately inspiring, for as they  say in Mexico:  Lesbianas y homosexuales  estamos in todas las partes  Lesbians and homosexuals are  everywhere.  March for peace slated for Central America  by Andrea Clark  Rise and demand; you are a  burning flame  You are sure to conquer there  where this final horizon becomes a drop of blood. A drop  of life, where you will carry  the universe on your shoulders,  where the universe will bear  hope.  Miguel Angelo Asturias, Barefooi  Meditations  It is in this spirit of universal hope for the self-determination of the Central American  people, that an International  Peace March through Central  America will take place starting December 10th, 1985. As the  military, economic, and political intervention in the region  continues to escalate, worldwide anxiety also continues to  grow at the fear of an explosive regional war.  In July, 1984, a Norwegian ship  called the "Peace Ship", was  equipped with medical supplies,  paper, and fertilizers bound  for Nicaragua. Due to increasing tensions and fears of U.S.  intervention and continuing  violations of human rights by  certain Central American  governments, the Norwegian peace  movement was inspired to make  a further initiative. This initiative resulted in the development of an International  Peace March through Central  America. It is a march for human  rights, self-determination and  solidarity in Central America.  The Norwegian initiative views  the debt and credit difficulties, which most Central American countries face, as being  responsible for creating enormous economic problems.  The  debt crisis affect the everyday  life of ordinary citizens with  poverty, starvation, disease,  kidnapping, imprisonment, torture, oppression, war and fear.,  The invitation to participate  in this march has resulted in  approximately 400 participants  with almost 40 from Canada. Five  women and one man are from B.C.  The march starts Dec. 10 in  Panama City and will continue  through Costa Rica, Nicaragua,  Honduras, El Salvador, Guatemala  and finish in Mexico, Jan. 22nd.  A delegation from the march is  expected to travel to Washington  with the findings.  Prior to deciding on the  march, extensive consultations  and discussion took place  with representatives from  several organizations in  Central America.  This included  CONIPAZ (Nicaraguan Peace  Committee), AMLAE (Nicaraguan  Women's Organization), Ernesto  Cardenal, FMLN, ANDES, (El  Salvador's Teachers' Union)  CONIP (El Salvadore's People's  Popular Church), AMES (El  Salvador Women's Assoc.),  Crupo de Apoyo (Guatemala),  IGE, (Guatemala's Church in  Exile), URNG, (guerilla movement) trade union representatives in Guatemala.  The plans presented were  enthusiastically received  with the Central Americans  Central America continued page 22  Fiji Women's Crisis Centre  Joins the Struggle for Women  by Eunice Brooks  Patience and persistence are  paying dividends for women  and children in Suva, Fiji.  The image of an island paradise has been blown away by  the reality of increasing  violence towards women and  children coupled with backward legislation that still  takes a,woman's virginity  into account in rape cases,.  and provides no relief for  women who must leave the  financial dependence of abusive husbands. To contend  with these and other issues,.  Fiji women opened a Women's  Crisis Centre in 1984.  Case: In 1983 a woman working with the government was  raped by two men who broke  into her house. Police believed the men had been  tempted into the rape by  watching her undress and  by the knowledge that she  was known to go out alone  at night.  Case: A 22 year-old man admitted to raping a four year  old child. He got a 3h year  sentence.  Case: Two men forced a 17  year-old girl student into  a garage where they raped  her. She appealed for help  to an off duty policeman;  who was chased away by the  rapists. The judge aquitted  the men, when another man  testified he had had sex  with the girl in the past.  In Fiji there is no recognition of rape within marriage.  There is also no such thing as  a non-molestation order. Still  women are organizing and believe there is hope for change.  The Women's Crisis Centre  group meets in a tiny office,  furnished with cast-offs from  both the American and New Zealand embassies. The Centre operates on volunteer labour.  Funding has been applied for,  but there are stringent rules  Fiji continued page 22 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 11  TRANSITION HOUSE  Transition House occupation:  'New' Women tackling fundamental issues  The occupation at Vancouver Transition  House is in its sixth month.     The  Salvation Army and Act II's services  have been in operation since mid  October. Battered women and their  children continue to use the services provided by the occupation.  Vancouver City Social Planning Department,  which was charged with developing  a feisability study for a city sponsored  transition house,   has informed council  that its report will be ready in December.  Council will, most likely,  make a  decision on transition house funding by  the end of the year.  Women are asked to write'Vancouver City  Counsel and urge the city to approve  funds for a feminist run transition house  for battered women.  by Gretchen Lang  The neighborhood is quiet, the house large,  and the kitchen is spacious and clean.  Around the kitchen, square paper reminders  are taped to various appliances, the only  clue to the number of different women  that have come through this house. I'm  introduced, and the woman in the dining  room tilts back in her chair and grins.  They are what Wendy, an occupational  volunteer, calls a loose assortment of  personalities, working together in this  house.  Wendy is one of thrjee women interviewed  here, all of them new to feminist activism  in Vancouver. They are part of the occupation force at Vancouver Transition House.  When the house was closed in June the crisis provided a unique opportunity for  these women to become involved in feminist  concerns. For each of them the motive for  involvement was largely need: The need to  maintain a non-judgmental environment  for battered women.  Joan has a face that is round and open.  She works at a Vancouver branch of the  Bank of Commerce. She was frustrated by a  job that, she says, didn't care for people, and went looking for something that  did. Especially "women people" she adds;  then laughing, adds again, "Is that a  politically correct phrase?"  The politically correct line worried her.  Asked if she was a feminist, she thought  yes, she was, but couldn't designate herself as such. There seemed to be a lot of  rules and regulations and ways to be  before one could achieve being a feminist.  Upon entering Transition House, Joan was  screened by a core group of women with  counselling training. She says the structure is in place to screen out volunteers  with unacceptable biases and to support  those volunteers with less experience.  She'd expected feminists to get along a  bit better. The differences of opinion that  confronted the occupation group disturbed  her.  "I was surprised at the depth of feeling  women had for what they felt was right,  and at the lack of tolerance."  Yet the ones who'd set their'minds on  keeping the house open got along very  well. Jean feels richer for meeting people  so concerned and committed to "women  people". "I was beginning to loose faith,"  she says, smiling.  The house bedrooms, each equipped with a  crib, are neat and comfortable-looking  but, understandably, impersonal. One  imagines a woman sleeping between the clean  sheets and coming to terms with the idea  that she's left home.  Patty, who was also working at the house  that day, says she understands the difficulty battered women face in breaking free.  Yet it's hard to watch them go back to a  familiar but violent homelife.  "I'd  never  guilt  them for going it,  but  I  wish they wouldn't   (go back).   I want  it  in print.   I wish they wouldnrt!"  Patty may not wish to sit  under the feminist umbrella but  she feels the occupation has been  a good introduction to women  who are very active feminists.  Patty came to Vancouver three months-ago  from Toronto, where she had participated  in various feminist rallies and marches.  She says she has not necessarily joined  the Vancouver feminist community by becoming involved with the occupation. Rather  she feels she has joined a group of women  who, coincidentally, feel as she does  about the need for a feminist run transition house. She prefers to participate  only, in feminist activities that she feels  strongly about. This, she says, does not  place her in the "Movement".  "I am similar to feminists in my awareness"  (of oppression), but adds that she believes  "feminists fight oppression.of a wider  scale". She hopes only to change herself  and her circle of friends.  Patty may not wish to sit under the feminist umbrella but she feels the occupation  has been a good introduction to women who  are very active feminists. "I like the  idea of women helping women without  the political bullshit." The divisions  and political splits of the feminist community, she says, don't matter at the  occupation.  "I had not expected the group to be so  organized, so strong, so dedicated,"  Patty emphasizes.  "It's hard work doing nothing," she says  of staffing on the days the house is not  busy. "You can eat, and drink coffee and  socialize but at the end of the day you  come out feeling like you've been working  in a fish factory." She says the occupa  tion has given her "a new respect for  feminists" she didn't have before.  Patty, who at times finds 'hard-core'  feminists too serious, won't be going out  for long term activity in the woman's  movement but she says she'll keep her  eyes open for real need. She likes the  immediacy. "Crisis time, that's me I"  The inside of Transition House is clean,  warm, ordinary. The front door, however,  is locked and barricaded. A note inside  the back door warns against opening it  for anyone but occupiers.  Wendy has lived in both Toronto and New  York. She says she feared confronting the  issue of the violence done to women.  "I was afraid it would be hard to see  their pain."  Though she participated in "Take Back The  Night" marches in Toronto, it had been  ten years since she was seriously active  in the women's movement. A rape crisis  collective in Toronto was once a possibility, but she felt it required the correct  "political line".  "They lacked compassion for each other",  Wendy says. She says that on the contrary,  the Transition House Collective works  well together. The dedication is "for each  others sake tool'"  Of her fear of violence towards women she  now says, "All I see is their survival."  Unlike Patty and Joan, Wendy sees herself  as part of the feminist community in  Vancouver. She feels there could be nothing about the occupation to discourage  new activists from continuing in feminist  work, and she herself has now started in  the W.A.V.A.W. Rape Crisis Centre training program.  She adds, "There ought to be a book for  incoming feminists explaining why some  feminists are a bit rough around the  edges. There is sometimes a strong reaction to oppression."  Wendy leans her arms on her kitchen table  and smokes. She starts by saying she  isn't effective in a group. Still as she  stops to appreciate each individual's  contribution to the collective she is  obviously proud of her own. She later  ammends this statement to say she does  not speak well in a group. But she's  realizing that there is no one but  herself to speak her views.  "I'm less afraid of peoples' judgement  now. It's the year of facing my fear."  Sanctuary from page 8  One of the Tucson 12 is a catholic nun,  Sister Darlene Nicgorski. The' government  has video-taped evidence against her,  including pictures of her passport  stamped during her travels to Honduras,  Guatemala, and Nicaragua.  While the 25  minute long video focuses on a political  poster promoting the Democrats, it does  not show a religious shrine which is also  on her living room wall. Sister Nicgarski  does not dispute that she has aided refugees.  Maria del Socorro Pardo de Aguilar, another one of the twelve, also admits to  housing dozens of Guatemalans in Mexico,  feeding them, and cleaning their clothing; she admits that she has told refugees about a "hole" in the border where  they can safely enter the United States.  None of the "12" receive any money for  their work.  At the "12"'s trial, the prosecution has  asked for and received certain restrictions. It has been ruled, for instance,  that none of the defendants will be  allowed to talk about religion or defend  themselves by claiming they acted out of a  need to adhere to their faith.  Aguilar is furious over this. "We are all  Christians," said Aguilar, "and we are aiding refugees because we are Christians."  Sister Nicgorski believes the indictments  are a move by the Reagan administration to  silence the refugees, and "to get the support of the American people for incursions  into Central America. The government  can't have people telling what's going on.  These Central Americans coming give a  face to the war, they give a human spirit  to it."  Many believe the Sanctuary movement is a  feminist issue. An overwhelming number of  the refugees are women whose husbands or  fathers have been killed or arrested for  opposing their governments. For the same  reason, many other women have been imprisoned, raped and murdered in Central  America. 12 Kfatsb Dec/Jan 19S5-6  by Cy-Thea Sand  Do you think Talking Sex  is only  a lusty male pursuit or an elitist feminist pastime? Have you ever wondered  whether or not porn reflects valid desire  and our need for sex education rather  than just being sexist and racist garbage  which places women and children in danger?  Would your sexual fantasies get you  thrown out of a) your family, b) your  church c) your community or d) the  women's movement. Have you repressed  your sexual desires until after the  revolution or until after the children  grow up? Are you tired of being the object of the male gaze, or, as an artist,  bored with politically correct creations?  Questions such as these resounded through  Women In Focus  during The Heat Is On I  Women On Art On Sex  November 29 - December 1st. Hosted by Women In Focus,  assisted financially by the Canada Council and organized by a group of Vancouver  feminists, The Heat Is On  concentrated  on the need for sex education and examining new, 'progressive' images of  sexuality.  The conference was open to men. As Sara  Diamond said in the keynote address,  Setting The Context,  The Debate On Sexual  Imagery,   ,,vr..the majority of images are  made by and for male viewers. It seemed  important to make available alternate  work by women, both to women and to men."  Diamond's keynote address was one of the  most clear and succint conference openings I have heard. Dense with information  critical to the anti-porn, pro-sex controversy and read in the spirit of honest  inquiry, Setting The Context,   did just  that. It established an atmosphere of respectful attention which characterized  the rest of the day. Paying attention to  what repulses or attracts us is after all  at the core of critical and intellectural  West Coast Training Presents:  SANDRA BUTLER  Internationally recognized authority on  sexual assault and author of  Conspiracy of Silence: The Trauma of Incest  A dynamic lecturer, feminist consultant and practitioner, Sandra Butler offers fresh insight into  the experiences of women and children survivors  while leaving workshop participants revitalized  with a positive focus and approach to the problem  of sexual assault.  • March 17-18,1986:  Counselling the Survivors of Sexual Assault  •A workshop designed specifically for front-line  social workers and counsellors.  fee $100.00  • March 19-20,1986:  Counselling Issues for Practitioners in  Private Practice-An opportunity to acquire skills  and explore difficult issues in treating survivors,  fee $185.00  • March 21-22,1986:  Healing the Healers (women oniy)-A chance to  explore how we, as individual service providers,  can best deal with our own burn-out and displaced  anger.  fee $185.00  For further information and enrollment, contact:  West Coast Training  2196 West 46th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. V6M 2L1  (604)226-2144  growth, or as Sue Golding put it: "Turn and  face the strange than go beyond it."  Both Saturday workshops - Coming Together  Or' Coming Apart? The Social and Political  Meanings of Sexual Images  and The Objecting  Object:  Women And The Art Of Sex  had theoretical, activist and sex radical perspectives and approaches.  Christine Conley, Edmonton art critic and  Joan Borsa, Saskatoon writer and professor,  showed slides of traditional art on women  and contemporary art by  women respectively.  Conley illustrated how the ideology of  a sexist culture is reflected in "high  art" where women are always objects, manipulated and positioned for men's aesthetic pleasure.  Slide after slide showed famous works of  reclining nudes: passive and controlled  images of female passion appropriated and  designed by men.  In her study of contemporary sexual  images by women artists, Joan Borsa shows  how women artists are trying to get up  off the couch, as it were, to make art  rather than be made by it.  Borsa draws upon French feminist Helene '<  Cixous' injunction to women to write  (paint) with their bodies and also relies  on the ideas of film critic E. Ann Kaplan  who wonders whether or not women can  resist sexual objectification and  establish their own sexuality by reversing the male gaze and staring back.  Borsa's slides illustrate how women  artists are attempting to authenticate  female sexuality in spite of its  roots in the aesthetic trap of voyeurism  and exhibitionism.  Vancouver anti porn activist Pat Feindal  discussed sex as a commodity and  ideological battleground in capitalist  society. She explained that profound  changes in family relations over the past  thirty years have affected the sex industry. As we attempt to smash taboos  which limit sexual fulfillment, Fiendal  urges us to look at the taboos not broken  by the sex industry. Racism and classism  which, Feindel says, keeps sex workers  poor and exploited.  «\  Anne E. Davies, M.A.  \      Counselling & Therapy  yS.  y    • women's issues  j     • sexuality  vl^|C  RlSfl  • relationships  • families  • groups  &.  Vancouver appointments  available Thursdays  210-1548 Johnston Road  531-8555  White Rock, B.C. V4B3Z8  Toronto's Varda Burstyn argued that the  question is to arouse or not to arouse.  She charmed the audience throughout the  afternoon with her humour (I'm in training to be big and hard—is porn's message  to men) and passionate commitment1 to sex  education and exploration.  A few of her many crucial points include:  an examination of women's fear and  how it fragments our identity in the pull  for sexual freedom in a dangerous  world, and the notion that it is here  in this quagmire of contradiction between  what women may desire, and what is safe,  that polarization and accusations ferment  and explode.  Kiss and Tell:  Artists and Writers on Sexual Images  Two women who have experienced first  hand the disproval with which most of us  approach issues of sexual differences are  Amber Hollibaugh and Sue Golding. Moving  through the constraints of the family  towards sexual autonomy via the left,  feminist and gay politics has been quite  the adventure for these two women who  have dared to ask profound questions  about the nature and limits of female  sexuality.  Sue Golding Joan Borsa Varda Burstyn Jackie Larkin  Hollibaugh is interested in the question  of power dynamics within sexual arousal  especially as it relates to butch/femme  lesbian relationships. Hollibaugh and  her lover Esther Newton, are presently  working on a book about these issues.  Sue Golding relentlessly questions whet-  -her we know what we are looking at when  The Alexander  Technique  Relieves back pain, excessive  fatigue, poor posture and physical  tension. Learn to move with  flexibility and ease in daily activities,  work, performing arts, and sport.  JULIA BRANDRETH (604) 224-7062 is Dec/Jan 1985-6 13  we approach sexual imagery. Her slide  presentation challenged established  notions of what is transgression and  what is aesthetics by politizing the  reality of sex itself.  Sex as a dynamic historical process inseparable from social and power relations  is one of the many varied and challenging  ideas which Hollibaugh and Golding  brought to this conference.  An idea not addressed at the conference  is the impact of race on sexuality. It  was a conference which should more accurately been called white women on art and  sex.  It is instructive that in trying to talk  about power in the context of sexuality,  we do not name the tremendous power we  have in determining who will utter what  in our tentative attempts at smashing  silences.  I admire and respect the work done while  recognizing its formidable limits.  by Emma Kivisild  Cn Sunday, the final day of The Heat is On,  the artists had their say, presenting  their sexually explicit/erotic/pornograph-  ic. work, and discussing the process and  the difficulties of creating such work.  The day opened with Lisa Steele and Kim  Tomszak's In the Dark,  a combination performance and video screening, exploring  sexually explicit heterosexual imagery  which was performed for the first time  in 1983. The video is of Steele and Tom-  szak having sex in a series of scenes  that fade over and into each other. Par- •  allel with the screening, which has a  silent soundtrack, the artists read from  texts. Among other things Steele talks  about her mother's sexuality and desire  for pleasure, and Tomszak about his alienation from mainstream pornography's  images. Both discuss the making of the  video itself, and the sex industry.  There are erotic moments, she says, but  "no one can fuck forever." The protagonist in her fiction is a woman seeking such  Kim Tomszak Lisa Steele  In The Dark  The response from the audience was overwhelming, with many women finding In the  Dark "Beautiful", "real", and the first  explicit affirmation of their own sexuality they'd seen. In the Dark is currently banned in Ontario by the Ontario  Censor Board.  The panel following the performance was  entitled "Kiss and Tell, Artists and  Writers on Sexual Imagery". Vancouver  writer and graphic artist Caffyn Kelley  showed drawings and read from recent fiction, exploring what she sees as the impossibility of building erotic relationships in "this culture (which) burns  fright into everyone's flesh."  Kiss and Tell:  Artists and Writers on Sexual Images  a relationship. Kelley's drawings were  from various series depicting stages in  her creative/emotional life.  Toronto poet Himani Banerjee was the only  woman of colour to give a presentation at  the conference, a; bad situation exacerbated by the glaring scarcity of women of  colour in the audience. As a consequence,  the issues raised in her paper, important  and power questions about racism, imagery,  and sexual images of women of colour, were  not integrated into the general conference discussion.  Banerjee examined images promoted by the  ruling class - "images of prescription  and description" - the effect of cultural  context on seemingly non-problematic images, and images from the ruling class,  which she says are irretrievable. It is in  the final category that she says the present sexual images of South Asian women  fall. Banerjeee also delivered an incisive  critique of the term "visible minorities"  which, she says, makes Canadian people of  colour seen, but no heard. ' *£&%•??£  lisa Steele presented slides of her own  sexually explicit photography and video,  going back to work she did as early as 1972  Her talk focussed on her personal artistic  and feminist process over the years, including what she sees as repeated denials  of her own power as a feminist artist, and  of her work as feminist art.  Cindy Patton,  a founding editor of the  Boston based lesbian sex magazine Bad  Attitude,  read from the magazine. The  pieces she chose - a story by New York  writer Joan Nestle about butch femme  relationships, one of her own stories en- .  titled "A Birthday at Brent's", and a  humourous 'anti-fantasy' by the paper's  co-editor Amy Hoffman - showed some of the  range in the publication, which also includes essays, poetry and photos and graphics. At the end of her reading there were  repeated calls to "read another story."  Patton also outlined some of the criticisms Bad Attitude  has received from feminists and other problems they've had (seized  by Canada Customs, difficulties with  printers...)  A  closing plenary planned as the final session of the day did not happen, in a decisionj  made by informal concensus. Instead, everyone decided they would rather go home to digest the wealth of images and information,  There were, however, repeated calls to fi<*ht j  censorship in B.C., and a local committee was!  formed. Participants also expressed thanks toj  the panelists and artists for making themselves so vulnerable, and urged the creation |  of more feminist erotica, and the organization of a women's sexuality conference in Vancouver.  photos by Francie Queyras  A WOMEN'S GROUP  When: 8 Wednesdays'  22 January to 12 March 1986  Cost:   $ 150 (Sliding scale-Fee Negotiable!)  Maximum 12 participants  This group is intended for women who have done little or  no counselling work. This is an opportunity to learn how  to be yourself in a challenging and self-disclosing group.  Doing this group will demand that you pay attention to  yourself as well as other participants. In turn you will learn  more about yourself, how others see you, and how to  communicate personally with other women. This is intimate  work. You must be prepared to push yourself and learn.  You will be challenged, you will receive support and the  satisfaction of re-discovering the sometimes pleasant,  sometimes fear-filled experience of being who you are.  GROUP LEADER: Pamela Sleeth. I am a counsellor in  private practice. As a feminist I am committed to work  with and for women's empowerment—personally, professionally-within relationships, as members of the  community and as individuals.  Please telephone me at 734-8752, leave your name and  telephone number, and say that you are interested in the'  group. I will contact you. 14 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  PROSTITUTION  Juvenile Prostitution:  The problem  that no one  has time for  by Barbara Brown  With so much recent discussion on and  interest in the issue of prostitution  recently  Kinesis asked Barbara Brown to  investigate the current situation  regarding juvenile prostitution in Vancouver and in particular to update our  readers on the impact the Federal  Commission on Sexual Offenses Against  Children  (The Badgely Report) has had  on the problems and conditions facing  teenage prostitutes.  Children - thirteen, fourteen, fifteen  years old - are being sexually abused  in Vancouver every day. Men rape and  beat boys and girls, and sometimes even  kill them, yet the children are seen as  the criminals. It is estimated there are  over 200 juvenile prostitutes in Vancouver.  The Ministry of Human Resources Emergency  Services Office is located on the corner  of Drake and Seymour. Within the building  they have a free, confidential medical  clinic, and operate a 24-hour province-  wide sexual abuse.crisis line. They also  try to place homeless kids from the  streets into group homes or emergency  shelters.  I talked with one worker about the juvenile prostitution problem:  Most of these kids are in the care of  the Ministry of Human Resources,  but we  have no power to stop them from running.  They get brought into our office and we  try to place them in group homes but they  often run as soon as they arrive.  When I asked what the problem was with  the group homes, why the teenagers run  away from them, the worker replied that the  group homes are often too full, and also  weren't staffed with people especially  trained to deal with street people.  The homes are often used as a short-term  refuge from the street,  continued the  worker. They come in on their, own after  suffering violence from a bad trick or  their pimp - knifings,  rapes,  beatings -  they are shaken up and scared.  They want  a place to be safe for a while.  They are  usually placed for a couple of days,  and once recovered,  they leave.  I asked if the street people used the  confidential Medical Clinic at Emergency  Services.  "Yes, for treatment of V.C. or Pelvic Inflammatory disease, which is widespread.  Some come in needing abortions or patch-  ups after beatings on the street."  "A child can expect to get beaten up at  least 10 times a year", says Vancouver  streetworker John Turvey. And that, says  Turvey, is added to "the constant risk  of being knifed, raped, or even killed  each time the kids go out to work the  streets."  According to Turvey, subjection to violence  is a major part of 'street kids' lives, and  their relationships with their pimps or  boyfriends (which are just about the same  thing on the street) are no different. They  are sent out to work on the street to make  money for their "lover". In exchange they  get protection, somebody watching over  them, and a place to stay. They can expect  beatings for not bringing in enough money,  or lying to a boyfriend about earnings.  On any given evening walk downtown, in the  area south of Nelson between Granville and  Richards, and you'll see every street  corner (particularly entrances to alleyways and parking lots), covered with  teenagers: boys, girls, and transvestites,  most looking no older than 15 or 16.  Cars  drive down alleyways for pick ups and parking lots are used for quick business transactions.  On the street corner at Granville and  Helmeken, I watched as a boy stumbled  across the street, seemingly unaware of  the speeding cars and blaring horns. At  first I thought he was a girl - he had  long blonde hair, and was dressed in a  black miniskirt, a blouse, black leotards,  with a handbag and high heels. His thin  legs wobbled.  A man in his mid-forties approached him.  This man was dressed in old pants and a  windbreaker that hung sloppily over his  shoulders and tightened around his middle.  The two stopped and talked for a few minutes before locking arms and heading north  on Granville. They stopped outside a hotel  and entered separately.  Downtown hotels are a common way of serving tricks. In a typical example I saw a  hotel.lobby bristling with stumbling drunks  and addicts. The lobby itself was furnished with hard, dusty, wooden tables and  chairs and with overflowing ashtrays. It  was impossible to excape the pervading  odor of stale beer and cigarette smoke. A  steady stream of people moved up and down  the elevators, to and from neighboring  pubs and strip joints.  But most striking was the number of young  Jieenagers coming and going.  "89.9% of teenagers working the streets  come from abusive backgrounds", the MHR  worker reported to me. "That's where they  first learn the value of their bodies  to adults."  These 'kids in flight' are children  first—and sexual assault  survivors. They are not  disposable people.  This 'value' is also reflected by community  attitudes. "Children are no longer children  if they are sexual", observed streetworker  John Turvey. "The media exploits infantile  sexuality and so promotes sexual exploitation of children. These 'kids in flight',  are children first - and sexual assault  survivors. They are not disposable people."  In late August 1984, the Federal Commission  on Sexual Offenses Against Children published a list of 52 proposals for improvements to the legal system and social services in connection with sexual offenses  against children. Commonly referred to as  the Badgely Report, the study also included-  speciflc recommendations for dealing with  juvenile prostitution.  The Commission conducted an intensive study  into the lives, past and present, of teenagers working on the streets. Among its  recommendations, the Committee concluded  that social programs that were tailored  to meet the.particular needs of street kids  should be implemented. These programs were  to offer job or trade-related skills, as  well as conventional life skills.  Badgely  also recommended the formation of a government office to oversee these programs,  a national education program on sexual  abuse, and increased services for sexually  abused children.  The Commission assigned a  large portion of responsibility to the clients and  pimps of juvenile prostitutes. In the Commission's  opinion, "the parasitic  relationship between pimps  and young prostitutes in  their employ is an intolerable form of child abuse.'  It equated the procurement  of juveniles with the  "gravest of sexual offenses"  Thus the report recommended  a maximum sentence of 14  years imprisonment, with a  minimum mandatory sentence  of 2 years, for anybody procuring or living off the  avails of prostitution of a  person who is under 18.  The Conservative government,  in December 198.4, stated they  would form a committee whose  task it would be to study all  of the reports' 52 recommendations .  Now, fourteen months after the release of  the Badgely Report, the Conservative government is pushing Bill C-49 through Parliament. The bill is designed to "clean up  the streets" by giving police the authority  to arrest prostitutes, fine and charge  the prostitutes with a criminal offense.  The bill does not distinguish juvenile  prostitution from adult.  With the recent involvement of local M.P.'s  in the issue of prostitution in residential  areas, I attempted to find out from them  what was happening with the Badgely Report's  proposals.  NDP Cabinet Minister Margaret Mitchell  said the NDP has been fighting against Bill  C-49 and the inclusion of juvenile prostitution withirf that bill. Mitchell stated  that, "Svend (Robinson, NDP Justice Critic)  and I frequently bring up and refer to  the Badgely Report, but the government just  ignores it."  Opposition Leader John Turner was not  available for comment but his assistant,  constituency officer, Mike McNeil, report^  ed, "I don't know what John Turner's  specific comments oh this would be...I  know he doesn't like juvenile prostitution.  I haven't heard of the report, no."  PC member for Vancouver Centre, Pat Carney,  locally active in the fight against prostitution was only in town for two days  and was not available for comment. Her  secretary though, had not heard of the  report.  Attempts were also made to find out what  the Vancouver City was doing with the Badgely recommendations. Jane MacDonald,  secretary to Mayor Mike Harcourt, stated  "juvenile prostitution is not the city's  jurisdiction, this falls under the- Ministry of Human Resources."  "I haven't heard of the report," MacDonald  continued, "but I'm sure the Mayor has."  Further efforts to discuss the report with  people in the Social Planning Department  failed, as most had never even heard of the  Committee on Sexual Offenses Against Children or the Badgely Report.  Evidently, just over one year after its  release, the Badgely Report is a forgotten  document. After 3% years of research, and  the. expense of two million dollars, the  government is apparently ignoring the  Committee's findings and rocommendatrions..  Instead, juvenile prostituiton will be  included in Bill C-49, the police will  have the power to arrest juveniles and give  them a criminal record - but then what?  Release them back into the care of the  streets, the pimps and the Johns. WO M EN ?girls? wimmin gir  i_s!wimmin?G ' & LS g irlsgirls womyn yo  ounger  women GALS■ »****9 «  r  Woman  BQ by   (ME'&OOh TH I S   I S  honey/wide   the   sup-  er,feminist    plemeimt  -EROH     BACHEL    ~  S^EETheart   femmf6    BUTCH  activists   girls  rule O.K.Wo me n  Dy k es: you  BABY,Baby      |   j'|  eyed young-  I DE ALISTIC H£T  ORETTE(S) LADY  L    I   T   T   L E  la out from  Tf^S unJcrmy  UGLY  UGLY  UGLY  gina evanlcovich  Ageism,, oppression based on age, is faced  by all women regardless of age. However,  ageist oppression is most easily recognized  when we are young or old.  On the young end of the age spectrum, an  example of ageism can be found in the policies and attitudes of International Year of  the Youth.  The president from the conference  on the status of girls when asked why girls  .(14-18yrs) weren't represented at the  conference replied:  we don't think change will come from  girls.  Its at age  (25-30) that you become  aware of what is your life, what are the  difficulties of the world.  Another aspect of ageism directed towards  young people is our society's glorification  of youth which ignores the very real problems  faced by young women. Problems, such as  poverty, being a young "prostitute, being a  young mother on welfare, being legally under  parental control, being a lesbian under  the legal age (21) to be sexually active.  The glorification of youth also oppresses  old women in that it denies and makes invisible the process of aging and being old.  Making old women invisible hides their  poverty, the exploitation they face from the  drug industry, the violence they suffer on  the streets, from relatives and in nursing  homes.  Ageism is something that all women face.  It is essential that the feminist movement  and our "community" start to look at ageism  and our ageist attitudes and behaviors  seriously. We need to recognize our ageist .  behaviors because they alienate and divide  women from each other keeping many outside  the movement.  My experiences with ageism come from being   For my grandmother being old means being  a young lesbian although I see many parallels lonely, it is being over medicated because  with the ageism faced by old women.  For me ageism has a lot to do with not  being taken seriously. I am not looking forward to a repeat performance when I'm old.  I'm tired of not being taken seriously, of  making points that are not heard until it  is repeated by a woman older than myself.  To treat me this way is to treat me as inferior. I'm tired of hearing young and irresponsible in the same sentence. The two  words are not synonymous.  I find the term baby dyke offensive.  I  implies that women who are older than me  have more experience and know better what  it means to be a lesbian. I'm tired of the  assumption that because I don't share your  analysis that I don't understand it. Don't  assume that I don't have my own political  analysis based on my own experiences which  by the way are not necessarly related to me  being young. These attitudes are inaccurate  and hurtful and make it difficult to be in  the feminist movement. P*sfe|  What I know about ageism and how it affects  old women comes from reading and from talking for change, more seriously. Maybe when we  with my grandmother. It doesn't come from   start to look at our ageism critically, we  talking to the old women I know in the      will be able to have a women's movement  feminist movement because I don't know any.  with women of all ages.  the old are often expolited by the pharmaceutical industry. It means buying a wig  to try to pass as young in a society that  denies the natural process of aging and says  that to be old is to be ugly.  When she writes to her children and repeats  news or makes an error she is thought to  be getting senile. It means being poor  because social security is low and women who  work at home don't get pensions. It means  never going out alone at night because  being old and a woman means she is  doubly vulnerable to male violence.  It has been a priority of the feminist  movement to deal with class issues to deal  with racism, anti-semitism; issues that when  not dealt with divide women from each  other.  Ageism also divides women and we all need to  start dealing with our ageist attitudes.  We can start by asking old women what their  experiences are now, instead of just using  them for our history papers.  We can start taking younger women, our experiences, our analysis, our strategies P  a  Cr  e t. N^y o  Presenting Our Lives  We are not the women of Seventeen or  Teen Beat.  Where these mags discuss  make-up, breast-size, and boys, we've  chosen to address prostitution, abortion,  sexual orientation, ageism, and alternative culture (Yes Virginia, there are  female musicians.)  Whether we are dependant upon parents,  lovers, and/or the state, younger women  are forced to make choice without the  same degree as older women.  This is illustrated in Ani's story (see  page 8). As a teenage mother she is  too young to receive her own income assistance through MHR. .Instead, she is  forced to remain with a guardian. She  accepts and fulfills the responsibilites  of being a single parent, but is not able  to assume responsibility for her own budget?  This experience is not specific to Ani's  story. We are impoverished. Of the women  contributing to this supplement, most are  unemployed. Two of us have chosen the  route of non-traditional occupations,  without opportunity. The few of us who  are employed barely survive doing childcare, prostitution and minimum wage  shitwork.  Well there is always post-secondary  education, isn't there? Isn't there?  The representation of sexuality within  the supplement has been overtly negative.  This bothers us. While many of us experience positive sex, why does what we've  written address suffering and trauma?  Basically we've been fucked over. As women  we are denied a clear language with which  to make our desires accessible. The  younger we are, the more strongly we  are denied.  The work in this supplement came  from our's and our friend's experiences.  We are not the women of Seventeen.  We are women fighting back.  Bill C-49  As a veteran of 12 years of street  prostitution, I think that I am an authority on violence against women. In those  years I have been beaten, stabbed, raped  and abused countless times.  I turned out at the ripe age of 15  years old in the city of Vancouver. To  me, it was the only way of survival. I  was a runaway from an abusive home and  didn't want to be returned. In the  years that followed, I tried to deter  young women from following in my footsteps with minimal success.  These girls are quick to learn the way  to exist on the streets. They became involved with older street people who prey  on young women. In essence, these women  are still being abused by pimps and tricks  but have learned to deal with it. Now  the abuse is coming from the biggest  pimp of all—the government.  DoTii uofry dear  everyone's f'<rsf  ■try at a b\\[t  you t^trt to 60  to Scfoojp <?j  painting by Sarah Lightbody  This bill, which was passed to  the Senate for final reading at the end  of November, has directly attacked single  women with children.  Under this legislation, a single mother  who works the streets to feed her children can be arrested and sentenced to six  ■months in jail and/or a 500 dollar fine.  Who takes care of her children while she  is incarcerated? Are they fed into an  already overcrowded foster care system?  Who is the government to say that these  women are wrong for trying to feed their  children?  Most of the women in the downtown eastside  are single mothers. For them, this means  that they will have to spend extra hours  on the street to pay the government.  Under the criminal code of Canada, persons who receive money from the act of  Still, the public is blind to the main  reason for prostitution: poverty. The  provincial government has cut back the  essential services: education, job training, and most of all they cut back on increasing the welfare rate in three  years. The rate for welfare is 50% below  the poverty line.  Now the federal government has passed new  legislation attacking the women working  the streets, (bill C-49).  prostitution are committing the offence  of "living off of the avails of prostitution". This is pimping. With bill  C-49, the government is a pimp.  I am asking for support from the women's  community to help override this bill, and  fight for the rights of not only the  prostitutes, but of every woman in  Canada, and to stop this legislation that  attacks only poor women and makes it  illegal to be poor.  Michelle.Kanashiro famine street  by Angela Hryniuk  in Famine Street  There' is nothing left but the heart  to eat.  I began- my work with youth almost  five years ago. The reasons behind  choosing a field of work related  specifically to young people are only  now becoming more and more clear to  me. I felt robbed of the years between  II and 18, by being forced to grow up  quickly because of my family splitting  up. I ran away at 16 to a foreign country because of the abuse I could no  longer tolerate at home. Six months  later I returned more disillusioned  than when I left.  At 18 I began working on a suicide and  rape crisis line. I didn't feel close  enough to the people I counselled on  the phones, I couldn't see their faces  and didn't feel significant in their  lives. So I moved to the streets to work  with Native youth in a core area drop-in  centre in Winnipeg. I remained with  this ever changing group of youth for a  few years feeling personally satisfied  I was giving to people who wanted and  needed.  What I really did was dig deeper and  deeper within myself. I moved further  into complex issues, both for myself  and for the people I worked with, in  order to understand more about us.  I lived through  the people I worked  with. Then, I began my work with  prostitutes. I moved to Vancouver to  work with those who had many of the  characteristics that I wouldn't admit  &RXXBXXKX  to in myself but could relate to in  them. If I could understand them, love  them as they were, then I could understand and love me. If I could somehow  help them, then I could somehow help you  know who.  This article isn't about me, but by  deciding to work with 'street kids'  I re-lived my own adolescence with  people I would have wanted to be  associated with. So in essence it is  about me. But it's also about a lot of  women, who, like me because of various  upbringings and vaules didn't end up  on the streets, but in their minds  did. We fall in love with people who  are those parts of us which we can't  acknowledge in ourselves.  This article was written intentionally  in a non-journalistic form. There has  been extensive media coverage on the  topic of prostitution, it almost  seems to be in vogue, thus the public  is becoming de-sensitized to some of  the more gruesome, and more real  facts behind these women's lives. In  any article the who, what, when, where  and why are the basic questions demanding to be answered, unfortunately  reporters tend to forget about the  last of these five, the "why".  Why young women end up on the streets  selling themselves. In all articles,  radio interviews and television  specials I have yet to hear any mention of the abuse these young people  suffered as children.  From my experience more than 90% of  prostitutes have been sexually abused  and assaulted by men in their lives  whom they trusted. They were taught  to be sex pieces with no self esteem,  worth or confidence. They had more  than just their childhood stolen from  them. They were taught how to sell  sex and now are out there doing best,  what they know most about.  I have taken the five questions: who,  what, when, where and why and answered  them twice. The first time with the  language the reporters use, the  slang most people know and the assumptions most of society has about prostitution out of fear and ignorance.  The second set of answers from the same  questions are the responses from the  facts I know to be true about prostitutes from personal experience. I  have yet to hear these women being  referred to in humanistic terms.  There has been so much written, yet  so little knowledge brought forth.  Isn't it the responsibility of writers  to bring the truth about these  women's lives into the public's conscience, instead of perpetrating  further exploitation?  prostitution?  WHAT? Prostitution. Hooking, (ie.  golden showers, blow jobs, half and  half, S&M, doubles, B.J.'s)...intercourse .      ^twill  WHAT; People who make money by engaging in sexual acts. Women who are in  the act of self-perpetuating the  sexual abuse they underwent as children. Women who are angry.  WHO? Prostitute. Hooker. Whore. Tart.  Slut. Twat For Hire. Rent a Cunt.  Daughter of Joy. Floozy. Pro. Escort.  Pickup. Fallen Woman.  WHO: Mom. Sis. Grandma. Auntie. Women  young and old. Women who like to dance,  read, make love, think, horseback  ride, write, laugh, sing, watch  movies, go to school. Women who have  children, families, lovers, fathers,  friends, uncles. The women you see  standing on the street late at night,  usually in the most vulnerable area  of any city, in mini skirts, blouses  open and exposing are the same women  who you bump into with your shopping  cart in Safeway, stand in line with  in a washroom, sell a book to. Prostitutes are people. Women with  feelings who laugh, cry and are  more angry than most. We are talking  about human beings. Not just "them".  WHEN? At night. After breakfast. In  the afternoon. On Remembrance Day.  In the rain, Monday through Sunday.  After dinner. Christmas day. Anytime  you like.  WHEN: A woman needs money to feed her  children. A woman has just had a  fight with her boyfriend. A woman  who hates herself and wants to inflict  more pain in a physical way. She is  angry. She is hungry. She is bored.  She has bills to pay.  WHERE? In a car. On a bus. In an  'alleyway. In a hotelroom. In a house.  In a park. In a brothel. In the rain.  In a cathouse. In a bed. In and out  wherever.  WHERE: Prostitution starts in the home.  Like I said, 90% of those "twats for  hire" have been sexually abused and  assaulted in their childhood beds by  men who are known to them and whom  they trust. Hooking begins when a  child is forced to perform sexual acts  and then is silenced by material gifts.  WHY? "People want this service". "They  . do it for the money". "There is a need  for this in society". "It provides an  outlet where men can have a physical  release without being penalized". "It  is the oldest profession known to man".  "Because they enjoy it".  WHY: Let me introduce you to Jolene and  Toni. I met them while working at  Phoenix House, a group home for young  prostitutes. In their words, the  reasons why.  There are thousands of Jolenes and  Tonis across this country on the streets,,  who are taught from a young age that  they are worthless and the only useful  thing about them is their body.  Because they have learned to keep silent  with their pain they don't speak out.  They accept any abuse that is inflicted  upon them because of past lessons. In  a twisted way they think that they are  to blame. Society does little to dispel  this belief.  There is not enough preventative work  being done in our cities to teach  Jolene and Toni that the street is not  their only option in life. Children  slide through the system with their  fear and silence, when they become  youth they speak out in their actions.  If there was some way that these  children could be listened to, and if  foster homes were more thoroughly  screened, then maybe less of our  youth would end up on the streets.  The media's role in perpetuating  myths about women must be changed  if society's attitudes are to be  changed. Prostitution is an age old  phenomenon, but that does not mean  it must continue.  The next time you see a young woman  hooking try to understand that she is  scared, vulnerable and only doing what  she has been taught. The next time you  see a young woman hooking try to look  into her eyes. r-(~F a  cr  J-  growfng   up  tough  by Jolene Thomas  The life of a street kid, moving from  city to city, never knowing if they are  going to have a place to stay or food to  eat.  I've lived that life. It's not a glamorous  life like everyone thinks. It's a life full  of hardships, having to deal with ignorant people, police and most of the time  just your own feelings.  A lot of people think we're there because  we want to be. We're not. We are there  because normal society wouldn't listen  to our cries for help.  We all ran. I ran from a very abusive  family. I was getting abused from the  age of four till I was 16. I thought the  beatings were normal until about my 8th  birthday. It was then that I realized  that when the other kids at school got  punished they would get a privilege taken  away or just a simple grounding. But no  bruises.  I grew up in a small town here in B.C.  I lived with my mother and father and  eight older brothers and sisters. My  father started beating me when I was four.  My mother tried to stop my father but  everytime she did he would beat her too.  My brothers and sisters acted like nothing  bad was happening.  When I started school the teachers thought  I was clumsy and didn't ask questions. I  wouldn't have told them the truth anyway.  I was too scared. At the age of ten I  Started to run away from home, but I  would always go back because I was scared  my father would start beating on my mother.  I loved her too much to see her hurt. Just  before my thirteenth birthday I got pregnant  with my first child. Two months later my  mother died in a car accident. Her death  was really hard for me to handle. All of a  sudden I was all alone. I had no one to protect me from my father and no one to live  for, so I thought.  In the March of the next year my youngest  sister and I got in a fight. The fight  started in the kitchen and pretty soon it  was on the balcony. My sister threw me off.  I was five months pregnant at the time. I  had a miscarriage.  That summer I started to do D.A., heroin ,  and cocaine so I wouldn't have to live  with the pain. The pain of the memories and  the pain of being beat by my father. My  boyfriend introduced me to the drugs and I  was soon a regular user. I used to go to  school higher than a kite and making excuses  for not doing my homework and being late.  Sometimes I wouldn't even make it to class  because I was just too out of it.  One day I went down to the arcade that my  boyfriend owned to get my regular fix for  the morning, but my boyfriend wasn't there.  Danny, his younger brother, was though.  He gave me my fix but instead of taking  me to school he took me to a drug rehabili-  taion center. I spent a month there, two  weeks of which I don't remember. I thank  Danny now for taking me there because it  really helped me in the long run.  One. year after that incident my father  got remarried. The lady he married was  Pice, for the first month but after that,  she started beating me too. I couldn't do  anything right. If I got B's in school  they wanted A's. If I cleaned the house  while they were gone, they would say I  had a party.  I ran from home again - this time with my  boyfriend. The police picked us up 30 miles  away and took me back to my father and stepmother. I got beat so bad I didn't want to  _show my face outside the house.  My boyfriend came back a week later and I  moved in with him. He lost his job a month  later and had to go on welfare. He started  to blame me for everything that had happened to him. He beat me up the first time  because he came home and I was reading a  book and listening to music. He said I was  lazy and interested in other guys. He beat  me till I almost passed out. I moved back  home after that.  When I was 16 my father kicked me out. I  came to Vancouver with $40 and the clothes  on my back. I decided to hit the streets.  Well I.didn't really decide, I was kind of  forced since $40 doesn't go far.  I met a few people that were "street smart"  and I moved in with them. They introduced  me to one of their "street sisters". She  told me the prices you charge men who pick  you up. That was my first lesson in being  street smart. Another lesson was learning  to be tough. Tough means not crying over  everything that happens to you. You have to  learn to cope with (block out) all the bad  things that happen. You have to act older  than what you are.  It was tought to get used to sleeping with  men who didn't love me. But when I saw the  money I didn't care anymore. It was a means  of survival. I met a lot of people that were  in the same situation. I learned that growing up tough isn't the best way to grow up.  But there was a way around it. I could have  told someone what was happening, but I was  too scared and I didn't need to be.  continued on p. 5  tout's story  by Toni  My grandmother writes me a letter, the  night I read it I get a phone call from  my sister and find out from her that my  grandmother died in her sleep; I cried  for a week, it had been a long time since  I had cried. I don't know how I did because I had learned from my dad to take  the pain without crying. He used to take  me to the boiler room and beat me until  I didn't cry and could take the pain,  which didn't take long. I used to keep  it to myself, it was really wierd sometimes.  I would freak myself out by putting up a  wall around me where I couldn't hear anybody, see anybody or do anything but  draw pictures and walk around by myself.  I would be out very late in the night, I.  couldn't think right, couldn't trust anyone or talk to anyone.  I went to school, didn't do work, didn't  talk to anyone, kids started to call me  names like "space case, weirdo". It made  my life hard for me.  I passed out frequently in class because  me and my brother had no food to eat.  My brother started to steal and I started  to fight for the both of us since I was  older. I took care of him, helped him  with his homework, and he stole lunches  and fruit from school and corner stores.  My dad didn't care about us. He just used  us to get back at life. He spent his  money on cigarettes and beer. He didn't  bother to buy food. We would sit in the  dark waiting until he came home.  My brother would come and hug me in the  middle of the night and I would have to  go to him and tell him it would be  alright. We got hit practically every  night. One of my teachers noticed marks  on my legs and arms and she sent me to  the nurse.  The nurse told our family social worker  but she couldn't do anything because me  and my brother wouldn't say anything.  We were so scared of my father.  Once he  was drinking and he grabbed me and I  hit him. He got mad and took off his  belt. I ran down the apartment block  hall and he chased me down the stairs.  I saw a door open and ran in and locked  it. My brother was already there. I  called him and we hid in this strangers  closet clutching each other.  I had once met the girl and her boyfriend  that lived in this apartment. I heard  her say something to her boyfriend then  she came and opened up the closet door.  She said that my dad had left and the  door was locked and he couldn't get us.  So I got out and helped my brother out.  She asked me if I wanted to talk about  1 it and I said no. She said I could trust  her but I didn't know if I could trust  her or not.  My brother told me to tell her, so  I thought a minute and knew we had  to tell someone, so I told her. She  said we could spend as long as we  liked with her. They had two  extra rooms. I sat in one and she  sat in the other. As soon as she  left my brother brought his  blanket into my new room and sat on  my bed. He had been crying. He  asked me what if dad finds out that  I told Terry, the girl, about what had  been going on. My brother wanted to know  what would happen. I told him I had no  idea. He said he wanted to go somewhere,  where no one could bother us or hurt us.  I told him to go to sleep and not to  think about it.  The next morning we were on our way to  school. We were going to the stairs  and around the corner I saw my dad. I  told my brother to run. Just as I turned  my father grabbed me and dragged me up  the stairs to our apartment. He beat me  so bad I couldn't move. I was lying on  the floor. I tried to crawl to my bed but  didn't move. Someone came in and I started to pray it wasn't my dad. My brother  took one look at my back, he gasped and  ran for the bathroom to get sick. He  came back and asked me if I could walk.  I said no, so he dragged me downstairs  back to Terry's.     llllllii  My father was looking for my brother.  My brother yelled at Terry. He said look,  look what he did to her. It's all your  fault. I put my head on his shoulder  and she brought me in and locked the door.  Randy, her boyfriend took me and put me  on the couch. He asked me what happened  and I told him. Next:.thing I knew I was  in the hospital lying on my stomach.  We were put in a foster home after we  went to court. My back got better, I  was in the hospital for about a week.  When I finally got out I only wanted to  see my brother.  Our first day at the foster home was fun,  but we weren't allowed outside late. We  had dinner and watched some video movies  on their machine. For the first time in  my life I wasn't scared until the two  girls who shared my room started to  fight. I started.to run for the door but  one of them hit me. It was my second  fight, two against one, so I fought back.  continued on p. 5  HEM OVER Industrial  Waste Banned  by Cole Tanguay  Women's music. What is it? Is it just Cris  Williamson, Holly Near, or Ferron. We hope  not! Is there room to grow, or are we  just stuck in another time warp. Are there  new venues lurching, from the basement,  oozing from the air ducts?  Industrial Waste Banned is one of many  groups coming into a new era where the  lyrics are finally saying something to everyone and not just a chosen few. Industrial  Waste Banned has been struggling with a new  type of music for three long years; have  they finally made it? (sure says one observer.') The following is an interview with  two band members?  Filis,  are you really a punk band?  Filis:  No, not in the sense of traditional  punk music, whatever that is. Basically,  Punk music started with a bunch of people  who felt they had something to say and  wanted to say it musically and verbally in a  way that had not been done before. Our roots  come from punk, in that we felt that we had  something to say, and maybe had a different  approach musically as well as verbally.  So you're not a punk band and you're not a  rock band  - you 're just a band?  Ya, we're just a band!! Also, I felt that  there were a lot of things that concern  women or say about women and their roles  in society that I wanted to say to men and  women. I felt I could say it in a way men  couldn't; I could say it to people who don't  listen to the established types of music.  A lot of people I worked with in the community, or saw in the. streets, weren't  going out and buying Holly Near records.  Connie:  They weren't satisfied with the  choice of music that was available.  What inspired you to start a band?  . Filis:   I'd been going to see different  bands and I liked what they had to say;  I started writing lyrics because I felt  I had some ideas to express and that music  was a great medium to put the message  across. People listen to music all the  time. With the origin of punk there was  an opening for new women musicians to  start out.  Connie:  There is the realization that there  aren't very many women musicians in the punk  scene. Basically music is a male dominated  scene.  Do you find there is much support in the  women 's community ?  Filis:   I know that we have a definite following of women. I don't know if they are in  the women's community per se. I don't feel  that we have had an overwhelming response  from the women's community. It could be  because our music differs quite a bit  from 'traditional womens' music'.  Connie:  You might say its more radical in  approach than other womens' music.  Filis:  A lot of people don't know how to  type our music; that sort of throws them.  People say we're a punk band, Punks  think we're an art band, and art bands  think we're something else.  What is the future of the Industrial Waste  Banned?  Connie:  We have a few projects out now.  One is a song on Undergrowth '85; a  compilation tape of local alternative bands.  Secondly, we've got two songs coming out on  a womens' compilation album coming out of  Toronto. We're looking to go on the road in  the future, as well we're planning on  writing more music and songs about society.  We've gone through some changes ourselves..  we now have a new drummer.  Filis: Alex is drumming with us now. We  are no longer an all women band, however  our message remains the same.  Filis says hello to Elaine.  What 'ñ†  the i  '. behind your music?  Filis: Our songs are about very many different things. We sing about the economy, the  environment, women's roles, nuclear devastation. I think that our message is that  society doesn't have to be the way it is,  and its up to the people to start making  the changes today.  Connie:  To start thinking about the future  t o sj r s    st o ry,   FroMf  I kicked one of the girls in the face  and she just lay there. The other girl  ran downstairs and got Marilyn. Marilyn  is the lady that owned the house. She  grabbed me and took me to the basement  and yelled at me and said I was a trouble  maker. The other girls said I had started  hitting them.  When her husband came home she told him  what happened, he said I was grounded for  a week. They wouldn't even give me a  chance to tell my side of what happened.  I hated living there. They made me do all  the chores. I did the cooking, the laundry, made beds. They made me clean the  yard. My brother couldn't handle living  there so he went back to my dad's. I  didn't want to live at the Martel's either  but there was no way I was going to move  back to my dad's place. So I just stuck it  out. I saw my brother at school everyday so  that wasn't so bad. He told me everything  was okay now at dad's.  From the Martel's I moved into a foster  home. There was Betty my foster parent and  her daughter Gail who was 21 years old,  and the dog Misty. I was living there for  a year and everything was fine. Then I  went into grade eight and everything went  down hill. I had to be in at 9:00 pm every  night. I wasn't allowed to have boyfriends.  I wasn't allowed to wear make-up, couldn't  stay at my friends' houses. If I went out  I had to tell her where I was going and  leave a phone number.  She started drinking heavy. It seemed  like everytime I cam home she was drunk.  I got blamed for everything that went  wrong or missing. I had no privacy whatsoever. I got grounded all the time for  swearing and being late after school. My  grades went from C+ down to D's and E's.  Everytime I thought things were getting  better something bad would happen.  Betty had to go into the hospital for an  operation and blamed it on me. My grandmother died the same day I received the  letter from her. Me and my boyfriend got  into a big fight.  About a week later me and Betty got into  an argument and she hit me with a metal  meter stick. I swore at her and said I  hate you.  The next day I played it cool and acted  like nothing happened. I told her I was  staying at my friend's home for dinner  and I'd be back at six.  When I came home from school I packed  some of my clothes and threw the bags  out the window, went downstairs and said  see you later. I went to a friend's place  and met some of her friends. I met this  guy Brad, he asked me out and I stayed  at his place for awhile. I started  smoking, drinking and smoking pot.  cm^iirjo   -up   Tft-ufrHj   Frort  H  , I was moved here to Phoenix House.  When I first came here I had a chip  on my shoulder. I thought I was the  best and the toughest. I soon found out  that you didn't have to be, to live  here. I soon adjusted to living here. It  was great I I loved it because you were  free to do anything you wanted to.  I hope that if anyone reading this  story is getting beat up or raped by a  relative please tell someone so you  won't end up where I did. You don't  have to be scared because someone will  listen and do something about it. My  boyfriend at the time of writing this  story, listened to me and he is giving  me all the support I need to cope with  the memories. He is just one of the many  people that want to help ex-street  people stay off the streets.  I hope you've learned something by  reading this story. I did, but I lived  through the story in real life. I hope  no one has to live through that experience of being scared to say anything. HJ  A  Or   e  3-  'ñ∫High School5 Learning to SurOWe^  by Cathy Cummings  I travelled a fair bit in the years one  spends at school so I experienced different  types of education and culture, all good  and bad in their own extremes . The last  high school I went to, however, was located  in the centre of an industrial city in  England.  The school was more like a concrete jungle.  Once the school bell rang in the morning,  that was it, you were there. The only in or  out was through the front entrance, where  the Headmaster's office was situated. You  had to have a letter or a pretty good and  valid reason to get in or out of them doors,  off the stairs Problem solved, ha, that's  what they think.  One young gent sets fire to the science lab.  While on detention left on his own, he'  starts coming down with the shakes so decides he'd sneak into the storage room and  get high again and sets the place on fire.  The smoke was what killed him, not the  flames (or so the autopsy says). What  I said along with others is: why was he  left in a school alone when it was obvious  he was really out of reality.  Another event that got us great publicity  for our school, front page material let me  say, was when this first year pupil, at the  age of twelve killed one of the clean]  School offers us  a different  kind of  education  I felt this school offered you an education  in a different kind of way. Different being  that if the teacher could control the class  you would be taught and even then the work  was very obviously being given to you with  no interest or concern to educate you.  This school along with many others I'm  sure, is just a place where you have to go,  and then become frustrated. Your problems  aren't solved or even considered, just  postponed, and hidden from the public eye,  not for your sake, but for the sake of the  education system. Places like this one,  become breeding grounds for aggressive,  depressed, frustrated young individuals who  feel that they have no where to turn, that  they're wasting their time and that they're  not suitable to be in the public eye.  The system is best at pretending that if  the problem is hidden from society, no one  will know and then maybe the problems will  go away. Left alone these problems don't go  away, they grow and these young individuals  rebel against- the system and also each other.  What they learn is how to fight, shout,  swear, feel insecure, unwanted and unneeded  in society.They abuse each other and themselves  They lose respect for everything around  them and build a defence guard around them-  The police and the school didn't want us  to circulate with the public at all, at  least not in school hours. Police patrolled  the perimeter of the school on foot at  regular intervals of the day. There were two  play yards within the huge metal fences,  no fields, just concrete. The gates were  locked with big padlocks. The reason?  To keep us in so we couldn't walk around  the city center and cause trouble. Trouble  meant smoking, going across the street to  one of the many pubs , stealing from the  shops. Vandalizing the public property  was impossible between school hours.  The gates were locked also to keep others  out, meaning drug dealers, and students  from local schools coming down to cause  agro.  These security ideas the school and police  jointly came up with, thinking this would  solve the many problems students offered  society.  Good thinking, eh.  This bright brainwave was pretty short  lived.  Dealers would watch their timing with the  cops and when their little blue backs were  turned, transactions would continue between  the bars. Presto - what happens then is  kids get messed up inside school,  corrupting others, and sometimes hurting  others. There were no facilities to help  these drugged up youths, except of course  detentions, writing lines, or, best of all,  you were'really bad you could scrape gum  ladies. He was being punished for his violent  temper by having to stay late and scrap gum  off the stairs, I don't know exactly what  happened, no one does, the main witness was  dead and the twelve year old flipped. Strange  what a drug can make you do.  The teachers didn't have a clue, they just  thought he was particulary disturbed that day  This school contained a vast assortment of  youths, every race, every background, but  mostly youngsters that weren't accepted  at other schools for some reason or another.  Most of my friends .from this school (and I  know a lot of people) are doing one of a  few things: they have families and have had  them since they were still children them -  selves - mostly they are single parents.  They are heavily involved in drugs, stealing  for a living, prostitution, sitting in jail,  unemployed, a handful working away from home  family and friends and a number are dead.  I'm 21 and don't want to think of having  children in a world like this sometimes.  But that's just one school isn't it?  Isn't it?   VANCOUVER r  WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE  Store closed: Dec. 30, 31  Jan. 2:  YEAR END Inventory Sale begins  20-50% OFF  while Quantities last!  Jm  Mail orders welcome.  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6B 2N4    Ph: 684-0523  Ariel  Books  mm  in  Say hello to Jane Rule at Ariel Books Sat. Dec.  7th, 2-3 p.m. when she will be autographing  copies of Inland Passage.  2766 W. 4th Ave.  733-3511  J&*  ^  W  w  Coming Out-  Women's music, art and  issues have their place  on our airwaves every week.  Mon. 7:30 to 8:30 pm  Tues. 9:30 to 10:30 am  Feminist current  affairs and arts  Thurs. 7:30 to 8:30 pm  Gay and Lesbian  perspectives  The Lesbian Show -     Thurs. 8:30 to 9:30 pm  B.C.'s only lesbian  radio  Rubymusic-  Fri. 7:30 to 8:30 pm &  10:00 to 11:00 am  Music by women  artists  CO-OP RADIO  D@2o?7 [MM  We're also on cable in many locations throughout B.C. 4 OUT  (f  IN THE  MUSIC  SCENE  Interview by Jeny Evans  Tracy has been touring with Heather  Bishop for the last year playing base and  doing back up vocals.  She has also been performing on her own  with Kris Purdy, another. Manitoba musician.  Originally from Montreal,  Tracy now lives  in Winnipeg. After highschool and one year  at university she had moved to Yellow  Knife N.W.T. to further pursue her  music.  She has been playing guitar for  thirteen years and has created a style  of her own.  We talked about her experience in the main stream music world.  I've been used to playing in rock bands,  totally dominated by men, and then I've  gotten more into my own music and working  with Heather. What really blows me away  the most is people actually want to know  what you think, they actually want to  hear you, to know how you feel.  I'm used to playing in a bar and kissing  ass, really, playing a song that's been  done by five hundred other groups. Why  should I care if I put my heart into it  ..or not, after so many years of tucking  away my feelings with dealing with  society. This is what I found growing  up'where I grew up. You do what you're  told, you get in line, we just don't  cause waves, right?  Well, as soon as I left highschool, I  finally got out on my own, to be my  own person. I never realized I could  be my own person. So it's given me a lot  of strength. The more I perform the more  strength I get.  We talked moi  it means to I  former.  There are some friends I know, let's say  specifically a teacher I know who is a  lesbian, who is out in school. She is  "getting alot of razz from the kids. I  think it's up to the heterosexual parents to educate their kids on sexuality.  Obviously these kids have no where to  turn in schools to understand what it's  all about. Thats where it all starts,  being a kid and dealing with your sexuality. So what do they do: they try to  stereotype you. You're either heterosexual or you're fucked up. There needs to  be more courses and guidence counsellors  zlly about what  . an out young lesbian per-  It's really hard to come out as a  lesbia^i let's say as a teenager. There's  a lot of pressure now to be accepted by  your peers and to be a lesbian on top of  that, is very hard to really come out.  It's different for each person. I think  it's good for any person to come out just  for themselves, for their relief,- but  granted there is the other half to deal  with. I chose to come out after highschool  was over. I think it would be really hard  to come out in highschool. I'm not saying  stay in the closet because you're going to  get really hurt. It's up to you and what  you can handle.  8  -\pT  (x e     s e v/ e rV  Tracy Riley: Lesbian  feminist musician extraordinaire. Her music  ranges from rock and roll  to reggae, to folk and  blues. She plays guitar,  base and congas: she's  amazing on the harmonica  and loves all forms of  .  percussion.  Her songs are about  people, loving women,  about battered women,  incest survivors, women  on the street, about peace.  I asked Tracy about when she came out as  a lesbian.  Well, as soon as I fell madly in love with  a woman, that was enough for me. I had  been involved with other women in Montreal.  Maybe it was because my family lived there,  so I really never delved into it all the  way. I was seeing a man and a woman and  got scared that my family would find out  so I stopped going out with the woman.  I went out with this guy that lasted a  year and a half. I mean I really felt  like I cared about him and did love him.  I was fucked around, which certainly happens in lesbian relationships, don't get  me wrong. I wouldn't say: let's turn to  lesbianism because it's all roses, but I  do believe that the bond I feel with a  woman is just so intense.  I have seen heights I never have before.  I think people need to understand the  beauty, women can understand a close  friendship with women. They understand how  close you can become to another woman and  I think that they just need to realize it  that it isn't vulgar if you happen to fall  in love with a woman and touch.  My mother's reaction when I told her was  "honey, when I was growing up I had a lot  of women friends, and we were very close,  well, why do you have to touch them?" So  obviously it's a sexual hang-up.  The thing that rang true to me, that hit me  the most, was when I realized that this child  over here, was petrified of nuclear war. It  never really struck me until I realized this  kid is terrified, that they won't have a  future. I'm finding these kids are scared  and so they should be. That's when it struck  me, hey, wake up, let's fight for peace, for  disarmament.  J asked Tracy if it was difficult being  a younger woman in a movement that often  doesn't recognize younger women's experiences.  Well, I'm finding because I end up mostly  in an older age bracket, that they assume  that I am just as aware as they are. I don't  know a damn thing about the statistics  let's say of the woman's group here, as  opposed to an overview. You know what I  mean? I don't have all this background.  I am a woman, who is a lesbian who deals  with whatever issue that comes into contact with me. Or I see something done to  someone, that I think is wrong. I sing  songs about battered women, or incest  victims. I believe that these issues need  to be dealt with, each person needs to  deal with them.  All my songs aren't lesbian feminist songs,  but I do write from my heart which is  around women. When I write a love song, it's  about a woman.  All nJEgHjmgs aren't le^j^^^ffibist so$^;b*ut I;ctp  write from my heart wli^Bs around ^^^mW-  I could choose to stay in the closet and  still do my music but it would be a lot  of bullshit. That's why I chose to come  out, so I could breathe. I don't know how  many conversations I've had with my family,  "Hi honey, have a boyfriend yet?"  It's scary sometimes to do a song in a  mixed audience, to do some lesbian material, to see what kind of reaction you  get. It is all new for me. Three years is  not a long time. I've been playing for«  about thirteen years so it's not the musicianship that scares me up on stage.  Tracy and Heather have been working in the  Manitoba Artists in the Schools Program.  Tracy shared an encounter with one of the  children that changed her way of thinking:  Tracy has respect for the work women  like Heather,  Ferron and Kate Clinton  have done in opening the doors for other  lesbians and lesbian performers,  and  breaking the silence around woman 's experience.  I think they've paved the way quite  a bit, to the point where I don't have  to be out there sceaming down people's  necks to get my point across. They have  opened up their ears at least. These  women have made it easier for us. A lot  of lesbian musicians don't necessarily  have to be out, but can be strong as  feminists.  Tracy Riley will be performing this summer at the Vancouver Folk Music Festival.  ?^T^^  fvC^v^o v^<!  H&< P a & e     Ei&ht  OUT OF WEDLOCK  by Melissa Jacques-  Teenage pregnancy. Right, let's  put on our thinking caps: Bring out  the stats on abortion, birth control,  and the increase in adolescent promiscuity. Flash over to visions of  irresponsible youth, traditional  victims, and the price to be paid for  hetero-Sex.  It's all been done before.  Then let us look again, addressing  fundamental issues of choice and  vival. Let's dump all the shit in  • brains about "menial women's work"  and "oh, but you're sooo young", making  room for discussion about isolation,  economics, emotional rewards, and responsibility.  I've known Ani for four years..My son  Clair and I were present at the birth  of her year old son, Mikel. She is  now sixteen. Crystal and Ani became  friends through the pre-natal program  for teenage mothers, at R.E.A.C.H.  Clinic. Crystal is nineteen, her son  Jesse is almost seven months. They are  both single parents. -  Melissa:  Did you get lots of advice to have Melissa:  Do you feel that you work hard  an"abortion? enough?  Ani:  Both ways. A lot of advice from relatives, oh you should keep him, don't have  an abortion. While my friends said, "Ani,  you should look on the other side."  I had a doctor's appointment for an abortion  and the whole bit, right? But at the last  minute it was like, "I ate something today,  I can't go." I called up and said, "I  really don't want to have one." My doctor  said, "No problem, you can even come to  me during your pregnancy, so my doctor's  great, delivered him great, and here we  are.  Crystal:    oh yeah. I got plenty of advice,  like for my pregnancy test I went to Pine  Free Clinic.  The woman told me I was definitely pregnant.  She said, "You can keep him,  have an abortion, you can give it up for  adoption. At the time it was like a slap  in the face.  I thought, Wow.  My MHR worker gave me this stuff about,  , "Wait till your baby's up in the middle of  the night with colic. And she was really  discouraging me from having this baby.  Melissa:  Why do you think that was?  Crystal ■ :  Maybe because she looks down on  single mothers. Maybe she looks down on  people on welfare making babies.  Ani:  Maybe she had a whole bunch of single  mothers with like, six kids going "I  need more money, my kids have got to go on  the bus." Like I just can't handle welfare.  Ani:  I think having a child you work more  than when you have a job because you have  to be there twenty-four hours per day.  You can't just say, "It's five o'clock,  quitting time, I want to go home." Like,  if you're not there you have to find a  babysitter, you have to pay someone or  trade babysitting. You can't just phone  in sick.  Crystal  ; A twenty-four hour j ob, constant  Melissa:  How did your family react to the  pregnancy?  Crystal :   I didn't tell my mother she said  to me, "Is it what you really want?" and  I told her "Yes." This is after I decided  I would keep it, and she was happy for me.  As for my father...1'told my father in a  letter. He wrote back; "Well, do what you  want, and if you make a mistake at least  you can say you did it your way." He didn't  seem too happy about it.cause he wanted  me to go back to school and get a good  job.  Ani: I actually did go back to school after  I had Mikel. I went to school when I was  pregnant right until I had him and I went  back to Sir Charles Tupper School to the  mini.program where they babysit the kids.  I went till May and haven't been back since.  Melissa:  Did you find it hard?  Ani: It was really hard cause they'd let  him nap all day there, he was allergic to  milk and he was really cranky, so when I  got him home he would not want to go to  sleep till really late at night, and then  he'd sleep till 2:00a.m. and I'd have to go  to school the next morning at seven.  Ani, Mikel and Crystal  Melissa:  Do they think you work every day?  Crystal  J No way! They think it's easy.  Ani:   You're a slob, you sit on the couch  with a glass of, um, coffee.  Crystal '•   Beer or something...  Ani:  Yeah, beer of course. You're always  on drugs.  Melissa:  Of course, you've always got money  to spend.  Ani:  Yeah, it's just like $640, and you  just lounge around on your lazy-boy chair  watching soap operas.  Crystal :  Watching your colour tv, smoking  cigarettes and drinking beer, yeah, right.  Ani:  While your kids are running around  in dirty old pampers. And you're telling  time "shut up, shut up, I'm watching  tv." It's like, this is their impression  I'm sure.  Melissa:  You both go to the Single Mother's  Foodbank right? Do you feel you'd make it  through the month if you didn't  Ani:  Definitely not. They supply you with  noodles, coffee, baby food, formula,  bread, eggs, vegetables, fruit, milk. It's  mainly fresh food with some canned stuff.  Melissa:  And there's a waiting list?  Ani:  Yes there is. There didn't used to  be, but since Expo is coming along right,  they actually have to cut back on everyone's  welfare cheques. Since they want to build  some stupid lights that cost millions of  dollars we have to get less welfare and  go to a foodbank, and if I didn't go to  a foodbank I probably wouldn't survive.  Melissa: Is the foodbank in you neighbouring: No, we live in the east end and it's  at forty-ninth and Oak. Most people don't  live within twenty blocks of that area.  It's the only place that will supply space  for a foodbank. The church is actually  a pretty together church.  Crystal   ; But you have to bring your baby.  You get three bags of food to carry on  the bus with a baby too. I think that  because the foodbanks supply the food,  MHR could at least provide transportation .  I think it's more important to help the  people. I mean there's not many jobs these  days and if you want a jobs they want you  to have experience. I think it's more  important to worry about one's own people  than to worry about Expo.  Ani:  Expo 86 is actually a very sickening  thing to be happening. I think it's really  gross. They pay people to work on Expo,  they're having the fights with the unions.  I have a friend who's a draftsman, who  gets paid $24.00/hour and stuff, right. He  makes in one week as much as a mother  on welfare makes in a month. It's extremely  insane: all that money that goes into  Expo, you know that stupid golf ball thing..  Melissa:  That beautiful big hockey stick...  Ani:   ...that you would really like to just  spit on, it costs thousands of dollars  to build that stupid thing. I mean, give  me a break.  continued on page 16  and     nine  why can't I ?  T.f.T.T.T.T.T.T.T.T.T.  It seemed to me everyone did it so why  couldn't I? It was the late 70's and I  came of female age during the sexual  revolution.  I was the eldest daughter and my two  older brothers were who I really looked up  to. My eldest brother was a natural 'Don  Juan'. It seemed that he had every girl in  the neighborhood chasing after him. He'd  tell me stories of his great sexual exploits.  At the time it seemed like if you weren't  sexually active you weren't cool, so to  speak.  I was 13 years old when I started high  school and I had a lot to learn about sex  and reproduction. In my first year of high  school four girls my age were pregnant. I  found it hard to comprehend that these ■  young girls were having children. It came  to me as a shock, but since it caused no  real alarm at school or in Inner City  society, I accepted it.  I became sexually active at the age of 14.  It was summertime and I had a teen sweetheart of 17. "Virginity" didn't have the  meaning for me like it did for some others.  My parents were very strict but I think they  trusted me not to get in "trouble". I  had been tutored and even had sex education  courses in junior high. The only thing my  mother ever told me about sex was to keep  both legs closed and both feet on the  ground.  Birth control seemed irrelevant to my  life at that time. I'd go from month to  month taking chances everytime. Sex education taught me to use contraception but  my fear of my parents finding devices in  my belongings made me shy away from such  things.  The end result of my lack of understanding  concerning sexual relationships was me 16  years old and a mother.  At first I tried to let myself believe that  the whole thing was just a hormone imbalance,  anything but a baby. I gained weight and  because of my age it was easy to think that  I was experiencing the latter stages of  puberty. I was so bent on not believing  that I was pregnate that it took me four  months to come to my senses. Finally, I  got the nerve to go to the testing clinic  and when they told me I was pregnant for  sure I was truly shattered.  I went home fighting the tears hoping no  one would see me crying. When I got home  my mother answered the door. She knew  right away that something was wrong. I told  her what the problem was and she broke down  and cried with me. We held each other and  she tried to comfort me and convinced me  to call my father.  Telling my father was very hard too. He  made me feel cheap and dumb for getting  pregnant. He vowed to do everything in his  power to help me get rid of the baby.  In New York a woman can get an abortion up  to 27 weeks. With support from my parents I  decided to get an abortion. The day at. the  abortion clinic was long and stressful. I  arrived at the clinic at 6:00a.m. At 1:00p.m.  I finally made it to the doctors office  and every thing was set until the doctor  examined me. She said, "No, I can't perform  an abortion on this patient. This patient  is at least 32 weeks pregnant."  SECOND   T-RI-MESTER  by Meaghan Baxter  I had been independent of my parents  for two years. I chose not to seek  advice from my mother, father, sisters  and brother about my pregnancy; I  wanted to make my own decision. I was  afraid the members of my family would  attempt to pressure me to have an  abortion, or to have a child. I did  not think it appropriate to draw my  family into it: I was confused enough  with various external influences  which contributed to my experience.  During one of the weeks in early  pregnancy, when I was only suspec- -  ting my condition, the city council  of Nelson(the city in which I was  living); proclaimed it Pro-Life week.  I denied the pregnancy at first; I  attributed the signs of pregnancy to  stress from work; illness (I contacted  pelvic inflammatory disease when I was  three weeks pregnant) - the antibiotics. . .anything but pregnancy. I was  never sure how pregnant I actually  was until after the operation. There  had been some confusion in my mind  about when we actually conceived because of the early incidence of P.I.D.  Later, complications which prolonged  the experience were due to bureaucratic procedures one must go through  presently in British Columbia to  attain the right to an abortion. It  was necessary for me to have an  ultrasound done before the abortionist could take my application to the  board. Everything took time, and when  the initial details were finally covered, I was ten weeks pregnant. At  that point the operation was put off  for four weeks. There is only one  abortionist in the city of Nelson,  and abortions are scheduled irregularly. I could not possibly take the  time off work because of the nature  of my job.  With each week that passed while I  waited and waited, I became more and  more pregnant; what should have been  a simple operation became a dangerous one. (a second tri-mester abortion  at fourteen weeks).  T.T.T.f .T.f.f.F*  I was a mother whether or not I wanted to  be. When I knew this I was resigned to the  situation and chose to do the best I could  under the circumstances.  For the first six months of our relationship, my partner and I lived four  hundred miles apart (he in Vancouver).  He moved in with me at the beginning  of our seventh month together.  Within one week I became pregnant.  ...my breasts feel extremely heavy.  No costume is right for the meeting  today; nothing seems to fit.  The smell  of coffee makes me nauseous...1 feel  the foetus growing inside of me.  When  I try to define how I feel, all I  know is this growth that I have to  deny.  I don't have time to think  things through. I snap at W.  I am  afraid he is rejecting me. My body  keeps telling me to rest,  to sit  back and be pregnant; it 's a natural function of my body. I 'have a  physiological desire to have this  child.  When we fuck I want his cock  inside of me, but then I cry out  (mourning)  -I'm terrified of the loss.  I feel ugly and I dread the impending  operation.  W. and I went to the store  today to buy me a new pair of jeans  (mine no longer fit).  When I tried to.  rut the pair I liked over my hips,  they wouldn't fit.  I looked into the  full length mirror and I didn 't  recognize my body;  it looked so big.  I couldn 't believe I was looking at  myself,  I had to fight back the tears.  Why-can't I feel normal. I am  afraid people will find out, and that  I'll be hated. I have to put all my  energy into work, and into this constant denial.  I want to talk to someone about it,  but I'm afraid I'll fall  apart if I do.  I can 't afford not to  do a good job,  but I feel I am  alienating myself from my closest  friends: I'm always too busy,  or  exhausted.  continued on page 16  I became the object of gossip and slander.  I was alienated from most of my friends.  During the next six weeks I went through  many phases of feelings and mixed emotions.  I grew emotionally stronger as my due date  came closer. My daughter was born June  28, 1979 and was welcomed to my family  with open arms. Unlike many pregnant teenagers I had a lot of support from my  family. Six years later they are still  supportive of the two of us.  I returned to high school and attempted to  complete my high school education. I was  forced to drop out because even with the  financial help I was getting the combination  of studying and childcare was too much.  Later I received my high school equivalency  diploma. (I studied at home with my daughter.)  Loraine and Meaghan  Today my daughter lives with my parents. I  miss her in my life as we are very close.  Having my child at that age helped me to  grow and understand the responsibility of"  having a child. We are friends in a sisterly  way. She acknowledges me as her mother and  we have a good line of communication.  The pregnancy may have been untimely, but  for the most part my daughter, my family  and I have survived. ^30- E     t e  tJ]—  FELL  IN  LOVE  THIS  SUMMER  for the  first   lime  in my life.  by Mehia Strong  it is one of the best things that has  happened to me, and i felt great.  for two years i had speculated on this  'coming out', and watched womyn fall  in love and break up. i have known  that i am a lesbian since, i was twelve,  and accepted lesbianism as my identity  at that time, i am lucky, it was relatively easy for me since i live in a  womon-identified household, and have  lived around and in the lesbian community  for years, this all helped me to accept  myself as a lesbian with very little  inner conflicts/confusions, i had only  to deal with outer hassles.  • • THEATRE • •  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  Phone 738-6311  $2.99 on Tuesday $4 Students with valid cards  c&tteetitm  LESBIAN  INFORMATION LINE  Need Information?  Want to Talk?  Contact LI.L(604) 875-6963  Thurs. & Sun. 7-10 p.m.  or write 400A W. 5th Ave.  Wild West  1 all-women collective,  selling bulk organic  produce, yogurt, and  juices, for the health of  you and your family.  For a free catalog, call  or write:  WILD WEST ORGANIC  HARVEST CO-OP  ,2471 SIMPSON RD, RICHMOND BC V6X2R2  it    veuNGER,  j j  " VA^,r*-'  i have been raised with lesbian pride  and that is important to me. it has  given me a strong base from which to  create our womon's future, i am now  designing who i want to be, and how to  get there, being a feminist lesbian is  my life, it is me. i dream in female in  a positive way, and i live a womon  oriented lifestyle, i try to make as  many connections as i can with womyn,  of all ages, and that is of great importance to me. i have especially tried  to network with younger lesbians,- as i  feel there is a great need for that, we  are still very isolated, even within  city spaces.  so it is frustrating and alienating to  have to deal with ageism in the lesbian  community: to have my lover teasingly  called a cradlerobber; to be considered  not sexual because i am fifteen; to be  turned away from dances because i am  a child to some womyn. i am so often  painfully aware of ageism, even some of  my dyke sisters are amazed that i am  who i am, now. sometimes my age becomes  a barrier between us, and then we relate  on a level that i don't want there, i  don't want to be a token, or a curiosity  or a person of less worth because of  my age.  we as lesbians have a responsibility  to not play such games as these, we need  to accept each other for who we are, and  focus our energies on more demanding  issues, young lesbians exist and we have  a voice that needs to be heard, once  that is heard, we can keep on dreaming  and creating our lives and our selves,  to become the wildest womyn of our dreams.  1**  0*  ft  ***  IB  u  Karen and her lover ■went  to the prom  ?*■-*  IS  They all said tt was wrong  But she just smiled and turned away  You see she's proud to be gay  That's what she says  But the words get around town  LYHTCS 3Y NAD IN*'" DAVENPORT -1982©  They all wonder why she  doesn't wear a gown  The laws against her  maybe even throw her out of town  younger than you          v  check the lost and found  If not there, try the next town  butch baby's  young bucks on the run  So here we hide  in the morning sun  sneakin into those "gay" bars  bright eyed and busy tailed  under age, we're told  close to gettin jailed  "it's the rage"           •  .*.  hero we are marchin next to you  lost in the masquerade  won't you pull us through  caught in the cage  But still we are  younger than you  Here we go  seeing through you  Butch baby's young bucks  seeing through your younger eyes  confusion cries  bright eyed and bushy tailed  coming out to  our highschool friends  close to gettin jailed  here we are marchin next to vou  some of those scars  won't you pull us through  may never mend  and we really find out  gotta get us through  we only had one real friend  ^ :;T;./:-;T;^t T^.;,:^-},. ?-/L= -.-^'tV: ' '■ ■' * ' ' : '•. •"':''-  gotta make it through           - "-  • OP  JpTa^g- e   eLev e  Uptightly     Politely  by Ima Warsick  I would like to begin by sharing something that happened to me last fall.  I  went to a panel discussion of the  exhibit "Still Sane" which is a series  of sculptures telling about a woman's  abuse by psychiatry. It is done with  casts of her body, wire mesh, cloth and  paint and then spelled out across it all  what happened to her inside. What was  done to her because she told a shrink  when she was 19 that she was a lesbian  and then at the end how she came through  still sane. Most of us wouldn't have made  it. I think a lot of people have seen  the show and know what I mean when I  say it is powerful.  So, at this-panel discussion we were  all gathered to talk and the panel was  made up of women experienced in psychiatry but not professionals. Now I don't  know much about the scene in Vancouver  but what I saw was ugly. One woman  would speak and' say she had nursing  experience and was fed up and wanted  to start some sort of retreat for  psychiatrically abused women and then  another woman would say naah, we tried  that and just tear the idea to shreds.  Again and again any wise and progressive suggestion was just stupidly attacked.  Near the end of the evening we were  passing a hat for money when one woman  stood up and basically said, "Ahh if  you have any money I have a friend...  she should be here  tonight. I don't  ' understand why she isn't here because  she was supposed to be getting out today and I know she wanted to come..."  and proceeded to explain to us how  her friend had been addicted to librium,  I think it was, and had gone to the  civic saying "look this stuff is  fucking me up you have to help me get  off it", and was instead shot up  heavily with more, involuntarily admitted to Riverview and was being told  everyday she was in, that.they were  billing her for the involuntary stay.  So if women had any money extra her  friend could use a hand. This is what  I heard.  Right now we should get into a car and  at least six of us should go to Riverview  and not leave until we find out what is  happening to her friend.  There was a silence and a few kind of  sympathetic noises maybe and then  everybody started right back into  arguing about feminist therapists as if  that woman hadn't spoken. This was  when I said what I think any decent  person would say, "Right now we should  get into a car and at least six of us  should go to Riverview and not leave  until we find out what is happening with  her friend. Right now we should do  it". There were lots of nice lavendar  cars parked out front and there were  lots of women in that room who I  believe had been truly affected by the  Still Sane exhibit.  When I was speaking I suppose I looked  pretty young because I am, and not very  nicely dressed not even very clean and  nobody knew me in the community and I  guess I could have been some crazy girl  wandered off the streets trying to lead  them all into a mess. So everyone sat  arqund - you sat around and I watched  you not do a thing.   Most of you were  simply too squeamish to do anything but  be seen at the cool feminist art show.  And talk and talk. And you couldn't  even have enough unity to drop everything and act with your heart for once.  I think of my friend who was institutionalized, given drugs they should not  have given a 14 year old body and  certainly not in those doses. Hoxj he  was adjusted into a punching bag, raped  and then thrown down alone. Perhaps  we can give him room in our analysis  as "a male victim of male violence"  but will we ask ourselves where were  we? When he walks down the street at  night he is a man, he has never dreamed  of wearing anything but flat shoes, he  does not know. Still, he has understandings of oppression so deep and  screaming—can we afford to disconnect ourselves from what he learned,  because it was a he that learned it?  Our brothers in prison have few illusions about power and authority. They  are fighting for spirituality, dignity  and freedom from abuse day after day  after day.  Oui  battles here \  rce of our pai;  common, and the  the same.  I am critical of feminist energy that  is not going into these essential connections when there is so little time  left. I see this in much anti-pornography campaigning. While women  are working on watered down censorship  laws the philedelphia police are  dropping bombs on black neighbourhoods  and letting her burn burn burn. That's  the censorship of 1985. -It's going to  'work against us no matter what small  positive reform someone may bring  about. Things are not  slowly starting  to look brighter.  If you are repulsed by pornography  then organize a downtown space, make  resources available for women on the  streets and get out of their way. We  need them to teach us. Also firebombing is acceptable.  It may sound strange but in the same  way I distrust the motivations of the  women's peace movement.  Definitely  missiles are overwhelmingly phallic  but we much be careful how we approach  our opposition to nuclear war. Essential is the understanding that this I  kind of high-tech violation has been  waged by bur nation against smaller  countries (where you pay the least for  the most produced) for years and years.  The war is happening now and we are  needed to support those movements who  are struggling against our death culture promotions. They have initiated  the self-defence and it is erroneous  to see ourselves as independent new or  separate.  Does hanging flowers and baby clothes  around a military base help us take  back the night? Is it true that we have  become so clever with our wool against  war that time and time again direct  actions take a back seat to the creative  symbolic ones. Are we doing this for  media attention? Again? The media seems  to think that Greenham Common is pretty  cute. Is this a positive sign that we  are affecting public opinion? Is the  media public opinion?  Does hanging flowers and baby cloths  around a military base help us to take  back the night? Is it true that we have  become so clever with our wool against  war that time and time again direct  actions take a back seat to creative  symbolic ones.  "While there is a lower class I am in  it, while there is a criminal element  I am of it, while there is a soul in  prison I am not free". Eugene Debs, the  man (a man) who penned that statement  did it in a defiant manner and I expect  with a spiritual understanding as well.  For all women, whether they are aware  of it or not, the statement is a truth  of their lives. This  is why women  must oppose militarism because they are  women. We must reach out and make our  sisters our allies. And we must reach  out and show our allies what is sisterhood. Our unity will be the rejection  of the black/white good/evil madonna/whore  mentality which has justified the obsession of technology over nature and  turned the pagan god of the woods into  satan.  As a young woman I would like to add  that this means the next time a self-  declared feminist humiliates her  children in public, there is someone  there to challenge her violence. And  please it would mean that another  ageist remark in the middle of a meeting will not be politely uptightly ignored. -fFa 3 a-   tvAJ e< v/ e-/-  MARCHING OUT OF THE MILITARY  MEGAN SOMMERS  Now that I have completely separated  myself from the military, I can  reflect back on my "time in".  When I enrolled I was seventeen; I was  unemployed, confused and not doing  well in school, nor at home. With the  gentle persuasion of my parents and  the pull from my brother, who had  joined up, I found myself in the army.  Even though I may have thought I was  prepared for the military, I wasn't.  I was so scared and felt really nervous, but soon enough I was relaxing  and meeting people. Day by day I was  becoming involved.  trangely appealing  m and marching  There was something  about being in unif<  everywhere.  After a few weeks I began to centre  my existence on the military, jI ate,  slept, socialized and dressed military. Most importantly, I thought  army. I became a soldier.  My new life was wonderful. I was  - allowed to drink alcohol in public  and swear to my heart's content. All  . my new friends were there, so companionship was not hard to find.  One day I started to think about the  politics of the military, at the same  time, I started to learn about alternative (leftist) politics and current  events. My realization of oppression,  racism, sexism, etc. actually shocked  me and interested me a great deal.  I decided to continue making myself  aware of the world outside of the  institution's walls. My conflict with  the army didn't start until I realized that I was being oppressed and  manipulated.  The thick walls of military logic  were becoming thin walls of brainwashing. We were manipulated by the  accessibility of alcohol. The rules  concerning drinking were very  liberal - a sharp contrast to the  discipline demanded in all other  areas of army life.  The use of fear in brainwashing and  manipulation is very effective for  the military.  We were constantly  threatened with being charged, made  to run distances with our rifles over  our heads, even imprisonment. The  guarantee of money is the final  clincher to their brainwashing.  I had been oblivious to the amount  of racism in the military. Regardless  of whether or not you're a wonderful  human being, if you aren't caucasion  you are second class. An insulting,  slang term can be found for every  existing ethnic group. The saddest  part is that this type of thinking  isn't condemned, it's very acceptable.  THE  \ftNCOUVER  OUTDOOR  CLUB  FORWOMEN  ORGANIZED AND RUN BY WOMEN  LEARN NEW SKILLS  information  phone:  Linda      876-3506  Cpl. Megan Somraers of  Nanaimo has been awarded an armed forces commendation by Gen. G. C.  E. Theriault for actions  beyond the call of duty,  national defence headquarters announced over  the weekend.  Sommers was cited for  her participation in a  medicaL evacuation during military exercises  August 26, 1983, at Fort  Lewis, Wash. She was  .travelling in a six-vehicle  convoy when the lead  vehicle was involved in an  accident.       -&%ii^  A defence department  press release says Sommers took immediate action by contacting the  medical evacuation personnel. She also provided  critical information on the  victims  Not only does racism rear it's ugly  head, but sexism does as well. At  times I would beat my head against  the wall because I wasn't heard. The  reason: I was a woman.  I remember once I had made a very  intelligent suggestion on how to  rearrange a section and I was literally ignored. However, moments later  the same suggestion was made by a  male co-worker and it was acknowledged.  The attitude towards homosexuality  really bothered me. It just isn't  fair that someone can't work at a  job because they are homosexual.  I was bothered by these attitudes .  more and more. It got to the point  where I could not stand hearing them  Yet, something kept me there.  In the spring of 1984 I received a  chief of defense staff comendation  award for saving two lives in the U.S.  Three older men also received the  award. Instead of feeling proud, I  felt embarassed. A lot of men were  giving me a hard time about it.  All of this led to my decision to  leave the military. I felt that women  pilots- in   reaching   the  crash site.  "Cpl. Sommers' initiative... and quick  response helped save the  lives of the accident vic-  tas," the release says.  just weren't taken seriously. They  allowed women in because the equal  rights amendment says they have to;  not because they chose to.  I personally feel that I gave all I  could without destroying myself. Some  people in the army laughed at me and  some believed in me. I say this because I chose to state how I thought  and not to keep silent. Some even  referred to Marxism as "Megan's world".  Throughout my time I didn't meet a lot  of people I really liked. Some didn't  enjoy what they were doing, but they  felt trapped, which I understood.  Last summer, I was out of the army,  employed and walking by the Jerico  base. Actually this happened more  than once. I stood there and thought  about going back in, but decided that  it would be a cop out for me. It would  have been too easy.  Even though I earned money, had fun and  met a lot of people, I have to conclude by saying that the army is not  a humanistic existance.  It's a place where you can't be yourself in any way, whether it is politically, sexually or spiritually.  There's just no room for individualism.  THE NEGRESS  The negress spends her life  watching and waiting  anticipating...the day  she can say...I'm okay.  The negress sees herself  through another woman's  eyes. And every day  she tries to feel good inside  because Maybelline  doesn't make eye shadow  in her shade.  A negress tries, lives  and dies...all her life fighting  to reach the top.  All through her struggle  she never wants to stop.  Picture the negress, who's  life is many a cross  to bear. Whose self is everything  she's got.  Her hopes, dreams and wishes  are really not a lot.  Just a place where she belongs.  A place where she can be  the woman she wants to be.  Surging pain and recycled blood  womb to cock to mouth  the pain is .reborn  the blood to be used  after passing through miles of gut  manifests itself  to complete the cycle  Each thrust reaches  trying in vain to break a barrier  the impact vibrates  repeats itself  in terminal writhing agony  yet something broke  my barrier shattered  leaving me exposed  my blood free to flow  again, and yet again.  Has unity been gained?  What other barriers mu  to achieve intimacy?  be shattered  Laura E. Morrison by Zoe Lambert  Ageism is a form of discrimination  which is poorly recognized, rarely discussed and less often combated, within  both mainstream and alternative culture.  It is discrimination based upon age,  and can mean being told what hour you  must be in bed when you are young, or  being shoved off to a pensioners home  when you are old.  Since ageism is so poorly understood  what follows is an exploration of one  type of ageism: youth oppression. Although in this article ageism will be  defined in terms of young people, many  . parallels can be easily made between  the oppression faced by both young and  old.  Since youth oppression effects  youth regardless of sex, this article  is not  specific to females. However, it is  hoped that the reader will identify areas  such as sexuality and economics, where  females may be more overtly oppressed.  Youth oppression is maintained through  the institutions of the family, education system and legal system. Systematic conditioning, sexual oppression  and economic discrimination is enforced by all of these institutions  alike. In response, youth are organizing, only to find that they are also  oppressed by the. activist 'left' and  the women's community.  In the home, young peoples' lifestyle  is determined for them, as well as  values impressed upon them. It is first  through parents that young people are  taught to conform to authority.  Whether it is scheduling, such as meal  times, bed times, and homework hours,  or larger decisions like schooling,  pressures to enter specific vocations,  or choice of friends, parents use  their authority to determine almost  every aspect of a young person's life.  Through this process young people are  taught to distrust their own judgement,  and above all, to obey any person who  is "wiser" than they by the virtue of  age. This training does not  allow  young people to develop the skills of  decision making nor responsibility.  Through oppression, young people are  taught to conform to authority without question; further maintaining a  fundamentally hierarchal and oppressive society.  Schools, based on authoritarianism and  control, also enforce values which glorify our governments- and promote biased  histories and war. Students are forced  to sit in rows, conform to the authority of teachers and administration, and  to regurgitate information which is assumed to be 'objective' and true. All  information in based on a value system  and to question this value system or  the content of the information, is one  of the best ways to fail your term mark.  Examples of.this value system, which  promote the status quo, can be seen  in teaching methods.  In one Ottawa school, photographs of  starving people in El Salvador were  seized while similar images of  Ethiopians were considered acceptable.  Again and again students are penalized for asking questions and coming  to their own conclusions and analyses.  The education system serves to  squelsh any kind of free thought or  rebellion in youth, and to quietly  assimilate them into society.  High school students in-both Ottawa  and Vancouver have experienced repression for having anti-nuclear  clubs and refusing to stand for the  lord's prayer. The"screening of speakers, confiscation of files, and isolation all figure in high school administrations tactics against students.  Sexual oppression begins within the  first year of life: "don't touch" or  "bad!" followed by a slap on the hand  of a youngster who touches their genital . Sexual oppression in the forms  of prohibiting masturbation, restricting information on sex and birth con-  tori, prohibiting sexual activity, par-r  tlcularly lesbian and gay relationships,  leads to crisis of sexual identity  which affects people throughout their  lives.  Poor access to birth control again  contributes to sexual oppression. A  woman under sixteen must have parental  consent in order to get prescription  birth control.  Lesbian and gay relationship, condemned by peers and authority figures, are  illegal until the age of twenty-one.  Domination in the home by parents and  enforced obedience to authority figures,  is an open door to the gross amount of  sexual abuse and pedophilia to which  young people are subjected.  Finally, if a young person attempts to  take control of their life, they are  economically and legally oppressed.  A young person under the age of 16,  who chooses to leave the family home,  firstly does not  have legal status,  and legally exists only under the  authority of parents or guardians.  Similarily, a parent or guardian can  condemn a young person to a mental  institution without  certification by  doctors and against the will of the  person.  It is illegal to hold a job under the  age of 16. Young people over this age  barrier are faced with unemployment  and are often not recognized for the  skills they have.  Young people are rarely given responsibility in their work place thus not  giving them the chance to learn new  skills and limiting their chances for  advancement. When young people do get  additional responsibility, it is usually because the employer can do so  without giving the employee additional  pay.  Wages given to young people are almost  always below the poverty line; and indeed in some provinces there is a lower  minimum wage for those between the ages  of sixteen and eighteen. ip a n  f o uiTeenl-  There is also the problem of job  ghettos. These are low skilled, poorly  paid shit jobs. One exmaple is the  hiring policy of McDonalds Restaurant  chain. A person hired at age sixteen  who maintains their employemnt despite  strict behaviour and dress requirements  (people have been fired for not smiling!)  are often promptly fired at age nineteen so that the corporation can avoid  paying a higher minimum wage. Youth  are seen as an expendable work force.  Youth job ghettos typically have a high  turn over in staff. This is less because young people lack stability,  and more because these jobs are abusive  and stagnant.  Social services such as welfare will  not support a person under the age of  nineteen, unless that person becomes  a.ward of the state subject to the  inhumane environment of foster homes.  Since it is illegal to work until the  age of sixteen, many people are forced  into prostitution as their only economic alternative after breaking out  of the" family unit.  Economic and legal oppression rules  out alternatives for youth. Middle  and upper class families, well aware  of this, hold tightly to economic  control by doling out minimal allow-  Aside from personal finances, young  people do not have access to larger  sums of money to start up and continue their own projects to serve their  own needs. Although there exist  groups both for and by  young people  (none of which are listed in the International Youth Year Canadian youth  groups and services directory,  incidentally), to my knowledge there  are no social  services for young  people that are actually opertated  and controled by youth.      tfP^'-vM  Government grants and funding through  the private sector are available  only to middle and upper class youth  who have the connections and know-  how to get those funds.  Worst in youth oppression is the  constant degredation and invalidation of being told that one is  stupid, incapable of making decisions, and that one's experience  and analysis are misguided.  By virtue of coming out of a new  generation and having different  cultural experiences, young people  have new ideas, out looks and  approaches. People fearing Ghange  and new ideas, oppress youth by  discouraging their iniative on the  basis that youth are too young to  make coherent analysis and decisions.  make coherent analysxs and decisions.  f Press Gang Printers  a feminist, worker-controlled collective  603 Powell Street, Vancouver  253-1224  15W2ndAvc\bnamr.BC.V5YlBl.Canaii*   (604)879-7323  REPAIRS. ACCESSORIES. MACHINING  KenBotham       poralluakes    A)ice Macpherson  Come and see us!  Unfortunately, ageism also exists  in the women's community. The  following experience is an expample  of the oppression and frustration  I have felt.  I attended a lecture by Mary Daly in  Ottawa, held by Carleton University.  I was frustrated by all the word  DP*  '1 wish for social revolution, political anarchy, and annihilation of  the existing power structure."  splicing and cool fem-lingo and that  I was so uncomfortably out of place  in an environment which was so predominantly white, middle class,  middle age, educational.  Mary stood on a pedastel above us. At  question period, women practically  ' fell to their knees in thanks' for  Mary's wisdom. What happened to "no  more heros"?  I was burning for discussion and more—  for talk about action.  I raised to the mike, shaking because  I knew I had a.'funny' (punk) haircut  and clothes, and I asked, why? Why  the power structure within the lecture (I thought we, condemned hierarchy), why no talk about action?  Were we only to go home having comfortably patted ourselves on the back?  The friend I was with raised to the  mike.  She also asked about action and  addressed her concerns as a young  woman about her friends being oppres-  B.C.'s only unionized travel agency.  7U  TRAVEL UNLIMITED  pA,NTiNGi  BENO  TtTiOHS  • RESIDENTIAL  • INTERIOR  • DRYWALL REPAIR  sed and dumped into mental institutions and living in a world bent on  militarism and destruction. My friend  went beyond Mary's comments of how  women are naturally peaceful and we  must stop nuclear weapons (the room  seized oppressively against us - don't  talk about militarism, that means we  will have to give up our first world,  middle class privilidges).  Mary dismissed our comments and called  us "idiots" twice. Mary Daly has made  a great contribution towards a non-  mysoginist language, but language  must be transformed into action.  Afterwards, a woman came up to us and  said that we did not understand, yes,  that we were young and if we read the  right books we would know better. I'd  heard that line before.  Is it so hard for sbme women to understand that my words are based on  concrete analysis, based on experience?  Is it so hard to realize that young  women, young people, are rising up  against depression, against a high  rate of youth suicide, against a world  that offers us no future?  Yes, we want action. We live in the  crisis of our own lives and the crisis  of the world around us.  Is it such a heresy to question the  feminist line?  As Sue Dyment has said, I don't believe  that "girl rulers would somehow be nicer  than boy rulers." I know only too well  how the girls in highschool put me down  and how the women in the feminist community oppress me.  I am wary of professional feminists with  their professional salaries and professional status. I question an anti-  porn movement which is calling for state  (male hierarchy) consorship; a weapon  which can and has been used against  women (the consoring of Not a Love  Story  in Ontario).  I question so much more, but to question in the feminist "movement" (are  we moving?) is to commit hersay, is  to be "divisive".  As one member of the youth movement,  Ted Dyment, has said, "To tell us to  lower our voices is to belittle the  i for our rage". ^if at te ring  <U HAP PENS  to young women  all the time. This  is about  how one of us  got Out.  by Jean Bennett and Jeny Evans  The following interview, conducted in  the spring of 1985, is the story of a  fifteen year old woman who was battered  by her boyfriend. Her experience is not  uncommon. During the past two years we  have spoken with many young women who  have been physically, emotionally  and sexually abused by their boyfriends.  The interviews were carried out as part  of a research project for Battered  Women's Support Services. They had  identified a huge gap in knowledge of  the dynamics of abuse in heterosexual  teen relationships and in the provision  of support services to young women.  The women interviewed crossed all social  and economic backgrounds. The inaccessibility of feminist services to non-  white women contributed to the fact  that all the women we interviewed were  white.  Most women were in their teens at the  time of the abuse, although in some  cases it began when they were twelve  or thirteen. Their age makes these  women particularly vulnerable since  none of the resources available to  adult women are provided to teenagers.  Nor are these young women treated  with even the most minimal level of  respect.  The following interview was chosen  because, this young woman describes  so explicitly why she stayed in an  abusive relationship, the process she  went through in recognizing that she  was being battered and how she finally  got out.  I was fifteen at the time. He was my very  first boyfriend. ,A11 my friends said don't  go out with him, he's weird, but I had  tunnel vision. He was a Jehovah Witness  which I didn't know at the time I got involved. We lost our virginity at the same  time, so later when I found out he was  religious I thought wow look at what he  sacrificed for me. I think that's why I  couldn't see the abusive part. The relationship lasted nine months.  After we made love the first time we  didn't make love for awhile because it  was such a shocking thing. Later on we  both regreted having done it so soon. I  had an idea that making love was a beautiful, nice thing to do but I didn't know  what that meant. It wasn't nice. Just  wham bam. If I said it was hurting he  would just keep going because he thought  that it was feeling good. He would put so  many fingers into me that sometimes I  was bleeding. Every time I had my period  he made me feel gross and I had to make  up for it by giving him head and I mean  so often that my face hurt. Then I found  out he was telling people at school what  I did for him. I had a reputation as a  slut because I was friends with some guys.  He was afraid I was fooling around so he  had to prove I was his.  The abuse started not long after we  started going out, actually right after  we first made love. The physical abuse  started at the same time. He was nice and  sweet until he had secured me as his girlfriend.  I sure felt like shit when I went out  with him. He would compare me to this other  girl. He wanted me to look just like her.  It was so conflicting; he would say he  didn't want me to look nice for anybody  but then he wanted me to be this blonde  bombshell. He would tell me he loved me  then hit me. It was so confusing. I thought  I loved him but didn't know why.  I don't know how my mom began to pick it  up but she started asking questions like,  does he kiss you when he sees you. So, I  began to ask questions too. Once I made  him this really nice dinner and he just  ate it without saying anything and I was  really upset, but we made love afterwards  and I thought that was supposed to make  up for the other so I pushed it aside. I  wanted a boyfriend so badly that I wouldn't  listen to other stuff. I really began to  question it when other people knew what  3 L L   +He   f,Me  witri   h«M i  K nJ e W   Deep  J 0W  |!A5iDe      + H 3 T  SorMe + HincjvN/a  W r 0 n Or 4  B  * 1   I T'  H #   * d   +  Listen  t 0   I mI-  V i t i 0 si.  P a  F/ Ft  I tried to break up three or four times  before the final time. The first time was  about one month after the abuse started.  I thought that it was strange but he convinced me it was okay by being really  nice again. Two to three months later I  tried again and then several times in the  few weeks before the final time. He would  always be really nice when I wanted to break  up.  I decided to try something. I realized that  as soon as he saw me he would touch, my  breasts, so I asked him not to touch my  breasts at all this time, I could see he  was really straining so I realized how  often it must have been and I wondered do  you love me or my breasts.  was going on. Also, it was getting worse  because it was becoming more frequent.  Everytime I was angry I wrote it out in my  diary. I started noticing what I was  writing and how often, so I told him I  wanted to break up. He phoned everyday  begging me not to break up, then he got  his friends to phone me too. I can't stand  wimpy guys and this went on for a couple  of months. Then he brought over everything  I ever gave him and I realized what a jerk  he was and that made it easy from then on.  I never talked to any of my friends because  of the beginning when they had told me not  to get involved. I never wanted to admit  how un-great the Eealtionship actually was.  I had one girlfriend but never talked to  her.  I felt pretty gross, like shit. I felt  guilty, always trying to make up for what  happened, then getting that little bit of  re-enforcement, the I love you. I also began hating myself for letting it happen. I  never talked to anybody because it wasn't  something you talked about and I didn't  realize it was a problem. Plus, it was so  important to have a boyfriend and he cared  for me.  Everything that happens to you you learn  stuff from. Unfortunately, I learned a  lot. It's no* the way I want to learn  things, but I built up a lot of self-confidence because I could say I was right even  if the person I thought I loved the most  in the world said I was wrong. I know now  that I am the most important person in the  relationship.. The other person is important  but I want what is best for me.  All through the time with him I knew deep  down inside that something was wrong, but  it's hard to listen to intuition, it's such  a little voice next to a real person.  It's neat to talk about this. All the things  I haven't thought about in awhile. It's  neat to remember the details in retrospect,  to see all the little parts that contributed to me getting out.  For more information, contact:  Battered Women's Support Services,  at  734-1574.  If you would like to be  interviewed contact Jeny or Jean at  254-7597.  We.are also available to do  workshops or speaks. ?s 6 l    <» i *. t e e n/  O  4> 41 O 4* <► if  OUT OF WEDLOCK  continued from page 8  Listening  to my son  Whose breathing  Is like an ocean  Grinding against  the shores of my heart  Winged answer  Baby's breath  Love is a wreath  Around the soul.  Why do the emblems of my pride  Untouched, unmovable  While I exist separately  Hooded, foreshadowed  by exotic waves of being?  Care for me, come to me  Let words too have their power.  The wreath is bushy  and hairy  It will tickle the tip of your  iceberg  -L3«iette Morrison. March 1985.  if 4>   if if if  if if if  graphics by Claudia Burke  Melissd:  What.could you do with $1,000.?  Ani:  I could buy myself and my son hew  clothes, new shoes. I have new shoes  because a friend of mine bought them for  me. I mean c'mon man.  Melissfi:  Do you feel your monthly cheque  enables you to buy the necessary clothing  for your child?  Crystal.:  No!  Ani:  You have to go to the Sally Ann,  Value Village, yard sales, flea markets,  all kinds of different organizations that  give away clothes to be able to survive.  It can cost $20 for a pair of kids shoes,  for 2 months'. They grow, and coats and skidoo  suits, that's grossly expensive.  Crystal  ; And then on top of that there's  your rent, your.laundry, bus fare, toilet  paper, toothpaste, dish soap, they just  don't give you enough.  Melissa: Ani, your situtation differs in  that you don't even get your own cheque,  could you explain.  Ani:  I live with my aunt and MHR gives  $395 to look after me and Mikel. If I  were to live with my mother they would have  given her $180 for both of us. Because of  the fact that I am not old enough to  have my own welfare, to live on my own,  they don't think I can.  Ijelissa:  If you want to get out without, the  baby, can you afford to?  Crystal;  No. Since he's been born, I've  gone out twice on my own. Once my sister  babysat for free, and once my sister's  friend babysat for free. I can't afford  it! Not once has my worker said anything  about a homemaker or offered me anything.  If you don't ask for anything they don't  try to help you at all.  Ani:  Welfare and other people see you only  as a 16 year old. People with jobs and money  think, well when I was 16 I was just in  school. But I've gone through so much in  the last few vears with having a child.  Whenever people ask me how old I am and I  say I'm sixteen, people just cringe and  say, "Sixteen, you're so young to have a  baby." It's incredibly insane.  SECOND    TRI-MESTER  continued from page 9  The complexity of the experience cannot  be expressed in only a few words. I  felt very alone, very alone. I experienced rage, guilt, confusion, terror  and remorse.  Some of my emotions were  a direct result of my fears: the  guilt was a direct result of societal  pressures not to assume responsibility  for my own body and make a choice.  I had to re-learn for myself that the  choice I made was right. My pain was  and is real and I'm talking about it.  Dilation and curretage:. it's over.  I  feel relief,   emptiness and rage.  The  operation is over but the pain is not.  I had contractions for several days  after the operation.  With each chunk  of dead tissue and placenta I aborted,  I beeame more angry.  Why did it have to  take so long? Why did the tissue have  to be dead.  The spirit inside of me is  gone: I have never felt more alone.  W.  brought me roses and placed them by  the bed.  When I see him and touch him,  I feel hope.  The choice I made was based on several  factors including: economics, my  phsical condition, and my relationship  with my partner. We conceived in love,  but we had been together for only six  months.  I was aware the relationship  could change during the pregnancy  (which obviously wasn't planned) and I  had no desire to become a single  mother. As it turns out, our relationship has been strengthened by the  experience.  My choice made me feel stronger about  my belief in the pro choice movement.  I.believe I should be allowed to assume responsibility for my own body.  I also feel, more strongly than ever,  women should be allowed to get an  abortion on demand. The present procedure involving an application to a  board of strangers (usually men) who  then decide whether a woman may have  an abortion is archaic and patriarchal.  Melissa:  Do you see the same people, now  as you did before the birth of your son?  Crystal .:  No, my whole circle of friends  has changed. Now I'm more with single  mothers, other younger mothers. I have one  friend, she doesn't have a baby but she's  the same age as me. It's just like, what  do we talk about, we just don't have anything in common anymore.  I have one friend  from school and she's always like, "Let's  go out here, let's go out there." I have to  keep reminding her that I have a baby and  it's like, Oh she forgot, right? And I  can't forget.  Ani:  Sometimes I'd like to, almost. Just  for like a couple hours, "If I didn't have  a kid, I could...run to the grocery store.'  Ohmygod, wouldn't that be so exciting. Wanna  babysit for a couple of hours Melissa?  (laughs).  Melissa:  Why do you think more young mothers  are choosing to keep their kids?  Ani:  A few years ago it was more taboo.  Crystal ."• Nowadays people are beginning  to accept that a person's a person, whether they have a baby or not.  Ani: Also, there are a lot more options  for single mothers than there were ten  'years ago.  Melissa: Ani, how do you feel about the  issue of abortion?  Ani:  I feel everyone has the right to their  own choice. Personally, I didn't do it,  but it doesn't mean that maybe next time  I might not. Everyone has the right to do  what they need to do.  Crystal :   I think it's up to the woman. She  knows what she wants, she knows herself,  if she's ready or not. It's nobody else's  business, except hers. Unless she asks for  advice from someone, nobody should come  to her and say, "Well you've got to have  that baby and blah, blah, blah".  Melissa: Chrystal, what advice do you have  a younger woman who is pregnant and decides  to keep the child?  Crystal :   I would just say, have faith in  yourself. Respect yourself, your own feelings, your own wishes.  Don't let people  drag you down or upset you. Think for your-  be your own best friend.  self,  Ani: My advice is very similar to Chrystal's  people should get out and do more like go  to the programs at R.E.A.C.H. Clinic, try  and sign up for the foodbank try to go to  community centres. If you feel good about  yourself then you can feel good about your  baby, and a life. Right?  Melissa:  Do you feel that having this child  has been worth it to you?  Crystal :   It makes life worthwhile when  you wake up in the morning and you see this  little kid grinning at you.  «► <> <► if it it if I| if if if  Weeping Ventricle  Torchless and shadowy  Mommy's long hair lashes my salt-stained cheeks  Eyes blacken as she glares  Hands on sharp hips  She darts forth with a grabbing.hand  slicing her wrists in her frenzy to break her  plastic dildo  She reaches for my throat, poking deep into my  salivate spoutter  Out of the smother we tear clawing  We scream  sobbing  We hold  folding  by Crystal Bullitt The Female Offender  Examining Sexual Violence  This -is part two,  of a two part article  Part one appeared in Kinesis' Nov./85  by Kim Irving  On January 28, 1985, an organized police  raid on 11 daycare centres took place in  the Lower Mainland. Four of the daycares  were closed while police investigated allegations of sexual assault against children.  Edith Wilkins, owner and operator of one  of the closed daycares (Peter Pan) became  the focus of the public's attention for  several months. Daycare staff, parents  and social workers, however, rallied  in support of Wilkins, stating that she  was a target of a "trial by media" and a  MHR "witchhunt". On June 6/85, after extensive investigation, Wilkins' licence to  operate a daycare was re-instated. Sexual  assault allegations were unfounded.  When the raids occured, MHR was under immense pressure from community groups and  feminists to improve services for sexually  assaulted children. Reluctant to investigate abuse in the family home, MHR felt no  qualms about drawing attention to community services. Perhaps they sought to improve the myth that sexual assault of  children happens "out there" (and that  they were taking appropriate action).  [Sexual assault by men and women does occur  in daycares, however^ the majority of assaults occur within the family home; the  usual offender being the father, stepfather or another male relative.)  MHR's interest in establishing women as  sexual offenders reflects a general  societal bias. Evidence used to buttress  this point of view is the idea that women  are now considered equal, economically and  socially to men. Obviously equality, from  this perspective, means "to be like men".  Homophobia has also been used, to bar  lesbians from working with children. The  unrational fear is that lesbians will  sexually coerce the unsuspecting child/  Another contributing factor is societies  long-held mistrust and hatred of mothers.  Mothers are often depicted as either  seductive towards children (especially male)  or uncaring and cold, (see Kinesis  Nov.  85). Even when a father/male is accused of  raping a child, the mother is often found  at fault for either causing the assaults,  or for not stopping them.  Women, it seems, are blamed for (sexual)  violence, whether we are the offenders  or not. An example of this was the recent  Bohnekamp trial that concluded in Cranbrook, B.C. last month.  On January 19, 1984, thirteen-month old  Deidre Windsong Bohnekamp died of hemor-  rhging and choked on her vomit when her  mother's boyfriend Corey Grant Soper,  violently shook her.  Her parents, Corey and Linda, and their  roommate Soper (Corey's friend/Linda's  lover) were arrested. Deidre had been  beaten and anally raped. At the trial  neighbors, friends and relatives testified  to witnessing Soper violently abuse Deidre  in front of her parents. Deidre had also  been removed from the home in Aug.'83 by  MHR, only to be returned two months later.  The Bohnekamps were suppose to be "strictly  supervised" by a MHR family support worker. That November, Socred "restraint policies", axed the family support program,  leaving the Bohnekamps.on their own.  The outcome of the lengthy trial was an  aquittal for Corey Bohnekamps on manslaughter charges (he denied any knowledge  of the abuses), 6 years imprisonment for  Soper on manslaughter charges and 6 years  for Linda Bohnekamps for manslaughter.  Linda' surprising conviction was not for  committing assaults (there was no report  of her ever abusing Dierdre), not for  witnessing the abuses (neighbours, friends  and MHR also knew the situation and were  never charged with manslaughter), but for  not upholding her role as mother, as  determined by the male judge.  Judge Micealangelo told the public that his  decision to find Linda guilty of abetting  murder should be taken as a warning to all  parents.  What are the statistics on sexual violence  by women? By and large there are few sources  that look at incidences or examine the  reasons why a woman would rape.  In the 1985 Badgley report on sexual offenses against children, eight women are  reported as being convicted of sexual offenses (buggery, gross indecency and incest).  The reports' statistics states that 1.1%  of women are sexual offenders, compared to  the national average of 2.8%.  Of the eight "cases", five of the women were  complying to the wishes of a male accomplice  and drugs, alcohol and pornography were  frequently used. (Of the remaining three, on<  woman was determined to be "mentally ill",  and another was a "victim of incest" and  the third was in a "consensual affair" with  a 14 year old boy).  In discussing these cases the report examines the offenders lives from the perspective of how well they fit into the 'nuclear  family' image. Little recognition was  given that lower/working class women are  more likely to be convicted of sexual  abuse or that sexual assault occurs  in all classes. The report also suggests  that women who sexually assault are  "mentally ill". The label of "mental  illness" is not surprising, when we  consider that historically, women's sexuality has been viewed as uncontrollable,  immoral and evil.  Since women are not likely to receive  the same degree of benefit from sexual  assault as men do (power, status and  self-gratification), it is more difficult to analysis the reasons why women  are sexual offenders. It's clear,  however, that we can expect to see  harsher sentences since, traditionally,  women who committ "male crimes" are more  severely punished.  As the incest survivor movement has grown,  so has the writing.  Some feminists have  started the discuslon of female sexual  violence.  In Voices in the Night,  an anthology by  incest survivors, co-editor Toni McNaron  explains her incest by her mother: "For me,  she was my first lesbian lover." McNaron  wrote, "As a result of my incestuous, bond  with her I have often felt crazy living my  life as a lesbian". McNaron said she spent  two years working on her incest which gave  her the "tools to understand the complex  web of love and hate that formed around me  and my mother and which eventually covered  any potentially caring women."  McNaron's reference to her mother as her  "first lesbian loyer" confuses and minimizes the role of offenders, when we consider child-rape.  Though Voices In The Night  is one of the  first publications to examine and  validate woman-rape, and is valuable for  that reason alone, more care has to be  taken to separate our sexuality from  sexual violence.  Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 15  Yet, these distinctions are not always  clear. For example, in the fall '84 issue  of the American "lesbian erotica" magazine  On Our Backs,  a "fantasy" of woman-child-  rape was published.  The title "Sarah Jean Harper Came Last  Night" was a rip-off from the true incest  story titled "Mary Jane Cried Last Night".  'Mary Jane Harper Game Last Night" starts  with a ten year old girl in a hospital,  who becomes sexually aroused by her  nightgown. A female nurse restrains the  child while trying to give her a needle,  and this is presented as increasing the  childs arousal. Two other female nurses  bind the childs limbs to the bed, and  the first nurse then rapes the child.  Not untypically, and in keeping with  the myths about child-rape, the child in  this story is presented as wanting and  enjoying the assault.  The fact that this story presents such  violent and perdictable imagery as  rotica only indicates how blatant and  ingrained misogynist and pedophelic  attitudes are in our culture.  In the most recent issue of Lesbian  Ethics,  the emotional and sexual abuses  in lesbian therapy are examined. In a  previous issue, editor Jeanette Siveria,  had asked survivors to write their  personal experiences. Although Silveria  said she has heard many second-hand  reports about abuse, only 2 women responded with accounts of their experience .  Silveria believes that the intimacy of  therapy and the powerlessness and  humiliation felt by survivors of abuse  makes it difficult for them to speak  out. Silveria also comments that many  survivors within the lesbian community  know about abusive reports.  "We may talk about individual cases in  our communities" wrote Silveria "but the  victims remain isolated victims".  In the same issue, lesbian feminist  therapist Laura Brown proposes ethical  principles she believes would assist  therapists in taking responsibility for  their power and in making their power  visible and tangible.  Brown says "The damage done when a  therapist sexualizes the therapy relationship is similar to the damage done  by incest."  Brown suggested that sexual abuse by a  therapist could be "potentially fatal  to women". She also wonders whether  sexually abusive women therapists are  Brown is one of the first lesbian feminists to confront this issue and says  she has been accused of "gossiping, bad  mouthing "sisters" and "slander".  Brown comments "We have difficulty knowing ourselves capable of overt power;  we certainly did not envision ourselves  capable of the sorts of power abuse  we have observed in men".  Although Brown's work is essential, her  position as a therapist ensures that she  will receive some recognition for her  analysis. Where recognition needs to be  given is within the women's community  generally to survivors of woman-rape.  We must learn to hear survivors, discuss  our difficulties with the issue and confront those within the women's community  who are abusive.  Just as our analysis on male-rape has  come from the voices of survivors, so  must our analysis around woman-rape.  Its a complex and emotionally charged  issue for all women. 16 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  ARTS  Of late, we have been prone to laugh at  culture, defining it as the window dressing of an upper class elitism. Alternatively, we spell it with a K and fight to  make it a caricature of its so-called  elitist roots.  Its dictionary definitions range from "a  style of social and artistic expression  peculiar to a society or class" to "intellectual and artistic activity." Its  etymological roots tie the word to "cultivate" or "develop."  Following are a few instances of cultural  consumption which explore these theories..  The first annual B.C. Book Awards, which  took place at a restaurant on Granville  Island last month, epitomized an attempt  at cultivation that failed. This failure  may well be more of an accurate reflection  of the current state of book publishing  in B.C. than its organizers would wish.  Author, author  Women;s Voices: A Vancouver Mosaic announces  the selection of Nora D. Randall as playwright and Susan Astley and Suzie Payne as  co-directors for the Women?s Voices play,  June 5 to 14, 1986 at the Vancouver East  Cultural Centre.  Nora D. Randall is a member of the Acting  Up theatre collective. Her most recent  work involving oral histories includes  "Still Happening" to be published in Still  Sane  by Press Gang Publishers, 1985, and  "A Mother is Missing", Solidarity Times,  November 16, 1983. As a member of the editorial collective, Nora researched and  wrote many articles for Makara Magazine.  An example of her dramatic work is "Occupational Hazard" produced in 1979 by the  Dorothy Somerset Theatre. She has also  written for CBC Television arid Radio.  Nora will be working with the Women's  Voices research material over the next  few months. The script written during  that period will be workshopped by the  Women's Voices actors in March and April.  Susan Astley spent many years acting and  directing in the Tamahnous Theatre collective. She has been involved in many new  works, the most successful to date being  "Sex Tips for Modern Girls." She has  recently directed "Trip the Light Fantastic", New Play Center and "The Enemy  Within", Headlines Theatre. Sue has also  worked on several performances as a choreographer.  Suzie Payne is a founding member of Headlines Theatre and has worked extensively  in the development of new plays. Her most  recent directing achievements have been  "Talking Union", a carpenter's union play,  "Under the Gun - A Disarming Revue", 1984  Headlines Theatre, and "Twelfth Night',  1985 Arts Club Theatre (assistant director)  These three professionals will write and  direct a play based on seventy five interviews and extensive archival research  about women's lives in Vancouver in the  past one hundred years. The play will  discuss the role and experience of women  of many ethnic groups in Vancouver's  history.  For more information, please call the West  Coast Women and Words Society at 872-8014.  The Social Credit government, represented  at the awards by Jim Chabot, does not  agree with the sentiments in the books  which won the awards - books about aboriginal rights and the land. While the Social Credit government provides a very  small amount of funding to B.C. publishers through lottery money, they have recently pulled out of funding books of a  political or social history bent.  If we want publishing to reflect our cultural heritage, we need spokespeople at  these kinds of events who are not there  because they provide the occasional financial carrot.  As an alternative to all of this, an event  on Commercial Drive at Octopus Books one  Saturday night in November. I will not pretend to be a disinterested spectator in  this next foray into cultural literacy -  a launching of a book of poetry by Helen  Potrebenko, entitled Walking Slow  and  published by myself.  Helen talked at some length about poetry  and culture. She described what people  think poetry, is and whether or not you can  write it or understand it without six years  of university under your belt (the question  was rhetorical). She talked about accessible poetry and definitions of culture  which encompass a multicultural society.  She caught at a style of social and artistic expression which we own ourselves - an  expression missing at the B.C. Book Awards.  In defining cuture, the audience plays a  considerable role and this brings other  kinds of culture into the discussion aside  from the written word.  I will attempt in this column to avoid  monopolizing its content with books alone.  I don't believe that literature is any  more than one small reflection of any  culture and it is as corruptible as anything else. Whether we read something be-  gcause it sells or sell something because  we want it to be read depends on what we  think is important in the development of  a cultural ideology. Do we as an audience  create culture at these levels then,.and  is what we create more relevant if it is  more immediate?  Being in an audience at a concert takes  a great deal more active concentrated  effort in terms of communication with  others who are responding to it than  reading a book at home. Listening to  Julian Bream is a different kind of communication with an audience and therefore  with our cultural peers, than watching  Jane Siberry. Rita MacNeil presents us wii  a culture alien to most of our experiences,  but nonetheless familiar and recognizable.  So, as an audience, we play an integral  role in creating culture in our response  to it. As producers, directors, writers,  publishers, artists, we feed a definition  of culture that persists in spite of what  we are spoon-fed as acceptable morms. And  as feminists, we are active participants  in cultivating our own .particular understanding of our cultural needs. It may  take a few more years and some hindsight -  as well as foresight to see where this is  taking us.  I've forgotten about biases in all this.  That fact in itself may be telling. A  friend was horrified at the title of the  column and demanded to know why I was  not categorically calling it Cultural  Truths. The reason (or rationalization)  for that will have to wait until the next  column.  Motherlode  Acoustic group sounds nice  Motherlode is a four-woman acoustic  group whose sound is very, very nice.  It can be moving, uplifting and pleasant to listen to, but it's a little  too much after a while, so that their  greatest strength is also their greatest weakness.  Motherlode's members, Janet Peterson,  Nan Collie, Kathleen Follett and  Marie Eaton, both in their November  concert at Women in Focus and in conversation are friendly, happy and loving. They laugh a lot and have obviously found a style and working partners  that satisfy them.  They describe their meeting at the  Puget Sound guitar workshop five years  ago as instant harmony. Despite constant  commuting (Janet and Marie live in  Bellingham and Nan and Kathleen live in  Portland, Oregon) , they found they "just  couldn't stay away from each other".  Their training, as classical musicians,  shows through the folksy style in their  facility with vocal harmonies and their  ease with a variety of instruments.  They all play guitar and bass, with  a variety of instruments. They all  play guitar and bass, with various  members also playing mandolin, cello,  french horn, flute, harmonica and  talking drum. I think the classical  training may provide a clue to the  overwhelming prettiness of sound, as  well. I have the impression that  they couldn't create dissonant  music if they wanted to.  In subject matter they address a variety of issues, including the arms  race, the Reagan administration, .  refugees, and the socialization of  children. They sing honestly and  openly about personal relationships,  individual growth, and love. Many of  the songs are quite funny, presenting  problematic situations (sugar-addiction, macho government, keeping  warm in winter) in a light-hearted,  humourous way. They woo the audience  with laughs and sweet, lush  sounds and you can't help but love  However, the mush outweighs everything else, and though I like most  of the songs individually, the  cumulative effect of too many  corny lyrics in their oh-so-lovely  style was to leave me somewhat bored  by the end of the evening.  One of the problems is that, rhythmically, the sound derives very  little from black and latin influences, coming across as very white.  I hadn't realized before how much I  depend on Afro-Latin rhythms to provide a sense of movement and tension, but when they did show a bit  of latin influence on a couple of  songs (Pie Shop and Freedom) it was  like a breath of fresh air.  Also, I question the assumptions in  Banish the Night which seem to equate  light with good and dark with bad:  Song fills up the soul  Soul opens the heart  The heart welcomes the light  Banish the night with song.  Most of the capacity crowd seemed  to lap up the whole show, with enthusiastic applause and calls for  more. I found myself wondering why I  couldn't be as happy as everyone  else. Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 1?  ARTS  Under the Skin: Woman Centered Tragedy  by Patty Gibson  If you didn't manage to catch the premiere  production of Betty Lambert's Under the  Skin,   chances are you didn't know it was  happening. The play received almost no promotion, was engaged for a short five-day  run, opened after a twelve-day rehearsal,  and managed to convey the impression  throughout, that somewhere, a full commitment to the play's content was missing.  Drafted during the last year of Lambert's  life, Under the Skin  tells the story of a  woman's nightmare come to life, when her  only daughter disappears just one week  before her thirteenth birthday. Portrayed  by Alana Shields, Maggie is the frantic  mother who feels the bottom drop out of  her otherwise safe and secure middle-  class world as she tries to come to grips  with the likelihood of Emma's death in  spite of believing she can hear the child  calling out to her in the night.  Maggie's" primary support comes from  neighbours John and Renee Gifford (played  by Dwight McFee and Wendy Van Riesen) in  whose kitchen the entire play is situated.  Spanning a six-month period, the audience  .is invited to examine the tangled web of  disturbing and contradictory dynamics  lurking beneath the surface of the characters' lives and relationships with one  another.  Under the Skin  is a complicated play, difficult to digest, and in all fairness to  Director Pam Hawthorn, difficult to stage.  Hardly an evening of light theatrical entertainment, this is a full-blown woman-  centred tragedy, with all the taboos and  ' risk-taking Lambert has come to be known  for. The play is nothing less than a  critical and passionate appeal for justice  : in a world where patriarchal myth, religion and philosophy combine to brand woman  as evil.  From the opening scene on we are told  time and again by both John and Renee that  Emma is "just off with some guy", that she  invited sexual attention from men, that  "she was always rubbing up against John in  the workshop", and that Maggie is somehow  responsible for anything that may have happened to her daughter simply because she  was frank and open about the girl's maturing sexuality. Sound familiar?  At the same time we are increasingly made  aware of John's deep and disturbing hatred  for women, his unbridled contempt for his  wife Renee, and.his hostility for the in-  dependant and self-sufficient Maggie. John  is a batterer whose bullying behaviour manages to' keep both women, despite their differing positions, under his thumb. And  ultimately, although this can twig at any  point in the drama, John is the man responsible for the kidnapping and captivity of  Maggie's daughter.  Although the play is partially carried  along by Emma's disappearance, the question  of "who dunn it?" is minor. What we're asked  to consider here is not who, but why? Why  indeed does an adult male capture and sexually violate a pre-pubescent girl? Is  Renee complicit in the act and if she is,  in what way? Is there such a thing as  intuitive or subconscious knowledge that  tells truths our rational or conscious  selves cannot cope with? What kind of a  society closes its collective mind to the  myriad of violent crimes against women  and children?  One of the most powerful monologues delivered in this play comes from Maggie at the  point where she believes she has heard  Emma calling to her in the middle of the  night.  Life goes on and on and on.  And it has no business going  on.  I could hear her crying  out for me.  Sometimes I think  my ears are just dead to the  sounds in the air.  That the  air,  the real air,  is alive  with screams of pain and terror.  The Abbatoir across the inlet.  The  screams, of dying fish on hooks. All  the suffering of the forest. And  the deep,  deep sea. And that what  I do,  what we all do,  is learn to  close our ears to the real noise of  the night. "  Inspired by a situation in Port Moody twelve  years ago involving the six month captivity  of a young girl by a next door neighbour,  Under the Skin  uses the incident to explore  social perceptions of rape, wife-battering,  and child sexual abuse. Multi-layered and  cleverly crafted, Lambert's drama reveals  two things on this subject: rape is not a  result of sexual desire, but an act of revenge against women; and violence against women by individual men is not is-  lated. Indeed, it is supported by an entire male tradition. In the final scene of  the play John says this to Renee:  You don't understand these things.  A man goes through many stages in  his life...  Have you read "Stages  in Life's Way" by Kierkegaard? Did  you realize that if God exists,  Renee,  it is our duty to deny him?  Have you read Heidegger? Have you  read Jaspers?...You know Dostoyevsky  once said only if you could rape a  10-year old girl could you say you  were truly free. Free of all morality... Even Moses said you should  rape the young girls... Moses understood that's what women really want.  Despite the strength of the script however,  the New Play Centre's premiere staging the  first week of November at the Waterfront  Theatre was faulty and suffered from poor  casting, poor direction, and managed, at  many critical junctures, to restrain the  play's content. Choices made regarding  how to play the female characters ended up  making the friendship between Maggie and  Renee difficult to believe. By playing John  more as a psychotic and less as an abuser,  the force of male -violence was also held  in check.  Lambert's inclusion of an on-stage battering  scene was all but destroyed through inappropriate gesture. In addition, the play  was- frustratingly anchored in a six-month  time frame with a set that never changed.  Given that the entire play's movement is  carried along by build-up of suspense, the  •surfacing of perceptions, and changes in  all three characters, the fact that the  stage itself is so constricted again works  against the actual content.  Nonetheless, the play is powerful, timely,  and uncompromising in its effort to bring  to the stage a tragedy that is central to  women's lives. There are rumours that it  will be picked up again in B.C. and perhaps  Toronto next year. If so, let's hope for  a more daring performance.  Adoption from page 4  history, her nationality, and a profile  of her talents, interests and characteristics.  When the consent is signed,  guardianship of the child is transferred  to the State.  A six month probationary period follows  the signing of the consent. If the birth  mother changes her mind during this period  and wishes to have her child returned to  her, she must prove in Court that the  revocation of consent is in the best interests of the child. The burden of proof  in this matter lies with the birth mother.  After the six-month probationary period,  the adoption is finalized. All records  that identify the birth parents are sealed,  and the adoptee is issued an ammended  birth certificate.  In B.C., progress towards bridging the  gulf between adoptees and their birth  parents has come mainly from groups like  Parent Finders and the Canadian Adoptees  Reform Association. They have fought for  the rights and interests of adults who were  adopted as children. They have pressed for  open records, including access to the or  iginal gained from the birth mother.' As  a result of their efforts, both adoptees  and birth parents can apply to the Ministry of Human Resources for non-identifying  background, information, but the information provided is not always complete.  The future of the adoption reform movement appears promising. In July, 1985,  the Alberta government established an  information registry to connect adult  adoptees and birth parents when both  "parties .register. On May 14th, 1985, M.L.A.  Rosemary Brown introduced a private member's bill recommending that B.C. establish a provincial registry. As birth  parents and adoptees voice their common concerns, a process of adoption  based on a continuing information exchange  could become a viable option for women in  B.C.  . Diane Johnson, a psychology student at the  University of Victoria,  is investigating  the concerns of birth parents in B.C.  Birth parents are invited to participate  by obtaining questionnaires from the Univ-  sity of Victoria or Simon FrajSer University,  through the offices of the B.C.  Public Interest Research Group.  Periodicals in Review, a column on feminist periodicals,  will be returning to Kinesis with our February issue.  Periodicals in Review will be written by Wendy Frost and  Michele Valiquette and will appear every two months.  . the promise! You will  discover your perfect  wiseness and beauty!  • INDIVIDUAL COUNSELLING  • RELATIONSHIP COUNSELLING  LESBIAN, GAY OR HETEROSEXUAL  • PROSPERITY BALANCING  • SEMINAR AND WORKSHOP DESIGN  AND FACILITATION  • PAST LIFE PATTERNS AND BLOCKS  • MEDIATION  Call Linda Galloway, a highly skilled psychotherapist and counsellor, for gentle movement  through your conflict to loving self-acceptance.  Linda has been facilitating personal growth for  thirteen years and can be contacted for  discussion and further information by phoning  251-6425, or writing.. .ORACLES Interactional  Development Box 65537, Station F, Vancouver,  B.C. V5N 5K5 18 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  ARTS  1811 Dictionary:  Language to put women down  by Jill Pollack  Someone, knowing my penchant for old  words, gave me a copy of the 1811 Dictionary of the Vulgar Tongue,   first published in 1788 in London, England, the  book is subtitle, A Dictionary of Buckish Slang,   University Wit and Pickpocket  Eloquence.  The main thing that I learned from reading this dictionary is the way in which  women were portrayed and how certain  terms have either lost their original  meaning or retained some sense of it.  But all in all, it points out the subtle (and not-so-subtle) power of language .  General terms to describe women:  Perhaps because of the large numbers of  women who could not read (were not taught/  allowed to read), it can be assumed that  this book was meant for men and written  by men. I could not find one definition  of a woman or her lifestyle that did not  have a derogatory component.  General terms to describe prostitutes:  Left-handed wife Short-heeled wench  Covent Garden nun        Unfortunate woman  Curtezan Merry Arse Christian  Fire ship A piece  Bed-maker Custom-house goods  Sad cattle  One of my cousins  1811  DICTIONARY  VULGARTM TONGUE.  Bawdy baskets  Mopsey  Doxies  Walking morts  Flat cock  Dishclout  Fusty loggs  Hen  Dog's wife or lady  Doggess  Doll  Puppy's mama  General terms to describe breasts:  Apple Dumplin Shop  To sport blubber  Kettle drums  Dairy  Cat-heads  Diddeys  Some terms were not meant to be humourous  but most make me sad, often angry. I  think it is important that consideration  is given to how we say what we say.  The dictionary points out that women were  only identified by their sexual relationship to men. The definitions are male-  defined or animal defined. They exhibit  a complete lack of respect, dignity or  caring towards women. According to this  book and in Marilyn French's words, "All  women are cunt".  General terms to describe female genitalia:  Mother of all Saints       Dumb glutton  Man trap Madge  Fruitful vine Tuzzy-muzzy  Old hat Commodity  Ware  It is important to assess the way in  which language has been used and how it  must have (still does) affect women. The  same attitude that gave validity to these  words and put them into common usage in  1811 is still prevalent. It is perhaps  more obscured, but nonetheless present.  One of the primary ways to communicate  is through oral and written language. It  forms the ideology of communication and  ,reinforces sense of self at the same time  as it reflects social mores. Of the myriad  things that have determined the status of  women in society, words have been and still  are a major factor.  .This dictionary provides insight into the  psychological battering that women received  on a daily basis, in 19th! century England.  It is profound that no terms were included  in the dictionary which present women in  a positive light. Though we may never  again be defined as a Scotch Warming Pan  who is a Toad Eater and then Cold Meat...  "One picture is worth a thousand 'vulgar' words."  Ape Leader: An old maid; their punishment after death,  for neglecting to increase and multiply, will  be, it is said, leading apes in hell.  Ankle: A girl who is with child, is said to have sprained  her ankle.  Heavy Baggage: women and children. Also a familiar  epithet for a woman; as, cunning baggage,  wanton baggage.  Toad Eater: A poor female relation.  Trot: A decrepit old woman.  Warming-Pan: A female bedfellow.  Cold Meat: A dead wife is the best cold meat in a man's  house.  Evil: A wife.  Rib: A wife.  Scab: A worthless woman.  Poisoned; Big with child: that wench is poisoned, see how  her belly is swelled.  Lawful Blanket: A wife.  Hussy: An abbreviation of housewife.      «i*pw,:jR- "*J  Horse Godmother: A large masculine woman, a  gentlemanlike kind of a lady.  Gunpowder: An old woman.  Good woman: A non-descript, represented on a famous  sign in St. Giles's, in the form of a common  woman, but without a head.  Rabbit Catcher: A midwife.  Reagan from page 8  show anything they wish to  publish for the rest of their  lives to the government. The  government says this limitation applies to only a handful of employees. In fact it  applies to 128,000 officials.  A Canadian film about nuclear  war, If You Love This Planet,  is deemed political propaganda. The names of any organization or individual to  whom the film is distributed  must be filed with the government .  The widow of Salvador  Allende is denied a visa and  is unable to visit the U.S.  to speak with church groups.  The government attempts to  ban any books that might  worry people about nuclear  terrorism.  The Department of  Energy's proposed regulations,  later modified as a result  of criticism, stated that  any library that lets "unclassified controlled nuclear  information" fall into unauthorized hands could be  fined up to $100,000.  On May 25 Reagan fires 3  members of the six-person  Civil Rights Commission for  daring to monitor non-  enforcement of civil rights.  On October 19 the President  has a press conference and  announces "You can't let your  people know (what the government is doing) without  letting those in opposition  know." Congress votes against  a presidential initiative to  enforce lifetime censorship  of officials.  October 25: Grenada! The press  is banned at gunpoint.  1984: In January the government  and the U.S. Court of Appeals  have a spat about censorship.  Government loses. Next the  government threatens Professor  Jeffrey Richelson an hour before he is to deliver a  technical paper on arms control to an academic audience  using the 1917 Espionage Act  for muscle.  The Omnibus Defense Authorization Act of 1984 gives the  Pentagon authority to withhold from public disclosure  any  technical data with  military or space application  that could not be released to  a foreigner without obtaining  an export licence. On October  1 Samuel Morison, a civilian  navy official, is arrested for  selling satellite photographs  to the prestigious Jane's  Fighting Ships  military magazine. The photos, already  widely publicized, are deemed  classified.  Reagan is re-elected.  The Defence Department orders  the Pentagon not to- let out  any information about contractor performance, fraud,  or waste. Defense spending  escalates.  The Federal Communications  Commission rules that any  agency of the government has  the right to file a complaint  against a. broadcaster if it  feels it has been unfairly used  on the airwaves. The ruling  goes unchallenged. On December 17, the press is informed  that the next space shuttle  flight will be treated as a  military secret.  The Defense Department announces that even speculation about  the flight is forbidden and  that any offenders will be  punished with a full scale  investigation. When the Washington Post publishes a story  on the shuttle, using already  available information, the  Secretary of Defense denounces the paper stating that it  has given "aid and comfort  to the enemy", the precise  wording of the constitutional definition of treason.  1985: By now little or no  information is available on  which average citizens can  use to judge the American  . government practices. The  press is too frightened to  write about what frightens  it.  In March a federal judge in  Baltimore, ruling on a motion  in the Morrison case, says the  the 1917 Espionage Act applies  to unauthorized disclosures  of classified information.  The American security establishment currently holds that  there are a half billion classified documents they must  conceal. Morrison faces up  to 40 years in prison for  publishing three already  published pictures in a well  known magazine.  Then comes Executive Order  12498 which gives the White  House power to review, control,  approve, or suppress any agency activity that "may influence, anticipate, or could  lead to the commencement of  rule making at a later date."  Under the order the President  has the unprecedented power to  bar any executive agency, including Congress, from  studying anything the White  House prefers to leave unstudied. No official information that might allow  the American people to question the wisdom of the President may be collected without the President's permission, which will be given or  withheld in secret. Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 19  Looking  back on  the women's  music  industry  by Connie Smith  Throughout October and November,  Langara  Community College presented a series of  lectures on "Women in Technology",  under,  the direction of Cindy Nagel.  The following  is part one of a lecture I gave on November  7,  1985.  It was called "The Women's Music  Industry - A Decade of  Contrary to anything you may have been told,  women have always been involved in music.  In the past, women composed classical  music. They formed all-women choirs and  racially integrated jazz bands. They played boogie piano and rock and roll guitar.  They directed all-male bands and orchestras.  Contrary to what you may have heard on the  radio, women have always recorded music.  The first blues record ever made featured  a woman's voice. Her name was Mamie -Smith.  The year was 1920.  Somewhere out there - in locked vaults, in  used record stores, in the basements of  recording studios - are thousands and thousands of 78?s, 45's and LP's recorded by  women. And as the years go by, more and  more of these records are being found,    £  documented and re-released. In New York   J  City, Rosetta Reitz, founder and keeper   I  of Rosetta Records, has single-handedly   Q  unearthed an entire history of jazz and   jg  blues women. Women who recorded hundreds  f  of 78's during their careers. Women whose "S  records played on the juke boxes and sold  out in the record stores. Women whose  lives have been left out of written history and whose music has been lost, until  now.  The question is no longer, why didn't women  play jazz, blues, country, folk, rock,  R & B, or classical, because now we know  of their existance. The question is, why  can't we buy their records? Why can't we  read about them in the books? Why weren't  we ever told?  Women have always written lyrics which  spoke honestly about their lives, particularly the country women whose ability to  say things in a very direct manner was  often seen as unsophisticated or corny.  Women have always written songs about sex.  Not bad sex, or -lonely sex, or no sex, but  about good sex. Sexual demands. If you can't  do it,  I'll find another sweet papa who  can.   That sort of thing. And there have  always been women who loved other women and  who sang about this life in public and on  record. Some of our earliest legends  shared their hearts with women at one time  or another and lived to tell the tale. Ma  Rainey:  They say I do it  Ain 't nobody caught me  Sure got to prove it on me.  There have also been women who defied  every category in their performance and in  their life style. Some of these women were  punished publically their entire lives for  this difference. Janis Joplin was punished  until she died.  There have been female studio musicians.  Bass player Carol Kaye has spent years in  recording sessions, her most well-known  clients being the Beach Boys and Joe Cocker.  There have also been women who worked as  recording engineers, such as Leslie Ann  Jones, a white woman who apprentised in the  rhythm and blues studios of Los Angeles  and San Francisco. By accident she came  upon the women's music industry.  Women have worked"in studios arranging  material, writing lead sheets, and  composing. Jazz pianist and composer  Mary Watkins had a 20 year career as an  arranger before releasing her first  album in 1978 with the all-woman's  recording company, Olivia Records.  Women have also produced their own  albums. Aretha Franklin. Valerie  Simpson. Some women have had their  record labels and recording companies. Mary Lou Williams. Betty  Carter. Genya Ravan.  | During what is usually referred  to as the Girl Group period, 1958-  1964, young women were writing  and producing their own songs.  They weren't hired as writers  and producers, so they weren't  credit for their work,  but it was often their natur-  £k al instinct for how a song  ^should be sung that determin-  sd how the record was produced. Also during this  period, some of the leading songwriters were young  women. Ellie Greenwich.  .Carol King. Cynthia Weill  *E&  Rita MacNeil  8W©§ ^^W^S-W  ■1rifoyv»ft  Throughout history there have always been  women of conscience who appeared at benefits, wrote music in support of a political  cause or deeply held belief, and who lead  revolutions with their music.  All these women had a lot in common. They  produced an incredible body of work. They  lived their lives in music in one way or  another despite the incredible prejudice  they faced in their lifetime. And they did  all this in total isolation from one  another.  During those early days of  the movement, women talked  to each other. They compared  stories. They spilied their guts.  They told the truth. Most  women I know, including  myself, joined conciousness-  raising groups. We got very  mad. And we began to organize.  Well, something happened in the late 60's  and early 70's that changed everything.  And hopefully it will continue to do irreparable damage. It was called the Women's  Liberation Movement.  During those early days of the movement,  women talked to each other. They compared  stories. They spilled their guts. They told  the truth. Most women I know, including  myself, joined consciousness-raising groups,  We got very mad. And we began to organize.  Women organized in every lifestyle:  housewives, single mothers, single women,  divorced women, lesbians. Women came out  by the thousands. Women organized in every  discipline: waitresses, nurses, doctors,  stewardesses, lawyers, clerical workers.  Musicians.  What happened next was truly phenomenal.  Between 1972 and 1975, women all over North  America and in Europe simultaneously and  independent of one other, built what is  now known as the women's music industry.  At first there wasn't a name for it. And  it sprung from a naive desire to set up  an alternative system for women musicians.  I say naive, because many of the women  who got involved in this work say that  had they known what the work was actually  going to entail, they might have been too 20 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  frightened to do it. But they were too  excited and too angry to be scared.  In 1972, three significant things happened.  In Toronto, Rita MacNeil came home from her  first women's liberation meeting and wrote  her song, The Need for Restoration. She  had been unable to articulate her feelings  at the meeting that night, but she found  her voice in song.  In the eastern United States, a woman  named Maxine Feldman produced her own  45 rpm. The songs were Angry Atthis  and  Bar One.   She wrote and sang about her  life as a lesbian. And in Chino, California,  the first lesbian concert was held inside  the walls of the California Institute for  Women. A prison. The concert was a success  and the women were invited back.  It was beginning.  In January, 1973, Rounder Records, a company known for its excellent folk recordings, released a record by two new feminist  groups, The Chicago Women's Liberation  Rock Band and The New Haven Women's Liberation Rock Band. This was the very first  recorded album of consciously feminist  music. It was called Mountain Moving Day.  Legend has it that it was  at this festival that the term  "women's music" was first  used. The woman credited with  coining the phrase was Margie  Adams, a composer who came  to Sacramento looking for  someone to perform her songs.  She decided at the festival  to do it herself.  Eleven days prior to the release of this  album, another group of women living in  Washington, D.C. sat around their living  room trying to decide what kind of feminist  business they could start. Two months later,  musician Cris Williamson suggested they  start an all-women's recording company..  Meg Christian, who was also a musician,  and her friend Ginny Berson said they'd  think about it.  In May, 1973, feminist writer and. activist  Kate Millet organized the Sacramento  Women's Music Festival. This may have been  Cris Williamson  the first of its kind. Legend has it that  it was at this festival that the term  "women's music" was. first used. The woman  credited with coining the phrase was  Margie Adam, a composer who came to Sacramento looking for someone to perform her  songs. She decided at the festival to do  it herself.  At the time, I'm certain it would have  been hard for her to imagine that in  1980, a tape of her concert On the Road  for Women's Rights  would be sealed inside  a time capsule as part of Boston's 350th  birthday celebration. Or that her song  We Shall Go Forth  would be inducted into  the Political History Division at the  Smithsonian Institute. The effects of  this music when people have the courage  to listen to it are devastating.  Two weeks after the festival, a singer and  actress named Holly Near returned home  to northern California from an extensive  anti-war campaign. She had been performing  with Jane Fonda and Donald Sutherland in  Jane's anti-Vietnam road show Free the  Army.   Their audience had been American  soldiers overseas. Holly was so sure of  the ability of music to initiate change,  she founded her own recording company,  Redwood Records. Her first album, Hang in  There,  a collection of anti-war songs was  out in less than three months.  Meanwhile back on the east coast, Meg  Christian and Ginny Berson took Cris  Williamson's idea to heart and founded  Olivia Records. It was the first all-  women's recording company in the world.  They didn't have a product and they weren't  sure what they were doing, but they had  a record company.  In November, 1973, in New York state,  Alix Dobkin, Patches Attom and Kay Gardner  made another revolutionary move. They  produced the very first album recorded  with an all-women cres. All women and all  lesbians. The album was called Lavender  Jane Loves Women.  On the jacket, Alix  wrote Long Live Dyke Nation.  Power to.  the Women.  The very next day, November 16, in Urbana,  Illinois, a group of women held a women's  folk festival in response to a local folk  festival that had not included one woman.  This festival became the precursor to the  first National Women's Music Festival,  now in its's 12th year. It is also at  this national women's music festival that  the annual women's music industry conference is held.  In 1974, Holly Near released A Live Album,  dedicated to Ronnie Gilbert of the Weavers.  Her music was now completely centered  on women's lives. That same year, Olivia  Records released a 45 rpm with Meg Christian on one side and Cris Williamson on  the other. They also released Meg's  first album I Know You Know.  This record  contained the now famous Ode to a Gym  Teacher,   and an open lesbian Valentine's  Day song.  Willie Tyson released Full Count for the  newly formed Lima Beans Records, and in  New York City, Maxine Feldman (the woman  who had recorded Angry Atthis two years  earlier) performed on stage with Yoko Ono  and the all-woman rock band ISIS, at  rt called "Women for Women".  KATHARINE P. YOUNG • BARRISTER & SOLICITOR  • Accident & Insurance Claims  • Personal & Insurance Claims  • Employment & Labour Law  CONTINGENCY FEES AVAILABLE  FREE INITIAL CONSULTATION  50O2695 GRANVILLE ST., VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 2H4 (604) 7344777  In 1975, the International League of  Women Composers was founded with membership  in 14 countries. Olivia Records released  Cris Williamson's album The Changer and.  the Changed,  which is still the biggest  selling album of women's music, and Wise  Woman Enterprises, another women's recording company, began operations.  Rita MacNeil released Born a Woman,   the  first album of women's music recorded in  Canada, and a shy young woman from Richmond, B.C. sang publically for the first  time. Ten years later, Ferron would share  the stage with Laura Nyro, Peter, Paul  and Mary, Joan Baez, Judy Collins and  Bob Dylan.  Nineteen-seventy-five was also the first  year of the Michigan Women's Music Festival, now referred to as "Michigan" by  women familiar with its legacy. Michigan  is now the largest festival of its kind,  growing in numbers of two to three thousand every year. Last summer was its 10th  anniversary, and the event was recorded  on Redwood Records for release next year.  Leslie Ann Jones was the engineer.  This is a chronology of the first four  years in North America jof a movement  which may someday alter the sound of music.  If not the sound, it will at least change  the lyrics. It has already changed our  expectations. It has certainly changed our  lives.  You are invited to:  HEN NITE  Women's Jam  Session  Railway Club  579 Dunsmuir  Tuesday Dec 17  Starting at 9:30  m.cTerri-Lynn Ryan  guest band: ViciOUS Rumour  Please bring your  own instruments. A little  night reading  by Cy-Thea Sand  Mojo Hand,  An Orphic Tale.  By J.J. Phillips.  180 pages. Berkeley, CA: City Miner Books,  1985.  novel begins and ends with Anna's observations. Anna, Elizabeth and Clair are three  diverse characters: one a university  professor, another a passionate, beautiful  mother of many children and the third an  artist whose mental breakdowns have made  her overly-controlled and cautious. As  the title suggests, cold and long winter  months precipitate significant upheavals  in the women's lives. Each woman becomes  more emotionally independent by taking  courageous risks and by challenging herself to go the limit despite potential  or real societal disapproval.  Winter Passage  is a comforting novel in  many ways. It lends coherence and logic  to an otherwise chaotic world. McDaniel's  language is precise and words are well-  placed and chosen. However, the novel's  coherence feels contrived at times and the  reader is sometimes told too much. Nuances  and gestures are explained rather than  suggested, which allows a hint of pedan-  ticism to mar an otherwise fine first  novel.  Winter Passage.  By Judith McDaniel. 151  pages. San Francisco: Spinsters Ink, 1984.  The first and only time that I reviewed  just one story (not a collection of them)  was in Issue # 5 of The Radical Reviewer.  The potency of Judith McDaniel's story of  a young woman off to the country for peace  and quiet who is gang raped and brutalized,  prompted my comments. As in her story,  Present Danger (Sinister Wisdom 17),  Winter  Passage  is set in the country. But this  time a woman's transcendence occurs not  in spite of male violence but in harmony  with and as a result of the power of  friendship, sexuality and the natural  world.  Actually it is the world of three different  women we are asked to enter, although the  Every Move You Make.  By Alison Fell.  283 pages. London: Virago Press. 1984.  This haunting novel of a young Black woman's  search for identity was originally published  in 1966 and has been out of print. Phillips'  language is erotic and evocative in this  unusual exploration of one woman's quest  for wholeness.  Mojo Hand  is set in Raleigh, North Carolina  where Eunice Prideaux has travelled to  find her Orpheus in a guitar-thumbing,  burnt-out singer by the name of Blacksnake  Brown. When Eunice first hears Blacksnake's  voice she describes it as "slowly rough  and delicately brutal, like stones being  rattled in a can of ribbon cane syrup."  Those words also describe the overall  ambiance of this novel, which in its depressing and depressed determination reminded  me of the French Canadian novel,  Lot's Wife,   by Monique Bosco.  Both novels chronicle a woman's descent  into despair and confusion in reaction to  complex relationships with men. Mojo Hand  concerns a woman's obsession with a man  who represents both the creative possibility of a race (he is a Blues guitarist)  and the destruction inherent in self-  indulgence and despair. Eunice Prideaux  embraces Blacksnake's degradation and  despair while negating her own talent and  potential. Her motivation in choosing this  is- never made clear, which I think is the  workrs major flaw. The essential hopelessness of the novel made reading it feel like  struggling to consciousness after a parti-.  cularly horrific dream.  Henry Miller wrote to J.J. Philips in 1967  praising the language of Mojo Hand.   This  letter is reproduced on the inside front  and back covers. I agree that the book's  exquisite language is a major achievement. Perhaps because of such good writing  I find reading of yet another woman's descent into passivity and powerlessness most  painful and disquieting.  This is a wonderfully rich novel of the  early seventies in Britain when protest  and passion defined each day for radical,  progressive lefties and feminists. Reading  it I was reminded of Marge Piercy's work,  especially Vida.  Alison Fell tells the story of June Guthrie,  who is Scottish, working-class and bound  to integrate her political and personal  selves into a meaningful and creative  whole. June worries that without such an  integration - a focus, in essence - she  will "drop like a stone, ...fall right  through the bottom of everything." June's  sensitivity often frightens and weakens  her and there is a wonderful line in the  novel which will speak powerfully to anyone  who has paced in anguish while those  around them slept in peace: "For in  that stillness of time and leaf and air,  it was I who must thrash and churn and  move the wheels of the night, to journey  to the other side. No such courage was  demanded of him, who could still slip  through the hours like an eel across a  pond."  Alison Fell was a member of the Spare Rib  collective and she recreates feminist  magazine work as a focal point in June's  life. The novel dares to approach the  messy, emotional life of women behind  political placards and slogans. The  friendship between June and her best  friend Vi charge the novel with a sincere  honesty and intensity, and the overall  result is solid and satisfying fiction.  The Street.   By Ann Petry. 270 pages. New  York: Pyramid Books. 1961.  Happiness is finding an out-of-print book  in a second-hand bookstore. In good condition and smelling of dust and abundant  use, The Street  was waiting for me in  Arbutus Books on MacDonald and Fourth  Avenue. The other good news is that Petry's  classic is being reprinted by Virago  Books in January 1986, with an introduction by novelist Rosa Guy. The Street  is  a required text in Pam Annas' course on  working-class literature (University of  Massachusetts/Boston). Critic Barbara  Christian states in Black Women Novelists:  The Development of a Tradition,  1892-1976,  that The Street,   "is one of the first  novels, if not the first, in which  a woman novelist presents a struggling,  urban black mother attempting to  create a better life for herself."  Lutie Johnson is a single mother  fighting for survival on a Harlem  street, which itself assumes major  character status in this protest  novel. It entraps and destroys its  victims who have nowhere else to go.  The idea of a street as a character is  Kinesis Dec/ Jan 1985-6 21  also used by Paule Marshall in her 1983  novel Praisesong For The Widow.  Marshall's characters escape, but  Lutie Johnson and her son Bub do not.  Petry's characters - Lutie, tough and determined to make it, her son Bub who fears  being left alone but keeps his terror to  himself, Lutie's vampirish landlord and Boots  Smith., a streetwise mover who offers to give  Lutie a chance at show business - are all  detailed portraits. When she describes the  horrific conditions in Harlem, Ann Petry's  language is effective and powerful. The work  as a whole, however, is marred by polemical  repetition and melodrama, as if Petry does not  trust the reader's response to the oppression  she so intensely describes. Petry had been a  journalist before writing The Street  and she  may well have had a white audience in mind as  she wrote.  Barbara Christian writes that Ann Petry is  "concerned with proving her thesis that no  matter how conventional and no matter how  American a poor black person may be, she will  be defeated by her environment." The Street  is a potent example of social document fiction,  dramatizing the smells, sights and sounds  of a people trapped by systemic discrimination.  The Highest Apple. Sappho and the  Lesbian Poetic Tradition.   By Judy Grahn.  159 pages. San Francisco: Spinsters Ink,  1985.  This is a beautiful collection of essays  which celebrate the power of the Sapphic  myth and legend on lesbian poetry from  Emily Dickinson to Audre Lorde. Judy Grahn  begins with the centrality of poetry in  lesbian feminist culture, tracing its history and themes through Sappho, Emily  Dickinson, Amy Lowell, H.D; and Gertrude  Stein.  The contemporary poets threaded  into this 'lesbic' tradition include Judy  Grahn herself, Adrienne Rich, Paula Gunn  Allen, Audre Lorde^and Olga Broumas. Her  selection of four of the above poets was  inspired by an article by Professor Mary  J. Carruthers of the University of Illinois at Chicago who states that "these four  poets have voices that are bold, even  arrogant, in their common, urgent desire  to seize the language and forge with it an  instrument for articulating women. Not all  women writing today write this kind of  poetry, not all poets who are lesbians  are lesbian poets, nor are all lesbian poets  always lesbian." Judy Grahn has added  Paula Gunn Allen's 'American Indian Voice'  to complete "the picture of lesbian presence on this American continent."  One of the most intriguing and empowering  symbols of this work is the bonding of  women represented by the Isle of Lesbos and  by Sappho's relationships with women.  Grahn argues that this essential, primal  bond has been mutilated by patriarchy ever  since: "From the island in the center of the  mind of the Ancient World, the bond between  women had retreated, first to the cloister  and harem, then to the hoarding school,  and finally to the spinster's spare bedroom  of Emily Dickinson's time in the second  half of the nineteenth century."  The idea that patriarchal power corrodes  women's lives and our relations with each  other is central to radical and cultural  feminism. However it is presented here in  a unique way: literature, language and love  are understood to be at the heart of freedom; without literary traditions, without  a language with which to explore (lesbic)  passion, lesbians are severed from their  collective psychic and creative powers  (the highest apple). Skipping over generations of man-made history, Judy Grahn  reconnects us to the essential rebelliousness of lesbianism, which has at its core  a deeply spiritual/sexual impulse. The  Highest Apple  is an exciting and accessible discussion of literary history.  Whether the reader studies poetry seriously  or on the run in a busy life, this work  should enrich her understanding of the  power of language and the role it has in  gay culture. 22 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  COMMENTARY  Held Hostage to the Myth of the Necessary Father  by Anne Miles  One day last summer a woman friend and I  were at the beach with our young children.  Our enjoyment was spoiled when two boys,  aged about nine or ten, began throwing  rocks from the embankment behind us,  narrowly missing us several times. My  friend gave an exclamation of disgust,  stood up, and requested forcefully that  the rock-throwing stop. She was greeted  with jeers. The young delinquents got  quite a shock when, a moment later, she  strode up the steps after them, threatening  to call the police and grabbing one of  them by the arm, giving him a shake and demanding that they leave! They backed off  in short order, though not without much  swearing and half-heartedly hurling a  couple more rocks.  I congratulated her on her assertiveness,  as did a man sitting nearby. She explained to me that the same thing had been  going on the day before when she had been  sitting on the beach with a group of women  and kids. No one had done more than ask  the boys to stop (and had been ignored)  and one of the women had concluded,  "It's too bad. One of those boys has no  father so of course he has no respect  for women." This comment had enraged my  friend, who like myself, is a single  mother, almost as much as the,rock throwing  had done'.  We discussed the possibility that this  boy had learned his disrespect for women  not from being fatherless, but from the  way his mother had been treated by his  father before the latter had left the  scene! Despite recent evidence that boys  learn domestic violence (and girls learn  to accept it) by observing the behaviour  of their fathers toward their mothers,  the myth is still prevalent that even a  bad father is better than no father at all.  Society has laid the blame for much delinquency and emotional disturbance (especially  on the part of male children) on the  "broken" home. Single-parent families  (the overwhelming majority of which are  female-headed) are seen to be deprived  and incomplete. Much research showing  the supposed evils of the single-mother  family has totally ignored the fact that   women raising children alone often live  in poverty. In other words, poor single-  mother families are compared to affluent  two-parent families and found wanting!  The absence of the father's influence on  a psychological level is considered to  be the reason for any problems. The fact  that the family is probably being subjected  to poor schooling, inadequate housing and  the other stresses poverty brings is not  taken into account. 1  As single mothers we are not supposed to  exist. We are an affront to the patriarchy,  which has traditionally ignored or harassed  us. It is almost impossible for a female-  headed family to survive without subsidy,  whether in the form of allowances so that  mothers may stay home, or subsidized  daycare. Traditionally, the patriarchy  has allowed fatherless families to starve  or has forced women and children who are  not "owned" by anyone to turn to -crime,  prostitution or very exploited labour in  order to survive. As social services are  cut back in the name of so-called restraint,  the possibility of returning to this  Dickensian scenario raises its ugly head.  In a more sane and balanced society where  women's contribution as mothers was recog--  nized, as well as our right to reject  oppressive relationships with men, it  would be accepted that it is hard to mother  and still earn a living. Such a society  would subsidize motherhood, thereby  ensuring a decent future for the human  race, a future governed by men and women  who, as children, have had their basic  needs met, regardless of whether or not  there was a father in the home.  I have some fear that what I am saying may  be misunderstood. I am not claiming that  every mother is better off without a man  in the home, or that children do not benefit from positive male role models. However,  as I look about me I see too many marriages  where, because the patriarchy gives men  power and control that they find difficult  to relinquish, the woman is treated by her  husband as less than a full human being.  I am speaking here of anything ranging  from physical abuse to the verbal put-  downs, degrading expectations and emotional starvation that are too often regarded  as a wife's lot in life - something she  has no right to complain about as long  as her mate is a good provider, is not  publically unfaithful and doesn't beat her.  A woman who is trying, single-handedly,  to cope with a marriage like this is  wasting energy that could be directed  toward making a fuller, richer life for  herself and her children.  I believe that both the patriarchal  family and the single mother family are  aberrations born of a culture whose values  are mistaken. Of course nature intended  the male and the female of the human species  to live harmoniously. My inclination has  always been to like and want to be close  to men. It was one of the ugliest lessons  of my coming-of-age to learn that society  has done its best to make true intimacy  and equality between men and women almost  impossible to attain.  The sexes were meant to complement each  other, but this is not achieved through  relationships of dependency and control.  A single mother once told me, after my  own marriage broke up, that she believed  that men and women will not learn to live  together in our lifetime, but that our  children may reap the benefits of their  mothers' rebellion. Single mothers, she  had concluded, may be the key to egalitarian marriages for future generations!  As women who insist on personal freedom  we can break the patriarchal pattern by  rejecting male dominance, by insisting that  the men in our lives treat us in such a  way that both male and female children  grow up with a different (and more positive)  expectation than did we of how men and  women should relate. We are in a position  to pick and choose the men whom we want  to be examples to our children. I hope,  as a single mother, that I will prove  strong enough to do just that,, even if it  means, as it too often seems to, long  stretches of time deprived of male companionship. I now like to consider myself and  my children not as the victims of a  "broken" home, but as a family in the  process of healing itself and helping all of  humanity to regain its wholeness.  Linda Caporeal, "Psychology and the Single  Mother", Momma, The Sourcebook for Single  Mothers, ed. Karol Hope and Nancy Young.  (Plume Books, 1976).  Central America from page 10  hoping the project will contribute to the prevention  of an armed invasion. Another  crucial aspect to the march  is giving these countries  international news value, and  hopefully arousing awareness  of the crisis in Central  America. The march may also  help people in El Salvador,  Honduras, and Guatemala to  "come out" in the open; the  international solidarity  will give them courage and  inspiration to resist suppression. It is hoped that with  enough international attention the conspiracy of silence and misinformation on  Central America will be  exposed.  This will be the first time  that an internationally  formed peace march will pass  close to areas where military combat is in progress.  With"broad international  participation and media  coverage the participants  will be at limited risk.  The safety of nationals  participating in the march in  their own countries will  not likely be jeopardized.  However, when the march is  over, those who have co-operated may suffer reprisal.  The Central Americans say  this is a risk they are willing to take. They live constantly with threats of disappearance, imprisonment or  death. It will be crucial to  watch for what happens to  them after the march, and to  take appropriate action if  there are reprisals.  To keep informed throughout  the march call your MP, the  media and ask questions.  Our people will never be  scattered.  Our destiny will  triumph over the ill-fated  days which are coming at a  time unknown.  We will always  be secure in the land we have  occupied.  Popul Vuh (Sacred book of the  Mayas)  Andrea Clark, who is participating in the march, will ■  report on its success when she  returns from Central America.  Fiji from page 10  for funding which the group  does not yet meet. The Centre's  closest neighbour is a men's  gym—not the best place to have  a feminist group headquarters,  but the rent is low. Money for  rent and other expenses presently comes from the Centre  sponsors.  The Crisis Centre is open five  days a week and soon there will  be a 24 hour telephone counselling service. When women and  children need emergency shelter,  volunteers provide it in their  homes. Initially, the Centre's  aim was just a service for  rape victims, but the magnitude of violence towards  women has forced them to  broaden their activities. Now  along with self-defense classes, the Center offers crisis  intervention and legal assistance .  The group is a mixture of various nationalities, with a mix  of cultures, backgrounds, philosophies, and motivations.  What draws them together is  their abhorence of violence  and commitment to feminism.  According to the women the  Centre functions with remarkably little disharmony and  focusses on shared concerns.  Women at the Centre believe  the incidence of unreported  violence far out-weighs what  is presented in the courts.  There are hopes of influencing  judicial procedures, of public education on women's needs,  and research into the statistics of violence. While donations of money from the volunteers and concerned citizens  are appreciated, the group  has applied to the Fiji Council of Social Services for several grants to cover such activities as education and job  training for local staff. But  the Fiji Department of Social  Welfare itself is poorly funded.  Despite the slowness of progress,  the women are determined to  stick with the project and to  change the status of women in  Fiji. Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 23  IETTERS  Crticism not  based on article  Kinesis:  In September I was asked by Kinesis  to write  an article on women and food for the October  issue. I was asked to address this issue  as a therapist who specializes in the field  of eating disorders. Thus I was quite taken  aback when I read the "commentary" by  Silva Tenenbein that KOhesis  printed in  the November issue.  Everv individual has the right to question  and/or disagree with what I have written.  Ms. Tenenbein's "commentary" however,  aside from interpreting the inclusion of my  my phone number as advertising, has little  to do with the content of the article.  That Ms. Tenenbein has difficulty with the  concept of therapy is clear. The article,  however, was not about therapy. It was  about women's relationship to food. What  the reader does about that relationship  is her choice. If Ms. Tenenbein objected to  the inclusion of an article in Kinesis  by a therapist, then her objection should  have been appropriately voiced to the editorial board of Kinesis.  I am disappointed that Kinesis  would print  a "commentary" that has so little relevance  to the article that I wrote and has so much  potential for misrepresentation.  Sandy Friedman.  Ed.  Note:  Kinesis agrees that Silva Tenen-  bien's commentary,   'Fat and Free Enterprise ',  although it raised important  issues about fat liberation and therapy,  was almost entirely unrelated to the content  of Sandy Friedman 's   'Food for Feelings '  article carried in the October  Kinesis.  Kinesis takes full responsibility for not  noting that the commentary was not a fair  criticism of Friendman 's article and  deeply regrets any harm our running the  commentary has caused Sandy Friedman.  Support for therapists  the first time in my nearly 40 years. Food  is no longer the issue in my life, and I  have spent the past year on an exciting  journey 'round myself - what a trip!  I think that it would be a pity if even one  woman was put off by Ms. Tenenbein's  comments, and didn't take the chance to do  something positive about an issue with  such negative connotations.  Sue Barner  Appreciations  and apologies  Kinesis:  We appreciate the article by Silva Tenebien  and Sarah White in the November 1985 issue  of Kinesis,   which brings to our attention  that the December period is not just a  Christian holiday. We, Vancouver Lesbian  Connection, would like to apologise for  our dance theme (for Nov. 29/85) being  'Pre-Christmas'. Thank you for raising our  awareness of the unconscious racism inherent  in our society.  Vancouver Lesbian Connection.  Press Gang  boycotts Expo  Kinesis:  Press Gang Printers has recently been  developing a printing policy which clearly  sets guidelines for our community customers.  In the course of deciding what we will or  will not print, the issue of support for  Expo 86 has arisen.  We at Press Gang have decided that we will  not produce any printed matter, whether  words or images, which support Expo 86. This  includes any advertisements, or material  displaying the Expo 86 logo. We have made  the decision for several  In its bid for re-election, this government  may throw a few dollars to community or  cultural groups which can enhance its  shakey image with the public. Some  people in the political community may  jump on the "Expo Bandwagon" for the short  term gains. However, the long term effects  of life under this government far outweigh  the few short term gains to be had.  We can only encourage all political and  community groups to join with us in a  boycott of Expo 86. The fact that during  the $500,000 opening of Expo, complete  with expensive fireworks display, hundreds  of people in B.C. were forced to line up  a the province's food banks is an outrage  to us. We need higher welfare rates in  this province, more well paid union jobs,  and a comprehensive social services system.  When it gets right down to it, we do not  need Expo.  Kinesis:  I was dismayed to read Silva Tenenbein's  reaction to Sandy Friedman's article "Food  For Feelings". Her comments appeared to have  little connection with the material itself.  Perhaps Ms. Tenenbein lacks personal experience. As I do have almost a year's  worth of first-hand experience with the  therapy that Sandy and her partner, Doris  Maranda, are offering, and nearly 40 years  experience as a compulsive eater, perhaps  I could offer my  opinion of their "wares".  It is my opinion that, for me at least,  assuming control of my eating is directly  related to assuming control of my life.  The control doesn't come from an outside  source, it comes from me...however, I wonder how long it would have taken me (if  ever) to come to the place where I am now,  without the help of Sandy and Doris.  In the past, I have spent considerable  amounts in numerous vain attempts to  secure the well-known "quick fix". I won't  go into detail, but I will say that thanks  to Sandy and Doris and the therapy they  have evolved, I am well and truly off the  merry-go-round...brass ring firmly in  hand! The brass ring in my case, is an  awareness of myself (secured, I might add,  at a fraction of the previous sums expended and  the best investment I will ever  make).  I am now armed with the knowledge of my  use of food as a anesthetic for feelings,  and the knowledge has provided me with  the option to change or not, as I choose.  I have learned patience and self-acceptance  I have connected body, mind and spirit for  Our Social Credit government tells us we  are in an either/or situation. They tell  us that either they put money into megaprojects, or that they put money into social services. They tell us that we can not  have both.  The choice of the Socreds has been to  institute its so-called "restraint"  policy, cutting and closing social services,  weakening the human rights process,  laying off workers and generally increasing hardships to residents of B.C. in  dozens of other ways. Welfare rates have  been cut, and the much needed Rentalsman's  office has been dismantled. For the past  summer, Vancouver Transition House has  been occupied by a group of concerned  women in an attempt to ensure the quality  of its service not be further eroded in the  latest government tender.  However, for a government with a facade  of restraint, it has launched several  costly and dubious megaprojects. The vast  amount of funds poured into North East  Coal, Light Rapid Transit and Expo 86 are  funds desperately needed for social,  educational, health and other services.  They sold Expo to us on the basis of  job creation. Now these jobs have disappeared, and the call has gone out for volunteers  to staff the fair. Because of this, we  can in no way support Expo 86. To do so  would assume a tacit agreement that we  can afford megaprojects at the expense of  social services.  As well, it would imply support for a  provincial government that hopes to cash  in on "Expo Fever" to get themselves reelected. Women at Press Gang all marched  in the rallies and walked on the picket  lines during the Solidarity Movement, and  we will not support any project which may  get this government re-elected.  We realize that some community groups  may profit in a short term way from Expo.  In Sisterhood & Solidarity,  Press Gang Printers  Women Who Rape  Coverage:  Sensationalistic  We have criticisms to make concerning  the two page section of your November  issue headlined "Women Who Rape".  Our first criticism is specifically  about that headline. 'Rape' is a word  which has a particular history. It has  been descriptive, for hundreds of years,  of a particular set of practices men have  inflicted on women, to take power from  us, to degrade and humiliate us.  It is true that there are some women who  sexually abuse and assault other women  and children. We have not found a word  which describes this phenomenon in the  same way 'rape' has described men's assaults. To the vast majority of women,  the word 'rape' is not, could never be,  a gender neutral term. To use it as if  it were, has the effect of obscuring  women's experience of rape.  When we do speaking engagements and put  forward the feminist analysis which  holds that rape, and the threat of rape  are ways in which men control women, it  is often the case that someone will ask:  "well, what about women who rape?". It  is our experience that this question,  and taking time to deal with it, ends  up deflecting discussion from the immense problem of the sexual abuse of  women and children by men. This kind of  scenario, which usually springs from  male defensiveness, if not hostility,  serves to distort the whole picture of  who is really doing violence to whom,  why, and in what numbers.  Because of this experience, we have a  certain sensitivity to phrases like  "Women Who Rape", and the ease with  which such language plays into the hands  of those who would minimize and distort  the reality of male violence. .  We wonder how many copies of Kinesis  were bought specifically because of  the sensational headline on the front  cover, in combination with women practicing karate and great slashes of red  ink.  Having said all this, it is certainly  incumbent upon us as feminists to deal  with the difficult and potentially volatile issues of women who sexually abuse  and women who batter, but not without  the sensitivity and integrity which a  feminist approach presupposes. There is  no place else to start but with women's  voices, women's lives, but a great deal  more is required of us than acknowledgement and validation of individual women's  experiences. Eli  24 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  We must ensure that women's stories are  presented in a context which provides an  on-going reference to the infinitely  larger social, economic and sexual oppression of women by men and also in a  context which discourages the kind of  sensationalism which was evident in  Kinesis.  Kinesis'  failure to do this  constitutes a grave betrayal of both the  women who shared their experiences, and  the women's community as a whole.  If honest and fruitful discussion is to  proceed, and if women are to feel safe  to join in that discussion, a forum is  required which recognizes the indispen-  sibility of adequate context and analysis. Kinesis,  we expected better.  The WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre Collective  I  LETTERS  Out of Context  Kinesis:  I am responding to Kim Irving's article,  "Women Who Rape" and the other two adjoined  articles, "I Remember...A Nightmare" and  "When Will the Community Be Safe" (Kinesis,  Nov. 85).  The three articles seem to say that  feminists are not willing to hear or  listen to women talk about the abuse of  them by other women - mainly their mothers.  I thought Kim started off well by revealing  the statistic, 97% of the sexual abusers  are men, but then she goes on for the  next two and one half pages exposing only  the abuse done by women.  I want to preface this by saying I do  not have all of the answers on how to  approach this very difficult topic but I  have some concrete ideas now of what I'm  critical of.  I also know that in order to get a letter  published in Kinesis  it must be read and  approved by the editorial board and other  women, so I direct these criticisms to Kim  plus those women.  The basic history of the Women's Liberation  Movement, which includes our struggle as  feminists to expose male violence, is  not included in this article and I think  it is crucial when we write about women  being 3% of the abusers.  Maybe something like this, "It is only  in the last 10-15 years, because of the  very committed hard work of feminists,  that male violence has been exposed at  all. We women are continually fighting  some of the old but not dead theories  and myths that women are to blame for  everything. As a woman working to end  violence against women, I must try to convince 1-5 women a week that she is not to  blame for her rape or beating from a  Gross-Couv\\-i  Ay  V SV\\ Soec\a\  »' - c-aX  Board  One WeeVC Woorn -v Fu\\  ot\\y $°f\  For Vvoo  &orA \  \AoUl  o  As well, the present attack on the Women's  Liberation Movement is not addressed in  this two and a half pages at all and I  think it should be in order to context the  written material. Maybe something like:  "There is a country-wide attack on the  Women's Liberation Movement that is trying  to get me/us to believe that women are  equally if not more responsible for violence against all people. The overwhelming  evidence uncovered by feminists in the  past few years must never again be buried.  Some is:  •a woman is raped every 17 min. in Canada  el woman in 4 will be raped sometime in  her life, most often by someone she knows,  el in 8 girls is sexually assaulted before  the age of 18, usually by a male family  member.  e54% of women living with men will be  struck at some time during the relationship.'  In the three years that I've answered  the crisis line at Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter I have never had a  call about a woman being sexually abusive  although I know that other women have  had the odd one.  Those who refuse to accept the evidence  of the 1000's of women and children  abused as documented by feminists are gaining a lot of ground. Some psychiatrists,  social workers, church authorities, etc.  have as their aim - to re-establish that  women are to blame and that we must be  suspicious of each other.  I'm critical that the cover is titled  "Women Who Rape" in small but very visible  letters and the 2% pages are titled that  way in large bold black letters. It seems  to me that this kind of attention in  terms of headlines is not reflective of the  fact that 97% of sexual abuse is done by  men. I suggest a headline that does so.  And to continue with this idea I think the  amount of space given could be done  accordingly, 97% of space dealing with  male abusers, 3% of space to deal with female abusers.  The title, "When Will the Community Be  Safe" is also very misleading. It implies  that being in the Women's Liberation Movement is as unsafe as not being in it. And  I disagree with this a lot. Women absolutely  are safer in the Women's Liberation Movement than outside of it. Examples of safe  places are Women's Centers, Women's Shelters  Health Collectives, Consciousness Raising  Groups, etc. - these are all places  where women can gain support, educate each  other and organize with other women to  fight our oppression. The headline should  reflect this.  I do not think that women do not abuse.  However, after reading the full 2% pages  of the article I was left with the impression that I needed to fear and be suspicious  of most women now and to be particularly  careful of women lovers.  I'm sure that Kim and the other women's  intentions were not  to leave me with this  impression. This is why I think that  stories such as these must be contexted  very carefully particularly when writing in  a well-circulated paper. I do not want misogyny and homophobia to be increased. Our  work as feminists is to decrease it and  eventually end it.  Afterthought: I think this is relevant  to Kim's article even though I don't  think she was actually responsible for  this - it alarmed me that in the October  issue of Kinesis  a two sentence write up  about this year's Take Back the Night  Demonstration was found along with a  visual that was not reflective of what the  protest was about.  I certainly am critical that there was  not adequate space given for this event.  Over 500 women protesting in the streets  the violence done by men to women and  children certainly is a momentous occasion  and deserves a great deal of attention  in a feminist paper. It is definitely  a mistake to give Take Back the Night this  kind of space and an article exposing  women's violence 2% pages worth of space.  Joan McMahon for The Vancouver Rape Relief  and Women's Shelter Collective.  Biased  Kinesis:  This letter is in response to Kim Irving's  article entitled "Women Who Rape". My intent is not to deny the basic premise of  the article but rather to criticize the  publishing of the two personal accounts  that followed.  By means of the preface these two stories  are presented as the irrefutable truth.  In fact Kim living's research is incomplete  and her interview questions are leading.  Complete research would include talking  to the accused women and checking out some  of the facts and inconsistencies within  the victim's story. According to one member of the editorial staff neither of the  accused women were even aware of the printing of the stories. It was felt that by  presenting both sides, that the credibility  of the premise, women rape, might be at  stake. It is my feeling that the credibility of not only the premise, but of Kinesis  as well, is at risk withsuch biased journalism.  At what cost do you present your premise  and at whose expense? Kinesis is a paper  for and by women. The alleged rapists  are women yet they were offered no voice  in your paper. The power that a person  with victim status can wield can be great  and may therefore be subject to abuse.  Regardless of whose story is believed,  both parties should have had the same  opportunity at a public forum in the same  issue. Your editorial policy is and I  quote "Writers will be notified about  letters concerning their articles and can  choose to reply in the issue in which the  letter appears." You obviously place  importance on -immediate response for your  own writers. If Kinesis  is going to convict someone of such a violent crime  (which is in essence what you have done)  you can at least give all parties a fair  chance. Anything less is totally irresponsible and harmful. I hope in future that  Kinesis  will give their victims the same  chance as their writers.  Margo Hennigar  Unfair  Kinesis:  I want to take issue with Kim Irving's  Province-style  expose in the Nov. Kinesis  regarding "Women Who Rape", and Community  Safety. I have a lot of problems with the  whole feature, but I'm particularly disturbed by the so-called anonymous interview. The introduction to the interview  states that is anonymous because "it would  not be safe for her"—the survivor—"to  name herself or her abuser". This was de^  cided "after long discussions with the  survivor". There were no  discussions with  the woman accused, and her anonymity has  not  been protected.  Since this story was published, her identity has become widely known within the  community and she has suffered as a result. Was this Kinesis'  intention in publishing the interview? If not, why were  better steps not taken to protect her  anonymity? If this was the intention, is  this what Kinesis  sees as "dealing with Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 25  LETTERS  abusive women in our midst"? Do we deal with  abusive women in our community by crucifying  them in public? Will this help solve the  problem? This woman's story is presented  as total fact and the reader is supposed to  take it completely on faith. The accused  woman was given no chance to tell her side  of the story.  I wish to acknowledge that I do know the  identity of the woman accused, and while  I question the reality of the interviewed  woman's interpretation of her experience,  I'm not in fact trying to defend the  woman I know or to prove the story true  or untrue. I'm trying to make a point  about the way this issue was presented in  Kinesis  and the problems that arise from  that. The interview also raises broader  questions about how we think about the  difference between rape and manipulative  relationships. There is a difference between saying yes when we mean no and saying no. One is participation in our own  subjugation/objectification/victimization  and the other is rape. I think we have to  take responsibility for our part in our  role as victim. Even if everything in  this woman's story is true, I think it's  wrong to call it rape.  In all, I'm disappointed in Kinesis'  coverage of this issue, and I question  whether Kinesis  is even the place to deal  with it. This style of coverage is sensationalist, and does nothing to increase  our understanding of this issue or of  one another.  In pissed-off sisterhood,  Melva Forsberg  Kinesis  clarification  The above letters raise a number  of criticisms about  Kinesis' articles  on  "Women Who Rape". Our clarification will attempt to deal with these  criticisms in order.  Both of Vancouver's rape crisis  centres detail criticism of our presentation of the articles, our use  of of the word 'rape' in referring to  sexual violence between women and what  they see as the overall lack of context of male violence aginst women.  Kinesis agrees it was inappropriate to advertise the feature with  the headline  ''Women Who Rape1, on the  front cover.    Its appearance on i^he cover is an unfortunate example of wrong  way thinking.     Our intent,  in using cover space was geared to alerting women  to the fact that the feature was in the  paper.    We were concerned that,  given  the difficult nature of the subject,  women not come upon the material unexpectedly.    The decision about the  cover colour and graphic was arrived  at separately.  The inappropriate juxtaposition of the color,  graphic and the  'Women Who Rape ' headline was entirely  unrecognized and was a serious oversight on our part.  With regard to the use of the word rape  in discussing sexual violence between  women.  This is a difficult area for  Kinesis. Despite many discussions we do  not have a unified position on the use,  or rejection,  of the word  'rape'.   We  respect the arguments against its use but  also believe that to many survivors,  including the accounts we carried,   the word  is appropriate.  The question of language  is obviously a sensitive area and clearly  would benefit from further discussion.  The issue of the headline   'When  Will the Community be Safe'., is also,in  our view difficult.    Certainly we agree  that the women's communities- are safer,  for women,   than the community at large.  The headline reflects to a considerable  extent,  however,  issues the survivor  discusses in her interview.    On balance;  and although that particular headline  was arrived at after almost an hour's  discussion,  we agree it could have been  improved.  The question of context is also  equally difficult to resolve.    Firstly  we must acknowledge an oversight on our  part.    The   'Women Who Rape' feature was  originally conceived of as a two part  feature.    Part two appears in this month 's  issue.    We neglected to include this  information with part one and, obviously,  this knowledge would have made a difference to reader's perception of the material .  Both WAVAW and Rape Relief, want  us to include, beyond what the article  did reference, the context of male violence as well as the overall social, e-  conomic and political oppression of women.  Kinesis has been publishing for  over 14 years.  Throughout that time the  paper has been devoted to examining the  entire spectrum of issues involved in  women's oppression.    Male violence,  its  incidence and our feminist analysis of  it,  has been a centred theme in  Kinesis'  coverage from the paper's inception. As  a result we believe our readers are as  informed about this issue as virtually  any women in Canada.  Further, given that this is Kinesis'  first coverage on sexual violence between  women, we believe the paper has, percentage wise, more than met Rape Reliefs criteria that we devote only 3% of our coverages to sexual violence between women.  Along with this we believe it is important for women to realize that  Kinesis  constantly labours under extreme space  limitations.  Because the paper is typewritten even a short article appears  terribly long and is therefore often  inaccessable to our readers.  Because the  paper is typewritten stories are shortened or even cut entirely every month.  Devoting space to the entire context of  women 's oppression in an article about  sexual violence between women is,  we  believe,  an unfair expectation. If  Kinesis had followed this suggestion  it would have meant dramatically less  discussion on the issue of sexual  violence between women.  UPRISING BREADS BAKERY  Gifts in good Taste  Giant Gingerbread Santas  Buttery Shortbreads and other Holiday Treats  All Natural Fruit and Nut Christmas Cake lib. $4.95  ■ UPRISINGS - The Ultimate Baking Book  Gift Certificates  ■ Bread Knives — locally crafted  Hi  1697 Venables (1 block west of Commercial)  urs.Mon.-Fri. 8:30-5:30, Sat. 10-4:30, 254-5635  CRS Worker's Co-operative  cl^irf:  SIGNPAINTER  GRAPHIC TECHNICIAN  COMMUNICATING DESIGN  254 • 8892  With regard to the two letters which  deal with the issue of verification of  the survivors accounts and the opportunity  for both sides of these accounts to be  printed.     (Kinesis received a total of four  letters arguing this view.  The two we have  published are representative of the points-  raised in the other letters.)  Kinesis made no attempt to verify either of the survivors account. There is a  fundamental tenet in feminist theory and  analysis about sexual abuse which holds that  women do not lie about their experience of  sexual assault.    It is this basic belief,  that,  for  Kinesis., justifies printing only  survivors accounts.    If feminists believe  this premise should be re-examined in cases  of sexual violence between women we would  need to understand why this should be so.  The simple fact that abusers are women is  not,  in our view, an adequate rational.  Finally,  we reject the suggestion that  in printing survivors accounts  Kinesis has  exposed individual women as abusers.    We  do not believe any abuser can be identified based solely on the survivor's accounts.  Great care was taken in both the, accounts  to screen the stories so that no fact was  included that could identify either the survivors,   the abusers or even the communities  where the events took place.    We had abso^  lutely no interest in presenting the  accounts in a way that would lead to speculation as to times, places or identities and  we believe the. accounts do not encourage  such speculation.  In closing we deeply regret our errors  in the coverage of this issue and accept  full responsibility for them.  Our intention,  in printing the articles,  was to begin discussions on a complex and  difficult issue that exists between women  and within women 's communities.    It is an issue which,  by and large,  is not revealed,  not discussed and therefore almost entirely  unresolved.  Kinesis has, over the course of its  existence, carried an enormous amount of  woman positive coverage.    We must also deal  with material which examines the negative aspects of women's reality.    All the letter'  writers agree this is necessary and all  agree,  for different reasons,  that Kinesis  did this poorly.    We wonder, and this is not  an idle question,  if it would be possible to  have introduced this subject in a perfectly  sensitive way.  We hope the discussion on the issue  of sexual violence between women will continue .  Writer responds  To R.R./W.A.V.A.W.;  I used the word 'rape',  in the article  "Women who Rape",  in radical feminist terms  meaning;   'any sexual contact that is unwanted, whether the woman/girl can express her  objection or not. ' I believe that words like  "sexual abuse",   "incest" and "molestation"  are nice words invented for institutional  use in order to minimize the survivors experience.  I am disappointed that your letters spend so  much time attacking the lack of context,  and  so little on providing further analysis on  this issue.  I caution your use of the words    "phenomenon*  or "odd". Survivors of woman-rape are often  treated as a "phenomenon" or "odd" and  therefore do not receive the regonition and  support that they need and deserve.  Kim Irving 26 Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  •EAST END FOOD CO-OP FUN/FUND RAISING SER-  vice auction, Dec. 7, 8-11 pm at LaQuena.  (1111 Commercial) with co-op comedian  and musical entertainment too. Open to  the public. We are soliciting services  which we will auction off. Almost anything  will do so please don't think you have  nothing to offer (examples: childcare,  help with your income tax, mandolin  lesson, bicycle/car tune-up)..For more info  contact Gail 873-5080 or Pat 879-4384.  •WOMEN'S DANCE sponsored by UBC Women's  Centre and Gays and Lesbians of UBC.  Sat. Jan. 25, 8-12:30 pm in the Student  Union Building (SUB) ballroom. Tix $3/$4  Childcare available. For more info call  228-4638 or 228-2163.  •CENTRAL AMERICAN FILM FESTIVAL,  Sunday, December 15th, beginning  2 pm at the Van. East Cinema, 7th  and Commercial. Admission $5.,  students $4., seniors and disabled  $2. FILMS: In the Name of Democracy,  Todos Santo Cuchumatan, El Compa  Clodomiro, Witness to War, The  Story of Dr. Charlie Clements.  Sponsored by Seeds for El Salvador,  P.O. Box 65689., Station F, Vancouver  B.C. V5M 5K8  •CRIS WILLIAMSON, Sun. Jan. 26, 8pm  TIX $10. presented by the Vancouver  Folk Music Festival. Cris Williamson,  known for her superb songwriting and  dynamiG stage presence, returns to the  Cultch with fellow musicians and surprise guests. A benefit for Native  Environmental Issues.'  •START THE NEW YEAR OFF RIGHT support  your local sisters. Enjoy the sounds of  Mister Sisters, the best soft-rock duo  on the west coast. Nightly at the Castle  Hotel, 750 Granville St., Monday Jan.  6th to Sat. Jan. 18th, 7pm - 11pm  •STILL SANE BOOK LAUNCHING. Come and celebrate with Press Gang Publishers. Talk,  dance and have fun. December 20th, 8 pm  Women In Focus, 456 West Broadway. For  information call 253-2537.  •CYNTHIA SMITH: JULIA'S DREAM, BW  PHOTO SERIES. December 3-14, 1985  opening Tuesday Dec. 3, 8-10pm, (N)  On Commercial Gallery, 1011 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 3X1  Gallery Hours: Tues.-Sat. 1-4 pm  •MOVIES FOR KIDS at the Van. East  Cultural Centre. Admission is PAY  WHAT YOU CAN every Saturday afternoon  at the VECC's Movies for Kids! So you  can bring a birthday party, a classroom, a Scout troup, or an entire  platoon of smallfry and still stay  within your budget. 1:30 pm. Jan.  11-Swiss Family Robinson; 18-Dumbo;  25-Robin Hood.  GROUPS  •SUPPORT GROUP FOR SURVIVORS: The Support,  Education and Prevention of Sexual Assault  (SEPSA) Group is pleased to announce the  formation of a support group for women  who have expereinced sexual assault in  their childhood. The group will start in  mid January and will be held at a Vancouver location. The group will run from  12-15 weeks. Fees are $120 and a sliding  scale is available. For more info call  734-9471.  •FEMINIST BISEXUAL WOMEN'S GROUP: As  bisexual women, we have the right not  to be sexually exploited by other  women (or men). We must demand the  right to be with whomever has the  most love to give us. If you are a  woman-identified woman as opposed to  being "lesbian-identified" and if you  believe that choice in sexual orientation is the right of all women,  not just lesbians, then you may be  interested in joining us. For more  information about upcoming meetings  etc. please call: 254-3664.  CLASSES/WORKSHOPS  •LESBIAN FEMINIST GANG will be holding  our first workshop on the politics of  lesbian visibility, on Sun. Jan. 26  from l-4p.m. at the VLC building,  876 Commercial Drive. Topic of this  workshop is Lesbian Invisibility/Visibility in the Feminist Movement. Entrance is wheelchair accessible. The bathroom is not accessible but we can provide attendants. Let us know about  other special needs. Childcare will be  provided. For more info and to preregister for childcare, phone Gina 251-  9994. Look for posters.  •WOMEN'S STUDIES 215: Further Perspectives on Women. During the 1985 spring  term, Women's Studies 216 will examine  sexuality and sexual politics. 14 sessions is $75. Register for Women's  Studies 216: Further Perspectives on  Women at Langara, Jan. 2,3,6; at VVI•  Second night of class. Rosalie  Hawrylko: psychology and Margo Dunn:  history and literature.  SUBMISSIONS  •WANTED FOR THE ONLY older Lesbian  Feminist/Women's Newsletter in Canada-  articles, cartoons, humour, anecdotes,  black and white photographs (for reprinting) letters, and/or art work.  Sample copy $1.50, subscription $6.00  (4 issues per year) Donations appreciated. Write: A Web of Crones, P.O.- Box  6, Hornby Island, B.C. VOR 1Z0. Cheques  etc. to Courageous Crones.  •QUILTS FOR PEACE - I am doing research  on quiltmaking in the Peace Movement  and I am looking for women in the Vancouver area who are making quilts with  anti-war content. If you have made a  quilt like this, or know of someone  who has, please call Elizabeth at 734-  9395.  LAWYER  Susann Richter  B.Sc. L.L.B.  1      Preferred Areas of Practice  Family Law  Employment Law  Commercial Law  Civil & Criminal Litigation  1  Languages Spoken—  German & English  1      Free Initial Consultation  In Association with  Norton, Stewart,  Norton and Scarlett  687-0545  1200-1055 West Georgia St.  j      Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2P4  Spartacus Books  ANARCHISM • FEMINISM  SOCIALISM • THIRD WORLD  PRISONS • LABOUR HISTORY  ART e LITERATURE  UPRISING  BREADS J  BAKERY  Vancouver's Best  Wholegrain Breads  1697 VENABLES ST.  VANCOUVER, BC  V5L2H1 (604)254-5635  At CCEC  Your Money Works  In Your Community  "CCEC works for community development.  We offer reduced interest loans to our member  cooperative, housing and advocacy associations.  CCEC Credit Union:  Keeping your money in your community."  OCTOPUS  BOOKS  INEXPENSIVE QUAUTY BOOKS  HARD TO On ART, S0CIAII  UTERARY MAGAZINES  t JOURNALS  M»$  876-2123  Mon. and Wed. 11a  Friday 1 to 7 pm.  33 East Broadway  CCEC Credit Union Kinesis Dec/Jan 1985-6 27  BULLETIN BOARD  •LESBIAN FICTION ANTHOLOGY: The Lesbian Manuscript Group of Women's  Press is calling for submissions  for an anthology of lesbian short  fiction. We are looking for short  stories and experimental short  prose pieces, and we are particularly interested in work by lesbians of  colour. The deadline for anthology  submissions is February 15, 1986.  Please mail submissions to: The  Women's Press, Lesbian Manuscript  Group, 229 College St., Ste. 204  Toronto, Ontario M5T 1R4  •DYKE DIARIES: A CALL FOR SUBMISSIONS  Submissions of up to 5000 words are  being requested for an anthology of  lesbian personal writings—diaries,  journals, letters, thoughts. Material  on any facet of the writer's life is  welcome; pieces need to grow out of a  lesbian life and may be as lesbian-  specific (or not) in content as is appropriate to the thoughts/emotions/sit-  tuations being discussed. Pieces used  may be published anonymously if the  writer wishes; confidentiality will be  strictly observed. Please include the  year of writing and the age of the  writer at that time. Deadline for submissions is March 1, 1986. Please send  material to Frances Rooney, P.O. Box 868  Station P, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2Z2.  CLASSIFIED  •NEED EXTRA MONEY? Sell natural products  for 25% commission. Want to lose weight,  naturally? Call Fiona 251-4653.  •MUSIC FOR NICARAGUA.' Music For Nicaragua,  a component of Tools for Peace, was founded  last year by a group of Vancouver cultural  workers to collect musical instruments,  sound equipment and funds for use in  Nicaragua. If you have instruments of any  description in repairable shape, audio  equipment or sound equipment, please  bring it to: FOLK FESTIVAL OFFICE, 3271  Main St., Vancouver. Get involved! The  people of Nicaragua need your aid!  •FOR SALE: FRAMED PRINT (1 of 5) BY  TERESA REIMER. "December 1970-2" -  grey/brown/peach/white semi-abstract  approx. 14" x 20". $100. - or best  offer. All proceeds to CARAL. Phone  Val - 732-0520 eve. or wkend.  •TWO ROOMS AVAILABLE FOR WOMEN ONLY to  share large 4 bedroom east end house  with single mom and 1 yr. old son and  4 yr. old daughter. Pets welcome. $200  per room per month including utilities,  available Feb. 1/86, $75. damage deposit per room, contact 253-7601  •WANTED: WE ARE TWO WOMEN LOOKING FOR A  3rd person to share large 3 bedroom  communal house in Mt. Pleasant. Lots  of perks for the right person. We are  active people involved in co-ops. Opening available now. Call 873-5080.  •TWO LESBIANS LOOKING FOR A THIRD to share  our house. Non-smoking, no pets. Avail,  mid Dec, phone 327-6457.  •MY COUNSELLING BUSINESS HAS OUT-GROWN  MY AT-HOME OFFICE. I am seeking other  women professionals to share an office  with. If you are involved in healing  from a feminist perspective, please call  Linda Galloway at 251-6425 for further  discussion.  •CABIN FOR RENT: This winter have your  skiing holiday in the Kootenays.  Beautiful isolated cabin just outside  Nelson. Wood and electric heat, hot  running water, fridge and stove, etc.  Cross-country at the door, downhill  skiing at Morning Mountain (5 miles)  and Whitewater (18 miles). Sleeps 2-4  Tours and other extras avail. Daily,  weekly, and. weekend rates, book early  for holiday space. Women only, call:  352-3799.  •LITERARY PHILANTHROPIST URGENTLY  REQUIRED. Two nationally-recognized  women fiction writers seek financial  assistance to pursue their art on a  full-time basis with dignity and dedication. Contribute lastingly to N,  American literature. The terms are  simple: you give, we produce. Author  autonomy will be maintained. Apply with  references to 46-810 Broadway, Van.  V5Z 4C9. No triflers please.  •PSYCHODRAMA GROUPS FOR MEN AND WOMEN  AND FOR WOMEN ONLY Beginning in Jan.  Psychodrama is an action method therapy which can utilize the techniques  of bio-energetics, gestalt and dream  work in one method. For more info, call  Sally Hamlin-Batt 255-0374.  To my sisters,  rThank you for your support.  r With love and best wishes  during this holiday season and for 1986.  Sue Harris  Parks Commissioner,  VANCOUVER  FEMALE IMAGERY:  Studio  Workshop  in Drawing,  Painting  & Sculpture  HINDA AVERY, MFA  January 31-March 21  8 Fridays, 9 am-12 noon.  Lower Studio, Duke Hall,  Centre for Continuing Education,  5997 Iona Drive, UBC  $114. Enrolment limited.  Inquiries 222-5273  CENTRE FOR  CONTINUING  EDUCATION  feopteS  WORD    PROCESSING  on  IBM PC "PLUS"    (HARD DRIVE)  Papers, Theses, Manuscripts, Resumes,  Financial Statements, etc.  LOCATION:    12th Ave.  & Commercial  Call 876-2895  •REALLY NICE ONE BEDROOM APARTMENT in a  terrific housing co-op for sublet Jan.  1/86 - Sept. l/86,$395/month, includes  all utilities, rent may be negotiable  call 872-3008.  •VIEWCOURT HOUSING CO-OP IS LOOKING FOR  people interested in co-op living for  our waiting list. The Co-op has bachelor  suites at $310/month and one bedroom  suites at $390/month. Apply in writing  to membership committee and include a  self-addressed envelope to #12 W. 10th,  (10th and Ontario), Vancouver, V5Y 1R6  (877-1758).  •EMILY'S PLACE! COUNTRY, WARM CREEKSIDE  CABUN, 4 miles west of Parksville. 1  hour to ski Mount Washington, cabin:  $10 per woman per night. Also available  for workshops. Emily's Place Society  directs fees to the project's continued growth. Reserve now for the holidays. 248-5410.  •COMMUNITY SOUND SERVICES: Complete  three-way P.A. plus operators and  truck, available at socialist rates.  Phone Communique 253-6222.  HOUSING CO-OPERATIVE  Sitka Housing Co-op is a 26 unit housing  co-op especially for women and women  with children in East Vancouver. After  months of work the building has started  and we are excited to begin accepting applications for membership.  If you are interested in applying please  contact Sitka by phoning 255-9265 or  251 -3241 or write to us at Sitka Housing  Cooperative Society, 2842 St. George  St., Vancouver, B.C. V5T 3R7. »\ u at  ? Sri  MX S  ft  #  #  4^'  ^  ff  SJ  6P  NOW AVAILABLE IN BOOKSTORES  ^S^\^&£ "00  Kinesis Wa»Ca,endar>400A  postage & handling to. ^ ^ Ave>> Vancouver.  This calendar is a production  of Kinesis Volunteers. Profits from  sales go in support of Kinesis.  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  □ VSW Membership-$23 (or what you can afford)  — Includes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis subscription only - $15  D Institutions - $40 D Sustainers - $75  □ Bill me □ Here's my cheque  □ New □  Renewal  D  Gift subscription for a friend 158817  To whom it may concern:  My understanding of sex-role stereotyping agrees with the definition that is spelled out by the Canadian  Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission in its report Images of Women. Accordingly I have  something to say about:  ill  I RADIO  'ñ°television    B PRINT  Call letters of station _  Program or ad   Call letters of station _  Program or ad   Name of publication I  Canadian Media only  My comment is:  Canadian Media only  Canadian Media only  SEX-ROLE STEREOTYPING IS:  National Watch  on Images  of Women  in the Media Inc.  copy to MEDIAWATCH: 209-636 West Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z1G2 and retain one copy for your files