 A   Tories plot to kick you  1    and me off UIC. Don't  go down without a fight  Happy October 18 to all  Canadian female  persons!  Women workers:  beware of Industrial  Inquiry Commissions  bearing settlements of 6  and 1 %  Sept/Oct '79 50^ 0  6  9  Experts fly in from  Denmark to tell us porn  is harmless. It isn't,  protests BCFW  Kristine Linklater, who  shot herviolent  husband, is out of jail.  IP Abortion: where do we  O go from here, and who  can we expect to come  with us?  IO Anti-nuclear organizing  °—should it be a  feminist issue?  Portland speaks frankly  _\ <4j about her Anti-  "  ■ Psychiatry Bibliography  4A The definitive fall  *"** bulletin board  Cover: Judith Rayburn has travelled the continent on her bike, alone.  SUBSCRIBE TO KiMMJiJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Name   2 o  n  Gi  < *+  ■      fi)    Q)  W  Address.  i  Payment Enclosed _  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $ 8  $10  $15  $50  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate funding  —we need member support! Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  Three out of five  of the poor in  Canada are women  Gus Long  The majority of Canadian women,  whatever  their backgrounds,  are very vulnerable  to becoming poor overnight.  So opens the National Council of Welfare's  latest report, entitled "Women and Poverty"  released October 2.  According to the Council, poverty is  overwhelmingly a woman's problem: three  of every five poor Canadians are women,  and one of every six Canadian women is  poor.  Two of three elderly widows have incomes  below the poverty line, and they constitute the poorest group in the country.  The stereotype of poor women, the single-  parent mother, accounts for 168,000 of  Canada's poor women. The percentage of  poor single-parent mothers decreases with  age, as children grow up and family  responsibilities decline, but on average  44 percent of all single-parent mothers  —and their children—live in poverty.  Most people who work for the minimum  wage in Canada are women, and in no  province does the minimum wage provide  more than just barely enough to support  one person above the poverty line. Only  Nova Scotia is worse than B.C.  For working mothers, family responsibilities are an added burden. Day care  Lions Gate  facilities are inadequate. There is no  paid leave for mothers who must care  for sick children. Ontario has single-  handedly blocked an attempt to introduce a "child-care drop-out" provision  for pension purposes.  Husbands' pensions plans seldom provide  adequate protection for widows: fewer  turn to p. 2'.  Unemployment is caused by lazy toads ?  High Unemployment?  Kick seasonal, sick and pregnant workers off unemployment insurance.  For  good measure, make sure that people  whose spouses have jobs can't get unemployment benefits.  These are among changes in unemployment  insurance being considered by Employment Minister Ron Atkey.  "I'm not  going to get my employment plans  through cabinet unless I cut somewhere," he told members of the National Action Council when they met  with him to protest the proposed cuts.  In British Columbia, the changes might .  mean the end of unemployment insurance  payments to about 9,000 women who will  apply for maternity benefits within  the next twelve months. ' Add 15,000  who will collect unemployment sick benefits and as many as 50,000 seasonal  workers.  The Tories are also contemplating the  introduction of a two-tiered system which  would tend to give women lower benefits.  In the system under consideration, 96%  of women would be reduced in benefits,  compared to 61% of men.  What the Conservatives are doing with  these proposals is testing the water.  Probably, in the light of angry protests, they will make some small concessions. They'll give those concessions a lot of media play while pushing through the other cuts.  Architect of these new Tory cutbacks,  Toronto MP Paul McCrossan, says that  high unemployment insurance payments  foster cheating.  How does he know that?  J found that at public meetings and  coffee parties I only needed to mention unemployment insurance and it  would provoke two or three people to  rail against it...  Which just goes to show what kind of  coffee parties and meetings McCrossan  goes to.  The young and the single, says Mc  Crossan, don't need as much money as  heads of families. Families with two  working parents, he says, have something he calls self-insurance.  A sinister phrase.  J think we assume  that a person just  entering the  labour force,   says Mc  Crossan, doesn't have the high income  but neither does he  (sic)  have the obligations because you don't start off  at $100 a week buying a house.  He adds, I don't think you can just say  that low income means  low security.  Insurance claimants without dependants,  McCrossan emphasizes, should get less  than those with dependants. The rate is  now 60% across the board, but he would  like to see that dropped to 50% for  single people.  He is also quite determined that people  who quit their jobs should not be eligible for unemployment insurance.  We're paying about $500 million a year  to people who quit their jobs.   Giving  them full benefits is  like paying an  arsonist to burn down his own house.  What about the woman who quits because  of sexual harassment on the job?  The Conservatives want to introduce the  new bill by March 1. Now's the time to  protest. Write to Ron Atkey, Minister  of Employment and Immigration, Parliament Buildings, Ottawa.  B.C. Fed rallies  The British Columbia Federation of  Labour is organizing against the  UIC cutbacks. As this issue goes  to press, they are preparing for a  rally October 11 at the Garden Auditorium of the PNE at 8 p.m.  We lost at Lions Gate.  At this year's annual general meeting of  Lions Gate Hospital September 19, all  four of the new board members elected  are anti-choice on abortion.  That means that four of the twelve-member board of the hospital, which serves  the communities of North and West Vancouver, will now make the disruption of  abortion services their number one  priority.  The feeling was  totally different from  the pro-choice victory of the year  before,   said pro-choice supporter  Sheila Perrett.  Anti-choicers turned out in force,  flaunting their typical array of  fetus imagery.  The voting wasn't even close.  Imcumbent and pro-choicer Marilyn Webb  for example, got 221 votes. Another  pro-choicer, John Bell, came in with  234.  Compare those numbers with anti-choicers  Mike Welton and Norman Duce. They  received 419 and 438 votes respectively.  You could .call it a Duce coup,   commented  a pro-choice organizer in despair.  Duce recommended himself to the meeting  by saying that he had four children,  two of whom had been born at Lions Gate.  That meant, he said, that he was very  familiar with the emergency and maternity sections of Lions Ga^f.  Not as familiar as your wife',   came a  pro-choice interjection.  What went wrong? The North Shore Women's  Centre worked hard on getting people out  When I thought of the pro-choicers who  could have been at the meeting,  but  weren't,  I felt sick,   said a North Shore  woman.  The   "pro-lifers" had the numbers.   They  got their people out  there and we didn't  Nurse-Nice-Guy  will be no more  The government must realize  that  the jig  is up.   It can't have a free ride any  longer on the backs of overworked and  underpaid nurses.  Doris Shepherd, a leader of the Registered Nurses Association (RNABC) speaking  When the association sits down this fall  to hammer out a new contract with the  government, Shepherd warns there will be  no more   "Nurse Nice  Guy".  At the union's two-day wage and policy  conference in Vancouver recently, Shepherd told nurses that they had to stand  united to demand the decent wages and  working conditions we deserve.  Shepherd condemned the government's  Essential Services Disputes Act as being  harmful to nurses.  Last year,   in binding arbitration under  this act,   hospital nurses received a  rotten agreement,   she said.  What happened was insult added vo injury,\  compounded by inequity. Given the way  employers abuse the law, let's hope  essential services legislation doesn't  force nurses to the picket line, Shepherd!  warns.  Bargaining for next year's contract will  begin before the binding arbitration,  which produced the 1978-79 contract, is  implemented.  And who knows if the nurses' retroactive  will have been paid by then,   she said.  Nurses earn $8.28 an hour after one year Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  LOCAL MOVEMENT NEWS  Happy October 18 female persons  A mere fifty years ago, Canadian women  were judged to be 'persons' under the  British North America Act, Canada's  constitution.  The Person's Case was a legal battle  between the government of Prime Minister Mackenzie King and five Canadian  suffragists over the eligibility of  women for Senate appointment.  The Canadian Supreme Court ruled in 1928  that women were not "persons" under the  BNA Act and were thus ineligible for  Senate appointment.  The women, Emily  Murphy, Nellie McClung, Louise McKinney,  Irene Parlby and Henrietta Muir Edwards,  appealed that ruling to the British  Privy Council which overturned the Supreme Court decision the following year.  In 1931, King appointed the first woman  to the Senate.  She was Cairine Wilson  of Montreal, first national president  of the National Federation of Liberal  Women.  WomanVision, Vancouver's only feminist  radio program, is commemorating the  fiftieth anniversary of the "Person's  Case" with a documentary series about  the case, which it is producing with  the help of a $2,000 grant from Secretary of State.  The three-part documentary will be aired  on Vancouver Co-operative Radio, 102.7 FM  Monday, November 5th, 12th, and 19th on  the WomanVision show at 7:00pm.  The first part of the series will consider  social conditions and events - like the  fight for the franchise - leading up to  the Person's Case.  The second part will  focus on the case itself and public  reaction to it and the third will examine the aftermath in the depression years  and legal landmarks affecting women since  1929.  The WomanVision program collective is  Emily Murphy  collecting historial materials, including prose, poetry, diaries, music and  is interviewing women in the legal profession, suggragists, relatives and  friends of the women who launched the  Person's Case.  Anyone with suggestions  about materials or interview subjects  is invited to contact WomanVision at  Vancouver Co-Operative Radio, 337 Car-  rail Street, Vancouver - 684-8494.  SENATOR NANCY BELL will be speaking on  October 18 on women in the senate. This  lecture is part of the noon-hour series  at the Women's Resources Centre 1144  Robson, entitled Women in Jeopardy. It  is being sponsored by the National Action Committee.  In Victoria, the Feminist History Group  has organized the Person Project. Their  activities include a photographic exhibition showing the women involved in  the Persons' Case decision; an art exhibition, and a 30-minute program with a  local television station.  Calgary women are holding a 'gala evening' at a local hotel. Called Women Celebrate Women, this $35-a-plate affair for  800 has sold out. Doris Anderson and Margaret Atwood will be keynote speakers.■  VSW is planning a gargantuan auction  On December 1, at the Bayview School, an  auction of unprecedented grandeur will  be taking place. VSW will auction off  such rare and irreplaceable items as  a picture of Sandry Currie in her nun's  habit...an entire feminist library...a  retreat from the struggle in a sister's  woods cabin...babysitting...Chinese meals  for your friends...cakes baked fresh for  your favourite lover on the morning of  her/his birthday...a chance to spend your  weekend producing Kinesis...an uncontested  place on the Muckamuck picket line...  All this and more if you GET BUSY NOW. Go  through your clothes closet. Anything in  there you haven't worn for six months?  Donate it to the auction. Take a look at  your library. How many books do you have  that you won't re-read (how many times  can you read Flying, anyway?).   Put them  aside for the auction.  THE AUCTION will be a highlight of our  annual Christmas party. Three committees  are already organizing for that event.  You can join the auction committee, or  the food committee or even the publicity  committee simply by calling VSW at 736  1313.  VSW quarterly meeting  VSW QUARTERLY MEETING takes place on October 24 in the basement of KITSILANO LIBRARY, 8th and MacDonald at 7.30 p.m. The  constitution will be on the  SYLVIA SPRING, executive member of VSW,  has been appointed to the national task-  force on sexism in the broadcast media  by David MacDonald, the federal minister  responsible for the status of women.  NAC president Lynn McDonald is also  among the six members of the public  on the 20-member-board. They will meet  monthly and produce a report in the  spring.  BCFW CONVENTION COMING UP: VSW members  are reminded to get their names in immediately  if they want to go as delegates.  Proposed changes in the constitution  were debated at length at VSW executive meetings in August and September.  The following amendments were proposed  and accepted:  1.  (1) f (i...B) the number 14  becomes 21  16. (3) quorum of 3 is altered to 6  members  17. members' meeting becomes extraordinary general meeting  26. (2) This article is moved down to  become (3)  (3) This article is moved up to  become (2) and annual is changed  to extraordinary general  (4) Corrected to ByLaw 26 (3)  50. An article (2) is added, which  reads: Written notice of an Annual General Meeting shall be  given to members not less than  30 calendar days prior to such  meeting.  A lot of debate occurred over the purpose served by a consistution.  Contentious viewpoints covered the Constitution as (l) a structure protecting the organization, (2) guarantee of  democratic control, (3) a bureaucratic  requirement under the Societies Act.«  Women's Building is  alive and well!  Gillian Marie and Sylvie Beauregard  We have activities planned for the  next few months, but first, an update  on our summer activities.  The work of formulating a constitution  has been completed. It was a difficult  process.  The constitution is on its way to the  Registrar of Societies for approval,  a procedure that will hopefully take  six weeks. Copies will be made available to interested women.  Briefly, the objects of the society  are:  to develop a funding base to purchase  and maintain a women's building;  to provide facilities for women and  women's groups with a feminist perspective;  to provide an environment where women  can gain from mutual support.  On disillusion of the society, its assets and BCRIC shares would be handed  over to a women's organization with similar aims and goals.  We have put together a brochure publicising the women's building and the  work of the planning committee.  This brochure is available from Vancouver Status of Women, 1090 West 7th.  We would appreciate any assistance with  the brochure's distribution, as we want  it to reach as many women as possible.  Please call VSW at 736 1313 if you have  any ideas.  We are working on a grant proposal fom  Secretary of State to help pay for the  on-going expenses of the committee. This  grant would cover phone, rent and publicity costs.  Our big news: the women's building now  has a room of its own.' We share offices  with the Women's Legal Clinic, 253 E.llth.  We meet there every second Thursday at  5.30 p.m. The next meeting is on Thursday, November 8. Women prepared to give  some energy to the planning committee  should contact us.  Fund-raising activities are planned for  this fall, which include a benefit dance  mid-November.  We are working on organizing benefits  with popular feminist musicians. Watch  of details in your Kinesis.  Women with experience in organizing benefits are welcome to join the fund-raising  committee.  We are receiving pledged BCRIC shares.  If you would like to donate your shares,  we would appreciate receiving them.  Send them by registered mail to:  The Women's Building  P.O.Box 66017 Station F Vancouver  V5N 5L4 ■  WAVAW group  organizes on the island  Vancouver Island has a Women Against  Violence Against Women group, too.  Three Victoria women's groups, Transition House, Rape Assault Centre and  SWAG, have joined together to do public education about violence against  women. They are planning to produce  two video tapes on that topic, which  will be of particular relevance to  Island women.  You can contact the Vancouver Island  Women Against Violence Against Women  at 1947 Cook Street, Victoria, B.Cb WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE  Kinesis   Sept/Qct '79  WASA protests porno  POSter Suzanne Perreault  On Monday, August 13th, 1979 at  8:30pm, outside the Cave nightclub,  Women Against Sexist Advertising  protested the use of pornography to  advertise a hair and fashion show.  A large number of womens' groups  supported this action by attending  and being part of the picket line.  The Salon 545 poster was not primarily concerned with advertising  hair fashions, furs, jewelry, foot-  ware or the majority of any other  products to be displayed there that  night. Nor did it portray the use  to which the profits from the show  were intended.  The poster even  1    Ss   1  m_\  _.*** ____^  America5  1    top      *  fcRAFFlTI  8g£yuE  WASA protest outside the Cave  failed to provide sufficient information about the show itself. Its  primary use was  to degrade and .  objectify women.  (Sepia poster concentrated on the  right buttock of a reclining woman.)  Vlfe asked the public to support our  action by boycotting the show.  If  they had already purchased their  tickets to demand refunds and send  their donation for the Children's  Hospital Fund directly to the sponsor, the Variety Club. We had  addressed envelopes for this purpose.  The hospital would then receive the  entire donation, not just the profits  for the evening.  The hair and fashion show was held  to support the Children's Hospital  Fund and to promote the United  Nation's "Year of the Child", which  strives to give children a vision  of a better world, with freedom,  health and equality for all people.  It is ironic that the oppression of  women through pornography was employed for this purpose.  Also,  the press attended this demonstration but unfortunately, press coverage for this event was inaccurate  and sensational despite press releases given prior to the event.  Pornography and the sexploitation  of women are major contributors  to the objectification of women.  As objects, women cannot function  in the world as independent human  beings.  This is not only crippling  but dangerous.  When carried to  its logical conclusion, the soft  core pornography exemplified by the  Salon 545 poster leads to "snuff  movies" in which women are tortured and killed for the purpose  of the viewers' sexual titillation.  This leads to violence against  women being not only practised but  socially accepted.  Pornography is the theory - rape  and violence against women is the  practise.%  Protest against violence  towards lesbians, gays  Verbal abuse, physical abuse, beatings,  gang assaults.  There has been a marked increase in violence against lesbians and gay men in  Vancouver over the past few months.  This was the focus of a protest rally  August 11 at Robson Square. Fifteen  groups were represented, including CUPE,  AUCE, SORWUC, BCFW, VSW, Vancouver Rape  Relief and the Lesbian Information Line.  Addressing the crowd of 200 on behalf.of  Vancouver Rape Relief, Yvette Perreault  said:  J am here as a lesbian,  as a  as a woman.  I have experienced violence  for being each of these.   Sometimes it's  hard to tell what they're beating you up  for,  and most times it just doesn't matter.  We must all stand together, emphasized  Perreault:  Women,   homosexuals and lesbians,   the non-  white and the poor are being scapegoated  for the pain and misfortune of this decaying society.  And the heat is on.  And we must understand mutual rights  and responsibilities:  You have a right to ask us for help,  and you have a right to expect us to be  re with you.  You also have a responsibility to be  there for and with us.m  Prostitutes face zealous  city fathers, cops  Kinesis staff writers  Police and zealous city fathers are  pushing for amendments to the Criminal Code which would make it easier  to bust prostitutes.  At its annual convention in Vancouver  recently, the Canadian Association  of Police Chiefs passed a resolution  urging that soliciting by a prostitute not have to be "pressing and persistent. "  Mayor of Vancouver Jack Volrich is  upset that Justice Minister Jacques  Flynn does not intend to revive the  bill to amend the Code. The bill died  last spring when the New Democratic  Party caucus insisted that committee  hearings be held and witnesses for  and against the bill be heard.  The bill was aimed at undermining the  Supreme Court decision of 1978 which  ruled the Vancouver woman Debra Hutt,  who approached a policeman in an un  marked car, had not demonstrated the  necessary "pressing and presistent"  behaviour. The Supreme Court also  ruled that a car is not a public  place.  Following the Supreme Court acquittal  of Hutt, 280 soliciting charges were  dropped.  In February of this year Vancouver  police renewed their zeal in laying  soliciting charges again. They did this  because an Ontario Court of Appeal decision appeared to counteract the  Hutt decision, and said that approaching more than one potential client  was sufficient to pass as "pressing  and persistent."  They were further inspired by a pretrial order of Provincial Court judge  Nick Mussallem who told 20 peoole to  stay away from select downtown street  corners. The order was upheld by the  B.C.Supreme Court.  Calgary police also got in on the act.  They laid charges against 61 women in  the belief that the Vancouver and Ontario rulings would mean that a prostitute could be charged if she had approached more than one man.  The first of those Vancouver February  arrests went to trial August 15. The  soliciting charge was thrown out.  Alicia Allen, 33, was acquitted by Judge  Kerry Smith.  How can a prostitute make a living if  she is not allowed to approach a prospective customer?  he asked.  Smith ruled that the facts were virtually identical to the Supreme Court  ruling in the Hutt case, and, that the  element of pestering was not'present.  Looks like the Vancouver police and an  upset Mayor Volrich are back to square  one.  Justice Minister Flynn has reportedly  suggested to Volrich that he try to  introduce a municipal nuisance bylaw. We would be happy to have a nuisance by-law if it is upheld by the  Supreme  Court,   Volrich responded.  We'll have to wait and see what Volrich in fact intends to do.  At Vancouver City Council September  19, Doug Little urged support for  for the Canadian Association of Police Chiefs.  We should do all we can to let our  police know we are behind them, he  urged.  Little and Warnett Kennedy both concurred emphatically with the cops'  complaint that they are 'seriously  hampered' by the current criminal  code. Little's motion of support passed 8-3.  Opposed were councillors Darlene  Marzari, Harry Rankin and Mike Harcourt. Councillor Marguerite Ford did  vote in support of the motion, but  said that the police should keep  their noses out of law-making,  I still  live in a country where our  police enforce the laws,  not write  them.  Prostitution has never been illegal in  Canada. Soliciting for the purposes of  prostitution is the crime. For the one  who solicits, that is. Men who buy  the services of prostitutes have never  been branded criminals.  From a feminist perspective, the criminal code drips with sexism. The proposed amendments,, which the police  chiefs and Mayor Volrich would like  so much to see, would merely compound  hypocrisy and would make the lives of  prostitutes even more difficult .■ Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  SFU conference on pornography  Philosophers contemplate navels, feminists raise the real issue  \Apny is not  LV 0£&RADlMfr TO THf  WOMfN M TOE PlCfURC,  Hm/tE, ETC,  IT CREATES  4   CLIMATE WHERE ir  S ACCEfTABLE To  fN  REALITY,  BC.I V0MEM.  Pornography: a two-day forum for all  members of the community seeking an  open discussion on a question of public concern.  What a joke.  When Simon Fraser University first  planned this conference in the spring,  there was some embarassed last-minute  scrambling to include feminists.  AUCE 2's strike intervened, and the  forum was re-scheduled for September  21-22.  Lorenne Clark, Debra Lewis and Susan  Wendell were permitted to speak for  feminism.  All have impeccable academic credentials,  which is why they were let in. All have  an active, political commitment to the  women's movement, which had nothing to  do with their being permitted to speak.  When it comes to discussing pornography,  only "experts" need apply. Especially  when it's a forum for all members of  the community.  If you're a member of the concerned public, better forget it. The conference  was held in the ritzy Holiday Inn deep  in the heart of the financial district.  It cost $40.00 to get in.  Twenty-eight people spoke. Twenty-four  men and four women. Philosophers, educators, psychologists, cops, theatre  owners, writers, artists, politicians...  Did they include any women who have  actually been portrayed in pornography,  who have been abused because of pornography?  Of course not.  Missing persons  To remind the public and conference participants of these missing persors, the  British Columbia Federation of Women  (BCFW) staged a two-hour protest outside  the hotel on the second morning of the  conference.  Inside, Clark, Lewis and Wendell spoke in  support of the demonstrators.  In a succinct and eloquent flyer, BCFW  explained the reason for the protest:  We are  tired of liberal rhetoric which  denies  the woman-hatred inherent in  pornography.   The same people who defend  pornography in the name of "sexual liberation" and "freedom of speech" strenuously oppose all portrays of Jewish or  Third World people that are anti-semeti^  or racist.  Imagine,  the BCFW statement continued,  the public outcry that would occur if  there were special movie-houses where  viewers could see whites beating up  blacks,  Christians mutilating Jews.   But  if it's called pornography and women are  the victims,  you are a prude to object.  To tell the locals about pornography,  the conference flew in "experts" from  New York and Denmark.  Danish criminologist Berl Kutchinsky  described pornography as a harmless  bore.  Most types of sex crimes, he  claims, have decreased since the Danes  legalized pornography.  The trouble with Kutchinsky's research,  comments Debra Lewis, is that it is  virtually irrelevant.  It is not even asking the right questions.   Kutchinsky makes no distinction  between erotica and violent pornography.  And he concentrates on the effects of  pornography on men.  Feminists do not claim that that there  is a one-to-one relationship between  sex crimes and pornography.   We recognize  both as being part of the systematic use  of violence against women.   We also suspect that,  over and above that systematic violence against women,   there is  a causal connection between pornography  and incidents of violent crime.  Kutchinsky admits that there has not  been any reduction in rape since the  legalization of pornography in Denmark.  The inability of a liberal ideology  to deal with the issue of censorship  was the theme of Clark's i  On the one hand, liberals say that  you can't argue for censorship if  you don't have solid data about the  negative influence on pornography.  On the other, they say that even to  conduct that kind of research would  be an invasion of privacy.  Violence vs. erotica  Sex should not be the issue with regard  to pornography, said Susan Wendell, coercion should.  Wendell outlined to the conference three  sorts of actions which would directly  contribute to solving the dilemma posed  by pornography:  Creation and distribution of i  . qual  ity erotic material which depicts adults  enjoying sex together as equals.  - Appropriate changes in legislation and  enforcement practices which will result  in more effective prevention of rape and  other kinds of assault, including sexual  acts between adults and children.  - Legal regulation of sale and distribution of material which recommends or  clearly condones unjustified physical  coercion and sexual acts between adults  and children.  The majority of speakers at the conference simply refused to deal with th,e  links between violence against women  and pornography. For the most part,  they advocated a freedom of expression  position. There was a constant attempt  to link the feminists up with the moralists.  But as Debra Lewis points out (in her  address, see below) moralism and pornography are reverse sides of the same  coin: both seek to control and demean  women's sexuality.■    kinesis siaff writers  Coercion  and consensual  sexual activity are  different  Debra Lewis  First, and most importantly, I am a  feminist. As a feminist, I approach  the issue of pornography from the particular perspective of women, based on  an overall analysis of society which  recognizes the economic, social and  sexual oppression of women.  We believe that pornography is simply  one part of a social system based on  the oppression of women. As victims  of such oppression, we do not believe  that academic objectivity deals with  the issue in a real way, in a way which  reflects the impact of violence on our  lives.  In this way, this conference  itself is no less open to criticism.  Of the six lead speakers in these sessions, only one is a woman and a feminist.  Of the remaining twenty or so  panelists, only two are, to my knowledge, feminists. We do not believe  that such tokenism adequately reflects  our concern with the issue.  Academic objectivity myth  But the myth of academic objectivity  has further implications. None of the  women speaking here today is here due  to grass-roots involvement with either  the issue of pornography or the women's  movement.  It is true that some of us  are involved at that level as well, but  it has been made quite clear that we  are allowed to participate because of  our academic qualifications and not  because of our grass-roots experience.  This is academic elitism at its worst.  We cannot divide the study of an issue  from the actual experience of those  whom it affects most directly. To do  so is an artificial way of viewing the  world, and an inslut to those of us who  have brought attention to the problem  in the first place.  The women's movement is constantly  struggling to make public those issues  traditionally seen as non-existent,  trivial, or of marginal importance.  But we continually see our issues rip-  ped-off by the so-called experts, and  then excluded from those forums set  up to examine the problem. My decision to participate in this forum was p- Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  based in part on the need to articulate these objections.  To focus directly on the issue of  pornography, the feminist perspective  presents two conditions without which  we believe any consideration of the  problem to be valueless.. In the first  place, we believe that a distinction  must be drawn between the issue of violence and coercion and that of consensual sexual activity between consenting  equals.  It is the former material that  we would define as pornographic, as  opposed to other forms of erotica,  which display desirable interactions  between human beings of either sex.  However, conventional studies of the  use and abuse- of pornography draw no  such distinctions, and are consequently  of minimal value from a feminist perspective.  It is however, the case that sexuality  and violence are closely linked In our  culture, and it is from this fact that  our concerns about pornography, as we  define it, stem. We do not see the  existence of pornography as divorced  from the prevalence of other forms of  violence against women nor, indeed, from  the general position of women in a fundamentally mysogynist society.  Pornography is one part of an ideological system which promotes women as  acceptable targets of violence and  coercion. Robin Morgan has stated,  "Pornography is the theory, rape is the  practice." This is, admittedly, placing  the problem somewhat simplisticly, yet  it is clear to us that the existence  and acceptance of pornography as a legitimate media subject is an important  weapon in the social control of women.  British sociologist Jalna Hanmer, in  her work on violence against women,  notes:  "A sociological definition of violence  needs to include both the use of force  and its threat,  as both compel or constrain women to behave or not to behave in certain ways.     Death is at one  extreme of the continuum while  the  threat of force is at the other.     Lying  in between are a variety of everyday  occurrences from wounding and grievous  bodily harm to indecent assault and rape.  A definition of violence should include  the  legal categories and move beyond to  include all modes of behaviour that  coerce compliance.     This definition  is a feminine one,  based on the perspective of women. "  Pornography has its role in social control in two ways.  First, it displays  women as acceptable targets of violence  and coercion.  In the eyes of men, this  reinforces our image as submissive and  masochistic, and justifies their coercive behaviour towards us. Second,  such portrayal exerts an influence over  how we as women see ourselves.  It presents male dominance/female submission  as the norm, and reinforces the hegemony of such relations over us.  In addition, it presents us with a  clear warning of the alternatives 'ñ†  available to us should we step beyond the traditional roles ascribed  to us. Women who do not choose to  accept our position as the property  of individual men become open territory through pornography or other  socially approved acts of violence.  As feminists, then, we do not see the  issue of 'social costs and benefits'  of pornography as a simple question  of the direct relationship between  pornographic material and specific  acts of violent behaviour.  In fact,  a perusal of existing research in  this area, keeping in mind the crit-  cisms I have already made, is inconclusive at best and both confused and  confusing at worst.  Yet, even assuming that such research,  performed from a feminist perspective,  would have some value, it is only the  tip of the iceberg concerning the effects of pornography as an ideological  tool. As such it is a part of a superstructure which supports and maintains  existing social relationships regard-  sophisticated.  Images of violence  against women, from the pages of Vogue  magazine to snuff movies have become  increasingly acceptable, even fashionable.  But the message is as clear as it was  to our sisters at the stake : this time  you have gone too far, and this may well  be your fate.  less of the overt use of violence.  This is not to say that we as feminists  are unconcerned about effects of pornography on acts of physical violence.  It does mean that pornography, as well  as rape, wife battering, prostitution,  and other forms of violence against  women must be seen as part of a broader  social framework.  The title of this session, then, 'social  costs and benefits', neglects to ask  several important questions.  First,  and most importantly is, costs for whom?  I'm sure that it will not surprise you  that my answer is that it is women and  children who pay the price for the  existence of pornography and other forms  of sexual coercion. Periodic fluctuations in what society is prepared to  label violent crime do not account for  the all-pervasive nature of violence  and coercion in our lives. Many sociologists have indicated that the threat of  violence is an underlying feature of all  exploitive relationships whether based  on class, race or ethnic origin.  This  is no less true for women.  Virtually all women are aware of the  threat of violence in their lives. We  know that there are places we should  not go, things we should not do.  This  is not to say that all of us suffer  actual physical violence.  There are  The next question to be asked, then,  is who benefits? Certainly it is true  that, in the short run, men, individually and as a group, are allowed to  maintain a dominant position through  the control of women by pornography.  But the issue is more complex than  this.  I suggest that it is the state  as a whole which most benefits from  controlling women.  I refer to the state  not only as government, but as the  entire system of legal, cultural and  ideological structures which exert  control over our lives and sustain  exploitive relationships based on sex  as well as class and race.  Our entire  social system is based on relations of  inequality.  Individual men are offered  the short term gains of insuring their  favoured position vis a vis women so  that, in the long run, the social system remains intact.  This approach means that, as feminists,  we are opposed to both conventional  approaches to the issue of pornography.  We are opposed to the traditional civil  libertarian stance which advocates the  elimination of all controls concerning  pornographic literature.  Freedom of  choice is a myth in a society based on  relations which are oppressive, in which  only the priviledged have a real influence on what we are allowed to see and  do.  Pornography and moralism are no more than opposite  sides of the same coin  a myriad of other control mechanisms,  both economic and social, to insure  that we remain in our proper place.  But violence is the bottom line, the  weapon to be used when others fail.  This then, provides some explanation  of the rise in violent pornography in  the past few years. Women are increasingly unwilling to accept a passive and  submissive role and, although this  movement is still at a very initial  stage, the threat to male supremacy  is a real one.  Pornography then comes  out of the closet.  Although we no longer burn self-sufficient women at the stake as witches,  it is perhaps only because our methods  of social control have become more  Yet we are equally opposed to a moralistic approach which insists that it  is sexuality itself which needs to be  censored and controlled.  This is  simply the other side of the coin preventing the development of genuine  erotica based on new principles which  would promote real freedom of choice  in our sexual relationships.  Pornography and moralism are no more  than opposite sides of the same coin -  the one seeks to control women through  overt violence and threats, while the  other uses the more subtle approach of  limiting the options available to us.  In this way, ironically enough, they  work hand in hand to ensure that women  are maintained in a dependent, submissive positional Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  WOMEN'S STRUGGLE  Pink collar workers see red: IIC gyps AUCE 2 workers  Ann Schaef fer  Women workers: Beware of Industrial Inquiry  Commissions bearing settlements of 6 and 1%.  Local 2 of the Association of University  and College Employees (AUCE) at Simon  Fraser University recently received these  stellar sums in a binding IIC decision  covering two years.  To quote from the IIC report: "Effective  November 22, 1978, all of the pay rates...  which expired on March 31, 1978, shall be  increased by 6%.  Effective November 22,  1979, all rates shall be increased by a  further 1%."  In addition, employees of  15 years will be granted one additional  day of annual vacation for each additional  year of service to a maximum of five days,  resulting in entitlement to six weeks in  the 19th year. In making its decision, the  Commission "remain seized of the matter"  of wages of grade 0 and 1 workers, mostly  temporary and/or student workers doing the  same tasks as grade 2 workers.  Why did they settle for more?  Meanwhile, within the past few months other  campus groups have settled for significantly greater sums for significantly less  effort than AUCE 2:  * Poly-Party, representing about 70 tradespeople, agreed to a two-year contract with  a 9% increase in the first year and 7h% in  the second. The agreement was reached in  mediation.  * Faculty (represented by the Faculty  Association, not a union) were granted 6%  across-the-board by the Board of Governors  as well as an increase in career progress  payments averaging 2.67%.  * Administrative and professional staff  (the recipients of bonuses, cocktail parties, trips to Harrison Hot Springs, etc.  during the course of SFU's many recent  strikes) received an 8%  salary increase as  well as a career progress pool (1.3%  of  payroll) to be distributed among eligible  managers.  AUCE 2's 600 members, predominantly women,  are clerical, technical and library workers at the university. Approximately 200  are temporary workers, the great majority  in grades 0 and 1.  Prior to the appointment of the IIC the  union undertook a 6i-week all-out strike  of the campus after a series of rotating  strikes from December to February failed  to produce results. Mass picketing and  shows of support from numerous Lower Mainland unions characterized the lengthy strike.  During one mass-picketing episode, 18  peaceful marchers were dragged away and  arrested by RCMP officers. (See sidebar)  AUCE 2 is a young union—the IIC settlement  is only their third contract with SFU.  The first contract (Nov. 1974 - Nov. 1976)  was easily won, considering that estimates  of the total wage increase range from 36%  (AUCE figures) to 70$ (university figures).  Union arguments at the time revolved around  the concept of equal pay for work of equal  value and took into account the salaries  paid to entry-level janitors at the institution. The administration persisted in comparing salaries to those of similar workers  at UBC.  In the second round of negotiations, AIB  controls were in effect and the university  was already aruging that AUCE 2 workers  were "overpaid", primarily because corresponding UBC workers had already been caught  in the AIB squeeze. These negotiations resulted in an erosion of AUCE 2's earlier  victory. In a 17-month contract, wage increases were only 3.68$ and 2.54$ while  inflation averaged around 9%  per year.  The most recent contract further erodes the  real wages of AUCE 2 workers. During the  lengthy negotiations (which began several  months after the contract expired and were  not completed for nearly a year, with the  publication of the IIC document), the  university's position progressed from offering 0%  with a bonus (which would not affect  the base rate of pay and would thus not be  included in negotiations for the next contract) to their final offer of 6%  spread over  two years. The union's final position was to  demand a two-year contract with a 6%  increase  in the first year and another 3%  in the second  year.  The university's history of bargaining with  AUCE 2 would seem to indicate either that  they made a very serious mistake in signing  the first contract or that something more  sinister is afoot. If AUCE 2 workers are,  indeed, overpaid (a slipper concept at best),  then that is a result of their first contract,  on which the administration has attempted to  renege (intentionally or not) practically  ever since the ink dried on their signauures.  One wonders if a large, bureaucratic institution such as SFU, with overpaid administrators and personnel officers, would be  likely to make such a silly mistake. More  than once, the Industrial Inquiry Commission decision unabashedly (and somewhat  embarassingly) praised SFU's traditional and  rather unimaginative bargaining methods.  ("By comparison with the method employed  by the Employer, the approach and techniques used by the Union leave something to  be desired...In short, we are satisfied  that the methods and techniques used by  the Employer in carrying out salary comparisons are generally superior to those  employed by the Union...Consequently we  are obliged to attach a good deal more  credence to them.")  Regardless of the long-run intent of the  university administration, it is clear  that the Commission's decision is in  many ways a defeat for AUCE 2, for other  unions with a majority of women members  and for unorganized women workers as well.  The Commission refused to consider the  concept of equal pay for work of equal  value, conveniently opting out of any  ethical or equitable considerations by  saying that the concept was not a part  of the existing collective agreement,  and therefore none of their business.  They also wrote that "however desirable  the objective-, it is not something which  can reasonably be achieved in our present society", taking the words out of  the administration's brief to them, and,  referring to another decision for moral  support, that the Labour Code "contains  no provision 'that justice is to replace  the law of supply and demand'...while  such standards as a just wage are based  upon desirable concepts, they are not  relevant in our collective bargaining  scene where wage gains are won by economic power."  Women are betrayed by such reasoning  which serves to perpetuate inequities  in wages and in the many facets of life  which are affected by economics. As  long as wages are determined by simple  comparisons with primarily unorganized  workers (clerical, secretarial) who also  happen to be women, the real purchasing  power of both the organized and unorganized sectors will stagnate and fall  behind. And, according to the logic of  the above statements, if we don't already have economic power, we won't get  it through collective bargaining. We're  trapped I  The only course open to us is to refuse  to accept this mode of thinking. Making  wage comparisons is a tricky business,  and in the AUCE 2 case it backfired.  Lest I sound too negative, I'd like to  point out that there were many positive  consequences of AUCE 2's most recent  battle.  In face of government attack,  AUCE decides it can't go it alone  For one, the AUCE Provincial, representing six locals, has applied for affiliation with the Canadian Labour Congress,  and in turn, the B.C. Federation of  Labour. As a union, they learned what  many workers as individuals have learned  before forming a union—that they can't  go it alone. The union has maintained its  independent status as an autonomous,  democratic, locally-based union ever  since its inception; now it seeks to  improve on that status by sheltering  under the CLC umbrella. This is in the  face of government actions circumscribing the basic rights of the collective  bargaining process, particularly for  public sector employees, including the  right to strike and to picket.  A great deal of solidarity was expressed by other unionists, who risked  arrest and criminal records to show  their support for women's struggles  for equitable wages and better working  conditions. Hopefully this will inspire  AUCE 2 members and other pink-collar  workers to continue fighting with more  drive and determination in their next,  inevitable battle.  It became evident that "you don't win  principles such as equal pay for work  of equal value in third party settlements. They will be won only by women  unionists fighting hard on picket lines",  in the words of Norma Edelman, coordinator of the union. Knowing that you  won't be given your rights, you have  to grab them, in the words of a famous  feminist, gives women workers a more  reasonable picture of the obstacles we'll  have to face. Employers aren't going to  give anything away. AUCE 2 and other  pathbreaking unions must be prepared to  strike long and hard.  And the university administration was  surely not blind to the fact that AUCE  2's strike vote was only won by a slight  majority. That just wasn't enough to  convince them that the membership were  serious about their wage demands.  Poly-party: a bargaining table breeze  Poly-Party's recent settlement was won  on the basis of a 69$ strike vote.  Although they have also endured a  lengthy strike (fall of 1976) their  settlements have been reasonable in  terms of the rate of inflations. Although SFU's enrolment has declined  (it is down \\%  from last fall), presumably as a result of its negative  labour environment, this does not entirely explain Poly-Party's success at  the bargaining table. ■ Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  LABOUR'S STRUGGLE  On strike over issue human rights board  should have settled long ago  BCGEU recognizes  sexual harassment  At B.C. Ice and Storage, they're out  on the picket line over an issue which  should have been settled by a human  rights branch board of inquiry years  ago.'  Susan Jorgensen is on the line, too,  striking for equal pay for equal work.  It's three years since she first filed  complaint with the B.C. Human Rights  Branch, I allege I am not paid a wage  equal to male employees.  A lineworker at B.C. Ice and Storage,  Jorgensen racks fish. It's a job she's  been doing since she started there in  1973. It's defined as "women's work" and  pays less than the other jobs at the  plant, traditionally performed by men.  "They have one seniority  list but if  there is a layoff,   they  lay the women  off before the men.     I'd been sent home  many times,  for a day,  a week or months  depending on the season.     But there'd  be a man hired that day and they 'd  keep him on.     The company would say he  was doing a different job. "  Although Jorgensen's complaint names  her union's collective agreement as  being discriminatory, she says she  has had the support of the union -  United Fishermen and Allied Workers -  throughout.  A union can't always get what it .wants  in a collective agreement, she explains.  The workers at B.C. Ice and Cold Storage are currently out on strike over  wages and the creation of a single rate  for all workers.  The Board of Inquiry, first convened  in January of this year, has been postponed one more time until January 1979.■  RCMP playing musical chairs with SFU 18 charges  AnnSchaeffer  On March 22, a mass rally of students  and unionists was called to support  the AUCE 2 workers who were entering  the third week of their strike against  Simon Fraser University.  There was music and then the inevitable speeches. It was a beautiful, warm  clear day. Hawks circled overhead; three  curious deer wandered down from the  mountain to have a look at the hundreds  of peaceful demonstrators. Early on,  some students tried to block a car  going up the road to the campus but  AUCE 2 organizers made them get back  on the median. Then one of the speakers,  BCGEU secretary-treasurer John Fryer  said everyone crossing the picket  line was a scab and that he, for one,  was going to go stand in the middle  of the road and stop them from going  through to the university.  About 100 people joined him, blocking  traffic in both directions. Almost immediately, four or five RCMP cars arrived as well as several groups of men  in suits, carrying walkie-talkies. An  announcement came over the P.A. system  that it was okay to move in circles,  that people should keep moving and let  cars through. The police were actually  directing cars to turn around, telling  the drivers, They won't let you through,  go park down the hill.  The rally emcee came on over the P.A.  system again, asking for RCMP help in  directing traffic and reminding the  picketers, over and over again, that  this was a peaceful demonstration in  support of AUCE, and that they should  keep moving, and may chant if they  wanted to.  By this time no cars were coming  through. It turned out that the RCMP  were blocking cars at the bottom of  the hill.  The marchers were peaceful.  The RCMP had a special video unit to  take pictures of all the people walking on the line; they also took photographs. Plainclothesmen kept walking  around and talking on their walkie-  talkies. Nothing happened.  I kept expecting the injunction to  show up. By this time the marchers  had been walking in circles for an  hour and a half. It had been a long  time since any cars had even tried  to go through the picket line. I left.  On the way home I heard sensational  accounts on the radio, saying that the  crowd was violent and that the police  had had to arrest many demonstrators.  About one month later, charges were  laid against 18 of those arrested -  "obstructing a police officer" and  "blocking a highway." Their trials were  scheduled invididually over a four-  month period, even though all of the  charges were identical and a mass trial  would have been more feasible, less  costly and less time-consuming.  The first trial, that of i^eter Armitage, was held at the end of July.  He was convicted of blocking a highway and finded $250. The second charge  was dropped because the defence convincingly arguea that Starek, the officer  in charge, did not adequately inform  the picketers that their actions were  illegal, nor did he use the p.a. system  to announce his desire that they clear  the road.  Within the past week, at least two of  the remaining 17 have received subpoenas  changing the charges to "obstructing a  highway" and "obstructing a particular  RCMP officer", rather than the officer  in charge, presumably so that there can  be no doubt that a specific officer was  obstructed and charges can't be dismissed as easily. It is expected that  the rest of those arrested will eventually receive subpoenas as well.  The next trials are scheduled for the  end of October.  Support Ann Russell  Ann Russell, BCFW activist, goes before  the court October 29.  The trials are taking place in the provincial courts in Burnaby. Attend to support  Anne Russell on the morning of October 29.  The majority of the trials will be held  in November. Some are scheduled for  the same time as the B.C.Fed convention  so it is expected that they will be rescheduled.  SFU 18 spokesperson Bill Burgess says  these arrests are an attack on fundamental workers' rights.  The pickets  faced intimidation tactics in the form  of police camera surveillance and the  use of excessive force.   The charges  are an alarming extension of the use  of the criminal legal system in place  of civil proceedings,  if any, appropriate to labour disputes.  When you can be arrested and sent to  jail on charges of blocking a highway,  simply by being photographed on the  picket line,   this is an attack against  our hard-won right to strike.  THE SFU 18 DEFENCE COMMITTEE NEEDS  FUNDS TO CONTINUE THE COSTLY LEGAL  BATTLES. DONATIONS CAN BE SENT TO: c/o  AUCE PROVINCIAL OFFICE, #901 - 207 W.  Hastings, Vancouver V6B 1J8. ■  The Women's Rights Committee of the B.C.  Federation of Labour has just completed  its interim report on sexual harassment.  Unions including the Letter Carriers,  Postal Workers and B.C. Telecommunications have been developing policy which  recognizes sexual harassment as a major  issue facing women workers.  The Women's Committee of the BCGEU (B.C.  Government Employees Union) has been  circulating a questionnaire on sexual  harassment.  BCGEU member Maureen  Headley comments:  "It was quite clear from the narratives  provided by the returned questionnaires  that the most blatant types of sexual  harassment occur with young women on  their first jobs. "  "As women get older,   the examples of  harassment seem to change.     The harassment becomes much more subtle. "  "Three of the needs identified in the  questionnaires were quite clear.     Women  want more discussion and public education on  the subject,   an opportunity  to  talk about the problem with other women  workers,   and some  training on how to  deal with the problem. "  As a result of the survey, the BCGEU  has agreed to include a discussion of  sexual harassment in shop steward  courses, and to develop a workshop on  the topic which would give rank and  file members a chance to talk about  their own experience of harassment.  (Sisterhood info) _  The strike, the struggle,  continues. . .  The strike continues at Muckamuck.  In a decision Friday, August 24th,  the B.C. Labor Relations Board rejected a management application to  reconsider the original June 6th  decision against decertification.  The labor board panel also rejected  an appeal by the employer who claimed  that current employees at the restaurant (i.e. scabs) want the union disbanded.  The panel said it had no 'persuasive  evidence' that the union, Service  Office and Retail Workers of Canada  Local 1, did not have the support of  the majority of the employees who  went on strike.  But what if those employees who went  out on strike aren't on the picket  lines regularly?  The panel ruled that in every lengthy  strike there will be some employees  who went out on strike who do not  picket, but who remain interested in  the dispute and who plan to return to  work when a settlement is reached.*  Nobody can do it  like a union can  When employees of a McDonald's restaurant formed a union recently in  Shawnigan, Quebec, big Mac managers  all over the world started getting  indigestion.  An organizer for the Confederation of  National Trade Unions (CNTU), to which  the new union is affiliated, says that  this is the first time workers anywhere ;  in the McDonald's chain have been successfully organized.  The union is preparing a set of contract  demands while the. Quebec labour department considers its request for accreditation. Shawnigan is a strong union  town, and probably as good a place as  any in which to start the big Mac attack.i Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  ACROSS CANADA  Beware the Beautiful 80's  The multi-million dollar Shoppers Drug  Mart chain has turned the ignition on  a new campaign to boost cosmetic sales  to $100 million by the end of what  Shopper's president, Murray Moffler  calls, "The Beautiful '80's".  The drug store 'chain, under the guise  of promoting women's "beauty" as being in  the same league as health and fitness,  wants to suck $100 million out of the  hard-earned pocketbooks of women.  President Koffler admitted that cosmetic sales, "represent the real growth  area of the company - and for the drug  retailing industry as a whole," - outstripping prescription drugs and personal hygiene products.  The male-owned chain is bent on pushing  its cosmetic products. "The Look-At-Me  Decade" its glossy advertising campaign  is costing the company millions, and is  also costing women millions - not just  in terms of $$$, but self-image and  respect.  Cosmetic ads covertly pedal the theory  that if a woman isn't all dolled up,  Barbie doll style, she won't attract a  man - and that just, won't do, now would  it?  So, the message is, if you don't wear  blood red nailpolish, the wet-look lipstick and gobs of gunk on your face,  you're not attractive.  And if you're  not attractive, "beautiful" etc. then  what are you???  But to add insult to injury, the company  is camoflauging the trite hype under  the banner of "fitness".  To quote the story in McLean's: "It will  be a 'glorious day' rhapsodized Shoppers  founder and chairman, Murray Koffler,  when "we will know that 'beauty' has  joined the basics of 'health and fitness  for which Shoppers Drug Mart stores have  always been known, and we will become  the community centre that protects and  maintains the health, fitness and beauty  of all its citizens."  Company officials have said that in  order to raise sales they plan to reach,  as yet, untouched markets.  Who is to be  the new market?  "Mr. & Mrs. Canada,"  says Koffler.  Yuck and Ugh.  VSW urges women to do something about  this massive exploitation of half the  population. It's time men were told  that they are not going to get fat and  rich by exploiting and degrading our  inherent true beauty - naturalness.  We can do our bit by refusing to shop  at Shoppers Drug.  Woman wins damages  in harassment case  Toronto - In a landmark decision, an  Ontario Human Rights Commission board  of inquiry has awarded a Toronto woman  $3,000 in damages and $500 in lost  wages after she filed a complaint of  sexual harassment on the job.  Nineteen-year-old Maria Ballesta, an  immigrant from Uraguay, filed the complaint against Toronto meat-packing  firm Maclver and Lines Ltd. and a male  employee.  Hired in August, 1976, she  said she was dismissed and discriminated against because of her sex.  Ballesta said a male co-worker made .  sexual advances toward her and physically assaulted her in front of a  company supervisor who failed to take  any action. When she complained, she  was accused of lying and told to get  out.  The case was the first of its kind to  reach the tribunal stage.  However, no evidence was presented because the hearing was adjourned ten  minutes after it started while lawyers  negotiated a settlement.  According to Jim Stratton, director of  conciliation and compliance for the  human rights commission, the case "will  bring to public attention that sexual  harassment of employees is a serious  human rights problem in our province."  Maclver and Lines will apologize to  Ballesta.  The co-worker named in the  complaint also agreed to send a letter  of apology to her.  The company also said it will hold a  seminar with the human rights commission  on company premises to explain the human rights code.  Upstream  El/ERNOT/CE WHEN THE ECONOMY COOLS  ...WE GET THE FREEZE OUT/  Working women attack cutbacks  The effect of government cutbacks on  women was the theme of the recent founding convention of the Saskatchewan Working Women's Association (SWAA).  The association came into being as a result of two women's conferences spon-  - sored by the Saskatchewan Federation  of Labour in '77 and '78.  Those involved in the formation of the association, which now has active locals in  Regina, Saskatoon and Prince Albert,  believe that there is a need for working  women to organize.  The founding conference dealt with the  effect of cutbacks in education, day  care, healthy care and the effect of  cutbacks on private sector jobs such  as clerical and service occupations.  For more information, contact the Saskatchewan Working Women's Association,  Box 4154, Regina, Saskatchewan.  Jamaican women get landed  The nine Jamaican women will be granted  permanent landed immigrant status,  Immigration Official, Ron Atkey confirmed September 19th.  The Jamaican women faced deportation  for not having declared that they were  leaving children behind in Jamaica, when  they applied to the Canadian government  under a domestic work program.  The  Canadian government said that they wanted single women, without dependants.  .But as the Jamaican women point out,  the officials knew they had children,  and turned a blind eye until the program ended in 1975.  The women, all living in Toronto, were  ordered deported in January after taking  their case to the Federal Court.  The  court ruled that the deportation was  valid, but did not rule on the question  of whether or not the human rights com  mission had jurisdiction over the immigration department.  The former Liberal government had asked  the Federal Court of Canada to rule that  the human rights commission did not in  fact have the right to rule on immigration cases, arguing that the commission would be swamped with appeals by  immigrants being deported.  But the Conservatives have decided to  let the human rights commission investigate complaints of racial discrimination against immigration officials and  their practices.  Woman wins share of the farm  On Ontario woman has received 30% of the  family farm, in a divorce settlement handed down recently by the Ontario Supreme  Court.  County court Judge Brian Clements said  the woman, of Tilbury East Township south  of Chatham, is entitled to more than $280.  000 of the $712,000 estate, including the  30$ of the farm.  After her marriage in 1953, the woman  worked full-time on the farm maintaining  the family home and raising four children ,  as well as keeping the farm books.  Her husband had argued that he had total  ownership rights to the farm assets because he had inherited the farm from his  parents. But the judge ruled that that  was contrary to the Family Law Reform Act,  CP info.  Women's Institutes going strong  Requests for amendments to the Canada  Pension Plan and Old Age Security Pension, a Canada-wide policy for disposal  of hazardous wastes, and child custody  legislation, were among the resolutions  carried at a four-day conference of the  Federated Women's Institutes (FWI) held  in Saskatoon recently.  The 60 year old 'FWI is a 50,000 member  rural organization with the motto "for  home and country".  Commenting on the current Canada Pension  Plan, the FWI said that women who work  in the home contribute "a lifetime of  unpaid child care functions on behalf  of their families and society, only to  find themselves alone and practically  destitue in old age, since work in the  home builds no security for old age."  SAC being phased out  The Saskatchewan Advisory Council on the  Status of Women (SAC) is being phased  out.  'The council has outlived its usefulness,  says the minister responsible for the  status of women, Gordon Snyder.  He intends to allocate $40,000 to volunteer women's groups because, "they more  accurately reflect the feelings of the  majority of Saskatchewan citizens."  Illegal to deny abortion access  The Alberta Supreme Court recently held  a doctor liable for failing to help his  patient find access to a legal abortion  in Edmonton.  The doctor had argued that he only had  admitting privileges at hospitals without Therapeutic Abortion Committees.  However, the Court said that the doctor's  legal duty was to refer his patient to  a doctor with admitting privileges at  hosptials where there were committees.  Therefore a doctor who refuses to refer  a patient entitled to an abortion, to  a doctor or an agency able to help,  could be in violation of her/his legal  duty.  Northern Women's Journal -Aug/Sept '79 NORTHERN WOMEN  Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  Campaign sparked by Yukon women gets Linklater out of jail  Kristine Linklater is free.  After a day-long hearing, Justice Harry  Maddison granted the request of her  lawyer Paul O'Brien that she be released  until the time of her appeal.  That appeal will be heard in Vancouver  late in '79 or early in 1980.  Linklater, a 23 year old Yukon Indian  woman from Old Crow, was found guilty  of second degree murder in March of  this year for shooting her husband. He  had beaten her time and time again.  The sentence: life imprisonment.  She  would not have been eligible for parole  for ten years.  At the bail hearing, O'Brien pointed out  that if her appeal is successful, and a  verdict of manslaughter returned In place  of the murder conviction, the time Link-  later will have spent in custody by then  could amount to more than the sentence  for manslaughter.  If the appeal is not successful, Link-  later will again face the 10 year term  in Kingston.  Her bail release is a significant victory for the women's movement whose  efforts succeeded in bringing Link-  later 's case to media attention.  It's worthwhile re-tracing the steps:  1. Yukon women, appalled at the verdict  of murder for a woman repeatedly beaten  throughout a marriage marred by drunken  violence, write letters to their local  papers. They write to the politicians.  They contact the CBC in Winnipeg to get  coverage of Linklater's case on Our  Native. Land.  In addition, they contact  the women's media.  The newsletter of  the Yukon Status of Women Council, the  Optimist, covers the case thoroughly.  Upstream, the Ottawa women's newspaper,  launches an appeal fund of Linklater.  Kinesis covers the case.  2. A reporter from Whitehorse, Mary  McGuire, files her story not only with  the Whitehorse Star, but also with the  Toronto Globe and Mail.  3. The civil liberties associations of  Vancouver and Toronto, Indian Rights for  Indian Women, the Alberta and Ontario  Status of Women Councils, along with VSW,  join the letter-writing protest to politicians.  4. Eventually, spurred on by the fuss,  a Toronto Star reporter arrives in Whitehorse.  His quest: a personal interview  with Linklater.  His story, "Kristine's  Downhill Run to Tragedy" appears in April.  The title alludes to the fact that Kristine, before marriage, was a champion  downhill ski racer.  The article speaks  New Caledonia allows women's access  Trude la Bossiere  Prince George's College of New Caledonia board will allow "Women's Access  Activities" to the extent of the special  grant for this purpose received from the  ministry of eduction.  The two recommendations put forth by principal Charles  Mc Caffray were passed at the July 14  board meeting in Prince George.  The uneventful vote was in sharp contrast  to the ugly atmosphere created at the June  meeting in Burns Lake. We weren't at the  Friday evening public meeting at which a  female employment counsellor was verbally shredded (in public) after reporting on the need for re-entry skills  training and commenting on the popularity of women's studies courses offered  over the winter in the Burns Lake area.  Minutes of the meeting appear inoffensive,  which is understandably for the better.  Who wants to be reminded of unpleasantness?  Apparently a letter outlining the behav-  ious of certain board members was sent  to Chair Ruth Rushant.  She didn't make  the letter public and a source states  that Rushant is concerned with keeping  a viable working body going in the form  of council and the Women's Advisory Committee. She apparently says that much  work is needed to bring an awareness of  women's problems with the college to  the attention of board members.  Women from the Interim Advisory Committee expressed relief at board approval  and say they are willing to work hard  and without confrontation on the hiring  of a staff person and the hope of starting  some programming for January 1980.  Principal McCaffray was more effusive,  promising to meet with the executive  early in the week to determine how much  was left of the $25,000 grant and to discuss job descriptions for the staff person. He stated that the college would  be able to act quickly on this matter,  and that he would be reporting in full,  to the council in April 1980.  The activities should be interesting to  watch.  The male board memebers, although  appearing chastised at this last meeting,  appear determined by their actions and  comments to undermine efforts by women  to gain access to college programs.  The College of New Caledonia region includes Burns Lake, Granisle, Quesnel and  Mackenzie as well as Prince George, which  is 12$ of all British Columbia.■  Will Yukon women  get a transition house?  Will the Yukon Indian Women's Association get a transition house in the Yukon?  Federal MP Erick Neilsen says that a  women's transistion house is "rightly  or wrongly, just not a priority."  There are more important concerns in the  Yukon.  Like roads.  Somer Brodribb of Whitehorse comments:  Community support for a transition house  in Whitehorse has been something like you  would expect a colony of lepers to receive. ...residents  living three blocks  away from the proposed site of the house  complained that  "a whole gang of beat-up  women and their damn kids hanging around  it going to  lower the tone of the place. "  In 1976 Flo Whyard, then minister of  Human Resources, told the Indian women:  "there is no way I can commit this government now to assumption of an operatin  cost for such a hostel three years down  the road. "  The new minister of Human Resources,  Meg McCall, supports the proposal. Neil-  sen, now minister of Public Works, admits  there are 370 Public Works houses in  Whitehorse, many of them empty.  Would one of those be too much to ask for?  not only to the Linklater case, but to  the whole issue of wife-beating.  He quotes local Yukon residents:  "So many women here are scared to say  anything about it.     They blame  themselves.     They say  they fell down the  stairs,  or they hit themselves on a  door.     Well,   they're not fooling anybody.     We know where  they got it from... "  Wife-beating, concludes the Star report,  is "the great unmentioned crime of the  Yukon. "  Jones offers to put Linklater up in   ►  his own home.  5. Moved by the Star story, a Toronto  woman offers to pay the expenses of  treatment for alcoholism Linklater might  require.  She is now attending treatment  sessions at Toronto's Donwood institute.  Recently, she told Upstream in a telephone interview that we was very glad  to be out of jail and was enjoying her  stay at the clinic.  6. Linklater's is not an exceptional  case, Sharon Grunberg, of The Whitehorse Star, comments:  "...a satisfactory conclusion   to  the  Linklater case will not be  the end of  the^ story.     This tragedy has pointed out  graphically what many of us already knew:  we do not have sufficient alcohol  treatment facilities or education and job  training opportunities in the North.  The sudden impact of our technologically  advanced culture has not been cushioned  by programs designed to help human beings  make the transistion. "_  For three years, the transition house  proposal has been doing the desk  shuffle.  Rob Hart, regional consultant  for demonstration grants, warns that  he expects most proposals to be eliminated or reduced in size.  These are  times of fiscal restraint. SomerBoderibbinfo  ASPEN still blowin'  in tile WinCl       Trudela Bossiere  The newsletter ASPEN, written by and  about northern women, received a $3,000  publishing grant from the Secretary of  State recently. ASPEN had been in a  temporary hiatus after its initial  $1200 was spent on three issues this  past spring.  The money was quickly swallowed by the  editor's wages, and plans are to produce ASPEN by volunteer labour only this  time around.  With core costs such as  telephone, printing, and postage on the  increase, the Women's Equal Rights Association (WERA) of Prince George decided  to drop the paid editorial position in ,  order to produce throughout the winter  and spring.  ASPEN is a co-operative effort of WERA  and the Northern Women's Network (NWN)  and includes women's groups from Burns  Lake to Fort Nelson.  Each issue of ASPEN focusses on one issue  in depth, with the hope of providing an  information link with women throughout  the north.  Some of the material being prepared for  the September issue includes a report on  Women's Access Programming at the College  of New Caledonia, a project WERA has been  lobbying for, and the beginning of a  series of profiles on local women.  Subscriptions are $5.00 per year and are  available from ASPEN, c/o WERA, 1306 7th  Avenue, Prince George, B.C. V2L 3P1.B 10       Kinesis   Sept/Qct '79  To court or not to court, that is the question  Ellen Baragon  Ellen Baragon,  a former Rape Relief worker,   took part in the recent East Vancouver project, Neighbours Against Rape.  She is also an activist in the prisoners '  rights movement.  An increasing trend in rape crisis centres around North America is to move  away from the criminal justice system.  The decisions being made by workers inside sexual assault (Berkeley, USA and  Vancouver, B.C.) may serve to discourage rape victims from taking their attacker to court, and will lay new precedents for the anti-rape movement.  This latest trend has developed out of  rape crisis centres' desire to foster  a 'radicalization' through open rejection of the present judicial system.  Some rape crisis workers believe it is  unreasonably destructive and cruel to  jail rapists. But there are other reasons for this move.  Many women feel the court process is  ineffectual for the victim's needs and  is most often more abusive to her than  it is helpful, largely because of sexist  attitudes held by the judge, jury and  legal profession. Secondly, many women  believe that because the judicial system  is based on racist, classist principles,  we are supporting racism and classism  by taking a case to court.  In addition, there is the influence of  the prison movement which asserts that  prisons are cruel, useless, institutions  of the state, and that therefore it is  politically incorrect to encourage prison convictions for rapists.  Vancouver Rape Relief for example, is  not making 'not-to-court' an official  policy, nor is it refusing to do court  accompaniment, but will be drawing up  special forms and drafts for the rape  victim. These will, be used as part of  a kind of screening process against  court appearances, and favouring alternatives. The rape victim will be asked  to state her needs (this word, italic-  alized, is used in part of the Rape  Releif resolution) on a form and then  to discuss them at length with the  staff. She will be given literature to  read on the negative aspects of the prison system with grim descriptions of  what her attacker will be facing inside.  Also, she will be told about the unpleasantness of being a witness in a  rape trial.  Decisions such as these to reduce support for rape trials raise disturbing  and crucial questions for rape victims  and feminists.  How hard are feminists willing to fight  to end rape? Is the anti-rape struggle  a priority or has it been side-stepped  to make room for other issues? If women  still believe that eliminating rape is  the ultimate priority they should be  fighting on all possible fronts, including rape trials.  Whether a woman decides for herself to  proceed to trial or not, both choices  are deserving our respect and support,  if we agree that the needs of the victim are optimum.  Rape crisis centres were born out of the  women's movement to deal specifically  with rape victims, overwhelmingly female. It would be irresponsible for those  centres to use rape, victims as a pivot  for varied political aims and do this  independently of the women's movement as  a whole.  Of course feminists have a responsibility to oppose racism and classism. But  this is quite different from rape crisis  centres developing socialistic or anarchistic revolutionary programs which  are far removed from the needs and interests of the rape victim, and directly  contradictory to women in general. This  is not to say that supporting racist,  classist institutions benefits any woman.  However, empathizing and supporting the  rapist is definitely against her interests.  The Santa Cruz Women Against Rape group  printed a letter in The Wall Paper. Here  is an excerpt:  'We cannot turn our backs to the racism  of the system when a black man is being  prosecuted.. .we must not support a racist process for any end. '  The statement is indicative of the analysis which makes distinctions between rapists into categories of black/white, poor  and not poor. Again, rape crosses all  racial, class lines. This is a fact. It is  absurd and dishonest to hold the victim  responsible if she was raped by a man who  make it out to be; that in fact prisoners'  rights (male) are a greater priority; that  women who feel confused or guilty are  justified in those feelnggs.  What do feminists owe the rapist anyway?  Where do feminists draw the line between  humanitarianism and acting against the  interests of oppressed women? If feminists feel the need to work on political  issues related to men, they should exercise their freedom to do so, outside of  the rape crisis centre.  Feminism developed into an autonomous  movement in order to force distinctions  between women's political objectives and  those of the male left. This move came  after women in the 'left' realized that  the traditional working class movements  were dominated by men and designed to address men primarily, not women.  Also, it became clear that rape crossed  all class and racial lines and that this  fact could not be ignored if the anti-rape  was black or poor. Rape is not more acceptable when committed by a black poor man  than a white affluent one.  Certainly, the rape victim should not be  responsible for political solutions to  racism in society. Her experience was rape.  It is not racist of her to condemn the  rapist for rape. It is racist, however,  to provide special concessions for those  rapists who happen to be of a particular  race. It is plain sophistry to confuse  women with this analysis and use them as  a scapegoat for the state's racist practices. Incarceration of rapists is not a  classist or racist action in itself.  Prisoners' rights is a highly inappropriate issue with which to confront a  victim of a rape. She does not deserve  this kind of guilt being placed on her.  The major reason for the success of the  anti-rape movement has been the absolute  denouncement of male violence, categorically. A softening of feminists' views on  rape trials; discussions over the future  of the 'poor' rapist; making differentiations between rapists; talking about rape  as a 'problem' which will only be alleviated come the Revolution, does nothing  whatsoever to support and resolve anything  for the rape victim, or' for all women for  that matter.  It will serve to make the rape victim  feel greater alienation and confusion when  she must deal with political issues she  may not be familiar with. No matter how  well thought-out the crisis worker's analysis is on these issues, to many rape  victims, her analysis will probably mean  little. Also, it is .extremely dangerous  for the women's movement as a whole, because in the mind of the public, these  messages will seem clear: that women's  'libbers' have finally come to the conclusion that rape isn't as bad as they  struggle was to germinate. As with union  organizing, it is impossible to identify  with the employer in order to form a union  successfully. The interests of boss and  workers are incompatible. Unionists understand this and would be justifiably opposed to those workers who put energy into  taking the bosses' interest into account.  The rapist and his victim have a similar  relationship to each other in terms of  domination, power and control. A victim  or her advocate, in attempting to identify  and 'help' promote the interest of the  rapist, is equally incorrect.  Vancouver Rape Relief is saying that they  have not made any official policy changes  but have merely chosen to focus on those  activities which avoid using societal institutions, i.e. criminal court, 'Unofficial' policy is a convenient term to use  for a strategy which an organization does  not want to be held accountable for. Further, while it may not be a line which is  _actually forced on the victim, the new  resolution would certainly put pressure on  the victim not to go to court. This is  particularly true in an instance where  the workers do not put any energy into  educating themselves about the judicial  system and court procedures in an ongoing  way. For even if the woman in question managed to ignore the obvious bias against  rape trials, she would surely lose her  confidence in the ability of the worker as  an advocate. This loss of confidence, would  be warranted.  Currently, Vancouver Rape Relief does not  plan to cover the area of the police or  courts in their working committee structures. These committees are ongoing groups  within the collective, whose job it is to  research and create systems for dealing  with the various tasks facing the organization, for instance: press, medical, officei Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79       11  maintenance, community contacts, education..,  In order to eliminate rape and all forms of  sexual violence, women must fight back with  contempt of sexual violence. Whether this  is via a leaflet, lecture, demonstration,  trial or physical combat, it is vital to  our survival.  Confrontation tactics are useful  The most recent activities that women in  the anti-rape movement have been engaging  in is confrontation tactics. Women confronting rapists in the workplace, the home, and  public denouncement and humiliation are  positive ways of dealing with the situation.  The rapist may not become rehabilitated,  but the woman in question can take advantage  of the feminist support and utilize it to  regain her strength and self-confidence.  Another program which Vancouver Rape  Relief sponsored was Neighbours Against  Rape. This program prompted neighbourhood involvement in rape prevention  tactics in a sound, sensible way that  was easy for the communities to implement once the need was established.  These kinds of projects should be actively pursued and rape prevention should  be the key focus for the future. But,  alternatives such as these can and  should be done simultaneously with feminist-backed rape trials. Neither rules  the other out.  Women are responsible to defend other  women against sexual aggression in all  ways, whether it is preventative, or  after the fact, emotional or physical  support.  Of course prisons are bad, so is capitalism. Prison is a state institution  and cannot be beneficial in the long run,  any more than any other capitalist  institution. Ideally, feminists working today will bring about a change so  radical these kinds of institutions  will cease to exist.  Now, what are the advantages of incarceration of rapists for women?  1) Prison walls do restrain the rapist  from raping again. Even if this isn't  a permanent solution, it can prevent  those rapes from occurring while he is  inside, and the numbers of victims  can be quite substantial in any given  2-3 year period.  2) It is crucial for a woman who has  been raped, to know that her feelings  about the attack are validated and  supported. Women must know that the  larger community acknowledges the violation of her rights to freedom from  abuse and that visible, concrete steps  are being taken as part of a process  of obtaining justice.  Woman needs support, validation  To a- large extent, the trial can provide her with this,,and although the  system can be abusive for the woman,  she may decide that this choice outweighs that factor.  The act of striking back which the  trial can provide is very important in  terms of learning to defend our rights  and our lives when they have been  threatened and/or violated. Sometimes  what we do in retaliation against a  crime is not reflective of our long-  term goals or even a highly constructive way of dealing with crime against  women. In fact, many of us would not  choose court for ourselves if we had  a choice in the matter. Yet for some  women, the trial would be the only  real, valid process.  The point is, if we fail to do anything,  we risk losing dignity and strength,  and without this choice the victim  will likely feel more frustrated and  her sense of victimization and power-  lessness would increase. Above all,  a woman's choice on this matter should  not be based on guilt or posed in  terms of huge, complex political issues.  She should be able to make a clear  choice, with the full support and expertise of feminist knowledge of the  judicial system and a sound analysis  of rape.  Lest we forget public enemy number one:  The Rapist. The argument that men become more brutal as a factor against  going to trial is a weak one. The fact  is, most rapists have never even seen  a prison before raping and most likely  will not be convicted for the rape.  These facts in themselves show that  violence is bred outside of prison,  and that the violence is still at an .  extremely unacceptable level.  So that while a rapist may become 'more'  violent once outside prison, this  change is impossible for women to  measure or appreciate. Basically it  all works out the same for women either  way, the common denominator is rape.  Further, the reality is that most  women are raped by men with no past  convictions, so that taking a larger  perspective is useless, abstract speculation .  In conclusion, the anti-rape movement  needs a feminist approach with a clear  objective: to eliminate rape wherever  and however possible. What does it  mean when we begin to lose sight of  how crucial this struggle is and how  important our choices for strategy?  Rape Relief in Vancouver up until  recently restricted men from working  for Rape Relief for very obvious reasons. Now that policy has changed,  and men are becoming more involved  in the internal structure. Men are  being represented in Rape Relief  campaign literature. Probably the  'to-court-or-not-to-court' issue is  not a purely isolated question, but  part of an overall changing perspective. Involvement with rape crisis  centres on any level allows men to make  decisions about the organization and  ultimately about the women's movement  as a whole.  This is not desirable in any instance.  Rape must be fought in the homes, in  the streets and in the courts if that  is where the struggle lies.  Liberalism is the enemy of all political movements, including the feminist  one, but for our success, we must learn  who's side we're on and stay there.  Rape poses this choice for us: is it  him or her?  Kinesis has invited a response from Vancouver Rape Relief. We also welcome comments from readers. Remember: deadline is  October 15. -  Prison Justice Day shouldn't be just one day  by the Solitary Confinement Abolition  Project.  Prison Justice Day is a relatively new  event to the public, but that's because  the media has only recently begun to make  public the news that on August 10th prisoners pay tribute to those who have died  in this country's prisons.  Prison Justice Day began as a hunger  strike in 1976, a time of prison riots  and hostage takings.  Prisoners were tired  of rioting; the government was tired of  rioting, and so came the Parliamentary  Subcommittee on prison violence.  It proposed many changes to the prison system,  but they have been slow in coming or have  not come at all.  There has been more violence in your  prisons in this decade than over the past  30 years.  The reason for most if is has  been to bring to the attention of the public the poor conditions your prisons are  in.  You, the taxpayer, have been paying  $20,000 a year to keep one person be  hind bars.  That's a cool $200,000,000  a year for the almost 10,000 federal  prisoners. When you take into account  the provincial and city jails, you can  at least double that figure.  That's  at least double last year's defense  budget.  The $20,000 per year is frequently spent on a person who has stolen  or defrauded $500 or less. She/he is  confined for two years or more. Where  is the justice in this? Why not instead  have the person remain in society, repaying the loss while she/he continues  to work.  - exerpted from ODYSSEY,   the prisoners '  voice at Millhaven Pen.,  Ontario  Locally, most of the citizen support for  Prison Justice Day happened at the now-  emptying B.C. Penitentiary, (from which  prisoners are being transferred to Kent,  the new maximum security prison in Agassiz.  A substantial crowd gathered August 9 to  hear MP Svend Robinson denounce the prison  system.  Then the media left, missing the  high point of this year's memorial.  Drumming and carrying placards, about 30 na  tive people suddenly spilled out onto the  highway, stopping traffic in a manner  reminiscent of the marches in support of  Leonard Peltier.  This drew the attention  of 5 New Westminster police cruisers,  that ordered our sound system turned off.  Eight people camped overnight.  The next day several people went to express support for the hunger and work  strikers at Oakalla.  They learned that  nearly all the women, as is their custom,  had participated. About two-thirds of the  men did, with two going to the hole (solitary confinement) for a week, due to disruptions they caused to the regular prison  schedule.  There was near complete participation by the prisoners at the B.C..  Pen and at Matsqui.  Whereas last year  Matsqui prisoners had had all privileges  cut for a month, this year reprisals  were much less harsh.  Could this be a  sign that just maybe prisoners are beginning to heard?  Prison Justice Day must not happen only on  August 10th, but every day of the year.  Only in that way will its aims be realized  They are - 1.  to put an end to senseless  deaths in prisons, and 2.  to support the  human rights of prisoners.■  Keep on rolling: a flashy story  A flasher approached a Vancouver woman,  Carole Carl, as she was painting the  outside of the Main Hotel recently. He  walked up to her, pulled down his pants,  and grabbed her leg.  Carl took her paint roller, and painted  him up and down.  "It was marine enamel,"  she said later.  "It's very hard to get  off."  The man fled, but police had no trouble  picking him up, His bright orange coat  of paint was flashing.■  Abortions cause child abuse  Look at Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick and Newfoundland,•says Dr.Phillip  Ney. They have low rates of abortion and  "relatively stable" rates of child abuse.  What he calls "permissive abortion" decreases an individuals "instinctual restraint" against the occasional rage  felt towards dependents. Abortion, you  see diminishes the "social taboo against  aggressing the defenseless."■ 12       Kinesis    Sept/Qct '79  INTERNATIONAL  Pregnant women radiant  Pregnant women living near the Three  Mile Island nuclear power plant will  be studied during the next two years  by scientists trying to learn how they  are affected by low-level radiation,  and by the fear of it. An estimated  8,000 women will give birth between  March 28th, the day of the radiation  leak, and March 27, 1981, who live  within a ten mile radius of the nuclear facility.  Pregnant women living  near the plant were advised to leave  the area after the accident because  their body tissues are particularly  susceptible to the effects of radiation. BMR  Dalkon Shield settlement  for near death, hysterectomy  Carie Palmer, a Denver woman who blamed  a faulty Dalkon Shield IUD for her near  death and emergency hysterectomy, was  awarded $6.8 million in her suit against  the A.H. Robbins Company in Denver District Court July 30th.  The case was  one of about 400 that have been filed  against Robbins for its manufacture of  the IUD birth control device in the  early 70's.  This is the seventh to  come to trial, and only the second in  which a jury ruled in favor of the woman.  The Dalkon Shield was taken off the  market in 1974 as the device was suspected of causing septic abortions  causing the deaths of at least 15  pregnant woman.  Meanwhile, an English woman, Ellen Fine-  berg, who contracted pelvic inflammatory  disease from the plastic beetle with  claws, is taking her case to trial.  Fineberg is suing for compensation for  her injuries and also "punitive damages",  claiming-that Robbins and the shield's  inventors did not adequately test the  device before marketing it, and that when  it did come to their attention that the  shield was dangerous, they suppressed  the evidence.  BMR/Spare Rib  Sexual harassment is nothing new  Workplace sexual harassment of women by  supervisors, foremen, and other male  workers is nothing new.  In 1912, for  example, women striking for union recognition at a corset factory in Kalamazoo,  Michigan listed foremen harassing them  for sexual favours as one of their complaints .  (LNS)  Reprisal rape in Rome  A few days after the screening of a rape  trial on Italian TV. Lucia Luconi, an  employee of the TV company, was raped  by seven men. An incident like this  had been predicted by feminists taking  part in a discussion after the programme and the Italian press clearly  recognized the incident as a reprisal  raid. The men, young and well-dressed,  were from the richest suburb of Rome.  There was no need to call a demonstration to draw attention to the assault.  The programme had already attracted  widepsread comment and the reprisal  made the headlines.  One radio broadcaster, reading the news item, declared himself "ashamed to be a man".  The courage of these two women, who  were prepared to make their ordeal  public in a country where most victims  are too ashamed to report attacks, has  already had results. An unprecedented  number of women have started coming  forward to report rapes.  In the past  only an estimated 1058 had dared to do  so.  Fiorella, the eighteen year old subject  of the programme, has not only suffered  rape, but also put up with the humiliation of having her sex life exposed on  television - her assailants got away  with two year suspended sentences and  damages of two million lira.  Fiorella has given all the money to  start a rape crisis centre.  Spare Rib  WhereWomen have a Choice  Seven Days  Sterile but gainfully employed  The Allied Chemical Corporation like  American Cyanamid, has required the  sterilization of all female employees  of childbearing age who want to continue in certain jobs.  Two women  agreed to have the operation.  Other large chemical companies have  also practiced "protective discrimination," usually restricted to moving  women of child-bearing, age into jobs  within the company (often at lower pay)  where they are not exposed to toxic  substances. Among these companies are  Dow Chemical, Monsanto, Du Pont, General Motors, Bunker Hill Smelting, St.  Joseph Zinc, Eastman Kodak, and Firestone Tire and Rubber.  Irish debate contraception  Orgasm and masturbation are fairly taboo  words in Ireland, a country where one of  the most widely sued school books about  sex, My Dear Daughter, sums up the entire female genital area coyly as "folds  of skin".  So the first conference on  women's health held in Dublin in May  broke new ground with a public discussion of female sexuality.  The conference was extremely well attended with  an age range from 14- to 69. School  students bitterly denounced the quality  of sex education in schools, controlled  by "people who are celibate and have  repressed their own experience of  sexuality".  The major issue at the moment is contraception.  The governing Fianna Fail  party is in. an uproar because Agriculture Minister Jim Gibbons has refused  to vote for the restrictive Contraceptive Bill which is shortly to come  before the Dail. Such a defection is  unheard of in this party, which prides  itself on its strict adherence to party  discipline.  Gibbons has decided however that contraception is a 'moral'  not a political issue and has been  granted the right to conscientious  objection.  He isn't the only one who opposes the  Bill.  The Contraception Action Campaign is agitating against it too, but  for very different reasons.  They fear  that the Bill will further restrict  the distribution of contraceptives.  - At present the Irish Medical Association is deliberating on the question  of Intra-Uterine Devices. Are they  abortifacients? Or are they contraceptives? Once classified as abortifacients they would be exempted from the  terms of the Bill.  Would that then  mean that the growing numbers of women  who already have them inserted will be  contravening the law against abortion?  It should provide interesting material  for lawyers for years to come.  Spare Rib  Studying herbal abortion  A survey of women using herbs to bring  on menstruation and induce abortion is  being conducted'by the Women's Health  Services, in Santa Fe, New Mexico.  During the last 10 or 15 years, a growing number of women seem to have been  using -herbs and herbal preparations to  help regulate their menstrual cycles  and/or terminate unwanted pregnancies.  There are numerous books which tell of  the virtues of various herbs and how  they may be used for' this purpose. Many  people have a favorite emmenogogue  (used to bring on a late period) or  abortifacient (used to induce abortion)  herb or compound formula.  Many of these recommendations and re-  cipies are based on incomplete information passed on from generation to generation over the years.  In this situation, much of the understanding of the  specific advantages (effectiveness) and  disadvantages (contraindications and/or  toxicity) that may have been known in  the distant past have been lost.  In  addition, much of the scientific research into the use of herbs and plant-  origin drugs was terminated in the  1930's.  A team of physicians, health care  workers, and herbalists is working,  through the University of New Mexico  School of Medicine, to determine the  usefulness and possible side effects  of herbs used as emmenogogues and  abortifacients.  They are sending out a questionnaire  to see which herbs are most effective  with the least side-effects, and to get  some idea of how many people are using  these herbs, and how they use them.  If you have used an herb to bring on  your period or to abort, they would  like to hear from you.  Contact Kristine Kellerhouse, Women's Health Services, 316 E Marcy Street, Santa Fe,  New Mexico 87501.  Phone 505-988-8869.  World support wins acquittal  Maria Antonia Palla, a woman journalist,  who was put on trial May 14, 1979 in  Lisbon, Portugal, has been acquitted,  following a worldwide campaign of support demonstrations.  Two years ago, she presented a television program on abortion, during  which women (faces not shown) testified to the brutality of their illegal  abortions.  Both pre- and post-revolutionary Portuguese governments have  banned all abortion. Maria Antonia  was harassed for two years for having  said, on the program, that abortions  didn't have to be butcheries, but  could be clean, safe, inexpensive,  legal.  The government formally charged  her with 'outrage to public morals'  (same charge brought against the Three  Marias) and 'encouraging a crime'. MRW Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  INTERNATIONAL  Ten million unionists for choice  The Trade Union Council (TUC) of Britain has announced a national day of protest October 27 against the Tory moves  to restrict abortion even further.  TUC (equivalent to the CLC) has over  10 million members through its many affiliates.  Look what she made him do  A London court was seduced into believing a man's claim that he didn't have  the power to refuse to have sex with  an 11-year-old girl.  Adrian Mellett, a 29-year-old conductor,  described the young girl as "a school  girl nymphomaniac".     The judges, believed him.  The story goes that the  young girl followed Mellett, "a shy  Irish bus conductor home from work and  got into bed with him because she had  a weakness for men in uniform."  Mellett, who claims he is a Roman Catholic brought up to believe that sex before marriage is wrong, claimed he was,  "no match for the temptress."  Mellet also told the courts that he  thought the girl was more than 16 (legal age) at the time, especially because "she is taller than he is".     The  judges gave him a conditional discharge.  Bust the clients, eh what?  "Accepting unlawful solicitation" should  be a crime, according to the Justices  Clerks Society, which is reviewing the  prostitution law in Britain.  If it became an offence to change the  customers, says the society, the number  of prostitution violations would be  quickly reduced.  The general tone of their report, to  the British Criminal Law Revision Committee, which is set up to review sex  offence laws is, apart from this novel  twist, punitive and repressive.  The law against street soliciting should  be retained, they claim, because "respectable people" living in areas  where prostitutes solicit are "affronted".  Citizens are also affronted, says the  society, when male motorists "in their  excited state" are unable to separate  "the respectable woman" from the prostitute .  Sedate doctors trash Valium  A U.S. Senate health subcommittee is  taking a look at Valium, the country's  top-selling tranquillizer.  Manufacturers Hoffman LaRiche make a  tidy $210 million annually from Valium  sales.  In 1978 alone, more than 4-4-.6  million prescriptions for the drug were  filled. About 2058 of the entire U.S.  population is now taking Valium.  Subcommittee witness Dr. Nelson Hendler  estimates 97$ of physicians "in general"  prescribe so-called minor tranquillizers for patients experiencing anxiety.  In so doing, he says, "you may create  the situation you are trying to avoid."  Addiction to tranquillizers is much more  widespread and more serious than the  manufacturers are prepared to admit.  One woman who testified to Valium addiction, said that during withdrawal she  experienced "a complete loss of self-  respect, a complete loss of confidence."  Women are prescribed twice as many tranquillizers as are men.  Doctors, too, are caught up in Valium  addiction, "While all the other doctors  were reading their morning mail, I was  eating mine," a psychiatrist told the  subcommittee.  Boston women  taking back their night  Yes,   that's right.   We're  taking back the  night'.  This was the chant of an estimated 5000  women who marched through the streets  of Boston, August 18. Black, Hispanic,  Asian, Native American and white women,  young and old, joined together to demand  an end to violence against women.  Recent incidents of such violence included the murders of 12 Black women  and one white woman between January and  May and the rape of eight women in the  Brighton area of Boston. 'ñ†  Police received 372 reports of sexual  assault in the Boston area from November  .1978 to April 1979, according to the  coalition. Women of colour have been  particularly subjected to acts of violence,   said coalition speaker Gail Sullivan. LNS  New Jersey woman could lose job  for self-defense  by Marjorie Ackerman  (LNS) - Bulesa Gibbs, a 47 year old  Black woman convicted of atrocious  assault and battery against her husband, was placed on five years probation at her sentencing on July 2nd  in Piscataway, New Jersey.  Mother  of 11 children and married for 23  years, Gibbs endured frequent abuse  from her husband, Johnny Gibbs.  This  abuse included being threatened with  a shotgun, beaten with a baseball bat,  and in one instance taking her son to  the hospital after his father hit him  with a shovel.  As a result of shooting  her husband in an attempt to defend  herself, Gibbs was arrested and then  found guilty by an all-white jury on  May 17th.  The shooting for which Gibbs was convicted occured last October during an  argument she had with her husband.  After a four-day absence, Johnny Gibbs  returned home. Gibbs told him to leave,  at which point an argument broke out  and he threatened her with a pot of  water which was boiling on the stove.  The argument continued, and when he  picked up the pot and started towards  her, Gibbs shot him five times.  Gibbs spent three weeks in jail. She  was then released on her own recognizance at about the same time Johnny  Gibbs was released from the hospital.  He immediately resumed his harassment.  At her trial, Gibbs pleaded self defence.  But despite a New Jersey law  which states she has a right to respond  with deadly force if she has a reasonable and honest belief that she is in  danger of great bodily harm, and despite a doctor's testimony that a  scalding over 50 percent of her body  could have been fatal, Gibbs was convicted.  With this conviction, Gibbs  faced a sentence of up to 17 years.  Before the sentencing, the presiding  judge, Alan A Rockoff, received over  100 letters and petitions with several  Marriage is no excuse for rape  James Chretien, a 32-year-old Massachusetts man, was convicted September 21  of raping his wife. It is that state's  first such conviction.  Chretien's lawyers sought to have the  rape charge thrown out because the di-  voree decree between Chretien and his  wife had not been finalized.  Court Judge John Irwin ruled that mar-  hundred signatures.  During the sentencing Rockoff spoke extensively to  the courtroom filled with Gibb's supporters.  A leaflet sent out by the  Women's Self Defense Law Project,  largely responsible for inspiring the  letters and petitions, was read and  criticized for being 'inflammatory."  Rockoff found fault with the accusations of racism and sexism, stating  that this country has been through the  civil rights movement'and now we are  in a different time in which we are  all "people".  Turning to Gibbs, Rockoff stated: "You are not a Black woman.  You were not tried by an all-white  jury..." and went on to insist that  Gibbs' conviction was arrived at in a  just manner by a jury (8 white men and  4 white women) of her peers.  Rockoff also criticized her attempt at  self defense.  He questioned: Why  didn't she go to the police for help,  why didn't she yell to her son who  was sitting in the living room, why  didn't she call her brother who is a  policeman.  Rockoff asked; What did  she do instead? She went in and got  a gun and shot Johnny Gibbs.  By asking  these questions, Rockoff was obscuring  the fact that Gibbs had previously  tried these alternatives and that her  life was in immediate danger.  Although Rockoff denied that his decision to place Gibbs on probation had  anything to do with the letters and  petitions, there was consensus among  everyone in the courtroom that his  leniency was directly attributable to  this wide response.  Gibbs, who earns her living by driving  a school bus in Piscataway, will be  facing a hearing where it will be decided whether she may keep her driver's  license.  Letters supporting Gibb's  right to keep her driver's license and  thus her job should be sent to:  Board  of Education, Piscataway Township,  New Jersey 08854. LNS  riage is not a defence against a charge  of rape.  U.S. planning week for choice  The U.S. pro-choice movement will hold  a nationally coordinated week of action  October 22 - 29. It will kick off with a  rally outside St. Patrick's Cathedral in  New York, with speeches by religious  leaders for free choice. Fifty organizations are jointly sponsoring the  action. '  14       Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  FESTIVALS  Summertime — everywhere there was song and celebration  •-■v.- ■   ' -  ■!:-v:,   •        ^    '"-v---.-  Island weekend joyful  Gillian Marie  On a grey, rainy, cold day in Vancouver, the Island Women's Festival  feels like a long time ago. Yet the  weekend still radiated warmth for  me, and as one of the women stated:  It 's the beginning of the year for  It was a wonderful weekend of relaxation, music, sons, theatre, sun,  massage, exercise, sharing, loving  and caring.  The weekend did have some structure  but only what was necessary. Workshops were set up for the mornings  and the afternoons. Some were informational, others were more active.  The tone of the weekend was set for  me by Saturday morning's informal  gatherings of women talking about  their feelings for women. In our circle, we began by stating what each of  us felt about the women in our lives.  We then discussed both the joy and  pain of relationships - both lesbian  and heterosexual - and how the model  for lesbian relationships is the  The Island Women's Festival—a wonderful weekend of relaxation , music, song, theatre, sun, massage, exercise  Nelson women's festival  Shelagh Wilson  "Women sharing - women swimming -  women singing - women eating - women  dancing - women together"  On July 21st Kootenay women and friends  gathered together at a collectively-  built community hall called Vallican  Whole.  They came together to celebrate  being women and to raise funds for the  Nelson Women's Centre.  The coming together happened slowly.  It was a hot day - close to 100 degrees  F.  For most, of the afternoon small  groups of women wandered down to the  nearby swimming hole.  Cool, sweet  relief from the heat!  Laughter and  talk rippled the air as women came  together, stripped of clothes and  stripped of the necessary defenses  we need to survive in that "other  world".  Back at "The Whole" women gathered in  neterosexual one which dominates society.  We discussed how it is possible to  have relationships that are not romantically based and possessive. Experience seemed to show that it was more  likely if we did not live with our  lovers, but rather lived alone. One  woman shared her recent experience of  moving away from her lover, and going  through the process of learning how  to give herself the love and support  that she had previously given to her  partner. She had been able to see the  roles that she had played in this and  former relationships. This workshop  was for me a joyful experience, where  I could take risks and feel only acceptance and support, and not judgement.  Both lesbian and heterosexual women  shared their lives and feelings for  women, and no one was put down.  This was in fact a characteristic of  the whole weekend. The sun shone brilliantly, as workshops took place on  such subjects as: belly dancing, creativity, theatre groups, self-defense,  wife-battering resources, goddess rel-  small knots around the bar or the rummage table or on the back porch near  the swings.  The childcare that had  been organized in a nearby home was  not really needed because there were  so few children.  Sometime in the late afternoon, films  were shown. Some would have preferred  more structured activities in the afternoon - an opportunity to learn new  skills as well as providing a vehicle  to help women from difference areas  get to know one another.  Others however appreciated the value in moving  away from organization and structure.  The festival was a coming together  that happened organically.  There was  no organized beginning.  No structured  "opening" where the women who arrived  were told what options they had.  For  a stranger this "looseness" felt vaguely  uncomfortable.  For rural women however,  in the middle of the growing season, a  day free or organization was a welcome  relief from daily routines. Would it  have been possible to meet both groups  igions, women and the law, birthing  and the politics of health care, how to  build a solar greenhouse, and a multitude of others.  We were royally entertained by the  Denwomen Theatre Group (can we get them  to come to the city sometime?), by an  impromptu group who performed the abortion skit (which Vancouver women saw at  the CCCA rally this spring), and by women musicians in evening concert (though  I would have enjoyed more women's music,  as opposed to women performing mostly  men's songs and sentiments).  A high for me was getting up before the  sun to take part in the white buffalo  ceremony, a modification of a prairie  Indian women's ceremony.  It was a wonderful time. The physical  beauty of the property on which it was  held was the finishing touch to the festival .  One of my more vivid memories is of women sitting in circles, surrounded by  a circle of trees - a circle within a  circle within a circle.■  needs? The showing of films helped but  it was too little and came too late.  After the films, came the feast - pot-  luck supper, good food, home grown food -  delicious!  And then the entertainment  began interwoven with an auction of  various goods from wooden toys to a  magic Indian healing stick.  Women from  the area played the piano and sang -  one women did a fantastic belly dance;  another read poetry and another...,  the energy began to build as we reveled  in the skill and talent of our sisters  and were touched by their lyrics.  The  magic of women coming together was at  work once again and then the dancing  began. Around midnight those with  children or animals to milk in the early  morning began to drift towards their  cars.  After an hour or two, only a  few diehards remained and they they too  left. Most everyone appeared happy with  the day.  True, the gathering was much  smaller than had been anticipated, but  the energy was high in spite of the  overwhelming heat.  Thank you Nelson  women for a fine celebration.■ Kinesis    Sept/Oct'79        15  How long, oh lord, how long?  Abortion: Where we have to go, what we need to get there  55  *|r  AboiI  ItfL. -J**..  by Concerned Citizens for Choice  Last summer, when abortion services  at VGH were threatened by anti-abortionists, the women's movement and  its supporters fused into a fighting  force. A new organization was called  into being, Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion (CCCA).  CCCA held a demonstration of 700,  endorsed by 4-0 organizations and  individuals, on July 28, 1978. Some  of the endorsers were large, provincial bodies: the B.C. NDP, the  B.C. United Church. Some were trade  unions: CUPW, no stranger to unjust  federal law; SORWUC and AUCE, victims  of arbitrary government rulings. The  endorsers had a combined membership  of perhaps 75,000.  On the heels of that demonstration,  CCCA signed up 5000 supporters to  vote for pro-choice trustees at the  scheduled September 1978 meeting of  VGH. When the Socred government  stepped in and put the hospital under trusteeship, cancelling the  annual general meeting and suspending the elected board of trustees,  CCCA turned at once to obtaining  memberships for the Lions Gate Hospital meeting. At that meeting pro-  choice supporters outvoted the anti-  abortionists by about 800 to 35.  Those were heady days. But the victories were shortlived, for in this  year's round of hospital meetings,  the anti-abortionists have made considerable headway.  What is needed by the pro-choice  movement is an analysis of where  things stand and a strategy for winning abortion rights for all.  Who supports abortion rights?  The majority is on our side.  A Gallup Poll conducted in mid-Feb-  s  ruary 1979 showed that 57$ of Canadians over 18 agree that "the decision to have an abortion should  be made solely by a woman and her  physician." Those who disagreed  were asked a second question:  "Would you make an exception in  the case of a woman whose mental  and physical health is in danger?"  Adding those who agreed with the  second question to those who agreed  with the first, brought the total  to 87$.  Public response to CCCA's aims and  actions over the past year bears  out the polls' findings that the  majority is on our side.  Yet five years ago, 62%  agreed with  the first statement in the Gallup  Poll.  Interestingly, the greatest  drop-off in agreement has occurred  among those under 30 and between  30 and 50 years of age. While the  majority of Canadians are pro-  choice, the anti-abortionists have  been making inroads into our support.  Who opposes abortion rights? The  inaccurately named Pro Life Society  claims there are 35 anti-abortion  groups in BC, with a membership of  11,000. They say Vancouver has  1,500 members, Victoria 2,000, Kamloops about 1,000.  In the past few  weeks, these separate groups joined  together in a province-wide federation.  Last year, according to Betty Green,  chairperson of the Vancouver group,  the society received $4-7,000 in donations and membership fees, and  spent more than $4-0,000 getting  their message out.  $25,000 was  spent on radio commercials during  the federal election campaign.  Said Green in an interview in the  Courier on June 12, "Pro-Lifers"  come from various age and income  I'I  brackets, and most have "some kind  of religious background".  This is  reflected in the $13,000 received  from church collection plates and  other individual donations.  But Pro Life has political friends,  too. Bernice Gerard, Vancouver city  councillor, founded the society together with Green in 1973.  Benno  Friesen, Tory MP from Surrey, has  pledged to help amend the Criminal  Code to "protect the rights of unborn children".  Two days before the provincial election, on May 8, 1979, the Columbian  printed a page-one story on the anti-  abortion views of Socred Minister  Bill Vander Zalm. Vander Zalm said  he has always been an "ardent"  supporter of the "pro-life" position  in an election leaflet circulated by  the Coalition for Life. He also  stated that he has used his position  in the Cabinet, particularly when he  was Human Resources Minister, to cut  off funding for groups, such as  Planned Parenthood, that support  freedom of choice on abortion.  What are the anti-abortionists up to?  At the end of June, a four-day conference of the national umbrella  group, Alliance for Life, was held  at UBC. Although we have few details  of the conference, it is known that  Canadian anti-abortionists have  organizational and financial ties  with similar groups in the U.S. and  Europe, and that an international  network has been growing in the past  few years.  Information about their activities  is collected by. the Canadian Association for the Repeal of Abortion Laws  (CARAL), a Toronto-based pro-choice  group. In a recent newsletter, CARAL  noted these "pro-life" projects:'ñ∫ 16       Kinesis    Sept/Qct '79  Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  ^Lawsuits:  In Ottawa and in Saskatchewan, anti-abortionists have gone  to court alleging that abortion is  contrary to the Bill of Rights.  Both suits were seeking injunctions  restraining the performance of  abortions.  ^Legislation:  In Ontario last October, a private members' bill was read  in the legislature that closely  paralleled the horrendously anti-  women bills passed in several U.S.  cities, such as Akron, Ohio.  The  object is to intimidate and deter  women from seeking abortions by  putting time-consuming and humiliating  obstacles in their paths.  No action  was taken on this bill.  In Nova Scotia, a "bill of rights for  children" that would include a "right  to be born" clause has been introduced into the legislative assembly.  ^Attacks on Medicare:  In Nova Scotia,  Alberta, and Ontario, various efforts  are underway to restrict or eliminate  medical insurance for abortions.  These include introducing a bill into  the Nova Scotia legislature, presenting a brief to Alberta hospitals  minister, and the adoption by OHIP  of new restrictions regarding payment  for out-of-province abortions.  With its stepped-up propaganda and  organizing in B.C., the anti-abortionists are clearly preparing to launch  similar attacks on the right to choose  here.  Our main enemy is the law  The anti-abortionist movement, with  its terrorist tactics, ranging from  doctored photos of babies in garbage  cans to firebombing abortion clinics  while in operation, as they have done  In at least six U.S. cities, is  appalling.  But we must not be fooled  into thinking it is the main enemy.  As the list above shows, the anti-  abortionists themselves are focusing  on the law and the courts in their  efforts toward a permanent victory  over women's rights.  In the end it  is the state that controls a woman's  right to choose.  And it is against  the state and its laws that we, too,  must direct our campaign.  For example, the limited abortion  rights we have are set out in the  federal Criminal Code, which makes  it abundantly clear that abortion  in Canada is basically illegal.  Section 251, the amendment that anti-  abortionists want ruled unconstitutional, permits some legal abortions,  under tightly restricted conditions.  While individual hospitals are vested  with the right to decide whether or  not to provide abortion services,  there is provision for the provincial attorneys-general to review each  abortion patient's case.  This has  not happened, to our knowledge in  B.C., but the A-G's office is empowered to prosecute hospitals, doctors  and patients, should it feel an abortion has been granted too leniently.  The Badgley Report of 1977 showed  that fewer than half the publicly-  funded hospitals in BC have set up  abortion committees.  The percentage  is much lower across Canada. This  situation cannot be changed without  changing the law. CCCA calls for  the repeal of all anti-abortion laws.  Government cutbacks are another problem..  In France, Britain, and the  U.S., cutbacks have seriously reduced the availability of abortion  even for those women who overcome  the legal hurdles. After the passage of the Hyde Amendment in the  U.S. in 1977, which cut off federal  aid for abortion to women on welfare,  clinics and hospitals were so generally hard-hit that abortions dropped  by approximately 60%.  For some years now, in Canada, we've  experienced cutbacks in health services.  Clark was elected on a bal-  ance-the-budget program with a plank  that is explicitly aimed at cutting  medical insurance and reducing the  federal share of health-service  costs.  Currently, the Socred government's bare-bones funding of B.C.  hospitals has been aired in the legislature, and has roused the ire of  both the B.C. Medical Association and  hospital administrations.  Guess which services are likely to  go first?  Thus, while it is necessary to continue to fight for the right to choose  abortion at local hospitals, we cannot restrict our vision or efforts  to the local situation.  We must fight for repeal of the federal anti-abortion laws.  We must  fight for the establishment of full  abortion facilities in all hospitals,  as well as for additional abortion  clinics. We must fight against cutbacks of health services, and against  any revision of medicare fees that  reduce women's health benefits.  To gain ali this, we must take on the  federal and provincial legislatures  and health ministries, as well as the  policy-making bodies of local hospitals. We must take on the same power  structure that the anti-abortionists  are aiming at.  Admittedly, the scale is more heavily  weighted against the right to choose  than it is against the "pro-life"  bigots.  Thier views are based on  millennia of women's oppression.  We are part of a wider struggle  As women, we face oppression in the  work force, oppression in the home,  oppression that prevents us from taking control of our bodies, our minds,  our lives.  This is not by accident.  In part, it  is because it's profitable to the corporations to push us to the margins  of society. The owners of corporations  disclaim social responsibility for the  fundamental needs of workers, in order  to maintain their profits. Instead,  the burden of feeding and maintaining  the workforce is assigned to women, to  our unpaid labour in the home.  It's obvious that a large part of women's oppression is our imprisonment  in the home. And it's our vulnerability to becoming pregnant, our lack of  control over our own bodies, that is,  in the large part, the means of our  enslavement.  If women were completely  free to look for work in the economy,  women in the hundreds of thousands  would press new demands.  For example,  the demand to join the workforce with  equal jobs and equal pay. Or the demand that the services women provide,  such as daycare centres, be provided  with government funds.  Thus, there is a powerful section of  society with a material interest in  restricting the availability of abortion.  In the last few years we have entered  a new period of economic austerity.  This has meant social service cutbacks that especially affect women,  such as in daycare.  It has also meant  that women are especially hard hit by  unemployment. If we review the record,  new concessions or progressive measures  from governments are fewer and fewer,  ABORTION—THE ETERNAL ISSUE  F\C^ mm  You may recognize your younger selves in this picture—an abortion rally of the early 70's  and harder and harder to win.  Of necessity, that means that the pro-  choice movement must look for powerful allies if it is to achieve success  in repealing the anti-abortion laws.  One candidate is the trade union movement.  The struggle for the eight-  hour day, for decent wages, for a  universal medicare system, and for  many democratic rights has given the  trade unions a legacy of fighting for  socially progressive causes.  The new  austerity period is making them more  receptive to the needs of other layers  in society.  That is why it is so important that  the B.C. Federation of Labour adopted  a resolution in support of a woman's  right to choose abortion at its convention in November, 1978. That  resolution pledged active support to  the fight for abortion rights. This  new policy should enable the labour  movement and women trade unionists  to help in forming coalitions for  abortion rights, in organizing rallies and demonstrations, in developing educational campaigns for a  woman's right to choose.  An example of what can be done is  the conference held in November,  1978 in Britain.  Organized jointly  by the feminist National Abortion  Campaign (NAC) and the LARC (a  grouping within the Labour Party  fighting for Abortion rights), it  was a conference of trade unionists.  Nearly 500 delegates (women and men)  from the principal British trade  unions attended and voted to support the NAC's efforts to increase  the number of walk-in abortion clinics.  They also voted to support the  March 31, 1979 International Day of  Action on Abortion Rights.  Most importantly, the conference  mandated the delegates to organize  a demonstration by the worker's  movement in the event the British  Parliament made the slightest move  to restrict the abortion laws.  Such ground work prepared the U.K.  women's movement and trade union  movement to jointly challenge the  move in the House of Commons, reported in the July 14,. 1979 Vancouver Sun, to cut the maximum time  limit for abortions to 20 weeks from  28 weeks of pregnancy.  A strategy for winning abortion rights  The way we will win abortion rights,  just as the way we will win any of  the demands of the women's and workers' movements, is by relying on the  strength'of our numbers. We need an  action campaign that involves massive  numbers of people.  The majority of  Canadians may support a woman's  right to choose, but their support  must be mobilized- if it is to count.  It was a mass action campaign that  drove back the anti-abortionists in  the VGH struggle.  Although the VGH  meeting was cancelled, the "pro-  lifers" submitted far fewer membership applications than CCCA did.  It  was our lack of numbers that lost the,  abortion issue at Lions Gate this September .  The "pro life" movement knows this.  In addition to its legislative and  legal efforts, it masses its supporters for an annual march on Washington  each January.  This year, 60,000 "pro-  lifers" protested on the anniversary  of the 197-5 it..s. Supreme Court decision that abortion is a woman's  right to choose.  They delivered a  red rose to each senator and representative in "commemoration" of the  unborn.  We won in Surrey  by our numbers.  Because the strength of the abortion  rights movement lies in the numbers  that can be won to taking an active  part, the value of lobbying as a  tactic can be placed in perspective.  When a small delegation goes to talk  to the powers that be — MPs, MLAs,  hospital administrators — it is not  likely to meet with success if it  bases its appeal on the powers of  reason, justice, and goodwill.  Those  are inadequate weapons against the  inflexible rule of the dollar and  of the size of the lobbyists' constituency.  A much more powerful  method of making our influence felt  is by calling on all supporters of  abortion rights to join in frequent,  militant actions around clear demands.  "Defend a Woman's Right to Choose at  VGH" and "Repeal All Anti-Abortion  Laws" are demands that have shown  their power to attract a wide range  of supporters.  CCCA rallied a united front of 50 otherwise diverse  organizations and individuals which  endorsed these demands for the rally  on March 31 this year.  This is a mass action strategy, the  strategy that will work for us.  Is it truly reliable? Where has  this strategy got us in the past?  Space limitations allow only a few  examples:  ITALY, 1975-76 - In a series of demonstrations beginning in December  1975, Italian women launched a massive campaign for legal abortion.  Initially, 30,000 women turned out,  later more than 100,000 marched in  the streets. The government dissolved itself rather than deal with  the women's demands for abortion and  divorce. But in late 1977, Italian  women won limited, legal abortion  rights, similar to those we have in  Canada. A new round of actions has  begun in response to the Pope's threat  to excommunicate doctors and nurses  who perform abortions. 7,000 women  gathered in Florence in early 1979  to demand implementation of the new •  abortion law.  U.S., 1978 - Faced with the possibility of losing the Equal Rights  Amendment, 100,000 marched on Washington on July 9, 1978.  This finally  won an extension of the deadline for  ratification from a reluctant Congress.  IRAN, 1979 - Between March 8 and March  11, tens of thousands of Iranian women joined in strikes, street demonstrations, and sit-ins to counter  attempts by Ayatollah Khomeini to  restrict women's rights.  In addition to trying to reinstate the veil,  Khomeini had urged a ban on abortion,  suspension of a law that had prohibited bigamy and restricted arbitrary  divorce by men, and an end to coeducation in the schools.  The Ayatollah was forced to modify and in  some cases retract his anti-women  decrees .  The International Day of Action  for Abortion Rights, March 31,  1979  In more than 20 countries, tens of  thousands of persons expressed their  common determination on the same day  to fight for women's right to choose.  For example, 1000 attended the first  proabortion meeting ever held in  Venezuela, at least 1500 turned out  in various cities in Australia,  there were 5000 out in London, 7000  in Belgium, approximately 7000 in  the Netherlands, about 2300 in  various cities in Spain, and 5000  out in New York.  In English-speaking Canada, the  largest demonstration was in Vancouver where 300 turned out to march  up Georgia Street.  An additional  300-400 demonstrated in Edmonton,  Regina, and Toronto.  Quebecoise  sisters organized the largest action-  2000 in Montreal.  ORGANIZING  Do you feel stirred out of the doldrums? Come help us plan the next  stage of the abortion rights struggle.  Among the ideas discussed at CCCA  meetings lately are:  * A conference to draw together supporters in the lower mainland and/or  across the province.  * An educational program to inform  people about the status of abortion  in Canada and to combat the distortions of the anti-abortionists.  * Serving as a clearing-house for  data about local hospital meetings  and their outcomes across B.C.  CCCA meetings are open to all.  For  information, phone Tessa Stewart  324-8890.  To whom it may concern:  CCCA needs your participation.  For information about the next  meeting,  please call Tessa  Stewart at 324-8890.     CCCA and  Kinesis invite your responses  to this article.  ■ Ann Thompson, Nancy Wiggs,  Tessa Steward, Linda Grant  and Sharon Hager  for:  Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion   ■ 18       Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  Should feminists become involved in anti-nuclear issues?  Will working on nukes take energy  away from feminist struggles?  How should feminists relate to the anti-  nuclear movement? Are nukes a women's  issue?  This section in Kinesis is an attempt  to open debate on those questions.  Vancouver Status of Women will be making a presentation to the B.C. Royal  Commission Inquiry into uranium mining.  The Commission's hearings open September 25 in Vancouver and continue until  February.  This is an open invitation to Kinesis  readers to take part in preparing that  brief.  If you are interested, please  call Gayla at VSW - 736-1313-  What do feminists elsewhere have to say  about the women's movement/anti-nuke  connection?  Feminist Anti-Nuclear Task Force formed  In the U.S., the Feminist Anti-Nuclear  Task Force has been formed in response  to the crisis at Three Mile Island.  They comment: "Three Mile Island was  a crisis which vividly demonstrated to  the world that the impact of nuclear  energy use is most devastating to women.  Energy policy is one of the most critical decisions of our time.  Women  must make our power felt and our voices  heard so that energy policies answer  our needs and concerns."  The Feminist Anti-Nuclear Task Force  has issued the following statement which  outlines their reasons for organizing  as feminists against nuclear power:  * The Harrisburg disaster makes clear  that radiation hazards threaten women  and children first.  Yet no studies  adequately assess the health effects  of radiation on present and future  populations.  Medical science lacks  even the knowledge to define and monitor populations at risk.  In the face  of inadequate safety controls and inadequate evacuation plans, women bear  the final burden of fleeing with _, our  families from a nuclear horror. 'We  who bear ultimate responsibility for  the health and well-being of our children,  ourselves,  and our families,  must  halt the  lethal threat of radiation and  nuclear destruction.  * The risk of genetic mutations and  life-threatening disease increases with  the use of nuclear power.  Already certain medical technologies - like amniocentesis - make it possible for us to  screen for birth defects.  But women  have little to say in the development  and use of these technologies.  We must  ensure that we have control over our  reproductive capabilities so that these  technologies are not used 'in human  "quality control" or as tools to carry  out racist, sexist, heterosexist, and  classist priorities. We must demand  that medical science instead be devoted  to controlling the hazards to which human beings are exposed.  * Nuclear energy poses serious reproductive hazards.  Other industries using  toxic substances - lead, benzene, and  others - have developed policies that  keep women out of jobs, or force us to  undergo sterilization on the grounds of  'protecting' our reproductive health.  But we all make babies.  Until we eliminate nuclear and other hazardous industries, feminists must lead the fight  to ensure  the whole health of workers  of all classes and races,  and both  sexes,  without erecting new job barriers  for women.  * The nuclear industry is exempt from  Close to 100,000 people demonstrated against nukes in Washingti  that closing of nuclear power plants i  financial responsibility in the event  of a nuclear disaster,  Women do not  control the nuclear industry which produces the disasters, nor do we control  the government which allows these disasters to happen.  But women pay the  price.  Who will compensate us for our  forced job loss and our evacuation expenses? How can we put a price on damage to our reproductive potential?  Who will foot the bill when women must  support the ill and the dying as a result of a nuclear disaster? Women must  force those responsible  to be accountable for their destruction.  l D.C. May 6 President Carter told organizers  replied:  * Energy is a feminist issue.  Women  have been caretakers and nurturers for  centuries.  Thus we know the crucial  link between survival and the regenerative, nurturing use of all our resources. We also know that the exploitation and domination of Mother Earth  reflects and perpetuates the violent  exploitation to which women ourselves  are subjected. Myth, language and history make this clear. We must end the  nuclear threat before it becomes the  ultimate violent act.     We call on women  worldwide to resist,  with our rage,  our  hearts,  and our actions,   this final  threat to our survival.  Many feminists now want to support anti-  lNo, you may not go out and play. It's falling-out.'  WSP/LNS  nuclear efforts in a way that preserves  their integrity, speaks to their interests, and contributes a visible women's  presence.  The Feminist Anti-Nuclear Task Force  is developing a network to link women's  groups.  Their address: 174-7 Connecticut  Avenue N.W., Washington, D.C. 20009 USA  Holly Near on nukes  Holly Near, who is spending this fall  singing at anti-nuclear protests across  the States, was asked in a recent Big  Mama Rag interview to outline her sense  of connection between the women's move-  First of all, I think women in the women's movement have done an incredible  amount of work in trying both /to teach  women that we have potential, which has  been taught out of us for generations,  as well as to give women power and support to go and be our best.  We are doing work across  the board  against racism,  class,  drugs,  alcoholism,  oppression of disabled peoples,  and we aren't all good at doing all  those things all of the time.     We aren't  perfect organizers,  but there are women  who focus on all these different things,  all of which have  to do with the quality of life for women.     So,   I'm not  suggesting that we stop doing these  important things; but I do feel that  we have to incorporate anti-nuke information,   consciousness and activity into  whatever we 're doing because we 're not  going to  last too much longer with  things going the way they are.     What  good will it do to create quality of  life organizations for women if we all  die of leukemia or the world blows up?  With nuke stuff, the information has  been so kept from us that we don't realize how urgent it is. There are reputable scientists who think that we  have a few years to get our shit together and turn this thing around or  we'll be in big trouble. That's one  point  - it's just out of survival.  Second of all is that women,  if they  give themselves the room and time to  practice it,  have an incredible,  instinctual understanding of life.     I  don't know whether it's because we are  potential child bearers,  because we  have a life cycle every month,  or because our oppression has protected us  from being the pigs we might have been  if we'd been in power - I don't know  what the analysis behind it is,  but I  do know that we have a spirituality,  a power that once acknowledged and  given room to grow is very powerful.  And I've noticed in talking to women  of different cultures that in almost  every one,  women take a  leading role  in the spiritual development of their  people.     So,  if we can    figure out how  to take our political and economic  knowledge,  our understanding of life,  and our instincts and intuition,  all  those things we have been  "accused" of  in a negative way,  and we use them,  I  think we can turn this thing around.  I have to believe that and I don't  think it will happen without women.  OFF OUR BACKS, the Washington D.C. feminist newspaper, has given the anti-  nuclear issue in-depth coverage. Here 'ñ∫ Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79        19  are some comments from them on women  and the U.S. anti-nuke movement:  Why feminists have not been involved  Although individual women are a strong  force in the anti-nuclear movement,'  there has not been a large organized  feminist support.  Part of the reason  for this, it seems, may be the image  of the issue and the people involved.  To feminists, radical or otherwise,  other issues have appeared to be more  crucial and more demanding of everyone's limited energy and resources.  Radical feminists have also seen the  anti-nuclear movement as somewhat liberal groups, led by men and concentrating on a "soft" ecological issue.  This is changing.  Feminists are now  seeing the issue as one that affects  everyone's future, but particularly  women, who have less control over the  situation and who will have less choice  over their reproductive lives if it  continues.  Pregnant women workers at  the Three Mile Island plant had to  evacuate the area and were not paid  for the time off work.  The question  has been posed that supporting the  anti-nuclear effort with its human  reproduction emphasis may be implicitly  supporting the right-to-life movement.  But the demands of pro-abortion and  anti-nuclear activists are for choice-  to choose not to have children or to  choose to have children who are healthy.  The structure of the anti-nuclear movement reflects influences of the women's  movement and women's frustrations with  their place in 1960's radical groups.  According to Seven Days, members of  anti-nuke groups who are too young to  have learned from that are "determined  to avoid the elitism, sexism, and centralized organization that they have  heard were common during the antiwar  struggle". Most are small, local groups  that have not as yet engendered powerful leaders.*  What your local  nuclear power plant  can do to you  Dr. Helen Caldicott  Nuclear power poses the greatest  public hazard the world has ever  encountered because of the inevitable contamination of the biosphere with plutonium and radioactive wastes.  Cessation of all  forms of nuclear power is the ultimate form of preventative medicine.  The fuel cycle of nuclear power plants  is complex, but not too difficult to  understand. It has many biological  and medical implications which must  be understood by the average person  in the street as well as by the politicians who make most important  decisions for society.  In this article, I describe the fuel  cycle step by step and explain the  medical dangers arising from each  step.  1. Mining.  Uranium is the fuel  for atomic reactors.  When it is  mined from the ground it emits a  radioactive gas called radon which  is often inhaled into the lungs of  miners where it converts after four  days to lead 210 which remains  radioactive for more than 100 years.  Radiation in the body is carcinogenic (cancer-causing).  It has  been discovered in the U.S. that  up to 20% of uranium miners die  of lung cancer over a 20 year  period of mining.  2. Milling.  After the uranium is  mined it is then milled and refined.  Thousands of tons of waste ore  (called tailings) are discarded  and left lying in huge heaps on  the ground.  The tailings generated  in the U.S.A. over the next 24  years may produce 45 cases of lung  cancer in the world per year for  tens of thousands of years.  The  causative agent is again the gas  radon, which is continually emitted  from the waste uranium in the  tailings.  3.  Enrichment and Fuel Fabrication.  The uranium is then enriched and  fabricated into fuel rods which are  transported to the nuclear reactor,  and placed in the reactor core. A  typical 1000 megawatt reactor contains 526 bundles and each bundle  consists of 12 rods.  The radioactive uranium produces heat by  fission which is utilized to generate electricity.  During this  MCMty*>-'!' £  process uranium is converted to  many radioactive daughter products which are the ashes or wastes  of nuclear power.  Once a year one  quarter of the rods are removed  from the reactor core because  their generating life has ceased.  The rods are both thermally and  radioactively very hot.  They  must be stored on racks in cooling '  ponds containing water for weeks  prior to removal for more permanent storage elsewhere or possible  ~p£fa*etU/ UBEKATIONl NEWS SERVICE:'  reprocessing.  They now contain a  very large amount of biologically  dangerous radioactive materials  including strontium 90, iodine 131,  cesium 137 and plutonium.  4.  Reprocessing.  Eventually it  is hoped these rods will be transported in caskets to a reprocessing  plant where they will be dissolved  in nitric acid.  During reprocessing, the plutonium  is purified and removed from the  solution, in powder form as plutonium dioxide.  It will then be  used as either fuel for atomic  bombs or fuel for "breeder nuclear  reactors" (reacots which breed  plutonium).  It is as this point  in the fuel cycle that the greatest  dangers arise once the plutonium  is separated. Plutonium is an  extremely potent cancer producing  material, appropriately named after  Pluto, the God of Hell.  It enters  the body by inhalation of contaminated air, where it is deposited  in the lungs.  Because of its  potent cancer producing properties  the acceptable body dose has been  set at less than 1 millionth of a  gram (an invisible particle).  There is some evidence this level  has been set too high.  Cancer  will not appear until 15 or 20  years after inhalation.  By extrapolation, 1 lb of plutonium, universally dispersed would be adequate to kill every man, woman and  child on earth.  Because plutonium  is the basic material of atomic  bombs, it is more valuable than  heroin on the black market, and  therefore vulnerable to theft by  terrorists, racketeers, non-  nuclear nations and deranged individuals.  Reactor grade plutonium  makes inefficient but dirty bombs.  It also has a curious physical property of igniting spontaneously when  exposed to air, thereby producing  tiny aerosolised particles which are  dispersed by wind currents and avail- 20       Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  able for inhalation by humans and  animals.  By the year 2,020 in the U.S.A., the  industry will have produced 30,000  tons of plutonium, most of which will  be in powdered form.  There will be  100,000 shipments of this material  annually on the highways of America.  Plutonium must be transported very  carefully, packed in small quantities in separate containers because  only 10 lbs. is "critical mass"  which means that a spontaneous  atomic explosion could occur if 10  lbs. or more were compacted together In a finite space.  One could  envisage disastrous consequences if  a truck were to crash and discharge  some of its deadly contents.  Plutonium half-life of 24,400 years  The most crucial property of plutonium is a half life of 24,400 years  (half life of a radioactive substance is the period of time for  half a given quantity to decay, and  a smiliar period for half of the  remaining radioactivity to decay,  ad infinitum).  Therefore radiation  from man-made plutonium will exist  on earth for at least half a million years.  To illustrate the  enormous medical problems arising  from the physical properties of  plutonium: if an individual dies  of lung cancer engendered by plutonium, his body will return to  dust, but the plutonium lives on  to produce cancer in another human  being.  Although it will be used as "fuel"  in breeder reactors, more plutonium  will be produced than will be utilized.  So there will be a continual  net increase in plutonium manufactured.  The nuclear industry has  not yet decided what to do with all  this plutonium.  5. Waste Storage.  There are no  permanent safe methods of disposal  and storage available at this point  in time.  After the plutonium is  extracted from the radioactive  waste, very dangerous biological  elements remain, which have no  further use and are pure waste  products.  This remaining solution  contains some plutonium, radioactive  iodine, strontium 90, cesium, as  previously mentioned, and many  other highly toxic radio-nuclides.  Because it is extremely hot, the  solution must be stored and cooled  continuously for years.  Currently  tanks with a 30 year lifespan are  being used.  Every month numerous  leaks of radioactive wastes are  reported in the U.S.A. in quantities from several gallons to  200,000 gallons.  When this dangerous fluid leaks it inevitably contaminates the local water system  and the various elements are taken  up by the food cycle.  Radioactive  iodine, strontium 90 and cesium are  absorbed by roots of grass and vegetables and are further concentrated  in the flesh and milk of animals  when they eat the grass.  Iodine 131, strontium 90 and plutonium are concentrated in milk, both  human and animal.  Cesium is concentrated in muscle (meat) and  plutonium is also concentrated  1,000 times in fish compared to the  background water concentration.  These substances are invisible,  tasteless and odourless.  It is impossible to know when one is eating  or drinking or inhaling radioactive  elements.  6. Biological Properties of Radioactive Waste.  All cells of the body  have a central nucleus which contains genes, the basic inherited  material which controls all our  characteristics (colour of eyes,  and hair, size, facial characteristics, enzyme systems etc. ).  Genes  are changed by radioactive particles.  Cells and genes which are actively  dividing.(as in fetuses, babies and  young children) are most susceptible to the effects of radiation.  If a gene which controls the rate  ■ of cell division is altered by  radiation, the cell may divide in  an uncontrolled fashion ,-to produce  caneer and leukemia. It may take  from 15-30 years before cancer appears after the cell is exposed to  radiation.  If-a gene in the' sperm  or egg is altered by a radioactive  that one millionth of 1 gram of  plutonium is also absorbed from the  lungs into the blood stream where  it is carried to the liver (to produce a very malignant liver cancer),  to bone (where like strontium 90,  it causes osteogenic sarcoma and  leukemia), and it is selectively  taken up from the circulation by  the testes and ovaries where, because of its incredible gene changing properties, it may cause an  increased incidence of deformed and  diseased babies, both now and in  future generations.  Plutonium  also crosses the placenta from  mother's blood into the blood of  the fetus, where it may kill a';  |7 Enrichment plant}w  _^_w^  particle, the young may be born  either with an inherited disease,  or the baby may appear normal, but  will transmit the damaged gene to  future generations, to become manifest in later years.  Radioactive iodine is absorbed  through the bowel wall, and migrates  in the blood to the thyroid gland  where it may produce thyroid cancer.  Strontium 90 is also absorbed through  the bowel after being ingested in  contaminated milk, and is incorporated in bone because it chemically  resembles calcium.  This element  causes osteogenic sarcoma - a highly  malignant, lethal bone tumor, and  leukemia, a cancer of the white  blood cells. The blood cells are  formed in the bone marrow, and are  therefore subjected to the effects  of radiation from strontium 90 in  the adjacent bone.  Cesium 137 is deposited in muscles  of the body where it can produce  malignant changes.  Plutonium is one of the most carcinogenic substances known.  It is  not absorbed through the bowel" wall,  except in infants in the first four  weeks of life when it is ingested  in milk.  As previously described,  infants are extremely sensitive to  the toxic effects of radiation.  The route of entry of plutonium is  by inhalation of contaminated air  into the lungs.  Small particles of  plutonium are deposited deep in the  respiratory passages, where they  remain for years.  It is accepted  cell responsible for development  of part of an organ, e.g. heart,  brain, etc. causing gross deformities to occur in the developing  fetus.  This mechanism for production of fetal deformities is called  teratogenesis and is different from  the deformities caused by genetic  mutation in the egg or sperm, because although the basic gene  structure of the cells of the  fetus is normal, an important cell  in the developing fetus has been  killed leading to a localized deformity.  (Similar to the action  of the drug thalidomide).  Massive quantities of radioactive  wastes are being and will be produced in the future.  The safe-  storage of waste is unsolved, and  even if there were a present-day  solution, we could not predict a  stable society or world for half  a million years; we could not guarantee incorruptible guards,.or moral  policicians and we certainly cannot  prevent earthquakes, cyclones or  even wars.  Waste is leaking now,  inevitably it will leak in the  future.  We could therefore predict epidemics of cancer and leukemia in children and young adults,,  and an increased incidence of inherited disease (there are 2,000 described inherited diseases).  It is  also inevitable that plutonium will  be stolen and utilized for atomic  weapon production (2 tons of plutonium are presently unaccounted  for in the U.S.A. ).  It has been Claimed that 80-90$ of  all cancers may be caused by environmental pollutants.  There was a  5% increase in cancer in the U.S.A.  in the first seven months of 1975,  and a total 3%  rise in 1975.  Governments spend millions of dollars searching the causes of cancer,  leukemia, and inherited disease,  but simultaneously spend billions  of dollars in an industry that will  directly propagate these diseases. ■ Kinesis   Sept/Qct'79       21  Portland speaks frankly about Anti-Psychiatry Bibliography  THE ANTI-PSYCHIATRY BIBLIOGRAPHY  AND RESOURCE GUIDE by Portland  Frank. Second Edition. PRESS GANG  PUBLISHERS, 160 pp. $4.50 paper,  $12.50 cloth.  Available November 1, 1979  Anti-psyehiatry is a two-fold movement. It actively pushes to abolish  the psychiatric system. But it also  seeks out new ways to deal with a  person's pain.  That's what Portland Frank says in  the introduction to her new edition  of The Anti-Psychiatry Bibliography  and Resource Guide.  The book began as a small project  back in the make-work days of OFY.  In its first edition it was published by the Mental Patients' Association (MPA).  Its real beginning, however, goes  back much further, to the early  sixties, when Portland was training  to be a nurse in Montreal. As part of  that training, she worked in the psychiatric wing of a hospital.  I would take one of my patients up  for shock,  and she would beg and plead  not to go because she knew what it did  to her.   For days after,  she would  be  lost,   says Portland.  That was her introduction to the basic  tenet of anti-psychiatry: that psychiatric institutions, as they now stand,  are grossly unsatisfactory in nearly  all respects.  Portland began keeping a scrapbook of  mental health issues in Canada. J was  going to change the nursing profession.  she recalls.  One night in the nurses' residence,  Portland freaked out herself. She was  carted off in a wheelchair to the psychiatric wing of Montreal's Jewish General. They had cheese bagels I could  throw across the room,  says Portland  wryly.  They told me I was just going in for  a week,  and that if I was good,   the  doctors would talk to the sisters at  the nursing school and I'd be allowed  back in.  But they kept her not one week, but  three months. Then she was booted out  of nursing school. The diagnosis?  Manic depressive with hysterical tendencies.  They kept telling me I shouldn't be  a nurse,  I should be an artist.  I dropped my art work for eight years due to  that.  It's a wonder I ever got back  to it.  After doing time at SFU for a B.A. in  psychology (I was fried inside and  out with the academic word)  Portland  The  inti-Psychiatry Bibliography  and Resource Guide  second edition, revised & expanded  K. Portland Frank  became involved with MPA in its first  year of operations.  Living in an MPA house, she concentrated on collecting her file-cards and  clippings. By the early 70's, anti-  psychiatry books and articles had appeared in numerous places, and activism  for mental patients' rights, promoted by  such groups as MPA, was growing. When  the first edition of the bibliography  was published (in 1974), it sold out.  Press Gang, which had taken over the distribution of the bibliography from MPA,  suggested to Portland that she do an  updated edition. That was three years  ago.  While forever aspiring to make this new  edition as perfect,  all-inclusive and  definitive as possible, I have become  guilty of holding up the presses. And  although even in its present form it  still feels more like a working paper  than a finished product, we all agreed  that the time has come to stop adding  to it and just get it out,  she explains.  Those of you who are familiar with the  first bibliography will notice major  changes. Apart from its far greater  length, the material has been organized,  Portland points out, to make a more  cohesive statement reflecting the perspective of mental patients '  liberation,  especially feminism and anti-capitalism/  imperialism.  The other change is one of format,  away from a strict bibliography to  a catalogue style. The first section  is an introduction to the anti-psychiatry movement and its writings.  That is followed by chapters on 'The  Politics of Sanity and Madness',  'Psychiatry and the Law', 'Mind Control Technology' - the name but a few.  Each chapter in turn is further divided into sub-headings. The section  on 'Psychiatry and Women' for example  has entries for: Lesbians, Self-Help  and Self-Defence Resources, Feminist  Therapy and Feminist Spirituality.  Individual entries are fully annotated.  There is also an anti-psychiatry glossary, with words from that movement's  new language.  Heard of these?  Mentalism  is the assumption that certain kinds of behaviour are sane/normal,  and that anything outside of these is  crazy. It does not take into account  the idea that there might be individual reasons for crazy behaviour.  Sane Chauvinism  means that mental patients are oppressed by non-patients'  attitudes towards them. As an oppres-  - sive force, it runs parallel to many  others, such as sexism and racism.  Politically, the perspective of the bibliography is always clear. Mental health  is not a system of health but of sickness. It is a profit-oriented industry  run by ruling-class whites who make  dollars while punishing deviants.  The bibliography is illustrated with  woodcuts by Portland. She made them over  a two-year period especially for this  book. They are incredibly strong, and  beautiful.  At the Women's Art Gallery  To .celebrate the appearance of the bibliography, Portland Frank and Persimmon  are having a show of anti-psychiatry  sculptures and woodcuts (the originals)  throughout October at the Women's Art  Galley, Women In Focus, 6-45 Kingsway.■  WOMEN AND POVERTY from p.1  than one in four receives any regular  benefits from her dead husband's employer, and even then she probably receives  only fifty percent of his pension entitlement.  Government pensions will not keep an  elderly woman out of poverty: in no  province does the guaranteed minimum  income for elderly people reach the  poverty line. B.C. is well down on  this list, behind Prince Edward Island,  Nova Scotia, Saskatchewan and Alberta.  In the event of marriage breakdown,  wives do not receive a fair share of  property and seldom receive adequate  alimony/maintenance payments. If a  single-parent mother cannot find or  take a job outside of the home,  welfare guarantees her - and her  children - a life of poverty and  humiliation. At one time B.C. led  the way in social assistance rates.  However, our maximum rates now put  us behind Saskatchewan and Prince  Edward Island.  What can be done for Canada's  1,219,000 poor women?  Equality of opportunity in the education system and in the labour market;  "equal pay for work of equal value"  to circumvent "female" occupations;  increased child care; "sick children's  leave"; a "child-care drop-out" period  for pension purposes; legislation making  spouses financial equals; automatic enforcement of maintenance orders by  courts; expansion of the refundable  child tax credit through elimination  of the married tax exemption—these  are some of the long-term measures  considered in the report.  More immediate steps include the expansion of the refundable child tax  credit by elimination of the tax exemption for dependent children; conversion  of the "equivalent-to-marriage" tax  exmption for single parents into a  refundable tax credit; increases in  social assistance rates and 0AS/GIS  pensions to meet the poverty lines.  The Council concludes that unless governments "vigorously intervene", there  is no reason to believe that future  generations of Canadian women will be  any  less vulnerable  to poverty.  Copies of the~report are available  from: Federated Anti-Poverty Groups  of B.C.,   3-411 Sixth Street,  New  Westminster,  B.C.   VZL 3B1.   Please  include 25$ for postage.■ Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  A letter to all feminists, all lesbians, all lesbian-feminists.  Yvette Perreault  This is a story of increasing police  interference and brutality. A story  that concerns all lesbians, all feminists and all BCFW members.  At the last Rights of Lesbians Subcommittee meeting, it was brought  to our attention that a Vancouver  store, the California Gift Company,  had a sexist window display:  - a woman sitting on a toilet, her  knees elevated, toilet paper tucked  in her bodice, a book strategically  placed at the base of the toilet  was entitled: "How To Play With Your  Pussy."  - next to this was a mannequin of a  young boy wearing small briefs. A  sign (keyring) hanging from his  finger read: "Under 21".  On behalf of the Rights of Lesbians  Subcommittee, I wrote a letter protesting this offensive display.  We had anticipated one of two things:  - The California Gift Co. owners  would immediately recognize the  error of their ways, being gay  brothers and all, and change the  display while apologizing profusely.  - or they would disagree with us and  do nothing.  We were unprepared for what did happen.  The following day, a local tv station called me, at work (interesting  how quickly that connection was made)  to ask for my comment on a "series  of actions against the California  Gift Co.". Apparently, during the  past three nights, the store's windows had been stickered and spray-  painted.  No group had claimed responsibility for the actions.-  I responded with a general rap on  sexist advertising and the objectification of women and said that  although I did not know who had  stickered and painted, the Rights  of Lesbians Subcommittee could certainly understand why women would  be so angry.  Visited by Vancouver City Police  The same day, I was visited, at home,  by the Vancouver City Police.  The  purpose of the.visit was to investigate a complaint of destruction of  property by the California Gift Co.  Listening with shock and amazement,  I pointed out that while the Rights  of Lesbians Subcommittee would  assume full responsibility for our  letter, we were in no way connected  with the actions. The police replied  saying that he knew that those "This  Exploits and Degrades Women" stickers  were BCFW stickers (not true), and  that these types of actions were  typical BCFW ones (also not true).  He wanted information on:  - who had defaced this private  property?  - what were we planning to do next?  (After all, this had to be nipped  in the bud before windows were  smashed!)  - and, if I wouldn't tell him anything, would I give the women connected with this, the message to  stop: "Better that you tell these  women to stop before this gets  worse and we have to kick down a  few doors and bash in a few heads".  The visit ended.  I thought they  only talked like that in the movies.  My reactions varied from anger to  fright (I know that other women  have experienced far worse) to the  realization that I was/am not anonymous anymore. This means that you  too, sisters, are not anonymous  anymore.  As a feminist, I have written dozens  of "appalled and disgusted" letters.  This is the first time I have done  so on behalf of a Lesbian  Feminist  organization. The reasons for and  implications of the police harrassment at this time because of this  letter are clear:  Lesbianism is an easily identifiable  symbol of rebellion.  The authorities understand the threat  of women taking power over our lives  and they connect, in fact they equate  lesbian with feminist with radical.  They may not always be right, but  police don't have to be right to  threaten and harrass you.'  As lesbians, as feminists, and as  women, we have good reason to fear  and to be angry and to struggle even  harder. Many of us have been lulled  into a false sense of security.  Being a lesbian in the women's corn-  often badly beaten on Vancouver  streets by young, heterosexual men.  - A lesbian has her arm broken by  a gang of straight boy/men when  she is walking a Vancouver street  with her lover.  - Homosexuals are executed (shot)  in Iran for the crime of sodomy.  - Stink bombs are thrown into a  meeting at the West End Community  Centre to protest violence against  gays.  It is easy to see that male homosexuals and lesbians are being persecuted by society, the state and  the police (which are simply an arm  of this capitalist, racist patriarchy). It is clear too, that we are  not being harrassed because of some  "morality" question, but because we  are indeed threatening.  It is vitally important that we continue to study our own oppression and  analyze the connections we have with  munity in Vancouver is relatively  safe. It's easy and seductive to  assume that because it's okay here,  it's getting better, or at least  safer, for everyone, everywhere,  if we never intend to win.  As feminists, it's crucial that we  hear and study each other's experiences so we can sharpen our perceptions and hone that pit of awareness until we are able to use our  fear and rage even more productively.  Obvious similarities and connections  appear between our stories:  - The Body Politic's subscription  list and material is confiscated by  the authorities.  - The Vancouver Sun is able to  legally discriminate against male  homosexual and lesbian groups by  refusing to print ads for GATE  (Gay Alliance Towards Equality) and  LIL (Lesbian Information Line).  - A teacher in Saskatchewan is fired  from his teaching position because  someone complained he was gay (Body  Politic July '79)  - There is a visible and threatening police presence during the  recent National Lesbian Conference  in Toronto.  Police later charge  an organizer of the Conference with  violating a liquor license.  - Lesbians are harrassed during a  demonstration against Nuclear  Energy in Washington.  They are  harrassed by other anti-nuke  marchers.  - Two lesbians from Edmonton are  sentenced to life in prison for  killing a man who sexually assaulted  one of the women.  - A lesbian mother who had been  awarded custody of her two children  has them taken away by a judge because she left England and moved  to Toronto to live with her lover.  - A lesbian from Vancouver is turned  back at the US border because she  carries a LIL card.  - Homosexual men and women are  other oppressed groups (drop-ins, discussion groups, study groups, CR's,  support groups have been developed and  are being used.  However, simply recognizing and understanding how and why we are held  becomes demoralizing and defeating.  We deal with so much depressing  shit!  The only way to combat and  prevent depression, burn-out and  failure is for us to ACT on what  we know to be true.  Political activity is a term that  scares many women.  Our very existence as lesbians and as feminists  is a political act.  A protest or  praise is a political act. A lesbian radio show, an all women's  bar and baseball team is a political statement.  Lesbian drop-ins and  women's bookstores are political,  as are women's art, music, and culture. Women supporting each other,  taking care of each other, demanding  our rights and spreading the word  to other women is clearly political.  But, there's still a problem: even  with this much "political activity'  going on, very little is changing.  We have not eradicated the oppression of lesbians.  Nothing less is  worth fighting for or worth settling  for.  We need MORE,  MANY MORE,  well  planned, tightly organized, successfully carried out and thoroughly  evaluated ACTIONS:  more than our  International Women's Day Celebrations, more than Gay Rights Rallies,  protests, benefits, and occasional  spraypainting and leafletting.  It  is time to go from taking care of  ourselves to direct, consistent  actions which will continue to  politicize us and raise public  consciousness and let them know  that we are here to stay and we are  determined to succeed!  Educating for action  Action-oriented groups inspire and Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79       23  keep their members. Actions prevent  burn-out!  Every meeting, drop-in, discussion  group, can include an action conclusion.  Theory/discussion are presented first then are followed  immediately with ways to act on  that.  For example, after a discussion on lesbians in prison, provide women with names of women in  prison they can write to, let women  know what the Women's Prisoner  Rights Group is doing, organize  workshops for the women In prison.  We have to believe in our power and  capabilities.  Change can and does  occur.  Protest letters and spray-  painting do lead to the removal  of offensive billboards.  There are countless suggestions for "  actual actions:  - Public statements can be made  effectively by wearing buttons, and  T-shirts with messages.  Leaflets  and stickers handed out or stuck to  poles and walls reach a great number  of people. Speaking out, face-to-  face confrontations with individuals  or groups, articles on TV, radio and  in the papers, graffiti, and spray-  painting also politicize the masses!  - Publicity:  the media picks up  quickly on innovative ideas.  The  Rape Relief "Rapist Jogger" poster  received national coverage as well  as politicizing women and men and  preventing rapes.  - Use the alternative media to get  your message out to other women and  groups; there are many allies and  supporters and potential members out  there.  - If we are successful, our aims and  purpose will be clear to others and  women will be encouraged to transform  their beliefs into-action, too.  This  is a way of passing on our skills and  what we know. We are beginning to  share resources and skills with other  groups and we have a right to ask for  their help and support In return.  However, we also have a responsibility to be out there with and for  those groups who are demonstrating,  picketing, need help because they  are in trouble.  Our lines of communication can be tightened, and we  can use the existing resources  (BCFW network) to keep each other  informed.  - Inevitably,-there are real consequences for anyone or any group  who takes risks and acts, especially  if you are successful (threatening).  Women in trouble need concrete support:  -We need a resource list of lawyers who  are prepared to advise and fight for  us (on lesbian mother custody cases,  lesbians fighting legal battles, activists who are arrested).  -Telephone trees can be set up so we  can reach each other quickly in emergencies.  - We can set up support for lesbians  who have been harassed, beaten arrested (emotional support, a lesbian  bail fund, child care....)  I want to live in a world where there is  no more oppression and no more violence.  I don't believe this will be possible  unless more and more of us protest, fight  against and fight back and creative alternatives to those systems and institutions  that oppress us now. Women anywhere who  initiate and carry out innovative, consistent, sustained actions to protest viol-  lence and oppression and to make positive  statements about lesbians and women are  indeed "Making a Revolution."«  Quadra managers speak with Kinesis about solemn feminists  Joey Thompson  It's tinsel-time at the Quadra on Homer.  The club has GOT IT like so many  other disco dens in Vancouver - the  flashing red, blue, green and gold  spiral lights, the silver ball that  sets off neurotic pinpoints of light,  the loud, pulsating music and disc  jockey.  But the clientele is different - women - nothing but women; gay women,  straight women, political women, separatist women, U.S. women, indifferent  women, sexist women.  The two club operators are also female.  The disco duet guarantee that club profits are going into their pockets -  not some rich, exploitive guy who is  making them work and feel dirt cheap.  Susan and Heather opened the club  last July to the tune of a costly  monthly lease. Now that the club is  attracting a respectable number of patrons, the two women want to buy.  The original price was $119,000, says  Susan. But the fatcat owner twirled his  moustache when he saw how women were  actually making a go of a club which  has been through several unsuccessful  face changes and personalities. (A  few years ago, seniors were waltzing  to Lawrence Welk in ballroom attires.)  Now the owner has upped the price to  $128,000 and changed the details of  payment - making it more difficult for  Susan and Heather to finance a loan.  He says if the women don't buy it,  he'11 run it as a women's club!  They've told him politely that they  don't think it would work. But for  now the future of the "gay establishment" is uncertain - and as insecure  as the women's political commitment  to feminism - "women's lib," Susan  calls it.  There's been much criticism bandied  about. Feminists have witnessed several night club acts there which they  say are sexist and disgusting.  One involves the posting of a Hubba  Hubba poster depicting a provocative  woman exposing 'tits and ass' while  'announcing the opening of the club.  Someone tore if from the wall.  J said it was a joke, a humorous poster, says Susan. They have no right to  do that,  that's an intrusion of other  people's rights and beliefs.  Another scene involved the night prowler cigarette lady who entered the club,  with permission from Susan, wearing  fish-net stockings and a skimpy outfit.  Feminists complained about her being  here.   They said some rude things about  her.   I thought her outfit was great.  Feminists have no sense of humour and  you can quote me on that,   she told  Kinesis.  Susan and Heather are not political,  nor do they pretend to be. They don't  want politics intruding on their night  life scene - or affecting their pocket  books.  I am tired of women/feminists coming  here saying who can come in and who  can't.  It's a place to come and dance,  not make political statements,   says  Susan.  I mean we all believe in the same things-  we 're all against rape and children  being molested.   We have the same principles.  And about the almost steady diet of  disco: Susan says they'll play what the  women want. And not all women want feminist music.  Not all women want disco either.  We'll  change it to punk rock or motown or  to 150 on weekdays) pay about $1.25  for a beer and a little more for hard  liquor.  We didn't want to open the place with  high prices.   Our prices are a little  too  low.   We'll have  to raise  them soon,  says Susan.  Right now we are just breaking even.  The two women are also afraid of breaking the law and the rules of the two  hovering branches: liquor control and  human rights. In order to avoid the  bureaucratic red tape they advertise  the place as a gay establishment. Women Only just wouldn't sit right with  the LCB and HRB.  They say they are trying to avoid  hassles. And that means calling the  cops to oust a drunk woman, if all  other attempts to do so fail.  We've only called the police once since  we opened.   We had to have her leave.  Staff talked to her for hours but  nothing worked.   People were complaining so we got the police.  She came back three weeks  later and  everything is okay.  The club is cozy, comfortable, relaxed  and a good place for an outing with a  few friends of the female persuasion.  But, Susan reminds me,  1 wave,  or whatever women respond to,  there isn't enough feminist  music to play.   It belongs at home.  They've toyed with the idea of bringing in live music. And are eyeballing  the price of beer and drinks with a  price hike in mind.  The 300 or so women who frequent the  place on weekends (anywhere from 25  Lesbian Drop-In  LESBIAN DROP-IN meets every Wednesday at  the Women's Bookstore, 804 Richards St.  starting at 8 p.m.  It is a discussion  group around lesbian issues. Discussions  focus on analyzing and exploring our  oppression as lesbians and discussing  ways of taking action to transform our  oppression.■ 24       Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79  Non-violent or non-feminist?  How to say "Peace" to a rapist and not survive  Ellen Baragon  (Rape is)  "an exaggeration of the  usual relationship between a man and a  woman. " - Susan Griffin  In an April 26/79 publication of WIN, a  'freedom through non-violent action'  magazine, an article entitled "Rape Resistance through Non-Violence" was printed.  The author was Mary Crane, but much of her  information came from several 'specialists' in non-violent actions.  Here is a summation of what Mary Crane  and many other 'non-violent' feminists  are saying about self-defence for women.  "Not every assailant can immediately be  won over by non-violent persuasion and  resistance.... In such an instance we may  choose  to endure a rape rather than injure our assailant.     This is a defensible  position from our non-violent perspective".  Essentially what this statement says, is,  "When it really comes down to it, the  rapist's life is more important than my  own or my sisters'.  Mary Crane's views on self-defence will  be dealt with here, one by one. Most  men and unfortunately, most women also,  view rape as part of an overall 'problem'  inside a sexist society, and as a glaring example of male oppressiveness.  What many fail to realize, is the critical heights to which sexual violence  has escalated.  Rape is an immediately life-threatening  situation and puts a woman in one of  the most terrifying, dangerous positions  she can .find herself.  Statistics on  crime in general indicate a significant  decrease in the United States in the  last year, while rape is the only single  crime on the increase, (not to mention  the ones which go unreported).  Rape is  not merely a social flaw in the fabric  of North American culture, but it is a  war being waged against females from  infancy to old age.  A grim example: female children of six  months have been sexually abused to the  point where their internal organs must  be medically attended to and rearranged  up until the age of fifteen after such  an attack.  Apart from the harm an instance such as this can cause an individual woman or child, the implications  for the female population as a whole  are severe and longlasting.  There may be many instances where women  may have a choice as to what actions  they may choose to take, in a potentially violent situation.  Sometimes  a domestic quarrel with a spouse or  highly-charged interaction between  parent and child, affords women the  choice between fighting back physically or not.  But unfortunately, rape very rarely  affords us the time or opportunity to  make those choices, however admirable  and thought out they may be. When a  rapist grabs you from behind, with a  knife at your"throat, or his hands  choking you, there is little room to  sort out your views on the 'non-violent approach'.  You must choose as best you can, with  the odds against you, how to save yourself, or at least survive the experience, physically and emotionally.  This is assuming of course, that most  women feel their lives are just as valuable as the attackers.  Research would  bear out that this is true.  CRANE: "As non-violent women,  we understand that while it is certainly not  healthy for women to be raped,  it is  also not healthy for men to rape.  On the contrary, rape provides men  with enormous power and strength over  women. Rape ensures that the victim  (and women generally) understand that  they are not only weaker and less powerful, but that they are objects which  may be abused beyond any limit, sexually  and otherwise.  Without this ability to terrorize and  subjugate women, men would be forced  to deal with women as equals.  They  would have to relinquish the power and  privilege they now enjoy.  Secondly, why must women continually  be encouraged to worry and fret over  the male emotional psyche? Of course,  male violence is unhealthy for the society as a whole, but must we always  be forced to 'consider the man's point  of view'?  CRANE: "We can both respect, cherish  the humanity of all men while at the  same time maintaining a healthy self-  protectivenesss against possible male  assaults. "  'Healthy self-protectiveness' is a catch  phrase as much as the term 'rape problem'  is, (a term which Crane uses repeatedly).  Real self protectiveness means to come  out of the situation alive and well, if  at all possible.  If we stop to consider how unhealthy  damaging our 'opponent' is, we further  the inevitability of dangerous circumstances.  Also, is it not absurd to suggest that  women 'cherish and respect' all men, even  the ones who rape us? Crane has prob  ably never asked a rape victim to respect the humanity of her attacker. Of  course, this would be a colossal insult.  Reject male violence completely  Women do not have an obligation, nor is  it necessary for a feminist society to  respect any form of human behavior (and  persons), who commit gross violent acts  on women.  It is imperative for ourselves as individuals and for the growth  of feminist principles to reject completely male violence in all forms as  totally unacceptable behavior.  We must stop reinforcing undesirable  behavior through traditional female  practices of soothing, forgiving and  attempting to 'change' male personalities, on a on<~-to-one basis.  In men's  eyes this kind of approach can only undermine the strength of women that feminists have fought long and hard to  illustrate.  Of course, it is quite possible that  Crane is using such language in a general abstract way, and not actually  suggesting we physically console the  attacker.  But her words have the same  implication.  Women do not need to be  encouraged to 'nurture and forgive'  in order to repel a rapist. Women need  support and strength from other women  to gain the confidence and courage to  do this.  CRANE: "Inflicting minor injury on an  assailant to avoid rape becomes an  acceptable choice compared with the  more permanent anger and frustration  and possible physical damage a rape  might cause the restster. "  Here, Crane seems to give women some  measure of freedom in choosing to secure  her own personal safety first, but Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79       25  quickly  etracts it.  CRANE: "We are taking a serious risk  however,   in deciding that some forms  of counter assault are acceptable and  other forms are unacceptable.... Safety  tips such as the keeping of weapons  and guard dogs and other counter assaultive measures have been purposely omitted since for most of us,   these would  be a clear breach of our non-violent  commitment. "  In other words, rape is undesirable,  but it is morally more righteous to  allow yourself and your sisters to be  brutalized than any one man (rapist).  CRANE: "Rape situations  that are most  amenable to dialogue,  include those  where we are dealing with men with  whom we want to have or maintain some  measure of rapport,  friends,   relatives,  neighbors. . . "  Clearly this implies that rape by a man  that the victim knows is more acceptable, and that women should attempt to  maintain relationships with men that  rape us.  Rape is never- 'okay', in any form, whether it is between husband and wife, boyfriend and girlfriend, or father and  daughter.  It is dangerous for women  to be encouraged to accept sexual violence under any circumstances, let alone  gaining some kind of 'rapport* with the  attacker.  Crane sets up a fictional incident to  illustrate the 'non-violent' approach  to a rape situation using various principles.  One of these principles is:  "Seek to increase the sense of humanity  the opponent feels about himself and  you. . . "    To the extent that we can help  him recover a sense of what it means to    ■  be fully,   wonderfully human,  we may be  able to stop his inhuman behavior toward us.. .Criticize your opponent',  but do not imply that he is a bad person. "  This example is taken from Ray Chandler's   CRANE: "Ideally we do not want simply  book, Dealing Non-Violently with Rape,  a book which Crane recommends.  Scene: Masked man stops woman on street  late at night.  He puts a gun to her  head and tells her to walk toward a deserted area. (R=resister, 0=opponent)  R:  I'm really frightened by  this.     Are  you going to rape me?    You are going to  rape me.     I've never had this experience before.     I wish I could talk about  it before we did it.     I really want to  talk to you.  0: Get undressed.  R:  I really want to talk to you about  how you would feel if one of your sisters or your mother was being raped.  This happens  to women all  the  time.     I  feel we're in a situation that we should  talk about^before you do something you  may be sorry for.  0: Do you have any money?  R: No, I'm a poor person. I think you  should realize we're neighbors and I  don't think you really want to do this.  I think we should get together another  time when we 're both less upset and we  can talk about it.  0: Or I could blast your head off.  R: I'm really aware that you could  blast my head off. I'm trying to  react in a way that will maintain our  humanity with each other. I wouldn't  ' hurt you if I had the chance. If you  would take the gun away from my head  and we would look at each other, maybe we could talk about it.  This scene lacks an understanding of  the reality we are dealing with and is  the epitome of what a sexist world  encourages women to do.  It embraces  all of the nonsensical, oppressive ways  that women and men relate to each other.  It asks that a woman be cool, thoughtful,  sensitive and incredibly innovative when  attacked, when she is frightened out of  her life.  to prevent the opponent by any means        h  necessary from raping us and other women.  Isn't achieving for women the freedom  from brutalization and endless patterns  of subjugation not a goal worthy in itself? How many women's lives does it  cost for the non-violent appraoch to  finally take hold?  The elimination of rape needs a commitment from women to end rape and take on  this task as a priority, believing it  to be crucial and important in itself.  Crane's views condone passivity and  guilt over the little physical strength  women do exert. Women have traditionally practiced 'non-violence' in their  lives and been victimized despite this.  Of course, non-violent revolution is a  respectable long-term goal, but how  does this relate to women particularly?  Most violent crimes are committed by  men anyway, and very often against women.  The reality of our pre'sent culture contradicts the 'non-violent'  approach quite sharply.  It would take  a tremendous flexibility in one's analysis to accept both.  A last example of the ^on-violent approach, or message, which Crane suggests  a woman may say to her attacker:  "I will not hurt you.     You can trust  that I believe it is against God's  wishes for people  to hurt one another. "  What I might suggest here, is that if  you choose to take the strategy printed  above, you may want to shut your eyes,  cross your fingers and pray, because  the power you had may as well be with  'God', for you would have given it up  from the beginning.  . Marge Piercy makes the point well when  she was asked how she felt about nonviolence.  She said simply, "When somebody is stepping on your toes,  you get  them off. "  Ellen Baragon is a former Rape Relief  worker who was involved in the recent  East  Vancouver project,    'Neighbours  Against Rape. ' _  Joan Baez dumps former allies, U.S. revises myths about war  Daphne Morrison  At her concert in Vancouver on July 29,  Joan Baez applauded Canada for bringing  in the "boat people" and she also spoke  against what she sees as the repressive  dictatorship of Vietnam. It is,' she says,  engaged in serious violations of human  rights.  Along with "Blowing in the Wind" this is  fairly typical fare from Joan Baez these  days, but the highly publicized attacks  on Vietnam which she is making through  the press and at the concerts on her  tour are causing concern to many people.  In a full-page advertisement which she  and 80 co-signers took out in five national U.S. newspapers on May 30 this  year, she claims that "thousands of  innocent Vietnamese, many whose only  'crimes' are those of conscience, are  being arrested, detained and tortured  in prisons and re-education camps." She  further claims that "people are shipped  to re-education centres, and fed a  starvation diet of stale rice", that  "people are used as human mine detectors,  clearing live mine fields with their  hands and feet", and that "for many  life is hell and death is prayed for."  What should be a cause for celebration  (the fourth anniversary of the ending  of the U.S.'s 20 year war in Vietnam)  instead is a "time for grieving".  Undoubtedly, Joan Baez has found another  Cause.  But is it the right one? The  Guardian of July 4, 1979, claimed that  on key points of fact, documentation  and interpretation the Baez ad is "in-  accurant and misleading." They printed *  a reply prepared by the Southeast Asia  Resource Center.  This reply made the  following points:  that the cruelty,  violence and oppression practised by  the U.S. government during its war  against the Vietnamese would be hard  for the current Vietnamese government  to match; that Amnesty International's  1977 and 1978 reports on Vietnam do not  list a single verified incident of torture; that the actual number of prisoners (the Baez ad stated there are  between 150,000 to 200,000 political  prisoners) is highly disputable; that  the source of the facts in the ad is a  single refugee who was known to have  sympathetic connections with the Thieu  government and whose charges of prison  conditions in Vietnam are likely to  be exaggerated and manufactured.  They  say that millions of Vietnamese■do in  fact live on a "starvation diet" because, in the aftermath of war, the  country cannot meet the basic food needs  of the population, and also because the  U.S. government refuses to honour promises to provide post-war aid for agricultural recovery, and refuses to send  in emergency food aid.  Finally, the  Southeast Asia Resource Center makes  the point that every Vietnamese peasant  is a human mine detector because of the  U.S. government's legacy of hundreds of  millions of pounds of unexploded munitions strewn across the country's rice  paddies.  In a footnote at the bottom  of the article, the Center states that  full documentation- of these facts is  available from them.  There is obviously no need nor justification for whitewashing Vietnam.  If  there are people being persecuted in that  country it is as well we know it. But  it is very difficult indeed to obtain  accurate information about what is going  on in Southeast Asia, and the vast majority of what we read in the western  press is strongly biased against the  socialist republic of Vietnam because  of its claims to socialism.  It would  seem to be imperative that the facts  should be indisputable before they are  printed for great numbers of people to  read.  There is also a growing atmosphere in  the U.S. which seeks to defend and justify that country's involvement In the war  against Vietnam.  It can be seen, for  instance, in a violently racist film like  "The Deer Hunter", and also in a Memorial  Day editorial in the Wall Street Journal.  This created the essence of this climate  of opinion by the following statement:  "it may have been a hopeless pursuit, but  surely it (the war) was an honourable one."  The Baez ad, whether wittingly or not,  serves to reinforce this justification  of the U.S. role in Vietnam.  And the more  "acceptable" this war in the past becomes,  the more "acceptable" will a similar imperialist war be in the future.  If Joan Baez is so concerned with violations of human rights, why doesn't she use  her position in the public eye to sing and  speak out about the conditions in North  American prisons, or the oppression suffered by native Indians, or the malnutrition and poverty experienced by hundreds  and thousands of North Americans? The facts  are more accessible and people have a  right to know about them, too.  Joan Baez  doesn't have to go far from home at all  in search for a human rights cause. ■ 26       Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  Musician-warrior describes her politics and personal herstory  When Cris Williamson performed in Vancouver earlier this year,  some feminists  loved the concert.   Others criticized it  for being apolitical.   This interview,  taped at that time,  gives a closer look  at Williamson's views on music,  women and  politics.   Jackie Robbins and Teresa Trull  were present during the interview.  BARB NEWTON: I am interested in finding  out about your background.  CRIS WILLIAMSON: Well I was born in  Deadwood, South Dakota, which is in the  Black Hills, which the Sioux considered  the centre of the universe.  It's beautiful. My dad was in the forest service.  We lived way back in the Rockies, where  there were no people.  There was music.  We had a windup record player, and we  used to listen to the songs of the Red  Army.  Wonderful, strange things.  They  were 78's.  In the 40's the Russians  were our allies, then in the 50's everyone turned around and hid all that  stuff.  We'd have been arrested for  sure if we were out among people.  But  we didn't know.  The highs and lows of  Russian music are amazing, passionate.  Really I grew up on every type of music.  Sunday was classical music. My mom  would put something on; my mother loved  music.  We sang everywhere, as a family.  TERESA TRULL:  At what point did it stop  being a chore - "Oh, I have to go home;  I have to practice", and become, "Oh,  this is fun!"  CRIS:  Only after the practice was done.  I would play four-chord rock and roll  songs of which I'd play 100, over 100  songs, because they all had the same  basic stuff - from the radio.  I have  a real good ear for chords.  I still  play the same way.  In the key of C you  can play endlessly, so that was my favourite key at the time.  Then I would go back and play classical  music, the way I heard it on the records,  and my teacher would know that I was  not reading, that I was playing from  feeling.  She would stop, 'cause classical' music - a lot of it is to learn to  read, to learn the language, the discipline of it, and I'm real grateful for  it now because physically it takes a lot  to continue to play the music.  Though  I don't play that way now, I more or  less can accompany myself.  I never  thought of myself as a pianist, though  it would be a great dream.  BARB: Some of your work has a nice  rhythmic quality; it has its high and  low points.  CRIS: It is kind of balanced now. The  voice is the main instrument and the  piano was just to accompany it. Now  that Jackie (Robbins) accompanies me,  I've been set free a little. I feel  freer; plus, I'm getting better.  BARB: Can we touch again upon that  aspect of classical music - how you  were encouraged to work with the notes,  rather than the feelings.     Does that  cause problems?  JACKIE ROBBINS: Definitely, there's  problems.  There's a stifling factor  that diminishes the quality not only  of the performance, but of enjoying the  time that you're playing, because you  are limited in that you must play within  the range of what it says, not only in  the realm of what's there on paper, but  especially if you're playing under a  conductor who is there to tell you how  to interpret.  CRIS: A lot of public school and a lot  of discipline can drive the imagination,  or that little spark of fire, away.  There's a lot of imaginationless people  walking around, which breaks my heart  because my music tends to stimulate the  imagination and to stimulate the creativity in people.  If everyone was doing  it we wouldn't heed to go around and  stimulate. We could live a sort of normal life ourselves.  But as it is, we  are continuing this ancient tradition.  I see that this is a continuous problem.  TERESA: So, the influences in your music  have been many and diverse. . But it's  always interesting to note how people  make decisions about what directions  they are going to take.  CRIS:  In 7th grade, after piano, I said  to mom: "Can I take voice lessons now?"  I had ruptured my vocal chords singing  incorrectly.  That's where discipline  comes in.  I've known pianists who have  gotten tendonitis in their hand from  playing incorrectly. What saved me was  my attitude - I've got a really good  attitude (and Jackie has this attitude,  too).  It saved me from stifling in  potentially stifling situations.  I saw  it kill other people, but it didn't kill  me.  JACKIE: Your attitude, or our attitudes,  led us to taking an assertive position  about the direction we wanted to move in.  I think I know what I want to go for,  both of us do; we have the initiative  to say: this is what I want. A lot of  people don't have that, and they are  often discouraged.  There is a two-fold problem with music  educators. Many of the music educators  are frustrated performing artists.  If  you go to music school - I went to a  conservatory of music - there's a performance major and there's an education  major. And there's an elitist problem.  The performers look down on the educators. Some educators are very creative  and encouraging.  But some of them are  so frustrated in their own lives, that  if they see the spark in your eye they  will say - I didn't get to, so you won't  get to.  CRIS:  They're the ones I took lessons  from - they wind up in small towns,  Cris Williamson  teaching. Even in my family I don't  know, if they saw my talent as being  particularly amazing.  I sang well.  I  can sing in tune.  I could naturally  sing harmony.  I have a natural voice -  which means that it naturally developed  and it naturally popped out.  I'm lucky  that way.  I'm still learning to sing.  It's an endless but beautiful process.  Every time I do a concert I take out  the same things.  They're not for sale.  They're something I take out of my bag.  I put them all out.  For some of them,  they're like special stones - each  little song you can look at that way.  You have to polish them, and learn not  t'o wear them away, or wear yourself  away at the same time. You have to keep  the special nature of it.  If you do the  same song again and again and again, how  can it still keep its life, because they  do have lives of their own.  So there's where magic enters in - when  you realize that people pay their money  to go into a sort of surreal atmosphere,  supra-real, almost. And they get transported. How does that happen? Is it  lights? Shadow? The Voice? It's many,  many things. Of course any one thing  could disturb that. It takes only a  drop to poison a water hole. So one  learns to become a master of what one  does, but you are also a student, endlessly.  BARB: What you are talking about is  the creative experience of music,  and  how to bring it out?  CRIS: That's what we focus on. We don't  focus on the money.  BARB: This is to do with your life  experience and some of the special  things that make you who you are?  CRIS: We tread that strange middle  ground.  BARB: How does one tread that strange  middle ground?  CRIS: By being a warrior.  That's one 'ñ∫ Kinesis   Sept/Qct '79       27  phrase I use.  To not be bought and sold.  Confucius says - the person who owns the  music, owns the world.  Owns the world '  in his hand.  The spinning world in his  hand.  That's the power!  Look at all  our globe, get up real high, you see  that music is something that could be  taken anywhere. Even if I sang in English in Europe, it could still work because the tones of the voice are the  same. Music is made of vibrations in  the air, it's not really something you  can hold in your hand.  It's not really  something that can be bought and sold.  And it's not real.  What is real is that I have to pay my  rent, get the music to the people.  Getting there is more than half the battle now, more.  It used to be just half,  now it's more than half.  Because it's  getting so prohibitive, everything.  If  I flew to get there, the tickets would  cost so much and I couldn't really bring  all that I wanted to bring.  Being musicians, there's a strange double  standard which I think is something women have to go through a lot, too. We're  learning about business, the buying and  selling of things, ok. What are we  buying and what are we selling? Well,  I'm selling magic, which is limitless  as long as I am taken care of, as long  as I am given some amount of protection  by the people who produce me, which involves a comprehension of what they're  dealing with.  In the women's movement,  it was very difficult, because they were  fighting elitism.  I didn't have the  problem, but their problem became my  problem.  I will work for free just as  hard as I will work for a thousand dollars, or whatever I get.  We're still underpaid.  I think magic  is always underpaid because how can you  put a value on it? People know that it's  the most powerful thing going in the  world.  The women know it, because it  deals with states of feeling. People  think they're safely tucked away, and  then it enters, because it is sound.  There are not alot of shields against  that and I have to be very careful about  what I evoke.  (I have evoked ghosts  that come out of people. They thought  it was safely tucked away. Something  they didn't even know from their childhood.  And they come up tears streaming  down their faces. ) And the letters I  get in the mail.  People who are terminally ill. And they say - you, your  music! Had I ever dreamt of such a  thing and aimed for it, I wouldn't  have gotten it.  I'm just trying to live and do great work  But I'm just trying to live and to do  great work.  I want to be a great artist.  Great!  Because I have studied  the greatest.  If Beethoven could write  and be deaf, then that's the kind of  work I am looking for. We have concerts  that are signed.  The deaf people will  come to my concert and they say, "Your  music is beautiful.  I heard it." And  I look at them, and the tears come out  of my eyes, and I say, "Oh take me now".  What more can I hope for in life than  that? Life is so paradoxical. Why  should we look for a perfect reality  in an imperfect situation.  That's  what I meant about the delicate balance.  It's a real tight rope walk.  BARB: Are you still working with Olivia  records?  CRIS:  Yes, we work.  I'm not exclusive.  That's the thing.  Nobody owns me and  I need my freedom.  JACKIE:  There's no signatures.  BARB: You can work with Olivia and with  other people as well?  CRIS:  I can work with anyone I want.  Why not!  BARB: Artists can get themselves tied  up with record contracts.  CRIS:  They come to me.  People come  to me.  I don't go to them.  JACKIE:  (Of Olivia): They projected  themselves as an alternative and we  called them out on that. We said, if  you are in fact trying to be an alternative to the music business, then you  have got to allow the freedom of the  artist - even though you have to work  on the outskirts.  CRIS: They'd never been a record company before.  It's really difficult.  You don't want to compete. But you must.  You're forced to compete because of the  dollars. And - there's the rub.  TERESA: Working with other women artists must have been tremendously exciting in terms of mutual support, in  an area where there hadn't been much  support at all. At one point it became limiting, confining and infringing  on your freedom, and where you wanted  it to go.  CRIS:  It's that same ownership. How  limiting for me - their limits.  It's  like when you join up with folks,  you often have to accept the limits  which therefore exist.  I tried it  for awhile but then I just naturally  grew beyond as I am going to do always.  I don't want to be limited except by  my own self and then I will work that  out.  But for someone to say to me -  you can't have your hair long - what's  that have to do with it?  BARB: Did someone actually say that  to you?  CRIS: Oh, you wouldn't believe the  amount of off-the-wall things!  But  that's because for a lot of women,  when they join up, it's like joining  the army.  Cut the hair off - join  the troops - get hard - get angular -  it's the war - for God's sake.  And  it is a war - but there are many ways  to fight the war and there are many  ways to be a warrior.  There are all  kinds of warrior societies. You need  to find people that are like yourself  in different ways.  And Jackie has  I realize Vm becoming a strong image. I always have  been in my life. I said, "Oh, Vll go and do that. . . "  because I didn't know I couldn 't.  often there have been women who nave  never felt free, who have never realised they were oppressed. I'd never  felt terribly oppressed, myself. If  I did, I got out of it. I took care  of it myself. That's what I'm always  hoping people will do, women especially,  to realize it and then start taking  care of it. Then not go out and oppress others.  I think the women's movement is the  most important movement going on in the  world today, because it's returning  us to feelings, and we need that. But  one of the feelings that you uncover  is anger.  You know, when women realize what has  happened, and how did they go this  long, they think that saying, "I am  for women" can be interpreted as "I  am therefore against men". Yet our  planet is made up of men and women  and we should feel free to relate to  anyone we wish to, as deep as we want,  in as many varieties - we could be  rainbows of people instead of just  one colour.  Why pick one when you  could be manifold, beautiful in so  many different ways? In music I try  to touch upon a smorgasbord of feeling.  I can't just stick to one thing  because I'm not that way, and people,  I think, are not that way.  I want  to encourage humanity.  TERESA: Why is it that your audience  primarily has in the past been women.  Is it because of your music? Is it  because of your association with  Olivia? Or is it because women are  opening up to feelings - either being  angry, or whatever.  CRIS:  I think all of those things  are involved.  It is also because I'm  strong at what I do.  Look at Amelia...  we still have pictures of her on our  wall.  We need that strength.  I realize I'm becoming a strong image.  I  always have been in my life.  I said,  "Oh, I'll go and do that..." because  I didn't know I couldn't.  And coming  from my circumstances, coming out of  the wilderness into urban areas, I  did not know one could not do these  things.  So I just did them.  I pursued my heart.  I- listen to my voices-  to what they tell me to do.  Often  they lead me to many strange places.  It took two years to decide whether  to go with Olivia, because of many  things.  Because it was a little  been that for me because she supports  what I do without detracting.  For a  long time I couldn't play with anybody because I would have to sacrifice what was best in order to.  It  was like people had to learn off me.  Before the women's movement - I was  out there seven years before the  women's movement.  TERESA:  So, discovering that the  women's movement was too narrow for  your focus, you are trying to reach  a greater audience, more people...?  CRIS: For instance, women who hate  men draw more attention to me.  That's  the thing they don't comprehend -  what hate and love do.  BARB: We become what we resist?  CRIS: What you fear will happen to  you.  I know fear is at the heart of  all hate.  And all that anger.  You  are just so angry about being so  terrified.  I used to hate the police  until I realized they'd just come  right to me.  Because they're sensitive to that.  Negativity training.  And it takes trice, quadruple the  effort to overcome negativity, because it's so dense and so powerful.  I respect it, but I won't have any  truck with it.  There's nothing more heartbreaking  than to have women stab you through  the heart and then turn the knife.  It's out of ignorance.  Women are  the nurturers, they have the capacity.  Now I want women to see we're all  humanity under this great looming  darkness, which could wipe out all  of us. It won't matter if you're  a man or a woman or a cat or a dog.  Cris Williamson has two records, both  on the Olivia label : The Changer and  the Changed,  and Live Dream.'ñ†  Meg Christian coming  MEG CHRISTIAN is singing at Western  Washington State University Concert  Hall on Friday October 19. Tickets  are $3.50 and are on sale locally at  Ariel Books, the Women's Bookstore  and Vancouver Status of Women.  The concert is wheelchair accessible  and childcare is available. For childcare, you need to call ahead: 676 3460. 28       Kinesis   Sept/Oct '79  Reclaiming our cultural myths, rediscovering the goddess  Kinesis speaks with Barb Newton,  who  is giving courses in Women and Spirituality.  KINESIS: What is your approach to the  area of women and spirituality?  BARB: I'm trying to do work which can  be of use to women who are beginning to  look behind women's experience in this  culture. We've been living under a  patriarchal, father god. We have got to  get beyond seeing the past through patriarchal eyes. One defence of male dominance is that it has always been with  us. But, has it? I want to question  that.  That's why I'm looking at the pre-class-  ical Greek cultures - those which were  grouped around the eastern Mediterranean.  (We have a lot to learn about consciousness from the pre-literate cultures of  India, for example, but I have to concentrate on just one area, or the material  would be endless.)  Also, Greek culture formed the basis of  our own Christian background, and our  major cultural myths come from the area  of the eastern Mediterranean.  What we are up against is that our  vision of that culture, those myths,  comes to us through 19th. century historians. They assume a patriarchal vision. H.D.F.Kitto, for example, thinks  that the way things were in the patriarchy of the British empire is the way  things have been for millions and millions  of years.  KINESIS: For example?  BARB: Look at traditional historian's version of the Greek gods - the collection  of patriarchs at Olympus. The assumption  is that these Olympian gods were the  most important. What they don't see is  that the goddess figures were deliberately  diminished, though they were the predecessors of the Olympus hierarchy. Take Athene.  The patriarchal version is that Athene  was born from the head of Zeus, the number one male god. (Zeus, by the way, was  a snake god who worked his way up into  being a male image.) Athene was originally a mother goddess figure, tremendously  popular. As the Olympian patriarchal  gods were taking over, Athene's power had  to be dimished. One way they did this  was to make Athene into a young virgin  maid. That meant that she was easier  to manipulate: the other mother figure  was too powerful an influence, being a  warrior and spiritual goddess image.  KINESIS: Where do you get your information from?    What are your sources?  BARB: Mainstream classicists project  their ideology of patriarchy back into  the world of the Greek colonies. But  there are exceptions to that. Jane  Ellen Harrison is a shining example.  She published work on Greek religion in  the early years of this century. One of  her books, Themis, re-issued in 1962,  is about an original mother goddess.  Jane Ellen Harrison had a tremendous influence on Gilbert Murray, who constantly acknowledged his debt to her. Needless  to say, Gilbert Murray is now famous and  Harrison unknown. She has another work,  Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion, which was published in 1908. It  took me two years to learn how to read  that book, it's terribly difficult. It  needs a good editing job so that the  information in it would be accessible  to many women.  Then there's Bachoefen, who was writing  about myth, religion and mother-right  in the middle of the nineteenth century,  when hardly any other work was being  done. E.O.James has two straightforward  historical books, The Ancient Gods (i960)  and The Cult of the Mother Goddess (1959).  There is a growing amount of knowledge  which is still not totally acceptable to  people in traditional disciplines. There  are, however, people doing research across  North America, mostly women, interested  in an approach to history that gets  beyond the obvious limits of logical discourse .  KINESIS: What kinds of questions are  these women asking?  BARB: One thing is that they're looking  at grandmother's crochet. Why did our  grandmothers go crocheting little mand-  alas until they went blind? It has something to do with web-building, web-making.  To look at that image in our myth - the  spinners of fate are women. They're the  original spinstressses, the spinsters.  And of course that word, spinster, has  been devalued, as have other words which  relate to feminine power, with the karmic  strength of women.  Another question: why is the muse feminine,  if women have been so low down on the totem pole of religion? The muse, in our  culture, is always feminine: it's a trace  of recognition of the supreme creative  power of women. If life doesn't always  come from women, where does it come  from; building freeways?  Why was it so very important for the  Christian inquisition to try to destroy  all vestiges of women's power if there  was never any source for that fear - some  past power?  KINESIS: What use do you make of primary  sources?  BARB: In about 300 A.D. Christian monks  burned down the library at Alexandria,  which was a treasure house of information  about the early presence of images of the  great mother, and of the existence of the  matriarchal clan. But we do have some  primary material. I look to Plato, for  example. In his ideal state he proposes  real equality for women. Look at Euripides'  plays - Electra, The Bacchae, The Trojan  Women, Alcestis. Look at Thesmophoriazusae  by Aristophanes. Perhaps the strong women of Greek tragedy were so crazy with  hatred and revenge for good reason...  We need to reconstruct our herstory in  that area. We don't understand the myth-  ology and its roots. Jesus, you know,  was simply the last in a long line of  male prophets. Jesus was competing against  Apollonius. There were a number of other  religious cults, too, many of which had  numerous women followers: Dionysius (or  Bacchus), and Mithras. Isis, Demeter and  Diana were goddesses whose cult following  was important for centuries after Christ.  The temple of Diana at Ephesus, and that  of Demeter at Eleusius were not destroyed  until around 400 A.D. Often what the  Christians did was build a church on the  spot where a temple had been.  Demeter and Persephone is, of course, a  myth of mother-daughter relations. We  need to reclaim and re-evaluate that  myth. And you have Artemis, like Athene,  a huntress warrior, virgin goddess. The  word "virgin" has changed. It didn't  mean a woman who had not yet been involved in a sexual relationship; it referred to a woman who was involved in  activity to such an extent that sexuality  was not the focus. Also, the status of  virginity was self-renewing. As spring  is the renewing season of the earth,  virginity was renewable through special  festivals.  KINESIS: Don't you think that there  are a lot of simple solutions going  around?    People have dismissed Christianity but welcome other religions with  open arms.  BARB: You mean, "let's worship Diana  and it will all be groovey"? That's  not what I'm talking about. I talking  about the feminine principle in our  spiritual lives. Misogynists did everything they could, but they still could  not wipe it out. All they could do was  degrade it. It has always been very  strong in Ireland, and there's much  work to be done in the area of Celtic  myth. Despite the fact we've lived so  long under a patriarchal father god,  the assertiveness of women has not been  stamped out. The negative powers just  can't eliminate the source of life on  this planet, unless they eliminate all  of us.  We also have to look at why men have  this ceaseless urge to dominate. What  about the reverse of a Freudian analysis?  What about men's desire to be women?  There is a Northwest Indian saying,  "as the earth is treated, so is the  woman." When one sex is dominant, the  other sex is sexual symbol. That imbalance is changing. Women have to take  a lot more responsibility with how we  are relating sexually to our own beings.  KINESIS: What do you mean?  BARB: Well, it's one thing to be typing,  another thing to be all dressed up with  some unspoken intent of relating sexually  to the man who comes to the desk.  One of the reasons I started a slide collection of images of goddesses and pre-  literate Greek images of women was that  I was feeling very strongly that fashion  is fetish.  The way we dress is central  to the way we accept our bondage. Some  of the images of women I have collected  are of nudes with square shoulders, strong  hands, great strength of character and  beauty of form. The later you go - look  at Roman nudes, for example - the more  often you get rounded, weaker images  of women, with less use of muscle.  KINESIS: Where and when are you offering  your course?    Who can attend?  BARB: It runs from October 13 - November 3  Time: Saturday afternoons, 1.30 - 4.00  Continuing Education and the Women's Resources Centre of UBC are sponsoring the  course. Registration is limited. The sesr-  sions are open to anyone who is interested  in examining cultural stereotypes and  re-evaluating their notions of spiritual  and feminist history. 'ñ† Kinesis    Sept/Oct '79       29  Letters  to Kinesis  We, at NAC, were very pleased to see  the extensive coverage given the NAC  Annual Meeting in your April/May issue.  Here, I'd like to respond to  some of the criticisms made in the  article by Gillian Marie.  I think the point is rather missed on  regional representation, a matter on  which I feel particularly strongly  having worked for several years to  get any accepted at all.  Of course,  the system isn't perfect, but it's a  great deal better than what it was  even a few years ago.  Prior to 1976  there was only one Executive Member  outside Ontario and she did not attend meetings regularly.  Lorenne  Clark and myself were the only non-  Ontario people to be elected for  1977-78 (both of us were then living  in Nova Scotia, but with strong Ontario connections, and both of us,  incidentally are ex-B.C.ers, Lorenne  from Vancouver, me from New West. ).  A Quebec representative was also  appointed after the election.  In  1978-79, some of us actively recruited non-Ontario candidates and,  in fact, one was elected from B.C.  (Lee Grills), one from Alberta, the  Quebec member ran again, one of the  Ontario members was from the north,  and a Newfoundland person was appointed to fill a vacancy (she is  now Minister of Education in Newfoundland ).  This year there are two from Quebec  and one each from Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, Saskatchewan, Alberta  and B.C. It is extremely helpful  to have women from across the country  on the Executive.  It would be better  still if we had more from outside  Ontario, but it makes a great deal  of difference just having those we  do.  Regional representation is, unfortunately, expensive. For example,  it will cost NAC up to $3,500 this  fiscal year just to bring in our  B.C. member.  Only a small fraction  of this is made up for by the member  groups from B.C. (11 paid-up groups  at $25 each = $275).  Many issues are national, like it or not  I cannot agree at all with Gillian  Marie's conclusions that her concerns are 'local'.  Of course, there  is much work to do at the local  level, but many issues, like it or  not, require national action.  Rape,  abortion, prostitution, divorce,  wife battering require legislative  change at the federal level. Unemployment insurance and maternity  benefits are federal matters, as is  much job training, and job creation  schemes and employment policy more  generally. Many social services are  federally funded, and many more services to women should be. Equal pay  is both a federal and provincial  matter, with the federal level leading in legislation, thanks partly  to NAC's work,  (incidentally, equal  pay for work of equal value, which  NAC has always worked for, does protect women in job ghettoes.  It is  equal pay for the same job that does  not.  Marie is quite mixed up in her  criticism of NAC.) Indian rights  is a federal matter.  So is income  tax discrimination against women  and pensions. Appointments to the  bench, Senate, and federal Crown  agencies and boards and commissions  come under the federal government.  The CBC is a federal Crown corporation, as' is the CRTC, the regulating authority, both of which I  NAC has been working on regarding  the derogatory portrayal of women  in programming.  In short, there  really is a lot of work to be done  at the federal level and we can use  all the help we can get in doing it.  I am hoping that more of NAC's work  will be done outside Ontario, by  working committees in various cities,  co-ordinated by the NAC Executive  Member in the region.  One good  example of this working was NAC's  brief to the CRTC on CTV, prepared  by Lee Grills with much help from  the North Shore Women's Centre.  The decision by the CRTC, to renew  CTV's licence, notes NAC's inter-  To The Editors  I would like to express my appreciation to Kinesis for the very fine  articles that appeared in the July  and August issues on The Dinner  Party.  The article by Helen Mintz  was an excellent example of thoughtful and constructive criticism done  in a spirit that makes clear some of  the limitations of the piece, without taking cheap potshots at artist  Judy Chicago or overlooking the very  important contribution it makes.  The article is very different from  many very regretable and damaging  pieces appearing elsewhere in art  journals and the feminist press.  I  hope others will follow this example  both in discussions of The Dinner  Party and other major feminist works  and projects.     by Sara Joy David  vention and announces it will be  bringing NAC representatives and  CTV together for talks.  Now to get to the Wages for Housework situation.  I don't think anyone in NAC is pleased with our  handling of it.  I think something  has been learned from the experience and the same would not happen  again.  Our differences with Wages  for Housework on issues remain important.  These are well put in  statements, approved unanimously  by the Executive, by our past-president, Kay Macpherson, and vice-  president, Lorenne Clark.  On closing, let me repeat that there  is a lot of work to be done at the  federal level for women and we very  much hope we will have Vancouver  Status of Women sharing it with us.  by Lynn McDonald,  President  National Action Committee  "Kinesis", Editor  Re the proposed Women's Building, so you  collect enough B.C.R.I.C. shares to make  a down payment on a building.  Then  what? How do you meet mortgage payments,  pay for maintenance, heat, light, telephone etc?  I suggest the 'planners' of this project  have a talk with the executive director  of the Y.W.C.A., and find out what maintaining a building costs. And remember  the Y.W.C.A. has over 200 beds to rent,  to defray mortgage payments.  It's a great dream, but it's time the  co-ordinating committee woke up and realized that for this project to succeed  you would need hard cold cash, and lots  of it, every month!  by Patricia M.Russell  I thought the Persimmon BlacAoriage  article on Doug Chrismas and the Helen  Mintz article on The Dinner Party and  the Brig Anderson piece on Bloodline  (which was recommended to me as good  entertainment by a serious feminist  who teaches courses on same in another  city! ) were quite good.  The care and  thoughtfulness of Mintz's article make  it a very worthwhile contribution to  the ongoing discussion on this major  work.  Middle-class women are and always have  been important members of all compassionate organizations. As a middle-  class woman, with a successful husband  whom I like, I sometimes feel that  your publication does seem to have  a kind of love affair with the young,  poor and grubby. You can be quite  poor and still keep clean and tidy. I  know because I've been poor and I remember it well. I love you. Just had  to say this.  I'd like to comment on suggestions  that you curtail the lesbian perspective in Kinesis. I can't think of a  single reason to substantiate placing limits on womyn's news in a feminist newspaper. I really don't believe  that we're working as feminist to titillate the interest of the public. We  are working to bring womyn together  on issues of common concern. In the  words of the new feminists, we should  ask, "Is this good for women or bad  for women?" before we. decide that  a feminist issue is beyond the range  of our commitment.  We print these comments unsigned  because they come to us on subscription renewals.   While not intended as  formal  "Letters to the Editor",   they  are invaluable feedback. Kinesis   Sept/Qct '79  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  CAROL STREET, songwriter/guitarist singing  original contemporary folk music, will  be appearing at the Soft Rock Cafe on  Wednesday, Oct. 24 at 9:30 p.m. along  with Niels Petersen.  Also at West End  Community Centre (GATE benefit) Sept. 30,  Mt. Pleasant Neighbourhood House Oct. 1,  and Kits Coffee House Oct. 2.  MARGARET ATWOOD reads from her new book  "Life Before Man" Saturday, Oct. 20 at  the Literary Storefront, 213-131 Water  St. in Gastown. Advance tickets only  on sale from Friday, Oct. 5. $4, members  $3. 7:30 p.m. door.  WALK-A-THON for the Rape Relief House,  Sunday, Oct. 28  starting from Lumberman's Arch in Stanley Park. Call  872-8212 for information.  WOMEN'S STUDIES ASSN. CONFERENCE will be  held November 2 and 3 at Capilano  College. Workshops in Women in Therapy,  Women in Rock Music, "Silences" by"  Tillie Olsen, and a presentation on  Daly's "Gyn-Ecology" by the Lesbian  Literary Society. For information,  call Sheila Perret, 684-2457.  LAW UNION OF B.C. CONFERENCE at the UBC  Faculty of Law, Rm. 178 from Oct. 26-  28. Registration $10. Rape Relief will  be making a presentation on Saturday,  3 p.m. For information, call 683-1321.  ART EXHIBITIONS coming up at the Women's  Art Gallery:  October 1-30  Portland Frank & Persimmon,  anti-psychiatry prints/sculptures  November 1-30 Wendy Davis, photography  At Women in Focus, #6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver (872-2250). Open Monday to Friday,  10a.m. to 4p.m.  Studio 58 presents the Canadian premiere  of Hugh Whitmore's Stevie, a play based  on the life of the poet(ess) Stevie  Smith, Oct. 1 - Nov. 17 at Langara  College.  Tickets $3.50 weeknights,  $4.00 weekends. 8:00 p.m.  COURSES  FEMINIST VIDEO WORKSHOPS in video preparation and production skills are being  offered by Women In Focus, with the aim  of developing a feminist perspective as  an alternative to present-day male  controlled media. Women only.  October  2 and 9 at 6:30-9:30 p.m. October 21,  11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Pre-register at Women  In Focus, #6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver  (872-2250).  SOUTH VANCOUVER FAMILY PLACE is offering  a variety of programs starting in Oct.  All residents of South Vancouver, Cedar  Cottage-Kensington, and Renfrew-Colling-  wood are invited. Programs are free.  For information, call 325-5213 or 325-  3114, or drop in to Family Place at  4932 Victoria Drive, Vancouver.  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING, an introductory  workshop for women, at Douglas College,  Langley Campus-Section V on Saturday,  October 27, 9:30-4:00 p.m. Instructor:  Mary Burns. Pre-registration required;  call 525-9211.  LITERARY STOREFRONT is offering the following workshops and courses:  SHORT FICTION, with Audrey Thomas  THE PROCESS OF POETRY, with Cathy Ford  CANADIAN WRITING IN THE 30's, with  Dorothy Livesay  WRITING FOR CHILDREN, with Christie Harris  Frances Duncan, Sue Ann Alderson, Doug  Tait and Ann Blades  S0NGWRITING, with Ferron  among others. Pre-registration a must  for all courses, starting October 1.  Call 688-9737.  1-DAY SYMPOSIUM FOR SINGLE MOTHERS.  Saturday, Oct. 20, sponsored by the  YWCA. Program includes: Doing it all  - Alone, Children, Social Life, Law,  Alternate Living Arrangements, Separation, A Single Mom from Day One,  Looking After Yourself. For information or registration, contact the  YWCA, 580 Burrard St., Vancouver.  Register early, space is limited.  Fee: $20 (subsidies available)  PEOPLE'S LAW SCHOOL is offering the  following free night classes:  COMMON-LAW COUPLES, Oct. 18, 7:30-9:30  at Britannia Community Centre Library  1661 Napier St., Vancouver. Instructor: Gail Davidson.  THE FAMILY RELATIONS ACT, Nov. 5 & 6,  7:30-9:30 p.m. at Hastings Community  Centre, 3096 E. Hastings, Vancouver.  Instructor: Peter Brown, Anne Rowles.  CHILDREN AND FAMILY VIOLENCE, Nov. 22,  7:30-9:30 p.m. at South Vancouver  Neighbourhood House, 6470 Victoria  (at 49th Ave.) Instructors: MHR  Child Abuse Team.  WOMEN AND FAMILY VIOLENCE, Nov. 29,  7:30-9:30 p.m. at South Vancouver  Neighbourhood House, 6470 Victoria,  Vancouver.  Please pre-register for courses by  calling 734-1126.  CAPILANO COLLEGE Women's Resources  Centre is offering the following  workshops and courses: -  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING WORKSHOP,  Oct. 20, 9am-4pm. Fee: $17.  HOW TO DECIDE: LIFE & CAREER PLANNING  FOR WOMEN, Part 1 - Oct. 1,3,10 &  15 or Nov. 5,7,12 & 14, 9:15-11:15  a.m. Fee: $5. Part 2 - choose one  of: Choosing a Career, or Finding  a Job, Oct. 17,22,24 & 29, 9:15-  11:15 a.m.  WOMEN IN THE.MIDDLE, three sessions:  Oct. 18, 9:15am-l:15pm; Oct. 25,  9:30-11:30am; Nov. 1, 9:30-11:30am.  OVERCOMING SPEECH ANXIETY & SHYNESS,  Limited enrolment. Four sessions:  Oct. 10,12,17 & 19, 1-2:30 p.m.  Fee: $15.  For more information on the above  courses, contact the Centre, Monday  to Friday, 9am-4:30pm at 986-7911.  The LABOUR STUDIES program at Capilano  College is offering these women's labour  studies courses:  LABOUR HISTORY - THE ROLE OF WOMEN,  Saturdays, Oct. 6 & 13 at 4911 Canada  Way, Burnaby. Instructor: Maureen  Headley, BCGEU. $8.  PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE & PUBLIC SPEAKING  Saturdays from Oct. 20 to Nov. 3 at  Capilano College. $12.  Register by mail to: Labour Studies Program, Capilano College, 2055 Purcell Way,  North Vancouver (986-1911, loc. 334), or  at the first meeting of the course.  WOMEN IN JEOPARDY: UBC Women's Resources  Centre is offering free noon lectures  at the Centre, 1144 Robson St. as  follows:  Oct. 11 - Battered Women  Oct. 18 - Women are Persons  Oct. 25 - Sexual Harrassment  as well as a weekend conference on  the above issues at Robson Square  Media Centre behind the Old Courthouse.  Fee: $10. October 26, 27.  For  pre-registration and information,  call 685-393-4- Coordinated by the  National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC).  GROUPS  Women interested in joining a group forming to learn about MENOPAUSE and be  mutually supportive through its symptoms, contact the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective, 736-6696.  Do you miss a WOMEN'S COFFEEHOUSE in  Vancouver? Would you be willing to  put energy into organizing one? Do you  have time, energy and commitment?  If .so, come to a meeting October 23  at Women In Focus, #6-45 Kingsway,  7:30 p.m.  THE DINNER PARTY PROJECT: A steering  committee has recently been organized  to bring Judy Chicago's The Dinner  Party to Vancouver. We are investigating possible exhibition spaces as  well as looking at when and how the  exhibition should be organized. A  critical part of the project will be  to involve Canadian women artists.  Look for further information in  future issues of Kinesis. A general  meeting will be called once there is  a definite possibility of mounting  the show. In the meantime, if you  are interested in contributing to  the project, write: The Dinner Party  Project, P.O. Box 286, Delta, B.C.  JUST OUT  Free distribution of the second volume of  the WOMEN'S WORK DIRECTORY begins Oct. 1.  This directory advertises a wide range  of traditional and non-traditional skills  offered by women in the community. Hire  a woman next time!  Recent titles at the women's bookstores:  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE - 804 Richards  684-0523 (all titles in paperback)  Six Of One, Rita Mae Brown, $2.50  Self Portrait, Anne Sexton, $8.00  The Death Notebooks, Anne Sexton, $4.55  Words for-Dr. Y (poems), Anne Sexton,  $4.55  Out of the Frying Pan, A decade of  change in women's lives, Carol Hope  & Nancy Young, $6.50  Period, A young woman's guide to menstruation, $7.50  Sturdy Black Bridges, Visions of Black  women in literature, Parker, Isery &  Sheftall, $7.50  ARIEL BOOKS - 2766 West 4th Ave, 733-3511  Woman and Nature, The roaring inside  her, Susan Griffin, $13.75  Fat is a Feminist Issue, Susie Orbach  (pb), $2.25  For Her Own Good, 150 years of the  experts' advice to women, Ehrenreich  & English, $4.95  Gyn-Ecology, Mary Daly, $20.50  Word Is Out, Stories of some of our  lives, Nancy Adair & Casey Adair,  $9.60  Begin At Start, Some thoughts on personal liberation & world change,  Su Negrin, $3.95 Kinesis   Sept/Qct '79  BULLETIN BOARD  1980 WALL CALENDAR, produced by women of  the Vancouver Women's Health Collective  in collaboration with Press Gang, is now  ready to order. The Women & Health  Calendar is ll"xl7", illustrated, with  a pull-out sympto-thermal chart for women  who want to record their menstrual cycle.  Order from Press Gang, 603 Powell St.,  Vancouver. All orders should be pre-paid  and include 10$ for postage and handling.  1-4 copies, $3.50; 5-9 copies, $2.80; 10  or more, $2.10 each.  The MONTREAL HEALTH PRESS has just published a revised edition of its famous  BIRTH CONTROL HANDBOOK, as well as an  excellent new handbook on SEXUAL ASSAULT.  Available at Vancouver Status of Women  or write: Montreal Health Press, P.O.  Box 1000, Stn. G, Montreal H2W 2N1.  For single copies, send 50^ for postage  and handling.  New to B.C. or the women's movement? See  GUIDE TO THE B.C. WOMEN'S MOVEMENT,  published by Vancouver Status of Women.  Updated regularly. Available from the  VSW office, 1090 W. 7th in Vancouver.  Other publications available at Vancouver  Status of Women:  Update on the Status of Women in B.C.,  1978, $2.50  Feminist Library Reference Bibliography  1977, $1.00  Books for Little People, a non-sexist  bibliography, 50jz£  Sexist Ads Kit - How to Protest, 1976,  ~5o?  Rally Action Books: March 22, 1976  $l-$2.  Exploring Sex Roles - Kit for High  School Counsellors, 1973, 50jzf  Verbal Self-Defense Kit for Feminists,  1975, 50s*  Numerous legislative briefs, and more.'  RESOURCES  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is open to calls  Thursdays from 7-10 p.m. at 685-4519.  WOMEN AND WORK  A Conference  A Women and Work Conference is being held  Sunday, October 14, 9:00-5:00 p.m. at  Langara Community College, 100 West 49th  Avenue in Vancouver.  Plan to attend!  There will be films,  artwork, and theatre as well as time to  talk to each other.  Workshops scheduled are varied and numerous.  Some examples:  Women's Labour History  What Is Women's Work?  Older Working Women  Sexual Harassment on the Job  Women in Non-traditional Jobs  Issues for Lesbians in the Workplace  Women and Unions  Immigrant & Third World Women  Health & Safety on the Job  Quality Childcare  Organizing the Unorganized  The Women's Movement - what's it  about?  A plenary dissussion is planned for the  end of the day to talk about issues brought  up in workshops.  The conference■is being co-sponsored by  Working Women Unite and Langara's Continuing  Education, Women's Studies. Cost: $2.00  for the entire day. Pre-register for child  care at Langara Continuing Education (phone  324-5323/4), and bring a lunch. All women  are welcome.  Hv  r^_\  4WM  Vancouver Status of Women houses an extremely  valuable RESOURCE LIBRARY/ARCHIVES at its  offices at 1090 W. 7th Ave., Vancouver.  We have the most extensive collection of  material on women's issues in Vancouver,  perhaps B.C. This archival material is  available for use. Pass the word to women  who are doing research...anyone from  Women's Studies students to women doing'  research for a speech, panel or general  interest would find this information  invaluable.  Our office hours are Monday  to Thursday, 10am-6pm, phone 736-1313.  Working Women Unite is a member group  of the B.C. Federation of Women concerned  with issues of women and work. WWU seeks  to forge links between the women's movement and trade unions, as well as articulate feminist demands which working women  can take into th^i:r,' workplaces.  Women have always worked - in the home,  in factories,   in office buildings,   in the  streets,  on farms.   We strive to gain recognition for the work we do and to improve  the quality of our lives.  WWU supports the struggle of the unemployed,  women in the home, and women attempting to  organize their workplace.  To contact Working Women Unite, write to:  Box 65563, Station F, Vancouver, B.C.  SUSTAINER APPEAL  Response to our sustainer appeal has been  tremendous. Since our first appeal in the  April-May issue of Kinesis, you have  pledged and donated more than $1700 to  the Kinesis sustainer fund.  Thank you,   sustainers.   Your contributions  give us a powerful feeling of community  support,  and make  the continued existence  of Kinesis possible.  If you have not yet made a sustainer  donation or pledge, but have sufficient  income to do so, we ask you to think  about it. Sustainers make a personal  commitment to keep Kinesis alive.  Sustainers contribute $50 per year, in  a lump sum or in installments of $5 or  more. In return, you will receive your  own subscription, along with any number  of complimentary copies for your friends.  Why not fill out this sustainer form and  help Kinesis continue?  Postal Code  WOMANVISION, Co-op Radio's weekly radio  program, by and about women, has moved  'its time slot from Tuesday evening to  Monday evening from 7-8 p.m. We're  happy to have the extra 15 minutes this  new scheduling'affords. For Kinesis  readers outside of Vancouver, if you  already have cable TV hookup, you can  receive FM stations for a small extra  monthly charge. The following cable  companies carry Co-op Radio: Victoria  90.5 (FM), White Rock 104.7, M.S.A.  104.7, Delta 104.7, Sechelt 96.1, Gibsons 100.1, Cowichan 89.5, Central  Interior (Prince George, Quesnel,  Williams Lake, 100 Mile House) 102.7,  Vercom (Vernon) 90.9, Western 104.7,  Davin 102.7, Fraser 88.5, and Vancouver  102.7 FM.  Six of us produce and operate the show:  Elizabeth Feder, Patricia Hogan, Rosemary  Allenbach, Ann Russell, Mickey Verde, Sue  Newman. As with most collectives, our  energy levels go up and down. We're open  to more women joining us. If you know  about broadcasting, radio journalism,  research, operating, or want to learn  these skills, please call 684-8494 and  leave a message for Womanvision. We'll  contact you.  Nearly 1,900 women commemorated the third running of the  Women's 10KM Race around the Seawall at Stanley Park  September 16. Women of all ages and levels of fitness can  participate in this and other running events in Vancouver. The  downtown YWCA has recently formed a group called Vancouver  Women Running, which aims to address women's issues and  encourage neighbourhood runs.  I enclose my monthly installment of    I enclose a lump sum of $50    Clip and mail to:  Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave.,  Vancouver, V6H 1B3  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly  to all members. Individual subs to Kinesis  are $8 per year. We ask members to base  their donations on this and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe, Kris  Craig, Sue Kelly, Gayla Reid, Joey Thompson, Joan Woodward.  NEXT KINESIS PRODUCTION WEEKEND: October  20, 21. Sign up now! WOMEN'S HEALTH SERIES H  "it's all iki ysuR head !  Thurs.  Nov. 8  700-9 00  Thurs.  Nov.   15  7 00-9 00  Thurs.  Nov.   22  7 00-900  Thurs.  Nov.   29  7 00-900  Thurs.  Dec. 6  7 00-900  &  HOW TO  BREAK  IT  ♦actions "by women  ♦patient's rights  I THE MEDICAL MONOPOLY  ♦how organized medicine  took control of healing  ♦what is health and who  defines it?  II SELF-HELP  ♦the power of sharing skills and information  ♦breast and cervical self-exam  ♦health groups- some examples:endometriosis, menopause,  children's health  HI POLITICS OF REPRODUCTION; WHO DECIDES?  ♦birth control: controversies (the Pill and the diaphragm)  ♦sterilization and its abuse  ♦abortion  IV OCCUPATIONAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH  *film and discussion  ♦hazards of women workers  ♦organizing for safety in the workplace  V PSYCHIATRIC ABUSE  ♦women and the mental health  system  ♦drugs as social control  &  EMOTIONAL SELF-HELP  ♦women's problem-  solving groups  ♦peer counselling  at Britannia Community Centre  (Napier and Commercial)  Room L3 (above library)  Childcare: call 736-6696  for information  Presented by the Vancouver Women'  Health Collective  1501 W. Broadway  736-6696  No Charge  Women Only  &d&pruri jhtyy, T$olbul 7f