 February^  —       SHIPthe daittes  ne>Ms about women thatsn  Rural supplement |g  Jewish Womeiv   .  Mexico —KiMMSiS*  BC students sit-in  by Pam Tranfield  Vancouver high school students  wore black to classes January  30, in mourning for the quality  of education in British Columbia.  Student representatives said  the action was an alternative  to walk-outs staged earlier  this month, and an attempt to  "gain a bit of respect" from  the provincial government.  Pupils also staged after school  sit-ins to show they "care  about the education they receive."  "In my opinion, the government  is saying we are stupid little  kids," says student representative Tom Vincent of Pt. Grey  Secondary, "so we are trying  alternatives."  Mass walk-outs earlier this  week prompted a weekend meeting of representatives from  50 Vancouver schools. The representatives, members of  Student Alliance for Vancouver  Education (SAVE), brainstormed  for alternatives.  In addition to the January 30  action, students have written  letters to Education Minister  Heinrich and a petition was  circulated through the high  schools. The petition demanded  a return to 1983 budget levels.  "They (the government) are  practicing the insanity of  cutting back until it hurts.  Now it is more than damaging  the schools," says SAVE's  Donovan Kuehn of Pt. Grey  Secondary.  Kuehn says he has done only  three science experiments  since September, and knows  students who are failing because they cannot afford  tutors and are unable to have  questions answered in class.  Vincent agrees, noting his  art class received 1/3 less  funding than in 1983-84.  Vincent and other SAVE members  were barred from a Vancouver  Board of Trade meeting this  week in which Jack Heinrich  defended the Socred budget  formula.  Heinrich told the board that  each school district is al-  loted sufficient funds to  maintain quality education.  "Sufficient resources are  available if well-managed," \  said Heinrich, "boards have  been given ample time to adjust."  Vincent says more student  walk-outs will only occur as  a "last, resort" move, such as  if the Vancouver School Board  is placed in trusteeship by  the government. Vancouver  School Board has been resistant to government-ordered cutbacks .  Students say parents are "for  the most part" behind the  student actions. Parents from  across British Columbia will  travel to Victoria February  12 to demand a meeting with  Heinrich.  School board budgets across  the province have been reduced  more than 75 million dollars  since 1983, and pupil-teacher  ratios in many classrooms are  over 30-1. j  Choice under attack  The right to choose abortion  came under fire across North  America in January as pro-life'  forces in Canada and the United  States resorted to increasingly  extreme measures in their  attack against choice.  Threats of violence marked Dr.  Henry Morgentaler's recent  tour of Alberta. Facing  abortion-related charges in  Ontario and Manitoba, Morgentaler was sprayed with ketchup  at the Calgary airport and in  Edmonton one woman screamed  "Kill him, kill him," while a  Baptist minister went so far  as to suggest one woman who' has  had an abortion be executed to  discourage others.  Morgentaler, in Alberta to  rally moral and financial  support for the trials, met  the threats with pleas to pro-  choice supporters to be tolerant of those who oppose abortion. He also made allusions to  the- idea of setting up a freestanding abortion clinic in  the province, citing the fact  that many Alberta women are  forced to travel as far as Montana to seek abortions. Alberta  Attorney-General Neil Crawford  has warned that any abortion  clinic set up in the province  would face a criminal investigation.  The Morgentaler case is having  its impact in the United States,  where a group of anti-abortionists are urging the Reagan administration to fire a doctor  from the Atlanta Centre for  Disease Control because he is  testifying on behalf of Morgentaler. The group thinks the  petition may be successful because of President Reagan's  anti-abortion politics.  In the past few months several  abortion clinics in the U.S.  have suffered bombings and  arson attacks, actions Reagan  was slow to condemn» Recently,  continued on page 2  This month's supplement: rural women  As a newspaper based in a large city, Kinesis  usually reflects its urban roots. However, many Kinesis  readers live  and work in outlying areas, and in last summer's reader  survey many of them asked for more news by and about rural  women. In this issue we try to satisfy that demand, with  coverage of rural women fighting violence against women,  rural lesbians organizing, a group of Native women's  struggle for decent housing, rural artists, and some personal  accounts of country life. We hope rural women will continue  to keep us up to date on their <  Supplements planned for the coming months will look at  International Women, in March (deadline February 15th);  Disabled Women, in April (March 15th); and Mothers, in May  (deadline April 15th). We welcome ideas, articles, photos  and graphics!  Board sets  double standard  Junior high school students  in Abbotsford decided to stage  a mass walkout on January 30  in support of a teacher suspended due to the school  board's double standard. Ilze  Shewan, a teacher at Clear-  brook Junior Secondary School,  was suspended indefinitely  when she appeared in Gallery  magazine's February issue with  her breasts exposed.  Her husband John, who took the  picture for the magazine, is  also a teacher for the Abbots-  for school board, but has not  been suspended.  "Mrs. Shewan is a great teacher  and we all want her to teach  here," said Clearbrook student  council president Tanya Paz, 15.  School superintendent Harry  Sayers said the school board  will soon hold a special meeting  to discuss the future of the  pair, and added that Ilze could  be fired and action may still  be taken against her husband.  In the meantime, students are  circulating several petitions  in order to get Shewan rein-  stat ed.     (Province)  BCGEU raids  FASWOC at  White Spot  by Emma Kivisild  B.C.'s largest union appears  desperate in its bid to gain  a foothold in the restaurant  industry by raiding another union.  The B.C. Government Employees  Union (BCGEU) went to the Labour Relations Board (LRB) for  help in their membership raid  on the Food and Service Workers  of Canada (FASWOC) members at  White Spot restaurants around  B.C..  The LRB ruled that both the  company and BCGEU were guilty  of unfair labour practices (in  BCGEU's case 44 violations of  the Labour Code). Nonetheless,  in an unprecedented ruling the  LRB ordered FASWOC to turn  over its membership lists to  the larger union.  FASWOC, long certified to represent the 1200 White Spot  workers, appealed the decision,  but their appeal was rejected.  At press time, BCGEU had less  than a week to try and sign up  a majority of FASWOC members.  At the heart of the dispute are  recent changes in the administrative structure of FASWOC  giving more control to the rank  and file, a majority of whom  are women. Cuts in executive  salaries and expense accounts,  more frequent elections and  conventions, and worker involvement in grievances eventually  resulted in union president  Larry Reed leaving the union.  He is now organizing the White  Spot raid.  FASWOC's new national president,  Cindy Hilborne, is a waitress  at the Nanaimo White Spot. 2 Kinesis February TO  MOVEMENT MATTERS  ittSIOg  IWD    3  Budget University    4  Across BC    5  Across Canada     6  Labour    7  Mexico    8  Jewish women  10  Peace .13  Abortion 14  Rural supplement  Lesbians  15  Violence   16  Denwemon  18  Meares Island 20  Native women   21  Jambrosia  22  Nelson arts    23  Sys Richards 24  Child abuse books 25  Transition House video 26  Rubymusic  27  Claire Kujundzic    28  A Little Night Reading ......... 29  Letters    30  Bulletin Board   33  EDITORIAL GROUP: Libby Barlow, Jan DeGrass, Kim  Irving, Emma Kivisild (Editor), Barbara Kuhne, Sharon  Knapp, Janie Newton-Moss, Cy-Jhea Sand, Connie Smith  Marrianne van Loon, Michele Wofistohecroft.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Carol Bierenga, Jan DeGrass,  Patty Gibson, Punam Khosla, Emma Kivisild, Michele  Wollstonecroft.  CIRCULATION/DISTRIBUTION: Jan DeGrass, Judy Rose,  Joey Schilbild, Vicky Donaldson, Margaret McHugh, Cy-  Thea Sand, Esther Shannon, Cat L'Hirondelle, Kim Irving,  Angela Wanczura, Heather Harris.  ADVERTISING: Jill Pollack, Emma Kivisild, Jan DeGrass.  OFFICE: Heather Harris, Cat L'Hirondelle.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Libby Barlow, Meredith  Boldon, Theresa Colins, Baylah Greenspoon, Heather  Harris, Gina Horocks, Kim Irving, Emma Kivisild, Barbara  Kuhne, Evie Mandel, Barbara Pulling, Swee Sim Tan,  Marrianne van Loon (Co-ordinator), Maura Volante, Marion  Grove, and Michelle.  COVER design by Marion Grove from a graphic  by Judith Masur.  KINESIS welcomes volunteers to work on all aspects of  the paper. Call us at 873-5925. The next story meetings1  are on February 6th and March6th at 7:30 pm at the VSW  offices. All women welcome.  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives are to  enhance understanding about the changing  position of women in society and work actively  towards achieving social change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy.   v  All unsigned material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status ,  of Women, 400 A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V5Y1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is  $23/year (or what you can afford). This includes a  subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $15/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not guarantee  publication.  af the Canadian Periodical  More women  needed in sports  by Tory Tanner  The Metropolitan Vancouver Athletic and  Arts Association (MVAAA) is an organization that promotes a healthy gay lifestyle.  Its purpose is to foster the growth of  arts and athletics in the community as an  alternative to the artificial scenes found  in the clubs and bars. MVAAA also provides  a chance for lesbians and gay men to  work together. Our community needs strength,  not separation.  The main event sponsored by the MVAAA is  the annual Gay and Lesbian Summer Games  held in Vancouver. In the past years,  women have made a very poor showing at the  games, and I would like to see this change.  Am I the only woman interested in activities other than the bars, dances and Carole  Pope concerts? We need volunteers, athletes and organizers. Come play with us  in the Gay and Lesbian Summer Games. Meet  new friends, have fun and get fit - all  at the same time!  What's your sport - tennis? softball? golf?  New sports are always welcome. With your  energy, enthusiasm and a time commitment,  your favorite sport can become an event.  In addition, any already formulated sports  team can benefit from the MVAAA. Now that  we have office space in a government-funded  building, Sport B.C., we can offer many  support services ranging from use of  boardrooms to contacts to postage. Have  your sport's chairwoman call us for more  information.  Like all non-profit organizations, MVAAA  thrives on volunteers.. Experience is not a  prerequisite; we require only enthusiasm.  JttBm  MVAAA is non-discriminatory. We welcome  all women to our mixed gay and lesbian  association.  For more information please phone us at  687-3333 or leave a message on our answering machine 736-4017. You can also write  to us at: Metropolitan Vancouver Athletic  and Arts Association, 1200 Hornby Street,  Vancouver, B.C. V6Z 2E2. And watch for our  presentation at the Provincial Gay and  Lesbian Conference at UBC. We hope to hear  from all you budding Martina Navratilovas  soon!  Lesbians meet  to discuss pregnancy  We call ourselves the Lavender Conception  Conspiracy. We are a group of Vancouver  lesbians who are seriously contemplating  having babies. Over the past months, we  have shared our hopes, our fears, information and opinions. We have supported  each other's courage in wanting to do  something that lesbians are not supposed  to do: parent.  One woman in the group is already pregnant and three more hope to be very soon.  Some of us plan on co-parenting and others  plan to parent on their own with help from  a lover or friends. We range in age from  30 to 38. Some of us have co-parented  before and all of us have had children in  our lives who have played a major role.  Two members of the group don't plan on  being biological mothers.  For other lesbians interested in the same  issues we'll be leading a workshop on  lesbian parenting at the Second Annual  B.C. Gay and Lesbian Conference, February  15 through 17, 1985 at U.B.C. We'll be  talking about alternate insemination techniques, choosing a donor, legal issues,  single motherhood, co-parenting, and forming support networks.  Morgentaler from front page  the president attended a 'March for Life'  at the White House, where he supported a  statement that advocated outlawing abortion under any circumstances. This statement forced a White House spokesperson to  issue an immediate statement saying that  the president meant, of course, that abortion would remain legal if the woman's life  was in danger.  Morgentaler and his colleagues Dr. Robert  Scott and Dr. Leslie Smoling were acquitted  on November 8th on charges of conspiring  to procure a miscarriage at Morgentaler's  Toronto Clinic. The Crown is appealing the  decision. Morgentaler and Scott were  charged on a second abortion-related offence in Ontario in December, and await a  trial date. Charges in Manitoba are on  hold pending the Ontario decisions.  KINESIS IS AVAILABLE AT:  VANCOUVER AND AREA:  Agora Food Co-op  Ariel Books  Beckwomans  East End Food Co-op  English Bay Books  La Quena Coffee House  Utile Sisters  Mall Book Bazaar  Manhattan Books  McLeods Books  NorthShore Women's Centre  Octopus East and West  Peregrine Books  Press Gang  Reach Clinic  Simon Fraser Studen Society Bookstore  Simon Fraser University Bookstore  Spartacus Books  UBCBookstore  Vancouver Women's Bookstore  Chetwynd Women's Resource Centre  Every woman's Books, Victoria  Haney Books, Maple Ridge  Pt. Coquitlam Women'sCentre  Quesnel Women's Resource Centre  South Surrey/ White Rock Women's Pi  Terrace Women's Resource Centre  Unemployed Action Centre, Nanaimo  IN CANADA:  Halifax  Red Herring Co-op Books  Montreal  Androgyny Bookstore  LibrairieAlternative  Sherbrooke  BiblairieGGCLtee.  Winnipeg  Dominion News and Gifts  Liberation Books  Thunder Bay  Northern Women's Bookstore  Thunder Bay Co-op Books  Ottawa  ce GlobeMagsandCigars  Mags and Fags  Ottawa Women's Bookstore  Edmonton  Aspen Books  Common Woman hooks  Toronto  A&SSmokeShop  Book City  Book World    '  DECBookstore  Lichtman's Newsi Books  Longhouse Book Shop  SCMBookroom  TheBookCellar  Toronto Women's Bookstore  World's Biggest Bookstore  York University Bookstore  IN U.S. A.:  Chosen Books, Detroit, Mich.  I.C.I. -A Woman's Place, Oakland, Ca.  It's About Time, Seattle, Wash.  Old Wives Tales, San Francisco, Ca.  Room of One's Own, Madison, Wise.  NEW ZEALAND  Women's Bookshop, Christchurch February ^5 Kinesis 3  MOVEMENT MATTERS  INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  COMMITTEE  This year's theme for IWD '85  is Women Take Back The Future.  When our.committee forms each  fall our first task becomes  selecting a theme that reflects  the image of women around the  world. This year, as we discussed our struggles and  successes, it became apparent  that what we were fighting for  was to ensure a future for  ourselves and our children.  With the rise of right wing  governments we have seen  attacks against women, attacks  meant to silence us.  Nationally, women have faced  severe cutbacks in funding  for our resource centres and  support networks, immigrant  women are denied adequate  English training, daycare and  schools are under attack, food  banks have become a necessity  to supplement poor social  assistance, and it continues.  Internationally, women fight  discrimination, and are denied  proper education. Women and  children are the unnecessary  victims of war, and women  live year round in camps protesting the onslaught of nuclear technology.  Globally, women march on this  day to celebrate our collective  strength - to take back the  future. IWD events are a positive and visible way to show  your support, to share inform  mation and to show that you  will be heard.  4Dance  (women only),  Friday,  March 8/85,   8 p.m.  At the Italian Cultural Centre,  3075 Slocan (take #9 bus east  to Nanaimo -transfer to #24  south and get off at Grandview  -walk 3 blocks east -Please!  walk with a friend).  Due to the success (and overcrowding) of last years dance,  we have rented a larger hall  to meet the demand. Come -  Celebrate with us and make  this IWD dance the party of  the year! There's lots"of  room for all women and children.  On site childcare will be provided. The centre is wheelchair  accessible (women with disabilities needing transportation call 253-7687 before  March 1/85). There will be no  smoking in the dance hall -  an indoor smoking area will be  provided. Music presented by  Jeannine Audette. Food bar by  Big Mama Foods.  Tickets are $3 unemployed,  $5 employed or a Batch of 10  for $40. Tickets will be  available Feb. 15 at the  following locations: Ariel  Books, Vancouver Women's Bookstore, North Shore Women's  Centre, PoCo Women's Centre,  UBC women's student  office, Vancouver Status of  Women, Octopus Books east and  west. See you there!  0March And.Rally, Saturday  March 9/85, 11 a.m. starts  at Victory Square.  The March and Rally has become  the core movement behind the  celebration of IWD. As we  march through the streets of  Vancouver bearing our smiles,  placards and buttons, our  songs proud and chants loud,  we are united in a strong  way that cannot be defeated.  We encourage all progressive  groups to join us with your  banners. Bring your friends,  sisters and children.  The March will proceed up  Hamilton Street, along Georgia  to the north side of the Vancouver Art Gallery. Here the  Rally will focus on Education  with speakers from the school-  board, the literacy campaign,  alternative forms of education. Youths will speak  about the Year of the Youth.  There will also be plenty of  sing-a-long music in between.  •Information Bay,  Sunday,  March 10/85,   10:30a.m.-5p.m.  At Vancouver Technical School,  2600 East Broadway (corner  of Broadway and Slocan -take  #9 bus east -it stops directly  in front of school). Wheelchair accessable. On site  childcare provided. Lunch  catered by Big Mama Foods.  This day is for connecting  with ourselves and other women, through the sharing of  information and in the discussion of our concerns. We  have a larger space this year,  and have added more workshops  as suggested, but if you're  not into groups then there  are also films and videos,  demonstrations and information booths from many women's  groups. So come and share  this unique day!  This year's workshops will  cover the following areas:  Women and Alcoholism, Militarism and Pornography, Abortion-why pro-choice?, Tech  Change in the Banks, Pornography, Teenagers discussing  their future, Midwifery,  Racism, The changing role of  women in the Church, Women  with Disabilities, Abortion  -strategies for pro-choice,  Women in trade unions, Asian  women, Violence against Women,  Women and body image, Lesbian  culture, Domestic workers,  Irish women, Jewish women and  unity, daycare.  Watch for the Information Day  Program available soon at  bookstore and women's centres.  •Evaluation: March 19/85,  7p.m. Brittannia Centre  Potluck.  Each year we invite the women  of the community to join us in  evaluating the success and  problems with IWD events. It's  most important that we hear  your feedback. If you can't  attend this meeting, write us  and let us know your concerns.  •I.W.D.  Display.  Feb.   26-March  10.   Vancouver Library, Main  Branch.  Women's Posters, buttons,  needlework and literature will  be on display. There will be  information brochures from  various women's centres.  If you would like to submit  articles for display, drop  them off before Feb. 15 at  Women in Focus, #204-456 West  Broadway between 10a.m.-4p.m.  Mon. to Fri. Please label all  belongings with your name and  phone number.  •Next Meeting.  Feb.   19,   26  and March 5/85,   7:30p.m.  at  Brittannia Centre.  It's still not too late to  join the IWD committee. If  weekly meetings turn you off  you can also volunteer to help  in other ways. We will need  marshalls, people to poster  and sell tickets, button  sellers, etc. Call if you can  help - 263-8715.  Lesbians Autonomous  Discovering new lifestyles  Within the lesbian community,  there has been an urgent need  for an information and support  group dealing with the issue  of alcohol and drug abuse. In  June of 1984, Lesbians Autonomous (L.A.) emerged; a result  of a few women frequently  getting together over coffee  to support each other in our  sobriety.  In our discussions concerns  arose, not only for our immediate circle of friends, but the  lesbian community as a whole.  What could we do? The question  was already being answered -  get together to share our  difficulties and solutions.  Much information has been  gathered and, by word of mouth  the group has grown.  The L.A. Group is here for  lesbians concerned about their  own chemical consumption,  recovering alcoholics, and  lesbians who have friends and/  or lovers in either of these  areas. We feel a need for  users and non-users to come  together, so that we can  better bridge the gap between  knowledge and understanding  that has kept alcohol and  drug abuse a mystery.  We are discovering lifestyle  alternatives, in a primarily  chemical oriented social  community. Part of the groups  function is setting up nonalcoholic activities. Some of  these include film nites,  parties, pool playing and outdoor activities.  Lesbians Autonomous is a  strong group seeking a healthier way of living and a freedom from the use of mood-altering substances. Together in a  relaxed, non-threatening  environment, we are opening a  line of communication that  helps us understand ourselves  and others and how alcohol and  drugs affect our lives.  Further information about  meeting times and phone numbers can be obtained from the  Lesbian Information Line 875-  6963.  Local video  goes to Japan  Heteromania hits Japan! The  video Heteromania  produced by  Vancouver feminists Tova Wagmai  and Jackie Hegadorn, will be  presented in Japan at an international showing of video artists. The video, produced in  the summer of 1984, is a  satire on the dynamics between  lesbians and heterosexual women.  Hegadorn and Wagman say they  are "thrilled and proud" that  their production was selected  for the Japan exhibition.  Arrangements are being made  to show Heteromania  at local  International Women's Day  celebrations in early March. 4 Kinesis February '8  ACROSS B.C.  Second semester at BU  by Nora Randall and  Myrna McLaughlin  Budget University is back for  its second semester from January 28 to May 30, offering  courses in the Lower Mainland.  Budget U. grew out of an all  day workshop held by Women  Against the Budget to decide  their future after the Kelowna  accord. Last year courses focused on the rise of the right,  new government legislation and  its impact, the role of media,  and economics.  After the success of its first  semester, Budget U., now calling itself an educational  seif-help women's organization,  decided to contact women's and  community groups in the Lower  Mainland and offer them a  chance to have a second semester course in their area. The  response to this outreach was  encouraging. Working in cooperation with interested  groups, Budget U. is now offering courses in several different communities.  Thunderbird Neighbourhood Centre expressed an interest in  courses on tenants rights and  worker and housing co-ops. The  White Rock, South Surre^flt^-^  10 years with  Everywomans  Everywomans Books will celebrate its tenth anniversary  this year, with readings and  music. Friends of the store  will gather at Open Space  Gallery for literary readings  and music by P.K. Page, Betsy  Warland, Daphne Marlatt, Rona  Murray, Ezzel, and Jan Gill-  anders. The anniversary will  also be celebrated at the  store with coffee and cake.  Throughout its first decade,  Everywomans Books has been  run by a volunteer collective  of approximately 20 women,  who share in operation and  staffing. As a feminist bookstore, Everywomans provides  books by, for, and about women,  in promotion of choices and  enhanced roles in society.  Best-selling categories are  health, fiction, abuse of women and children, sexuality,  spirituality, sociology and  politics. The large bulletin  board is an important community resource regarding women's  events and services. The store  also sells non-sexist books  for children and teens, and  maintains a small lending  library.  The February 16th celebration  is open to everyone. Open  Space Gallery is at 510 Fort  Street. Events there begin at  8p.m., suggested donation,  $2. Everywomans Books is at  641 Johnson Street, Victoria.  men's Centre chose social services, the Fraser Institute,  and the peace movement as topics of interest to their community.  A group of downtown workers in  conjunction with Budget U,- developed a noon hour series focusing on employment rights,  tenants rights, technological  change, equal pay, the making  of the news, and educational  cutbacks.  Courses of special interest to  Vancouver's alternative communities are being offered in  the east end. These include  women's history, an approach  to feminist theory, how to use  the alternative media, and an  analysis of the Canadian Security Intelligence Service.  A new feature of Budget U, is  the 'Open Course on Economic  Alternatives.' This course  will use as the focus of its  discussion the two books,  Beyond the Wasteland:. A Democratic Alternative to Economic Decline  by Samuel Bowles,  David M. Gordon, Thomas E.  Weisskopf (Anchor Press,  Doubleday) and The New Reality:  The Politics of Restraint in  British Columbia  by Warren  Magnusson, William K. Carroll,  Charles Doyle, Monika Langer,  R.B.J. Walker (New Star). The  structure, time and location of  this course will be determined  by the people who wish to participate. If you want to register phone the Budget U information numbers.  This year we're having a Homecoming Dance on March 2 at the  Ukrainian Hall. Exciting surprises are planned. Come on  out and have fun!  Check Bulletin Board (pp 33-35)  and B.C.  Blackout  for more information, or pick up a brochure. For more information  phone Maggie or Lynn at 255-  8189, or Nora at 251-3253.  Upcoming lesbian and gay conference  'Coming Alive in 1985', the  Second Annual Provincial Gay  and Lesbian Conference, will  be held at UBC on February 15,  16 and 17, 1985. The Confer--  ence is sponsored by the Vancouver Gay Community Centre  and Gays and Lesbians of UBC.  Keynote speaker at the Conference will be Virginia  Apuzzo, Executive Director of  the National Gay Task Force,  which is in the forefront of  the fight for homosexual and  lesbian rights and freedoms  in the United States.  The Conference promises to be  even more sudcessful than last  year's conference which attracted more than 150 people  around B.C. and Washington  state. A panel discussion is  planned on renewing the political agenda, with panel members including Connie Smith  (Rubymusic), Sue Harris, Vancouver Parks Board Commissioner  and lesbian activist, and Cy-  Thea Sand, one of the founders  and editors of the Radical  Reviewer.  More than 20 workshops are  scheduled for the weekend,  including such topics as human  rights, covenanting relationships, rural organizing and  gay and lesbian relationships.  The Lavender Conception Conspiracy will be facilitating  a workshop on lesbian parenting options and the Women's  Health Collective will be presenting a workshop on women's  health care in a lesbian context.  The Conference opens on Friday  with three events: a recital  at UBC; an openhouse at the  new VGCC headquarters; and a  reading by three San Francisco  Bay area writers and Toronto  poet G#en Hauser at the Unit  Pittg||»tkrnational Gallery.  Workshops of special interest  to lesbian and gay writers are  schedu!HfiPlkhroughout the Conference, including a workshop  on political journalism and  a Vancouver writer's workshop  featuring poet Betsy Warland.  Paul Wong will present his  video, "Confused: Sexual  Views", on Saturday, with a  commentary by video artist  Sara Diamond. Entertainment  will be provided before the  banquet on Saturday, featuring  a keynote speaker, and followed by the G/L UBC Valentine  Dance in the SUB Ballroom. The  Conference closes on Sunday  with the presentation of the -  films On Guard,  an Australsg&j|g  lesbian feminist sci-fi adventure, and Pink Triangles,  a '%  documentary on homosexual  oppression.  Pre-registration for the Conference package, which includes  the banquet and dance, is $30  or $20 for students. Child  care will be provided on campus, and billets can be arranged for those requiring housing  Ijlllpsr the weekend. For more  information: write Provincial  Conference, c/o 208-1242 Robson St., Van., B.C. V6E 1C1,  or VGCC, Box 2259, PMP, Van.,  B.C. V6B 3W2; or phone G/L  UBC at 228-4638.  Stepping Out of Line to continue  A co-author of the lesbian  workshop manual Stepping Out  Of Line  is initiating work  on a Vancouver collective to  carry on the work outlined  in the book.  Nym Hughes, one of the women  who developed the workshop on  lesbianism and feminism used  as the basis for Stepping Out  Of Line,  proposes to train 10  to 15 women interested in  conducting the workshops on an  ongoing basis. She hopes 5 to  7 women will then be committed  to forming a collective in  the Lower Mainland.  Hughes sees the work of the  proposed new group to be to  offer workshops on a regular  basis, to expand the existing  material to reflect an explicit anti-racist perspective  and the diversity of.lesbian  experience, and to work in  coalition with other lesbian,  feminist and gay groups. She  would like to work with lesbians who have read the book  and are in general agreement  with it, who "possess a  passionate belief in women's  abilities to change", are  committed to emotional honesty  and respectful communication  in a group situation, and who  have some experience as activists in some area of political work.  The first meeting of the three  month training process will  be on March 20, Common Room,  Grandview Co-op, 1455 Napier  at 7:30. Wheelchair access  and childcare on-site. For  more meeting info contact  Sarah at 251-4601. February ^5 Kinesis 5  ACROSS CANADA  'Negotiating Peace'  CAAWS workshops on sports  It's an ancient association.  Women have been protesting  against war since the ancient  Greek women of Lysistrata  undertook non-violent direct  action against their husbands  and lovers to try to stop  wars.  Now, in the late 20th Century,  women have come a long way  towards taking control of our  lives. We are playing responsible roles in many sectors of  our societies. We are prepared  now to share responsibility  for our own security and indeed for the security of the  world. But we are still on  the outside, protesting, while  it's men, almost exclusively,  who are sitting at the negotiating tables, making the  deals and the decisions that  will determine the fate of  the Earth.  Women have the skills and the  vision to contribute to the  historic challenge of preventing nuclear war and building  a new diplomacy for a world  without war. How, then, will  women get in on the decisionmaking?  These issues will be the focus  of a day-long conference in  Vancouver on March 2nd. This  gathering, "Women Negotiating  Peace" is part of a series of  local conferences leading up  to a regional conference which-  will be held in Victoria on  May 10-12. In June, there  ' will be an International Conference for Women in Halifax.  Out of these conferences will  come a coherent statement of  "Women's Alternatives for Negotiating Peace", which will  be presented at the Nairobi  conference in July, 1985,  marking the end of the International Decade of Women.  The Vancouver gathering will  feature workshop sessions as  well as keynote speaker Dr.  Rosalie Bertell, an internationally known scientist who  has done pioneering research  on the effects of radiation  on the victims of nuclear  weapons testing in the south-  conditions  a feminist magazine  older women. CONDITIONS  variety of stylet by both publisl  writers of  f Third World, workine/Cleu ar  Subscriptions (3 issues): SIS.  institutions; S9. special "hardship"rate; S20.  or mon - supporting subscription.  Back Issues (five A subsequent issues still mailable): $4.50 each.  Overseas distribution: add $2. for subscription.  SSO for sintie issue.  west Pacific. Dr. Bertell recently testified at the Nuclear  Free Pacific Conference and  at the 1983 Nuremberg Tribunal  investigating nuclear war  preparations. Her remarkable  career combines scientific  research, peace activism, and  church work (she is a Roman  Catholic nun).~  The Vancouver gathering will  draw together women from many  backgrounds to explore a  variety of channels of influence on policy-making.  For further info, contact  Lydia Sayle, Vancouver Planning Committee, c/o 4737 W.  7th Ave., Van. V6T 1C7.  When a girl decides she'd  rather play hockey than figure skate, that-she'd rather  play soccer than do gymnastics,  she is bound to encounter some  amount of resistance from  parents, team mates and/or  coaches. She may also face outright refusals to let her play  on the 'boys' team due to  sexist sports policies in some  communities. The issue of seg-  gragaton/integration in sport  is the topic of a workshop  sponsored by the Canadian  Association for the Advancement of Women and Sport (CAAWS).  The workshop draws on the research of Helen Lenskyj and  examines several issues: the  physiological arguments that  BCTel wants more money  Representatives of 18 Lower  Mainland unions and community  groups met late last month to  discuss the impact of a proposed phone rate increase in B.C.  B.C. Tel has applied to the  CRTC for two increases in  local rates totalling 19%.  The company was granted a 4%  interim increase without a  hearing last year. One of the  Native women  discuss status  The B.C. Indian Homemakers'  Association has received funds  from the Department of Indian  Affairs to educate people in  rural areas across B.C. about  Bill C47. The Bill, which  would have allowed Indian women  to retain their status upon  marriage to non-native men,  was blocked by the Senate last  summer.  The BCIHA has sent its president, vice-president and a  research writer to areas as  diverse as Invermere (in the  B.C. interior)' and Masset (on  the Queen Charlotte Islands)  to hold workshops for both  native and non-native people  about the bill and to gather  rural response.  A revised version of the.bill  is expected to come before the  House sometime this spring,  before the Rights and Freedoms  Act of the constitution becomes active in April of 1985.  applications under consideration would make this 4% permanent. The second proposes to  add 15% on to that. These increases would clearly have  a devastating effect on the  already inadequate resources  of people on welfare, seniors,  and other low income groups.  The issue will come before  the CRTC in early February,  when local groups will present briefs to the Commission  at an informal hearing. At a  second hearing the City of  Vancouver will make a formal presentation, in which,  says Council member Libby  Davies, they will propose that  the 4% increase be dropped,  and demand that the 15% increase be tabled pending  Ottawa hearings on the deregulation of long-distance  rates.  If long-distance service is  deregulated, and taken over  by companies independent  of those providing local  service, it is inevitable that  local rates will skyrocket  unless controlled.  Vancouver women's peace camp planned  Vancouver's annual walk for  peace will be held this year  on April 27th. The walk serves  to bring together many diverse  groups. However, the large  numbers at the march keep any  particular group from being  too visible.  In recongnition of this, an  ad hoc group is organizing a  women's peace camp for the 24-  hour period before the march to  celebrate women's contributions  to the anti-nuclear work and  other progressive movements.  We also want to celebrate  our unseen, daily victories: women surviving rape,  confronting racism, making it  through the bureaucracy and  the daily grind as welfare  mothers. The camp will be a  safe place to share our experiences and build solidarity.  The camp is open to all women  and children. It will open at  noon on Fri., April 26th and  close at noon the next day,  when those who wish may join  the peace march. Camp site  and details will be announced  in next month's Kinesis.  have been used to bar girls and  women from the traditionally  male sports; strategies for  achieving sex equality in  sport; and relevant human  rights legislation in Canada  and the United States.  The first of the three workshops took place in Victoria on  Jan. 19 and 20 and provided  the facilitators with an  opportunity to hear from young  female athletes who have challenged the frequently all-male  domains of hockey, soccer, and  baseball teams.  One 12 year old athlete spoke  of her experience as the only  female on the local boy's hockey  team, and of the struggle to  gain the acceptance of her  coaches, team mates and their  parents.  She also spoke of the remarks  made by the man coaching her  girls' soccer team that 'girls  simply cannot play as well as  boys'. In spite of all the  negativity surrounding her  participation in non- traditional sport, she assured the  women at the workshop that she  would keep playing.  CAAWS will be holding two more  workshops on female participation  in sport in Prince George Feb.  8 and 9 at the College of New  Caledonia, and in Port Coquitlam,  March 14 & 15. For more info call  CAAWS at 687-3333, Local 2242 o  732-1829.  MediaWatch  bumps Pepsi  Despite lack of support from,  the Advertising Advisory Board  and a refusal by Pepsi-Cola  Canada to remove or change  their recent advertisement  "Roommates", MediaWatch succeeded in getting it removed  from Canadian airwaves. Everyone involved in this campaign  deserves a real pat on the  back!  The ad \  fas  :-moving combination of camera work and  dialogue which when combined,  sexualized the relationship  of a young woman with her  father/date.  The ad was an issue that most  authorities did not want to  touch. In addition, Pepsi-  Cola is a multi-million dollar  company using a major Toronto  advertising agency. They  were not easy to deal with.  Nevertheless, pressure from  at least 20 public complainants and various women's  groups such as Vancouver  Status of Women (VSW), White  Rock Women's Place, Women  Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW), The North Shore  Women's Centre, and the  National Action Committee  were elemental in getting the  ad removed.  If you would like further  information on MediaWatch or  more complaint forms, contact:  MediaWatch 209-636 W. Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 1G2  (604-873-8511). 6 Kinesis February'85  ACROSS CANADA  by Mary Lakes  The re-deportation of Madhur  Prasad remains imminent. Prasad, 31, was deported to Fiji  last year for shoplifting  after 11 years in Canada. She  later surreptitiously returned "to be with my children".  Prasad's lawyer, Reiner  Rothe, was unsuccessful in his  bid to defer a deportation  order issued by Adjudicator  Daphne Shaw Dyke.  At a "stay of proceedings" at  federal court on December 17,  1984, Mr. Rothe spent one and  one-half-hours before Judge  Collier in an attempt to induce him to set aside the deportation order until the  Minister of Employment and  Immigration, Flora MacDonald,  had time to review the case.  He cited previous judges'  Madhur Prasad  faces re-deportation  decisions declaring that the  Immigration department was  usurping the rights of the  Minister and the applicant  where other factors than  those in hte Immigration Act  might cause embarrassment to  the Crown. Judge Collier  listened attentively and  appeared sympathetic. However,  he refused to go against the  majority legal position that  the Immigration decision prevail.  "Had the judge allowed the  case," said Rothe, "it would  possibly have been overturned  Julie Belmas launches appeal  Julie Belmas,. sentenced to  20 years in prison last May  for her involvement in the  1982 bombing of Litton Systems near Toronto and conspiracy to rob a Brink's truck,  is launching an appeal of  her sentence in the B.C.  Court of Appeal.  Toronto lawyer Clayton Ruby  will act as counsel for the  appeal, which will be before  the court in a few months.  Belmas, who was 21 years old  at the time of her sentencing, has been serving her  term in the country's only  federal prison for women in  Kingston, Ontario. She has  been fighting for the right  to be transferred to a prison  in B.C., close to family  and friends, but has not been  successful.  Both Belmas and Ann Hansen,  who was sentenced for her  involvement in the same  actions as well as the bombing of the Cheekye-Dunsmuir  hydro substation on Vancouver  Island, have been classified  for "security visits," a new  classification which restricts  the number of visitors they  can have, and for which a  special screened visiting  area is now under construction. Another new project at  the prison is a "Special  Handling Unit" to house these  "security risk" prisoners.  It is slated for completion  sometime this year. Because  of her high risk classification, Hansen has been prevented from registering in any  courses at Kingston except  hairdressing.  Gerry Hannah, and Doug Stewart, sentenced during the -  same trial are serving out  terms at B.C. prisons at  Matsqui and Agassiz respectively. Stewart's successful  hunger strike in November won  him a transfer to Kent prison  in Agassiz from Archambeault  in Quebec. Brent Taylor still  faces charges for his involvement at Litton.  The Free the Five Defense  Group has put out a call for  donations for legal and  support costs: P.O. Box 48296,  Bentall Station, Vancouver,  B.C. V7X 1A1.  in a higher court - this case  could wind up at the Supreme  Court of Canada and perhaps  set a precedent." Rothe  advised that prior to the  change from five to three  years for landed immigrants  to obtain citizenship there  was a law which considered a  person as having domicile  after seven years' residence.  "This was taken out," he  said, "had this law been in  force, Mrs. Prasad might not  have been deported."  In a letter to the Minister,  the Women's Action Committee  in Support of Madhur Prasad  pointed out, "Discrimination  arises whereby the children  of an immigrant mother must  be denied their familial ties,  as opposed to other Canadian  children who may retain their  relationship - access to and  reunion with a mother convicted of an offence." In  B.C., even in severe cases  where children have been  taken by the province into  permanent custody, it is  still possible for these  children to be reunited with  their mother.  In a decision on her children's behalf, Mrs. Prasad  choose not to have the children share her deportation  situation. It is surprising  that Immigration would even  have considered this to be an  option. The acculturalization  of Mrs. Prasad in Fiji after  her lengthy absence, school  disruption, residence and  economic instability, and  lack of family ties, hardly  constitute a choice for the  family.  In a letter to the committee,  Status of Women, Canada, have  recommended the discrimination issues be pursued. Section 15(10 of the Canadian  Constitution states, "Every .  individual is equal before  the law and has the right to  equal benefit of the law without discrimination..." (this  section will come into effect  in April, 1985). Section 12  states, "Everyone has the  right not to be subjected  to cruel or unusual treatment or punishment." John  Taylor, Mrs. Prasad's former  counsel, filed a federal  court petition prior to her  deportation declaring the  loss of a mother for Mrs.  Prasad's three children to be  cruel and unusual punishment.  Pauline Jewett, M.P. for New  - Westminster-Coquitlam, writes,  "I have written to the Minister of Employment and Immigration in support of the National Black Coalition of Canada  for a favourable review of  this case."  Mr. Rothe's position is to  appeal to the Minister on the  grounds of compassion and hu-  .. manitarianism. This is a  transcendence of man-made  laws where "motherhood" and  extreme circumstances are  considered. Mr. Rothe has  filed an appeal against Mrs.  Prasad's deportation. She is  expected to face trial for  "illegal entry" in March.  Catholics and Borowski attack HERizons  by Michele Wollstonecroft  A national feminist magazine  is being attacked by pro-life  groups who say they_aim to  get the magazine off the  newsstands because of its  pro-choice editorial policy.  HERizons,   published in Winnipeg, was first targeted last  November by a chapter of  the Manitoba Catholic Women's  League who wrote to the magazine's advertisers threatening to boycott businesses  that continued to advertise  in HERizons.  The League  claims to have influenced  Safeway Supermarkets decision  to remove the magazine from  its newsstands.. Safeway  spokesmen have denied that  pressure from the League influenced the decision. They  say that Safeway no longer  carries HERizons  because "it  wasn't selling."  Joe Borowski, anti-abortion  activist, was quick to join  the attack on HERizons  and  although the Catholic Women's  League appears to have dropped all action, Borowski has  continued his campaign. Borowski, president of the Alliance Against Abortion, sent  a second round of letters to  the magazines advertisers  as well as writing to Prime  Minister Mulroney.  HERizons,  begun as a Manitoba  magazine that became a  national publication in Sept.  1984, currently receives over  $200,000 in Federal Local  Employment Assistance and  Development grants as do many  other enterprises that prove  themselves a viable business.  Borowski's letter to the Prime  Minister says that this funding should be stopped. Borowski says that HERizons "condones violence...is anti-man,  anti-life". He also called  the magazine a "cheap-thrashing abortion rag."  Borowski also sent Prime  Minister Mulroney a cartoon  from the November issue of  HERizons  which he found offensive both for its "violence"  and "dirty language". The cartoon shows a woman walking  past a construction site, her  verbal harrassment by male  construction workers and her  subsequent fantasy of blowing  up the harassers.  HERizons  managing editor Debbie  Holmberg-Schwartz responded.to  Borowski's criticism by pointing out that street harassment  is real and not invented by  the magazine or the cartoonist.  "We are trying to show that  these guys are jerks", Holmberg-Schwartz said. She further noted that the cartoon  did not imply that the intention of the magazine was to  condone violence.  Although the advertisers have  continued their support, both  the advertisers and HERizons  staff are being caused stress  by these events. February ^5 Kinesis 7  LABOUR  Boycott  Eaton's  Vancouver women are rallying to support  Eaton's employees at six stores in Ontario  who have been on strike since Nov. 30/84  for a first contract. The employees are  members of the Retail, Wholesale and  Department Store Union (RWDSU). The striking employees are asking customers across  Canada not to shop at any Eaton's stores  until the strike in Ontario is settled.  About 80% of the strikers are women. They  are up against the same problems many  Canadian women face: low wages, poor  benefits, job ghettoes, and discrimination  against part-time workers. In fact, about  two-thirds of Eaton's employees work on  a part-time basis. The fight on the Eaton's  picket line in Ontario is a fight for all  Canadian women. The employees at Eaton's  stores in B.C. have not yet joined a union.  However, gains won by the strike in Ontario  will certainly benefit the workers here.  There are a number of major issues at  stake in this strike. Eaton's wants to  lay-off or promote staff on the basis of  personal appearance and "customer profile",  rather than seniority. The employees want  to put an end to this discrimination and  favouritism. Eaton's wants to take away  benefits like pensions, vacations, meal  breaks, and sick leave that employees have  had for years.  Eaton's has a double standard for sick  pay. Employees lose 25%-30% of their pay  when they are ill, while managers get 100%  pay for time lost due to illness. Eaton's  employs 80% female staff, yet only one out  of 110 store managers is a woman, and very  few women make it into commission sales,  the relatively higher paying jobs. Part-  time employees must work irregular shifts .  and hours that change from week to week,  no matter what the cost to the employee's  health or family life.  To support the strike you can hit Eaton's  where it hurts the most - in the wallet.  DON'T SHOP AT EATON'S. DON'T ORDER FROM  EATON'S. DON'T USE YOUR EATON'S CREDIT  CARD. This will tell Eaton's that you,  the customer, don't like the way they do  business with their employees. DON'T GIVE  EATON'S YOUR BUSINESS UNTIL EATON'S GIVES  ITS EMPLOYEES A FAIR CONTRACT.  For further info contact:  Women Supporting  the Eaton's Strike   (an open committee  of women and women's groups) at Box 65366,  Stn F Vancouver,  B.C.   V5N 5P3 or phone  255-1963).  On August 22, 1984, a federal Human Rights  Tribunal handed down its decision on the  complaint of Action Travail des Femmes (ATF)  v. Canadian National (CN). This decision represents an important milestone in Canadian  by Shelagh Day  human rights law.  Women vs. CN  In 1977 ATF learned that there were entry-  level jobs at CN Rail which were often available and it began referring women to CN.  The jobs for which the women applied require  no special qualifications.  However, the women who applied for these  jobs were discouraged at the employment  office or interviewed in a discriminatory  Between 1978 and 1981 seventeen individual  complaints of discrimination were filed  with the Canadian Human Rights Commission  alleging refusal to hire and discrimination  in employment by CN. In addition, ATF  filed a pattern and practice complaint  alleging that "CN in the St. Lawrence  region (Quebec) has established or pursued  a policy or practice that depri-i  to deprive a class of individuals of employment opportunity because they are  female." In 1981, women held 13 percent of  the blue collar jobs in Canada. In CN, in  the St. Lawrence region, women held 0.7  percent of the blue collar, jobs.  In March of 1981, just two months before  the ATF complaint was referred to the  Human Rights Tribunal for hearing, CN  officially adopted an equal opportunity  policy statement.  The Tribunal further ordered CN to immediately and permanently:  •discontinue the use of aptitude tests  which screen out women  •discontinue the use of physical tests  for women  •cease requiring welding experience for  ntry level posii  •design appropriate measures to inform  the public of available jobs  •revise its employment office and interviewing practices  •direct foremen to cease refusing candi—  dates because of their sex  •proceed with measures to eliminate sexual  harassment from the workplace.  In addition, and more importantly, the  Tribunal ordered CN, as a special temporary measure, to undertake a special recruitment program directed at women and  to hire one woman in every four new hires  until such time as the proportion of women  in non-traditional positions in CN in the  St. Lawrence region reaches 13 percent.  This decision has been appealed by CN.  If you disagree with CN appealing this  decision, write to Betty Hewes, Chairperson, CN Rail, 935 de La Gauchetiere,  P.O. Box 8100, Montreal, Quebec H3C 3N4  (with a copy to the CHR Advocate) or  phone her at (514)877-5430 in Montreal or  (403)421-6981 in Edmonton.  (Canadian Human Rights Advocate)  Feeling the labour pains of the 1980's  Labour Pains  is an exploration of the  current economic and social crisis in  women's and men's work. The author describes what the 'new reality' of the 80't  means to women, having studied both the  workforce and'the household.  Labour Pains.     By Pat Armstrong  The Women's Press: Toronto. 1984  This type of analysis helps-us to further  a feminist, pro-worker strategy. But it  is also frightening. Pat Armstrong paints  a depressing picture: continued high  unemployment, massive increases in part-  time work and heavier household burdens.  Women are entering the workforce in record  high numbers. At the same time, government and business leaders are hinting that  women are the primary cause of men's unem-  Feminism. Socialism  Anarchism  new books, magazines  buttons & newspapers  SPARTACUS BOOKS  upstairs 311 W. Hastings St.  ph: 688-6138  Not Selected Essays  tjiig-f on the History of  Money  Women's Work  SI2 ♦ SI postage  Camosun College  3I00 Foul Bay Road  ployment. Armstrong debunks this myth.  She points out that even within the same  broad occupational category (such as retail, finance, trade, or construction)  men and women hold different types of  jobs. For example, in manufacturing,  women are concentrated in the food, beverage, and textile areas, whereas men work  in jobs that produce cars, machinery,  and other forms of transportation equipment  This means, as Armstrong points out, that  women are not in competition for men's  jobs, but because of the economic crisis  men are in competition for jobs that women  have traditionally held.  Unemployment touches everybody's lives.  But unemployment affects men and women  differently. Because men are concentrated  in the primary industries they are the  most visibly unemployed. On the other hand,  says Armstrong, "women's unemployment has  been more scattered and less visible  both because it has not meant massive  layoffs...and because it has frequently  involved the transformation of full time  jobs into part time jobs and the reduction of hours for those already in household work." In many instances part time  work is lower paying and lacks the benefits that full time workers are entitled  During the last federal election, job  creation became a buzzword. Labour Pains  shows that government initiated job  creation programs have primarily benefited  male workers. The prospect of continued  high levels of women's unemployment becomes  even more frightening as the government  does not seem to be addressing women's  needs.  Armstrong's analysis is crucial if we are  serious about fighting back against unemployment. It should be part of continued  discussions on how to organize the i  ployed and on developing fight back  strategies.  In B.C. the effects of the restraint  program are very apparent. Groups like  Women Against the Budget have publicized  the effects of the program on women as  workers and consumers of social services.  However, there was very little discussion  of how the budget affects women in the*  household. Armstrong begins this process  and graphically shows that cutbacks in  social, health, and educational services  mean that women are forced to work harder  to make up the gap. This type of analysis  will help us to be more effective in  developing tactics and alliances to counter restraint. Armstrong writes that unless  women get together to develop a fightback  we will emerge from this crisis in a worse  position than before. It's a warning we  all have to heed.  Labour Pains  also contains a chapter on  the impact of microtechnology on women's  and men's work. Other chapters deal with  an historical analysis of women's work;  volunteer work; and part time jobs. There  are also pages and pages of useful tables.  This book is fascinating, but it is  difficult to read. Armstrong's style and  language are fairly academic. It takes a  lot of concentration to read all the facts  and figures as they often initially seem  confusing and contradictory. Her chapter  "Theoretical Approaches" is quite inaccessible, not only because of the language,  but also due to the assumption that the  readers have a familiarity with labour  segmentation theory and theorists. It's  a pity that an author writing such an  important arid incisive book about the  plight of women workers would make their  book inaccessible to that very audience. 8 Kinesis February '85  INTERNATIONAL  by Wendy Solloway and Colleen Tillmyn  xIaIMaJ/  Since the late 70's thousands of refugees  mainly from El Salvador and Guatemala,  have poured into Mexico City to escape  the institutionalized violence of their  governments.  Two feminists from Vancouver  who have been travelling in Mexico and  Central America sent this report about  two projects to help the thousands of  refugee children in Mexico City.  Wendy and I are getting ready to leave  Mexico City for Central America, and of  course we have been making the rounds of  the "farewell circuit." I am generally  accustomed to goodybyes, having moved  frequently from place to place. However  these goodbyes are different. We are  saying adios to people who cannot go back  to their homes in the countries we are  about to visit. Our Guatemalan friends  describe the delights of their country  that we can look forward to enjoying.  They have to fight back their tears of  longing. Then one of them questions the  other: "What else will they see?" Her  reply: "Lots of dead people. You will see  lots of dead bodies."  The Guatemalan government has embarked on  a brutal repression of its people which  amounts to nothing less than genocide,  as thousands of indigenous people are  murdered, relocated in camps ("asdeas")  where they are constantly scrutinized, or  forced to join civil patrols, or disappear.  Other victims include union leaders,  teachers, students, nurses, lawyers, nuns  - in short, anyone who is struggling for  a better way of life. Countless numbers  of children have been innocent victims  of this brutality. Of the onew who have  survived, many are homeless, hungry, and  without resources of any kind.  What is happening to these children? What  kind of psychological effects are they  suffering from? A woman researcher working with refugee children in Mexico is  studying the psychological repercussions  of violence and terror in children ages  0-6 and in the Guatemaln family. She  began her research in Guatemala, but  could not continue because her work  was considered subversive. (Many of her  fellow colleagues in spychology have been  assassinated.) Her project is now being  carried out among refugees in Mexico,  many of who are orphans.  Some background about their lives:  •some orphanages house around 400 children  •90% lost fathers who were killed in  zones of conflict/10% lost fathers who  died from natural causes  •they display a constant attitude of  hunger; this stems from psychological  hunger which cannot be satisfied in  these institutions  •clothes, pens, etcl, all belong to the  institution (i.e. they are now allowed  possessions of their own)  •stealing is a common pastime  •when they draw figures they draw them  as seen from the back, without faces  •they also draw barbed wire fences,  soldiers and helicopters  One day when some children in a Mexican  orphanage actually saw helicopters  flying overhead they began screaming and  running around, terrified. One five year  old described having seen men climbing  out of a helicopter and chopping off his  brother's hands. Another time, a program  was initiated between the orphanage and  some women prisoners, who were to visit  on Saturdays to play with the children.  The first time they arrived the police  accompanied them and the children began  screaming again "Don't kill me!". So  -the police had to wait outside. Such is  the reality of their existence.  The older children in these places participate in kindergarten programs at a regular school. However here, too, they have  Nairobi 1985  Conference marks end of decade  Women from around the world will gather in  Nairobi this summer to mark the achievements of the United Nations Deceade for  Women, 1976-1985.  The first UN World Conference on Women was  held in Mexico City in 1975, International  Women's Year. The UN General Assembly accepted the World Plan of Action adopted at  the conference, a plan which set five-year  minimum goals for the advancement of women  in such areas as education, employment,political participation and policymaking,  and recognition of the economic value of  women's work in the home.  In 1980, at the mid-decade conference, a  World Programme of Action was accepted,  which called for national, regional, and  international strategies to attain women's  full and equal participation, particularly  in development, politics, decision-making,  international co-operation and peace.  Two conferences are planned for Nairobi in  1985. One, the government conference July  15-26, will be open to governmental representatives. A parallel open forum of nongovernmental organizations (NGO's) is  planned for July 8-17.  Topics slated for discussion at the two  conferences will be related to the main  themes: 'Equality, Development, and Peace,  and to the sub-themes 'Employment, Health,  and Education.'  Thirty Canadian women will receive funding  from the federal government to attend the  NGO forum. Applications are due Feb 15th,  and interested women should contact Women' s Program c/o Louise Dufresne, Dept of  Secretary of State, Ottawa, K1A 0M5.  Women able to pay their own way should apply to NGO Planning Committee, 777 UN Plaza  11th floor, New York, NY 10017, by March  31st. Airfare to Nairobi from Vancouver  will be approximately $1500, and arrangements can be made through Ellen Frank of  Travel Unlimited, 253-5585.  i in i ii ii in i i i i ■ i i i | | | | |  Reteaching  the Christians  by Wendy Solloway  For centuries Christians have been  motivated by their faith to do many  things: convert heathens, accept their  plight on earth in the hope of something better in the afterworld, kill in  the name of God, as well devote endless  hours of service to those in need.  Not  having been raised a Christian, my knowledge comes from history books and from  my recent observations travelling  through Mexico.  There I approached the  situation of poverty, suffering and  social injustice from a political direction, only to find at the intersection  a number of Christian groups concerned  with many of the same issues.  In the conference room at the Cuernavaca  Centre for Intercultural Dialogue  (CCIDD), a group of middle class North  American Christians ranging in age from  19 to 65 sat engrossed watching a videotape of a speech by Fidel Castro. Earlier they learned about Nicaragua's Revolution, exploring such topics as why  INTERNATIONAL  ■ February '85 Kinesis 9  many problems. They are very angry a lot  of the time, extremely antagonistic, and  defensive. Therefore, the other kids in  these schools - who live in their own  homes and have people to take care of  them - have a very difficult time dealing  with this immense hostility.  As well as orphanages, there are also day  care centres for children. These places  are mostly funded by private donations  with the government contributing maybe  10% of the budget. In one such centre  there might be 300 children with 90 five  to seven year olds grouped in one room.  These kids usually have mothers but no  fathers. Their mothers are generally  "under" employed. Many of the children  do not talk; of the children that do  speak, many do not speak very well. "Why?"  we ask? "Wouldn't some kind of rehabilitation program be useful?" "out of the question" reply the authorities.  And still there are more children suffering - refugee children - who live in  camps: many orphans, many with mothers  and no fathers. Besides the refugee kids  be proposed, including how to implement  it, how many people would be needed, and  over what period of time.  The results of this study will be sent to  financial sponsors, to institutions  working with refugees, to members of the  medical profession and to churches. Results  will also be sent to those who are interested in knowing what life is like in  exile for those refugees who have had to  leave Guatemala.  A second project, a daycare/kindergarten  sponsored by SEDEPAC (Service for Develop  ment and Peace) began in May, 1984 in  Mexico City. With little revenue SEDEPAC  has managed to enlist the services of  a professional staff at the daycare centre.  The nationality of these workers reflects  the composite nationality of the children  - they are from Guatemala, El Salvador  and Mexico. Coming from similar circumstances as the children they are definitely sensitized to the special needs of  the centre. They are dedicated to creating  a healthy, secure and creative environment in which these children can develop  at a progressive pace.  Besides the refugee kids in the camps there are a growing number of  them in Mexico City. These children are given some help in the way  of medicine, food and clothes, but there is virtually no help for  their emotional and psychological needs.  in the camps there are a growing number of  them in Mexico City. These children are  given some help in the way of medicine,  food and clothes, but there is virtually  no help for their emotional and psychological needs. The aim of the project  .that "S" is conducting is to begin to fill  this gap by developing some type of rehabilitation program which could give these  refugee kids the attention they need.  Through observations, tests, evaluations of  Various stages of development, interviews  with parents/caregivers, etc., this project will attempt to point out general  problems. The more serious problems will  be particularly emphasized. After collating all of this information a program will  Each one of the staff members receives  a monthly "honorarium" akin to an allowance. The parents/caregivers pay on a  sliding scale if they can afford to pay  anything at all. Due to the illegal or  at the very least unstable status of  these refugees (i.e. undocumented or  with visas that must be renewed repeatedly) , only about 30% of these people have  found work, and among this group it is  rare that they receive more than minimum  wage. For these same political and economic reasons it is almost impossible for  refugees to enroll in school.  At the daycare centre the older kids (4-8  years) draw pictures of helicopters and  war planes firing shots out of the sky.  They play games where "death squads"  arrive with guns to shoot people. Fleeing  one's country in fear, perhaps having  witnessed or experienced torture, rape  or murder would leave psychological scars  on any human being; we can only begin to  fathom the consequences for children in  their most formative years.  The population of refugee children in  Mexico City is growing every day. Therefore the need for more childcare centres  is urgent. As adults we face the enormous  responsibility of creating environments  for these children in which they have the  possibility of "growing to their full .  potential.  This project, the first of its kind in  Mexico City, is trying to meet such an  objective. It is a difficult task. Time,  dedicaton, and experience will provide  some answers about how best to deal with  the special needs of these children. In  the meantime, with enough resources,  hopefully other centres will open their  doors.  These are interim measures; the real  responsibility lies in creating a world  that will be safe and nurturing to those  who will create the future. It is the  children who are the silent victims and  witnesses of our military madness. We owe  it to them to speak out.  If you want to help the refugee children  •f Central America, here are some suggestions:  •pressure your government to urge the  Mexican government to lift the restrictions on those wanting to visit and  provide aid to the refugee camps in  Mexico  •send clothes, plastic drinking cups,  blankets, writing pads, coloured pencils,  etc., to the children in refugee camps  in Chiapas to this address: Diocesis  de San Cristobal, San Cristobal de  Las Casas, Chiapas, Mexico  •send any amount of money to "S" at this  address: Asesoria Ecumenica de Proyectos  populares (ASSEP, San Jer5nimo, CoIonia  San Angel 01000, Mexico D.F.  •send toys, clothing or money to La  Guarderia, SEDEPAC, Roma 1, Piso 3,  • Colonia Roma, Mexico, D.F. , Mexico CD.  06600  'WxlfrtiKiKiAl^  the U.S  feels so threatened; the "literacy  ,campa:ign"; the failure of the count-  popular support  er-revolutionairies to g;  within the country.  One by one the media myths fall by the  wayside. For instance, did you know that  out of 35,000 foreign advisors most are  from capitalist countries and only 2-3,000  are from Cuba? The U.S. State Department  would have us believe that the country is  crawling with Russian-backed communists  plotting to overthrow the U.S. government  and plunge us all into tyranny. But these  Christians weren't buying it. They listened, asked questions, challenged each other.  There is hardly anything subversive about  this group...unless their searching for  an understanding of the problems of social  inequality can be called subversive.  Well, in my search for understanding I  have found just that - that in countries  like El Salvador and Guatemala those that  seek to alleviate the impoverished conditions of the vast majority of people,  including many nuns and priests and other  religious persons, are considered subversive. Their fate - imprisonment, torture,  rape, violent barbaric deaths. The catch-  ... unless their  searching for an  understanding of the  problems of social  inequality can be called  subversive.  all rationalization for such inhumanity  is the threat of Communism. How long will  North Americans cling to the image of  Soviet infiltrators taking over their  schools, unions, and peasant organizations?  When will we realize that people, many  who cannot read let alone understand the  Communist Manifesto, need to eat nourishing food regularly, see their babies live  past 5 years of age and live in decent  shelters with clean water and roof overhead?  It is precisely the faulty logic of many  North Americans that led Ray Plankey,  Director of CCIDD, to develop his idea of  "reverse mission". After having served as  a missionary in Chile for a number of years  he concluded his position was presumptuous  and discarded it because the ones who  really need to be educated are right in  our own backyard. With this in mind he  opened the centre.  For intense two-week sessions North American Christian groups get a real dose of  'academic theory*, Latin American history,  and a first-hand view of squatter settlements (in Cuernavaca, Mexico), where there  are for example, two water spigots shared  by hundreds of families. They talk with  campesinos (those who live in the "campo",  the country), and Guatemalan refugees  The plan is not to preach to the converted  rather it is to educate and thereby  motivate people into action. Having talked  with some of the participants, it seems  to me the program is working. They leave  tired but inspired, with a heightened  sense of commitment to work for peace and  justice.  Around'the corner from CCIDD is CED -  Centro para Encuentros y Dialogos. The  founder is a dynamic Chilean woman,  Gabriella La Vida. In the course of her  life she has started many such centres.  This particular one has its foundations  in religious faith and survives financially with ecumenical donations. Its activities are many. For example, workshops are  continued on p. 21  J 10 Kinesis February ^5  And as for being Jewish ..  It's both ironic and frightening that as Kinesis  goes to press with this article, Temple Shalom,  the synagogue on West 10th Avenue, was burned  by arson.  by Tova Wagman and Baylah Greenspoon  The following is a dialogue about our  experiences as Jewish lesbians. We touch  on a wide range of topics, from very personal stories of growing up Jewish in  Canada, to more general analyses of anti-  Semitism and what it means to be a Jew  in the world. We are both white Ashkenazi  Jews, which means our families came from  Eastern Europe. Also, we both come from  families that strongly identify as Jews -  culturally, traditionally and emotionally.  That is our point of reference throughout  this dialogue.  What we want is to share some information  about Jews in order to dispel some myths  and stereotypes. We want to present ourselves as Jewish lesbians in a personal  way, so that women will be able to connect their own experiences with ours,  while acknowledging differences between  us. We feel the need to gain support in  these times when so many right-wing  groups are flourishing. We thought this  open dialogue might encourage that.  We have  felt many emotions during the  course of this work - fear, frustration,  anger, excitement,-satisfaction. There's  a lot more to be talked about., but we  feel good about the work we have  done.  TOVA: Growing up as a Jew in Toronto felt  safe to me in some ways.  I'm not saying  I was safe, but in a way I felt protected  from anti-Semitism because I lived in a  mostly Jewish community, and went to a  mostly Jewish high school. My family all  lived in Toronto, and although we didn't  keep Kosher, we celebrated the traditional Jewish holidays,  such as Passover,  Channukah, Rosh Hashanah, and lorn Kippur.  I also c i Hebrew school for six  years  (e y after school and on  Sundays). •"ned Hebrew and Jewish  studies tt  A  /s  BAYLAH: That sounds a lot like my background. The main differences are that I  lived in Montreal, and that I attended  afternoon Hebrew school for only a few  years, and three times a week. My brother  went all through elementary school in a  combined Hebrew and English program. A  Jewish education was seen as more important for him as he had to prepare for his  Bar Mitzvah. (On a boy's 13th birthday he  must learn a portion of the Torah - holy  scripture" and recite it to the congregation at synagogue.) There were many  differences in the ways boys, and girls  were treated in my family, and in all the  families I knew. I remember that I had a  lot of anger about that from quite a  young age. However, a general education  was seen as important for both boys and  girls. That's a strong Jewish value. My  parents encouraged me to do well in school  and to go to college. When money was  scarce, one of the first considerations  was education.  Most of the women I was close to were  strong, vibrant, and resourceful. I think  that comes from our Eastern European  heritage - where Jewish men spent all  their time at study and prayer, and the  women were out in the world - keeping the  shop, at the marketplace and generally  making sure the family survived. To me,  that's an important legacy.  My brother was also treated very differently because of his Bar Mitzvah.  Girls  could have a Bat Mitzvah,  but we couldn't  afford for both of us to have one   (as  there 's also an expectation that the  family put on a party for the one having  their Bat/Bar Mitzvah),  so my brother got  priority because he was male.  For boys  a Bar Mitzvah is a big deal because it  represents the initiation of their "manhood".  Girls' initiation mark is when we  get our periods.  I became a "woman" in a  silent way,  but for my brother to become  a man was a bi,g celebration acknowledged  by everyone in the family and the .synagogue.  I was jealous about that.  Some  girls in my high school did have a "coming of age" celebration in the form of  ' a sweet 16.   The emphasis was social.  That's  very different form a Bar Mitzvah where  there is some socializing, but the focus  is on learning, and achievement.  That reminds me that I did not attend one  Bat Mitzvah in high school. I wonder if  more 13 year old girls are having Bat  Mitzvahs now, with the increased awareness  of women's rights, feminism, etc. I'd like  to think so. It's interesting that we  both lived in such predominantly Jewish  neighbourhoods. My high school was 99%  Jewish. I think a lot of Jews live in a  community together, a type of ghetto,  because that feels more comfortable,  safer. It's a bit of a false sense of  security, but I did grow up feeling that  being a Jew was very common. That's pretty  amazing, considering the fact that 80% of  Quebecers are Catholic.  What was confusing, though, was that although almost all my schoolmates were  Jewish, we had to sing hymns and recite  the Lord's Prayer every morning before  classes. The only hymn we would never  sing was "Onward Christian Soldiers."  Even at a young age we felt that was  going a bit too far'.  Oh God,  that's awful'.  How did that happen  if the majority of you were Jewish?  It's called 'institutionalized religion'.  There were two major school boards in  Quebec - the French one was the Catholic  schoolboard, and the English one (which I  attended) was the Protestant Schoolboard  of Greater Montreal. At that time, (the  1950's), it was required by law to begin  the school day like that. Even today, in  B.C. there are laws which state that  school begins with prayer. However, there  are many teachers who don't adhere to it.  There has recently been talk about reviewing those laws. Actually, I did like to  begin the day with singing, but I feel  sad when I think of how much denial there  was of me as a Jew. The place I often felt  best was with my family, where there was  a feeling of warmth, and I had a sense  of myself as a special person to my parents. We had a lot of music and laughter  in my growing up years.  I loved to sing.  I sang in Hebrew school,  in synagogue,  and during the Passover      ,"4\.  Seders.   I felt so connected to everyone  else singing,  and see singing as so much  a part of my being Jewish.   We were all  Jews,  singing our songs from centuries  ago,  and that was a powerful and proud  feeling.  Sometimes people ask me how can  I identify so strongly with being Jewish,  because it's such a  "patriarchal religion".  What I've learned is to keep  parts of the  religion,  rituals,  and celebrations,  and  leave the rest behind.   I also bring in  some woman-identified elements.  L-Vke the  time you, me, and Nancy took a Haggadah  (the story told on Passover - traditionally from a male viewpoint),  and rewrote it  to include more stories of the women from  our history.  This way I get my Jewish  needs and my needs as a woman-identified-  woman met.  I see my Jewishness as both religious,  and cultural. My Jewish culture includes  the foods I eat,  the expressions I use,  and a sense of history I share with other  Jews.  Things like sitting around with my  friends and having intense discussions  about different things - I love that.  It  reminds me of being with my family and  everybody talking and discussing and  sometimes cutting each other off. And laughing together - having a similar sense of  humour.  That to me is Jewish culture.  Something else I want to mention here is how  we as Jews celebrate life so much.   There  has always been for me a focus on living  and being here in the moment, whereas  Christianity focuses a lot of its teachings  on death,  as in,  if you live a good life  on earth  now, you'll die and go to heaven.  I was always taught to just live a good  life now, and don't worry about Heaven or  Hell because we don't believe there's a  Hell anyhow.  Yes. "L'chaim!" To life!  I think Judaism is  very life-affirming,  and we are supposed to enjoy -  food, song,  even sex! There are laws which say that  in marriage a woman should enjoy sex. (It'.s  assumed that usually men do enjoy it, but-  1  .v^Jiiul  m  -^f* ^ ~>  |   #<£>    (6) «§.«£■  wm&M  1 |     __   /  mmm  (  ^■JgSr      J  M|K  J that women are often not considered). It's  a husband's obligation to satisfy his  wife (unfortunately they don't say anything  about lesbians). Also, it's a mitzvah (a  blessing) to have sex on the Sabbath, the  day of rest. So, the message is that to  have sex is good, women should like it and  be pleased, and that it should be done  when the partners are- rested and can take  time for it.  I never knew that.   It sounds great though.  Did you celebrate the Sabbath while you  were growing up?  Somewhat. We at least acknowledged it. On  Friday nights we were all expected to be  home for dinner, with grandparents, maybe  other friends and family. We lit the  Shabbas candles, and did the rituals with  bread and wine. Those rituals are very  important to me, and I feel so enriched to  have always had them a part of my life. A  lot of customs involved getting together  with family. Sometimes we went to Synagogue,  but my favourite celebrations were home-  based ones. As a lesbian, I've been criticized for practicing a patriarchal religion.  What I say to that is that Judaism is not  just a religion, it is a culture, and  a people. And I could no more give that  up than I could stop being white. For  example, the Jews in Europe who didn't  practice any of the religious customs,  and didn't even identify as Jews, were still  taken away by the Nazis because they were  Jews.  So, much of the reason that I and many  other Jews choose to observe Jewish holidays  and practice some of the customs is because  of our oppression as Jews. Anti-Semitism  can happen anywhere and at anytime, and  to any Jew, religious or not. So I see  celebrating being Jewish as an act of defiance and as a strengthening tactic. It's  our right  to practice our religion, and  that right has often been taken away from  us.  Even at this time, many Jews are restrict-  ed from observing, as in Russia. There,  Jews cannot learn Hebrew, have Jewish  books, or assemble to do Jewish rituals.  So, we who can, join with other Jews and  non-Jewish allies and build a feeling of  solidarity. When practicing my religion,  I celebrate only what feels good to me -  holidays that have as their theme freedom  from oppression (Channukah and Passover),  and holidays that have a seasonal significance (most Jewish holidays do). I have  changed many of the traditions to suit  my present needs. But the food - I still  love those delicious holidays meals. My  grandmother was the best cook in the world!  Not according to my Auntie Fagiel But,  speaking of food,   that 's s& much a part  of being Jewish to me.  The kinds of foods  we eat: things like    gefilte fish,  good  corned beef from Toronto,  bagels,  etc.  I  really miss the accessibility to good  Jewish foods out West.  I suppose there just  isn't the demand for it because there are  fewer Jews living in Vancouver than in  Toronto.  After W. W.   II when the Jews came  over to Canada,   they mostly settled in  Winnipeg,  Montreal,  or Toronto.  Not so  much in Vancouver,  so there isn 't that  history of Jewish culture here in the  same way there is in Toronto.  I agree. I find it really different here  than in Montreal,,. Back East there's a  large Jewish population. Everywhere I went  there was a' visible Jewish presence.. But  here in Vancouver it seems that there are  very few Jews. But I encounter anti-Semi- ;  tism just the same.  Yes.   I think there is anti-Semitism in  Vancouver because there are fewer Jews,  and fewer predominantly Jewish neighbourhoods.  In fact,  I can only think of one.  People can be ignorant because they don't  have much contact with Jews.  Just as  lesbians are invisible in people's minds,  and they begin to believe stereotypes  about us, people also begin to believe  and internalize the stereotypes about Jews.  Actually, it doesn't matter what the  external conditions are.  There's anti-Semitism whether there are few Jews or many.  It's not  how many Jews there are that is  important, but what Jews represent in  people's minds.  I think we represent  difference.   Over thousands of years,  Jews  have hung on to traditions which have set  us apart from others, even when there has  been great external pressure to conform.  That 's been a major source of our strength  as well as our tsuris  (trouble).  In some  ways, our very presence is threatening to  many people.  That's often the case with groups that  don't hold the major power positions in  society. We are always  seen as threatening,  but especially if we get too visible,  too loud, too aggressive, too united, too  angry. I think of myself here as a Jew, a  woman, and a lesbian. In fact, I'd like to  be more  angry, and even more outrageous,  but I have years of conditioning to overcome. Feminism has taught me a low of why  I've felt bad about myself, but sometimes  all the theory in the world doesn't change  my ingrained emotional responses to things.  What I think we need to remember .is that  negative conditioning is an institutionalized way of keeping us down. Those- in power  want us to see ourselves as weak, as unable  to fight back, as less than - white, rich,  Christian, heterosexual, male, thin...We  get strong messages that "different" is  bad.  I know.  I think it 's instilled in us in  order to keep us feeling powerless.   Women  have been subjected to this to such an  extent,  we begin to believe that these  messages are true.  For example,   the constant exposure to images of thin women in  the media  (reinforcing how we  "should"  look),  advertisements for diet products  and programs,   leave us feeling critical  of ourselves no matter what we  look like.  This constant concern with our "flaws"  takes all our energy and keeps us from  moving outside of ourselves in order to  work on political change. And,  as you  mentioned,  it also keeps us from liking  ourselves.  How this internalized self-  hatred limits us as Jewish women in a  women's community is explained in the  following quote by Irena Klepfisz from the  book  Nice Jewish Girls:  I believe that Jewish Lesbian/Feminists  have internalized much of the subtle  A-S of this society. They have been  told that Jews are too pushy, too  aggressive; and so they have been  silent about their Jewishness, have  not protested against what threatens  them. They have been told that they  control everything; and so, when they  are in the spotlight, they have been  afraid to call attention to  their  Jewishness. For these women, the number  of Jews active in the movement is not  a source of pride, but rather a source  of embarrassment, something to be played  down, something to be minimized.  So we see that Jews, women,  lesbians, etc.  need to constantly struggle to free ourselves from negative messages and to  develop our own inner strengths.  This  is often easier said than done, but it  is  possible.  It takes a lot of hard work,  and I often have to remind myself that  it's okay to make mistakes, and that I'm  still learning.  I think we also need to remind ourselves  of our histories of resistance and  strength. Jews did  fight back during the  Holocaust - we were not  led passively to  the camps. And women have always been  strong: healers and leaders (so strong  and threatening that 9,000,000 were burned  as witches). Resistance does  make a  difference; it is just that the records  of how we have been successful get destroyed. In fact, I think people get into lots  of trouble because of lack of information  about many things. For example, anti-  Semitic attitudes, or any oppressive  attitudes for that matter, are often due  to ignorance and are not necessarily  malicious. But I get impatient, especially  with feminists, because I fell they should  know better. Like, if they're political,  why don't they understand about anti-  Semitism? Some women deny being anti-  Semitic altogether. I don't think that's  possible - the same way that I know that  as a white person I am racist. The point  of accepting this is not to feel bad, or  guilty, but to take responsibility for it. 12 Kinesis February ^5  I think there needs to be a balance between  educating others and taking personal  responsibility for educating oneself.  When confronted with a different culture,  I sometimes feel afraid to ask questions.  I think I'm going to say something stupid  or offensive, but I think we need to take  some risks with each other. Sometimes  it's easier to start talking with friends,  because there's already a basis of trust;  but even with friends it's hard and scary.  It's so hard and so terrifying, that in  the course of. writing this article you  and I have at times almost thrown in the  towel and dissolved our friendship. And  we have a pretty big basis of trust .-  In the past I have experienced very painful and messy situations with women who  fought over issues of class, race, anti-  Semitism, fat, etc, while living on  women's land in Oregon. So, I have no  illusions that it's easy, that all we  need to do is talk to each other and it  will be all better. But I still think we  have to admit to ourselves that we are  prejudiced, and then try to talk to each  other. And we need to keep reassuring  each other that we care. Silence doesn't  work, it only helps to keep things the  way they are, and we know whose interests  that serves!  Not ours,   that's for sure! To me, assimilation is a kind of silence.  It's taking  advantage of the ability to  "pass" and  never being out as a Jew,  even when it's  safe.  Whenever I read or hear stories of  Jews fighting back in the Holocaust,  I  feel strong.  Somehow too,  it reinforces  my desire to be visible as a Jew,  and not  to fear my Jewishness or try to downplay  how I am Jewish.  It's similar to my being  a lesbian,  and recognizing the importance  of coming out.  I think it 's important for  people to  personally meet me as a lesbian  because it may counteract some of the  stereotypes they have about lesbians.  Well I guess assimilation is one of the  ways that we try to protect ourselves  from anti-Semitism. I think that upward  mobility is an aspect of assimilation:  work hard, study hard and you might be  able to leave behind fear, poverty, lack  of mobility - all the things associated  with being a vulnerable  Jew. Through  countless expulsions from their homes,  Jews have learned how to scrimp and save -  we can "do without" today, so that maybe  tomorrow we'll be able to move to a  better house, to a safer country, to send  a child to school. There's always a good  reason to deny oneself. So from these  survival tactics we get the anti-Semitic  stereotypes of the penny-pinching Jew,  and the neurotic, martyred "Jewish Mother".  While there are grains of truth in most  stereotypes, it's important to remember  that they are generalizations and they  they become oppressive or damaging when  used to categorize all  of any group. And  it's crucial to understand that peoples'  ways of being in the world come as a  result of both their personal and collective experiences.  My Mother, for example, has such an ingrained sense of insecurity about "having  enough". This comes from the fact that  her parents both came from Eastern Europe  and that they were always poor. That was  her  personal experience. On top of that,  her parents had left Eastern Europe  because of their fears of pogroms - those  came in waves, and many Jews died.(the  -women were raped first). During my Mother's  middle years she knew that Jews in Europe  were being rounded up and sent to concentration camps. It's easy to see where her  feelings of insecurity come from, even  though she has had material comfort since  she was in her twenties.  I picked up some of those fears from her,  even though by the time I was born, there  was "enough", and the Holocaust was over.  Until I was 8 years old we "lived in a  very mixed area in Montreal: French/English.  Jew/Gentile, working class/middle class.  On my 8th birthday we moved. We had made  it! We could now live in our own single-  family dwelling in a totally Jewish,  English middle class area. My father had  prospered - going from a door-to-door  electrical "Mr. Fix-it", to owning an  electrical contracting business. Most  of my new friends' fathers were also small  business.owners. There were a few professionals, but they mostly lived in  other ritzier neighbourhoods. Most of our  parents were second generation, i.e.,  their parents were born in Europe and  Russia and then moved to Canada. So, we  really had improved our lot.  When I think of my background specifically '  in terms of class it's a real mixed bag.  My Mother divorced my father when I was  6,  after 14 years of putting up with his  alcoholism and drug abuse.  It was quite  hard for her because she took a lot of  flack from the rest of the family.   (Divorce was taboo at that time - 1964).  Determined that my brother and I would  have good schooling,  we moved to the outskirts of Forest Hill neighbourhood (which,  as I've already mentioned, was predominantly Jewish).  We- lived above a store and  were quite poor. My Mother worked at two  jobs so I hardly got to see her.  This was  quite different from the other girls I  went to school with.   They lived in huge  houses and had housekeepers,  and their  mothers  (most of them) didn't work outside  the home.  I used to play with a lot of  non-Jewish kids in the laneway behind our  apartment.  This was also different from my  girlfriends, who only hung around with Jews.  When my mom remarried, we moved to a high-  rise apartment right in Forest Hill.  The  majority of people who lived in the building  were Jewish.  I encountered less anti-Semitism living there than anywhere else I've  lived. My mom was upwardly mobile and  anxious to get out of poverty.  She wanted a  better life for us kids.  So there you go.   It's a misconception that  all Jews have money.   There are actually  a lot of poor and working class Jews.  In  the book  Yours In Struggle, I remember  reading that one quarter of New York City's  Jewish population is poor or near poor.  As Renee Franco   (a Sephardic Jew from Atlanta) says in the book,   "I have come to  realize that people don't want to know  they   (poor Jews) exist.   What could they do  with all their myths and stereotypes?"  And also, think of all the Jews who have  been in the vanguard of progressive and  revolutionary movements. For example,  International Women's Day was started in  America in 1908 by Jewish women, after the  burning of the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory.  What was interesting about this was that  both the workers and the owners were Jewish.  Jews have been, and still are, active in  many unions and Leftist movements.  Well,  I think it's important to be active  in some way,  especially now with the rise  of the right and all these anti-Semitic  groups,  and people saying the Holocaust  never happened.  Can you believe that Jews  even have to testify in court about their  experiences in Auschwitz?  I know. That freaks me out totally. The  other night I was watching the news, and  there were these two stories about anti-  Semitism. One was about Zundel, a man in  Toronto who is being tried for spreading  hate literature about the Jews. The other  was about the Aryan Nations Church in Idaho,  Oregon and Washington, and how their  doctrine teaches hatred of blacks and Jews.  It showed them having shooting practice and  teaching their young children. I got so  scared. It reminded me that there is often,  no real reason for racism or anti-Semitism.  It occurs just because we are  Jews or  blacks - the "other".  That scares me too.   We need to fight all  forms of anti-Semitism and racism, whether  it comes up as subtle innuendo,  institutionalized racism,  or genocide.  It's encouraging and exciting to me that the  Falashas, the black Jews of Ethiopia, are  right now being brought out from their  extreme conditions of persecution, and  are in effect being saved from extinction.  Only recently have these people been recognized as Jewish by the Israeli Rabbinical  courts. We must remember that Jews are a  people of different races, classes and  cultures. While recognizing and appreciating  our diversity, I also acknowledge our  common roots.  Yeah.  And one way to do this is to keep  telling our stories.  For example,   the story  told on Passover is a tale of liberation  -  when the Jews were freed from slavery in  Egypt.   This is an aspect of history common  to all Jews.  It's also important for me to  talk about what it's like for me as a Jewish lesbian in the world now.   Our Jewish  women's group is a place where I can safely  do that.  Yes. I, too, need a place where I can just  Be Jewish. That's mostly what I get out of  the group, and that's very precious to me.  I feel about being a Jew the same way as I  feel about being a lesbian - it's brought  me a lot of joy and a lot of pain - and I  wouldn't change it for the world!  Recommended Books:  Nice Jewish Girls.   E. Torton Beck  Yours In Struggle.   Smith, Bulkin & Pratt  On Being a Jewish Feminist  Rivington Street.  Meredith Tax  In My Mother's House.   Kim Chernin  Bread Givers.  Anzia Yezierska February'85 Kinesis 13  WOMEN AND PEACE  by Sue Mcllroy  The world arms bill for 1985 is expected  to reach one trillion dollars. The U.S.  presently spends one billion dollars a  day on the military and now Canadian  businesses are being invited to get in  on the action. In Dec. 1984, the U.S.  Pentagon toured eight Canadian cities,  holding seminars designed to show Canadian  businesses how they could secure contracts  to produce goods and services for the  growing U.S. military.  The Canadian government contributed  $150,000 to the cross-country tour that  was sponsored by the Pentagon. Accompanying the U.S. military officials were  Progressive Conservatives Stewart Mclnnes  and Bob Wenman (Surrey MP). Wenman is the  Parliamentary Secretary for Defense under  Robert Coates.  The Pentagon seminars are the result of  recent agreements between Prime Minister  Mulroney and President Reagan, and between  their defense ministers (Coates and Caspar  Weinberger), that "more U.S. defense  spending in Canada would foster common  goals of closer military and economic  cooperation." Wenman said the tour was  part of the growing ties that have been  forged between Canada and the U.S. due to  "the very strong chemistry that occured  between Mr. Reagan and Mr. Mulroney and  between Mr. Coates and Mr. Weinberger."  The tour began in Halifax on Dec. 3rd.  Sixteen people were arrested during the  day as protesters tried to stop the meeting. Demonstrators marched into the conference room carrying placards and shouting slogans. At least one demonstrator  was injured when protesters tried to  block the path of the police vehicle  carrying off the sixteen people who were  arrested.  In Toronto on Dec. 7th the tour was again  the focus of demonstrations by about 70  people, but the meeting was not disrupted  and there were no arrests. Local businessmen (as far as I know there were no  business women there) who were interviewed continued to state that they found  nothing wrong with obtaining military  contracts or with working for the U.S.  defense department.  The tour reached Vancouver on Dec. 10th.  Local groups had less than a week's  notice to organize protests. The conference  was held at the Holiday Inn Harbourside-  on Hastings St. from 8a.m. until 4p»m.  About 500 invitations were sent out to  the Vancouver business community.  Protesters began to arrive just before  8 o'clock to find that all the doors had  been locked, all the door handles on the  outside doors had been removed and a  large security team was present at the  main doors which were only unlocked for  guests, conference members and media.  Wenman opened the conference with a speech  on Canada's new defense policies. He  stated that Canada's reputation as a  neutral friend of both the USSR and the  U.S. was misleading. Canada, he said, is  now determined to be more up.front about  its alliances and wants to strengthen  ties with the U.S. both militarily and  economically.  Meanwhile protesters were refused access  to the hotel and so a four hour blockade  of the front entrance began. At least 50  people, most of them women, gathered in  the front entrance area. Many demonstrators sat in front of the doors and businessmen and guests had to step over and  around them to get into the hotel. Demonstrators shouted at the conference delegates begging them to change their minds  and to reconsider their decision to  attend the conference.  Other protesters handed out leaflets and  talked with people passing by. Another  Canada builds  war economy  . They told  of life.  group, led by Project Ploughshares, met  for a prayer service at Christ Church  Cathedral and then walked to the hotel  where they held a candlelight vigil.  Several of the protesters blocking the  front door asked to speak to conference  organizers but were put off with false  promises and excuses. Finally a group  decided to take more direct action and  attempted to obtain access to the conference room by another entrance. After  several run-ins with security guards, a  group of seven people made their way  through the parking garage and found a  fire door unlocked. They entered the hotel  lobby where^they were sjffrounded by police  and hotel security.  The protestors sat in a circle and began  to sing "You Can't Kill the Spirit" while  the security people held a conference.  Eventually the head of security asked  the protestors to leave adding that if they  didn't they would be charged with assault.  This was later changed to assault by  trespass and the security people insisted  that the charge would be a criminal rather  than a summary offense. (A criminal offense  is more serious than a summary offense  and carries heavier penalties.) Eventually,  four of the protestors agreed to leave  while the other three were dragged away  by police.  The main group of protesters headed  around the back of the hotel and cheered  the three as they were put into the paddy  wagon. Attempts were made to block the  path of the vehicle and police on motorcycles charged into the crowd. At least  one man was hit in the face by a policeman and three protesters later laid  charges of assault against police. The  three people arrested were held in custody  for five hours and.then released. Charges  against them were dropped at that time.  The arguments in favour of defense contracts put forward by businessmen and  the tour organizers all boil down to  one thing - anything that brings money  into Canada is a good thing. It is both  frightening and apocalyptic to hear these  sentiments expressed by businesses and  government, and we are hearing them more  and more these days.  The situation invites many comparisons  with Nazi Germany. It has been argued by  many historians that Hitler, for all his  crimes, did much good for Germany because  he repaired the economy and lifted the  country out of an economic depression.  Can this excuse his other crimes? ~  Several Canadian businessmen at the conference said that it was okay to accept  a defense contract because it could as  easily be for toothpaste and toilet paper  as for guns and tanks. But is there really  any difference between manufacturing a  bomb or the rubber tires on the plane  that drops the bomb? Aren't they all just  links in a common chain? Was it just  the heads of the SS that were responsible  for killing six million Jews or should  some responsibility be assigned to the  millions of Germans who did nothing, to  the American businesses who invested  in the German economy, and to everyone  of us in North America who profits even  indirectly by the wealth that these companies amassed?  There are several other more 'pragmatic'  arguments against defense spending. It  has been shown that, despite what governments and'businessmen tell us, defense  spending is not economically sound. The  present defense budget in the U.S. is  bleeding the American public dry. Spending  one billion dollars on education creates  twice as many jobs as it would if spent  on the military and one and a half times  more if spent on health care or construction. For women, who comprise the majority  of the poor, this erosion of social service funding and of money for basic  | human needs is especially devastating. Military contracts operate on a cost plus  basis. The manufacturer is guaranteed the  cost of the item plus a certain percentage  over that. No other industry has this  lucrative system, which in one case resulted in the U.S. Air Force purchasing coffee  percolators at a cost of $7,600 each.  Canada and the U.S. have a 25 year old  agreement called the Defense Production  Sharing Agreement. Under this agreement  Canada agrees to buy back from the U.S.  military equipment worth the same amount  as that which the U.S. buys from Canada.  So for every dollar that the U.S. brings  into Canada by defense spending, the Canadian government returns the money in  military purchases. Does this make good  economic sense?  Under another government program, the  Defense Industry Production Program, the  Canadian government gives interest-free  loans and grants to business for retooling,  and for research and development. In this  way the Canadian taxpayers pay twice -  first to fund the production of these  products and then to buy back products of  equal value for the U.S. military.  Both these programs are increasing Canada's  ties with the U.S. They also increase  our involvement with the arms race. These  government programs also fly in the face  of public opinion. A recent poll found  that only 23% of Canadians were interested  in increasing Canada's military strength.  The U.S. government is not accountable  to Canadians or Canadian businesses for  the use to which they put the equipment  which they purchase from us. As the U.S.  continues in their role as an interventionist military power, Canada should be  questioning its part in injustices perpetuated by the U.S. government. Uranium from  Canada was in the bomb that fell on Hiroshima. Due to the peculiar regulations of  the nuclear power commissions, uranium  from Canada often ends up in the USSR. We  may be supplying the fuel for bombs that  fall on our own cities.  Is a boost to the economy good no matter  how it is brought about? Can we separate  means and ends - will a country that  prepares for war live in peace? These are  questions which few delegates at December's  conference seemed to be considering.  Perhaps we need another conference to  educate Canadian businesses about the  real problems of securing military contracts with the U.S. b  14 Kinesis February ^5  OPINION  It's time  to act  on abortion  by Ann Thomson      ^^fe£  It must be generally agreed that Dr. Henry  Morgentaler's daring is matched only by  his extraordinary commitment to women's  right to choose. The shrewdness and  aggressive pace of his two-year-old campaign  to open clinics across Canada is aimed at  proving the injustice of the present law  and at enabling women who seek abortions  to get them quickly, safely, and without  humiliation or hassle. It is rare that an  authentic social reformer appears who is  inspired, as I believe Morgentaler is,  by a deep need to see simple justice done.  For all of his mettle, however, he cannot  and must not struggle on his own. Lasting  social change is never won by individuals  alone. Sisters, it is time for all of us  to get serious and to get active in the  pro-choice campaign. We are at the crisis  point: we stand to win an important (though  not the final) victory, or we stand to be  defeated, thoroughly, for decades to come.  Unless we put hesitation and differences  behind us and build a massive pro-choice  movement behind Morgentaler, our right to  choose on abortion is as vulnerable as  his life is before.a potential assassin,  or under a sentence of life imprisonment.  Morgentaler's demand is  our demand, a  fundamental women's rights demand, and it  must be feminists-who establish the  strength of the pro-choice movement.  We haven't much time. In Canada the showdown will come in 1985, perhaps as early  as March. That is when the court is expected to rule on the appeal launched by Ontario Attorney-General and Tory leadership  candidate Roy McMurtry against the November 8, 1984 acquittal of doctors Morgentaler, Scott, and Smoling. It is expected  that a re-trial will be ordered - thus  using legal machinery to invalidate the  authority of the jury in the Toronto trial.  To be "useful", the upcoming ruling must  also "protect" the state against future  acquittals of Morgentaler. So it is quite  possible that one string will be used to  hang two birds: to deliver a blow against  the demand.for legal and accessible  abortion and to diminish the value of the  democratic right to be tried by one's peers.  The media has a tendency to overplay the  antics of the anti-abortionists, and to  downplay the influence and strength of  our side. And while the pro-choice movement is on the march and growing across  Canada, we've seen scant signs of it in  B.C. lately. A troubling aspect of this is  the declining turnout of active feminists  or participation by feminist groups in  pro-choice public events in the past few  years.  In this article, I want to take up some  of the questions regarding the abortion  rights struggle that have not yet been  resolved in B.C. In the 70's, Vancouver  and Montreal were the leading centres of  the pro-choice activity. Remember jfrTjI^fv  Abortion Caravan, which trekked from Vancouver to Ottawa in the spring of 1970,  holding meetings, rallies, and media  events along the way? A lot has happened  since then, including the rise of many  other important feminist battles and demands. But it's time to re-activate and  reunite our forces to meet the crisis on  abortion rights.  Structure debate vs. collective action  One feature of the B.C. women's movement  has been the decade-long debate about how  to ensure democracy and 'avoid domination  by hierarchies and elites. This has preoccupied the only non-partisan province-  wide organization we've set up: the B.C.  Federation of Women. Established in 1974,  the BCFW has again and again opted to  postpone engaging in co-ordinated struggL  for women's demands, in favor of yet  another discussion of its internal structure  and constitution. For some years now, BCFW  member groups have been fragmented into  small, scarcely viable groups in tenuous  contact with one another.  I think this debate has posed a false  dichotomy,- one we can no longer afford. The  truth is that we can best protect our  internal democracy and vitality in the  course of organizing active, visible,  combative, united-front campaigns for '  women's rights, campaigns in which both  local decision-making units and  central  leadership bodies play important parts..  In the present crisis, I call on BCFW  member groups to send people to help, and  to allocate time to the abortion-rights  struggle.  The truth is that we can best  protect our internal democracy  and vitality in the course of  organizing active, visible,  combative, united-front  campaigns for women's rights..  Dont believe that we cant win  This is no moment for defeatism, a weak  excuse at any time. We have a very good  chance of winning this fight. Furthermore,  I believe that society is not so much  swinging to the right as it is polarizing  on both the right and the left.  Have you counted the allies that keep  coming forward for the right to choose? .  There is already formal if not very active  support from the labour movement, from  the NDP, from community, civil rights, and  student groups. After long consideration,  both the Anglican and United Churches have  adopted pro-choice positions.  What is happening now is that the Catholic  Church is splitting down the middle on  this issue. For example, members of the  American Coalition of Nuns are resisting  g a-JjSi^jtlcan order that they renounce their  ^B^cognition of a diversity of views on  abortion. Catholic lay theologians like  Daniel and Marjorie Amguire are defending  the value of abortion clinics in the pages  of Ms.  magazine and speaking on cross-continent tours.  "I believe in choice but..."  That the 'moral majority' is neither is beyond dispute. But there is undeniable  confusion in some quarters about how best  to observe a reverence for life. I would  hope that readers of Kinesis  would agree  that .feminists have utmost respect for  life and that we correctly identify the  human life that is at stake in cases of  unwanted pregnancy as the life of the woman. But sometimes one hears, "Well,- of  course, women should have the right to  choose, but I'm not sure whether I, myself,  could go through with an abortion."  Feminism overlaps with many other social  concerns, including for example, the need  for environmental protection. While organized religion has less and less hold,  many people have a deep appreciation for  Nature and awe towards its mysteries.  Conception and pregnancy are indeed awe-  inspiring, and also have a powerful impact  on a woman's physical and emotional being.  Sometimes a secular religiosity, perhaps  a belief in fate, plays a role in the  choice that a pregnant woman makes.  Every woman has the right to her own guidelines for making a decision about an unwanted pregnancy, but no one's standards  ! or beliefs can be forced up others. At  the same time, a feminist who believes  she would not choose abortion for herself  is not excused from fighting for the right  to choose for all women. And the right to  choose is incompatible with any artificial  cut-off point after which a woman is too  pregnant for an abortion. A great deal  of data and experience show that women who  decide on abortion seek them as early as  possible. However, while abortions in  later pregnancy may be medically difficult,  they must be illegal.  "When the NDP forms the government"  The NDP has excellent policy on women's  rights and it was at last given prominence  in the 1984 federal election campaign.  Between elections NDP office-holders and  women's rights committees have defended  the right to choose, but they have not  mobilized the party membership in rallies,  demonstrations or public events. This is  what is needed.  All types of protest against the present  law have some value, but quiet ones have  much less impact. Letter lobbies appeal to  the articulate and genteel, but their  organizers seldom know or control the true  number of letters that get written. If the  government denies receiving them - which  frequently happens - then the letter-writers' energies are wasted. And behind the  scenes arrangements or promises given to  small, pro-choice delegations are seldom  secure because there is no means of enforcing accountability.  Many NDPers protested the Pawley government 's raid on the Winnipeg abortion  clinic and its continuing refusal to  drop the charges against Morgentaler and  other clinic staff. But apparently a  majority of the party is powerless to  hold an NDP government to its own policy  on choice. The actions of the Manitoba  NDP are scandalous, and we urge pro-choice  NDPers to go public with their protest  and to link up with other wings of the  abortion-rights campaign.  Tactics that can win  We already have clarity within the movement about our demands: "Repeal all anti-  abortion laws" and "Legalize free-standing  abortion clinics" are widely supported.  So let's talk about the tactics needed to  win this fight now, in Canada and B.C.  Concerned Citizens for Choice on Abortion  (CCCA) with which I work in Vancouver,  advocates that we build an on-going mass February "85 Kinesis 15  Organizing  in the bush  by Maureen Bostock  Rural lesbian organizing'is a matter of  invention. It is a matter of starting with  ourselves and our own needs and then setting out to resolve them. More often than  not we think: "But how can I, with little  or no experience, organize...? How can I  organize without threatening my job, my  life...?"  Before talking about our experience organ-,  izing in Terrace, I want to tell you a  story about a lesbian living in a town 37  miles from here. Two years or so ago, she  experienced the intense isolation of being  the only lesbian she knew of in her community. She decided to change that. She had  read Our Bodies,   Ourselves and wrote to  them as they had included a section on  lesbianism, asking if they knew of any  groups in her area. She received the  address of the Vancouver Gay Community  Centre, who wrote back to her suggesting  she contact Prince Rupert Gay Group, 127  miles away. Upon contacting Prince Rupert,  she was told about Northern Lesbians in  Terrace. She called us and later became  involved in the community here.  When I heard her story, her painful isolation, it brought tears to my eyes. I realized how important, how crucial it is that  we maintain and strengthen the 'underground', the network of connections which  make it possible for us to link with each  other despite the extraordinary difficulties of being out in rural communities.  evidently out as lesbians came to the  festival hoping to meet us. Later that year,  we held our first annual lesbian picnic,  delighted that there were 12 of us.  When I look back to those early days of  Northern Lesbians, I can see that we-  approached organizing carefully and took  calculated risks. Initially we relied upon  the gay media to advertise our existence  and later felt comfortable coming out to  the women attending the Northwest women's  festivals, trusting that our commonality as  women, our political alliances as feminists,  would protect us. I think it was useful  for us to build slowly, nurturing the  strength of Northern Lesbians to prepare  us for the necessary exposure if we were  to challenge homophobia in Terrace directly,  Today in Terrace, there are two gay/lesbian  organizations. Northern Lesbians  is a lesbian/feminist collective whose purpose is  to provide a support network for rural  lesbians, to educate the community and in  general to fight homophobia. Our primary  work at this time is the quarterly production of The Open Door:  B.C. Rural  Lesbian Newsletter. As well, we do workshops on lesbianism and are attempting to  establish a-lesbian drop-in"in Terrace  In recent years we have done lesbianism  workshops at the women's festivals and  with the Katimavik groups during their stay  in Terrace. We have built a relationship  with the Terrace Women's Centre, who displays The Open Door  and our poster; our  number is listed with the Sexual Assault  Helpline; and we have a display at the  annual International Women's Day event in  Terrace.  The most difficult part of rural lesbian organizing I think for each of  us here has been coming to that point when we have had to swallow  hard and speak up - on the job, in community groups, in all those  meetings where you are sitting alone as the only lesbian among  heterosexuals.  Gay Connection  is a mixed gay/lesbian/bisexual organization to provide ongoing  social activities. Dances, potlucks and  drop-ins occur regularly and the numbers  have grown in a year to 45 members throughout the northwest. The primary method of  advertising the existence of the Gay  Connection is through a phone line which is  listed in the newspaper and on posters in  Rural lesbian organizing in Terrace began  a few years ago when the B.C. Federation  Of Women held a provincial day of action  on lesbianism. Under the auspices of Northwest Women Against Rape, lesbians within  the collective organized a film night on  lesbianism, open to the public. Attendance  was low; however, we met the co-ordinator  of the Prince Rupert Gay Group who shared  his experience of organizing with us.  Northern Lesbians was formed, and we sent  out ads to the gay media in Canada in  order to become part of the existing network. That summer, at the Northwest Women's  Festival, we attempted to hold a lesbian  drop-in which met with little success.  However, the following summer, word was  'ĢThe most difficult part of rural lesbian  organizing I think for each,of us here has  been doming to that point when we have'  had to swallow hard and speak up - on the  job, in community groups, in all those  meetings where you are sitting alone as  the only lesbian among heterosexuals. Each  of us here has stories to tell of having  to take a chance and speak up when someone tells an offensive joke, or when the  women's centre public relations problem  is blamed on us, or when the subject of  human rights addresses everyone else but  us, or when you just have to know whether  the people you are working with politically are going to back lesbians and gays  when those who hate us take action.  I've sat with my back to the wall, my  heart pounding in my throat, a flush on  my face you can see a mile away and wished  to be anywhere" else but there, knowing  all the while that this time, I've got to  say something, I can't let it go by.  There's integrity, self-love and commitment on the line for each of us at those  times. Each of us has known, I think, the  feeling of letting anti-gay comments go  by - looking down, hating ourselves for  it. And each of us has come to that place  where the line is drawn, and we confront  our fears of the consequences to standing  up for what we believe. Our invisibility  by our silence perpetuates our oppression.  What also confronts us in rural lesbian  organizing is the fluctuation of numbers.  Currently, Northern Lesbians consists of  myself and my partner. There were more of  us in the past and I am sure there will  be again. It is sustaining oneself during  the low times that is most difficult, and  communication with others engaged in the  same work provides a source of strength.  A rural lesbian community is as diverse  as an urban community except smaller  and it is necessary to accept that most  lesbians are content to have a community  and do not see the importance of pushing  for freedom from oppression. When I assess  what we have accomplished in Terrace, we  have created a community. We have yet  to foster a movement. While we've educated  the women's movement in the northwest  about lesbianism, we have yet to experience  heterosexual feminists standing up in  defense of our rights, without us taking  the lead. But we have created a lesbian  visibility which will eventually bring  about this next level of change.  Meanwhile, the primary issue which confronts us as rural lesbians is our isolation from each other. Each step that we  can take which breaks this down moves us  forward, whether it means subscribing to  a lesbian magazine or putting an ad out  to the gay media looking for other lesbians  in your town to meet with for support or  forming an organization to fight homophobia.  We have to'figure out how we can be there  to support women who are taking the first  steps in coming out, being.visible enough,  to be accessible but not so visible as  to threaten our safety. Take out a second  unlisted phone number and use it only for  lesbian connections. Make sure that a  woman can stand across the room from you  at a display of your materials and take  down the phone number, or place your  materials among those of the women's centre  (if they agree) so she can look them over  without becoming conspicuous to her friends  and neighbours.  Our- isolation from urban lesbians who have  access to extraordinary resources in  comparison, is another issue which needs  to be examined. While we need access to  those resources, we also need provincial  organizing, a mechanism whereby we can  bring the weight of numbers to the struggles in rural communities. The Open Door  reaches lesbians in 29 rural communities  in B.C. and can function as a vehicle  through which rural and urban lesbians can  exchange ideas about how to work co-operatively. In whatever ways we can build  solidarity and work together towards our  goals, we must do so. In the final analysis,  social change will only come about if it  is achieved consistently throughout this  society; and it has become clear to those  of us who live in rural communities that  the historical pattern of sacrificing the  needs of rural people to those of urban  residents must not be reporduced.  Resources:  The Open Door,   c/o Northern Lesbians,  R.R. #2, Box 50, Usk Store, Terrace,  B.C. V8G 3Z9  Stepping Out of Line:  A Workbook On  Lesbianism & Feminism, by Nym Hughes,  Yvonne Johnson & Yvette Perreault, Press  Gang (An excellent resource for lesbians  interested in organizing in your community.)  M^^^^lr^^^^^^ 16 Kinesis February '85  by Kim Irving  In large urban areas transition houses  and sexual assault centres have operated  for some ten years.  In rural communities  the houses/centres have only existed  since the early 80 's and most are placed  in communities with populations between  14,000 to 60,000.  The centres are far and  few between in B.C.  and t)ie Yukon, and it  is difficult to determine the actual  extent of violence against women and children.   When  Kinesis spoke with staff at  rural houses/centres several common concerns emerged.  The lack of public education surfaced as a major problem.  Every -  centre commented that outreach to the  surrounding towns and villages,   letting  women know about their services,  is nearly  impossible with the meager funding supplied  for their operation. Most houses/centres  can barely maintain the essential services  and can only provide local public speaking.  Though there were positive reports about  the RCMP,  some women are still faced with  ignorant attitudes from the police and  MHR workers who see assaulted women and  children as a private family matter.  And  when a woman wants to leave,  she has to  organize for transportation.   What if the  transition house is 100 km south and the  bus to get you -there only leaves every two  days? Efforts to escape are sometimes far  away dreams.  Or in situations of crisis,  having the police a half-day away is not  reassuring.  But the women working the houses/centres  are making progress.   With gentle perser-  verance they are breaking down red-neck  attitudes that have been traditionally  rooted in small' rural towns.  Perhaps this  is the last frontier of feminist consciousness raising.  RURAL VIOLENCE  February US Kinesis 17  CREATING ACCESSIBLE  KAUSHEE'S  Whitehorse, Yukon Territory  (pop. 12,000) is in a rugged frozen land  that attracts mostly the young or families  who seek work in the mines or with the  Government. Situated on a hill overlooking  the town is Kaushee's, the only Transition  house for the Territory and some of northern B.C. Kaushee's"was initiated in 1974  by the Indian Women's Native Association  who originally requested funds to organize  a home for unwed mothers. When this proposal  was brought forward it became apparent that  a general transition house was essential  for all women in need. The house was opened  in 1981 with grants from Indian Affairs  and the Yukon Territorial Government. Of  the 18 beds in the house, 80% are used for  women seeking safety. The other 20% are  used by transients or women looking for a  supportive environment.  Debra Dungee, director of Kaushee's,  reports that the house took in 185 women  and 194 children between Oct. 83-Oct. 84.  With a 40% increase in services, the 4  permanent staff and 6 casual staff have,  little time for outreach.  Sixty-five percent of the women using the  house are Native (status and non-status).  Helping the Native woman is not much  different from helping white women, says  Debra, as both groups are somewhat assimilated in the north. However, problems may  arise within the Native village when a  woman asks for money to leave. Whether she  gets the money or not could be determined  by who happens to be working in the band  office, such as if it is her husband's  brother...  Debra says.the RCMP has probably been their  best source of referrals, as the liaison  officer has kept frequent contact with  workers in the house. The problem, it  seems, is changing the attitudes in the  courts, especially with judges. Debra tells  of one case where the judge excused the  batterer due to his alcoholic/drug problems  and blamed his condition on his wife's  "unstable condition", though the man had  spread blood over the woman and. doused her  in gasoline. Debra had assisted the woman  at Kaushee's and says the judges remarks  about her were untrue.  Contrary to many theories, Debra doesn't  feel that alcohol is much of a contributing factor in violence against women in  the north. "Alcohol magnifies the difficulties and is often used as an excuse",  says Debra. Perhaps half of Kaushee's  cases are alcohol related.  Debra also disputes that the long dark  winters increase the violence. In fact,  she points out, the busiest months for  Kaushee's are in June and July. The quietest month is November.  Child-rape is also on the increase. Though  the offender is sometimes ordered to  leave the home, says Debra, it is sometimes  easier for the women and children to come  to the transition house. And, as in one  recent case, the offenders name was published in the (only) local paper which  made the identification of the child easy.  In a small town, you can't hide.  YUKON MEDIA WATCH  Vera Black well, MediaWatch representative for the Yukon, feels  that the increasing use of (illegal) satellite dishes has made televised hard-core  pornography readily available in the Territory. This could account for some misogynist attitudes, if not violence, she says.  However, a recent victory was won when  Whitehorse City Council put a by-law in  the Business licensing section that puts  pornographic materials up high on shelves  and illegal for children. At first, one  of the two bookstores (Mac's) refused to  put Penthouse  and Playboy  out of reach  because they did not consider them porn.  This was corrected when the store changed  owners.  Vera's most memorable day was the national  protest last year against the pay TV channel First Choice. Fifty women, children  and men marched with placards down the |  windy -30°C. streets of Whitehorse to the  cablevision office. It was action like  this that replaced First Choice (and the  Playboy Show) with Superchannel.  Vera volunteers her time for MediaWatch,  sometimes working out of her home or at  the Yukon Status of Women. The MediaWatch  complaint forms were not overly popular  at first, but people are now responding.  Forms have been sent out to rural communities but not many have come back. One  reason for this, Vera feels, is that people  were reluctant to complain because it  might mean losing their beamed-in service.  With little for entertainment, T.V. violence becomes acceptable.  FORT ST. JOHN  K SEXUAL ASSAULT CENTRE  Ft. St. John (pop. 12,700) is slightly  south-east of Whitehorse. It was the centre  of an oil boom a few years ago. It has now  calmed down and Sexual Assault Centre  staffperson Marcia Dodds thinks the drop  in population and transients has reduced  the degree of violence against women.  This centre operates a 24-hour crisis line  with their 8 volunteers. The centre was  opened about 2%  years ago, says Marcia,  with "adequate" funding from the B.C.  Attorney General's Office. Most of their  calls are from sexual assault survivors,  rather than crisis calls. Referrals come  from MHR, crown counsel and the RCMP,  though Marcia feels that the centre "isn't  getting the referrals that we would like  to see."  Presently, the majority of cases dealt  with by Marcia are child-rape. Since the  local mental health professionals don't  see child-rape as an "urgent issue"the  counselling and advocacy work is picked  up by the sexual assault centre. They are  just beginning to provide public education  for child-rape, says Marcia, but it has  to be done carefully as "it can seem very  threatening".- Marcia has not received any  calls from rural teachers (who may detect  child-rape before others) but feels that  they are the one-group that the centre  could make more aware.  The sexual assault centre will be training  men in their next training session. These  men will not answer the crisis line but  will be available for male/boy victims.  As Marcia says, "Men are taught to be  strong, assertive and independent, which  victims are not, so there's a lot of damage  to their self-esteem." She feels it would  be more beneficial for male victims to  see a male counsellor, though she does  admit that she does not know how well it  will work out.  Marcia feels that there are probably more  incidents of violence against women in  rural areas than are documented, but since  the victims are so isolated it is hard to  tell. Ft. St. John also has a 24-hour  transition house, which has been opened  since 1980.  ^&. PRINCE RUPERT  i§|§§ TRANSITION HOUSE  On the coast of B.C. is the Prince Rupert  Transition House (formerly known as the  Maud Bevan House) which has been opened  since 1980 with 10 beds funded by MHR.  Shirley Toffat, staff member at the house,  is a former battered woman. After the  experience of having a male therapist,  Shirley realized the importance of battered women needing to be together and talking.  Shirley spoke about the house and their  services: "Our big push now is for public  education at the local college in the daytime. The kids will be in school, so we  hope more women will come. Battered women  are discussed but there still is that  chain - you still feel like there's a  curtain there. We've even had volunteers  who wouldn't let on that they volunteered  here because they were ashamed. I guess  that there was some violence in their  families, they're afraid of repercussions."  Getting battered women out of the rural  home is a problem, says Shirley: "We have  had women from the Queen Charlottes  (Islands), women from the surrounding  villages like Ft. Simpson and Kitimat,  plus the smaller towns on the islands.  These women' usually call a MHR worker who  makes arrangements for them to come over  on the sea plane. There have been a couple  of times when the police have gone out  with the coast guard at night to pick up  a woman on an island. Sometimes the husband will hide the skiff, so a lot of  women will use the school ferry that is  there in the morning to pick up the kids.  They just run up to the guy and say 'Take  me with you'. A lot of women get here  that way. Then they phone from the pay  phone and we send them a taxi in case the  husband is behind them, in a boat."  Shirley says there is very little help  for women in the rural islands, such as  the Queen Charlottes. Since few batterers  are charged, or if they are, they are  released in 24 hours, and since hotels  for the women to hide in are few and far  apart, the women have little chance to  escape. The transition house will be  starting to advertise their services in  Queen Charlotte's papers in hopes that  women will be better informed.  There are some differences between helping  Native women and white women at the house,  says Shirley. Native women are very family  HELP  oriented and often go back to the abusive  relationship. Some can only excape by  relocating to another community, like  Vancouver. Shirley also points out the  different customs of the large East Indian  community in the area (pop. 5,000) where  even if the woman does escape, she is  faced with threats if she doesn't return  to the family. "It's what's expected of  them. One woman had been to the hospital  several times. They told us that if she  came back here to the transition house  one more time, she wouldn't live through  it. It's like she's being pushed into the  ground." Shirley feels that getting to  know the community and their beliefs is  important.  "The last few months we've received an  awful lot of calls from husbands. They say  that they can appreciate what we are doing  for the women but they say that their  wives leave them at one in the morning  and come to the transition house to cry  and talk. But 'I'm sittin' here', he  says, 'in an empty house, and even if I'm  wrong, who do I have to talk too?' So  we've taken that to the board and they  approached the local Friendship house who  are now doing a group for men. We don't  want to. get directly involved 'cause you  could have the man in one room and the  woman in the other..."  The transition house has also been dealing  with rape cases. "We had two women who  came to the door who had been raped..We  brought them in and told them what they  should do, why they should go to the hospital. One went, but the other refused to.  She just wanted to forget it. The police  told us that we can't force her but to  advise her not to take a bath until morning in case she changed her mind. Her main  think was to get into that tub and scrub.  She just wanted to sit, be held. She just  wanted to be comforted."  Though the transition house is geared for  the battered woman, Shirley firmly states  that they would never turn a woman away.  "If we can't help her, then we'll get  someone up here who can."  Pornography is also an issue. "We hear at  the house that women are bothered by their  husbands using pornography. They feel degraded, like they're being used. These  guys believe everything they read in these  magazines. We had one woman who literally  had to wear diapers (from forced anal sex).  She is in constant pain. To me, that's from  pornography."  Some of the ex-residents have formed an  anti-pornography group in Prince Rupert  that meets at the local library.  KSAN HOUSE  Ksan House, located in Terrace,  B.C. has been opened for three years.  Between Oct. '83 and Sept. '84 they took  in. 183 women and 238 children. They receive  minimal funding from MHR and are expected  to serve their community and outlying areas.  Betty-Ann, staff memeber at the house,  feels that there is a recent increase in  violence against women generally, especially with young girls in dating situations.  She also mentions the lack of Outreach and  education. "A lot of women are unaware  of what's going on (the degree of violence  against women). When you tell them that  one in four women are battered, they say  'really?' A lot of women don't talk to  each other."  Women in small towns have to bide their  time until they can find a way to leave,  says Betty. Women will sometimes get a  ride with a friend or hitchhike. Some end  up going back.  Betty also expresses a need for services  for men. Terrace has no groups or counsellors dealing with men who batter. At one  time one was offered but they didn't receive any referrals and the group was  cancelled.  Terrace also has a sexual assault line.  The transition house has not received any  reports of child-rape.  THOMPSON-NICOLA  SEXUAL ASSAULT CENTRE  For the whole B.C. interior, there is one  sexual assault centre, Thompson-Nicola.  They opened in Kamloops just over two years  ago and serve a community of 65,000 but  an outlying area with approximately 100,000  people (they have received calls from as  far away as Ft. Williams.) The centre is  operated by one full time staff, one  part-time worker and a volunteer collective  of 40 women.  The centre receives its core funding from  the Provincial Attorney General's office,  but the services have escalated and the  funds have not. In one four month period  the centre received 15 sexual assault  calls, 139 child-sexual assault cases  (current and past), 45 battering, 3 harassment and 20 other related calls. The  centre maintains a 24-hour crisis line,  an office, provides accompaniment for  women to police/court and hospital, does  follow-up counselling, runs two incest  survivor groups, a battered woman support  group, and a sexual assault prevention  program that goes into elementary schools,  and public speaking.  "We are trying to get enough money to  hire more staff," says Carol, the only  full time staff. "There's only so much that  volunteers can do. We are working_hard to  integrate more with other community agencies, such as the sexual abuse committee  and working with the RCMP, MHR and crown  counsel with cases. This helps take the  load off our work and it educates us too."  When the centre first opened, says Carol,  there were problems getting recognition,  but now they "are seen as legitimate because we do get referrals from MHR and the  RCMP, and we work with the schools and mental health workers. There is a growing  recognition of the need for our service."  "We've tried to find that line between being feminists and recognizing the humanity  of the men involved. We particularily get  into that when we are dealing with sexual  abuse cases, if there is a mother whose  daughter is being abused by the father,  yet the mother may still have feelings for  him. It's not black and white. It's really  a complex issue and has to be dealt with  on a whole social level."  Carol remarks that a large percentage of  calls were from adult survivors (of child  rape) who have been affected by the media  hype of this issue. They realize that they  have to start dealing with their past.  Many disclosures also come from the in-  school education program that encourages  children to talk.  Though there is a transition house in  Kamloops for battered women, Carol says  the sexual assault centre picks up the  overload mostly from women who once were  battered and now need support while on  their own.  Many referrals come from the MHR offices.  "They do the investigation and protection  part but we frequently get called to do  follow-up counselling. I think that some  MHR workers feel we have more of an understanding and are more comfortable in dealing with the cases."  Carol finds that in rural areas the women  are generally aware of their services  but have difficulty in dealing with the  police or MHR. "I get calls from rural  towns where the woman went to the police  and they may have done a quick investigation and came back and said it was no big  deal. They say that the child was making  it up....     ^|ip|i|  "We've tried various ways of helping like  calling the RCMP or MHR office and push- j|  ing them to investigate. That is important.  For a lot of the rural area the supervisor  is in Kamloops, so we try and deal through  them. Rather than tell them that they are  wrong, we gently tell them that they  could be better educated in this area.  "I think they don't know how to handle it.  It's a scary issue when the sexual abuse  is in the family. When you don't know how  to deal with it it's easier to turn your  back and pretend it never happened. I don't  think the neglected cases by the RCMP and  MHR are from malice but from a 'I don't  know how to deal with it' fear.  "The ramifications are that people have to  understand the effect sexual abuse has on  children and the long term psychological  impact it has. Until you start dealing  with some of that, it doesn't seem so  important."  QUESNEL TRANSITION HOUSE  WOMAN FIGHTS ANTI-CHOICE CLAUSE  about the clauses leaked out and Pro-Life  meetings were advertised at the House,  other women inquired and tried to buy  memberships. They were met with non-cooperation; no constitutions were available;  new memberships couldn't be bought or  were discouraged. After numerous other  irregularities were observed - annual  general meetings were held without informing all the members; one AGM was cancelled  when a majority of feminist women showed  up - concern mounted and the lines became  drawn. The Catholic Women's League enlisted the support of the fundamentalist  Christian churches and mustered 150 people  to the 100 feminist supporters at the  final AGM this year. Two men and three of  the original Catholic women were elected  to the Board.  It was at this time that Gina decided to  pursue a legal course. To date the society  has agreed to withdraw the two illegal  amendments but will not guarantee not to  add them again, claiming it is outside  their authority to provide such a guarantee. Gina is saying it is outside their  authority to ever include a clause which  deviated so far from the original constitution.  by Maureen Trotter  The Amata Transition House has a clause  in its constitution which states: 'That  the society in its capacity of protecting  lives and giving shelter to battered  women and their children and to young  females, cannot accept those women and  teenagers considering an abortion. This  provision is unalterable.' Gine Hepp, the  past vice-president, is seeking a court  injunction to have this clause and one  other similar clause removed. As well,  she is asking that the society never introduce such an amendment again. Because  the provisions are stated to be unalterable, they can only be removed by court  order.  The society initially consisted of a wide  range of concerned women who worked to  obtain funding for a House. In 1979, they  drew up a broad, all-encompassing constitution. Later, the Board administering  the operation of the House was made up  mainly of Catholic women. In 1982, without  the full board or membership ratification,  the qualifying clauses were added. There  is not even any record of the resolution  in the Board minutes. When information -18 Kinesis February TtS  Maura's nephew David samples buffet at a Ferry House  garden party.  by Maura Volante  Community is^feip^d.^ heard often^in my  two years on Denmon Island.  Lying alongside Vancouver Islii^itM^JBiitttJtes s&*0r§3M  of Courtenay,  Denmon '■^^^^^^^.piece  of land 12 miles long and 4 miles wide,  with rocky beaches,  forested ridges, a  lot of swampland and two beautiful lakes.  As  in tn^^^ty,   I found many subdivisions  in what's called the Denmon community,  but  the reality of  an  island  is  such that  one knows who: is and who isn't part of  the community*f2pipLs insularity can be  dangerous if  one is nol^areful to  stay  open to people and ideas from "off-island!1,  but it also seems to fill aniseed in  people to know where they belong,  as x^ell  as to encourag^^^^jievelopment of  resource sharing amori||l|jftose who live  there.  Like many other rural areas'J^iBfCanada,  Denmon Island &fpj$^large influx in the  early seventies of American 60Ep: dodgers  and back-to-the-land peSj^kJ, who brought  w^th them a multitude>J|||||rrafts and  skills,  alF^well as the p^^^^^^^Tqphistieation  oB^icfiddle-class, e#tt(p|lpa^ urban Aiferica.  It'*s hard to say whether "the island has  drawn to it special people or whether they  have become special through.living there ;  but there can: be no question that.it- is  a speciaj|§||ii>munity.  I f irs%^eJt;I'fpot on Denmon in^H^, summer  of 1980, -coming to'the annual'North Island  Wemons'  Festival.-(held in a different  locatJ0ti'^0£h year,  th|jp|,estival was" a  wonderful networking "device which has  since ceased to' happen through lack of  arganiza||8||jal energy)'^f^'-y as  impressed,  not only with the rolling forests and  meadows o^^p^oj^atfe^e" Vancouver Island  mountains!,  but by the strength,   skills and  togetherness of  the wemon organizing the  1 event. I learned later that much of the  ^/p^eseht consciousness and organization  of  the Denwemon was  catalysed and  fed by  their  involvement  in the   '78 and   '80  festivals.  Also,  many of  them were involved  February ^ Kinesis 19  in the North Island Women's Network, a  Courtenay-based, government sponsored  project to bj|||g social and educational  services to wemon of that area and north.  So, when the womon I was living with and  I decided to move to "the country", we  gravitated to', that area as a supportive  environment for'Vti^/as lesbian feminist  IJIllghers. We learned th&tyan anti-sexist,  alternate elementary sc|taal was forming on  Denmon, "fUg^t there were three wemon's  support ^fdu^p;S^^|d two men'^^apport  - groups, all in-vaj:ious wavs challenging  '''tx%d'f-fcioi^l./jroIes and supporting children; j-  wemon and nfeh' -t^Mi^nge  old pattern:sj||S§j|f  relating.  Among the few people that we knew beforehand and got to know in the months that  followed our move into a lovely old  cottage near the ferry (we called it Faery  House), we were welcomed and encouraged  to participate in the school (the Learning  Hoop) and the wemon's group. I felt no  ostracism on the basis of my lesbianism;  some seemed glad to have the presence of  defined lesbians on the island.  jjjjjjljtoir, tolerance and support from an  ^^^^^m^^^  heterosexual community can't  replace the presence of a lesbian^cornmuni-"  4y, and I sometimes felt quite, isolated  from othe^^^^^^^^^^^^^rstand my^per-  spec'tives on* the patriar^^f,- relationships,  childrearing, etc". .I':-also felt more  dependent^'dn/my relatr3,^,$Mp with Luna  t\\ax^L had in tttV'pfey^' Since we had space  for guesi^^^ro cabins on the beach came  with the house*!'and acre of land we were  renting), we frequently invited friends  from Vancouver, Victoria and rural areas  to join us for celebrations such as birthdays and holidays. This input, combined  with fairly frequent jaunts to Vancouver,  helped me to feel more connected with  the radical outlook I had come to take  for granted in East End Vancouver. We  were often joined in these gatherings by  Country living-the best and the worst of times  by Maureen Trotter  When someone asked me about my life in the  country, my mind pictures a collage of  moments and events of good times and bad  times^^^^^^^^^interesting times. The  bad time^^^^^^^^^^requent in the first  few years of our seven s.years here. They  seem linked tc^^^^^^^^fc.cidents although  there were routi^^^^^^^^te where one  incident merges with another to make them  indistinguishable. \*ike every spring we  often got stuck, sometimes so Ijadly it  could take up to two days ojjj||jjjp>with the  come-along, hand winch to get-out. A neighbour appropriately dub^^^^^^^^K'Ruts".  Fortunately the roads have been improved  so being stuck now is a more occasional  event. The other set of routine bad times  were the struggles to keep the road open  (a mile-long driveway) and being snowed-in  in late winter. Even now that the plow  comes, one can never predict its coming  and so I can never reliably be somewhere on  a specific day.  The snowed-in timasjJfSring real isolation* -  Once during the f ij^|!|J|||j|i||r we were snowed-  in and the truck ^^^^^^^- °f the driveway was broken down, •atuVfio o»e*«b»£t°the  old trapper on J^^^^^^ao^Lle had been in  to visit in weJ|j|||py partner,'Terry, seems  to thrive on sol:L£ude and "he-could not  understand my need to see other people.  Finally, in defsp era tion, I packed my baby  on my back a&d walked the 3% miles to visit  my nearest neig^^l^e only to find she  wasn't home. That was one time I entertained the^dea of .continuing on down the road  and not cdming back. But the ten or twelve  more miles I'd have to walk before I'd have  much chance of getting a ride sent me back  in the $pfer direction in defeat.  |||eis^;.my*-isolation is less than it was,  ig&Plf^gh loneliness is still a hazard of  gjpjp!i lifestyle. We have a radio now that  .brings in CBC - my main connection with the  ,rest of the world. And we have a radio  phone, the kind where at least half your  conversation is heard up and down the airways. It's great for some things but the  lack of privacy and high cost keeps me from  using it as an emotional link with my  support network.  It was pre-phone days when the worst night  I can remember happened. It was a Sunday  when Terry decided to go to town to work.  The 4x4 (four-wheel drive) was broken down  in the driveway so he took my car which had  no chains. He didn't come home. The roads  were sheets of ice and there are several  steep embankments in the stretches of  switchback in the road "home. I was worried.  I listened to the 6 o'clock messages on the  radio and thought tJhat.4J.,£bjEr;(£,.was no  message from him at 1O,^;0 would walk to  the nejLahbours to a"phone. No message came  so I packed my three year old into his  -^'ckj^fek and headed "out. I got there'- 'abS^f;j&r  midnight»^Tne ice was so slippery I had to  .^Itke my son so we could both crawl across  pfrsiight incline to their porch.  And then there was the time the cougar  got one of the goats between the house  and the barn one morning as I sat by.  the window reading.   Neither the police nor the hospital had any  accident reports; his boss said he'd left  for home at two that afternoon. My neighbour got out his 4x4 and we drove back  towards town checking the places a car  might have gone over. No sign of him. On  the way back we slowed down to look at  some tracks and the truck slid into the  ditch. A nearby farmer obligingly got out  his log loader with its great chained  wheels and pulled out the 4x4. There didn't  'seem anything else to do but go back and  wait. Finally, about mid-morning, I started  out with another neighbour to town, the  long way around. He had to be somewhere.  Just as we stopped to check the chains,  Terry staggered over the top of the next  rise. He was OK.' He'd been in the ditch.  He'd shovelled off and on, :fflj|b.etween  being sick with the flu and tr^aig to sleep  in the old car. He'd walked alms'^^12 ; ;  miles and had been lying in the snowj^wi the  side of the road, exhausted, wJ8*n he'd  heard the truck coming. It was almostP^.24  hours after he'd left for hom^^hat we  got back. After that, we again talked  about moving to town and again decided  against it.  And then there was the time the cougar  got one of the goats between the-*hause  and the barn^one morning as I- sat "by- the  window reading. And the' time th6 bear,  who persisted in coming and eating our  ^chickens, refused to go away.$0tmorning,  *had lost his fear of us and had to be  shot. But the adventure of a drastically  different lifestyle from the urban one  *I'"d been living for ten years began to  wear thin. Several years of the drudgery  of hauling water and chopping wood, the  freezing toilet seat in the outhouse  that kept me constipated a lot of the  winter, the kerosene lights and the dark,  cramped cabin, uncomfortable for a growing family, combined to blunt the edges  of my commitment to this land. Trudging  down the trail in the dark, tired after  a day in town, dragging groceries, laundry  and crying kids home on the toboggan, I'd  wonder what on~^^th I was doing. The  amount of energy it took just to survive  seemed sometimes more than it was worth.  But I stayed for a dream of what this  place, my life and the lives of my children could be. I wanted more control of  my envjjlrbnment, of the amount of chemical  we consumed, the pollution we breathed.  I wanted to be more in touch with the  cycles of nature, with life and death. I  wanted to be more self-sufficient, more  energy conscious.  And, over the years, the hard work and  perseverence are gradually making a difference. Now, when I lie in my hammock in  front of the big south-facing window of  my new house and watch the horses racing  in the meadow along the creek or a moose  grazing at the edge of the beaver pond,  I smile to myself and know I am glad we  stayed. Life is easier now. We have our  own 32 volt electrical system for our  water system and lights. A 110 generator  runs my power tools. Our wood stove is  efficient, as is our house, a passive  solar, stackwalled house designed to meet  our needs. We will finish the new barn  this summer. We skate on and swim in the  beaver pond. We snowshoe and cross-country  ski off the back porch. We ride horses  and trail bikes when we take time for  fun. The exercise of the chores and  the noon news regulate my days. I still  shovel shit and snow and haul wood but  that I can do these things out of doors  makes them pleasant tasks.  And, when I sit in the sunny greenhouse  in spring watching the sprouts shbot^gjjjjgj  from my seeds to finally fill the jars and  bins with food for the winter^^^^^^^^^^j  tent. When a friend makes the effort to  come 30 miles or more tfjg|l|jjj[jt|e, I am  happy. Walk^n^^pJ^in-hand witjjjjIy^BlSfc  children through the wjQy|||(t||jjgpe sun-  dappled trail to the chicken coop fills me  with a kind of peace.  And, when I help organize a Peace Walk or  build some furniture, or feed the pigs,  I know that what I do matters, counts  for something, both in the lives of the  animals and of my family, as well as in  the lives of people in my community. The  good times are moments of joy that flutter  through my life, touching me briefly,  quietly. They remind me to be grateful  for our life here. I know many others in  our world are not so fortunate.  a small nimber of Island wemon. who,  though not defining themselves as lesbians,  were wemon-identified in many ways. ,,  This circle, plus the wemon in the w|||j|rs  groups and several others with a feminist  consciousness, forms what I woJjfi§?loosely  term the Denwemon's Community. In this  community there is a sense of the importance of wemon-only gatherings, and^tt  forms a network for the distribution of  information relating to feminiflljfsconcerns,  locally and provincially. It Ifajft through  the development of this network that a  wemon's section was established in the  Denmon Library, with periodit||jjipsuch as  Kinesis  and Healthsharing,  as well as  many classics of feminist theory. Tt has  also been the basis,^-|^icrganization of  annual International Wemon Day-cel'ebra- ' '  tions at the communit»|^[|^^^b' which  around 50 wemon of- .diverse ages and inter-  re&Kflfather to share"'apotluck^iinher,  poetry, art, music and information.  I joined the "second wemon's group" (named  in order of formation) that first winter,  and found in that diverse collection of  wemon a real support system, not only in  *ga  4-** 1  • ^  m ' '  ■ m  Luna in the doorway of a half-finished house with Diana  (owner/builder) in the foreground.  emotional matters, but in practical country living as well. Wemon shared information relevant to my needs in job-hunting,  wood-finding, who to ask about what, etc. S|  We helped each other through crises that  arose, with the strict rule that informa?-  tion stayed within the group.;^ such a  small community, it^was" a. great relief to  have a space to talk, knowing it would  not be repeaijgjjjjjjjjttjdistorted ad infinitum■  We also had a lot of fun toge^fgtf, ensuring  that we w^Jd attend meetings regularly  not out of duty but because we wanted to  be with each other.  (■j||jj||Ij:joined the Hoop Collective, participating In an alternate school that taught  me a whole lot about working with kids,  ^^^^^p^'in a mix§|p||;ollective, communicating in care-fuilllllptys and much more (I  could write at lengtha^^^fc the Hoop as  an alternate school and as an important  chunk of my life, but it's not the focus  of this article, and deserves a separate  ramble of its own.).  There is a strong presence oifpjhildren  on Denmon Island, and for the most part  I found people to be very respectful.of  the youngers, willing to relate to them  as people rather than as the property of  their parents. With the many rearrangements of relationships over the years,  there are many kids with more than two  parents, and a variety of living arrangements can be found. Some of the most heated controversies have been around the  needs and position of children and teenagers, some of the conflict arising over  the question of kids at the dances. Some  adults want to protect children from  exposure to drunks (in one incident a  child was dropped by a drunk man who had  been carrying her on the dance floor) and  provide space for adults to forget about  the kids. Others maintain that protective  measures (like kicking ou^rdrunks) would  be more appropriate than barring children.  Certainly the teenagers dori/t like the  adult-only dances, arguing that there is  very little recreational activity for them  in a community/~'in which they are isolated  by transportajjglllfF'problems from their  peer grou^i^^^^ (which is where they  all bus "to School and back every day from  grade seven u||g|gp  I was surprise^^^a^^EJ a seemingly  child-centred community, that there was no  organized cTf5pi|M|l for dances, such as  we have come to expectf-^^^tfeminist gatherings in Vancouver. Some events, such as  the I.W.D. potlucks an<J§|plesentations of  "Power Play" by the Red Heart Theatre  Collective, have had childcare provided  by the men's groups. But when there's a  question of paying a childcare worker,  some people maintain that the money should  come only from the parents who ufte the  service. Still and all, Denmon Island  feels likeajsugportive place to b'4' raising cJ^j|i6pjlj||pfBj||§Ei.th all their exposure  to T.V. and Vancouver pop radio stations, '■■;.  J|j§j|(iiHK!MMiljtHYironmett|jjLs safer and .calra»s  l^r than the c^^^^^^^^^^^iich are important to children ^S/MSjggf^ts  who share  their lives.  Economics is a problem||i|jj|jjjfj|n as well  as most other areas ofjjIjflBBJpktrained"  province. A few peoplejjH||jljjfiiS|th money,  which goes farther on fjBjjjjjjj{j§Jsd.fch fewer  places to spend it. Maqjggi|g§j|Blpo jobs  in the Comox Valley (thfjjjjgpllltaining  Courtenay, Comox and Cumberland?)', making;  the population more working-class than on  Hornby, the next island^((^and that  much more isolated. Ano^Jter large segment  of the population survives on craft Wjbrk.  Some tradespeople actuajpLy support themselves working on Denmfer Island. |pfen  there are the unemploye^^-living on U.I.  or social assistance."^^re seem to be  more of these than before^.as is the case  everywhere.  When^gj^f-irst arrived I diligently searched  the Comox Valley for work. I had left a  good job as a recreation co-ordinator with  retired people tpjjj|ike the move to greener  pastures, and it -took me a few months to  realize that despite 'ffiy.-impres.sive resume  and fresh-from-the-cityi||J!ergy, no one had  any money--ygSlhire me, for anything.  Not that I had too much time on my h|nds.  As a musician and mother involved, with,  alternate education, gardeningjjjpgwn trips  for shopping and laundry, etSfjjtjpI felt  busier than I had in the city|§jg||adually  I settled into the routine, and it really  was some of the most fulfilling times in  my life. Just waking up every moaning to  green trees and sea water and quiet >j!M(^d-  me with peace and love for this earthv-My"  interest in earth-centred spirituaj||jlllg|j||  though already with me in my head and  heart, translated itself more and more  into practice, world-view, way of liflfjjB  Another change that I found creeping fjFto  my consciousness was a growing openness to  men in my life. I had never defined myself  as a separatist, but I had not sought out  men as friends for many years. I didn't  * Throughout this article I have altered  the conventional spellings so that Denman  becomes Denmon, woman becomes womon, and  women becomes wemon. This eliminates the  constant reinforcing message of man, and  is fairly consistent with pronunciation. 20 Kinesis February TO  tied' iv cf/ befo& WiivdinQ dtfM 1  jlllflk  «■  * • THEATRE • •  ■■  16th and ARBUTUS STREET  For the best in Foreign Films  and Independent Quality Films  Non-Sexist, Coffee Bar, Crying Room for parents  with small children  $2 Tuesdays, $4 Students with valid cards  LESBIAN  INFORMATION LINE  Need Information?  Want to Talk?  Contact LI.L(604) 875-6963  fimMtimtm    Thurs- & Sun- 7-10 p.m.   inw Qr wrjte 400A w 5th Ave  OCTOPUS  BOOKS  INEXPENSIVE CHMUTY BOOKS  HARD TO GET ART, SOCIAL i  LITERARY MAGAZINES  & JOURNALS  2250W.4TH 732-6721  1146 COMMERCIAL      253-0913  ■ SHW'MJW  jlMusic. . . Food. . . Socializing j  lOthANNlvW  OPEN HOUSE  SUNDAY, FEB. 24th  1-3 p.m.  Take this opportunity to visit the neighbourhood food store that you can own.  Also watch for the upcoming BENEFIT  CE in March!  Open: Tues.-Thurs. 12-7:30  Friday-Sunday 10:30-7:30  1806 Victoria Drive  Phone 254-5044  Islanders resist MacBlo  by Deborah March;  Meares Island, home to 'the largest uncut  cedar in Canada (at least 1,500 years old),  has been slated for clear-cut logging.  Against the recommendations of its own  planning team, the provincial government  has given permission to Macmillan Bloedel  to cut most of the trees on 90% of the  island - and people are outraged.  Meares is a mature forest of gigantic  cedar, hemlock and sitka spruce located on  the west coast of Vancouver Island across  from Tofino. The complex habitat supports  a variety of fish and wildlife including  bald eagles, deer, wolves and salmon. The  foreshore and intertidal zones teem with  clams, crabs, mussels, herons, otter and  racoons - to name only a few animal species.  Whales share the surrounding salt-chuk  with porpoises, sea lions and seals. It  is truly a garden of life and the Clayoquot  native people who live on Meares want to  keep it that way as do Tofino residents.  cal to the survival of coastal communities  and important to the growth of tourism.  Last Easter the Clayoquot declared Meares  Island a Tribal Park which assures total  preservation of the island yet allows free  access to the Canadian public and tourists,  guarantees water supplies for the District  of Tofino, honors all mariculture licences  and provides for future development if  desired. Tofino residents support this  declaration since it satisfies the town's  water development needs, recreational  requirements, tourist economy, and the  fisheries and mariculture industries.  Both MacBlo and the native people have  taken the issue to court, each requesting  the other party be barred from the island.  No matter what happens in court, environmentalists are asking the public to help  save Meares Island by speaking up for a  moratorium on logging of the island until  the study requested in the planning team's  report can be done.  "Bfe  In 1980 Macmillan Bloedel applied to the  provincial government to begin logging the  island despite protests from Tofino residents, local fishermen and the Clayoquot  Band. MacBlo has access to the timber under  Tree Farm Licence 44 - Meares Island comprises at most just over one percent of  this licence. Public outcry concerning  the proposed logging caused the government  to appoint a planning team including members from the Forest Service, the I.W.A.,  MacBlo, the federal government and local  citizens'. Three years later the team  issued the Meares Island Planning Report.  The report outlined three options for the  island:, total preservation; log half,  save half; log half, defer half for 25  years. It also recommended that a study  examining the impact of logging on the  social, cultural and economic values of  the area be undertaken.  Macmillan Bloedel left the public planning  process at this point though the report  was unanimous with one exception. They  lobbied the provincial government and received permission to clear cut 90 percent  of Meares Island against all recommendations of the planning team. MacBlo says if  the island is not logged 240 jobs will be  lost forever. Meares is marginal to the  provincial forest economy but it is criti-  Update  At press time Macmillan Bloedel had been  given the go ahead by the B.C. Supreme  Court to begin logging Meares Island. In  a countermove, two appeals were filed January 29 on behalf of Tofino residents and  the Clayoquot and Ahousaht Indian bands.  The first appeal claims Justice Reginald  Gibbs erred in upholding the company's legal right to log the island, and the second  challenges the court's decision to reject  aboriginal title to the land.  Protesters are presently on the Island  waiting for Macmillan Bloedel's operations  to begin. Native and non-Native supporters  from throughout B.C. are moving onto the  site. The Friends of Clayoquot, a group  involved in organizing the fight to save  Meares for the past four years, has invited people who have undergone civil disobedience training to join the protest.  Anyone wanting more information" about the  protest should contact Jim Rowed or Ken  Lay at 736-7732.  Abortion from page 14  action campaign based on a united front  of all supporters of our demands. In short,  that we adopt the classic tactic of social  movements: "Educate, Agitate, Organize."  We must do all these things as loudly and  visibly as possible in order to demonstrate  to both the state and the population at  large that we are the majority and that  we are too strong to ignore. This means we  go on talk shows, write articles, speak  at meetings, move resolutions for support  for pro-choice demands and for donations  to the legal defense fund. It means that  we bring speakers here from, for example,  Catholics For a Free Choice; that we  appeal widely for funds and ask groups  that endorse us to hold their own fund-  raising events.  It means that we organize demonstrations  and rallies, perhaps in the form of a  Women's Tribunal, which would publicize  the extreme difficulty of getting an  abortion in many parts of B.C. It means  we set up public meetings to hear Henry  Morgentaler speak. He is keenly interested  in coming to B.C. as soon as possible.  Interested in helping us? You need no  skills or experience to start. In Vancouver, phone CCCA at 876-9920. Or write us  at P.O. Box 24617, Station C, Vancovuer,  M5T 4E1. Individuals are welcome, but we  also seek endorsement, funds, and participation by organizations. Presently, CCCA  has endorsement from more than 100 organizations, some of them province-wide.  Outside Vancouver, get in touch with the  pro-choice groups that are active in  many areas: Chilliwack, Cranbrook,  Kelowna, Terrace, Prince George, Smithers,  the Kootenays, Victoria, and several  Vancouver suburbs are already organized.  Please get active. The time is now. February'85 Kinesis 21  Denwemon from page 19  need to, surrounded by lesbians in the  city. On Denmon I began working wit.h men  at the Hoop, going to mixed parties and  dances, and finding for the most part that  I was able to enjoy friendships with some  of the more politically -conscious men and  that I could tune out the ones I had no  interest in, rather than feeling impinged  upon by their presence in a room.  My personal life changed drastically  when I became for a short while sexually  involved with a man, and moved out of  Faery House to live on my own, half-time  with the 7-year old I co-parent.  The market for rental housing on Denmon  is very poor, with most people owning  their own property, and restrictive bylaws (due to limited water and access)  preventing much subdividing. "Summer  people's" homes sit empty because their  absent owners don't want the bother and  the risk of fire entailed in renting. So  I bounced around homeless for a couple of  months before settling into a 4-month  sublet which proved a cozy home for the  winter. I did childcare in exchange for  wood, as well as buying it and took baths  at friend's places, as "Spiral House"  (as I named it) had only cold water. At  least it was running water from a tap.  Later on, I lived in a bus and had to haul  water in.  Life as a single womon suddenly showed me  how couple-oriented the Denmon community  is. I felt for awhile that I had to do all  the reaching out to people who needed me  far less than I needed them. Yet when I  did reach out I felt well received,  welcomed at social functions. It is hard to  say whether I would have been as welcomed  by the general community if I had not been  involved for awhile with a man. I felt that  they related to me with greater ease and  comfort, and I resented this heterosexual  privilege even while I appreciated the  acceptance on a gut level. I continued to  declare myself as a lesbian and defended  lesbians and separatists whenever I felt  that we/they were being put-down in any  way. People couldn't figure me out, but  that's an old story.  I worked on developing my teaching format  for the voice, called ".Singing for Ourselves", offering it as a course through  North Island College, and as a workshop  in various places. I started playing a  conga drum I had on loan, enjoying the  privilege of being able to play in the  middle of the night if I wanted to. I  sang and played in several coffeehouses  sponsored by the Peace Group (a very active  political group on the island), and got  a lot of positive feedback from listeners  and participants. This gave me more confidence to think about touring Europe with  that unconventional format of voice and  drums.  That is what finally.drove me to return to  Vancouver, to look for work and .save money  for a journey to Europe. I may have been  able to survive on a low income on Denmart  Island, but I couldn't save any money  there. I spent my last few months enjoying  the paradise of swimming naked in Chickadee Lake, letting spring and summer fill  my senses, and nourishing a garden all of  my own on a piece of land generously  offered by some neighbour friends.  I have found it impossible to write of  life on Denmon without describing some  of the changes I went through there. It is  the story of my experiences, and someone  elses's story would be different. I'm  sure, though, that some similar threads  would run through it: the beauty and  healing qualities of living with nature,  the role of political consciousness on  the island, the awareness of living in a  community bound by the natural borders  of sea waters.  Ohamil women:  Beating the rats  by Pam Tranfield  An infestation of rats into already condemned houses, and lack of heat and  plumbing prompted eight native women  from the Hope area to bring their children to the Department of Indian Affairs  offices in Vancouver, and sit. Two  occupations and one year later, the  women have won victories but continue  the struggle for improved social and  health conditions on their tiny reserve.  Of five families at Ohamil reserve, four  are headed by women. Conditions on the  reserve, 32 km west of Hope were squalid,  but the women's needs did not seem to  be a "priority" for. Indian Affairs or  the administration at the Chill'iwack  area council.  Rats had infested the homes and grounds  of Ohamil after a nearby garbage dump  was closed. They entered the homes  through cracks in walls and floorboards.  In one home, a mattress where three  children slept was chewed. The children  slept on the floor to be near a space  heater, as the only source of heat was  a wood stove that could not pass fire  inspection. This home had been condemned  two years earlier, yet no provisions were  made to move the family or construct  new housing.  'ĢIn a trailer that housed seven people,  bathroom pipes were frozen. People had  stepped through rotting floorboards  around the toilet, and a house with an  outside well provided water. This trailer  had been considered temporary in 1977.  The women sat at Indian Affairs on two  occasions in October 1983. Indian  Affairs officials promised new homes by  March 19S4, and temporary trailers  arrived in late November. One of these  burned in March, sending the family to  Hope for nine months.  "They (Indian Affairs) put (the building)  off and put it off, but the families  moved into the new houses just before  Christmas," says spokesperson Emma May  Joe.  "No news is good news," she says, "and  I haven't heard any complaints. The  sewer system is working, there are no  freeze-ups, and if there are any more  rats they aren't able to get in."  Joe also says the Ohamil women are no  longer taken for granted by Chilliwack  Area Council, who allocate Indian  Affairs funding. "People included us  after that; they became more aware of  our needs." Ohamil has also joined the  British Columbia Native Women's Society,'  through which they are organizing educational and health programs. Joe believes  teaching the women to care for themselves  houses and children are essential lessons  that some women have never had the opportunity to learn.  A child development workshop is planned  for March with local members and health  officials.  Joe hopes funding and resources will  allow for more projects at Ohamil,  including economic development. The  women are looking to agriculture to become more self-sufficient and develop a  resource base.  Mexico from page 9  held for campesinos, women, and workers.  One topic dealt with the devaluation of  the Mexican peso, delineating step-by-step  some of the economic principles involved  and suggesting both temporary and long-  range solutions.  In another room someone clips topical  newspaper articles and evaluates them.  Hand-made blouses are sold directly from  the artisans to North American markets  so the profits go directly to the workers.  A magazine is distributed with pictorial  representations of problems particular  to campesino women. In contrast to the  traditional viewpoint that god is responsible for poverty and suffering, a hard look  is taken at the structures that are the  causes of inequality. A bit of analysis  rather than an offering to the Virgin  of Guadelupe may prove to be more useful.  In the giant city of Mexico, Quakers  receive refugees and provide whatever  clothing, money and counselling they can.  And it is the Catholic Church in San  Cristobol de Las Casas that orchestrates  much of the assistance headed toward  the growing refugee camps near the border  of Guatemala. Of late, the connections  between religion and politics grab front  page headlines and "liberation theology"  has become a household word. Here in  Mexico, there is much evidence of religiously-inspired actions aimed at counterbalancing the tremendous burden of social  inequality. 22 Kinesis February '85  ((JFOac^T::  K00T€M^T3*SA  by Susan White  Emma's Jambrosia, the all-women jam manufacturing collective in the Kootenays,  celebrated the beginning of their second  year of full-scale production with the  introduction of two new flavours (blueberry and plum), a new label design, and  the hiring of their sixth full-time employee. These changes and others are part of  the collective's plan to be operating at  a break-even point by the end of the next  fiscal year.  The new flavours, although just introduced  and not yet available in all stores, have  already been incredibly successful, according to production co-ordinator Heather  Gibson. The company expects the new  flavours, based on response to date, to  sell as well as or better than the existing line of raspberry, strawberry, and  peach. Heather also says that the new  label, designed by Nelson graphic artist  Claire Murgatroyd, is receiving rave  reviews. The new flavours and redesigned  label have allowed Emma's to begin expanding their distribution into the grocery  market, where they feel there is a need  for some stiff competition to the sugar-  laden jams currently available.  Three Emma collective members recently  travelled to Toronto to display Emma's  Jambrosia melanges at the annual trade  show of the Canadian Health Food Association. Although Jambrosia is already widely  distributed in the Toronto area, collective  members felt the trip was essential in  making health food retailers aware that  Jambrosia actually has less  sweetener than  H  mm*  Outwriil  women's newspaper  Please  would you  send me a FREE  COPY of Outwrite Newspaper and subscription details.  NAME   ADDRESS   Return' this form to Outwrite, Oxford  House, Derbyshire Street, London E2,  Eachmont  njetfsf and  imperialism,  'lesbian   . ;  the so-called "unsweetened" jams sold by  <  companies such as Whole Earth and Sorrel  Ridge. According to Sophia Dricos, who  does most of the cooking at Emma's, the  lengthy cooking time used by these companies increases the sweetness content to a  percentage considerably higher than that  of Jambrosia, which is cooked very briefly  to keep sweetness content low and preserve  the food value of the fruit.  The.trip to Toronto was one of many learning experiences for collective members  during the last few months. "Perhaps  we've been somewhat naive," says co-ordinator Gibson, "in expecting that it was  enough to produce a quality product. Now  that we've had a year to contend with the  intricacies of Canada's labelling laws  and seen the representations made by our  competitiors, we're taking on the responsibility for making consumers aware of  Jambrosia." As part of that responsibility,  Emma now has its first full-time marketing  person.  It continues to be a surprise to many that  Emma's Jambrosia is an all-women company.  "Our experience at the health food show  was of a tremendous amount of support from  other women," says office manager Karen  While. "One woman insisted on taking  pictures of us with our display, and a lot  of women came past to ask about our  experiences. That support was a tremendous  thing to take back with us to the rest of  the collective."  The Emma collective has recently expanded  to its quota of fifteen members. Those  women not yet employed by the company  The orginai Emma collective.  continue to share fully in the decision- -  making, and sometimes work on a casual  basis when large production runs are  scheduled or when Emma's does sampling  demonstrations at area stores. Whenever  Emma's is in need of professional help,  every effort is made to have that help  come from within the collective. During  the summer, much-needed air conditioning  was installed by Journeywoman Ventures,  a carpentry firm run by collective member  Marcia Braundy. And the Emma's Jambrosia  display at the Health Food Show centred  around a series of photographs by collective member Georgette Ganne.  Plans for next year include research into  more new flavours and the development  and distribution of a gift package that  will probably be available by early spring.  The possibility of expanding into the U.S.  market is also being considered. Individually and collectively, the members of  Emma's Jambrosia Manufacturing are looking  forward to another good year.  Women's rural retreat opens  Combatting isolation and making safe  places to gather to network, to exchange  skills and to relax are on-going needs of  rural women. It is alarmingly easy to slide  into a sense of isolation and impotency  in reaction to today's political environment and economic situation. Especially  now we need  the strength regional women's  centres can bring us: the empowerment  that accompanies networking, skill exchanges and mutual support for women's  needs. We need to feel our strength as  women.  USED & OLD  90GKS  8 0UC-WT <£ SOLD  ART  LITERATURE  HISTORY  CANADIANA  VANCOUVER  PHONE  681-765  Emily's Place is a newly created retreat  and workshop space located on Rubyfruit  in Coombs, mid-Vancouver Island. The  Emily's Place Society is a registered  society whose current goal is to nurture  the development of the networking skills  exchange, personal growth and recreation  opportunities possible for women at  Emily's Place. The present facilities  include a well equipped 16x18'foot building with a 6x12 foot sleeping loft and  an attached 12x16 foot covered cooking  shelter. It has a creekside setting with  15 more acres available for walking,  individual camping and relaxing. It is  close to Parksville and Qualicum and the  surrounding recreational facilities and  scenic beauties.  The Emily's Place Society is interested  in generating a workshops and networking  calendar based on input from rural, urban  and local women. We hope to help Emily's  Place become a place for both urban and  rural women to use and enjoy.  You can support Emily's Place by: 1. using  it for workshops, retreats, or for a few  days 'away'. 2. calling the information  number with your workshop topic request  and/or your interest in presenting a  workshop in an area of special interest  to you. 3. camping at Emily's Place.  Explore the possibilities for yourself.  4. encouraging the continuation and improvement of Emily's Place with your tax  deductable donation. 5. taking advantage  of institutional memberships with time  sharing opportunities.  For more info call Cindy or Cait at 248-  5410 or Ina at 876-9698 or write Emily's  Place Society, P.O. Box 220, Coombs,  B.C. VOR 1M0. February TJ5 Kinesis 23  A city slicker goes to Nelson  by Marcia Meyer  I have to sheepishly admit I've always  seemed to be one of those city slickers.  As a matter of fact, whenever I have  driven across this huge country I have  always marked my time by how long it will  take me to get from one man city to the  next - you know - like how long it will  take me to get from Winnipeg to Regina  or from Calgary to Vancouver. So when my  friend Bev Bradshaw moved to Nelson, B.C.  and kept asking me to come and see her  some time on one of my trips to Calgary  from Vancouver, you can imagine that three  hour dip (or whatever it is) from the  Trans-Canada Highway down into the midst  of the southern Kootenays was pretty  much of a shocking thought to me. I mean  what a jolt to my proverbial anxiousness  to get to Calgary in maybe less than 12  hours! And right in the heart of the Kootenays - that's not only rural - that's  rugged.  And so on an occasion when I thought I  could rearrange my busy city schedule to  find an extra day and enough confidence to  brave the twisting mountain roads to  Nelson, I made my way south to visit my  friend. And I'm glad I did, because what  I learned about Nelson at the time and  since then has been quite rewarding for  my artistic curiosity. Nelson is a buzzing  artistic community brimming with lots of  artistic activities, initiated and carried  out by women.  One of the most enlightening discoveries  I made about Nelson has to do with a visit  by Holly Near. Now do you remember when  Holly Near performed here in Vancouver at  the Orpheum? We all went, had a nice time,  criticized and praised the concert, went  home and that was the end of that. Well,  in Nelson, when Holly Near came to perform,  she held a workshop the night before her  concert, praised everyone on their singing  and encouraged the formation of community  singing groups. By December of that same  year the women for "Images" Newspaper in  Nelson had formed Images Ad Hoc Singers  and had done their first performance at  the Vallican Whole School and Community  Centre in the Slocan Valley. (About 30  minutes from Nelson). That was in 1982  and since then they have done several  concerts and are still going strong.  The Images Ad Hoc Singers started out as  women from the Images Collective but  little by little they have been branching  out to include other members of the women's  community. It is now about 25% non-Images  members (however one of the requests  when you join is to help Images out in  some way). They have done at least 10 or 12  performances since the first one and now  have a new musical director, Roma Sedgeman,  a music student at the David Thompson  University Centre (DTUC) before it was  closed down by Socred cuts.  About the choir, my friends Bev Bradshaw  and Darby Baylin said, "At first it was a  spur of the moment thing. The response  they got from peers at the first concert  was so great that they decided to continue.  In the beginning it was associated mainly  with the newspaper and practices were  on newspaper nights. Now we practice every  Monday night and the meeting place changes  every week. It may be in town or 20 miles  out, some of the singers may have an  hour's drive to make a practice.  "The choir is fully collective meaning  that everyone has a say in the repertoire.  After every performance it is time to  think about the next performance and the  material for it. We all think about it  for a weekand the next meeting we bring  in tapes of whatever music it is that, we  think we should do. The group listens to  all of them and votes on new material.  The Ad Hoc Singers aren't the only  artistic group in Nelson. This town also  boasts a women's theatre group called  just that, the Nelson Women's Theatre  Group, also know as Women on Cue. You  might have seen them here in Vancouver at  a place called Ms. T's where they did a  series of skits by Tish Lakes, informally  called 'Tish's Skits'. If you saw them  you'd never forget "I'm in Love With A  Wonderful Dyke" (adaption of Rogers and  Hammerstein of course), "Two Women in  Bed", "Quitting Smoking" and "The Great  Goddess Returns". They performed these  skits in Victoria as well as Vancouver.  Presently the Nelson Women's Theatre Group  is working on a play that deals with wife  battering called, "One of These Days —  Pow", written by Minnie Bruce-Pratt of  North Carolina. The script is very skeletal so when they first took it on their  intentions were to flesh it out, improvise and expand the script in workshops.  However, before they could do this they  were invited to perform for the Community  Services Centre's volunteer training  sessions. The purpose was to generate  discussion amongst the people who were  training as volunteers at Community Services. They also performed the play for  Social Work Students at Castlegar.  As it ended up, they didn't improvise at -  all but performed the script as it was  written. It is described by Darby as,  "twenty minutes of conversation starte:  It doesn't resolve any issues - as a matter  of fact it is very bleak. The woman is  without options." The purpose of the production is to stimulate discussion so that  the audience comes up with alternatives  available. The group will be performing  this production again at the Nelson Women's  Centre for a series called "Women and  Health", Monday, February 18, 1985.  As far as music goes, it is very  tough in Nelson to make any kind  of a living performing.  Nelson also has its fair share of individual artists. As far as music goes, it is  very tough in Nelson to make any kind of  a living performing. There is just not  the population to support the musicians,  and most of the performers do their music  as a sideline. One of the musicians around  town is Jeanette Grittani who did the  musical direction for "Straight Jackets".  She has also performed for Peace Rallies  and Women's Festivals as well as having  the occasional gig in the bars. Another  local musician is Lorelei Allen, who I've  heard is an excellent synthesizer and  keyboard artist and a composer (somewhat  of the New Wave idiom). As well as performing on her own she now plays in a band  called "Pilots" which is a rock and roll  band that plays at bars and concerts in  and around Nelson.  Jephi Sioux, who lives in the Slocan Valley,  is a part-time music teacher at the Valli-  con Whole and a piano player and singer.  Mara Seagull is,^ I've heard, an excellent  singer and guitar player who writes her  own material in the folk idiom. Pat Griffiths came out to Nelson from Vancouver  to study music at DTUC one year before it  closed. She is still in Nelson and still  plays keyboards. You might have heard her  playing for Women On Cue for "Tish's  Skits" at Ms. T's here- in Vancouver. Kate  Godfrey is a musician, songwriter, guitarist whose music has been described as  "mellow, emotional, moving and lyrical..."  Along with the musicians there are several  women visual artists in Nelson. Azul  Pluvielle is a woman artist from Toronto  who has lived in the area for 5 or 6 years  on and off, and exhibited her work at  the SUB Pub at DTUC. Maggie Putman is a  long-time resident of Nelson. She does her  work independently and has also illustrated a cookbook called, "Thursday Night  Feast". Bris Flannegin, visual artist,  does water colours which she has displayed  at Women's Festivals. Bris's sister Linden  Haunt does work in clay. Linden's work [  consists of women's masks and rattles  made out of clay in the shape of animals.  She has displayed her work at the Michigan Women's Music Festival.  Carol Hutchinson is a commercial artist,  (lots of the same item). Examples of her  work are: ceramic toothbrush holders with  women's faces, toothbrush holders with  women together, and her latest thing,  women with wings. She also makes bowls,  teapots, ashtrays, plates and other  pottery items.  Anne Swanson-Gross does pictures of women  and families in forest settings. The focus  seems to be on enlarged people in communal  or family groups. She does people sitting  at dinner tables and people cuddling cats.  She also has pictures of cats by themselves  Recently she opened a studio and art  gallery in Winlaw, which is located in the  Slocan Valley.  Giselle Perrault, a staindd glass artist,  sells pieces from her own studio and at  festivals. She recently had a display at  Renaissance Festival in Grand Forks, B.C.  Claire Murgatroyd is a graphic artists  and sign painter. She recently designed  the artwork for Emma's Jambrosia's jam  labels.  As my friends Bev and Darby tell me, "Almost everyone you meet in and around  Nelson is an artist of some kind, whether  it be a musician, visual artist, composer,  writer or empathetic appreciator of the  arts. A lot of people are here because of  that - because it is an art centre."  Because DTUC was an arts university it  seems to have attracted many artists to  Nelson and the surrounding area. Its  closure has affected the community a great  deal. Many of the artists have left - but  many have stayed. The biggest loss was  the DTUC Theatre Group. There is still a  remnant of this group called "Loose Change  Theatre". It is a mixed group that is  getting grants to do productions. One  good thing that has happened as a result  of the DTUC closure is that Women On Cue  have had some really good women come to  their group.  In trying to assess why there is so much  community involvement in the arts in  Nelson, I first came to the conclusion,  "well, they don't have the huge distances  to travel that we do in this huge city of  Vancouver." And then I learned that some  members of the Ad Hoc Singers may have  to travel for more than an hour to get to  a rehearsal. Maybe there is something in  a rural community that inspires community  involvement that we don't seem to have in:  the big city, (or maybe we just don't hear"  about it).  And maybe I should remap my travelling  schedule to include Vancouver - Nelson -  Calgary. 24 Kinesis February '85  ARTS  Sys Richards  Unusual  rural  batiks  by Jill Pollack  Batik: noun  (Malay)   (1880)  l.a: an Indonesian method of hand-printing textiles by  coating with wax the parts not to be  dyed: b: a design so executed;  2: a fabric  printed by batik  Sys Richards is an unusual artist. She has  chosen to live in a cabin in the Kispiox  Valley in Northern British Columbia, with  no running water or electricity. She has  chosen batik as a medium. And she incor- .  porates a combination of references from  her Danish heritage, the rural environment  and her personal experiences.  In other words, Richards maintains an  alternate, isolated lifestyle while attempt-  | ing to gain recognition as an artist. She  is not affiliated with a well-known male  artist nor did she establish a reputation  before moving to the country. These choices  make her an anomaly in the arts world.  Sys Richards is also a very good artist. •  A recent series, done for the exhibition,  Palindromes:  On Women Aging (the Burnaby  Art Gallery, August 1983), represented a  breakthrough in both format and content.  In that body of work, Richards decided to  incorporate the qualities of both batik  and the cloth she used into her presentation. She also departed from the square or  rectangular shape' and made a sculptural  piece. The result was a unique use and  rendering of an old tradition.  "Contemplation", "Old Woman", and "Four Walls"  Comprising five works, the series follows  a woman from her thirties to old age. The  first batik, "Decision"(1982), depicts a  woman, holding an axe, about to slaughter  a goose. A young girl has her arm protectively around the animal's neck and is  upset about its impending death. At first  glance, the image appears fairytale-like,  especially in its allegorical tone and  rendering. Yet it is a successful embodiment of an- emotional state. Many of us  have been faced with situations where a  hard decision has had to be made - one that  entailed hurting someone else in order to  survive... ~ •"^i.-.,.^.  Given the whimsical nature of the piece  and the bright colours, the actuality of  the decision is that much more tragic.  The woman has to feed the child and herself. Yet to do so means that she will have  to kill the child's 'playmate'. She has  to try to explain the implications and reasons for her actions, and face the consequences. V  Richards has mined the situation and hinted at a past while showing us the present.  She has paid attention to details such as  the patterning of the ground and the realism of the goose. She has followed through  with a motif to the degree of making the  woman's hair from leaves and drawings of  geese heads.  What she has achieved technically is re- -  markable. Richards does 'true' batik -  each colour is applied over the entire  surface, with certain areas waxed over.  This means that she must understand how  one hue reacts or mingles with another.  It is a long and time-consuming process,  with some pieces taking up to ten dye  baths.  A good example of her tenacity and creativity :n3"GoWenEgg^(1983)_^^  Richards is elaborating upon  the preciousness versus the  impermanence of life.   the artist choose a patterned material,  rather than plain unbleached cotton. The  fabric is a gridded-ridge, and has a three-  > dimensional quality to it. It appears that  we are seeing the image through a screen;  it is a broken-up rendering that coalesces  to form a narrative. Lucy Lippard has  written that "perhaps by coincidence, perhaps not, many of the artists who have  drawn from the grid's'precise strains a  particularly unique interpretation are  women" (from the catalogue for the exhibition, ■GRIDSy   Institute of Contemporary Art,  University of Pennsylvania, 1972).  In Richards' case, the imposed format of  the grid provides a counterpoint to the  lyrical figures of geese and people. In an  obviously overtly rural setting, one which  technology invades only to the point of  metal pails, the grids are a surprise.  Computer and video images are made up of  grids. Their presence in the face of a  mythically-based allegory points to human  beings' need to "provide a long sought-  after discipline within which...obsessions :  could finally be expressed" (Lucy Lippard,  ibid.)  Further, Richards is elaborating upon the  preciousness versus the impermanence of  life. In the first image, a woman is about  to kill a goose. In this second one, she,  along with a child, is carefully holding  a golden goose egg. That which provides  sustenance through its demise also offers  riches and promises of a better life - the  inherent, pervasive, dichotomy.  The third in this series, "Contemplation"  (1983), follows through with the geese  imagery, at the same time as concentrating  on pattern, design and repetition (without the dominant presence of grids). A  seated woman/goose is gazing into a globe/  crystal ball. In it, she sees her reflection  not as a woman, but as a goose. She is  surrounded by a diminishing arc pattern,  which converges around her body. No children are present. Richards has depicted a  sad view of a woman, clothed in bright  colour, who is re-assessing and re-defining  her life. What does she see? Only her  fantasy counterpart - that very animal she  has struggled with and benefited from  in the first two pieces. Her alter-ego  (the goose) has taken over; it is all she  feels she has left.  If Richards lived in an urban area, perhaps.she would have chosen another symbol.  But she raises geese, sketches geese and  lives with them. They are a part of her  life and a part of her art. Just as she  grew up listening to Danish myths, so too  has she created a mythology out of her  immediate environment.  "Contemplation"(1983) stands as the midway  point, in terms of the series, of the  woman's life and her depicted relationship  with her personal mythology. This piece  contains startling psychological clarity  and an incisive comment on the lives of many  women whose children have grown up and left  home. Her identity is shaken because the  primary source of her identity has gone.  She is left to find a new purpose and perhaps get to know herself again (or for the  first time). The side of the globe/crystal  ball that is nearest to her only reflects  her surroundings, empty of a living presence. Perhaps Richards is suggesting that  there are new, as yet unexplored, possibilities. Just as the woman is situated  in a non-environment, so too does this  allow her to choose.  What I find sad about  this piece is not that the woman cannot  see herself, but that it is unclear she  ever will. The reality of this batik, done  in an unrealistic manner, is frighteningly  Maybe as a form of relief, Richards has  made the next piece, a sculptural woman  who is sweeping up geese and flowers,  "Old Woman"(1983). Stretched over a metal  frame, the batik shows a root-woman-goose  who is 'cleaning house'. The metaphor is  clever and provides a glimmer of hope.  Older, intent, and at the same time closer  to that which she felt bound by, the figure  is getting rid of all the garbage in her  environment. She is actively sweeping away  those things which are no longer of use  and retaining only the healthy, alive  aspects of her being. She is upright,  strong and determined. Rather than holding  onto that which is familiar, no matter  what its supposed importance, the woman  is making changes.  The series ends with "Four Walls"(1983).  It shows a woman tied to a wheelchair,  one foot in a pail, clutching three paintbrush/brooms. Richards is_ making connections between the drudgery of familial  commitments and the act of creativity.  Although the woman is confined, she  must still provide nurturing, caretaking  duties. Although confined, she still  strives to make art. Of her 'four walls',  one is a grid-patterened floor (suggesting order in the face of emotional chaos?).  One contains a rainbow/fire-like arc ("I  will not give up"). Two are invisible (it's  always harder to understand, accept or  fight that which we cannot see). And then  there's the goose. Growing out of the  animal are two root forms which cover the  woman's head and torso.  The woman is old, wrinkled, lame. And still  •she is bound by and to her fantasy/alter  •ego. While she looks to one side, the  goose looks at. her. During her 'life', she  has had to make difficult choices ("Decision") , shared wealth and beauty ("Golden  Egg"), re-assessed her life ("Contemplation") and tried to take control ("Old  Woman"). Now she is attempting to live  within the limits that both she and circumstances have imposed. Now she is near-  ing the end of her life, and from Sys  Richards' rendering of this piece, it  seems that what she is left with is her  dignity and her memories. She is not  physically free, she is not psychologically free and she may have some regrets.  I appreciate Sys Richards' unsentimental  look at the stages in some women's lives.  I respect her determination to continue  in a medium that eludes respectability,  despite good reasons to the contrary.  And most of all, in Richards' own words,  "I have been looking to see these difficulties countered." February '85 Kinesis 25  ARTS  Children learning about sexual abuse  by Kim Irving  The book I Belong To Me  was written as a  response to parents and educators who  were asking for Canadian material on the  sexual abuse of children'. Printed in black  and white with a large text, the book is  designed for the preschool and primary  child (ages 5 to 8), and is the first  book in a projected series.  My only concern is that there is no preface for .parents and educators who may  not know how to discuss this issue with  their children. Children absorb an amazing amount of information and a book on  this subject will no doubt raise questions  for them. Adults should be prepared to  provide answers with ease and confidence.  A preface with general information on  sexual abuse, some sample questions and  answers and hints on how to create discussion with the child about the subject,  would be beneficial. Perhaps the authors  will provide this in later books in the  series.  To obtain a copy, send $5.95 plus $1  postage and handling to I Belong To Me  Box 1821, Station A, Kelowna, B.C. V1Y  8M3 or call 762-0869 or 769-4089.  I Belong To Me. Linda Kemp Keller and §  Barbara Parson. Whortleberry Books, 1984. 2  $5.95. |  The authors, Linda Kemp Keller and Barbara g  Parson, are educators with over ten years S  experience. Linda and Barbara have worked §■  extensively in the area of sexual abuse,  TM  organizing conferences, acting as committee members for The Awareness and Prevention of Sexual Abuse in Children and  speaking to teachers and students. Lynne  Atkinson, the illustrator, was a counsellor at Vancouver Rape Relief and has  been involved with other women's issues.  Through their work in Kelowna, the three  women came together to create the story.  As indicated on the front cover, the  story is told by Sam and Samantha who  immediately respond to the opening question  "Do you like to be touched?" with "Sure,  I like a hug from a friend" and "An arm  around me when I'm sad..." But they yell  "NO WAY!" when it's a kiss from grown ups  when you don't want it. Through Sam and  Samantha's continued dialogue we discover  that bad touching can come from a stranger,  babysitter, brother, a Mom or Dad. And  what do you do? they ask - tell someone  you trust who will help make it stop. And  if that person won't help, then you  keep asking till you do get help. At the  end, Sam and Samantha are playing by a  tree and Samantha remarks "I belong to me  and it's up to me to choose who touches  I  BELONG TO ME  and it's up to me to  choose who touches me  Abusive mother tells her story  by Jackie Goodwin  Elizabeth Camden is a child abuser. If  He Comes Back He 's Mine  is the story she  wrote for the son she physically abused;  the child who has been removed from her  home by the Children's Aid Society and  the provincial courts until he reaches  adulthood.  If He Comes Back He's Mine.   Elizabeth  Camden. The Women's Pess: Toronto. 1984  J Belong To Me  presents a difficult issue  to young children in a clear and concise  manner. Considering that children's  attention spans are short, the book quickly provides the essential information  about wrong touching and presents two  children who are self-assured and strong.  Though the book is rather dull in its  black and white format, it could be used  as a colouring book (which may increase  the child's interest). It is an important  book that talks directly to children.  The book opens with Camden, her social  worker and her sister in a court room at  the point where she has just lost custody  of her nine year old son after years of  punishing him too severely. From here  she begins her story by describing her  own abusive childhood.  Marked by intense emotional isolation,  Camden's portrayal focuses on the unhap-  piness that characterized her early years..  // you're getting too much news  and too little information,  our Public A ffairs programmes  offer a real alternative  The Rational Mon - fm i - i.zo pm  daily news and analysis from the left  Nightwatch Wed7:30 -8 pm  in-depth look at the issues  Union Made Wed 8:30 - 9:30 pm  by labour for labour  Redeye Sat9am-noon  music, arts and news analysis  CO-OP RADIO  Womanvision Mon7:30-8:30pm  feminist current affairs & arts  Coming Out Thurs 7:30 - 8:30 pm  gay and lesbian perspectives  The Lesbian ShOWThurs 8:30-9:30 pm  B.C.'s only lesbian radio  America Latina al Dia satnoon-1 pm  Latin American news and music  \©%5J PM  Call us for a free programme guide 684-8494        ^$T9£y  Something of a Cinderella figure, she  '.  details a childhood taken up by cleaning  the house and caring for younger children.  Desperate for praise, Camden ultimately  finds her first escape in the arms of  a charming but irresponsible boyfriend.  From here, she goes on to talk about her  life as a single mother, her lack of  choices and her futile attempts to find  emotional support in a family that remained unable to help her throughout her  life.  Camden does not avoid responsibility for  her actions with her son, however. With  the help of social workers and the Children's Aid Society people, she has carefully analyzed her situation. She recognizes that she abused her son because she  expected him to be perfect - to represent  her as a good person to the world. Sometimes established patterns are irreversible and it appears that this is the situation Elizabeth Camden and her son Keith  have created. Keith becomes a ward of  the courts and Elizabeth continues her  life with her daughter, the child from  whom she expects nothing and therefore  whom she can accept as an individual,  separate person. The last chapter is an  analysis written by Susan Silva-Wayne,  Family Services Supervisor of the Children's Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto.  While Camden's style is at times apologetic, it is honest and careful in its descriptions. Camden approaches her writing  with a sense of modesty and concern, so  that the reader does not feel voyeuristic  or assaulted by the re-telling of the  story. fT^f-X^/-  If He Comes Back He's Mine  is an important  book because it gives the reader a rare  and honest look at the motivations of an  abusive parent. So much attention is given  to the subject of abused children, and  abused children so often become abusers  themselves, that this book opens another  area of discussion in the whole problem  of child neglect, child abuse, poverty  and society's role in supporting women in  these situations. 26 Kinesis February TO  ARTS  Vancouver Transition  House fighting back  by Harris Taylor  Premier Bill Bennett's voice croons on  the news cast: "In the new world economy,  there will be survivors and there will  be casualties..." Women and children are  the casualties of Bennett's "restraint"  policy regarding the funding of Vancouver  Transition House and similar facilities.  V.T.H. has been forced to "privatize" -  making its existence ever more precarious.  V.T.H. was established 10 years ago to  provide services for women seeking shelter  from battering relationships. Its services  include 24 hour protection and a confidential address, food and shelter, childcare, counselling, legal, financial and  medical information in a supportive  environment. Human Resources cutbacks  threaten the existence of such.facilities  and, consequently, threaten the safety  and security of women and children in this  province.  "Fight Back: Vancouver Transition House",  produced in November, 1984, is a collective project which grew out of Women  Against the Budget - a group of women  concerned with the effects of the budget  cuts on women and children in B.C. Three  of the tape's five producers are survivors  of battering relationships. In the half-  hour documentary, these women discuss  their personal experiences and link  battering with our woman-hating culture.  "Fight Back" moves from personal experiences to a broader political base in its  discussion of Bennett's so-called restraint  policies and their effects. One of the  effects of Socred policy is the privatization of V.T.H. Heather Campbell, one  of "Fight Back"'s producers, described  privatization:  It is a way of the government's reneging on its responsibility to fund essential services like Transition House...  Transition House was funded under the  Ministry of Human Resources mandate to  protect children.  It was funded in an  ongoing way and that funding changed  with privatization...Now it's funded  year by year and every year whoever  has the contract has to spend a great  Seattle author writes political mystery  by Carolynn Jones  There is something very engaging about a  novel set in a feminist, politically progressive context. Subtitled, "A Feminist  Mystery), Murder in the Collective is a  tense murder mystery entwined with the  story of a woman's political and personal  growth.  Murder in the Collective.  Barbara Wilson.  The Seal Press; Seattle, WA. 1984  Set in Seattle, the story is told from the  point of view of Pam Nilsen, the central  character. Pam co-owns a printshop with  her sister, which they run collectively  with five other people. Among the members  of the collective is a tangle of connections: between lovers, between the two  sisters, and between ex-lovers, as well as  resentments about work and all the complications one might expect in a group of  passionately political people trying to -  work together.  In the course of a proposed merger with a  lesbian typesetting collective, a member  of the printing collective is murdered.  Pam is sure she can discover the murderer  and in the course of her amateur detective  work she uncovers a number of other mysteries. She ends by discovering the truth  only because she has grown through her  experiences. She has begun to confront  her own racism, acknowledge her attraction  to women, and understand the oppression of  women and lesbians in a real way.  Pam's political growth is painful, as she  learns how American imperialism is directly  responsible for the huge prostitution trade  in the Phillipines. As she hears about it  she thinks, "I didn't want to feel responsible; it hurt too much, it wasn't comfortable."  Questioning her sexuality is no less uncomfortable and confusing. On entering a  women's bar for the first time, Pam finds a  previously standoffish woman is very  friendly to her. "While I felt it wasn't  fair of her only to like me as a prospective lesbian, not as myself, I also found  myself opening up...feeling community, a  desire to share my discovery, see that it  was real."  This short, very readable novel explicates  lesbian reality, lesbian alcoholism, the  difficulty of being a poor single mother,  racism in the progressive community, and  the current political situation in the  Phillipines. Murder in the Collective  is  as much a political novel as a mystery  story and does a good job of keeping the  reader interested in both.  Barbara Wilson has also written  Ambitious  Women, a novel and  Walking. On The Moon,  a collection of short stories.  Murder in  the Collective is the first"in.a series of  mysteries.  Available in pape.r back,   $7..95.  deal of energy reapplying for funding,  making up a new budget...so that means  the funding isn't nearly as secure.  They can cut the funding with 60 days  notice.  While the Bennett government slashed funding for essential services last year, it  spent $150,000 on the opening party for  the B.C. Coal Project. That money could  finance V.T.H. for six months. Last year  1,500 women and children were turned  away from V.T.H. because the facility  was full. That figure should be evidence  enough of the great need for the service  yet the Bennett government cut Human  Resources funding by $30 million. At the  same time, the Socreds granted the Whistler Resort/Convention Centre $50 million  in bail-out funds and proposes to spend  $200 million on the Surrey ALRT extension.  Bennett's restraint policies only restrain  the poor - a category which includes most  women and children.  In the new world economy it's every man  for himself, survival of the fittest.  Proponents of this philosophy seem to lack  a sense of responsibility to members of  society who are less financially "fit"  than themselves. Women and "women's  issues", therefore, will be of little  concern to the survivors Bennett predicts.  The general attitude towards women in this  society is endemic of Bennett's economic  philosophy. Campbell commented:  We realized we had to spend a certain  amount of time on the tape exposing  some of the myths and the stereotypes  around battered women - like:  "Why don't  they just leave and get an apartment and  make a life of their own?" We had to  talk about how most women are still  economically dependent on men...and we  had to talk about the kind of socialization that leads women to stay and the  socialization to blame ourselves for  being beaten up.   We had to talk about  how the law in the community doesn 't  provide protection for women...  The alternative for women is to fight  back - to educate themselves, to organize  and then to -act. "Fight Back" is itself  an act of empowerment. It encourages all  women to empower themselves. Says Campbell:  We made the video for a real mainstream  audience...we also wanted it for women  of all different levels of consciousness  to see.  It wasn't mainly for the converted.   It wasn't mainly for the feminist community or it would have been a  very different video.   We wanted it as  a consciousness raising thing about  privatization that the Socreds were  doing and it also ended up as a public  education video on battering.  "Fight Back" is available at Video Inn in  Vancouver. Women's groups outside the  Lower Mainland can contact their local  community T.V. stations for information  or may order the tape from Battered  Women's Support Services,in their area. RUBYMUSIC  by Connie Smith  The Lady slipper Resource Guide and Catalog of Records and Tapes by Women  is the  most comprehensive listing of women  artists in the world. Within its 60-plus  pages are over 1,500 listings in 20  different categories, including Punk,  Classical, Rock, Soul, Reggae and what is  generally termed Women's Music or Feminist  Music. There are extensive listings of .  hard to find blues, country and jazz  collections, albums from every corner of  this planet, and a special section for  children. The Spoken Word selection is  nothing short of miraculous with recorded  interviews and speeches by Eleanor  Rossevelt, Helen Caldicott, Amelia Earhart  and Angela Davis. The catalog is published  annually, and it was the arrival of the  1985 edition that inspired me to share the  secret.  Ladyslipper, Inc. is a non-profit, tax-  exempt organization based in North Carolina with an office in Washington, D.C.  The group' formed in 1976 and the current  staff are Flo Hollis, Kathy Rudy, Laurie  Fuchs, Liz Snow, Sue Brown, Barb Lewis  and Symathia Williams. They are part of  the WILD network (Women's Independent  Label Distributors) and they promote and  distribute women's recordings in the eastern U.S. They also distribute these  recordings to women's and alternative  bookstores internationally and operate a  productive mail order service.  In 1982, Ladyslipper launched their own  recording label with 'Tartons and Sagebrush' by Marie Rhines, and in 1984 they  released Kay Gardner's 'A Rainbow Path'.  For Canada, Ladyslipper lists and distributes records by Ferron, Marcia Meyer,  Rita McNeil, Connie Kaldor, Jane Siberry,.  Nancy White, Denise Larson, Parachute  Club, Anne Murray, Heather Bishop and  the Moral Lepers.  A Ladyslipper catalog can be yours by  sending $3.00(U.S.) to Ladyslipper, P.O.  Box 3130, Durham N.C. 27705. In the mean- j  time, here is a sample listing of what you  will find. The prices quoted are American,  and if you wish to order, there is an  additional cost of $3.75 for the first  record and $1.75 for each additional record.  Folk Songs: The South  - Bernice Reagon  An early album by Bernice with her incredible acappella singing. Traditional Black  spirituals and work songs. She has said  that some of these songs have meanings on  several levels, and that she has used this  music as a basic foundation in her search  for truth. (Folkways 2457) $8.95  Show Off What You Got -  Carol MacDonald  Rhythmic, driving rock-n-roll from one of  the pioneers in women's rock - she was  founder and leader of Isis for seven years.  This recent LP, recorded with a male band,  includes the rock ballad "Silver Shoes and  Strawberry Wine", "Streetfighter", "You  Brought Me Out", and her original "Laugh  'Til We Cried", written for Isis. (SWS 1104)  $7.95  The Choral Majority 's Greatest Hits  This singing quartet of lesbians and gay  men blasphemes and parodies protestant  hymns, and carols against the new right  and homophobia with such crowd pleasers as  "Dyke the Halls", "Amazing Gays", "We  Three Queers", and the more serious "Were  You There When They Murdered Harvey Milk?"  Cassette only. (Choral Majority C-l) $5.95  Flying Lesbians  Wonderful rock and roll, rhythm and blues  by a 7-women German band. The jacket is a  stunning statement of Amazon strength. Three  of the ten songs are in English. You may  not understand all the words in the others,  but you get the idea in songs like "Wir  Sind Die Homosexuellen Frauen." imported  from Germany. (F03-V4) $9.95  Ladies on the Stage  - June and Jean  Millington. A very danceable, well-liked  and hard to find LP by these sisters who  pioneered in the early "women in rock and  roll" days as members of Fanny. Back-up  musicians include Vicki Randle, Jackie  Robbins and Cris Williamson. Specify LP  (United Artists 821) or cassette (UA CA821-  H) $7.95  Comin' Home -  Mary Watkins  This fall '84 release is an album of inspired music for solo piano by one of the  most talented composers and all-around  musicians anywhereJ It's all original  and Nmostly compositional and includes  "Dream Dance", "Mirrors", "Virgin Birth",  and others which will be new to most folks.  Specify LP (Starfire 2001) or cassette  (Starfire C-20001) $7.95  Night Rainbow -  Gayle Marie  Produced by Mary Watkins with a star-  studded cast of musicians: Linda Tillery,  Mojo, Gwen Avery, June Millington, Carolyn  Brandy, Ylonda Nickell. Original pop-rock  songs on which Gayle Marie does vocals  and piano. (She played organ and piano on  the Outsiders' single "Time Won't Let Me").  On her own label. Specify LP (Gayleo 001)  or cassette (Gayleo C-001) $7.95  Meditating with Children -  Dr. Deborah  Rozman. Teaches children to relax, concentrate, energies, deal with feelings and  stress and gain self-mastery. Includes  "Spaceship Meditation" and "Balloon Meditation". Addresses the often overlooked  reality that children are as sensitive to  and as affected by the pressure of twentieth century life as adults are, often  with fewer outlets to resolve the tension.  Cassette only. (University of the Trees  C-l) $8.95  Witches and Halloween -  Lady Cybele  A family tradition witch and psychic, Lady  Cybele discusses ancient and modern customs,  rites, and symbols associated with Halloween, and their use in the practice of  Wicca. Also some explorations of others  seasonal holidays. Cassette only. (Circle  C-3) $7.95  Lieder  19th-century lieder composed by Fanny  Mendelssohn, Josephine Lang, Clara Schumann, and Pauline Viardot-Gardia, performed by a mezzo-soprano, a bass-baritone and  a pianist. (Leonarda 107) $7.95  Works of Lili Boulanger  The performing and recording of this LP  were supervised by Lili's older sister,  Nadia Boulanger, who has been called "The  Godmother of Composers." Nadia was the  first woman to conduct the Boston Symphony  Orchestra, the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra  of London, and the New York Philharmonic.  She also held positions as organist,  pianist, lecturer, scholar, and teacher  to her sister Lili. This LP contains the  world premiere recordings of five of Lili's  important works." (Everest 3059) $4.95  Chamber Works by Women Composers (3-record  boxed set). Eight works by Clara Schumann,  Fanny Mendelssohn-Hensel, Germaine Taille-  ferre, Cecile Chaminade, Amy Beach, Teresa  Carreno, Lili Boulanger. Expand your   February TO Kinesis 27  collection with this, after you have Women's  Work  on Gemini Hall. (VOx 5112) $15.95  Malarial. ..Revisted  This 5-woman band from Berlin recorded  this tape live at NYC's Danceteria and  DCs 9:30 Club in 1981, and the result is  truly intense. Termed street-level punk  with all the drama of opera, they thrash  such subjects as concentration camps,  passion, death, and power. Half the songs  are in German, half in English. Cassette  only. (ROIR C-123) $8.95  Do or Die!  - Nico  This is a collection of live performances  from Nico's 1982 European tour. Famous for  her baritone vocals in Andy Warhol's Velvet  Underground, in the 60's, she has evolved  an individual style and approach to her  music. English' romanticism with all its  angst is a good description. Cassette only.  (ROIR C-117) $8.95  Liberation for Africa  - Sister Carol  Babylon, watch out! Carol East, a.k.a.  Sister Carol has arrived, A relative newcomer to the Jamaican reggae scene, this  young woman wrote eight of the ten songs  on her debut LP on very political themes.  Jamaican import. (Serious Gold 8003) $8.95  Mary Lou's Mass  - Mary Lou Williams  Mary Records was one of the first artist-  owned- and-controlled record companies.  This recording is a jazz Mass, featuring  her original composition and piano, and the  superb bass and some vocals by Carline  Ray. This was the basis for the ballet,  choreographed by Alvin Alley, of the same  name.. (Mary 102) $7.95  Hot Snow: Queen of the Trumpet  - Valaida  Snow. Valaida sings and swings on these  recordings re-issued from the 30's and 40's  singles. This amazing woman, in addition  to excelling on the trumpet, sang, danced,  could play every instrument in an orchestra, wrote lyrics, conducted, acted as  producer when called upon and spoke seven  languages. In 1941, while working in  Europe, she was incarcerated by the Nazis  in a concentration camp for 18 months, came  close to death from starvation and abuse,  but somehow survived and resumed her  career. (Rosetta 1305) $7.95  A Long Time  - Ella Jenkins  A collection of black gospel songs, spirituals, blues, and. songs of freedom, by this  woman so well-known for her work with  children's music and rhythm. With notes  and text. (Folkways 7754) $8.95  We 've Come A Long Way Baby  - Loretta Lynn  Title song says it all: "Second class don't  turn me on at all... From now on, lover-boy,  it's 50-50 all the way/Up to now I've  been an object, made for pleasing you/But  times've changed and I'm demanding satis"  faction too." Over half the songs here are  by women, several published by Coal Miners  Music which belongs to Loretta. (MCA 3073)  $5.95  Brer Rabbit Stories  - Jackie Torrance  The symbolic representative of the slave,  Brer Rabbit used shrewdness, craftiness  and speed to avoid capture. The stories  synthesized this character with African  tales and Native American legends. Jackie  grew up with these stories and uses a  simplified version of the old dialect  "for the rhythm and colour of the stories  cannot be heard or seen without it".  Specify LP (Weston Woods 720) or cassette  (Weston Woods C-725) $8.95  continued page 28  QJAMINADE 28 Kinesis February TO  ARTS  Claire Kujundzic  Taking control and surviving  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  We have all, at one time or another, had  to work or study in sexist institutions  and situations, and we are all familiar  with the difficulties of trying to function  with minimal compromise. We know the  problems involved in speaking out for the  things in which we believe without being  dismissed as weird, or of trying to take  some control of the space in which we  have to work instead of being manipulated  by it. Studying at the Art School is no  exception, and .Claire Kujundzic's recent  show at Emily Carr is the story of her  taking that control, learning to survive  and feel safe in her work in an unsafe  /ironment.  "Eruption"  The show is confident and fun; it reads  like a good story. A series of four  drawings from the introduction: a woman,  Claire, is tentatively trying her power,  learning to fly. The body of the work  consists of ceramic sculptures, clay pots  of a sort, holes in the ground out of  which the protagonist manages to climb.  Once out she turns -to the others, still  trapped inside, and urges them to join  her. Gradually she grows larger, stronger,  more self-assured, and eventually forms  the walls around a space, defining her  environment instead of being trapped inside it. The last piece is a lithograph,  a more abstract, more formal portrait of  the now-winged artist. As we read the  story we can laugh, and see the pleasure  Claire must have had in putting it together.  Each of the pieces works on its own as  well as in a story, and the show needn't  be seen in order. The ceramic figures  are like miniature people, charming, but  with strength and determination. The holes  in the earth from which they emerge are  more textured, more abstracted, almost  volcano-like, with a charge of nervous  energy. As the figures grow in strength  they become more still and dignified, and  the containers become more controlled and  conventionalized. The transition from one  of these types of images to the other is  smooth, and each provides a nice contrast  for the other.  Most of the figures are representations of  women, but one or two are men. When  Claire took her emerging, flying women  into an almost all male class for critique  she got reactions ranging from blank  misunderstanding to hostility. So she  decided to try including a male figure,  closed in as she had been, to try to  explain that sexual stereotyping, like  other forms of oppression, were traps for  men as well.  The men were seeing me as an antagonist  because I spoke out about sexist issues.  I though maybe if there were men in the  sculpture they'd see that I was talking  about a condition that affects all of  us.   What I will do is think about when  and when not to have men in sculptures.  I'm really concerned about women and  how they survive and struggle through  stuff but I'm also concerned with men  in so far as them not working out their  stuff keeps it all on the women to do  it.  Claire has long been a feminist and political artist in Vancouver. In recent years  she feels her politics have become more  integrated in her artwork, more a reflection of her own feelings and beliefs  than a message she is putting out. At the  Art School she is part of a women's support group and her show is partially a  portrait of the kind of mutual support  which helps women survive and grow in  difficult situations. But is is also the  story of her success in speaking out for  what she believes in outside the safety  of the feminist community, and a reminder  to others to do the same.  Rubymusic from page 27  The Thunder Bird Sisters  From the Shinecock Indian Reservation in  New York, this group sings contemporary  Native American songs depicting modern  life styles, with their complexities,  contradictions, pressures, and longings.  They have appeared at the National  Women's Music Festival. Text included.  (Folkways 37255) $9.95  An Anthology of Chinese Folksongs - Ellie  Mao. These songs are mostly sung in  Standard Chinese so as to be understood  by the widest Chinese-speaking audience.  Some local dialects are included. Includes  7-page booklet with English notes on songs  and Chinese glossary. Piano by Ann Mi Lee.  (Folkways 8877) $8.95  Asabia  Asabia is part of a new generation of  musicians of Ghana who realize the importance of returning to their musical heritage, and this fine LP is a voyage to the  depths of the music of the people of Ghana.  It's rhythmic, melodic, harmonic and  features many chants. Includes "Emma",  "Wamaya". (Star Musique 6023) $8.95  Julie of the Wolves  - Jean Craighead  George. Irene Worth reads this wonderful  story which has been cited as one of the  best books for children written in the  last 25 years (and won the Newberry Award).  Miyax, an Eskimo girl, decides to run  away to her California pen pal after she  is raped by her child-husband. Her only  means of surviving the trek across Alaska  is to thoroughly learn the behavior of  the wolves so she can be adopted into their  pack. For adults too. Cassette only  (Caedmon CDL5 1534) $8.95  Amelia Earhart - The First Woman to Fly  the Atlantic Solo  Includes the actual voice of Amelia Ear-  'ñ† hart telling of the importance of women  in aviation. Also the voice of her sister  talking about her, and dedication ceremonies for the Amelia Earhart plaque on  the day prior to her landing in Hawaii.  (Mark 56 746) $8.95  Dykes Resist.'  Lesbians give first-hand accounts of  resistance to male violence: their experi  ence fighting back, and the knowledge  they've gained. 90 min. For women only.  Cassette only. (Radical Rose DFB01) $5.95  The Freedom Movement  - Coretta Scott King  The crucial events of the civil rights  movement, 1955-1958. Cassette only (Caedmon CDL 1406) $12.95  Fre.e at Last,  Free at Last  -Coretta Scott  King. An account of the second decade of  the civil rights movement, 1960-1968.  Cassette only. (Caedmon CDL 1407) $12.95  We Are Among You: Lesbians with Disabilities.   (2-cassette set) This 2-hour, 2-tape  set was edited from a live program by  disabled lesbians in Minneapolis, and presents narratives and personal stories. A  fall '84 release, for women only. Cassettes only. (Radical Rose SD 04) $7.95  Sylvia Plath Reading her Poetry  Of the many American poets who reached  their ascendency in the last decades,  perhaps none looms so large as Sylvia Plath.  Compiled from BBC and Harvard collections.  Specify LP (Caedmon TC 1544) or cassette  (Caedmon CDL5 1544) $8.95. A little  night reading  by Cy-Thea Sand  Black Women Writers  (1950-1980): A  Critical Evaluation,   ed. Mari Evans  543 pages. Garden City, New York:  Doubleday, 1984.  If reading literary criticism is not  usually your idea of a good time, Black  Women Writers  my well change your mind. If  the reader is familiar with the writings  of Black women such as Audre Lorde, Maya  Angelou, Alice Childress and Alice  Walker, for example, this important work  will enhance that knowledge. If readers  are interested in discovering new fictional artists and poets, Black Women Writers  will satisfy and more. I am especially  impressed with the book because it had  increased my faith in my persistent belief  - however unpopular - that literary commentary can be and often is exciting.  Each segment begins with an autobiographical statement by the author being studied,"  followed by two or three essays (mainly: by  academic critics) on her work. Most of  these introductions were lively and memorable: Alice Childress talking about the  myth of so-called ordinary people, Gwendolyn Brooks on her reactions to the Black  militancy of the Fisk poets, and Gayl  Jones on the relationship between politics  and imaginative literature. Humour and up-  frontness characterize all of the writers'  personal statements; no coy self-serving  rhetoric here.  I was pleased with the writers' respect  for their readers, and this communal  spirit pervaded many of the essays as  well. John 0. Killen's essay on Alice  Childress is angry and upbeat; Addison  Gayle Jr.'s work on Gwendolyn Brooks is  powerful but marred by his lack of  commentary on a particularly vicious,  misogynistic image he quotes from her  work; Bettye J. Parker-Smith's wonderful  essay, "Running Wild In Her Soul: The  Poetry of Carolyn Rodgers" is an example  of how literary commentary can weave  history and language into a fascinating  whole. Parker-Smith's piece on Alice  Walker is also good. I did miss specific  lesbian criticism, especially on the  work of Audre Lorde and Alice Walker.  Barbara Smith, one of many Black lesbian  feminist critics, could have helped to  diminish the overall heterosexual ambience  of the book. But the most significant  impression I am left with is the Black  writer's symbiotic relationship to her  community, dramatized by Toni Cade  Bambara's statement she works "to produce  stories that save our lives."  Civil' Wars.   Rosellen Brown. 419 pages.  New York: Knopf, 1984.  Brown's second novel, Tender Mercies,  introduced me to her powers of character  ization and to her interest in the notions  of power and loss. In her domestic epic,  Civil Wars,  Brown intertwines the story  of a marriage with a personalized history  of the civil rights movement: "There  was public time - at a sufficient distance  it was called history - and there was  private time that beat like a small hot  heart inside the body of that history." I  admire this novel for its essential  courage in confronting the tensions and  nuances of race relations; its anti-racist  impetus moves the work into confrontation  and the realities of change. I suggest  that Alice Walker's novel about the same  historical period, Meridian,  be read as  well. Meridian  and Civil Wars  read as  two women's specific relation to a  collective history could lead to a seminal  understanding of Black and white women's  historical roots of solidarity and conflict.  Civil Wars  is also important for its  treatment of children as whole beings,  powerless most of the time and subject  to the ideology of their families. O'Neill  and Helen are raised in a white supremacist environment but when their parents  are killed they must go to live with  their radical uncle and his progressive  wife, Jessie. Helen's torment is particularly poignant; Brown has no easy answers  to the damage caused to children by a  heartless society which breeds insecurity  and fear. As in Marge Piercy's Fly Away  Home,   the white male "hero" is lost  without a political movement, while quiet  courage and radical heroism are lived  everyday by mothers and their children.  Growing Up Black In Canada,   Carol Talbot.  96 pages. Toronto: Williams-Wallace, 1984.  Because there is next to nothing written  about the Black women's experience in  Canada *, Talbot's short biography is  welcome. In it Talbot discusses her  family's history and thus introduces the  reader to glimpses of Black Canadian  history, describing such realities as  separate galleries (called nigger heavens)  for Blacks in Canadian churches in the  . 1880's, and beaches in Southern Ontario  with signs posted reading, "No Jews Or  Blacks". Talbot tells us that "one of the  first black settlements in Canada was my  mother's hometown, Amherstburg, settled  by blacks as early as 1812. It was the  most southerly Canadian terminus of the  Underground Railway..."  Talbot's language is often awkward and  self-conscious, but her voice gets  sharp and impressive when it is informed  by rage: "Maybe he (referring to early  black settlers in general) had to house  his family in a rickety shack with a  dirt floor and hear themselves referred  to as those "dirty niggers", who didn't  know how to live any better. More than  maybe, he was the victim of the racial  hostilities of his time, overt or covert,  that rampaged against his efforts to  raise himself and his family out of the  degradation of slavery and the equally  debilitating confines of racially imposed  slavery."  Because the book provides only glimpses  of Black Canadian history, Growing Up  Black In Canada  is disappointing overall.  However, it can serve as both a research  tool and an indication of the work to  be done on the Black experience in Canada.  *See Makeda Silvera's Silenced,  also  published by Williams-Wallace; also  Fireweed Issue 16  on 'Women of Colour'  and Fireweed Issue 19  on 'Theory'.  Bitter Sweet Taste Of Maple.   Tecia Werbow-  ski. 70 pages. Toronto: Williams-Wallace,  1984.  This is an odd little book mistakenly  referred to as a novel on the back cover.  February TO Kinesis 29  It is a collection of short, truncated  (yet intriguing) portraits of a group of  Eastern European women immigrants to  Montreal. All are social workers employed  in the same agency - a fact which awkwardly comes to light as the stories progress.  The writing is self-conscious and underdeveloped, but the characters themselves  are fascinating. Each in her turn grapples  with the surprises and shocks of a new  city and culture while longing for the  familiarity of her birth culture. Some  segments are memorable and one at least,  "The Price of Daring", contains the seeds  of a much longer narrative. I enjoyed  this book partly because I am from Montreal  and partly because the idea of the work  is good - telling the stories of women who  live everday lives of work and survival,  yet who dramatize the incredible uniqueness of individual experience.  Resources For Feminist Research  (RFR/DRF)  Vol. 13, No. 3, November, 1984. 'Women  and Language'. Available from OISE, 252  Bloor Street West, Toronto, Ontario,  M5S 1V6.  Language and women's relation to it is a  vibrant topic in both feminist academic  circles and in the feminist writing community. In San Francisco there is a division between language poets and political writers, and a similar schism may be  developing in the women's literary scene  in Canada. The debate involves the^relative value of self-narratives of historically silenced people such as gay people,  people of colour and women in general,  women of colour and working-class women  in particular. Writers such as Nicole  Brossard and her English translator Barbara Godard are interested in exploring  language in itself, how it operates ideologically to oppress us and as Audre  Lorde argues "...the master's tools will  never dismantle the master's house."  RFR's  issue on 'Women and Language'  presents diverse work by feminist  academics on subjects ranging from  literacy programs in Central America and  the ideology of Harlequin Romances to  women's speech patterns and the art of  translating true to women's experience.  Dale Spender's short piece on "Exploration  and Challenge in the English Language"  mentions the ongoing work of Cheris  Kramarae and Paula Treichler in developing  a feminist dictionary, and tells us that  the original meaning of the word "gossip"  was "the close woman friend present as  a talking comforter to a woman giving  birth".  It would be wise to have a dictionary  handy for some articles, although most of  them are clearly written and explore their  themes with zest and enthusiasm. There  is a glaring lack of work on computer  language and women's relationship to  technical language in general, however.  Computer anxiety is all too common for  women, aid an article on working and  middle-class women's relationships to  technical changes in the workplace would  be helpful, as well as writing on the  nature of computerese itself.  NOW AVAILABLE:  Places Of Interest To Women:  1985 Women's  Travel Guide,  USA CANADA CARIBBEAN.  Ferrari Publications, P.O. Box 35575,  Phoenix, Arizona 85069.  La Detresse Et L'Enchantment.   Gabrielle  Roy's autobiography from Boreal Express,  Montreal. Roy's English Canadian publisher, McClelland and Stewart, is considering  a translation.  Peace and World Order Studies: A Curriculum Guide.   Edited by Barbara J. Wein.  750 pages. $16 postpaid. World Policy  Institute, 777 United Nations Plaza,  New York, N.Y. 10001. 30 Kinesis February H  LETTERS  Salmon Arm  sonnet contest  Kinesis:  Kinesis  readers might like to know of the  following competition: The city of Salmon  Arm, where I now reside, at least temporarily, is having a sonnet writing contest.  The idea came from an advertisement promoting Martini and Rossi vermouth. The  suggestion made by the advertisers was that  there are more drinkers than poets in  Salmon. Arm and Canada.  Drinkers and poets are invited to submit  sonnets - 14 lines of rhymed iambic pentameter - on any subject and have a chance  at $500 and a week in Salmon Arm at the  Village West Motel (heated pool, Jacuzzi  etc.). Second prize is $250 and a weekend  in Salmon Arm. In addition ten prizes of  Canadian books will be awarded to lucky  runners up.  I am one of the judges (along with three  men - two of them high school teachers,  one a college instructor). I intend to see  that at least one prize goes to a woman  so how about a nice flood of entries  from readers to make this affirmative  action possible?  Winners will be announced during National  Book Festival Week, April 13-20. Entries  should be mailed by March 15 to Sonnet  Committee, Okanagan College, Salmon Arm,  B.C. VOE 2T0.  Patricia Maika  Ridington disagrees  with Kinesis  Kinesis:  As the major feminist journal in our province, Kinesis  has traditionally had the  role, and the responsibility, of presenting issues of relevance to British Columbia  women. I therefore find it very disappointing when Kinesis  does not present all the  information it has available, and focuses  instead on only one perspective of a controversial issue. A feminist newspaper  must, at all costs, avoid the bias which  women have long complained of in the  "male-stream" press. When covering the  controversy surrounding the appointment  of myself, and two other feminist women,  to the B.C. periodical review board,  Kinesis  editors had material in their  possession which would have allowed them  to write an article giving a balanced  perspective on the issue. It seems most  unfortunate that a choice was made to  focus only on the views of those opposed  to the board.  When Kinesis  requested an interview with  me, I was delighted to have an opportunity to clarify questions regarding my motivation for participation in the board,  the operation of the board, etc. I was  assured by Patty Gibson, who interviewed  me, that the interview would be printed  more or less verbatim, with only such  editorial cuts as were necessary for  reasons of space limitation. I was also  told that I could look at the copy prior  to publication, to ensure that cuts had  not changed the meaning of my remarks.  On that basis, I spent considerable time  with Patty, and discussed several issues  at length. Among these were: the relationship of the board to the Periodical Distributors ' Association and the Ministry  of the Attorney General; the involvement  of feminist groups in setting up the board  and determining its structure and function;  the problems which have arisen in the  Ontario Board which has no feminist members, and which we were determined should  not be replicated here; the financial  arrangements between the board and the   distributors who are submitting their  periodicals for review.and those "bag  product" distributors, who are outside  the distributors association, do not  submit material, and whose methods and  merchandise we can not influence. We also  discussed the difference between the board  giving an opinion that a periodical does  not violate current community standards,  and "approval" of a periodical.  To clarify, briefly, some of these points:  1. The board liases with both the Periodical Distributor's Association and the  A-G's office, but is functionally independent. We make our own decisions; our  standards are the A-G's guidelines,  current case law, and our judgement of  "community standards", based on our work  in women's and/or community groups. We  send the results of our deliberations each  week to both of the above institutions;  we also send our reports to community  groups and feminist organizations who wish  to be involved in monitoring to ensure  that the periodicals which we suggest  should hot be distributed, do not appear  on newstands.  2. The distributor's association had no  input into the selection of board members;  a number of women's groups did. The A-G's  department supplied liaison services,  but was not part of the selection committee; neither body has right to dismiss  board members.  3. The distributors who are part of the  association do not distribute only pornographic material; they also distribute  all the regular magazines, from Time  to  Sesame Street,   that are in general circulation throughout B.C. Board members are  paid through a trust fund set up by the  distributors, so that we can retain an  "arms length relationship" with them.  Since the distributors are the ones who  make the money from the magazines, it  seems appropriate that they should be the  ones that pay for our work. The distributors support the board because it allows  them not  to distribute some magazines,  without jeopardizing their contracts for  other high circulation periodicals. Under  the criminal code, (s. 161) they can not  be forced to distribute material if they  have reason to believe it is obscene.  Our presence allows them to hold back some  pornography, while maintaining their contracts for other periodicals, because we  give them "clout", and give credibility  to a claim that a specific magazine may  be obscene.  This system breaks down when the top levels  of the federal government usurp our  function and decide that a magazine is  not obscene, before we have had a chance  to give our opinion. This was the case  with the January Penthouse,  which had  been approved by the Departments of Justice and Revenue in Ottawa prior to being  submitted to us. In that case, we refused  to give an opinion, because our powers  had been overridden. That's frustrating.  But we still feel that our efforts to date  have been worthwhile, and have done a  little to improve the social climate for  women and children in British Columbia.  The Periodical Review Board has been functioning for 6 weeks. We have reviewed about  125 magazines, and held back about 50.  Those held back have contained scenes of  brutalization and dehumanization of women,  descriptions or depictions of incest,  bestiality, and gross violence in association with sex. I am firmly convinced that  their presence on the newstands would have  contributed to the misogyny of our culture  It is my understanding that the letter  from Maureen Bostock, which was printed in  the Dec. issue, was already in the hands  of Kinesis  before I was interviewed. The  interview addressed, even if it did not  entirely resolved, many of Maureen's concerns. Had the interview been run in its  entirety, or nearly so, as originally  planned, many of the questions and issues  discussed in her letter would have been  answered. The result would have been a  reasonable "debate" on the issue. In  order to "balance the scales" now, in  a just way, I trust that you will publish  this letter in full.  It is obvious that the Review Board is not  "the answer" to pornography. It is one  small step in an ongoing crusade - a  crusade in which we should respect and  support all those who are working in ways  they believe will contribute to our shared,  longterm goal of eliminating the hate-  literature which is pornography.  Jillian Ridington, Chair, B.C. Periodical  Review Board  cc: Vancouver Coalition Against Pornography; West Coast Women and Words Society;  Port Coquitlam Women's Centre; North Shore  Women's Centre; W.A.V.A.W./Rape Crisis  Centre; Rape Relief; Media Watch; Broadside  Disapproves of  Kinesis bias  Kinesis:  In the December/January issue of Kinesis,  you ran an article on the B.C. periodical  review board. As the board of Women and  Words, we take exception to the editorial  bias in the article.  Pornography has been discussed extensively.  The issue of a review board is complex  and one on which many women, both in our  association and the larger women's movement, have widely differing points of view.  Kinesis,  as a central and powerful voice,  has a responsibility, especially with  difficult issues, to seek out and present  as many views as possible. This process  could contribute to further awareness and  understanding of all women's work around  the issue. Instead, the article focussed  predominately on one side of the discussion and contributes to division among  women rather than resolution.  Kinesis  can play a vital role in bringing j;  women together or separating us from each i  other. We all experience the degradation  of pornography in this culture. We would j  encourage you to use fully representative j  journalism to help us to work together.  Starla Anderson/Betty Baxter/Brenda Kil- j  patrick/Hilary Mackey/Joan Meister/Jillianj  Ridington/Tova Wagman (Vancouver)  Reader protests  MRB article  Kinesis:  We regret the bias of the recent article  on the Magazine Review Board. It was bad j  journalism. Apparently there was no  attempt to interview Karen Phillips of  Port Coquitlam Women's Centre, nor Gwen  Ingham, the third woman on the Review Board,  the Attorney-General's liaison staff,  nor any representative of our Coalition  apart from Jillian, whose interview was  truncated.  The male press has not hesitated to give  biased coverage to feminist issues, but  the principles of feminism support full  and free discussion of every strategy  option, with respect given to each individual opinion.  Briefs submitted to the Fraser Committee  indicate that many feminist groups see  government regulation as a necessary step  in the regulation of mass-marketed misogyny.  Other feminists argue that governments  always use their power to support patriarchy. The history of obscenity law en- February TO Kinesis 31  wass  PA\U*»G  Nations  § COMMERCIAL  • RESIDENTIAL  • INTERIOR  • ORYWALL REPAIR  LETTERS  We are pleased to announce  the opening of  our meeting room  Ideal for groups  of 5 to 65.  Vancouver's gay ticket centre.  Mail order enquiries available.  PHONE: (604) 669-1753  1221 THURLOWST., VANCOUVER, B.C. V6E 1X4  Open 1 Oish -1 Oish 7 days a week  member of CVBA  Hello  PORTUGAL!  March 16 - March 31  Why not join myself and other women  who are interested in a fabulous trip to  Portugal and London?  Program includes:  • Return Airfare from Vancouver  • 3 nights in London  • 5 nights in Lisbon  • 7 nights in Algarve (Paradise Beaches)  • Transfers, Taxes and Cont. B'fasts.  PRICE: (Approx) $1,299.00 Cdn. per person  If you would like to make part of this wonderful tour for  women and/or require additional information, please  contact:  ILDA PEREIRA  at 877-1691 or  leave your name/phone number at  685-6546  forcement supports their conviction.  The Magazine Review Board is an experiment in feminist-government dialogue. It  came about as a result of two years of  feminist work against pornography in B.C.  The industry no doubt acted largely from  motives of self-protection, but perhaps  also from some small sense of responsibility.  Feminists had considerable input into the  structure of the MRB: at least half of  the members are to be women; terms of  office are to be^limited to prevent de-  sensitization; femininst groups had the  opportunity, along with other groups,  to nominate, and in fact three of the  four people appointed are feminists.  Government resources were made available  to: 1) handle the nomination procedure;  2) find a mechanism for payment of Board  members that would not make them subject  to any pressure from distributors; 3) establish a training procedure that would  educate the Board in the interpretation of  material and guidelines; 4) publish decisions material and guidelines; 4) publish decisions to police, customs, and  other enforcement bodies. Permission for  circulation does not guarantee immunity  from prosecution.  No one expects the Magazine Review Board  to do more than hinder the circulation  of the worst materials and provide documentation of the way the present systems  operate against women's concerns.  The Review Board is an attempt to find a  middle way between the radical feminist  position which permits the patriarchal  status quo to continue as before, and  the moderate feminist position which  involves women letting the men do it all,  women submitting to the male government's  manipulation of its concerns.  The Review Board is an interesting attempt  by feminists to take more control over  their issues, working with but not under  the male structures. As constituted in  British Columbia this year, it may be a  new option.  Many feminists are very pessimistic about  the possibility of the Board's being  effective. Their opinion deserves respect  and adequate expression. So do the opinio  ons of feminists who are willing to try  different strategies and to risk the  criticism of other feminists.  I sent a copy of a rationale for participation in the MRB to Kinesis  in October,  but it was not used.  Your readers deserve accurate and fair  reportage of this issue. We need, to  support one another, to affirm our collective wisdom to our common struggle.  Donna Stewart, Chairperson, Vancouver  Coalition Against Pornography  Ed note: Changes in the format of the aforementioned article were discussed with  Jillian Ridington prior to the story's publication.   In an effort to give voice to  women's organizations concerned with the  effects of the Review Board,  representatives of women 's groups working on the issue of violence against women were contacted and interviewed:  Women Against Violence Against Women,  Vancouver Rape Relief,  North Shore Women's Centre,  and Vancouver  Status of Women.  Ridington's comments were  given as much weight as the comments of the  organizations.  Dump national  inferiority complex  I am writing to express a long held concern of mine.  The November '84 issue of Kinesis  carried  a column announcing the national distribution of HERizons.   Editor Debbie Holmberg-  Schwartz was quoted as saying "The U.S.  has had Ms.   and other magazines to address  their concerns...Finally (Canadian women)  have something." Recently a Toronto radio  program referred to Stephen Leacock as  "Canada's Mark Twain." I have heard a  Canadian Olympic athlete referred to as  "Canada's Mark Spitz."  We have struggled for many years, as women,  to be recognized for ourselves, rather  than identified through men. No more  are we only this one's wife or that one's  mother. Yet, as Canadians, we continue  to be identified through others. (Canada's  Ms.)  I am not taking an anti-American stance.  Being a Canadian nationalist is no more  anti-American than being a feminist is  anti-male. (By the way, machismo and militarism are not the only expressions of  patriotism). Having struggled so long  against male domination, our American  sisters hardly need to be pushed into a  similar dominant role over Canadian women.  I am not an isolationist. I cannot criticize anyone for finding inspiration in a  good idea, wherever it originates.  I am asking; why can't -Canadian publications, authors and athletes stand by themselves? Why must our every thought, word  and deed be considered in an American  context? Let's dump our national inferiority complex along with our feminine inferiority complex.  Nancy Bruce, Toronto  More on  TESSERA  BECKWOMAM'5  Store fRDNt art 5>tudiD -&ffT sHoP  »*'1 " CARDS +CRrVrrs  S85?OM- EAR flEftfIHk Wfcfiac  ' HELIUM 5ALLA0MS  L0T9A ^gVlZLLEKY-ZkMGSAM  WDMEM'^   SMfioL 3£WELLERf "*2k»Ia  0m LANCE-   AW. WofcK-     ,       j   I 3  ANVrttiNU- MAPg IN CLAY-flfett fat* MfflEfl  Kinesis-:  We appreciate Cy-Thea Sand's concern with  racism and her willingness to engage in  continued discussion of issues raised by  her response to the editorial dialogue in  the TESSERA issue of Room Of One 's Own.  Her letter in the September issue asked  some important questions and we especially  appreciate her concern with the relationship between activism and theory in the  women's movement. When she writes that,  "Perhaps this is the real challenge of  feminism, to expand the borders of our  imagination so that form and content do  not contradict each other," she expresses  a major concern of recent Quebecoise  feminist writing, a concern shared by  TESSERA. In laying bare the ideological  underpinnings of a sexist and imperialist  society, an analysis of language may be  the prelude to certain forms of action.  At least it is our hope that this is where  theory and activism begin to meet.  It is also a place where we have to exercise feminist consciousness with diligence,  as our mutual exchange in Kinesis  makes  clear. It's ironic that the exchange it-  , self demonstrates the slipperiness, the  doubleness of language with its encoded  attitudes that often slip by unexamined.  Cy-Thea is- right to ask that "the work of  one group of women, responding to a particular cultural and historical situation...  not be compared to the work of another  group of women whose perspective and goals  may be radically different." Barbara 32 Kinesis February'85  1CJ  TRAVEL U.  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Tuning and Repairs  854 East 12th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V5T2J3  876-9698  Birth  Enhancement  Services  ... Pre/Post Natal Counselling...  Labour Support... Education...  Midwifery Services...  | Mary Sullivan 733-6077 Carol Anne Letty 254-9759  Gloria Lemay731-2980  We work on cars as well.  free estimates  Alice Macpherson  Outdoor Recreation Maps  of British Columbia  HOD  Highest quality topographical maps  (1:100 000 scale) of selected popular  outdoor recreation areas in B.C. Areas  and facilities for all major outdoor  recreational activities are located on  the maps. The back of each map contains information on weather, rights of  geography, safety, local contacts, trail  information and much more . . .  Maps Now Available For:  * 100 Mile House Region  * Windermere Lake Region  * Whistler/Garibaldi Region  * Greater Kamloops Region  * Central Okanagan Region  * Campbell River Region  * Shuswap Lake Region  * Princeton-Manning-Cathedral  * Princeton-Merritt Region  * Nicola Valley Region  * Chilliwack-Hope-Skagit Region  Write or phone:  The Outdoor Recreation Council of B.C.  1200 Hornby Street, Vancouver, B.C..  V6Z 2E2  (604) 687-3333/1600  Ariel Books  Monday-Saturday 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.  OPEN SUNDAY-1 p.m. to 5 p.m.  Watch for the International  Women's Day Sale:  March 6th through March 10th  20% off all books with woman/women in their titles.  t Ariel Books, 2766 West 4th JWi  See you there!  °\*  LETTERS  Godard's language was misleading in refer--  ence to the work of Black and Native women  in that it imaged a. single line of development for all women's writing when she was  trying to say the opposite. Cy-Thea is  also justifiably critical of Daphne Marlatt 's prescriptiveness in stating that  the next step to be taken by Black, White  and Native women writers in Canada is to  develop a feminist theory of language.  Differences preclude a single direction.  However, we feel that Cy-Thea is being  equally prescriptive when she criticizes  the TESSERA discussion of the differences  between intellectual structures in Quebec  and English-Canada for not including an  analysis of racism.  We would also hope that she recognizes that  "the particular cultural and historical  situation" of Quebecoise feminist writers  has shaped their gender-based analysis of  language. It was in their struggle against  national oppression that they realized  that patriarchal oppression underlay  colonial oppression, that though they  struggled along with Quebecoise men they  were still being oppressed by those men  through the very language they shared with  them. At Women and Words/Les femmes et les  mots, Makeda Silvera talked about similiar  experiences working within the Black  community on community newspapers.  We also agree with Cy-Thea that "tossing  about words like racism, for example, can  become a substitute for rigorous analysis  and soul-searching." Her use of the term  "academic" seems to perpetuate rather than  clarify the sources of division and confusion among us. In one context, referring  to Wendy Frost and Michelle Valiquette's  report on the 1981 Dialogue Conference she  equates it with "traditional" and opposes  it to everything that is "radical and revolutionary" in the women's movement. In  another context she uses it to mean "false  forms" which are "linear and competitive".  Clearly "academic" is being tossed around  as a value-loaded term identified with an  implicit masculine norm not being described. It masks the disturbing implication  that a theoretical analysis of language  belongs to the world of academia (which is  masculine, competitive and linear) and is  therefore suspect. We feel that this  position demands more "soul-searching",  especially as so much of our communication  in the pages of Kinesis  has required a lot  of linguistic decoding on both sides.  If we can substitute for the negative term  "academic" the neutral term "theoretical",  then we would underline the importance of  Cy-Thea's final question: "How can we work  towards -the healing of the schism between  activist and (theoretical) elements in our  revolutionary movement?" Perhaps this  discussion is a small but important step  forward.  Barbara Godard (Toronto  Daphne Marlatt (Vancouver)  Kathy Mezei (Vancouver  Gail Scott (Montreal)  Fields to launch  judicial review  Kinesis:  In dismissing Andrea Field's sexual harassment complaint, the B.C. Council of Human  Rights has demonstrated what the new Human  Rights Act means for British Columbians.  Quite frankly, it means that sexual harassment is now, in Council Chairman James  Edgett's words, "human warmth" and the  more you harass an employee, the more  acceptable it is.  Our moral outrage at this decision must  not be silenced. Andrea is fighting the  decision but she - and all others who  face this humiliation - need your.support.  The Vancouver Island Human Rights Coali  tion has established a legal defence  fund to support Andrea's struggle for  justice as she launches a judicial review.  We are proceeding with the appeal because  we believe British Columbians will not  stand for this abuse of power by the Council. And we believe we will win. But this  appeal will be expensive. Even with lawyers  donating time, we estimate the appeal  will cost several thousand dollars as it  goes before the Supreme Court of B.C.  Please demonstrate your support for the  appeal by donating to the Andrea Fields  Legal Trust Fund, Vancouver Island Human  Rights Coalition, 418-620 View Street,  Victoria, B.C. V8W 1J6. Please make  cheques payable to Vickers and Palmer In  Trust.  Help us ensure that all victims of  sexual harassment will not have to face  this malicious ordeal. Your support is  critical.  Hugh McLeod, President, Van. Island Human  Rights Coalition.  NDP-MLA seeks  women's input  Kinesis:  I have just been appointed to the challenging position of spokesperson for the NDP  Caucus on women's issues and the Status  of Women.  I am very anxious to use this opportunity  to look at all the services for women which |  are available in this province, at all the  activities in which women's groups are  involved, aid to work with women to ensure  that the Caucus articulate the needs,  aspirations and hopes of women as clearly  and competently as possible.  Because of my work in the women's movement  over the past decade, I recognize that the  more women involved in this process the  greater the chances of success. I-would,"  therefore, be very pleased to hear from  individuals and groups who would agree to  be part of this effort, and would be willing to assist the Caucus and me in this  endeavour.  I can be contacted at the Legislative  Buildings in Victoria (387-6082) or at my  constituency office in Burnaby (542-2112).  Rosemary Brown, MLA (Burnaby-Edmonds)  Northern lesbian  journal in crisis  Kinesis ,•  This fall we completed four years of continuous publishing as a lesbian-identified  journal. We are writing now to appeal for  financial aid to continue.  Our Winter 84-85 issue has had to be postponed because:  1) Voices is $356 in debt, and there is  no way that we can single-handedly raise  the $200 more that we need to put out  another issue. We have always operated  in the belief that, if we are meeting a  significant need, the dollars and other  support will arrive to keep us going.  2) Because we are very tired. One of us  is quite exhausted from trying to stand  almost alone in Northwest Ontario to  insist publicly that women have a right  to love other women. We have to draw back  from the struggle for a time to rest,  and winter is the most appropriate time  to do this.  If we receive enough support in response  to this appeal, we will begin to publish  in March. February '85 Kinesis 33  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  'THROUGH THE KEYHOLE 1985" - Thursday,  March 7/85, 8p.m. at Women in Focus  456 Broadway. A series of films relating to women in celebration of I.W.D  Admission by donation (proceeds go to  the financing of I.W.D. events.)  SEX TIPS for Modern Girls - opens Feb.  8th. 2 for 1 previews Feb. 6 & 7. Reservations 689-0926. The Firehall Theatre,  280 East Cordova St., Van., B.C.  THE TIMES OF HARVEY MILK, A documentary  film about the gay San Francisco City  Supervisor assassinated in 1979 by  Dan White, a fellow Supervisor and  former policeman and fireman. Benefit  premiere for local gay organizations,  Thursday Feb. 7. Reception 7 p.m. Showtime 8:30p.m. Tickets $7 in advance,  $8 at door. Advance tickets at Little  Sister's, Buddy's, Castle Pub or Studio  Cinema. Film opens at Studio Cinema  Feb. 8., 919 Granville, 681-1732.  RICHMOND WOMEN'S CENTRE will show a videotape of their presentation to the People's  Commission. Discussion to follow. Place:  Kwantlen College Campus, 5840 Cedarbridge  Way - Room 420. Feb. 7, 7:30-10p.m.,  Richmond. Further info: contact Bonita  Hurley 270-6182.  COMING ALIVE IN 1985 - the Second Annual  B.C. Gay and Lesbian Conference is  scheduled for February 15, 16 and 17,  1985 at U.B.C. The Conference is sponsored by the Vancouver Gay Community  Centre and Gays and Lesbians of U.B.C  Pre-registration for the conference package , which includes the banquet and  dance, is $30, or for students $20. Pre-  register now. For more info write: Provincial Conference, c/o 208-1242 Robson  Street, Van. B.C. V6E 1C1; or VGCC, Box  2259, Main Post Office, Van., B.C. V6B 3W2  WHO'S IN CONTROL: Legal Implications of  Reproduction and Technology, the 6th  biennial conference of the National  Association of Women and the Law, to  be held in Ottawa, Feb. 21-24. For mori  info: write NAWL Conference, Camylle  Enterprises, 39 Goulburn Ave., Ottawa,  KIN 8C7 or call (613)594-8004.  CLOSET PRODUCTIONS PRESENTS a Musical  Celebration of International Women's  Day and Women Against Violence Against  Women/Rape Crisis Centre's third birthday. Featuring Heidi Archibald and the  Bathtub Blues Band, and from Seattle,  the Righteous Mothers. Come join us in  this fundraiser for WAVAW/Rape Crisis  Centre on Sat., March 9, 1985, 8p.m.  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables^at Victoria. Tickets $5.  Reservations 254-9578. Advance tickets  available from Women's Bookstore, Ariel  Books, Octopus East & West and WAVAW  Collective members.   CONFERENCE ON HUMAN RIGHTS and the Peace  of Nations. Fri., Feb. 8/85 8a.m.-5p.m.  Hotel Gerogia, Vancouver. The conference  registration fee is $35. Call Continuing  Studies, Simon Fraser University, 291-  4565 for info and to register.  DR. ROSALIE BERTELL, an internationally  known researcher on the long-term effects  of low-level radiation is coming to  Vancouver to participate in the second  national meeting of the Canadian Support  Network for Nuclear Free and Independent  Pacific issues, to be held Thurs. and  Fri. Feb. 28 and March 1, 1985. She will  address the topic "The Pacific Region  in the Nuclear Age" at a PUBLIC MEETING  on Fri. evening, March 1, 8p.m. at  Langara College (Lecture Room A-122).  Letters from previous page  If you write, please use the following  address: Voices,  c/o I. Andrews, R.R.  #2, Kenora, Ontario P9N 3W8. (Please do  not use 'lesbian' in our mailing address:  We are out publicly but Our Mail is not.')  Make cheques payable to•Voices.   Postdated cheques are fine. We know very few  lesbian activists are rich, and we'll  appreciate any amount you can send.  Doreen Worden and Isabel Andrews, co-  editors, co-publishers, of Voices For  Lesbian Survival.  BUDGET U. HOMECOMING BENEFIT DANCE - March  2, 8p.m.-la.m. Ukranian Hall, 805 E.  Pender. Employed $5; Unemployed $3.  Childcare available 9p.m. to la.m. For  •more info, call Maggie or Lynn at  255-8189, Nora at 251-3253 or Mary Jean  at 251-2826, or write Women Against  The Budget, P.O. Box 65366, Stn. F,  Vancouver V5N 5P3  PORNOGRAPHY: WHOSE RESPONSIBILITY IS IT?  Keynote speaker Toronto based author,  researcher and film maker Varda Burstvn.  editor of recent CBC Ideas Series on  Public Sex. Douglas College, Fri.,  March 1/85, 9a.m. to 3p.m. More info  520-5473.  COURSES  THE FIRST KOOTENAY WOMEN AND WORDS conference will be held in Creston Feb.  15, 16, 17 at the Downtowner Motor Inn.  The conference is for all women working  in media and communications, including  writers, poets, journalists, broadcasters, teachers, librarians, and booksellers. Cost of the conference has been  kept as low as possible, and some daycare subsidies will be available on request. All conference seminars, plus two  nights accomodation: $30. Dinner featuring Dorothy Livesay, on Sat. night is $10.  Cost for two days of seminars, without  accomodation is $20. Those women who  wish to attend, but may not have received a pre-registration form, can do so,  by calling 866-5264, or writing Kootenay  Women and Words, Box 3, Sirdar B.C.  V0B 2CO.  DR. HELEN CALDICOTT - Nov. 26, 1984 speech ;  given in Vancouver broadcast in full,  plus live panel discussion. Radio Peace,  Co-Op Radio, CFRO 102.7 FM, Tues., Feb.  12, 1985 7-9p.m. Tapes of Dr. Caldicott's  speech will be available to listeners  who phone in during the program and  become members of Co-Op Radio.  SPECIAL ENTERPRISE ZONES: the third world  solution? A public forum 7:30p.m. Feb. 6  at 949 W. 49th (at Oak). Everyone Welcome.  Bring your questions on economic zones  to our expert panel.  1st WEST COAST CONFERENCE ON WOMEN IN  Central America, March 9-10, 1985.  Cultural Event, guest speakers, panels  and workshops. Sponsored by: Alliance  Against Women's Oppression, Somos Hermanas  For more info or to get involved contact  (415) 566-2070 in San Francisco.  UBC GAY/LESBIAN WEEK '85 is Feb. 11-17.  Special events include the Valentine  Dance,'An Affair of the Heart' at the SUB  Ballroom on Sat,Feb 16 at 8 pm. On Sun.,  the films "On Guard" and "Pink Triangles"  will be shown in the SUB Partyroom at  7.30 and 9.00 pm. For dance tickets and  further details, contact G/L UBC in SUB  Room 327A or phone 228-4638.  FUNDRAISING LUNCHEON FOR THE DOWNTOWN  Eastside Women's Centre, March 21, 1985  at 12 noon. Georgia Hotel, $20 per  person. Speaker Gill Turner. For tickets  & more info contact the Downtown Eastside  Women's Centre, 217 Main St., 681-8480.  VALENTINE'S DANCE sponsored by the Vancouver  Lesbian Connection. For women only, Friday Feb. 15th at Capri Hall, 3925 Fraser,  8pm to 1 am. Tickets $4-$6, available at  Little Sister's, Octopus East, and the  Women's Bookstore.  DEVELOP YOUR SELF-DEFENSE SKILLS and  upgrade your fitness level. A feminist  instructor with 13 years martial arts  experience is teaching a class for womei  only in a serious but non-militaristic  atmosphere. Shotokan Karate, with some  jiu-jitsu and kung-fu. 2-3 sessions/wk.  $20/mth; $48/3mth. For more into call  Lynn 685-2747.  WOMENS SELF DEFENSE CLASS - 6 weeks, Tues.  7-8:30 from Feb. 12 to March 19, $25.  Taught by qualified black belt instructor  Call Norma at 732-9486  WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN/Rape  Crisis Centre is holding a training  program beginning Feb. 27, 1985. All  women 19 years or more interested in  being a volunteer on our 24-hour crisis  line, please call us at 875-1328.  WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN - Women's Sexuality  Workshop, Feb 22-24 in Vancouver. Pre-  orgasmic Women's Group begins March 4,  1985. Preregistration essential for both.  For info and registration call or write  Anne E. Davies, M.A. (psychology) 210-  1548 Johnston Rd., White Rock, B.C.  V4B 3Z8 (604)531-8555.  THREE EVENINGS FOR WOMEN  Feb. 14: Native Women: The Question of  Status  Ardith Cooper, Charlene Frank and  Penny Desjarlais devote an evening  to discussing the history behind  the loss of status rights for native  women, the organizing efforts now  being undertaken, and what can be  done to help.  Feb. 21: Taxes—Help with your Tax  Form  Does your tax form get "lost" in a  drawer until the last minute - or later!  Are you .unsure of how to claim your  family allowance or receive your  child tax credit refund?  Bring your form and get the help you  need from accountant Barb Bell.  March 7: Women & the Charter of Rights  The Charter of Rights (Section 15)  comes into effect in April. It's a  promise of equality for women and is  the only section of the Charter that  is not operative.  Lawyers Fran Waters and Frances Gordon  will present an overview of the Charter  and answer questions you have about  its implications.  Time: 7:30 pm —THURSDAY EVENINGS  Place: Vancouver Status of Women  400 A West 5th Ave.  For more info: 873-1427 34 Kinesis February TO  BULLETIN BOARD  THE OVULATION METHOD OF BIRTH CONTROL  is being taught by the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective. All classes include,  materials and unlimited individual  follow-up. Fee is $22 per woman or  couple. Classes can be woman-only on  request. To pre-register, phone Barbara  at 253-6725 (after 5p.m.) or Carol-Anne  at 254-9759.  WOMEN IN KARATE - Fitness Plus self-confidence, stress release, self defence,  skill development at Vancouver General  Hospital Residence Ballroom, 2851 Heather  St. (off West 12th between Cambie & Oak)  Mon. & Wed. 7p.m. to 9p.m. Fee: $30/mth.  (+ nominal annual dues). Instructor:  Dulce T. Oikawa, 2nd degree (ho) black  belt. Shotokan-ryu style karate. For  further info: (after 6p.m. and weekends)  874-1595.  ANYONE INTERESTED IN WORKSHOPS ON CAR  maintenance and service, call Adrienne  873-5016  WRITING AS HEALING WORKSHOPS - How can we,  as counselors, help move our clients  from victims to survivors? Sandra Butler,  author of Conspiracy of Silence: The  Trauma of Incest,   answers that qustion  in her training session, Writing As  Healing. A second workshop, Healing The  Healers, is intended for community  activists, grassroots women, volunteer  women, and counselors, using writing to  deal with the burnout factor that affects  us all in dealing with sexual violence.  Sandra Butler will be in Olympia on  March 20 & 21 and in Vancouver, B.C. on  March 24 & 25 to present both "Writing  as Healing" and "Healing the Healers"  workshops. Registration is limited,  registration deadline is Feb. 28th. For  info, write or call Sherry Jubilo, 2600  Cherry, Bellingham, WA 98225, (206)734-  4722. Best time to call, early morning  or evenings.  SINGING FOR OURSELVES with Maura Volante,  Sunday, Feb. 17th noon-4, Britannia  Music Room, 1661 Napier St. Everyone  can enjoy singing, and regular singing  is beneficial for the whole self.  Whether you were always told to mouth  the words in school choir or whether  you already enjoy singing but want  more technique and new material, this  workshop is for you. Creative improvisa-  ation and singing as meditative/  therapeutic as well as group singing  of sings which are positive and affirmative of wemon's strength. Call 872-4251  for further info.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE pre-;  sents two workshop series: Evening  Women's Health Series: March 20, PMS;  April 4, Breast Health. 7:30p.m. $5 eacl  or $30 for the 7 workshop series (continues until June 27). Sliding scale  available. Lunch Time Health Series:  12-1, Feb. 27, Sexually Transmitted  Diseases; March 13, Birth Control.  Admission free. 8 workshop series ends  on June 5. Call 1 week in advance to  register for childcare. 888 Burrard,  682-1633  LABOUR STUDIES PROGRAM at Capilano College.  Registration begins now for spring '85  semester. Write the Labour Studies Programme, Capilano College, 2055 Purcell  Way, North Vancouver, B.C. V7J 3H5 or  call (604) 986-1911 loc. 430.  FREE LAW CLASSES BY THE PUBLIC LEGAL  Education Society. Registration and  information, 734-1126  SOUTH SURREY/WHITE ROCK WOMEN'S PLACE  Spring Workshops: "Not A Love Story"  film: Feb. 5th women only, 7:30; Feb.  7th mixed, 7:30. Theatre workshop for  Women, Feb. 10th, 2-4:30. Understanding  Relationships, Feb. 12th 7-10p.m.  Mother and Daughter Self-Defence, Feb.  16th, 10-4. Single Mothers Support  Group, Feb. 18th, 9:30-12noon. Women  and Self-Esteem, Developing Personal  Power, Feb. 23rd. Violence Against  Women, Feb. 27th, 7:30-9:30p.m. Basic  Repairs for Women, March 13th and 20th,  7:30-10p.m. All programs at 1425 George  Street, White Rock, V4B 4A2, (604)536-  9611.  FRYWORK PRE-EMPLOYMENT PROGRAM FOR WOMEN  We continue to work with women who are  having difficulty re-entering the job  market. Our main target group is women  from corrections and/or alcohol and  drug backgrounds. We ask that a woman  contact us five weeks prior to the  starting date of the next course.  Courses March 11-May 3 and June 3-July  26. Call 876-9251  BUDGET UNIVERSITY Spring Semester (see p.4)  Thunderbird Neighbourhood Centre, 2311  Cassiar. Feb. 5, 7.30 pm "Tenants'   z  Rights: Where Do We Go From Here ? A  1984 Update". Feb 19, 7.30 pm "Workers'  Co-ops: The Co-operative Edge"  Organization of Unemployed Workers, 1645  Commercial Drive. 7.30 pm. "History of  Working Women in B.C." Sara Diamond, February 6th and 13th. "Feminist Theory"  Lisa Price, February 20th and 27th.  "Vancouver's Other Media: Who They Are  and How to Use Them" March 11 - An Introduction to Vancouver's Alternative Media - Native, Labour, Gay, Feminist,  •*jtnr Mvoct Africa, JActiuHAcdU* pMsnuL ccJLL.  Student, Community Activist - and How to  Access Them. March 18 - Investigative  Journalism: a How-to for Activists, Researchers, and Interested Lay People.  La Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr., 7.30 pm,  "Women's Direct Action: The Theoretical  Beginnings. 1760 to the Present" Kandace  Kerr, March 5th, 13th and 20th.  White Rock Public Library, 15342 Buena  Vista, White Rock, 7.30 pm. "Services to  Women:A Right not a Privilege" March  19th. "The Fraser Institute: Who They  Really Represent and Why" March 26th.  "Women in the Peace Movement - There's  a Place for You" April 2.  SUBMISSIONS  THE ALBERTA WOMEN'S CO-ORDINATING Committee  of Canadian University Press is looking  for individuals to speak at our Spring  Regional Caucus over the Easter Weekend,  April 6th, 7th, and 8th. We welcome  support from women who would like to  conduct a workshop or seminar in their  area of expertise, and of course women  performers are also, most welcome. The  atmosphere will be as relaxed and non-  structured as possible. Sorry we cannot  afford fee payments but all guests will  share facilities with the caucus delegates in two beautiful chalets (with  loft, fireplace, T.V., etc.) above the  resort town of Banff. NOTE: Banff is  only a half days drive by Greyhound bus  or car from Vancouver. Interested? Then  please write to Alberta Women's Rights  Committee, 11563 University Ave., Edmonton, Alberta T6G 1Z4.  VANCOUVER FREE LANCER wishes submissions  from single mothers to present their  cause in a more informed light to a bi  ased public. Complete confidentiality  promised. 36 E. 14th Ave #316. Van  B.C. V5T 4C9.  SUBMISSIONS ARE INVITED for a college/  university level anthology of articles  on the subject of "Women, Men and Women  and Men: Contemporary writings on gender  in our culture (s)". Manuscripts should  be original Canadian material with a  solid conceptual framework, a factual  base and an explicit personal point of  view. Major areas of interest include  Gender Epistemology; Life's stages;  Behaviour - Innate or Learned?; Relationships; Work; The Inner Life: Creativity and Spirit; and Power.  Articles  may focus on either gender or on the  inter-play of both, and both homosexual  and heterosexual content is desired.  Submissions should be from 15-25 double-  spaced typed pages. For further details  contact Greta Hofmann Nemiroff, c/o:The  New School, Dawson College, 485 McGill  St., Montreal, Quebec H2Y 2H4  VANCOUVER'S GAY COMMUNITY NEWSPAPER will  publish a special Writing and Art Supplement in May 1985. We want contributions.  For more information, call Don Larventz  738-5337, or Michael Wellwood, 251-4904.  Or write Angles  at P.O. Box 2259, Main  Post Office, Vancouver, V6B 3W2.  ■ VANCOUVER -  WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE  Open 11 a.m. to 530 p.m. Monday through Saturday  Jb xAAake   <x   skcnUoC^ paji 4cv voum teUpfanAe.*  Mail orders welcome.  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6B2N4    Ph: 684-0523 February TO Kinesis 35  BULLETIN BOARD  i.C. MINISTRY OF LABOUR WOMEN'S PROGRAMS  are sponsoring a photography competition  for all B.C. women in recognition of  the United Nations Decade for Women  (1976-85). The works selected will be  displayed at a major exhibition in  Vancouver, summer 1985. Deadline, April  1, 1985. For entry forms write Kathy  Vinton, Women's Programs, Ministry of  Labour, Parliament Bldgs, Victoria, B.C.  V8V 1X4  CALL FOR PAPERS for CRIAW (Canadian  Research Institute for the Advancement  of Women) Conference, 1985, Saskatoon,  Saskatchewan, on Women: Social and  Physical Isolation.  Please send a summary of your proposed  contribution by Feb. 28, 1985,.at the  latest, to: CRIAW/ICRAF.Program Committee Chair, Education 3088, College of  Education, University of Saskatchewan,  Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7N 0W0.  GROUPS  ATTENTION MUSICIANS ! Call Carol Wright,  876-9788 if interested in the following:  instrumental group focussing an original  compositions as well as arrangements of  traditional material. The style — folk  to classical, bluegrass to new acoustic.  I envision a string band , but am open-  minded .  HEX!''KINESIS  STORY MEETINGS are Feb. 6th  and March 6th. All women welcome ! 7:30  pm, Vancouver Status of Women, 400A West  5th Ave. For info call 873-5925.  WE WANT TO FORM A CONSCIOUSNESS-RAISING  group on racism with other women who  are white, lesbians and feminists. We  want a non-facilitated but structured  group that will look at how we learned  to be racist, how we are racist now,  how racism operates in the world and  how we can change. Our goals are personal change and the development of an  anti-racist perspective and practice.  Please call 876-4541 for info.  SORWUC (Service Office Retail Workers  Union of Canada) Local #1 has moved!  New address: #125, 119 W. Pender, Van.  B.C., V6B 1S5. Same ph. number (604)  684-2834.  A WOMAN WHO HAS CHRONIC PID (Pelvic inflammatory disease) which is disabling  wants to hear from any woman who has  been cured of chronic PID or from any  practitioner who has treated this disease with any success. I'd also like  to hear from women who've had total  hysterectomy for PID; I wonder if the  infection actually was cured and the  pain relieved. I'd appreciate any info  for myself and for other PID victims  I'm in touch with across the continent,  and for a future book. Thanks. Write to  Maureen Moore, 2045 Trafalgar St., Van.  B.C. V6K 3S5 (604)734-9206.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE is looking for  energetic women to join our collective.  No experience necessary! Learn new  skills in sales, collective process,  ordering, plus about women writers and  publishing. Must be committed to a  minimum of two shifts per month and  collective meetings. Orientation March  20, 7p.m. at 315 Cambie St. To register,  or for more info call 684-0523, 11-5:30.  I.W.D. COMMITTEE NEEDS VOLUNTEERS to help  with our dance March 8/85. Women willing  to exchange 1 hours work for free  entrance, call Kim 253-7687 before March  1/85. Limited.  LOOKING FOR MUSICIANS TO WORK WITH regularly on original and contemporary songs  and creative improvisation. I sing and  am learning percussion - Maura 872-4251.  WITCH WEMON - Let's gather periodically to  create ritual for the purposes of:  personal growth; political change;  planet healing. Call Maura 872-4251.  THE LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE (LIL) has  moved to a new location! We are now at  400A West 5th Ave. Van., B.C. and our  new phone number is 875-6963. We are  still open Thursdays and Sundays from  7p.m.-10p.m. Please keep in touch for  our exciting new news.  DO YOU HAVE A PROBLEM you could use some  help with ? We are a professionally supervised non-religious community service  offered by the Lay Counselling Program of  Life Line Society in Burnaby. For an appointment call: Atisah Moreau, Co-ordinator, 434-9086.  THE WEST KOOTENAY WOMEN'S ASSOCIATION has  received a grant from the Secretary of  State Department to research the feasibility of setting up a credited Women's  Studies program in the West Kootenays.  To this end, I have developed and distributed a questionnaire that surveys  Women's Studies Programs across Canada  and a second questionnaire that surveys  educational needs and enrolment projections in this area. Anyone who would be  interested in filling out either or  both of these questionnaires, or who may  have information to contribute to this  project, please contact: Vita Storey at  the Nelson Women's Centre, 307 Vernon  St., Nelson, B.C. VlL 4E3. (604)352-9916.  CLASSIFIED  Kinesis classified are $3 for individuals and $6 for groups.  Recommended length 10-30 words. Deadline 20th of month.  There is no charge for announcements. Deadline is 23rd'  of the month. Kinesis recommends announcements appear  in the issue one month before the event, especially if it  happens near the beginning of the month.  Please do not phone in your ads.  TAX PREPARATION: As a person well-informed  in tax preparation I can prepare your  tax return to provide you with the best  use of your deductions and exemptions.  Business, employment, and self-employed  incomes will all be accepted. My fees  are scaled to income while taking into  account the time taken to do the return.  All information is kept confidential.  Call 321-9536 and ask for Holly.  WANTED:WORKING WOMAN to share bright house  with feminist. $275/month + utilities.  Available Feb 1st. Please call Susan at  430-3425.  ARE YOU INTERESTED IN LIVING CO-OPERATIVELY?  We are 43 resident and 12 non-resident  members (ages 1%  to 70 years) living together in a co-operative community in  VanocQuser and Aldergrove. We're looking  for new resident members for our Vancouver  housing co-operative and ask that interested people contact us at the address  below. Some of our interests are: alternate family groupings, community scale  economics, community living, appropriate  technology. We practice consensus decision-making, and we are striving toward  an egalitarian life style, working for  social change, developing intensive  farming (permaculture model) on our 10-  acre farm. If any or all of this appeals  to you, please leave a message for Community Alternatives at 732-5153 or 734-  0356 (answering machines), or write:  P. Hogan, c/o CHF/BC, 1237 Howe Street,  Vancouver V6Z 1R3.  NEW TITLES AT THE WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE:  Anna's World  by Marie Clare Blais;  Clenched Fists,  Burning Crosses  by Cris  South; If He Comes Back, He's Mine  by  Elizabeth Camden; Paz  by Camarin Grae;  I Hear Men Talking  by Meridel Le Sueur.  315 Cambie, 684-0523, Mon.-Sat. 11-5:30.  EMPLOYMENT WANTED: Available for building  renovations, wood refinishing, painting,  house maintenance, yard work. Experienced  efficient worker. References. $8-10/hr.  Janet Fraser 876-8446.  EMPLOYMENT WANTED: Unemployed teacher. M.A.  Reading. Tutoring, remedial reading,  study skills, math, science, socials up  to grade 12. $15-$20/hr. Janet Fraser  876-8446.  AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR - Complete Car Care by  Women. Adrienne 873-5016.  SUNSHINE COAST: Suite in house on secluded  waterfront. 20 minutes from Langdale  ferry. Ideal for women to retreat from  city life on occasional or regular basis.  $365/mth. Suitable for shared rental on  alternative basis-or otherwise. Children/  pets o.k. Access to private beach. Ph.  294-8759 evenings.  FEMINIST - quiet and responsible, looking  for same to share three bedroom duplex  in Richmond. Fireplace, spacious, two  sundecks, carport, two bathrooms, close  to transportation. Total rent $680  includes utilities, laundry. To be divided by two or three people. Call Linda  at 274-4868.  LESBIAN FEMINIST LOOKING FOR THE SAME to  share a house near Charles and -Victoria.  Spare rooms, backyard with garden and  fruit trees. Rent $287.50 includes  utilities. Available.now. Call Marilyn  at 253-1224 (Mon.-Fri., 9-5).  THE I.W.D. COMMITTEE WANTS TO COLLECT  photos of past I.W.D. events. We will.  cover reprint costs for any photos/  slides you may have for us. Call Kim  253-7687 or write I.W.D., #1, 603 Powell  Street.  FOR RENT - Quebec Street House - two  feminist women with two children seek  third woman with or without child. 1-2  rooms available in big, homey, non-smoking house. Rent negotiable. Available  now. Contact Claudia or Lorna 874-1968,  or Lorna (day) 682-4805.  FOR RENT - Downtown Class/studio space  (martial arts, yoga, theatre, dance...)  Reasonable Rates. Call Norma 732-9486.  NO FRILLS TAX SERVICE. Tax tips by Bonnie  Ramsay, 1855 Commercial Dr. 254-0122,  251-3803.  ISC1POI£,(TS  COOP     B»LSTnUR.<1NT  » Eggs Benedict at Brunch  1 Delicious Beef, Veggieand  Fish Burgers  i Caesar & Seafood Salads  1 Fresh B.C. Salmon  > Children's Menu  ' Vegetarian Selections  IWD benefit concert for WAVAW March 9th at  the Van. East Cultural Centre. Heidi Archibald  and Righteous Mothers performing.  GRANVILLE ISLAND  681-8816 SUBSCRIBE j  You too can avoid the line-up at your favorite  bookstore by subscribing now to Kinesis  If your label reads 01 -85 your subscription is about to expire. Don't forget to renew today.  <  CO  CO  <  _J  o  Q  z  o  o  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V561J8  □ VSW membership—Includes Kinesis subscription—  $23 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only—$15  □ Institutions—$40  □ Sustainers—$75  □ NEW □ RENEWAL  □ GIFT SUBSCRIPTION FOR A FRIEND  Name   -Amount Enclosed _