 WSIDM*  3 Joe Borowski is not the  only person challenging the  charter of rights and freedoms regarding abortion. ,  Two pro-choice challenges  have come to light as well.  Maxine Boag outlines the  issues in this critical year  for Canadian abortion rights.  4 Women in Ottawa recaptured the original intent of  Mother's Day by protesting  the proposed testing of the  cruise missile in Canada.  Maureen McEvoy and Julie  Wheelwright were there.  6 Is this depression so different from the last one?  Are 'hard times' aconvenient  excuse to ignore women's  rights? Sara Diamond and  Susan O'Donnell spoke in  Vancouver on Women and  Work!  7    Pornography   vs   Sex-  Oriented    Products.    Can  Vancouver aldermen tell the  difference? Kinesis prints  Pat Fiendel's brief to City  Council.  10 Vancouver's first public  debate on prostitution resulted in a City Council vote  that recommended criminal  sanctions on hookers, but  women are hopeful the  issue is not yet closed.  14 For women, microchip  technology is the opposite  of liberating. Johanna den  Hertog takes a look at the  way the chip has affected  women at B.C. Tel.  18 For rural women, the  overwhelming reality is  creeping poverty. Jane  Evans gives Kinesis some  facts about country life.  20 Penny Goldsmith reviews 'Wanted Alive', by  local poet Erin Moure, and  finds it a vivid portrayal of  Canadian life.  COVER: Photos by Laurie Meeker. Design by Claudia MacDonald.  km urn  news about women that's not in the dailies  SUBSCRIBE TO KJMESIS  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  □ VSW membership - includes Kinesis subscription -  $20 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only - $13  D  Institutions - $40  □. Sustainers - $75  Name   Address_  _ Amount Enclosed.  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding — we need member support! B.C. Lesbian Conference:  KMMSM  Breaking down isolation  The first ever B.C. Regional  Lesbian Conference was held in  Vancouver May 20-23. The first  provincial conference to be  held in Canada, its theme was  "Claiming Our Lives." Organizers say they believe it is  "a real milestone in lesbian  visibility". An estimated 600  women participated overall.  The B.C. Regional is the result  of momentum gathered from the  successful National Lesbian  Conference held in Vancouver  in 1981, which drew more than  500 women from across the country.  A wide range of workshops were  organized in an attempt to  appeal to the full spectrum of  lifestyles, interests and needs  among lesbians. Empty rooms  were available at all times for  spontaneous workshops or support groups around topics not  covered on the formal schedule.  Many of the workshops on topics  around which women needed support continued throughout the  weekend, and are hop ing to become ongoing support groups.  Some will be soliciting new  members who were not at the  conference.  An effort was also made to provide activities besides the  workshops around which women  could connect, such as the  sports activities organized  by the Canadian Association for  the Advancement of Women and  Sport(CAAW&S). The Lesbian  Celebratory Pride Parade  brought 200 women into the  streets to march through the  West End to a rally at Sunset  Beach.  Organizers made a visible ef  fort to make the conference  inviting to women with special  needs: most of the events were  wheelchair accessible; sign  language interpretation was  provided for most activities;  information was printed in  Braille; and excellent childcare was available throughout,  including overnight care on  Saturday night. Workshops,  food, and field trips were incorporated into the daycare.  The conference was aimed in  part at breaking down the feelings of isolation many lesbian  women experience, celebrating  lesbian lives, sharing common  experiences, and bridging the  gaps between gay women. Some  of the women had a more concrete goal in mind. Steps were  taken to create a "Provincial  Connection" - a formal network  among lesbians/gay women  throughout the province in both  rural and urban areas.  This embryonic network hopes  to provide resource lists of  lesbian groups and sympathetic  professionals, connect individuals with groups and/or organizations to strengthen them,  and extend urban resources to  rural areas. There will be a  meeting of representatives in  six months time. Until then,  women will be working: doing  publicity; writing educational  pamphlets; fundraising (to be  shared on a provincial basis);  finding seed money for lesbian  projects(in recognition of the  economic disparity in different  areas of B.C.); and discovering a way to give ongoing safety to lesbians suffering dangerous harassment, especially  in isolated areas.  i*6!5TIICTion  Red Hot Trial:  Feminist analysis ignored  Borowski challenges choice  by Jan DeGrass  A court decision is still pending regarding Joe Borowski's  legal challenge to Canada's abortion law at the close of a  two week hearing in Regina. Queen's Bench Justice W.R. Mathe-  son has called adjournment of the case until June 6th but is  not expected to hand down a decision until the fall.  A prior attempt by pro-choice supporters to intervene in the  hearings was refused by Justice Matheson causing some dismay  in women's groups across the country who feared that the  Federal Justice Department's legal representative, Edward  Sojonky would not adequately defend their interests. The  dismay deepened during the trial when Borowski's attorney,  Morris Shumiatcher, brought forth nine medical expert witnesses to testify that life begins at conception and that abortion could not be counselled under any circumstances, even in  cases of rape or incest. Defense lawyer Sojonky announced  that he would be calling no witnesses and indicated that the  opposition's testimony was irrelevant to the real issue - the  constitutional rights of women and the unborn.  Sojonky's cross-examination of the witnesses was limited  to questions concerning their religion, their personal values and whether they felt there were ever instances when a  mother's life would be at stake if an abortion were not  performed.  Regina pro-choice supporter Abby Ulmer of the Concerned Citizens for Reproductive Choice (CCRC) still feels that defense  witnesses would have been useful to the trial', but that Sojonky's summation of the legal, constitutional wrangle was  fairly good. "The Justice Department was concerned with arguing the law; not the moment at which life begins," said  Ulmer. continued on page three  Ironic but true. The very trial  that resulted from the prolonged efforts of women organizing  against pornography, rendered  these same women and their analysis of the issue completely  invisible throughout the two-  week proceedings. Not a single  women's groups was invited to  give testimony regarding the  material before the court.  Although Judge Darrall Collins  found Red Hot Video Ltd. guilty  of possessing obscene material  for the purposes of distribution on three counts, nothing  in his seventy-minute judgment  reflected the concerns of women organizing on the issue.  Focusing almost entirely on  the sexual explicitness of the  three films, he did not deal  with the degradation, humiliation and violence against women that forms the basis of  women's objections to the material. Indeed, Judge Collins  only mentioned one of the rape  scenes in passing.  The Victoria case is the first  to come to trial after police  seized a number of tapes early  in the new year. The tapes had  been pulled off the shelves  following several months of  active protest and intense  lobbying efforts by women's  organizations and anti-pornography groups.  According to Theresa Sankey of  Women Against Pornography(WAP)  in Victoria, very little was  mentioned about public protests  in the courtroom, despite dis-  sion of "community standards" and when they were, Red  Hot's defense challenged the  validity or significance of  such protest.  Nonetheless the judge's decision is the first to hold that  movies viewed at home are subject to the same laws governing -those screened in public  theatres. Unfortunately it is  not clear how the decision will  affect Red HOt's inventory.  Charges are pending against  the Red Hot Video outlet on  Main Street in Vancouver.  WAP representatives, who were  present throughout the trial,  saw it as being "a bit of a  circus". They believe much of  the testimony, most notably  the views of Michael Walsh  (Province film critic), was a  mockery of the entire issue  and to make that point the  group has planned a "Mock  Trial" for June 4.  Using the words of witnesses  testifying during the trial to  the Barnum and Bailey circus  theme, the group will stage  their spoof outside Red Hot  Video's Douglas Street store  and move to the courthouse for  a second performance. The group  is currently preparing an anly-  sis of the trial which they  will make available to all interested organizations working  on the issue.  Despite Collins' clear verdict  of guilty, Red Hot Video was  only fined $100 for each charge  although there is a maximum  penalty of $500. 2  Kinesis   June'83  MOVEMENT MATTERS  by Ellen Frank  for the WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre Collective  It has been almost a year since our decision  to open a new Rape Crisis Centre. The Centre  has been open since July '82. At the in-  movement meeting we promised to keep women  informed of what we were doing,- why we were  doing it, etc. This is the first installment of that process.  Our first priority wheh we opened was to get  our 24-hour crisis line in operation. The  agreement we negotiated with the government guarantees our right to protect the  complete confidentiality of the women who  call us. In July we got our office and our  telephones. At,that point we had eight  women in the Rape Crisis Centre Collective.  Along with the logistics of answering the  24-hour line and setting up and staffing  the office, our energies went into training  new women to work with us.  We started our first training session almost  immediately (that is, after we re-trained  ourselves), and by the end of August there  were 13 women in the Collective. We started  another training session in September, and  by the end of November there were 26 of us.  After the second training session the Collective decided to take some time to develop materials and to think about and plan  the next training session. That took a few  months of meetings. The third training  session started in March and has just finished now. Between November and May the  Collective shrank a bit (from 26 to 21),  but with the third training session we are  27 again. WAVAW has become, during.the year,  a large and diverse group of women.  Another focus was publicity. In order for  women to be able to use our services they  need to know we exist (unfortunately, not  all women read Kinesis yet). We printed  and distributed a poster, stickers, and a  pamphlet. We talked endlessly to Dominion  Directory about getting our phone number in  the yellow pages under "women", and to B.C.  Tel to get it in the front of the book. And  we talked to lots of people!  Then came the work that follows operating  a crisis line: ongoing contact with women  who phone us; accompaniment and advocacy  for women who are dealing with community  agencies and institutions (i.e. police,  medical, legal); liaison with community  groups to keep ourselves informed of what  resources are available to women and to  keep groups informed of our resources; and  liaison with those institutions that women,  we counsel are likely to be dealing with.  While we realize these institutions are  both oppressive to women and resistant to  change, we have to keep trying to effect  reforms in those institutions wherever and  whenever possible. Making changes in the  justice, social service, and health delivery  systems does, in the short term, make it  a lot easier for the women who are dealing  with those systems. An accumulation of  those changes does, in the long term, lead  to some changes in those institutions.  One place where a large change has occurred  is in the medical system. Through the efforts of women doctors all the victims of  sexual assault can now go to Shaughnessy  Hospital Emergency where there is always a  woman doctor on call. They are calling the  project the "sexual assault assessment project". Cab companies, the police, and ambulances are all instructed to take women to  Shaughnessy. The experience of the women  who get medical attention from these doctors  has been very positive. It is much improved  from the days, not so long ago, when the  ordeal in the hospital was referred to as  a "second rape".  By about September we were able to begin  doing more direct public education work.  Since then we have done many workshops,  spoken to many groups, and participated in  lots of radio, newspaper, and TV interviews  about all aspects of violence against women.  Until now our public education has been  WAVAW  mostly reactive: that is, groups phone us  and ask us to speak and we go. We want to  continue to do that, but also hope in the  near future to be able to take more initiative in whom we talk to.  Part of public education, of course, consists of protesting on an ongoing basis.  So, we write letters and press releases  objecting to pornography everywhere, sexist  ads, unlit parking areas, judges' decisions,  Ann Landers (sometimes), Jon Ferry (usually)  etc. We sign petitions. We lobby. In September we participated in the Take Back the  Night March. On November 11th we participated in the Remembrance Day ceremonies by  reading a poem to remember the women who  were raped and killed in all the wars. We  laid a rose on the Cenotaph. The poem wasn't  a new one. It originated from a woman in  Ottawa and has been read by many women,  over the years, at many Remembrance Day  ceremonies.  Considering all of that we underestimated  how controversial the action would be. We  thought we were just carrying on a tradition, and made the mistake of putting our  phone number on the flyers we handed out.  Although we waited until the final ceremony  was over before we marched down to the Cenotaph and read our poem, the press did an  excellent job of making it appear that fanatical women disrupted the solemn ceremony.  On November 12th we received approximately  80 irate phone calls from veterans who said  "No, they hadn't been there, but had seen  it on the BCTV news". We learned to be  more careful of the press and with our  telephone number. After the experience of  talking to all those people, and explaining  why we were there, we would recommend that  this year women demand to read that poem as  a part of the ceremonies, instead of after  they are over, as we did. Along with the  irate calls were many supportive ones  thanking us for being there, and there were  those who started out irate and ended  supportive.  On November 25th we were involved in organizing the International Day Against Violence Against Women. We marched in I.W.D.  We walked in the Peace March. We joined the  picketting of Red Hot Video, and we have  SOME STATISTICS FROM JULY 15 TO MARCH 31  Incoming Crisis Calls: 192  Incoming Information calls: 433  (does not include requests that were  referred to another service after  initial conversation.)  Speaking engagements: 71  Media interviews: 74  Approximate volunteer hours gone into  WAVAW: 11,400  Our phone numbers are:  Mon to Fri 10a.m. to 5p.m.  875-1328  24 hour crisis line  875-6011  feel free to call and talk to us.  added our voice to the protest against  "Playboy on Pay TV".. In March our application for membership in B.C.F.W. was accepted.  At present we have 3 full time paid workers,  and 5 women working on a Community Recovery  Program till June.  We believe the government is responsible  for providing social services to women.  In July the budget we submitted with our  funding application for an 8h month period  was for $125,000. We received ,a grant in  mid-July for $61,000 for that 8*g month  period. Our press release that day said,  and we continue to say, that we receive  partial funding from the Attorney General.  Five other centres, The Cowichan Rape As-* '  sault Society, the Thompson-Nicola Rape  Crisis Centre, the North Peace Community  Resources Society, KSAN House Society, and  the Victoria Sexual Assault Centre, also  receive funds. We share skills and information with these centres. In addition,  WAVAW also received, for the 1982-83 year,  $2,479 from the City towards operating  costs, and $5,888.71 from C.P.Air Employee's  Fund for Capital Expenses (typewriter,  Gestetner, desks, etc.). The rest is made  up by private donations and there is lots  of volunteered labour.  In the past year we have been spending  time figuring out our internal structuring.  We have a sincere desire to be, and continue  to be, a healthy growing Collective. The  Rape Crisis Centre is operated by the Collective. Collective members attend Collective Meetings, and work on the Crisis Line.  All major decisions are made by the Collective. WAVAW is also a Society.  The original WAVAW group had 19 women and  the beginning RCC Collective had 8 women.  Most of the others are in the Society. The  Society is made up of those original women,  and any woman who has been a member of the  Collective for six months. If a woman has  been in the Collective for six months and  leaves the Collective, she can remain a  member of the Society.  The purpose of the Society is to ensure  that the Rape Crisis Centre Collective  continues to fulfill the purpose of the  Society as stated in the Constitution.  This mandate includes providing support,  counselling, referral and advocacy to women  and children who have been victims of sexual violence; working for the prevention and  eradication of sexual violence; promoting  legal, social and attitudinal change regarding sexual violence; encouraging and  generating research related to sexual violence and providing public education on  sexual violence.  The Society has an Annual General Meeting  where we elect a Board. The duties of the  Board include approving changes to the  Constitution and to Bylaws; working on  contracts of employment for paid workers  continued on page 24 June'83   Kinesis  ACROSS CANADA  Abortion rights under attack  by Maxine Boag  A major battle over the legality of abortion  is under way in Canada. Three protagonists -  two pro-choice, one anti - have mounted an  all-out attack on the Federal abortion law.  Sharing the limelight are: Dr. Henry Mor-  gentaler from Montreal, remembered for challenging the abortion law in 1973 and successfully establishing abortion clinics in Quebec, and Joseph Borowski, once an MLA in  Manitoba, now owner of a health-food store,  a staunch Catholic known for flamboyant  publicity-seeking anti-abortion activities.  Morgentaler is openly defying the Federal  law by establishing freestanding abortion  clinics in Manitoba and Ontario. Borowski is  trying to prove, in court, that the fetus  is a person, and thus entitled to the "right  to life" enshrined in the Constitution. The  third protagonist is Norma Scarborough,  President of the Canadian Abortion Rights  Action League, challenging the law under  the same charter of rights and freedoms for  denying women the right to "security of  person".  Whatever the outcome of these challenges,  there can be no doubt that the abortion law  will be changed. As far as tfhe pro-choice  lobbyists are concerned, the change is long  overdue. The restrictions outlined in the  1979 amendments allow abortions to be done  only in hospitals, after approval by a therapeutic abortion committee. Applications  are received in writing; the woman is not  allowed to present her own case or to challenge the committee's decision. Only 20% of  eligible hospitals have such a committee,  and all define "health" in different ways.  As a result, Canada has the highest rate or  second-trimester abortions in the world,  and thousands of women have to travel to the  U.S. or to Quebec to obtain a medical  service denied them in their own communities.  Dr. Morgentaler, who was acquitted by three  juries when charged in 1973 for performing  abortions in his clinic, has now decided to  test the law again by opening clinics in  Manitoba and Ontario. He believes that by  offering a service far superior to that  available in hospitals, he will be acquitted  again when charges are laid. Backed by the  strong, grassroots Coalition for Abortion  Clinics in Ontario, he is ready to try to  render the law inoperable across the country.  His case is indirectly supported by the  challenge issued by the Canadian Abortion  Rights Action League, our only national  pro-choice organization. Citing Section 7  of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (which reads: "everyone has the right  to life, liberty, and security of the  person and the right not to be deprived  thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.") CARAL  President Norma Scarborough contends that  the abortion committee system denies  women security of person, and involves a  process which is in contravention of the  principles of fundamental justice. Women,  she states, are discriminated against by  this law which denies them the right to  state their own case to a committee, to  be represented by a lawyer and to appeal  decisions the committee has made. This  case goes to court later this year.  Joseph Borowski, in a case presently being  heard in a Regina court, is using the same  section of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in his attempt to render the 1979  amendments "void and inoperative." His  lawyer is presenting a range of "experts"  - including Bernard Nathanson, author of  Abortion America,  Dr. William Lilley from  New Zealand, a perinatal physician held  responsible for perfecting amniocentisis;  and a geneticist from France. All contend  that life begins at conception and that  the fetus is a person. If Borowski is  successful (his case will be concluded in  June), abotion will become totally illegal,  as it was prior to 1979.  CARAL attempted, unsuccessfully, to get  intervenor status at the opening of his  case, afraid that the defendant, the  Federal government, would not defend the  law adequately. Mark MacGuigan, Minister  of Justice, is on record as expressing  anti-abortion beliefs, and CARAL's concerns  to date have been justified. Little croSs-  examining of witnesses has occurred, and  the defendent has made no mention of the  degree of public support for abortions.  Last year 6,000 women had legal abortions  in Canada; a Gallup Poll in June 1982  showed that 72% of Canadians believe that  abortion should be safe and legal.  1983 will go on record as a critical year  for abortion rights in Canada. In view of  this, CARAL is sponsoring a national Day of  Action for Freedom of Choice on Abortion  in early October. CARAL/Victoria and the  Vancouver-based Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion will be coordinating  this action. Watch forthcoming issues of  Kinesis for more information.  An anonymous Ottawa citizen set pro-lifers straight with a little "direct action" on this billboard, conveniently located  two blocks from Parliament Hill.  continued from page one .  Sojonky argued that Section 251 of the  Criminal Code, which allows for legal  abortion when the 'life or health' of the  woman is endangered, already gives statutory form to that which the law recognizes  - that a decision to abort must be based  on medical criteria, which strives to  balance protection for both the woman and  the unborn.  "I was very disappointed with Sojonky and  the proceedings up until the point of  summation," said Ulmer. "At least he certainly seems to know his constitution."  Ulmer, like other pro-choice supporters,  managed to be present at most of the session, even though, as she reports, "it  was barely possible to sit in the courtroom considering some of the awful things  that were said about women". Abortion  defenders sat alongside of Borowski fans  in court, representing the many who could  not appear, while the real representation  was happening on the street.  "We weren't being heard in the court, so  our position had to be heard somewhere",  said Ulmer. Upwards of fifty pickets  turned out every day to demonstrate in  contrast to one day of protest by Right  To Life. At Wednesday's summation an organizing drive by a pro-choice coalition  within the Regina community mustered 150  pickets. Groups as diverse as the United  Church and Men for a Non-Sexist Society  took turns organizing the picket lines.  "Really we've had a lot of support from  the community," said Ulmer. "When we asked  for donations to place an ad in the newspaper people were very generous. I think  that many of our supporters are realizing  that it's time to speak up, donate money,  and give their time. There hasn't been  another case of this importance since  Morgentaler was tried."  The precedent setting nature of this case  stems from Joe Borowski's victory in having the right to legally represent the  fetus in court. The former NDP Minister  of Highways and long-time militant opponent of liberalized abortion laws seeks to  make it impossible for a woman in Canada  to obtain a safe, legal, medical abortion.  He argues that Canada's new Charter of  Rights extends the guarantee of right of  life to all 'persons', a right which should  include human fetuses. Hence the importance of establishing a fetus as a person  at the moment of conception. He is also  attempting to obtain an injunction against  the federal finance minister to stop the  spending of public monies on abortions.  These are the grounds on which Borowski  has in the past refused to pay income  taxes.  The Borowski case is considered to be only  one of many forthcoming constitutional  challenges around abortion. CARAL, the  national abortion rights league, plans  future action and Un Winnipeg beleaguered  supporters of Dr. Henry Morgentaler's  nascent clinic are also preparing for a  potential court ease in defense of Mor-  genthaler. Local pro-choice organizations  in your community would welcome financial  contributions. Women are also asked to  express their views to Mark McGuigan,  Federal Minister of Justice.  (Thanks to the  and Rosemarie  ial.)  Show on Co-op Radio  for background mater- 4   Kinesis   June '83  ACROSS CANADA  Women  challenge CKVU  by Emma Kivisild  Media Watch is beginning the process of  filing a complaint with the Human Rights  Branch against CKVU television. The charge  follows Doug Collins1 May 12th editorial  on CKVU's Vancouver Show, in which he  criticized Media Watch, saying, among other  things, that "if there is ever another  convential war it is my hope that Media  Watch and its army of snoops will be found  in the front line where they can be raped  by the Russians."  Collins began the editorial by objecting  to the recent funding Media Watch received  from the Secretary of State but peppered  the statement with what can only be seen  as vitriolic and misogynist words: "The  usual hot eyed feminists who would look  good sitting at the foot of the guillotine  with their knitting just like Madame La-  farge."..."...there's discrimination afoot  here since there is no minister responsible  for men. That could be because there are  so many lesbians loose in the world..."...  "They won't be happy until there is not a  bosom in the country worth looking at."...  "We already have human rights commissions  on the prowl for newspaper advertisements  that call men men and women women. Eventually, of course, we shall all be neutered and  the race will die out and the looneys will  have won."..."I suspect that the real purpose (behind Media Watch) is to remove good  looking women from television and from advertising. Remember all that fuss there  was last year about the Sanyo ads that  appeared on the buses. It showed a delightful looking gal lying on her stomach and  showing a bit of bosom. Just the thing to  cheer the chaps on their way to work in the  morning."  Media Watch went in to CKVU, viewed the  tape, recorded it, and made a transcript.  On May 16th, after a discussion with  their Board of Directors, they sent a  letter to John Meisal, chairman of the  CRTC, asking the commission to intervene  . on Media Watch's behalf. Meisal has not  responded.  On May 17th, Media Watch's lawyer wrote  CKVU, stating that the station had violated  Band needs help  The Neskainlith Native Indian Band in  Chase, B.C. has put out a call for food  and supplies following the withdrawal of  all their funding by the Department of  Indian Affairs (DIA) on April 1. The band  had been putting DIA money towards work  KIM£SIJ  KINESIS is published ten times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position  of women in society and work actively  towards achieving social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are  those of the writer and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 400 A West  5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of  Women is $20/year (or what you can  afford). This includes a subscription  to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $13/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right to edit, and submission  does not guarantee publication.  WORKERS THIS ISSUE: Libby Barlow,  Jan Berry, Frances Bula, Dorrie Bran-  nock, Jan De Grass,jDole Dudley, Linda  Field, Patty Gibson, Mich Hill, Nicky  Hood, Emma Kivisild, Barbara Kuhne,  Janet Lakeman, Cat L'Hirondelle,  Claudia MacDonald, Janet Morgan,  Rosemarie Rupps, Michele Wollstone-  croft, Joan Woodward.  DEADLINE FOR NEXT ISSUE: June 15  for July 1 publication. All copy must be  typewritten and double-spaced.  KINESIS is a member of the Canadian  Periodical Publishers' Association.  projects and salaries instead of using it  for welfare.  The band will be struggling to become  self-sufficient. They have requested  staple food, and especially need seeds  and live chickens. Women are also urged  to send a letter in support of the band  to the DIA.  Send food and supplies to: Neskainlith  Indian Government, P.O. Box 608, Chase,  B.C., VOE 1M0. For more information,  call 679-3295. Send letters to: DIA,  B.C. Regional Office, 700 West Georgia,  Vancouver, B.C.  Section 281.2 of the Criminal Code, which  deals with hate propaganda, specifically ■  public incitement of hatred. The letter  demanded a public apology from Collins,  on his weekly editorial, where he would  summarize the May 12th editorial, give  accurate information as to the real role  of Media Watch, and then apologize and  retract the May 12th statement.  Media Watch received a letter from CKVU  president Peter Viner the next day in  which no mention was made of the request  for an apology. Instead, Viner talked  about freedom of speech and the necessity  of hearing both sides of a question. He  invited Media Watch to appear on the show  to present their position, and referred  all further communication to his lawyers.  According to Media Watch's Maureen MacDonald, CKVU's lawyers recommended to the  station that a public apology take place  according to terms negotiated by both  parties. Apparently, CKVU has informed  their lawyers they are choosing not to  follow that recommendation.  Media Watch's attempt to officially charge  CKVU under Section 281.2 of the Criminal  Code requires a police report and Crown  Counsel approval. Crown Counsel refused  to approve the charge. Media Watch's  recourse then is to file a complaint with  the Human Rights Branch. Initial steps  have been taken.  Pending a Board of Inquiry from Human  Rights, women's groups in Vancouver have  begun to formulate strategies to deal  with CKVU's apparent endorsement of Collins'  views. Media Watch urges women to write  both Peter Viner, President, CKVU, at  180 W. 2nd Ave., Vancouver, as well as  John Meisal, Chair, CRTC in Ottawa. Copies  should be sent to Media Watch and VSW.  Transcript^ off Collins' editorial, ^re  available from both these groups.  Ottawa mothers refuse the cruise  by Maureen McEvoy and Julie Wheelwright  "I want to live and I want to grow up and  I hate the (cruise) missile. It's a danger to the whole world I think."  Ten year old Karen was only one of almost  3,000 women, their children and male supporters who demonstrated on Parliament  Hill May 8 in the women's march for peace.  The purpose of the march was to protest  the proposed testing of the cruise missile  in northern Alberta and to recapture the  original intent of Mother's Day.  Participants slipped past an RCMP barricade  and clasped hands to form a human chain  around the Centre Block despite RCMP's  refusal earlier in the week to grant a  permit. They claimed it would be too difficult to enforce security.  Earlier the participants had formed the  largest human chain on the lawn in front  of the peace tower, braving freezing temperatures that brought a flurry of snow.  Attendance exceeded the organizer's expectations with busloads of people from Montreal and representation from Kingston,  Belleville, Hull, and other neighbburing  cities.  After the formation of the "official"  chain, six women headed around the east  side of the Centre Block. They slipped by  several officers and once they started,  the chain began to grow, spreading along  the sidewalk until it was completed. It  was a peaceful and orderly event.  When the organizers had approached the  RCMP for the permit earlier in the week,  the officers had suggested the women form  a symbolic chain instead by making a replica of the Peace Tower and encircling it  on the lawn.  The demonstration began at a nearby park  and, singing in French and English, "We  are the women's march for peace, and we are  singing for the earth," thousands wound  their way to the Hill.  The march was organized by a coalition  of women's groups from Montreal, Ottawa  and Kingston. During the rally, Kingston  organizer Sheila Cook demanded the government declare Canada a nuclear weapons  free zone.  "We call upon the Canadian Government to  pursue the goals of nuclear suffocation  set forth in Prime Minister Trudeau's  speech to the United Nations in 1978", Cook  said. "In that speech he called upon all  nations to refuse to allow the testing,  production, distribution and deployment  of weapons- of mass destruction."  The first Mother's Peace Day was celebrated 111 years ago, through songs, poetry  and speeches. That day was organized by  U.S. activist Julia'Ward Howe as an urgent  appeal to end all wars.  The symbolism of the march for peace on  Mother's Day this year was not lost on  the crowd. Barb Jackson came with her  eight year old son Erin to teach him that  if you disagree with the government there  is something you can do. "You have power".  Violet Quigley of Belleville, Ontario said  she came because she has a 13 year old-  son she wants to see grow up. "This kind  of demonstration is important, especially  on Mother's Day."  "I think every holiday reminds us that  the world's in a bad position," said Brett  Mann also of Bellville who came with his  five year old daughter. "Every occasion to  celebrate life is a chance to protest the  cruise." June'83   Kinesis    5  WOMEN AND PEACE  Umbrella Die-in  On May 24 in downtown Vancouver, women demonstrated against nuclear war, marking the International Day  for Women and Disarmament declared by European women  working for peace.  The theme of the Vancouver protest was umbrellas  signifying both the inadequacy of the U.S. "Umbrella of  Defence" and disagreement with the so-called "Umbrella  Agreement" on weapons testing between Canada and the  _  U.S. |  Demonstators staged a series of die-ins at the Canadian -g  Armed Forces recruiting office and major financial centres £  and marched, chanting and singing, to the U.S. Consulate, *  where they handed a symbolic cruise missile back to the 3  U.S. Government. a  Report on Greenham  On the morning of Wednesday, April 27th,  at the highest point of the full moon  (6:31a.m.) women from Greenham Common  Peace Camp participated in a co-ordinated  action - the locking of 13 gates to the  American base with Kryptonite bicycle  locks.  The result was that all vehicles and people  were locked out from the base. No business  could transpire; no one could enter; the  traffic was really backed up.  The Americans were furious. They tried,  unsuccessfully, to saw through the locks  with a hacksaw, then with clippers and  wire-cutters(the last pair being over  three feet long).  While this was going on, the women realized that they had missed one gate. They  rushed around in a car to the open gate  where a soldier was standing watch. Thinking the women were about to enter the base,  he hurriedly began closing the gate. The  women readily helped him, and then clipped  on the last padlock.  In desperation, the Americans went at the  locks with chainsaws. The gates collapsed.  Unpredictable and chaotic is how some  Greenham Common women describe themselves.  They've got the authorities on their toes  and confused. For months, these women  have been living outside the base singing,  eating, loving, working and organizing.  They are a diverse group numbering around  'Acts of Obedience'  by Marianne VanLoon and Patty Gibson  Sister Anne Montgomery, American peace  activist and advocate of non-violent anti-  nuclear organizing, says she is deeply  afraid of the next six months. Why? She  believes the real policy underlying Pentagon strategies is a plan to win a nuclear  war.  Speaking to an audience attending the May  25 afternoon workshop at the Festival of  Peacemaking in Vancouver, she said the  Pentagon has two policies. One is the  political policy which the Pentagon publicizes to counter Soviet military capabilities and the other is the actual plan to  win a nuclear war. The importance of the  next six months, she says, is the intent  to test and deploy cruise and Pershing  missiles throughout Europe early in the  new year. In addition, she believes it  is possible that the deployment of these  first strike weapons by the Americans  could scare the Soviets into more immediate  war preparations.  While Montgomery was in Vancouver she also  led a discussion following the Robson •'!  Square's screening of In the King of  Prussia.   The film centres on the activities  and subsequent court proceedings of the  Plowshares Eight(of which Montgomery was a  member), a group of people who entered a  General Electric plant in King of Prussia,  Pennsylvania. They smashed two nuclear  weapon nosecones and poured vials of their  own blood on documents, afterwhich they  sang hymns and waited for their arrest.  "The democratic process is not working  because we have no way of voting or not  voting for nuclear weapons," she said.  "When that happens we must take direct  action, not all of which is civil disobedience." Because she believes these actions  are responsible and moral 'acts of obedience' , Montgomery prefers not to use the  phrase 'civil disobedience' and makes a  point of clarifying the term.  She says laws are not true laws if they  are destructive to human life and therefore they must be broken in order to expose them for what they are. "We must make  ourselves powerful in the face of people  who are guarding and making this violence,"  she said. "We are all responsible and by  taking that responsibility we can make  ourselves into a great movement such as  those led by Martin Luther King and Gandhi.'  Montgomery told her audience that it is  easy to despair after you've become aware  of the extent of the violence in society  generally and the technology fueling the  war threat. "You never stop being afraid,"  she said, "but by taking a first step to  meet others who share your beliefs, you  can become energized. Through sharing and  supporting, not only in action but in  reflection, a sense of community and  strength develops."  Consistent and personalized leafletting  has proven to be one of the most effective  methods of direct action, said Montgomery.  She gave the. example of Ground Zero in  Washington, a group that regularly leaflets a shipyard associated with the first  strike Trident submarine. The six people  involved in this activity and the shipyard workers have begun to know each  other. "A good leaflet, and the fact that  they are present really does change people  inside those places, even if it doesn't  show," she said. Workers have actually  quit their jobs when they found out the  implications of their work and people iit  ^the plants become more understanding when  they have the chance to get to know the  leafletters.   25, ranging from an older woman who has  temporarily dropped out of nursing to try  to help cure a nuclear madness, to younger  women with short-cropped colourfully-dyed  hair.  The town of Newbury and the Ministry of  Transport are trying to legislate them  off the land. They've had to change locations a few times and recently it was made  illegal for tents to be there. Consequently,  they invented homes they call 'benders1  (makeshift tents incorporating pieces of  cloth, live trees and vegetation and piles  of straw.)  Their inventiveness and energy is very  inspiring. They've had Teddy Bear Picnics  and launched thousands of peace balloons  onto the base. The mothers for peace, led  by a nun, stood at the gates in the rain  for a vigil. They've put their bodies  across the road to sabotage any repairs  that were to be done.  Their next major event is June 21st summer  solstice. They intend to surround the nine  mile perimeter of fence with fires, cooking and baking and celebrating for peace.  A patchwork quilt dragon is their international project. The dragon is to be used  on solstice and is now circulating around  the world. Each community adds its own  piece of dragon, to be worn by many of our  sisters at Greenham.  The movement in England for disarmament is  very strong. Let's make Cold Lake, Alberta  our strength! ■< -,'V'  (Fruma contributed this article after her  recent visit to the Greenham Common Camp.)  January 18,1982. A woman From Greenham Common Peace Camp after  'Keening' at the Houses of Parliament. Keening is a wailing sound, a  traditional expression of women's sorrow and anger. 6 Kinesis   June'83  LABOUR  Past and present:  Women's work  and  unemployment  by Heather Wells  On Wednesday, May 11th, at Little Mountain  Neighbourhood House, a small group of women  were treated to a very inclusive presentation on women and work with a concentration  on women and the unemployment movement,  past and present. Sarah Diamond,' tireless  woman sleuth in that blank area known as  the-history-of-women1s-struggles-in-the-  trade-union-movement, coloured in many of  the niaaen achievements of women's organizing during the depression. Susan O'Don-  nell took up Sarah's remarks discussing  current problems for women both in the  unemployment movement and in attaining  value for domestic work.  Sarah began by outlining a few parallels  between the lot of working women in the  thirties and now. Today, many more women  are organized into unions, there is currently a large women's movement supporting  the demands of women in the labour market  and, on the negative side, women workers  face the onslaught of technological change.  Women in the depression years were mainly  housewives with few household helping  devices. In 1932, they were 10.4% of the  paid labour force, much lower than today.  Their jobs were extensions of their domestic roles. In fact, as the depression  continued, wages for women fell and in the  garment industry they were expected to  take work home and to do it there. Women's  employment was never deemed important  enough to have working conditions improved  for them.  Sarah interviewed a B.C. woman who lived  through the depression and told of leaving  school at 13 to work for 15c an hour cutting asparagus. After working at a job  such as this, returning to school was unheard of because of the social stigma attached to labouring jobs. There were seven  children in the family. "We were just like  the farm workers today who are trying to  be organized," she said."  By 1935 there was an 18% drop in employe  ment opportunities for women. A debate  then erupted as to whether women should  work at all as that was seen as taking  men's jobs. Sarah discovered a quote from  Maclean's magazine in 1931 which suggested  that quotas should be placed on women  entering jobs. During the depression it  was assumed that a woman's family could  take care of her if she could not work.  Women needing social services had to look  to the YWCA as there was no government  agency. Through the YWCA they were forcibly  placed in domestic jobs paying $80 per  month for a sixty to eighty hour work  week. They were not allowed to refuse this  work. Expenses for the working woman were  considerable: in 1935 women would starve  for a week in order to buy stockings for  a job interview since appearance was crucial.  What was it like to be on the dole in the  last depression? The dole was defined by  gunny sacks full of turnips and potatoes,  a sack of which was supposed to last a  family for a month. Divorced women were  excluded from relief coverage unless they  could prove their husbands had not lived  in B.C. for two years. Husband catchers  were set up to drag men back to families.  An important but little recognized element  of women's role in depression organizing  was that they did not choose to organize  with men. They organized as domestic workers and as single unemployed women; earning  ' massive support in the community. Their  efforts became known as the single unemployed women's movement.  In 1937 a plea was made for women to receive direct relief as men did. Women in  domestic work won a $10 a month raise.  They won a reduction on their meal costs  (they were previously expected to pay for  all meals at their place of employ). They  won a 48 hour work week and time and a  half for overtime. An interesting aside to  women's organizing at that time is that  the Klu Klux Klan, powerful in B.C. at  that time, threatened organizers in the  domestic workers movement.  What role did political parties have to  .play? In 1935 the CCF, precursor to the  current New Democratic Party, particpated  in the various campaigns around unemployment that took place. Direct action was  taken at the street level as well, with  STRIKE  IS   CALLED   Ol   G\R\IE\T   WORKERS  Toronto garment workers on strike in 1931,  wages for women fell and in the garment industry, they were expected to  take work home and do it there. Women's employment was never deemed  important enough to have working conditions improved for them."  (Photo from 'Women at Work')  many citizens shocked to find that women  were capable of throwing rocks through  appropriate windows in order to make their  point. Hardy women who were interested in  the treks that set out across the country  to Ottawa or women who rode the rails with  the mass of unemployed men found that they  had to dress as men if they wanted to  participate, all an indication of how sex-  specific the concerns of the larger unemployment movement were.  Women's organizing did not stop at unemployment. They were well aware that a capitalist cure for the depression was going to  be a war and this brought them to organizing against militarism. They also organized  support for single men, they organized  food and support for sit down strikes and  helped with the release of all men charged  in the post office strike. They did extensive advocacy work for people needing relief.  Another big theme of the thirties was  evictions of tenants by landlords. Women  organized the pickets and the large scale  demonstrations. In Vancouver, women were  brilliant at figuring out who was carrying  out the evictions. If trucks arrived at a  home driven by a union member, they blacklisted the driver through his union. As a  last resort, women would chain themselves  to the house and to the furniture.  In a few final remarks, Sarah reminded us  that it's still hidden from us that women  led and were in the rank and file of the  unemployment movement. There is still a  danger that women will not be seen as  legitimate members of the labour force.  Our own right to have a job must be put  forward. -nT-  >T  Following up on Sarah's historical outline,  Susan O'Donnell formulated some points  directed at the current schizophrenic domestic and work lives of women. She talked  about this double role and its effect on  our ability to influence'the unemployment  movement and our status as legitimate  members of the workforce. Susan suggests  that our dual role is still hounding us.  We exist in two worlds, and when we leave  the accredited workplace for childrearing  in the home, we become invisible as a statistic in unemployment records.  As time goes on we seem to move laterally,  instead of upwards. Looking at 80% of women  in the service sector shows us that we have  gained no real positions of power as workers. Meanwhile, the value of domestic  labour and childrearing is very low - it  is not seen as real work - it is romanticized as women's work. "We have to break  that myth and get recognition for that  work," she said.  Looking at domestic workers in B.C. today  is very instructive concerning what value  is attached to work in the home. Basically,  domestic workers in this province, like  all women until just over fifty years ago,  are not seen as persons. They have no  rights and no status as citizens and hence  can receive no protection from exploitation by their employers. Slavery, she  said, is the nature of domestic work and  that's why we have so much difficulty  getting respect for childcare and domestic  "work as women. In fact, what devalues  domestic work is that women do it.  What is happening now that the current  recession continues? The unemployment  movement is being defined by men. A few  years ago in the trade union movement  there was a lot of talk about equal pay  for work of equal value. Now the trade  union movement is saying, 'isn't that  frivolous -.it's time to focus on unemployment "... but it's men defining what  that is. In a depression, the first concern is for primary industry and its men.  Men actually believe at some point in a  depression that they are' getting laid off  and women are still being hired and indeed,  this stage exists - men see this as women  getting their jobs. However, women have  always been a reserve army of labour and  EPIC  WORKER*  ^Nccns;  A LIVABLE  rw/SE!j  Injunction halts  Army and Navy  equal pay picket  The Equal Pay Information Committee (EPIC)  planned a series of pickets outside Army  and Navy Department stores to publicize an  unresolved equal pay for equal work case  against the store.  In January 1981, a former employee, Beverly Yaworski, laid a complaint with the Human .Rights Branch. Despite increasing pressure from citizens'  groups, unions, and women's organizations,  the Labour Minister has failed to set up a  Board of Inquiry.  When the picketers arrived in front of the  department store on April 31st, they found  that Army'tand Navy had secured an injunction against the action. The EPIC members  were further enjoined from calling for a  boycott of Army and Navy until'the case had  been resolved.  It took Army and Navy less than a week to  get an injunction from the legal system. It  has taken Beverly Yaworski over two years  to fight for equal pay without any success.  EPIC is continuing to press the Socred  Labour Minister to set up a Board of  Inquiry to resolve the issue. June '83   Kinesis   7  PORNOGRAPHY  'Sex-oriented products' outlawed  Did City Council miss the point?  byPatFeindel  On May 10,   Vancouver Status of Women made  a presentation to City Council regarding  its proposed amendment to the bylaws to  control video pornography.   VSW spoke  against council's recommendation  (no other  women's groups were represented and the  only other submission Was in writing from  Red Hot Video lawyers), but City Council  unanimously supported the denial of licenses  to any applicants who would be selling/  renting sex-oriented products.   "Educational  and pharmaceutical" products were exempted.  This amendment will have the immediate  effect of prohibiting any new stores like  Red Hot Video from being licensed; it will  likely affect those outlets now operating  in Vancouver with time-limited permits  coming up for renewal, in September.  It will  not,  however,  affect the other twelve  existing adult entertainment stores with  permanent operating permits, nor the dozens  of video stores now selling porn without  the appropriate  "adult entertainment"  license.  VSW also expressed concern over the sweeping category -  "sex-oriented products".  The category fails to define pornography  as a distinct form of hate propaganda,  and leads one to shudder at how,  in the  hands of a less than progressive-minded  Council,   the bylaw might be used.  The following is an abridged from of VSW's  brief to Council, written and presented by  Pat Feindel.  I want to begin my comments by referring to  three events of significance to this issue.  The first is that several months ago, Margaret Mitchel (MP for Vancouver East)  raised the issue of wife battering on the  floor of the House of Commons. The response  to her question was a joke about battered  wives and laughter.  The -second was a report several weeks ago  in the newspaper. A woman in New Bedford,  U.S.A., was raped by four men in a bar  while 12 others stood by and cheered on  the rapists.  The third is that last week I attended a  film in a popular Vancouver movie theatre.  The story line focussed on a rich egocentric woman who* gets, stranded with one of  her male servants on an island. The servant rebels against her power over him -  a power he previously/described as emasculating - and gradually, by means of physical forcfe.. andvher dependence an him for  survival, turns her into his virtual slave.  There are many scenes where the woman is  slapped, beaten, kicked and verbally abused.  There is a long scene depicting an attempted rape. During this process of enslavement, the woman falls madly in love with  her 'master'. And during the showing I  attended, every time the woman was struck  or kicked or verbally assaulted, an enthusiastic wave of laughter rippled through the  audience. The film was not a comedy. I  could have gone to any one of dozens of  movies playing in Vancouver this week and  come up with an example to refer to today.  All three of these events tell me the same  thing - that women's paon is not taken  seriously in my society. That women's pain  is seen as funny, entertaining, and erotic.  That is is seen as deserved, acceptable  and justifiable.  And so I find myslef in the rather horrifying position today of feeling obliged to  state at the outset what should be obvious.  That women's pain is not funny to the  women who feel it. It is not funny to the  women who take care of it. And it is not  funny to the women who fight against a  social system that allows it to be a joke.  A black eye is not erotic. A broken jaw is  not erotic. Being raped by four men is not  erotic. And being tied up and whipped with  a belt buckle to the point of unconsciousness is not erotic.  But every day we are being bombarded with  images that suggest that violence is cool,  brutality is chic, and abuse is a turn-on.  A large proportion of that violence,  brutality and abuse is being directed at  women. Our pain is sold as fashion, as  art, as pornography - "adult entertainment".  The problem is violence against women. It  is a huge problem and pornography is only  one aspect of it. I want to make it  absolutely clear that our concern is about  violence, not sex in and of itself. When  we look at pornography we are seeing primarily sexual violence - rape, incest,  physical and verbal abuse - the intimate  forms that violence most often takes in  the lives of women, that is most often  inflicted on us by those we know and care  about. S^^^^l  I want to reiterate that in opposing pornography, the Vancouver Status of Women  makes a distinction between pornography -  with its message of violence - and what  might be called "sex-oriented produces".  And so we are distressed to learn that in  trying to grapple with the problem of pornography, City Council will be considering  here today not the elimination or control  of products promoting violence against women, but the elimiation of sex-oriented  products of any kind. This approach fails,  as do the producers, sellers, and consumers of pornography fail, to make a dis-  M.n^£i<^'■:. t^twejen^ sjesd|md Sriolent hatreoy''^';  And thisJIpHure/Is precisely the root of  the problem.  We live in a society where accurate, positive information about sex and sexuality is  almost impossible to find. Pornography  fails miserable to live up to even its most  feeble claims to be "educational" or "sexually liberating". The message of pornography is clear: sex is evil, and the evil in  it is women.  When pornography is all that is available,  it enjoys a monopoly in the marketplace of  the sexually curious. We now have an entire  generation of the sexually curious being  introduced to sex through video pornography  because there is virtually nothing else  available.  Although we sympathize with the general intentions of the Community Services Committee  the Vancouver Status of Women is in the  position of being entirely unable to support  the recommendations before City Council,  on the grounds that they would result in  further entrenching the confusion between'  pornography and sexuality. In fact, we  would want to actively support any efforts  to increase the availability of materials  that promoted positive attitudes towards  sex, towards women's sexuality, and towards  women in general.  It is our view, that in the legal arena,  pornography most clearly falls into the  area of human rights. If there were a  multi-million dollar industry in B.C. that  was based on the physical and verbal abuse  of any other class of people than women,  we feel this would be obvious.  For those who seek scientific data, a considerable body of research now exists  documenting the link between pornography  and the tendency towards violence in its  consumers. (Bibliography available from  Women Against Porn, Victoria or VSW). Certainly many women can attest to that link  from first-hand experience of violence in  their lives. But pornography affects all  One day after a week-long picket against Red Hot Video  (see p. 8), city council missed the point and placed a sweep-  ing ban on 'sex-oriented products.' photo by Joni Miller  women - we are all threatened by it,  silenced by it, and must all face the violent attitudes and behavious that it promotes. We believe that it is hate propaganda against women, infringing on the  rights of all women, and should be treated  as such by the legal system.  We do not recommend amending the Motion  Picture Act to include videotape. The Film  Classification department is currently  restricted to three categories which it  applies to film (Mature, Restricted, General) . None of these clarify the difference  between violence, sex, sexual violence, or  hate propaganda.  In addition, film classification is now  carried out based on so-called "community  standards" which are arrived at arbitraily  by the province's Director of Film Classification without any basis in research or  community input. Though Guidelines in written form do exist, the Director has publicly stated that they are now what she uses  in determining community standards. The  Act is fraught with so many inadequacies  already, that it seems unlikely that its  use would have any impact on the video  pornography business except in the form of  license and classifying fees. We would not  object to such costs being incurred for  Red Hot Video, but we would not want to  suggest that this will solve the problem  of pornography.  Our concern is that pornographic images are  contributing significantly to the normalization of violence against women, to the  acceptance of such violence as justified,  appropriate and erotic. This is not a  problem that can be solved by outlawing  the sale of sex-oriented products in the  City of Vancouver. We urge City Council  to look at this issue in more depth, and  to appeal to our provincial government  urging them, first to act on Criminal Code  sanctions already in existence, and second,  to begin Immediately drafting legislation  which would portect the rights of women  under the Human Rights Code.  ,We intend on our part, to continue to  publicly expose pornography for the hate  porpaganda that it is, to urge the educational and health systems to develop more  and adequate sex education, and to put  direct pressure on both consumers and  those who profit, directly or indirectly,  from the pornography industry. Kinesis   June '83  June '83   Kinesis  by Pat Hercus and Jean Bennett  for People Against Pornography  ■"Red Hot,  goodbye,  Red Hot  Red Hot, goodbye  Goodbye, Red Hot, goodbye Red Hot  We 've come to shut you down. "   (to the tune of Goodnight Irene)  With the strains of a slightly modified  old favourite, more than 200 women, men  and children joined together on May 8th  for a mass picket of Red Hot Video's Main  Street store. The singing,1 chanting and  marching that stretched a loop of protestors for half a block marked the end of  a seven-day picket of Red Hot Video.  Anti-pornography groups, rape crisis centres,  women's groups, unions, a student newspaper  and scores of concerned individuals picketed the store for a total of 109 hours. For  every hour Red Hot Video was open that  week, anywhere from six to fifty people  picketed outside. Our presence told Vancouver and Red Hot Video we are opposed to  the degraduation and violence of women  that is the stock in trade of pornography.  Our message was clear: we want pornography  out of our community.  When we first conceived of a week-long  picket of the Main Street store, we had  several goals in mind. The pornography  issue is massive and thoughts of action  aginst it can be overwhelming. A week-long  picket of one store (said to be the distributor for the other outlets) gave our  energies a clear focus. We saw the picket  as one way of emphatically stating our  belief that there is a direct connection  between the pornographic image and the  real-life violence against women. We also  wanted to refute the pornographers' claims  that the community finds porn acceptable.  A week-long picket provided an opportunity  for a large number of people to be directly  involved in anti-pornography work, and also  allowed for public outreach and education.  Specifically, we wanted to draw attention  to the May 9th trial in Victoria, where a  Red Hot Video outlet faced three counts of  obscenity. Women Against Pornography in  Victoria told us the picket encouraged  them, and gave them a feeling of solidarity;  that they were not alone in their opposition to pornography.  Overall, the picket was a tremendous success.  On the picket line, women experienced a  sence of taking back their own power. As  women we live in real fear of repercussions  for speaking out. Through the picket we  confronted that fear and learned how to  deal with the harassment and antagonism  that speaking out often provokes. We saw  clearly what we are up against, and refused  to be intimidated into silence. People sang  dressed in costumes, carried balloons,  decorated the trees, and made music. The  picket became an energizing force, giving  our genuine anger at the pornographers a  positive outlet. Customers respectful of  union activity were perhaps more conscious  of a picket line and the implications of  crossing that line to shop at Red Hot Video  As women we especially fear being out on  the street after dark. Picketing at night,  in front of a store that directly promotes  violence against women, galvanized our  determination to fight back. While it was  frightening at times, we stayed, and the  Red Hot Video staff were the ones who hid  behind blinds and locked doors. The night  is still not safe for women, but for  awhile a chunk of it was taken back.  Many picketers gained a sense of solidarity  on the picket line through knowing that  other groups and individuals were participating in an effort that would continue for  seven straight days. During the picket  there was a genuine sense of being part of  a movement. Although walking in circles  was boring at times,.there were many opportunities to talk with other picketers and  find out the different reasons they had  for participating. Several shifts were  livened up with taped music, singing and  impromptu songwriting. For those who had  never been involved in anti-pornography  work before, the picket offered time to  RED+-fcT VID&? PCKEJT . .  PORNOGRAPHY  get more information and to clarify the  issues. One of the greatest successes we  had was that some people who had never  been politically active demonstrated their  visible support of the anti-pornography  movement.  The educational aspect of the picket was  one of People Against Pornography (PAP)'s  concerns. We saw the action as a vehicle for  reaching a large number of people in the  community, especially those who live near  Red Hot Video. Through direct contact we  expressed our opposition to pornography's  reduction of women to sexual playthings  and its fusion of sexuality and violence.  We attempted to clarify that degradation  and violence, rather than explicit representations of sex, is the issue. Those  who saw us and spoke with us realized  that picketers were not anti-sex, but were  opposed to the oppressive version of female  sexuality that pornography promotes.  During the week hundreds of leaflets from  PAP, Rape Relief and Little Mountain Anti-  Pornography Group were distributed to  passersby and Red Hot customers. However,  there was a lack of materials that called  for specific action on the part of these  people. While Rape Relief produced a leaflet calling for a boycott of. Red Hot Video  and people to honour the picket line, a  leaflet of this sort should have been  available throughout the week.  Clearer guidelines were needed on what we  hoped to accomplish, how the picket was  to operate, and what to do if there were  problems.  Some picketers believed their function was  to physically prevent customers from entering the store; others believed that actively harrassing customers would further our  goals. As one person pointed out,'however,  men provoked by the picket line would  likely take their anger home and act it  out on the woman in their lives. Hostile  confrontations with customers created a  potentially dangerous situation on the  picket line and often destroyed chances  for meaningful discussion.  .Although attempts to embarrass and intimidate customers are effective in large  groups, it is crucial that small numbers  of women do not offer angry men an outlet  for their violence. A tighter back-up  system would also have prevented such a  situation from developing, and would have  avoided shortages of picketers in mid-day  and late evening shifts. A list of guidelines could also have provided up-to-the  minute information on how to deal with  Red Hot's intimidation tactics.  The reactions from customers and passerbys  were mixed. Shouts of "faggot", "dyke" and  "what you women need..." contrasted with  enthusiastic votes of approval, thumbs up  signs, gifts of food and hot drinks to the  picketers and money for the cause. A hot  cup of coffee on a rainy afternoon does  wonders for flagging spirits. Some would-  be customers back-tracked when they saw  the picket, while others forced their  way through the line to knock on Red Hot's  locked door. Other customers were turned  away when they were informed of the issue,  agreeing to rent their family tapes elsewhere .  The picket's beginning received mediocre  media coverage, but with the increasing  distraction of the provincial election,  media attention dwindled. The education of  individuals and groups was our focus, but  more consistent contact with the newspapers,  tv and radio may have resulted in more  coverage. We did, however, make the Sunday  evening news on BCTV wedged between a shooting at a commune and a multiple arson story  Did we have any effect on Red Hot Video?  "Did we have any effect on Red Hot Video?  Despite their denials, we hurt their business  considerably. Their use of increasingly visible  intimidation tactics reflects how nervous they  became."  . ness considerably. Their use of increasingly visible intimidation tactics reflects  how nervous they became. They began with  a posted threat to prosecute illegal picketing, an empty threat since congregating  on a city sidewalk is perfectly legal.  Later in the week they offered a free copy  of the new charter of rights (available  at no cost from the government) and wound  up on Sunday with a video camera trained  on the picket.  The ultimate absurdity lay in the "picketers' delight", a message posted in the  window telling us of a Red Hot 'informer'  in our midst. These tactics served only to  strengthen our resolve, and to reveal  exactly how threatened they were.  The response of the police clearly indicates how little help we can expect from  the state in this battle. On Saturday  night eggs were thrown at the picketers;  (most of them landed on RHV's windows).  When called in, the police told the picketers they should expect such harrassment  if they engage in this type of protest. Do  we give up our civil rights when we take  to the streets to protest violence against  women? On the other hand, the police, when  called by RHV earlier in the week, responded  by telling picketers they were singing'too  loudly, and they were hurting RHV's business. "That," said one picketer, "is precisely what we're here for!" Little help  can be expected from the guardians of a  society where the rights of property supercede the rights of human beings to protect  themselves from the violence of a misogynist culture.  The week ended on Sunday with a mass picket. While the demonstration was^successful,  and fun, a rally held elsewhere could more  effectively have brought the week to a  close. Speakers could have provided a wrap-  up of the' picket and focused our attention  on what remains to be done. The picket.was  not an isolated action, but rather a part  graphy work.  Perhaps a rally would have made this more  clear. However, a solid 200 women, children  and men, chanting singing, made it clear we  have only just begun the fight on a large  community scale.  The week long picket proved to us that the  anti-pornography movement has a broad base  of support. We truly are becoming a powerful force. This became, as the days progressed, an undeniably strong and steady wave  of protest. Now is the time for building ou:  strength for another wave. As we stand and  fight against the pornographer's image of  woman as sexual toy and willing target of  male domination and violence, we take back  our power as human beings. If we are to  survive, we have no choice but to fight  back. How else can we hope to create a  society where human rights do riot mean the  right of one group to exploit and oppress  another?  XJSA mi  M  Akl *»NJAUYS»IS 10 Kinesis   June'83  "... the existence of prostitution  in Vancouver drew a consistently  negative response from the local  residents. They pressed authorities  for its immediate removal either from  their neighbourhoods, their places of  business, or from the city entirely.  Groups like the National Council of  Women, in appealing to Ottawa for  criminal legislation, were seeking the  tools to make possible an all out drive  against vice. They believed that  tougher laws accompanied by moral  reform were the only way to deal  effectively with prostition."  If any of this sounds familiar,  including the presence of the  Council of Women, you might note  the date of the above proceedings:  1906-1917!  The preceding statements were  taken from an article by Deborah  Nilsen entitled "The 'Social Evil':  Prostitution in Vancouver,  1900-1920", published in a  collection of essays about women in  history, In Her Own Right (1980),  Editors Barbara Latham, Cathy Kess.  Nilsen states, "Agitation at the  national level for more stringent laws  and local demands for strict law  enforcement  ENFORCEMENT... illustrate a high  degree of confidence in the law as a  means to eradicate prostitution."  The lobbyists got their harsh laws,  new offences were created and old  summary conviction offences were  changed to the more serious  indictable offence category.  WELL, THEN, DID PROSTITUTION  END, DECREASE, OR OTHERWISE  DISAPPEAR FROM VIEW? Actually,  no. It increased... despite harsher  criminal laws and increased police  enforcement.  Coincidentally, it appears that the  economy was severly depressed from  1912-1917, the demand for women  workers was limited and decreasing  steadily, and the labour market was  bursting with the unemployed. In  their police records, most prostitutes  cited other occupations, almost all of  them at the lowest end of the wage  scale: domestic service, waitressing,  and shop clerking.  Not surprisingly, Nilsen concludes  that the marginal position Of women  in the labour force, poverty, and the  hardship of a depressed economy  were the instrumental factors driving  women into prostitution.  Prostitution recommendations  spark heated debate  by Lorri Rudland and Cole Dudley  On May 17 at 7:30p.m. Vancouver City Council galleries overflowed into the hallways  with a boisterous, occasionlly fractious,  and certainly diversified assembly. Forty-  one delegations appeared to respond to a  motion proposed by Alderwomen Marguerite  Ford and May Brown in support of the recent recommendations of the Federal Justice  Committee for harsher criminal laws against  pro s t itut ion.  The Parliamentary Standing Committee on  Justice and Legal Affairs (Justice Committee) , an all-party committee composed of  Members of Parliament, studied the prostitution issue and subsequently brought  down its majority recommendations. The  recommendations included: the creation of  a new crime, the offering or the acceptance of an offer to engage in prostitution  under which both prostitutes and customers  can be charged and liable to a $500 fine  or 15-day jail sentence; extending the  definition of public place to include any  place within public view, such as a motor  vehicle; and the prosecution of adults  who buy sexual services from persons  under the age. of 18. Justice Minister  Mark McGuigan is expected to act on these  recommendations before the House breaks  for summer recess. ' 3^2?^-"  The heated five-hour debate which occurred  at City Council was the culmination of  lengthy and intensive lobbying actions  by Vancouver's Mayor Harcourt, residents  of the West End and members of CROWE (Concerned Citizens of the West End), and the  Association of Police Chiefs. The Vancouver City Council has no jurisdiction over  criminal law but the extended debate  succeeded in bringing to the attention of  the public the real issues involved in  prostitution.  As expected, City Council supported the  recommendations in a majority vote: 22  for, 19 against. The COPE slate - Libby  Davies, Harry Rankin, Bruce Ericksen and  Bruce Yorke - voted against the major  recommendation which makes offering or  accepting an offer to engage in prostitution the crime.  Speakers supporting the Brown/Ford motion  included representatives from CROWE, the  Progressive Conservative Women's Association and riding associations, the B.C.  Liberal Women's Association, a Hotel  Owners Association, and some church and  community groups. A supporting brief was  also filed by the Vancouver Council of  Women.  Speaking against the motion were the  Alliance for the Safety of Prostitutes  (ASP), Vancouver Status of Women, Vancouver Women's Health Collective, Women  Against Nuclear Technology, Vancouver  Rape Relief, B.C. Federation of Women,  NDP Women's Rights Committee, Carnegie  Centre, National Action Committee on the  Status of Women, Lesbian Conference Committee, Vancouver Association of Women  and the Law, street workers Allan Roscoe  (Emergency Services) and John Turvey  (Downtown Eastside Residents Association),  the,First United church and several individual presenters.  Those who spoke in favour of the harsh  criminal sanctions clearly saw the recommendations as a way to combat the harassment to which they are daily subjected  in their neighbourhoods. Mrs. Elsie Mitchell of the West End Seniors Network  said: "I have received calls from seniors  telling of purse snatching in broad daylight. Our right to use our streets,  stores and yards is being violated."  The groups and individuals who spoke  against the recommendations regarded them  as an expedient way for the police to  wipe the streets clean of prostitutes,  ;, without addressing the social issues surrounding prostitution. Lorri Rudland of  the Vancouver Status of Women stated:  "These recommendations are expedient, simplistic, and are not designed to deal with  the complexity of prostitution or even  with the nuisaace problems that prompted  their creation."  Many of the speakers pointed to the connection between violent and sexual abuse  by family members and subsequent prostitution. Allan Roscoe of the Ministy of  Human Resources Emergency Services reported: "The young people I work with have all  suffered from sexual, emotional and/or  physical abuse in or out of their homes."  According to a Task Force Report on Prostitution by the U.S. National Organization  of Women 15-25% of adult female prostitutes  are incest survivors, and about 50% have  a childhood history of sexual or physical  abuse.  In an area of high population density,  such as the West End, it is not unusual to  have a steadily increasing rate of violent  and abusive crime. People who spoke against  the recommendations felt that the pending  measures would do nothing more than scapegoat the prostitutes, adding another financial burden and forcing them onto the  ^streets again to pay these fines. "With the  passing of the amendment, prostitutes will  be more vulnerable to violence than they  already are. They will have to put in longer hours to pay fines and by having to go  underground they will be easy prey with  virtually no access to the justice system,1  said Marie Arrington of ASP.  Speaking to the problem of neighbourhood  disruption, Libby Davies told City Council  that if the existing traffic and nuisance  (noise) laws were enforced, the problems  residents currently encounter would be  greatly reduced. Rather than making prostitution the crime, the real offenders would  be liable to prosecution.  Joni Miller of Vancouver Rape Relief asked,  "What protection is City Council offering  for any of us? How will this proposal stop  the men who harass in my_ neighbourhood?  ...Isn't it time that the blame for sexual  harassment was put squarely on the men who  perpetuate it...?"  The West End has an extremely active night  life regardless of prostitution and it is  this night life which attracts the men who  abuse and harass women. It is also the  presence of this night life - restaurants,  bars and clubs open to the early hours of  the morning without adequate parking facilities which cause much of the noise and  cruising in cars that the residents complain about.  Removing the prostitutes will not solve  the problem of sexual harassment in the  continued on p. 26 June'83   Kinesis  HARD TIMES  by Michele Wollstonecroft and Emma Kivisild  Debby is a Native Indian, originally from  the North Coast of B.C. She works as a  secretary at a community office and is  raising two children on her own. She also  does Tri-Chem(liquid embroidery) and  teaches beading classes.  "I think everybody's affected by the  recession. There's no doubt about it.  There's no money around and when you do  make things like arts and crafts, there's  nobody out there to buy them.  "The classes get native women out to do  things. They get 10% of the sale. They're  learning something and getting a couple  of bucks spending money. There is no money  out there to buy, so I teach whoever wants  to be taught.... They can do it at home in  the evening after the kids are in bed,  while they're watching T.V.".-  Kristie has a degree in social work from  UBC and two degrees as a massage therapist.  She has been unemployed for a long time.  Because she could not find a job, she  began a skills exchange service or network,  thereby creating a job for herself.  "There are1 so many people who need to be  doing something worthwhile, they just need  to feel they can use their skills, and  that's where the service is invaluable.  Women in the home, for instance, have  domestic skills that aren't worth much in  the workforce, but this way they can exchange them and make them marketable in  that way. Another group that really benefits is seniors. They can do so many things  - and they can still do them.  "As far as I'm concerned, without using  your abilities and skills, the future's  dim. I see all these people sitting around  complaining, and I figure that the service  is at least an alternative to that, an  option. I don't want to survive;I want to  live."  Linda was working as a secretary for a  large corporation and making a good  salary, when she was laid off. At that  time two people in every department of  that company were let go. Unable to find  similar work, Linda decided to go to  University.  "Because I could not find work I went  back to school(which I've always wanted  to do). I couldn't have gone to university full-time without the loan and grant  system. I sold all my 'office clothes';  now I have hardly any clothes, and that's  fine, I have what I need. I found a more  meaningful job (home-making for the  elderly and handicapped) and no longer  have to 'play-act' or lead a double life  of who I am at work and who I am outside  of work. My life is much more unified.  "Fortunately, I don't have any dependants  and no large bills to pay. I usually  share accommodations, and in the summer  house-sit for people who are out of town.  "The one thing that I don't have that  I was used to was the feeling of having a  choice. I've been forced into this lifestyle, but it suits me right now. I think  I'm getting more out of my life than  before. Essentially, I've taken a bad  situation and made it work for me."  Rose is a newspaper seller in her late  fifties who lives alone in a rented  suite. She feels that her job, as a  "street job" is directly affected by the  recession. She says that there are too  many people either harassing her for  money or just plain harassing her. As  well, there is no protection for her work,  everyone sells newspapers now, from the  local corner store to the vending machines,  to the drug stores. "I only make seven  cents a copy. If I sell 35 newspapers  I only make seven cents times 35; you  figure it out."  Beryl is a West Vancouver housewife. She  is in her late fifties and has four grownup children. She collects antiques and  has taught courses about antiques, as  well as having run an antique business.  Although not immediately affected by the  recession, Beryl expressed concerns over  the future. Her husband is due to retire  in a few years and his company pension  plan is very limited.  "If my husband dies after he retires I  will not receive any of his pension,  unless, before retiring, he agrees to take  only 75% of his pension and then I will  receive a portion of that 75% if he dies.  If he takes his 100% pension then I'll  get nothing if he dies. I believe that I  deserve that pension and should share in  the pension of my husband... There are not  many choices for earning another income  for a woman of my age and with my skills."  Annette graduated from high school in  1980. Since then she has participated in  the W.E.A.T. program(a government program  introducing women to various trades) and  attended bartending school. At the moment  she is unemployed. She shares accomodation with her boyfriend, who is also  unemployed. '  "At one point I was looking for work that  would be specifically interesting to me.  Now, I'll take almost any job. But even  waitressing requires one year of experience. As a person who recently graduated  from high school(three years ago), where  can I get that experience if no one will  hire me?  "All our money goes to pay rent, then  bills. What we have left we spend on  food, which usually leaves nothing extra.  I want to go back to school, but can't  afford it right now.  "...In the media we see how the recession  affects big business, or hear politicians  talking about it. I think it is important  to interview people who are really affected."  Gayle, a 26 year old single mother is  studying communications and women's studies  at SFU on a full-time basis.  "Things are going to get a lot harder. This  winter is going to be hard on everyone. I'd  like to see more people participating instead of going to movies or big rock and  roll concerts. People could support local  artists, the grass roots events. I hope  things could get back to that.  "I hope that I can get a half-assed job  related to my education, but I may very  well end up as an educated waitress. In  that case, I have my participation in other  things, like the women's movement, to  validate my experience.  "I wish we could change people so that  they would not think that their only participation in society was through their work  and make them realize that they can look  at other things.  "I wouldn't mind these hard economic times,  you know, if it was for a redistribution of  things globally, for bread and water, of  for freedom, but it's just to put the money  in the pockets of people who already have  too much." Kinesis   June '83  Rosie the Riveter: take two?  by Kate Braid  One of the commonly heard  themes in the women's movement  during the past two years has  been "women should be moving  into non-traditional jobs."  There were government programs  and posters and articles and  conferences about how clerical  jobs were threatened by microchip technology, how women's  participation in the labour  force was rapidly increasing  and, most of all, that there  was a critical shortage of  tradespeople which women were  being invited to fill.  If the economy had continued at  full tilt, there would most  certainly have been a shortage.  When it took a nosedive, there  was instead a drastic shortage  of jobs. It is hard for anyone  to be out of work for prolonged  periods of time, but there is  an extra edge to having barely  tasted the rich fruits of  trades work, deciding you want  more, and then having them  snatched away.  This sudden switch in direction  seems to have hit the newest  women the hardest. They went  into trades training in the expectation of plenty of work  and a healthy paycheck. Instead,  the two I spoke with are out of  work. "The problem," said Colleen Penrowley, "is that I finished my pre-apprenticeship in  Carpentry in March and I don't  feel I have the skills to go  out and do odd jobs on my own.  Maybe if I was a second or  third year carpenter I would  do that but right now I don't  have the confidence."  Thea Beil completed her pre-  apprenticeship in Plumbing in  December 1982. Since then she  has helped her dad (also a  plumber) on a few jobs but  basically She has not worked  at her trade. "There are just  no jobs," she said, "except  the job of looking. I had a  long chat with one employer  the other day about job possibilities and then he asked,.  'Who is this for?'".  Is she disappointed that the  work promised of 1982 didn't  turn out? "Actually, even last  July when I was still in  school, things were starting  to slow down and everyone said,  'Now's the time to train.' I  was sort of prepared not to  get a job right away after my  pre-apprenticeship". She concluded, "I find it really frustrating, though, never to have  any money."  Thanks to a more recent work  experience, UIC has modified  that frustration somewhat for  the women I spoke to who are  in the final year of their ap  prenticeship training or who  already have trades qualifications - that is, those who are  journeywomen. For these women,  UIC was their "lifesaver," as  more than one said. The advantage of being laid off trades  and technical work which are  often unionized and have high  wages and good benefit packages  is that UIC payments are a little higher. Nonetheless, it is  a struggle to cope, to make  drastic changes in long-term  financial plans.  "My greatest source of amazement," said Carlyal Gittens,  a tilesetter who was laid off  a union job some 10 months ago,  "is that I'm not in a corner  weeping my eyes out over my  bad financial situation. I'm  managing not so much to pay as  to juggle."  Rose Hilton, an electronic  technician was the first woman  hired by a Canadian commercial  radio station (CKNW-CFMI). This  January she was laid off and  the effects are a tight financial situation. "My son who is  12, really feels the difference," she explained. "He's  growing fast and instead of  something that's fun, like a  bike or a new sleeping bag, we  need the money for essentials  like the new shoes he seems to  need every few months."  Both she and Carlyal have discovered, from different directions, that their skills provide them with options. "I  have less than nothing financially," Carlyal explained,  "but I've come to realize that  some people have some money,  so I'm starting to hussle tile  setting work."  After several years in the  trade, these women have skills  that are saleable, even on a  restricted market. Rose is now  working on a government grant  that boosts her UIC payment,  on a project installing a remote broadcast facility at the  ( Arts & Science Centre. It is  "work that is directly related  to her trade. "What I like  about this job is that since  I got laid off I started to  feel that maybe I was no good.  My confidence level has taken  a nose dive." She continued,  "I've put in application after  application and got rejection  after rejection, but it's  simply a fact that no one is  hiring anybody for any reason.  They're laying off. Intellectually I know that but emotionally I couldn't stop myself  feeling, 'Maybe I'm in the  wrong field. Maybe I should  change again. Maybe I'm no  good.' This job makes me feel  I'm not a total loss. I'm  doing what I like and I know  I'm doing it well."  Lack of confidence is a.constant bane in almost every  tradewoman's life. For thousands of years we have been  told we cannot do these jobs,  these are "men's" jobs, and  the immense power of that  conditioning has to be counteracted every day with a puny  dose of the reality that we  can and we are. It takes a  long time and it takes, for  now, the constant reassurance  .that we are capable.  "At first I just liked these  odd jobs because they get me  out of the house," Carlyal explained. "But then the challenge of the jobs kept me  going. I'm learning an awful  lot. I like my trade so much,  it means a lot to me that I'm  learning this much on my own.  For sure," she continued, "I  wish I had union work. I want  my paycheck every week with no  worry. Working for myself is  far more worry and responsibility. I never stop thinking-  about the jobs I do - all day  I'll mull over a certain problem. But I love the work."  She reflects a similar experience of the changes her trade  has wrought for her. "If I had  not been in the trade for the  past three years, I wouldn't  have known how to look for  work. The other day I wrote  my name for someone for a  possible job referral and  under my name I wrote "A good  investment". I would never  have had the guts to do that  before. If you don't have the  confidence to ask for a job,  to think, know, you can handle  it, the skills don't matter."  This is what is so hard for  those women just entering  tradeswork or just completing  their training. "It really  counts to have those few years  of experience and the resulting confidence under your  belt."  Not everyone is having a hard  time. It seems that women with  many years of experience in  their trade and/or with seniority in their union or company,  have best withstood the economic downturn.  Janet Lane is an avionics mechanic for CP Air. She has  worked there for several years,  doing electronics work on the  jets. ("Want me to fix your  jet for you?" is her quip when  tradeswomen start trading  skills.) Last summer CP Air  started layoffs - 7 out of 12  were laid off. Janet is about  11th from the bottom of the  seniority list and still working.  Is she worried? "Of course, you  always worry but I'm glad I'm  in electronics because there  seems less chance of being  laid off than other fields. In  the future I think the need  for electronics will increase -  new aircraft are much more  electronic than.in the past.  And jLf I get laid off," she  says, "I think there is more  chance of a related job. After  four years I have basic skills  in electronics and electricity.  I feel I've made it in my  trade," she says. "I love my  job, and with this experience  under my belt I know that even  if I'm laid off, I can find  another trade. I only wish I  was in the middle of the seniority list!" |^$iil  There is no question that seniority is a vital asset. But  women suffer the same disability we suffered'after the War.  In spite of good learning and  good skills, as Rose puts it,  continued next page June'83   Kinesis  Women working: laying the myths to rest  by Susan O'Donnell/Roseanne Mdran  Women work. We have always  worked, although our labour is  often unpaid. Women are less  unionized than men and therefore more vulnerable to unemployment. Although the increase  in unemployment over the last  year has officially affected  men and women equally, the percentage of unemployed women is  always higher than recorded.  Statistics seriously underpre-  sent female unemployment. In  addition, this general unavailability of jobs is compounded  for women by periodic labour  force withdrawal for childrearing, the lack of paid maternity  leave protection, inadequate  daycare facilities, inflexible  working hours and the inaccessibility of training and retraining opportunities to facilitate re-entry into the workforce. In light of this information, two pressing economic  factors are working against  women at this time.  0Women earn 59$ for every  dollar that men make.  This  reality has implications for  both working and unemployed  women whose UIC benefits are  calculated\,.on the amount of  money earned when working.  0One third -of Canadian families  are headed by single parent  women who receive little or  no economic assistance .from  the fathers of their children.  Myths about women working in  the labour force abound. Some  of these include the belief  that: Women don't need to work.  Mothers should stay at home.  Women's position in the workforce is improving.  Women are not marginal members  of the labour force, although  we frequently hold marginal  jobs for marginal wages. We  in the women's movement are  fighting to ensure that women  have equal pay, pensions and  benefits, a voice in decisions  affecting our work and a better  chance for decent jobs. Adequate educational and full employment strategies are preconditions for equality between men and women.  For the minority of women who  are organized, the trade union  movement's commitment to equal  pay for work of equal value is  beginning to move us in the  right direction. Affirmative  Action Programs have also promised some hope, although management has had a great deal of  success in dividing organized  men and women over this issue.  Non-union women are the victims  of a number of problems, including poor wages, underemployment, cheating by the employer on the question of hours  worked, tips withheld and often  unacceptable working conditions.  Thus we know that the unionization of all working women is  essential.  Workers' solidarity is important as well, but it must be  grounded in an understanding on  the part of male workers of the  plight of their female counterparts. This means the recognition of the double role played by women in the workforce  as workers and homemakers  through pushing for a comprehensive system of daycare and  maternity leave at full pay.  continued from previous page  "I'm 36 years old but when it  comes to jobs, I'm competing  with men my age and younger  with far more experience of the  trade under their belt. They've  been playing with this stuff  since they were kids. When  there was a boom, in the late  '70's and early '80's," she  goes on, "they could afford to  hire us. I was hired as a kind  of novelty. But a boss's  interest is profit. If the  crunch comes and there's a  choice; if they've got a man  and a woman the same age and  the man has more experience,  they'll choose the'man. The  men are more experienced and  more qualified than we are."  There are, of course, exceptions .  Judy Doll has been a carpenter  for 10 years and an independent  contractor for seven. The  spring was "very rough" for her  business wise, but since April,  she says, "I haven't felt any  effects of these economic  hard times. In fact, I've been  able to charge what I consider  a fair rate for my labour in  addition to an overhead that  covers extra costs like tools  and truck and my estimating  time. Without my income, at  these rates, my family (husband and three kids) couldn't  survive."  Lark Ryan is also still working, after six years for the  same company as a purchaser/  driver. "They laid off six  people (one part-time) out of  eight and I stayed. You can't  ever be sure," she adds, "but  I've been told that the day I  get laid off is the day the  company goes belly-up. We just  got a raise, in line with the  ^union whose rates we always  get.(our shop is not unionized.) But the boss has given  notice that next year there  will be no raise."  It seems that the women who  have struggled this far in  non-traditional work are  "hanging in", barely. Our main  need, is one that is only possible over time - that is,  more time. To gain entry to  the unions and the security  and benefits they offer; to  gain seniority; to increase  our skills and the simple  numbers of skilled women in  the trades. One option is the  goal held by a group called  Plane Jane, a group of women  doing carpentry and renovations together since April '82.  "One of our goals," claimed  Melanie Conn, a member, "is  to be solvent enough that  eventually we can accommodate  women who want to learn carpentry skills."  The concentration of women in  female job ghettos is an issue  which cannot be ignored. The  first laws passed in Canada  regarding women's work stemmed  from a desire to protect women  workers, while at the-same time  excluding them from some jobs.  Protective legislation reflected the desire of the middle  class to protect the traditional structure of the family.  Excluding women from certain  areas of the workforce followed from a belief that women  workers were a threat, that by  flocking into areas such as  The concentration  of women in female  job ghettos is an  issue that cannot be  ignored.  Separate workplaces  necessitates equal pay  for work  of equal value.  office work, telegraphy and  teaching, women had driven men  out of these occupations and  should not be allowed to go  further. The accomplishment  of the distinct separation of  male and female workplaces has  necessitated our struggle for  equal pay for work of equal  value.  It is important to recognize  the built-in assumptions of  inequality underlying much  legislation which concerns  working women. These assumptions are based on the notion  of the working woman as essentially dependent and functioning within the traditional  family structure. Both assumptions are unjust and inaccurate,  No areas of legislation reflect  this injustice better than  those concerned with benefits  and pensions. Benefits exist  because of employment and their  level is scaled to the wage  earned. At present, provisions  overtly discriminate against  women; their design results in  women receiving disproportionately low benefits and fails  to recognize the equal contribution that women make to the  marriage partnership.  Just as the rights of women  have to be more seriously addressed in the area of fringe  benefits, so too the areas of  occupational health and safety  and sexual harassment. Sexual  harassment in the workplace is  another aspect of the power  politics between men and women.  Those men who practice it operate insidiously, and prey on  women, who in most instances  desperately need their jobs  and are afraid to speak up.  Women today spend approximately  ?3 hours a week on work in the  home, a figure which has not  changed since 1945. For all  this work, we receive no pay,  no vacations, and no guarantees  of an old age free of poverty  after a lifetime of essential -  work.  The amount of value that society places on domestic labour  can be seen in the payment and  living conditions received by  mothers on welfare and domestic workers. According to the  Domestic Worker's Union, B.C.  domestic workers are exempt  from any laws regarding hours  of work or overtime. Women on  welfare and their children live  40% below the poverty line. In  the case of welfare mothers,  the state assumes the role of  breadwinner, and with domestics, the employer plays this  role. The livelihood of women  and children in these situations is totally dependent  on the economic generosity of  whoever assumes this breadwinner role.  The victimization of j  a major cornerstone of our  economy. In turn, this provides  . a rational for institutionalized violence against women.  This violence takes the form  of batterning, incest, rape  and the proliferation of pornographic imagery. It even  extends to our right to control  our own bodies, through our  choice to give birth or not,  our ability to secure safe and  effective means of contraception or medical practices that  do not inhibit our ability to  directly control our health  and well-being.  We see this year as being one  of increased economic difficulty for everyone. We are  well aware of the erosion of  hard won trade rights, the  astounding rate of lay-offs  and attempts by government to  force 'make work' programs on  working people. The Vancouver  Status of Women continues to  be a part of the fight against  this assault.on working people  in whatever ways we can, although we are well aware, as  history shows, that women's  issues are easily cast aside  in times of economic crisis.  Susan O'Donnell delivered tnis  speech at the May Day rally in  Vancouver. 14 Kinesis   June'83  by Joanna dan Hertog  In May 1983 official government figures  showed 609,000 women unemployed in Canada  today. This is an increase of 23.2% over  April 1982.  Other figures on technological change show  that approximately 7000 manufacturing jobs  are being lost each month in Canada. In .  the field where traditionally most women  have been employed, the clerical and service sectors, it has been estimated in  studies published in the last month by the  federal government, that as many as 1 million jobs may be lost due to technological  change by 1990.  On top of that,.women's general position  in the labour force has not been significantly improved upon during the last  ten years. Although the participation rate  of women in the labour force has soared  (from around 35% in the late sixties, to  over 50% now), the average income, and j ob  levels have not yet matched the aim of anything like "equal pay".  The average income of a Canadian women in  1981 was about $8,100 compared to the average of $16,659 for men. If only full time  work is compared, women averaged $12,069  compared to $20,719 for men. Women still  earn 58% as much as men, although the participation rate for women-in the labour force  is steadily increasing.  At present, six out of ten of the new  "entrants" to the labour market are women.  The government expects this to increase in  the next decade to seven out of ten. Government policy, however, seems to take no  account of any of these trends.  These figures indicate that government and  college programs continue to train women  into primarily secretarial or clerical  work. Apparently, clerical work remains  the most common work for women who graduate  with a Bachelor of Arts degree, after  teaching. And, in teaching, women are losing ground to increasing numbers of men.  Between 1975 and 1980 statistics indicate  that 66.7% of new teaching jobs went to  But of course it is primarily the clerical  sector which is going to .experience the  greatest amount of job loss, and dislocation in the coming years. These statistics  only give us a rough idea of the scale of  the changes in work which we are all at  the brink of experiencing.  They are already affecting, with disastrous  consequences, the lives of hundreds of women in this province. The changes being  ushered in under the banner of "exciting"  high tech are very troubling given the  implications they have for job mobility,  security, quality of work life, educational  levels required, rural viability, overall  extended levels of unemployment, wage  level gaps, stress, health and safety  concerns... to mention just a few. And, in  all these cases, women are most frequently  the ones in the jobs which are experiencing  the first onslaught of the new micro-chip  technology.  We are at a stage now in Canada where the  issue of technological change is just  beginning to hit the public consciousness.  There has been a spate of articles in  business, left-wing and feminist magazines  about the possible future effects some of  this technology will have on our work and  our lives. But the tone of the public debate is frighteningly naive. Few people  seem to be aware of the scale of the dislocation already taking place right now  throughout Canada, nor of the immense reorganization of world economies that is  paralleling the speed of local technological changes. Unfortunately, both our  provincial and federal governments have no  answers on how the thousands of individuals  who will be made redundant will be reintegrated into the economy.  The government is not aware of the immensity of the human problems that this uncontrolled system of allowing corporations  free rein in the introduction of technological change, is creating.  To illustrate on small scale the massive  technological changes affecting some women in our province today, let's look at  what the women at B.C. Tel are currently  facing.  The technology being introduced by B.C. Tel  is not unique. It basically consists of  computerized inventory, billing, record  keeping and mailing functions; the centralization of all possible services and  "Slogans of the 'liberating'  aspects of the new microchip  technology are sad mistruths,  when the reality has been  unemployment, increase in  stress and illness, and a grim  future for women."  B.C. Tel and technological change  New Threats for Working Women  offices to as few locations as possible,  and the introduction of as much microelectronic switching machinery as possible  which reduces the need for labour. The  same kinds of computerized technology is  also being introduced right now throughout  B.C. by all the banks, credit unions,  supermarket chains, department stores,  real estate companies, B.C. Hydro, government departments, warehousing and transport  companies, and, on a smaller scale, by  many of the retail outlets in all communities.  B.C. Tel has been engaged in wholesale  technological change for about five years.  At first, the effects on the 11,000 workers  at B.C. Tel was an increase  in jobs, in  educational opportunities, in some mobility, and in the interest-level of the work.  At first the effects on B.C. Tel  workers was an increase in jobs, in  educational opportunities, in some  mobility and in interest level of the  work. But that period is over.  For the approximately 5000 clerical workers  and traffic operators (95% women) who began to think about working with the computer terminals or with computerized  operating consoles, the prospect was not  very negative. But that period is over. In  the last two years all the lasting effects  of the new technology have begun to take  hold.  Operator offices are being closed down  throughout the province. In 1979 the first  operator office in Penticton was completely  eliminated. That meant that approximately  60 women lost their work. While the contract stipulates that workers at B.C. Tel  cannot be laid off due to technological  change, employees have to be able and  willing to "relocate" to another available  job elsewhere in the company. Very few of  the Penticton operators could move, of  course; most have families, and cannot  move their husbands and children to another  city, particularly given that operator  wages are not high enough for most families to risk such a major dislocation.  Since the Penticton office closure, the  whole Vernon operator office has been  closed (45 operators). In the last months,  the Nelson operator office was closed on  March 1 (28 operators), and Dawson Creek  will lose their operator office on August  1 (80 operators). Next year Terrace and  Williams Lake will also lose their operator offices.  The company knows that by requiring employees to relocate as few as 30% and as many  as 60% may "quit", thereby absolving the  company of any additional responsibilities  ! to these employees.  The computer and electronic switching  systems are the technologies behind the  elimination of local telephone operator  offices. In the last two years B.C. Tel  has centralized all  "directory assistance"  calls to just three lower mainland offices.  Now, when you call "113" you will be connected with one of the (fewer) directory  assistance operators in Vancouver, New  Westminster, or North Vancouver. This holds  even if you are, for example, a Dawson  Creek resident and want to know the new  number of the Dawson Creek medical clinic.  Your call is transmitted through Vancouver.  The second stage of the computerization is  now producing massive redundancies, job  loss and dislocation of operators. This  computerization allows all  long distance  calls from anywhere in the province which  require operator assistance to be handled  by centralized computer operator "positions" .  The technology allows more calls to be  handled per minute, operator offices to be  reduced ultimately to just one location,  monitoring of operator performance to be  done by computer (average seconds per call  are calculated for every computerized operator office), and staffing levels to be very  carefully matched per hour  of anticipated  'call volume'.  What has all this meant for the operator?  For any operator who lives anywhere in the  North, the Interior, the Island...in any  of the communities where B.C. Tel has  operations, there are little or no job  prospects for the future. To keep her  employment (plus her built up pension  rights, vacation, seniority, medical and  dental benefits, and so on), the operator  must be prepared to leave her home area  and relocate to another city.  But at the same time even such a relocation  holds no guarantee for secure job prospects.  While massive technological change is taking place in transmission of long distance  calls, similar technology is also wiping  out hundreds of jobs in the clerical and  (primarily male) plant sections of the  company. The possibility of transferring  to other work within the company is also  disappearing.  B.C. Tel is centralizing its billing information, customer records and assignment of new numbers through an integrated  clerical computer system. Video display  terminals in the thousands have been introduced in all the clerical offices in  the province.  initiated by the union about two years  ago to permit entry into the better paying and more skilled "craft" JOBS. But  entry into those jobs has been frozen.  There are now as many redundancies in  the craft areas of the company as elsewhere, also because of new technologies.  The company has introduced multi-million  dollar switching computers which are  gradually eliminating the need for skilled  electronic work. Phone marts, which will'  increase in the next years as customers  are wooed into owning their own phones,  will eliminate hundreds of installers and  repair persons. These jobs have been life-  Telephone operators at the new computerized operator station. The push is not only to make work more efficient, but to  centralize it, to reduce labour, and to simplify the tasks. The terrifying result is that thousands of jobs are lost without  any possibility that others are being created elsewhere.  Women are complaining everywhere of speedup, of problems with vision from working  on VDT's, of increased monitoring, and of  much.greater boredom in their work. There  will no doubt be another wave of massive  job displacement attempted by the company  in the near future, this time in its clerical section. Once again the choice will be  to relocate or to "quit".  The push is not only to make work more  efficient, but to centralize it, to reduce labour, and to simplify the tasks.  The terrifying result is that thousands  of jobs are lost without any possibility  that others are being created elsewhere in  the company.  Local communities are losing the very few  union and relatively better paying jobs  open to women and the skill gap and wage  gap is increasing  between those who operate the machines and those who manage.  The health and safety conditions are once  again being reduced to 'factory' kinds of  problems: lighting, piecework oriented  control of productivity, stress, tendinitis  and fatigue. The reduction in the required  skill levels is resulting in a major  attempt by the company to re-classify downward many clerical wage groupings.  Mobility within job groupings has been slashed  to zero.  There has been an overall company hiring  and job posting freeze for over a year.  About 1200 telephone operators and clerical workers had taken a qualifying course  time careers for most of the people in  them. They required rigorous electronic .  training and a four year apprenticeship.  All that is disappearing.  The latest step in the elimination of  skilled work is the change to "throw away  phones". The first of these non-repairable  phones are just hitting the market. They  will not be cheaper for the customer, but  will eliminate the need for millions of  hours of service work and do away with  more employee's.  The technological change that B.C. Tel is  introducing in the province is affecting  the well-being of local communities, the  total aggregate number of jobs available  in the province, and in particular the job  situation for women.  More serious still is the fact that in  no industrial service or retail sector is  there any counter trend. In every instance  the technology that is being introduced is  being used to accomplish exactly the same  four goals:  1. To reduce the overall number of jobs.  2. To centralize the operations.to a few  major centres.  3. To simplify the tasks, which in turn  means that wages are lower, training time  is less, educational requirements are reduced .  4. To increase the "match" of staffing  hours to work volume, which in turn increases pressures for more part-time,  shift, and temporary or on-call work.  June '83   Kinesis       1!  For women the task ahead has become overwhelming. As clerical work is deskilled,  the fight for equal pay for work of equal  value will only.become more difficult.  Health and safety problems have reached a  new order of magnitude with the massive  introduction of VDT's into every possible  area of women's work.  Job mobility will plummet with the new  technology, which is confirming an existing oppressive division of work between  "knowledge" worker and "unskilled'-' worker,  at an awesome rate. As already noted, wage  rates, long term job security, security of  hours of work; all is already on a significant downward slope.  And nowhere are there governments which  seem yet to be prepared to put any controls  on this boundless, and inhuman introduction  of new technology. Unions, such as the  Telecommunications Workers Union, (TWU),  are fighting hard to stop layoffs, to stop  the dislocations, to stop the downward reclassification of work, but any short  term successes will mean little if governments are not able to take some overall  control over the process.  TWU members have, by sheer daring and perseverance, won several important "holding  actions" against the indiscriminate technological change the company wants to introduce. An attempt to lay-off 2000 employees at two different points last year, was  stopped when the union succeeded in applications to the Courts. At this moment the  union is involved in several major arbitrations challenging the right of the company  to force the relocation of its employees.  The increase in temporary workers and  downward reclassification of pay is being  resisted, so far successfully.  But these are small fights compared to the  .overall effects of the combined efforts of  all the large corporations, retailers,  and even governments to allow "laissez-  faire" philosophy to govern the issue of  technological change. We urgently, need to  require major public involvement in looking at the social wounds we are creating  with this blind, ungoverned restructuring  of the mechanics of work.  The effects of the way  technological change  is being introduced into our economy and  our lives, is no less massive than the  setting of national interest rates or the  establishment of a provincial budget. The  scale of the impact demands there be public  scrutiny, and at the very minimum legislative accountability to prevent the undermining of the essentials of our present  working environment.  As done in other countries, such as Austria, Sweden, Norway and others in Europe,  corporations should not be allowed to  stand outside the law on the question of  technological change. We must all demand  that at the very minimum, no technological  change should allow a decrease  in the  working conditions, wages, or opportunities of those presently employed.  Instead of the Utopian statements made by  so many of the introducers of technological change on the "increase in leisure"  that all this technology is supposed to  bring, we must seek specific legislative  protections to ensure that any reduction in  the provincial aggregate hours worked is  across the board, and not vested simply  on those at the bottom end of the scale...  those, who still most often are women.  Slogans of the "liberating" aspects of the  new microchip technology are sad and cynical mistruths, when the reality until now  in this province has been that the only  tangible human effects have been unemployment, increase in stress and illness, and  a rather grim future facing women in the  1980's and 1990's.  Johanna dan Hertog is a staff member of  the Telecommunication Workers Union and  editor of Transmitter, the union 's newsletter-. 16   Kinesis   June '83  by Marrianne van Loon  Despite government and industry attempts to  ice us that the economy is looking up,  i still find themselves faced with layoffs and a severe shortage of jobs - even  the low paying, high turnover jobs traditionally considered women's work are  hard to find.  Unemployment insurance(UIC) and welfare  (Guaranteed Available Assistance for Need -  GAIN) are the government's way of dealing  with the provision of minimal support for  unemployed and high unemployment statistics.  Information on the province's welfare  program and the Federal government unemployment insurance plan often appear to be a  well kept secret. The following information will give you a basic understanding  of the rules.  If you are unemployed or underemployed,  you may be eligible for UIC benefits. If  not, you will be eligible for welfare.  Unemployement insurance is insurance  against unemployment. You must pay pi  while working in order to collect benefits  if you become unemployed. If you are not  self-employed, a dependant of your employer, over 65, or on certain government  grants you have probably paid into UIC, and  therefore will be eligible to collect.  You must have worked at least 15 hours per  week, or earned at least 20 per cent  (currently about $80 per week) of the maximum insurable earnings, to pay UI premiums.  You may claim for UI in a number of ways.  Your qualifying period is the 52 weeks  preceeding the time at which you applied  for UI. You may be eligible if:  1. You paid UI premiums for at least  20 weeks of your qualifying period, or;  2. During the year previous to your  qualifying period you paid premiums for  at least 14 weeks, and you worked at  least 10 weeks during your qualifying  period.  If you don't qualify in either of the above  ways, you probably can't receive UI benefits, but if you think you are eligible,  you have nothing to lose by applying. It  is the Unemployment Insurance Commission  that will determine your eligibility.  It is very important to. apply for UI as  soon as you have become unemployed, because  UI payments are not retroactive to the time  you finished work.  The amount of money you receive on UI depends on how much money you earned during  your qualifying period: you will receive  60 per cent of your ayerage weekly wage to  a maximum amount. If you didn't earn very  much money while you worked, your benefits  will be low. It is this regulation that  most clearly discriminates against women •  who are most often in low-paying jobs.  Welfare will top up your UI benefits to  a minimum subsistence level if those  benefits are less than welfare allows.  To begin your claim, you must go to your  local UIC office. You can find out where  it is by phoning any of their offices,  listed in the blue pages at the back of  your phone book under Government of Canada,  Employment. At the UIC office you will  probably have to wait through at least two  line-ups. So, in addition to your employment records which your former employer  must give you to provide proof of employment, take a good book.  You must fill out several forms, hand them  in, and after 6 to 12 weeks under the current backlog, you will be notified of your  eligibility and you will begin to receive  UIC report cards in the mail. These cards  must be filled out immediately in order to  receive your next cheque, and it is wise to  be honest. You are allowed to earn up to  25 per cent of your weekly cheque before  money is taken off your cheque.  UIC will disentitle you if they believe you  are at any time not "capable and/or avail-  /§0, WHAT ARE YgvS   V  \flAHS   ft>K  THE SUMrtEft£)  /OH. X'LL  BE SIDING- My TfME)  LiVlUG- OH  CHICKEM FEED t*i\>f  [desperately Searching raft.J  VSoMETHtUg- USEFUL, To  PO^  UIC and welfare:  A beginner's guide  able for work and unable to obtain suitable  employment." This means you must be able to  prove that you are actively looking for work.  You are advised to keep an accurate job  search record of everywhere you look. Include everything - people have been cut off  from UI because they only looked for work  at a few places that they thought there  was some possibility of getting hired.  You probably won't be called in for an interview with UIC, but if ybu are, you  should show up unless you are deathly ill  or have a job interview at the same time.  Few other excuses are tolerated. For instance, being unable to find childcare is  not an adequate reason for being unable to  attend an interview, according to UIC. Take  your child.  You must be willing to accept any work for  which you appear to be qualified and to  accept it at the going rate. If you tell  UIC that you will not work for less than a  certain amount, they may classify you as  unavailable for work and cut you off. Any  of the numerous UIC and welfare action  groups in town can offer further advice on  the UIC interview. Keep an accurate record  of all dealings you have with UIC, in case  you need to .appeal at a later date.  You have the right to appeal any decision  UIC makes which you feel is unjustified.  You must do this within 30 days. Appeals  are by no means a waste of time - decisions  are often reversed, and, furthermore,  appeals help UIC workers document problem  areas, which may aid policy changes in the  future.  An area women frequently have trouble with  UI is the area of the regulations dealing  with pregnancy. This is a sexist society,  and UI regulations are no exception.  There are special benefits for pregnant  women. The rules are complicated. Pregnant  women are only eligible for pregnancy  benefits during the 8 weeks before the baby  is due and the 6 weeks following birth, and  if you do not fit the qualifications for  the special pregnancy benefiSf^ you "will r '■  receive no benefits at all during this time,  even though you may qualify for regular UI  benefits. Sadly enough, this means that if  you intend to become pregnant, and are  either already on UIC or are likely to be  on UIC in the near future, you should consult UIC policy further in order to plan  things so you remain eligible during your  pregnancy.  Unlike UI, eligibility for welfare is not  dependant on previous employment, but on  how much money you have. If you are single,  for instance, you are allowed to have up  to $160 cash, up to $1,500 if you have dependants. You can own a car, and the house  in which you live.  To apply for welfare, phone the nearest  Ministry of Human Resources(MHR) office  listed in the blue pages under Government  of BC and make an appointment with a financial assistance worker (FA worker); you  should be given an appointment within two  weeks. If you are really desperate, you  should go in person to the office, and be  polite, but insistent that someone help  you.  To hasten your request for assistance you  should take the following papers to your  appointment; a social insurance card and  other identification; receipts for rent,  fuel, water, hydro etc.; your medical card;  your bank book and bank statement if you  have them; records of any income you may  have; and, anything which proves the value  of your assets.  You should have somebody go along with you  to the appointment, and you should be familiar with what you are entitled to before  you go in; local unemployment action centres can help you.  Find out when and how you will receive your  cheque from your FA worker at the appointment. Every month that you are ori welfare  you will get a form mailed to you, which  you must return to the Human Resources  continued on p. 18 June'83   Kinesis   17
T The coffee truck drivers are treated like
boxes mounted on the back that barrel
1 tive criticism from the customers* Some cus-
4 tomers take it as a oersonal offense if
those are "coffee trucks", a canteen on
t of paper taped to her truck and wrote
beverages including, of course, coffee.
Those trucks are driven mostly by women.    |+f              ^
They service many of the workers in high    \-\-+    r I 1f*1~| fVlf 1
density industrial areas, construction     TTT      -"- * U^-M^l
sites, large bus and cab companies, dock    H~r
workers and fish plants. Each truck has     PIT
its own route made up of 30 or 40 'calls'   —^^^^
strung together in an order not only dicta-  f^^H JHH^as^,
ted by logical succession but also by the   Co HM       By g*
fixed coffee breaks and lunch times of each '«38fBKJ&r*      m   H
company.                               £?IHI|B    ^mT~P  Mm
Driving coffee trucks is not an easy job.   °^mg;*:^^C  Mm
Drivers must often rise by 5a.m. to be     ^^^^mS/f'^^ml      mm
ready to load the truck with food by 6:30 i lijWK^^^m §      mm
a.m. Several stops may be needed to obtain 5 ~* '"'m^uk^&m** '  'US
fresh supplies of sandwiches, hot foods,    '% "■   T^^m
pastries, cigarettes, pop, juice and coffee. I JStKSS^mL,'-   sfe JkI
Jill, who drove her first truck in 1969     "^^>&**^m     JBi
(she's been around) believes coffee trucks ""'*v-fJliiEjll^   *WwSk
first came into being during the depression gfjHJ| W^*~     i    . mMm
She tells the story of a stranger who toldJBH  mt/BS^^t\ Wgm\
her he had started the coffee truck busi- $jj$m%^m\mw^^      'Thrill
ness in Vancouver when he built the first
j—j—! questioned by the - surprised customers, she
■mmn                           Li-l replied that she wanted her friends to
j£V           Q—j know what she had to deal with every day.
£»£»       j—J—1 She reports that a recurrent complaint is
C*llU66   rjr\    "how come there's nothing good on this
Inn fucking truck?" But when asked to make
j_U positive suggestions as to what they
mmm^m^mW$J * ULL- -1 Bome comPiajLn ttiat the food is "junk" but
Ilk'   "*.^&  W90% won't stand for anything else. Any
■P^J^KlP^^|||||creative changes are met with resistence.
|Kri|«jLi'      JWhen Sandra tried to "go healthy" and pro-
mm*HsBBflk§mm\  ''^^pi^ed alfalfa sprouts,- she received cracks
WmmrW^mgr   JQlike, "What's this, the gourmet coffee
wKmr^          ^^&»3 truck?".
mm\i        *>  y|i ^mw
imLlt        ^   '\    ■<» r/^^ ^he women interviewed agreed that it
mmm " -   *%&   1 MLM2Mmta^es  a certain kind of person to do the
wwri^fe*' J? -Hmrmi0^3' ^ey believe you have to basically
vm     Wm W^^mmr^^mm^^ke People, be somewhat of a sales minded
mWm^*Wrw person» be a little thick-skinned and be
H| WSL        mmwlm^m^F   able to "handle men".(who comprise a good
■ JR   ^H £ Jm$     90% of the clientele) .
XWkmwiam   BeinS able to "handle" the slew of comments,
sion, many men worked at temporary work
Tt*|31|I requires constant personal and creative
.„ --^' "^-j the first line of defense. According to
~ ^m*  ,~i„     . *  \\    Sandra, "lectures on Women's Liberation
Illlllji&J just don't.work." Sometimes even "thick
||il '^yH-j skin" is worn a little thin by the con-
r^. \J- "j stant barrage of comments.
^S^B! 1 l^he women are expected to accept sexual
■rV^^ j harassment as part of the job. The attitude
*-J:^\!|    SKJr      is, "they just have to put up with it."
Ply '  |s-'   Employers often pressure "the girls" to
PR>Ji|  x ", wear shorts in the summer; they make it
sjgpplr- --jp|   -*»« j~'clear that sex appeal equals more sales.
s., % "$^  "   '^^V8****^^ Young, inexperienced drivers often finish
^iw^"J|'' Jm\^\%           k1 a ^a^ witn 20 phone numbers and four dates
;   ^K^Bk  t' -   f^for the.same evening!
2\ f9 IB     JBiThe women we interviewed, all seasoned
and otten not having eaten tor days.        | | | | I LU^Jc-^ ~£i£2~
This man claims to have convinced some of  , ,  - ;^sj^«&fi ^»-,
those employers to forward a."draw" of
enough money to pay for a meal which he
would deliver to the sites. His argument  yjjJtblllPIPlHBi
was that a fed worker is a better worker; **'* *   ' ^H
supposedly he made a lot of money.       iPkjffhv^jffi
After the Second World War, some business-  ^^*^l|^s|
men(she names Joe, former owner* of Court-      %«vV»-  1 \
esy Caterers as a prominent pioneer) de-    !   *?P^ * *L   V- \"~'   If
veloped the coffee truck business into a   Jfc       tJ^L*^-*"  S
bigger industry, forming companies and     l§x.'' * ^^Jm            VJMEt
hiring drivers. The first major customers.  fgif-  'THpP .   iif|p
were the dock workers.                   *"$^»   -W^'  TM
Since the late '60's, industry's trend      ** ^%-MMtt«  *  H
^n^f^T        1^ drivers, refuse to play into that aspect.
the considerable numbers of workers laid-   [\}nl ^ Kinesis inte
off, have resulted in a declining pool of   Uvolved ln tke eoffe6
customers, especially in Vancouver. The     Hsandra MacDonald, Joa
women have to work harder for less money,   lUw W§§.   d™   "3VUU
, .  .     i -ii i .    • ^      _ 1'   \-and Jill Brunsdale.
rviewed four women in-\   to tell the customers they're married
truck business".             \    (whether married or not) to avoid a lot of
n Day , Louise Manelia,  J  come-ons;.
4 Despite the hard work and the other diffi-
1  cultles, the women Interviewed stated that
Joan and Louise, owners of Manelias, fear
that a trend toward de-centralization of     they pay their dues t
industry(ie. a move to 'cottage'•industry)    contracts or benefits
could eventually make them obsolete.         at this time is acce£
industries who refuse
The customers themselves are feeling the     union coffee trucks,
pinch, packing their own lunches and tight-   The economic survival
ening up on spending. The drivers cannot     drivers hinges on' sp]
constantly pass on their inflated costs to   They are often forcec
the customer so their profits diminish.      neck speeds> taking \
According to Jill, the business had its      constantly on the loc
heyday in the early *70's, when she         police. Not crossing
figures she was making the equivalent of     gjgg freight train cc
$13-14.00 per hour. At that time all coffee   $20_80 month of bus±r
trucks were unionized under Teamsters' local  calls if vour service
351.                                           y
The companies got around the unions by       The work is highly cc
"leasing" the trucks to individual drivers   estimates there are s
, . ?  , .  ii.j   ,    „  ii  ..   ._      drivers in the Lower
and by helping independents set up in
,  :                                  about seven companies
suburban areas.                            ,   ,
c".=ao.                                     fco whom those co.mpam
The last union shop was Courtesy Caterers.   the trucks on a lp.ase
The workers (a small handful of women who    son/"no base" agreeme
held down the picket on their own under      "independents", peop]
dangerous and trying circumstances) struck   trucks and buy food f
for three weeks in 1980 until the owner      companies.
settled by selling out his business and      ^ market | floQded
retiring. There is some bitterness          competition for the p
around the fact that some union companies     § , H    - ., ,
,   ,^ _        .   ■ -      ,  ,  .     needed to build up ro
bought from non-union coffee trucks during   v±e for each other's
the strike, which seems to have been "the    a-Q available new cal
straw that broke the union's back".         T,           § .
,   „                                 However, most drivers
back-                                  is fair play and all
All drivers can still be in the union, if    eye for business to s
because of the relative independence of
ut as there are no     the    and fche feel±  of autonomy.
, the only advantage
sability to union      There is not the constant contact with
to deal with non-     other workers encountered in an office and
there are no bosses breathing down their
of coffee truck       necks all day long,
it second timing.      Louise, one of the owners of Manelia's
to drive at break-    says she iOVes the challenge, the element
inorthodox shortcuts,    Qf gambling. You see the results immediate-
k out for traffic      ly: a good day is indicated by the money
the tracks before      taken in.
uld mean the loss of
ess, and you can lose   There is an art to the job which a
is unreliable.        driver can pride herself in. Canvassing
and building up routes is a challenge in
mpetitive. Jill        itself. Juggling the times for maximum
pproximately 75 - 100   efficiency, dealing creatively with custom-
Mainland. There are    ers> improving the quality and variety of
with fleets of drivers the stock, becoming proficient at bookkeep-
es supply food and     ±ng and cutting costs are tasks which call
or straight commis-    for a variety of skills.
e^ho^wn^their6       Driving coffee trucks is an occupation at
which a woman need not have a formal
rom the catering       „,      *..       .         , .               ~ ±.
education to achieve some measure of financial and professional success. The
. There is fierce      drivers make more money than many women
otential new calls     working in traditional jobs. Although
utes. Some drivers      their incomes fluctuate according to
business or snap up     their expenses, economic trends and the
Is in another's area.   quality of the route, the women have
feel that competition  some degree of control over their income,
have to have a shrewd   Perhaps some new construction sites will
urvive.               open, you just never know. 18      Kinesis   June '83  Rural Women: the  feminization of poverty  by Jane Evans  We all know the "Rural Woman", don't we?  She lives in a small but cozy house, has  a bit of land on which she grows massive  vegetables, trees laden with fruit, and  chickens which lay eggs all year round.  She is poor, but it is a truth universally  acknowledged that it is easier to be poor  with dignity in the country than in the  city.  Well, yes, but this woman is part of an  alarming trend which has been called the  "feminization of poverty". She does not  own her cozy house, her rent has just  been raised 65%, her shelter coverage from  Welfare (because she has five children) is  woefully inadequate, and her hens have  stopped laying.  First of all, let's define what we mean  by a "rural woman." She lives in a community dependent on agriculture, forestry,  fishing or sometimes mining or tourism.  In spite of technological advances, most  of these industries stress physical  strength and as long as these are perceived as male qualities, such communities  will remain strongly male dominated. This  means that traditionally male occupations  and the training for these occupations  will be closed to her. She probably,suffers  from isolation and lack of mental stimulation but,she values immeasurably the intangibles, for herself and her children,  of country life.  In spite of the tremendous rise in food  prices, the farm operator has not benefited; these price increases have taken  place beyond the farm gate. The difficulties of obtaining credit mean that few |  A beginner's guide continued fromP  within a specified time period in order to  get your next cheque on time.  As with UIC, it is always wise to keep a  good record of all dealings you have with  welfare, and you have the right to appeal  any decision which is unfair.  Welfare will class you either as employable  or unemployable. If you come off UIC to  Welfare you will be employable due to UIC  regulations. If you are employable, you are  supposed to be looking for work. This means  if you are single you must renew every  month. Welfare may have money to help you  find a job. Bus fare money for out of town  travel for job interviews, and money for  work clothes are some of the things which  you may be able to receive.  Welfare payments vary with your family  status and employability. For instance,  if you are single, under 60 years old and  employable you will receive a maximum of  $375 per month. With 3 people, a family  will receive up to $770 per month. The  monthly cheque for people classified as  unemployable is slightly higher.  Money that you receive from other sources  while on welfare may or may not affect the  size of your cheque, depending on its nature. A general rule is that single people 'Ģ  can earn $50 per month over welfare rates  and families $100. Child support is included  in this and anything over $100 will be deducted. For instance, UI cheques are deducted entirely.  If you are on welfare, you are entitled to  have your medical needs covered. If you are  turned down by your FA worker, you should  appeal.  Welfare offers daycare subsidies in. some  circumstances. You can inquire at your  MHR office to see if you meet eligibility  requirements.  Welfare also has funds for certain educational and training programs - basic upgrading, training for a trade that would  take, two years or less, and some two year  non-academic university programs.. Again,  local unemployment action.centres can help  you before you see your FA worker.  There are many groups and organizations  which offer help with UIC and welfare.  To find the one nearest to you, check  with your women's centre, union, local  community centre, constituency office,  community legal services office or Canada  employment centre.  Remember, you are not the only person who  is unemployed, and there are many people  who can help you.  Any time you deal with UIC or MHR remember,  1. Know as much as possible about whatever you apply for.  2. Ask advice if you have questions.  3. Keep your own records of all dealings  you have with the office.   -  4. You can always appeal if you disagree  with any decision that affects you.  women run farms for themselves; in 1979,  only 15.6% of self-employed farmers were  women and only 3% of those employed anyone  The Farm Credit office states that their  policy is no discrimination on the grounds  of sex in the granting of loans but "few  women apply". Implicit in the attitude of  the local office is that women do not  want the responsibility of a farm with its  uncertainties and hard work.  According to Labour Canada however, 54.9%  of farm work is done by unpaid women. This  tremendous contributions to the G.N.P. is  never acknowledged. If the farmer can  afford to pay his wife, he cannot claim  this on his Income Tax*. The number of  women who are the primary operator and  employ their husbands is so insignificant  as not to appear in the statistics. Also,  of course, she cannot be plugged into the  system of UIC or C/QPP and she is not  covered by Worker's Compensation for the  Maternity Protections Act. Almost the  only paid, non-agricultural work available  to her will be extensions of domestic work  in service jobs.  *(lf they are living common-law, he can  do  so; she can also claim the child allowance, as Income Tax does not recognize  these relationships.)  B.C. has, at 80%, twice the national  average of employed poor women in service  jobs due to the tourist industry. These  jobs, particularly in rural areas, are so  low paying that women in them may receive  as much as 50% of their income from government transfer payments. The Social Credit  government in B.C. has instituted some of  the most punitive Welfare regulations in  Canada. A single parent (and of course  98% of our single parents are women) is  deemed unemployable as long as she has a  baby under six months or two children  under twelve.  .xs soon as the baby reaches six months or  the elder child reaches twelve, the parent  is cut.off the Welfare rolls and told to  get a job. She must then re-apply every  month for benefits. Not only are there  almost no jobs in rural areas, she will  have to travel some distance to the Welfare  office and cutbacks in case workers mean a  wait of some hours. If she can find a job,  there will be no day care for her baby.  The Federal rural poverty level has been  set at $9,825; this is considered too low  for B.C. as our inflation rate is, at 14%,  higher than the national average. Statistics for 1979 showed that over 10% of B.C.'i  population was poor, and fiscal trends for  the last three years would suggest that  this figure is much too low at this time.  One in six of the women in the general population is poor; in rural areas this would  be much higher. If this figure is combined  with that of native people (three in four  of whom are poor) a horrifying picture  emerges.%  We see, then, that to be a woman in a rural  area, whether white or native, and particularly a woman who heads a family, is almost  automatically to be poor. She will probably  be rural from choice, but she will suffer  from lack of information about her legal  position, lack of contact with the mainstream of feminism, lack of access to  abortion and most of all, lack of awareness  about political realities. Local women's  organizations need money and contact with  resource people to maintain the work which  has already been done. The experience and  energy of rural women is a resource the  Women's Movement cannot afford to ignore. June '83   Kinesis  ARTS  by Marilyn Burnett  Laura Sky's latest work, Good Monday Morning, the second of a four part series  about women and their lives, exemplifies  her efforts to combine the graphically  stunning images that film allows with an  interviewing technique that encourages the  film's 'stars' to honestly express their  concerns.  As with her other films, the performers  are ordinary people who tell their stories,  provide their anaylsis and raise questions  about their current conditions of work and  living.  In this case the film centres on women  workers across Canada who are confronting  the intolerable working conditions that  the new microtechnology rapidly being introduced into their workplace creates.  A veteran of socially responsible film  making, Sky has a number of films behind  her that expands over a ten year period  including a seven year stint with the  National Film Board as the Ontario director  of the now defunct 'challenge for change'  program.  A politically committed woman, Sky notes  that her method and approach to making  documentary films is based on the notion  that "people have their own systems of  knowledge. We always use the same crew  because it is important to us that the  people we are working with feel a commitment to the people in the film. And we  never use voice overs in a film...to have  an expert come down ott high to explain  the problem.  "It is important that people watching the  film develop a relationship with the people who are in the film. In order to be  able to achieve that we work at gaining  the trust of the audience and of the individuals in the film," Sky says.  Perhaps the most striking elements of Sky/s  work is her uncanny ability to gain that  trust.  In Good Monday Morning, more than one character expresses sentiments that are clearly  emotional centre points to their lives.  Debra, an office worker in Vancouver, who  for seven hours a day removes staples from  bundles of papers and then re-staples them,  is one such character. "You think that you  are calm, cool and collected and the next  thing you know you are dwelling on something that happened at work - you are dwelling on how frustrated and how useless you  feel. That is what it is - the feeling of  uselessness...and the next thing you know,  you explode at the drop of a hat. At anything. You are like a time bomb.  "It has finally taken its toll on me and it  is taking its toll on something that is  Good Monday Morning:  a film for organizers  very precious to me - my relationship with  Pat and I am not going to stand for it any  more. They have manipulated, they have  pushed around; they have intimidated. No  morel"  According to Sky the process behind the  actual filming of the product is key!  "We spend a great deal of time with the  people who are going to be in the film;  so, when it comes time to film they feel  comfortable with us and the interviews are  more like conversations."  In addition to/talking with the characters  beforehand, Sky's films are not released  Although it is painful to experience the tedium created by the  work women do in this film, it is  not without hope  The frustrations and dreams of thousands of women who  work with VDTs form the basis of this film.  until they have survived several test screenings and the characters within the movie  feel comfortable with it.  Often defined as a feminist film company,  Sky, herself a feminist, shys away from  the label for; her films.  "I hate it when women's films are segregated. Segregation limits what we have to  offer for political change and runs the  risk of creating another ghetto.  "The enormous strength of feminism has  sponsored the development of a popular  movement that has affected almost everyone  - no matter what their class.  "Feminism is infused in every aspect of the  film. But we don't make films for feminists.  We are making them for women and men - contributing them to the general dialogue and  debate between women and men," says Sky.  She believes it would be a political  error to make "feminist films .for only  women. I feel a feminist analysis is infused in the films, no matter what the  film, because that's who we are."  SkyWorks, consisting of three women part<-  ners and two other employees who are also  women, reflects Sky's committment to feminism as more than simply a theory but  rather as a means of operating.  Although Sky says she would hate to be  accused of discrimination (against men)  she also notes that "it is no accident"  that women provide the core of SkyWorks.  Stressing that the work group should not be  a therapy group at the same time, Sky does  say though, that the women working at SkyWorks have "chosen the obligation to support  one another both in our personal and professional lives; so, there isn't that split  between the two.  "We expect many things from ourselves in  terms of professional and job competency.  And one of the things we expect, because  of the women that we are, is caring for  one another..."  Her expectation of caring clearly underscores her films. It is just" this sense  of caring that shines throughout Good Monday Morning and makes the film a tool for  organizing and educational work.  Although it is painful to experience the  tedium created by the work that the women  portrayed in Good Monday Morning do, the  film is not without hope. Throughout, the  characters turn to their union for support  and help to change their working lives and  to give them a new found strength.  'ĢIn the last scene Karen, an office worker,  and a member of the Newfoundland Association  of Provincial Employees, stresses that while  she and the other women working in that  office were out on strike for five months  "you would never be alone. Even if you were  standing in front of a car all by yourself,  you were never alone. You always had all the  girls backing you."  As images of the women in Good Monday Morning appear on the screen the movie's theme  song runs through providing the only editorial comment within the film. Ending on a  note of strength, the husky voice of,  Toronto singer-songwriter Donna Greene  fills out the end of the movie:  I morn, our anger found it's voice,  And the sound is the sound we share,  To take us where we are strong.  We belong; Awakening to a new world,  My sisters and I,  We'll make a Good Monday Morning now.  Together we will fly. " 20   Kinesis   June'83  ARTS  Women and Words:  a conference update  by Sally Ireland  The cross-Canada conference - Women and  Words/les Femmes et les Mots - to be held  at U.B.C. from June 30 - July 3 is now in  the final stages of planning. With over 45  workshops and panels, theatrical performances, and readings, the conference promises to be a stimulating way to spend the  July 1 holiday weekend.  On opening night, June 30, besides introductory comments from the conference coordinators, there will be a six speaker  panel entitled How far have we come? detailing the changes that have taken place  for women in the literary industry during,  the past decade and which will highlight  the crucial issues to be addressed by women  in the future. The six panelists including  Libby Oughton, Makeda Silvera, Sharon Pollock, Beth Cuthand, and two others yet to  be confirmed, represent a broad spectrum of  interests, geographical areas and ethnic  backgrounds. Afterwards there will be a  wine and cheese reception and possibly a  short humorous theatre piece on the vicissitudes of women involved with the literary  community in Canada.  Most of,the workshops and panel discussions  will take place on July 1 and 2. Each will  be an hour and a half long, and for every  timeslot there will be six or seven to  choose from. Many panels will be bilingual,  and in those cases, Women and Words will be  providing translation: simultaneous translation for the larger panels and animators for  the smaller ones.  There will be something for^everyone. Judith  Merril will give a workshop on Science Fiction and Visionary Literature; Margaret  Atwood and Phyllis Wibb will speak on the  Muse Figure. There will be a panel on How  Class Affects Women's Writing with Helen  Potrebenko, Sara Diamond, Cy-Thea Sand and  Carol Itter; a panel on Lesbian Writing with  Nicole Brossard, Mary Meigs, Befsy Warland  and Beth Brandt. Denise Boucher, Lorraine  Weir and Pat Leslie will speak on Censorship  and Self-Censorship. Shirley Neuman of Long-  spoon Press and Marie-Madeleine Raoult of  les Editions de la pleine lune will give a  workshop entitled Publishing: The Process  (Two Case Studies). There will be a panel  on Ethnicity, Race and Women's Writing with  Kristjana Gunnars, Mary di Michele, Lillian  Allen, Myrna Kostash, Suniti Namjoshi and  Coreene Courchene.  Marian Engel, Joan Haggerty and Libby Sche-  ier will take part in Creativity and Child-  bearing/Childrearing. Frances Duncan, Lois  Pike, Jane Rule and Audrey Thomas will speak  on the Relationship between writer and publisher. Sharon Nelson, Nanci Rossov and  Rina Fraticelli will give a workshop entitled Getting Organized: Parallel/Alternative/  Internal Structures. Other panels and workshops include Mainstream and Alternative  Publishing; How to Write.a Good Review;  Native and Western Myth in Women's Writing;  Writing from a Native Woman's Perspective;  Alternatives to Traditional Theatre; How  to Improve Promotion and Distribution of  Women's Books and many more.  For those who feel the above workshops and  panels aren't enough, some rooms will be  set aside for impromptu sessions. There  will be a cafe and hopefully a bar where  women can gather for informal networking;  and on July 2, from 4 - 5:30p.m. there  will be open readings and some theatrical  performances.  The evening events on July 1 and 2 will be  open to the general public. On Friday,  July 1, Yolande Villemaire, Mary Meigs,  Erin Moure and Margaret Atwood will read  at the Old Auditorium on Campus. Joy Koga-  wa, Kristjana Gunnars, Louky-Bersianik and  Dorothy Livesay will read at the IRC auditorium. On Saturday, July 2, Travis Lane,  Phyllis Webb, Nicole Brossard and Maria  Campbell will read at the Old Auditorium,  while Audrey Thomas, Helen Weinzweig,  Suniti Namjoshi and Claire Harris read at  the IRC Auditorium. On both nights there  will be theatrical performances including  Les Vaches de Nuit by Jovette Marchessault;  The Apple in the Eye by Margaret Hollingsworth; and Integrated Circuits by Robin  Endres. These will take place in the Music  Recital Hall."All evening events begin at  8 p.m.  On the morning of July 3 there will be a  breakfast followed by an hour long plenary  session during which the organizers will  be asking for feedback on the conference.  Afterwards there will be a general meeting  of the West Coast Women and Words Society  to determine future directions.  Registration fees for the conference are  $40 for members of the West Coast Women  and Words Society and $45 for non-members.  Individual membership in WCW&W is $5. f|||f|§p  Single day attendance is $20 per day. For  further information contact Women and Words  at 684-2454.  Erin Moure:  A Rare  kind of poet  Those of us who know the Canadian train  by Penny Goldsmith   t system to some "degree, either because we  When I read Erin Moure's first book, Empire,   couldn't afford a plane ticket back when  York Street(Anansi, 1979), I was immediately the train was actually cheaper, or because  at home in a way which I assumed was not    we wanted to see the Rockies, know what it's  particularly tied to the fact that I was    like. After reading Moure's poems, I will  familiar with the surroundings she describ-  never again feel quite as isolated, alone  ed. And when I read her latest book, Wanted    and trapped after forty-eight hours of not  Alive,   I knew that I had been right.        sleeping on a couch.  Moure's facility with the written word  allows her to shoulder themes that go well  beyond the superficial. The scenario is  WANTED ALIVE,   by Erin Moure. House of  Anansi Press, 1983. 111pp. $8.95.  Canada; the players are friends, lovers,  family and anyone else who wanders through  her world; the poems are about almost anything that affects people. They are perceptive, clear, tight and universal as well as  personal:  ... now i can't tell the truth about  events or anything./ there are too many ■  i orders banging doors./ too many priests,  | governments,  obeisant armies./ hold it,  \     i want/ to sing to you.  in spite of./  get out the chasm & wear it,.like a  ripped coat,/ if they arrest you,  i'll  kill them  Erin Moure is a member of. the Vancouver  Industrial Writers' Union and works for  VIA Rail, and inevitably her poetry encom-  pases, to some extent, her job. Her writing  of trains is not, however, romantic or  nostalgic (her poems for the Supercontinent-  al are a fine epitaph for the workers who  ran it, the passengers who rode it, and the  politicians who killed it).  What do you expect from us/ We earn  dividends for no one/ We watch Pythagoras  &. prime ministers from the same train/  flat & curious/ We are a stubborn trade  Moure is a rare kind of a poet in that she's  funny. She laughs with the reader, not at  the expense of anyone, even the train passengers. Her frustration at passenger complaints when the train is fourteen hours  behind schedule is coupled with a deep  awareness of Who those passengers are:  Then there are the women beaten by their  husbands/ who bear the barks/ as they  bore their children,/ without disgrace,...  One of the things that I find effective in  Moure's work is that she is a story teller  and a great many of her poems have "plots"  that turn them into mini stories. This is  not in any way to imply that her poetry  is prose-like - Moure's sense of poetry is  very finely honed. She is an expert in this  field with years of experience which shows,  in this her latest book, to great advantage.  I recommend this book whether you are a  poetry lover, a reader of stories, or someone who's just generally interested in  what's going on in the world of Canadian  literature. Erin Moure combines a working  sensibility with skill and experience and  has come up with a solid book of poetry. June '83 Kinesis  by Elizabeth Shacklef ord  "Brown" isn't a particularly fascinating  surname. It seems to lack any trace of  music, glitter and pizzazz. Fortunately,  Angela Brown turns out to be about as  drab as an Irish wake^ Vitality is her  middle name.  Angela Brown was recently seen on stage at  the Women in Focus Art Gallery. Her two act  performance piece, To A Modern Venus, took  an historical look at the "idealizations  and idolizations" of women. Music, dance  and comedy were combined with slides and  narrative in an evening that had plenty of  surprise and laughter in it.  The show opened with a series of slides  depicting the political rallies of the  suffragettes in the early part of this  century. Just as the audience began to  appreciate the remarkable strengths of  these women, Angela entered as a flapper.  After instructing the female portion of  the audience on how to spot a good prospect  by the way he dances, she went on to demonstrate a few of her own dance steps. Her  "aren't-I-wonderful" smile was broken  only by ear-piercing squeals of delight  which marked the success of particularly  difficult manoeuvres.  By the end of the evening, the audience had  been taken through eighty years of wildly  changing images of womanhood. There was a  coalmining woman from the second World War  and a smiling Miss Canada, blinking pathetically in the mercilessly bright stagelights.  A teenager of the 1950's sang: When people  ask of me:/ What would you like to be/ Now  that you're not a kid anymore?/ I know just  what to say,/ I answer right away:/ There's  just one thing I've been waiting for./ I  wanta be Bobby's girl,/ I wanta be Bobby's  girl/ That's the most important thing to  As a final surprise, Angela came out impersonating a man who's been scandalized  by the recent advances women have been  allowed to make.  The evening left me thinking about the various images women attempt to-live up to.  Despite their incredible range, the images  all possessed a certain fragility.  After seeing the show, I interviewed Angela  to learn more about her life as a woman  and as an artist. Angela was raised in a  small town. With no husband to "protect  her", Angela's mother was frequently taken  advantage of by men: at the garage, on the  job, in the courts. Angela can't pin-point  when she became aware that being a woman  had its disadvantages. Growing up as she  did, she feels she was always somewhat  aware of the problems.  Although her mother's hardships affected  the way she saw the world, Angela was more  80 years  of  idealizations  and  idolizations  influenced by her mother's strengths. Who  can deny that a woman nicknamed "Spitfire"  must have had her strengths? When Spitfire  began to, encourage Angela to be creative,  it must have been very encouraging indeed.  At University, Angela began by studying  sculpture and drawing, with theatre as a  minor. She also studied art education,  which seems to have influenced her later  work. An important turning point occurred  when she discovered modern dance at the  age of nineteen. It eventually led her to  apply to study dance at York University,  where she was promptly turned down. Undaunted, she worked hard and applied again the  following year. Although she had "posture  problems" and was considered (at 23) to be  too old to start the program, she was  accepted because she had "the spirit of a  dancer".  During and immediately after her three  years at York, Angela did children's theatre. She toured Quebec for a year with a  Montreal-based theatre group and was also  involved in "Barefoot Dance Theatre", which  performed for children in the Toronto area.  To A Modern Venus was not Angela's first  solo performance and is very unlikely to  be her last. At present, she is extensively  researching the fascinating history of  British Music Hall. Apparently, splendid  one-woman acts were standard fare at some  of the.taverns featuring Music Hall. At its  height, Music Hall threatened the very  existence of "legitimate" theatre because 'ñ†  it was so much more exciting and intimate.  The then renowned but now forgotten women  performed by constantly changing character  as they sang and danced.  Angela gives her audiences a well-researched, historically accurate show. She admits  that she tends to have an impulse to educate while she entertains. Her greatest  challenge is to find the proper balance of  entertainment and education. Presently, .she  is considering reworking To A Modern Venus  to make it an entertainment which would be  followed by a discussion with the audience.  It is in this "separated" format that she  has some hopes of taking the show on the  road.  The idea of touring seems to be the natural  outcome of many of Angela's ideas about  art. Already at University she was ostracized by the dance 'snobs' for her frivolous, theatrical tendencies which probably  amounted to nothing more than a desire for  more intimate contact with her audience.  She feels strongly that art should "reach  out to the real world"; to young women  about to make important decisions, to housewives, to the growing numbers of men who  genuinely want to understand what feminists  have to say about the world we live in.  Of course, there are still some important  obstacles to be overcome before Angela is  able to go on tour. She is not funded in  any way and this has several important  implications for her work. For one thing,  she has learned to do much of the "behind-  the-scenes" work on her own. Angela researched, wrote, choreographed, directed  and produced To A Modern Venus completely  on her own. She did use some technical  help, (Alison Stuart deserves special mention for her work as stage-manager) but  these people had to be paid with the sculptures, prints and paintings Angela produces  when not performing. Unfortunately, tours  tend to have more concrete expenses, such  as fuel costs and motel charges, and it  would be impossible for Angela to meet these  costs at the present time.  Despite these problems, I am sure that  Angela will continue to make a valuable  contribution as a woman artist in the years  to come. Unlike her images, there is nothing  fragile about her. She is, after all, the  daughter of Spitfire. 22      Kinesis  JuneTO-  ARTS  Student art show:  Emulating  a  'dead beast'  i^^as.  1* ■^^"^pti^t^^m&k  *!*C!c<xaF^ ■a**-***5  *'^£******  JgejpClHK* t.U»H> AIM  by Susan Stewart  As one who adheres to the "art is dead"  school of thought (art as defined by patriarchal culture) it was with some misgiving  I set out to review the current show of  student work at Robson Media Centre and  assess if there was any life left in the  old carcass. Art students are well known  as emulators of art trends past and present  but. also as innovators of the first order.  Shows of student work can sometimes surprise  and thrill even the most jaded viewer. Unfortunately there isn't much to thrill at  in this large show which represents students  from four art institutions: Emily Carr  College, University of British Columbia,  University of Victoria and Simon Fraser  University. There were a few notable exceptions. My favorite piece in the show was  an installation by Cherie Markiewicz entitled "Suspended Animation: Acid Rain", in  which many small clay birds hang suspended  in death over a desolate landscape. It is  a moving environmental piece and solemn  indictment against those agencies which are  destroying our wildlife. It would be wonderful to see this work in a public space -  a gallery situation doesn't seem to suit it.  "In Search of Art Through What Tou Said" by  Cathy Ord is mildly provocative. It is an  installation in which two hanging sheets of-  plastic are covered with phrases which  appear to be comments by an audience about  an unknown art work, the kind of comments  found in any gallery comment book. In front  of this are two school chairs and headphones  with an audio track of the artist's voice  in monologue, making comments about the  comments. At this juncture the work becomes  very ambiguous. The last line of the taped  segment reads, "...perhaps at the checkout  of safeway art could serve better or not  serve at all." It is thought provoking to  ask questions about people's response to  "In Search of Ar  art but we would be better served knowing  why people respond the way we do.  "African Notes" part I and II is a slide  series/audio track by Laiwan Chung. This  piece also asks a provocative question but  in the end leaves the viewer hanging. The  images are of the Zimbawe landscape, both  wild and cultivated, superimposed by a  sparsely descriptive text. The audio contains ambient sounds, cultural music (Afri  can drumming) and commentary by the artist  The piece is spiritually evocative and reads aud:  like an experientially perceptive diary.  Problems arise when the artist attempts a  synthesis of the spiritual with a political  understanding. More than once she asks, *  "Do we confront our dreams or is it just  pocketbook theory?" One is tempted to ask  if she is confronting her art.  There are several other pieces which could  be loosely interpreted as having social or  political content but the connections are  so hazy it is impossible to know for sure.  People are not asking questions. Most of  the work in the show is preoccupied with  meaningless formal problems that have been  solved a thousand times over. There is no  question that some of the artists are capable of hard work. If art school does anything it encourages clean presentation  and well made objects, videos, images etc.  Through What You Said" by Cathy Ord. (detail)  meet craft standards. The work is an oak  chest with drawers which open to reveal  tableaux representing different aspects of  western life. These are interesting and fun  but not made well enough. The craftmanship  >is barely adequate.  Coolly detached figurative pieces prevail.  Emotional involvement with the work is kept  at a minimum. A pervading element of the  exhibition is the almost painful isolation  of each work from the others and from the  "Divided We Fall" by Jackie Mur-'  ray is a well made installation of plexi  panels, copper wire and living plants.  There are four panels, each inscribed by  "The art of male-defined culture  is a dead beast. It is very  disheartening to see student  artists buying the Hes which art  schools perpetuate.",  Even so, there are very few works which  exhibit craft integrity, that important  ability of an art work to pass beyond its  making into its meaning. Works that do  reach this particular level of proficiency  include Takado Asano's ceramic pieces  "House Spirit I and II", Shirley GoForth's  "Dream I", a well presented installation,  and Theo Jones' immaculately rendered  drawings "Untitled". Glen Mosely's "Western Living" is an example of a piece that  is a good idea, contains a lot of humour,  but in the end fails because it doesn't  »+*<*liilll\  a human figure which are then draped by  the wires which clip at one end onto the  leaf of the plant sitting in front of it.  Somewhat like a battery starter. The meaning of this work is so absolutely obscure  that it neutralizes its own artfulness.  Acid Rain" by Cherie Markiewicz  "House Spirit" by Takado A  Women were well represented in the show  but a viewer would be hard put to distinguish the women's work from the men's. Art  ideas which find their sources in the mainstream of male art prevail throughout. One  doesn't have to look very far back in male  art history to discern trends and styles  which were well emulated by women artists  in this show. Derivative work seems to be  greatly encouraged by the powers that be.  One does well to remember that art schools,  for the most part, are male dominated hierarchies which determine their own definition of culture and art.  There is also a major problem in the organization of shows such as this one where  adjudication and award decisions are made  by one individual, in this case a painter,  Paterson Ewen from Ontario. Personal bias  is bound to play a part in selection, but  in fairness to the adjudicator I think  the work we saw was an adequate representation of what was produced by the 1983  fourth year art student population.  The time has come for women to break with  the traditional, the norms, the models  which represent institutionalized art and  to create an art alternative. The art of  male defined culture is a dead beast. It  is very disheartening to see student artists buying the lies which art schools  perpetrate about art.  Life in art exists where artists attempt  to buck the system that silences them,  including that great myth-maker art school.  To my great dissappointment the work by  students in the VI Annual Helen Pitt Graduate Awards Exhibition had very little to  say and apparently no complaints or challenge to offer the status quo. June'83   Kinesis   23  SPORTS  Gymnast  trains for  '84 Olympics  by Anne Ray vals  In an event held at the UBC War Memorial  Gym from May 12 - 15, 20-year-old Lori  Fung of Vancouver won the title of Grand  National Senior Master of Rhythmic Sportive  Gymnastics for Canada, for the second consecutive year.  Modern Rhythmic Gymnastics goes back to -  Ancient Greek and Early Chinese dances. In  modern times, a class in rhythmic gymnastics began in Berlin in 1929. Eastern-bloc  countries have shown most of the enthusiasm  needed to sponsor such an event up to the  recent past, but gradually western countries,  including Canada, are becoming more involved  It is a dance type of movement, a mixture  of ballet and gymnastics, set to music. No  poles or bars are used as in artistic  gymnastics. The exercise takes place on a  40'x40' mat on the floor and features dexterity of hands combined with grace and  agility of the rest of the body. Five  pieces of equipment are used in this sport:  the hoop, ball, skipping rope, Indian clubs  and ribbons. They are all the colours of  the rainbow, with the exception of gold,  silver or bronze (the medal colours).  In the National Championship Competition  at UBC, Lori took first place in all categories. She has a small, lithe body (94  lbs.) which leaps and twists and flies over  the floor. Her performance awes you with  ceaseless movement and energy in motion: it  is beautiful to the untrained eye and almost flawless to the eyes of the judges.  &  Winning the title of Grand National Senior §  Master in May of this year is especially 3  important because this is the pre-Olympic j>  year. The 1984 Olympics to be held in Los £  Angeles will include Rhythmic Sportive |  Gymnastics for the first time, and Lori ■£  wants a try at~it.  The excitement of competition is a many  faceted thing, one aspect of which is extensive travelling. Lori has competed in  major centres across Canada, as Well as in  the U.S. Farther afield, she has joined in  competitions in Tel Aviv, Rio-de Janeiro,  Prague, Zurich, Munich, Sofia (Bulgaria),  Corbeille (France), Tokyo, Auckland, and  Monaco.  But Lori's life is not all excitement. A  lot of it is taken up with just plain hard  work. She 7 completed Grade 12 by correspondence. Many hours are spent practising each  day, usually at BCIT when she is in  Vancouver, but often wherever she can find  an empty gym.  Her hard work has paid off in medals and  applause, but amateur sports in Canada is  not a way to get rich. Pocket money is |  sparse, and parents are usually out of it.  The Province of British Columbia awarded a  grant of $14,765 in 1983. This money has to  be spread throughout eight regions in the  province, of which the Lower Mainland is  only one. Up until this year, the Ministry  involved paid half of an economy fare for  travel to other countries. This year they  did not, and Lori's father said he took on  UIC/Welfare Guide  continued from p. 16  this is still our function during a time  of unemployment.   /;"'.* -^  Women fight in very different ways from  men and Susan cited the aboriginal women's  sit-in at the Department of Indian Affairs  aS an example. These Indian women, through  this action, started organizing in ways  they had never done before. At different  points in their organizing they found  themselves travelling from Britain to Holland to Mexico discovering the existence of  a world-wide aboriginal movement and overall, discovering ways to re-integrate  language and medicines into their culture;  elements that had previously been lost to  them. In Mexico, for instance, they discovered old medicine men who taught them  cures for their own diseases. This example  shows us that we have to take on economic  issues and get a handle on how economic  control is affecting us so that we utilize  what we all know  as feminists.  Susan finalized her discussion by comparing the state to a bad husband. The state  has a real interest in us not understanding our role in the home; as long as we  have to go back and forth, between the  home and workplace it is still cheaper for  the state to have the nuclear family than  to provide the dole.  the total cost of a trip to Bulgaria in  early May. In addition, coaching and costumes are expensive. Some countries (notably Japan) who host events pay for the  trips; many others do not.  Having achieved five Gold Medals in Vancouver, Lori is now off to Japan to compete in four cities for the Brother Cup.  From there she hopes to go to Korea for a  training period until July 1.  In August she will attend a World Championship Selection Meet in Toronto, followed by  the World Championships in France in November. This competition decides whether Lori  goes to the Olympics next year.  The experts seem to feel her chances are  good to excellent. She has a superb combination of skill, grace, agility, control  and speed. She also has the energy and  determination for that extra push#  Wheel chair athletes  Three B.C. women wheelchair athletes competed in the first ever women's wheelchair  basketball championships held in Angers,  France on May 11th.  Donna Daisley-Harrison, four-time Pan-American gold medalist swimmer from Burnaby,  Margaret Prevost-Wedge, B.C. track gold  medalist from Alert Bay, and newcomer  Christi Lawrence of Kelowna, were valuable  contributors to the Canadian team which  placed a surprise third, behind the Netherlands and the United States.  The women won four games and lost one, to  the United States. In the battle with Sweden for the bronze, they came from 10  points behind to win by two. "We played  some pretty nerve-wrecking games," says  Donna. "We're a team that starts off slow,  and it's always in the second half that we  put the pressure on."  The team's success in France came as the  culmination of months of discipline. The  women train on their own most of the year,  and only get to practise together at training camps where, as Donna says, "They make  us do a lot of hard work, about double the  amount we're expecting. They're really  heavy-duty training sessions."  A core of about six women on the team have  been training together since last year,  but several of the team members, including  Donna and Christie, only joined a few  months ago. Neither competes regularly on  a team. Added to this relative inexperience  was the fact that two of the starters  were absent, one due to injury, and one  because of pregnancy. The team used a great  deal of determination to overcome the  international pressure.  Hopes are high for the future. They want  to build a hard core group of women who can  work together regularly.  "In some ways it's best to start at the  bottom," notes Donna. "We're learning,  experiencing and gaining in each international game. Losing one game placed us  bronze, but look outI"  Golfer uses disguise  A B.C. woman disguised herself as a man in  a recent golf tournament in her hometown  because of the dearth of tournament opportunities for women there. Wendy McGregor,  from the town of Hope, managed to play five  holes of the 16th Annual Coquihalla Open  at the Hope Golf and Country Club before on<  of the members of her foursome figured out  she wasn't a man and complained. Tournament  marshalls removed her from the course.  Wendy says she wasn't trying to make a  point by challenging the men. She placed  fourth in a women's tournament in Hope last  year, but wants to see more competition.  She had even gone to the trouble of establishing a men's handicap of 23 at the club  prior to the tournament.  She also says she is still determined to  compete in as many tournaments as possible,  and that she/he may turn up again.  Sports events at the B.C. Regional  Lesbian Conference (May 20-23 in  Vancouver) were well attended and  provided an opportunity for  women to connect with each other  outside the workshop format.  Participants enjoyed a noncompetitive atmosphere on the  playing fields.  photo by Claudia MacDonald 24   Kinesis   June'83  LETTERS  Employees, owners  meet to discuss   -  working conditions  Kinesis:  Four ex-employees of Sister's Restaurant  met on April 5, 1983 to discuss grievances  that ex-employees had about their working  conditions.  Ex-employees Baylah Greenspoon, Linda  Frankie, Nancy Rosenberg, Sarah White;  owners Marion Lay and Cedar Mitchell and  mediator Frances Wasserlein were present.  The grievances aired included policies  based on assumed dishonesty of workers,  such as requiring waiters to make up cash  shortages, pay for dine and dash, and  credit card errors; refusal to pay the  minimum four hours for shifts of less than  four hours, as required by the Employment  Standards Act; no overtime pay; unpaid  staff meetings; waiters not paid for time  spent doing cash; and heavy workloads  where each worker is requied to do two or  three separate jobs (eg. cook and wash  dishes).  Other grievances presented to the owners  included workers being pressured by management personnel to work in ways that  were objectional. A good example of this  is to push alcohol. We also grieved  workers being required to work unscheduled  shifts. In general workers felt a lack of  respect and trust as seen in false accusation of theft, being told to work faster,  much like a sweat-shop atmosphere, and two  workers being laid off for a week with one  day's notice. The grievances were aired  but no discussion took place at that time.  When the ex-employees were finished Marion  responded for the owners. Cedar endorsed  the following, but declined to make any  other comment throughout the meeting.  Some discussion took place around proposals for improved working conditions. The  following are some of the proposals  management undertook to implement: regular,  paid staff meetings; paid 4 hour minimum;  management will take over service when  any employee experiences harassment; job  descriptions are being written, and clear  lines of authority will be established;  plan to institute a tipping policy which  is fair to all workers; pushing alcohol Is  not Sister's policy and will not be encouraged; employee benefit package, eg. meals  at cost when employee attends restaurant as  a regular customer; method of lay-off will  be with one week's notice and generally as  much notice as possible regarding changes;  want advice from a union (we suggested that  the workers should talk to a union if they  wish, but the owners should seek advice on  a personal basis only, as unions represent  workers); a letter of apology to be sent to  the worker unjustly accused of theft (this  letter has been received).  Management proposed to print these ideas  for present and prospective employees, and  also for anyone else interested in seeing  them. We urge women to read and comment on  these proposed working conditions and policies after they are printed. Keep informed  and offer your suggestions and support.  Baylah, Nancy, Sarah -  Porn analysis:  sexism in reverse?  Kinesis:  I enjoy your magazine a lot but sometimes  have difficulty accepting some of the analytical articles and think they are destructive to the feminist cause. There is  a type of negative, one-sided feminist  analysis that becomes sexism in reverse.  For example, in the recent articles on  pornography, I thought Regina Lorek was  expecting some kind of reward for the  victim role. Statements such as "Pornography teaches men that their fantasies are  possible, that they can conquer women",  only alienate men and turn them against  feminism.  Sado-macho relationships are our cultural  norm. It is ludicrous to blame men ("Men  must stop their violent...") and then demand that they solve our problems ("Men  must share with women..."). Villanizing  all men in general simply justifies their  misogyny, and I do not like seeing this  sentiment promoted.  Jancis Andrew's article was the most constructive of the three on pornography. No  doubt anyone, male or female,would agree  with or at least respect her stance.  J. Wilson   :S&*j  W.A.V.A.W.frompage2  in the Collective; making sure the RCC  abides by the Constitution and Bylaws; and  ensuring that the Society and Collective  continue to operate in a co-operative manner,  The Collective hires (and fires) from within the Collective. The hired workers have  job descriptions and set hours of work. In  a Feminist collective it is all too easy  for the women who are paid to feel they  have to do everything and work themselves  into the ground, get burned out and crazy,  and become Movement martyrs. We are trying  very hard not to do this at WAVAW. This,  of course, is very tricky because the hired  workers are also Collective Members, and  have non-paid responsibilities that go  along with that, i.e., meetings, night  shifts.  The office is open from 10 to 5, Monday -  to Friday. The rest of the time two women  are always on call (either on a Pager, or  at home).. We try very hard to keep track  of the work we are doing. We are, however,  very careful that the statistics we compile  in no way endanger the confidentiality of  any woman.  This has been a busy and exciting year for  WAVAW. We feel good about the work we've  done and continue to do. We continue to  learn from our past and present experiences  and from each other. Feedback from the  community has been quite good. The collective is strong, healthy and growing.  IWD ^3  answers criticisms  Kinesis:  We of the I.W.D. '83 committee would like  to take this opportunity to address a  brief letter to the women's community, in  answer to criticisms and suggestions we  have received.  The I.W.D. committee is open to all women  who are interested in participating, either  as members of groups or as individuals.  These meetings were advertised in Kinesis  and other places before the first one in  November '82. Our theme was decided upon  early in the organizing as "Hard Times  Won't Stop Us". We decided to narrow the  focus of the rally to present a more comprehensive view of "Jobs and Equal Pay".  The Information Day tried to address the  broader issues that concern women today.  Our outreach/publicity committee sent  letters asking for endorsements and/or  contributions, booth reservations and workshop suggestions to many unions and women's  groups, using B.C.F.W. lists and union  lists. *%&$&&$  At any time women could contact any member  of the I.W.D. committee with further suggestions. The final workshops decided upon  reflected the imput we received, and  practical constraints.  We agree with Alliance for the Safety of  Prostitutes (A.S.P.)'s criticisms in the  May issue of Kinesis which suggest that  pornography and prostitution are key issues  in the women's movement. We were at that  time unaware that A.S.P. existed, and  would have seriously considered a workshop  about the issue of prostitution. A manual  for "The Organizing of I.W.D. '83 is now  completed and available to anyone who  wishes to have more information.  We will be starting earlier this year,  possibly September, to organize I.W.D. '84.  All women's groups and individuals are  welcome, and encouraged to participate.  Prior to getting our own Post Office Box,  we can be contacted through Press Gang, or  Vancouver Status of Women.  In Sisterhood,  Dianne Chappell, Louise Proulx  for I.W.D. '83 Committee.  Our fashion  reflects our culture  Kinesis:  In response to April's letter entitled  'Leave fashion to the Vancouver Sun':  Fashion is a reflection upon a culture. By  observing a culture's fashions, you can  gain much insight into their lifestyle.  Fashion in the Vancouver Sun is coming  from an industry largely controlled by men.  To acknowledge the fashion we create is to  acknowledge our culture.  Sheila Everywear  Fifth Floor Studio  Courses offered  for outdoor leaders  Kine sis: S; |jj '&l  The Women's Wilderness Institute Northwest  {WWIN) of Portland, Oregon is offering a  week of instruction this summer for women  interested in becoming outdoor leaders  with WWIN. The July 9-16 course will cover  teaching techniques in backpacking, bicycle touring, and Whitewater rafting. It is  open to any woman with at least three  years experience in any one of these sports  WWIN, formerly known as Keep Listening Wilderness Trips for Women, has been teaching  wilderness skills to women since 1977.  Their courses are in the Pacific Northwest.  This summer's Instructors Course will be  based in Zigzag, Oregon, east of Portland,  in the Mt. Hood National Forest.  The course outline includes teaching techniques in outdoor safety, group process,  wilderness preservation, group meal planning, orienteering, camp stove operation  and troubleshooting, fires, shelter, minimum impact camping, bicycle maintenance  and repair, and Whitewater rafting skills.  The course will include three two-day June '83   Kinesis    25  LETTERS  continued from previous page  trips: backpacking, bicycle touring, and  river rafting.  Teaching the Instructors Course will be  Marcia Munson, one of the founders and  original instructors of WWIN. She can be  contacted with questions about this course  at 303-685-1652. Cost of the course is  $300, with fee waivers of up to 75% available to needy qualified applicants.  Other WWIN courses offered in 1983 include  backpacking in the Three Sisters Wilderness  Area August 31 - September 4, Mother-Daughter Backpacking September 23-25, and bicycling in the San Juan Islands September  11-18. With the exception of the Instructors Course, WWIN trips require no previous outdoor experience.  WWIN is a private, non-profit educational  organization run exclusively by and for  women. For further information about any  courses, send a long self-addressed stamped envelope to: WWIN, P.O. Box 14743, Portland, Oregon, 97214.  Marcia Munson  Coverage  a real boost  Kinesis:  Thank you for your great article on Diane  Pakiecki and Donna Daisley Harrison in  your 1983 April issue. Press coverage can  be a real boost to our athletes* fundraising  efforts and need for encouragement.  Yours in Wheelchair Sports,  Chris Robertson  Fear, anxiety  valid responses  Kinesis:  I am writing on behalf of the Health Collective to respond to the letter from  Kirsten Emmott,- M.D., which appeared in the  March '83 issue of Kinesis. Her letter  raised questions about a variety of issues  presented in the insert "A Feminist  Approach to Pap Tests" written by Robin  Barnett and Rebecca Fox and included in  the February '83 issue of Kinesis.  Kirsten refers to Robin and other women  diagnosed as having cervical cancer and  having extreme anxiety. She goes on to say  that: 1) they want something done fast;  2) many request hysterectomy; 3) doctors  tread a fine line between cutting too much  or leaving a condition untreated; 4) it is  hard for doctors to understand a woman  diagnosed as having cervical cancer being  worried about the risk of PID; 5) Robin  could calm her anxiety by asking herself  just what she wants - surgery or natural  treatments (The numbering is mine).  Points 1 and 2 seem likely to be true. The  obvious intention of the insert was to  provide women with more information so that  they would be able to look-carefully at the  options open to them and make their decisions in an informed manner.  It is not at all surprising that women  (and men, for that matter) respond with  extreme anxiety when told they have cancer.  Cancer is a very frightening condition as  most people have friends, relatives or  associates who have died of cancer, often a  painful death, and sometimes at a young age.  Anxiety, in fact, seems a very appropriate  response. What seems important on the part  of the medical system during an anxious  time like that is a supportive attitude and  accurate information. Part of what that  entails is taking seriously the questions  that the woman has about the risks of any  procedure suggested.  PID is hardly a minor risk and, as Maureen  Moore pointed out in her letter (April '83  Kinesis), is a more frequent result of a  D and C than Kirsten realized. Apart from  the fact that PID is a very serious condition, any question that a woman has about  a procedure suggested to her should be  taken seriously and answered. Almost all of  us have developed fears about many medical  and surgical treatments and procedures for  good reason. Our fears have a very valid  basis. Many people's lives have been adversely affected by treatments recommended  by doctors, even the most renowned of specialists. It is important for doctors and  others within the medical system to understand that the fears, anxiety and other  emotions are valid responses.  It is also very important to understand  that mistakes have been made, that doctors  haven't always been right, and that there  may well be something for the doctor/nurse/  other health worker to learn from the  questions, hesitations or disagreement on  the part of the patient. It seems that the  issue of the extent of risk of PID from a  D and C is a case in point.  It seems obvious to us that although Robin  was no doubt anxious, she responded in a  rational manner to her diagnosis. What she  did was to investigate all options open to  her, get information from as many sources  as possible and make the decisions that she  needed to make. We object strongly to Kirsten 's portrayal of Robin as anxious and  somewhat irrational.  We think that it is a mistake to take the  advice in point number 5. We think in fact  that it is important to investigate all options and in making decisions see how they  can work together. It is not necessary to  put oneself totally in one camp or the  other. We can learn from'and make use of a  variety of ways of healing.  We appreciate Kirsten's writing to raise  questions about the accuracy of Robin and  Rebecca's information. We think that her  disagreements were important and that the  exchange of information is useful. We think  though that it is very unfortunate that in  raising her disagreements she chose to portray Robin as anxious and irrational and to  excuse lack of support from doctors on that  basis.  Beth Hutchinson  on behalf of the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective  Thanks for  analysis and feelings  Kinesis:  Hi! Just got your April '83 issue - the  articles on Pornography are excellent.  Thank you, thank you, for sharing these  articulate analyses and gut feelings.  Kathy Miller  Divided  by overcompensation?  Just a short note in response to, in particular, Bonnie Ramsey's letter printed in  April's issue.  Bonnie's upset because no fat women were  shown in the fashion issue of Kinesis. I  guess if I were fat, I'd feel the same.  However, no women wearing braces were  shown, either. Braces are supposed to be  some sort of handicap. When I wear my retainer in public and try to talk to shopkeepers and bank clerks, they think I'm  retarded because of my speech impediment.  Of course, orthodontia is for the rich,  right? Who cares?!  It's fine to be conscious of the inequalities in society (but would Bonnie Ramsey  please explain to me how fat women are  denied housing, medical care, and employment?), but I think it's a mistake in over-  compensating for those inequalities by  including minorities and underpriviledged  people (the two are not synonyms) just for  the sake of inclusion. Why don't sbme fat  feminist women get together and print  their own fashion guide, for example?  By seeing ourselves with respect only to  skin colour, weight, religion, sexual preference, education, etc., we divide ourselves. The emphasis is then on maintaining equality, and sometimes that's an impossible task. Some women will despise me  because I'm white - how do I correct that?  Others will resent me because I have a  job - do I quit to make them happy? What  do I do about my education - have a lobot-  omy?  I wish people would keep things in perspective. Keep the goals of nuclear disarmament,  feminism, etc., in focus and not try to  steal the attention. Are my thoughts and  feelings less important because I'm white,  middle class, and thin?  Lots of people are robbed of their dignity  and rights because of prejudice and indifference. It's tragic and unnecessary. But  attacking others, and making them scapegoats for society's faults is no answer.  Helene Wisotzki  • Should pornography be censored?  » Do feminist therapists exploit their clients?  » Is abortion 'free and easy' in Canada?  • Are feminist classics still being read?  Subscribe to Broadside for the  HSroadWi^  A FEMINIST REVIEW  Broadside, PO Box 494, Stn P, Toronto M5S 2T1 Kinesis   June '83  BULLETIN BOARD  Events  FRAUEN UND FILM: A Festival of Films by  German Women. Presented by Women In  Focus at 1155 W. Georgia, Van.  Thurs., June 2 - Marianne and Julianne  by Margarethe von Trotta 106 mins.  Colour 1981 Showtime 7:30 & 9:30p.m.  Fri., June 3 - Invisible Adversaries by  Valie Export 100 mins. Colour 1976 Showtime 7:30 & 9:30p.m.  Sat., June 4 - Journeys From Berlin by  Yvonne Rainer 125 mins. Colour 1971  Showtime 7:30 & 9:30p.m.  Wed., June 8 - The Ail-Round Reduced  Personality by Helke Sander 98 mins.  B&W 1977 Showtime 7:30 & 9:30p.m.  Thurs., June 9 - The Second Awakening of  Christa Klage by Margarethe von Trotta  88 mins. Colour 1977 Showtime 7:30 &    «  9:30p.m. g  Thurs./Fri., June 16 and 17 - Madame X h  by Ulrike Ottinger 141 mins. Colour 1977 $  Showtime 8p.m. ^q  Sat., June 18 - The Power of Men is the  Patience of Women by Cristina Perinicoli  75 mins. Colour Showtime 7:30 & 9:30p.m.  CINEMATHEQUE Membership necessary $2.00  Films: $3.00 per night or series ticket  $15. Available in advance from 456 W.  Broadway, Vancouver, B.C.  (With assistance from Goethe Institute  of Toronto and C.E.I.C, Ministry of  Labour, B.C. and Pacific Cinematheque)  For Information Call 872-2250.  MATERNAL HEALTH SOCIETY presents 'What's  Happening In Maternity Care At New Westminster's Royal Columbian Hospital?',  Thurs., June 9, 7-10p.m., New Westminster  Public Library, 716 Sixth Avenue, New  Westminster. For more information, ph.  937-0145, write Maternal Health Box  46563, Station G, Van.,B.C. V6R 4G8  WOMEN AND WORDS PRE-CONFERENCE CELEBRATION  9p.m. Saturday, June 11th; 1320 E. Hastings (at Clark); New Moon/Swedish Hall.  Live music by The Angel Band - and D.J.'s  into the night. Child care on premises;  . members and guests $4-6 at the door.  YARD SALE - Women Against Nuclear Technology is having a No Nuke Yard Sale on Sun.,  June 12, 11a.m.-3p.m. at 1774 Grant St.,  just off 1st and Commercial. See you  there!! Donations: call 255-0523 or  734-5393.  ASIAN WOMEN ARTISTS: A Life of Art - a  Multi-Media Exhibition at Women In Focus  Gallery, 204-456 W. Broadway. Opening:  Tues., June 14, 1983. 7-10p.m. (The  second half of the evening will feature  performances by various artists). Admission: $3.00.  June 15-24, Gallery Hours: Mon.-Fri. 10-  5p.m.; Sat. l-5p.m.  Special Workshops: Free Admission (Dates  and workshop events may be subject to  change) Thurs., June 16 CALLIGRAPHY,  2-4p.m.; Fri., June 17 DANCING 2-4p.m.;  Wed., June 22 FLOWER ARRANGING TEA CEREMONY 2-4p.m.  Closing: Fri., June 24, 7-10p.m. A full  evening of performance: films, traditional folkdancing, singing, etc.  Admission: $5.00  FEMINIST COUNSELLING ASSOCIATION'S :  of talks and discussions continues...  June 16 - Being a Feminist in the System  with Susan Wendel, Ph.D. Philosophy,SFU.  July 14 - An Evening with Catherine  Wedge, Feminist Lawyer.  Time: 7:30 - 9:30p.m.  Place: Vancouver Health Enhancement  Centre, 2021 Columbia  Fee: Free for members; $3 non-members.  WAGES  Prices  SKREW V  CORP.   J|P  DOWNTOWN EASTSIDE RESIDENTS ASSOCIATION  (DERA). Funding appeal is set for  June 28, 1983, 7:30pm, at the City Council  chambers. Support is needed.  FOLLOW-UP TO 'LESBIANISM & CHRISTIANITY'  Workshop at the '83 Lesbian Conference ■  Potluck BBQ. 5p.m., June 17th(Friday)  at 4564 Belmont (off Tolmie from 4th)  224-0472. Anyone welcome, even those  not at the workshop or the Conference!  LESBIAN & FEMINIST MOTHERS are you interested in forming a support group? What  would you like it to consist of? What  topics would you like to deal with?  We'd like to hear from you! Call: Linda  536-8719; Carol 254-3910; Anne 263-2143;  Jas 734-0116.  THE ORGANIZATION OF UNEMPLOYED WORKERS is  having an open house on June 15th from  2-8p.m. Dinner, entertainment, child care  provided. Everybody welcome. 3516A Main  Street. For information call 873-2849.  TO ALL THOSE PLANNING TO ATTEND VSW'S  Annual General Meeting, the date of the  meeting has been changed from June 30 to  June 29.  On the Air  WOMANVISION ON CO-OP RADIO, 102.7 FM  Listen out on Mondays, 7-8 pm.  News, views>music, the program  that focuses on women.  THE LESBIAN SHOW ON CO-OP RADIO,  102.7 FM. Tune in on Thursday-  from 7:30-8:30 pm for programming by, for and about Lesbians.  RUBYMUSIC ON CO-OP RADIO, 102.7 FM  Friday night, from. 7-8 pm. Join'  host Connie Smith for an hour of the  the finest in women's music: pop,  gospel, folk, feminist and new wave.  Groups  THE VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE  is hoping to move to a new location that  is wheelchair accessible and larger than  our present space. If anyone knows of a  space that is available (approximately  2000 square feet), near a major bus  route, give us a call at 736-6696.  IF-YOU HAVE A MOTORCYCLE and are interested in joining other women for rides and  hands-on mechanics, call the "Women's  Motorcycle Group". Louise: 327-6457;  Nancy: 876-4541.  THE LITTLE MOUNTAIN NEIGHBOURHOOD HOUSE,  3981 Main St., sponsors Support Services  for Single Parents.  Single Mothers' Support Group, every  Monday 5p.m. to 6:30p.m., a Potluck Meal  6:30p.m. to 8:30p.m. the Group meets.  Child Care provided.  Moms and Tots Drop-In, Tuesday and  Thursday 10a.m. to 12 noon. Play time for  children. Time out for Moms.  Single Mothers; Daytime Group, Thurs.  lp.m. to 2:30p.m. Child Care provided.  For more information...879-7104.  IF YOU'RE THINKING OF STARTING WOMEN'S  GROUPS, ie. (support groups, health,  self defense) and need a place to meet  or are already established and would  like to do outreach in the Little Mountain area, contact Sage at 879-7104.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE...Want to talk?  ...Need information? Call L.I.L. Thurs.  and Sun. 7-10p.m....734-1016. L.I.L. is  looking for new members., Call to join  our fun collective.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH RESEARCH COLLECTIVE is looking for new members. Research  experience is not needed. We are learning  to develop/improve research skills. So  far we have produced a booklet oh PID  and are about to start a new project.  Call 736-6696 if you're interested.  PID BOOKLET AVAILABLE - A new booklet on  pelvic inflammatory disease is available  from the'Vancouver Women's Health Collective for $2.00 or donation. Call 736-6696.  THE RADICAL REVIEWER has received a summer  grant to produce a special issue on B.C.  Women Writers. We are interested in  critiquing obscure as well as popular  B.C. writers and are especially interested in the works of Native Indian and  lesbian writers. Please write or call  with your suggestions, research ideas,  essays, reviews, short fiction or poetry.  The Radical Reviewer c/o Hedy Wood or  Alexis Applin, 3545 St. Catherines. 876-  2943.  BOTH THE DIAPHRAGM FITTING AND CERVICAL  CAP FITTING Collective desparately need  more women. Interested? Training provided,  some commitment necessary. For more  information, call the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective at 736-6696.  INTERESTED IN SHARING CASUAL SPORTS,  outdoor activities with other women?  Loose-knit group forming for regular  times or once-in-a-while. Call Linda  879-2119, 736-5714 messages.  Qr     The Best in  ^Ck  Feminist Journalism -  Our 13th year  * National and international news  about women  * Thoughtful commentaries, and  news ahead of its time  * Health, prison, and labor news  SUBSCRIBE TODAY! June'83   Kinesis   27  BULLETIN BOARD  THE VANCOUVER OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WOMEN has  recently formed out of the former YWCA  Outdoor Club for Women and we are now  welcoming new members. The club has been  in existence since 1979 and we currently  have approximately 75 members. We meet  at Britannia Community Centre on the  first Tuesday of every month at 7p.m. for  educational and social programs. We offer  weekly women-led activities such as hikes,  canoe and kayak trips, ski trips, rock  climbing, beginners mountaineering, horseback riding, etc.  Organized and run by women, the club's  purpose is for women to share the excitement of the outdoors, to learn new skills  and keep fit in a friendly non-competitive atmosphere. Membership fees are $30  annually (sliding scale) with $15 the  suggested fee to cover our newsletter  and mail*out costs. For further information call Jan at 261-8953 o» come to  our next meeting.  PART-TIME/TEMPORARY JOB AT VANCOUVER  STATUS OF WOMEN. Co-ordinator for  "Women Growing Old: A Seminar  Series". Half-time, June 27-Sept.  15; approx. $500 a month.  This job will include research work,  locating and working with speakers  for the series, organizing publicity,  editing materials from the project  for Kinesis and collating information  for VSW's library. We will be looking for someone who likes to make  contacts and talk with people, and  who has an ability to do research,  editing and publicity. Typing  skills and an ability to organize  materials will be essential. A  commitment to feminism and issues  relating to older women is necessary. Send your resume to VSW, c/o  Patty Moore or;.Heather Wells by  June 15.  Classified  WOMAN LOOKING FOR TRAVELLING PARTNER to  Yukon and North for 3-4 weeks in August.  A car would be great. Call Linda, 879-  2119 or 736-5714 message.  WOMAN WOULD LIKE A COMPANION for beginners  judo and/or member at the European Spa,  Doris 438-6163.  WORKSHOP SPACE FOR RENT, available immediately. Phone Press Gang at 253-1224.  continued from p. 10  West End or elsewhere. As Libby Davies  stated: "Dealing with a bandaid solution  becomes the priority for many politicians  because dealing with the causes of prostitution means examining and changing the  very society and economic conditions we  live in."  The social reasons why women and men are  on the street - including the lack of alternative employment - are more difficult  questions to address. Despite the final  vote by City Council, the heated debate  served to shed light on these underlying  issues. This public forum was one of the  first in which the media actually printed  and aired the views of those opposed to  enacting harsh criminal sanctions against  prostitutes.  In a two block section of Davie Street,  the 1000 and 1100 blocks, there are:  21 Restaurants and Clubs  66 total Commercial establishments  Of these, 26 operate till midnight, after midnight or all  night.  Parking is limited or non-existent.  One establishment in this area, the  Rock Palace,  has a liquor license for  200 and no parking lot.  Graphic by Janet Morgan  SUMMERTIME that time of the year for lying  around in the sun and reading a good  book. For your reading pleasure the following books are to be found in our local  feminist bookstores:  The Holiday,  a novel by Stevie Smith,  $8.95  Southern Discomfort,  a novel by Rita Mae  Brown, $3.95  Mother Wit: feminist guide to a psychic  journey,  by Dianne Mariechild, $9.95  Event,  a feminist literary journal, $3.00  Journey,  a novel by Ann Cameron, $5.95  (The above are all available at Ariel  bookstore,  2766 W.   4th,   Vancouver).  Death of Nature; Women, Ecology and the  Scientific Revolution by Caroline Mer-  chent, $9.95  Braided Lives, a novel by Marge Piercy  $4.75  Drawing Down the Moon  by Margo Adler  $11.90  Depth Perceptions: New Poems and a  Masque  by Robin Morgan, $7.75  (The above are all available at The  Women's Bookstore,   322 W.  Hastings).  Both stores carry a good selection of  children's literature.  COTTAGE FOR RENT on Pender Island. $110/  wk. summer months. Available year round.  Evenings 254-3479  BILLETS NEEDED FOR WOMEN & WORDS Conference. Can you provide a billet for  women visiting Vancouver for the Women & Words Conference, June 29-July  3? We need quite a number of billets  still - mostly for women travelling  alone, a few for groupings of 2-3-4.  We also, and especially, need billets  in francophone and Native Indian  households. Please, if you can provide a billet, phone the Women &  Words office at 684-2454 and leave  your name and number; the Billeting  Committee will be in touch with you.  VSW IS UPDATING A SPEAKER'S DIRECTORY to  serve as a resource to the community at  large. This will involve finding women  who would be willing to speak to various  community groups in any of the following  areas: non-sexist childrearing/stereo-  typing; especially around jobs/history  of the women's movement/talks for teenage mothers around sexuality and parenting/pornography/health; reclaiming our  bodies.  If you can offer your services  as a speaker on any of these topics  please call Heather at VSW 873-1427.  JOIN THE VANCOUVER SKILL AND SERVICE EXCHANGE to exchange your skills and services for other valuable services, without exchanging cash. For details, send  self-addressed stamped envelope to:  Vancouver Skill and Service Exchange,  #504-1395 Beach Avenue, Van., B.C.  V6E 1V7  NEED TRAINING TO RETURN TO THE WORKFORCE?  ■ Looking for financing for a new project?  Have complaints about something you  bought? The federal government's Index to  Programs and Services is one aid. By  listing more than 1,000 federal programs,  the departments and phone numbers, the  Index is a convenient stepping stone to -  finding the right office to contact  about a specific subject. Some of the  programs described in the Index pertain  particularly to women. For example,  Labour Canada has a Women's Bureau that  deals with equal opportunities and the  status of women in the labour force.  Employment and Immigration Canada has^  counselling programs for women who want  to return to work. The Index to Programs  and Services is available in many libraries and post offices. It can also be  purchased for $9.95 from government bookstore agents or the Canadian Government  Publishing Centre, Supply and Services  Canada, Hull, Quebec, L1A 0S9.  PID SUPPORT/INFORMATION NEWSLETTER - This  newsletter contains information about  PID and (upon instruction) lists the  names and telephone numbers of women  who are interested in getting in touch  with other women with PID. It is published by the Vancouver PID Support Group.  Call 736-6696 for more information or  send $1.00 to M. Wright, 1829 Kitchener  St., Vancouver. V5L 2W5  THE BLATANT IMAGE needs help in obtaining  rarely-seen, little-photographed non-  traditional images of women; for example,  a woman's view of cooking,washing diapers,  office work. Deadline June 30, 1983.  Send self-addressed stamped envelope to  the Blatant Image, 2000 King Mountain  Trail, Sunny Valley, Oregon.  VSW  ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  June 29,1983  N.D.P. Hall 517E. Broadway  7:30p.m.  Guest speaker: Sara Diamond  Musical Entertainment  Election of the Executive  Refreshments  Members and Friends welcome