 Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  °i  a  KIN€SIS  •fEflAL COLLECTfWtt  50 c  JULY-AUGUST 78.  -Vol 7  Vancouver Status of Women  "IL  Nurses Speak Out  WOOD Cj HOON Interview  ABORTION: the issue*  mi Kinesis   July-August  '78  A.G.M.  V.S.W.  The Annual General Meeting of Vancouver Status of Women, which took place  in Kits Library on June 20, was highlighted by good energy and a spirit  of unity amongst the diverse membership.  Blatant  Gerrymander :  Rosemary Drowns  Riding Axed  A few hours before the meeting opened,  Judge L.S. Ekhardt's plans to abolish  the provincial riding of Vancouver-  Burrard, held by Rosemary Brown, had  become known.  The meeting expressed, in strongest  possible terms, its disgust with this  blatant example of gerrymander. Lee  Grills, re-elected for a second term  as president, commented: "Clearly,  this is a scheme to wipe out an NDP  seat.  It is an outrageously undemocratic move aimed at attempting to  silence the strongest feminist voice  in the legislature."  W2 Are Pro Choice  The meeting also strongly re-iterated  VSW's pro-choice stand on abortion.  In recent weeks, anti-choicers have  been elected to hospital boards in  Surrey and Powell River.  The Canadian  Medical Association has backed down on  the doctor's obligation to refer a  turn to p.26, col 1.  CONCERNED CITIZENS  FOR CHOICC ON ABORTION  THE CONCERNED CITIZENS FOR CHOICE ON  ABORTION WILL BE MARCHING  THROUGH THE  STREETS OF VANCOUVER IN SUPPORT OF THE  RIGHT TO THERAPEUTIC ABORTIONS AT  VANCOUVER GENERAL HOSPITAL.  THE MARCH BEGINS AT GRANVILLE AND  HASTINGS STREETS AT 7:00 PM., JULY 28,  1978 AND WILL END AT THE ST. ANDREWS  WESLEY UNITED CHURCH HALL, 1012 NELSON  STREET, WHERE A RALLY IS PLANNED.  THE FOCUS OF THE DEMONSTRATION AND  RALLY WILL BE ON CONTINUING THE AVAILABILITY OF THERAPEUTIC ABORTION AT  VGH.  THE PUBLIC WILL BE ASKED TO  BECOME MEMBERS OF THE VGH CORPORATION  AND TO ATTEND THE ANNUAL GENERAL  MEETING IN SUPPORT OF A WOMAN'S RIGHT  TO CHOOSE.  THE CONCERNED CITIZENS FOR CHOICE ON  ABORTION BELIEVE A WOMAN HAS THE RIGHT  TO FREE CHOICE ABOUT ABORTIONS; THAT  THE DECISION ON ABORTION SHOULD BE  MADE BY A WOMAN IN CONSULTATION WITH  HER DOCTOR; THAT THIS RIGHT TO CHOOSE  MUST BE DEFENDED AGAINST THOSE WHO  WANT TO ELIMINATE ABORTIONS AS A  HOSPITAL PROCEDURE.  CONCERNED CITIZENS FOR CHOICE ON  ABORTION HAS COMMITTEES FOR YOU  - The Concerned Citizens for Choice  on Abortion has expanded to include  a steering committee, a membership  committee, a rally organizing committee and a media committee.  Meetings are held weekly — call  V.S.W. at 736-1313 for the times  and places of these meetings.  We  need many more volunteers I  - C.C.C.A. spokesperson Liz Whynot is  encouraged by the response of volunteers and endorsing organizations.  "Memberships are starting  to come in by the 100's.  But," she  said, "we need them by the 1000's  and we only have 4 weeks to go."  - Letter lobby — politicians in Victoria have been under tremendous  pressure from anti-abortionists.  We must write to W. Vander Zalm,  W. McClelland and W. Bennett to  make our views known.  ROSEMARY BROWN will be a keynote  speaker at the rally.  Call 736  1313 for further details.  Combat  Discrimination  ror several months now a coalition has  been forming to oppose the Anita  Bryant campaign and its Canadian  counterpart, Renaissance Canada.  The  forefront of Anita Bryant's campaign  is against lesbians and gay men but  freedom of sexual orientation is not  the only human right that the Bryant  campaign opposes.  Freedom of the  press, freedom of religion, freedom to  organize into trade unions, and equal  opportunities for women are just some  of our human rights that are under  attack.  For this reason the coalition  has chosen the name COALITION AGAINST  DISCRIMINATION and plans to do public  education in all of these areas. A  spokesperson for the Coalition said,  "The fact that Anita Bryant is not  coming to Vancouver in the near future  does not mean that the Coalition will  cease to organize. On the contrary we  have a great deal of work to do and  we'll be working hard in the coming  months to build our coalition.  We  will be reaching out to trade unions,  churches, and community groups for  endorsement of and participation in  our actions."  Three actions have been planned by the  Coalition:  — a fund-raising benefit  — a high profile educational campaign on the lack of rights that  lesbians and gay men have in Canada,  and on the attack the Bryant  Campaign poses to all other human  rights  — a public demonstration  An educational pamphlet is being prepared and it will give information on  who Anita Bryant is, who supports her  (such as Renaissance Canada and the  Ku Klux Klan), where their money comes  from, and what human rights are under  attack.  The pamphlet explains that  lesbians and gay men have no legal  rights in Canada and states how and  why this situation should be changed.  It will be distributed to any interested person or groups in the community, trade unions, churches, etc.,  and speakers from the Coalition will  be available to groups requesting more  information about these issues.  We are really excited to see the  number of people participating in the  Coalition organizing meetings.     Our  largest attendance so far has been 15C  people.    This is also one of the first  opportunities for lesbians and gay men  to work together and it is going very  well.    We hope many more people will  join our Coalition  — these are issues  that affect us all.  THE NEXT MEETING OF THE COALITION  AGAINST DISCRIMINATION WILL BE HELD ON  WEDNESDAY, 19 JULY 1978 AT 7:00 P.M.  PLACE TO BE ANNOUNCED.  The coalition does not yet have a  mailing address so if you wish further  information phone the VSW office at  736-1313. O Kinesis   July-August  '78  WOM€N & VIOLENCE  The provisional sub-committee of BCFW  (British Columbia Federation of  Women) on "Women and Violence" has  been re-activated.  Co-chair of the subcommittee explains:  The provisional sub-committee on  "Women and Violence" actually got off  the ground at the BCFW convention last  November.    However, my co-chair was  unable to continue her involvement,  and I undertook other commitments.  For these two reasons,  it is only now  that the work of sub-committee is  really getting under way.  The problems the committee was formed  to look at have, of course, not gone  away.    I recently attended the  "Women  in a Violent Society" conference in  Calgary.    I came away more convinced  than ever that feminists concerned  about various forms of woman and child  abuse  — pornography,  rape,  incest,  wife battering,  etc.   — must work  together to exchange information and  to try and find ways to work towards  eliminating these crimes against  women.  The proposed changes in legislation  concerning prostitution and pornography make this an important time for  us to have some input.  The next meeting of the "Women and  Violence" group is on July 20 at\  2029 West Fourth, Vancouver.  TAKING BACK  TH€ NIGHT  We have a right to be out on the  streets at any time without being  subjected to harassment, and without having recourse to the "protection" of men.  To assert this right,  the  Fly By  Night Collective is forming,  to plan  a midnight march in Vancouver.  The  theme of the action will be  Women  Take Back the Night. This is a theme  which women have taken up in Europe  and across North America.  You contact the collective,  call  736 1313 for details.  The march is  scheduled for sometime in August.  Rape Relief  Needs Support  Rape Relief Centres in B.C. have not  yet been informed about their funding  application.  Megan Ellis, Vancouver Rape Relief  spokesperson said, "The Attorney-  General's Ministry is still perusing a  report submitted two months ago by  Nancy Goldsberry, a researcher hired  by that Ministry to do a project on  the 4 rape relief centres in B.C."  Goldsberry recommended that the staff  of Vancouver Rape Relief should be  increased from 6 to 12 workers.  "To date we have not been made aware  of their response to these recommendations.  Nor has the Coalition of  B.C. Rape Centres been told how much  money we will be receiving for this  fiscal year which began April 1,  1978," Ellis said.  Rape Relief is presently surviving on  interim funding from the Ministry of  Health but these funds are insufficient to cover expenses, so they are  running an overdraft at the bank.  Ellis stated that the Attorney-General's Ministry is in the process of  conducting an audit and that they have  been informed that there will be no  funding until this audit is complete.  "We are absolutely appalled at this  situation as we had submitted our  budget for approval last fall. A  decision should have been made before  the commencement of the new fiscal  year over three months ago."  Ellis said she expects an increase  in funding this year if the A-G's  Ministry follows the recommendations  of its own report.  Not only has the caseload expanded  considerably at Rape Relief while the  staff has remained constant, but the  Vancouver City Police Force has estimated that there will be a significant  increase in the crime of rape next  year, she stated.  Ellis encouraged everyone to write  support letters to the Attorney-  General, the Minister of Health, and  the Minister of Human Resources. "It  is essential that our program should  not just continue, but be expanded so  that all women in B.C. have access to  Rape Relief services."  Law Foundation Grants  i  to Rape Relief  Salary  Two months ago Vancouver Rape Relief  received a grant for one salary from  the B.C. Law Foundation for a combined  legal researcher and court worker.  This means Rape Relief will be expanding their program of accompanying  rape victims through court procedures  and will be able to provide a speaker  to community groups, etc., to discuss  sexual assault law and law reform.  MAUD RAWSON    <*»  Rosemary Brown MLA brought this  issue to the attention of the  legislature and the public.  She  wanted to know what was being  done for Maud Rawson - would  she, for example,  have home-  maker services?    Charges have  been laid, but we have been unable to ascertain if anything  has been done for Maud herself.  not an isolated case  On August 13, 1977, at approximately  11:00 p.m., Maud Rawson was taken  from her home by ambulance to Prince  Rupert General Hospital.  She. was  unconscious, had massive facial and  head injuries, extensive burns to  her abdomen, and multiple burns  to her chest, arms and face.  Police  were observed at the scene by  witnesses who called the ambulance.  Later that evening Maud's sister and  brother-in-law went to the police  station to again report the incident  and lay a complaint.  They were told  that since this was a marital dispute charges would have to be laid by  Maud, if she wished, when she regained consciousness.  Maud's sister and brother also asked  help of the doctor in attendance, a  local lawyer, and Legal Aid.  In  every case they were told that since  it was a marital dispute nothing  could be done and no charges could be  laid until Maud regained consciousness or the police decided to take  action.  The police investigation  did not begin until August 17 when  Maud's brother once again inquired  what the police were going to do for  Maud.  On August 16 Maud was flown to Vancouver General Hospital.  She remained unconscious for a week.  She  remained in Vancouver General until  December and was then transferred to  G.F. Strong Rehabilitation Centre.  Presently she is confined to a wheelchair with quadraplegic paralysis.  She is not expected to walk again.  Her vision is impaired and she has  no memory of the period between  the end of July 1977 and early January of this year.  At the end of May 1978, Maud's sister  and brother were informed by police  that the Prosecuting Attorney would  be laying charges of assault causing  bodily harm.  Maud is suing for  divorce and is seeking compensation  under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Fund.  A trust fund has been set up in Maud's  name (through Brail, Daniells S Kahn,  Barristers and Solicitors, 605-207  West Hastings St., Vancouver, B. C.  V6B 1A7) in order to help cover the  cost of legal fees and to aid Maud  in rebuilding her own life when she  is discharged from the Rehabilitation  Centre (presently this is expected  at the end of June 1978). KINESIS July - August  ABORT 10H^  TH£ MAJOR  issues  This will be the last issue of Kinesis  in which we can remind you to join  VGH. We only have a month to go to  get the application forms in for the  September Annual General Meeting.  If you have not already joined Vancouver General Hospital, you may know  that the anti-abortion groups are  threatening to have therapeutic abortions abolished at VGH.  You may also know that the Concerned  Citizens for Choice on Abortion is  organizing to defend our right to  choose and to preserve the option of  abortion at VGH.  Every year, VGH has a meeting at which  new trustees are elected to the Board  of Directors at the hospital. They're  the ones who have the say about continuing the policy of therapeutic  abortions.  If the anti-choicers  managed to elect their candidates to  the board, they would be able to  change hospital policy.  Join VCH  now  The anti-choicers must  be stopped.  You can stop them by going to that  meeting and voting pro-choice.  To be  able to vote, you have to join VGH.  To obtain a membership, simply write  to the Concerned Citizens for Choice  on Abortion, c/o 115 N. Kootenay St.,  Vancouver, B.C.  Return that form, plus the membership  fee of $2.00 to that address.  For more information, call Jacqueline  at 736-6232, or leave a message after  7.00 pm at 683-3206.  IF YOU ARE A MEMBER ALREADY, SHOW THIS  INFORMATION TO ALL  YOUR FRIENDS.  MAKE  SURE THEY JOIN UP.  TIME IS RUNNING  OUT.  FORMS SHOULD BE IN BY AUGUST  1ST, '78.  pathfinder  Pro-Life Catholics today say that  abortion is murder.  That is what  the Pope says.  But the infallible  popes have not always been so sure.  The history of the Church's position makes interesting reading.  In 1140 Gratian's Decretum stated  that abortion was homicide only  if performed after the foetus was  formed. According to Gratian, the  foetus was "formed" at 40 days after  conception if it was male, 80 days  if it was female. (The question of  how to determine whether the foetus  was male or female prior to the abortion was, it seems, a theological  mystery.  In the thirteenth century, Pope Innocent III, wrote to a monk who,  while playing with his mistress, had  caused her to abort. He advised the  monk that if the foetus was not yet  "vivified", the monk was not "irregular."  This ecclesiastical pronouncement was  the official Catholic position for the  next 700 years, except for one three-  year interval.  Pope Sixtus V (1585 -  1590) in 1588 decreed that ensoulment  occurred at conception and made abortion at any time a mortal sin (one  for which you can be excommunicated).  Pope Sixtus V, incidentally, had  other stringent moral views, and he  made adultery a hanging offence in  Rome.  The rank and file ignored the edict  from Sixtus V.  Pope Gregory XIV repealed all the penalties set by his predecessor, except  those penalties relating to the "ensouled" foetus .  In 1869 Pope Pius IX decreed, in the  face of 500 years of Church doctrine  to the contrary, that the foetus was  "animated" at the moment of conception, and that abortion at any point  thereafter was a mortal sin.  It was  also Pope Pius who found it necessary  to decree that spiritually the Pope  was infallible.  CATHOLIC CHURCH  CONFUSED  The position of the Roman Catholic  Church has therefore not been a  model of consistency.  The current Catholic position, advanced with such fervor, that abortion is murder, is a position  which is barely 100 years old.  By moral decree, Catholics seek to  determine the right of a woman to  control her body. This would be  less surprising had their position  been more consistent.  But basically, Catholics, for reasons unrelated to "morality" have changed  their position on abortion over  the years.  MEDICAL  PROFESSION  Doctors are governed by canons of ethics.  In Canada, all members of the  Canadian Medical,Association (CMA)  conform (or are supposed to conform)  to the ethical standards of the CMA.  In June 1978 the CMA amended its  code of ethics to provide those doctors who refuse to perform abortions  on moral grounds with the option of  refusing to refer patients to other  doctors or agencies.  This was a reversal of CMA policy.  Formerly, physicians who refused to  do abortions were ethically required  to refer a woman who was requesting  an abortion to someone who would do  it for her.  In fact, of course, little changes.  Many anti-choice doctors have always  refused to tell a woman needing an  abortion - or even wanting birth control - to someone who would provide  it. And women often have a great deal  of difficulty, especially in smaller  communities, in locating a sympathetic  doctor when her own doctor refuses to  help.  That has always been the case.  But the arrogance of the CMA, the  doctors who voted at the general council in June, is deplorable.  Abortion is legal in Canada. Abortion,  as a procedure, is available - though  not equally available to all women. Why  does the CMA have the right to decree  that doctors can themselves deny women  access to a legal procedure because of  their personal, moral views? No one is  asking them to perform the procedure.  But the effect of the CMA position is  that doctors who oppose abortion  can impose their views on their patient by the simple expedient of withholding information.  Any women seeking an abortion must have  her application accepted by not one,  not two, but three doctors on a therapeutic abortion committee. In effect,  doctors who will not perform therapeutic abortions and who refuse to  refer a woman to someone who will, are  arrogating to themselves the right  to decide that women should be granted a therapeutic abortion - a decision which under the Criminal Code is  supposed to be made by a therapeutic  abortion committee.  turn to p,5 Kinesis    July-August  '78  VGH NURS€S SPGAK OUT  Last month we carried an insert  outlining the current situation at  VGH. Since then Kinesis  spoke with  two Nurse Clinicians, Leith Nance and  Debbie Liebich who are actively involved with the Committee of Concerned  Nurses. We also spoke with Verna  Lovell, a BCIT Nursing Instructor  and UBC Sociology student who has been  following the events at VGH.  Verna  filled us in on the background to the  current crisis.  With the firing of four out of five of  hospital's clinical directors, shortly  after the appointment of Dorothy Bab-  cock as Director of Nursing, the VGH  nursing staff have come together in an  outstanding show of solidarity in  support of their fired colleagues.  The firings, however, have only served  to highlight an increasingly serious  problem between nursing and the hospital administration.  Leith Nance states: Administration  emerged 20 years ago to facilitate and  respond to the needs of nursing and  medicine,  not to control them.    Today  they have lost sight of their function  as facilitators and use their authority only to control.  The vast majority of nurses support  the 4 fired clinical directors.  These  women were working to bring about  improvements within the hospital which  would result in improved patient care.  VGH is short-staffed.  There are too  few nurses trained in specialties.  Debbie told Kinesis  that the hospital  has a large pool of 'float' nurses  who take assignments when areas are  short-staffed. This float is a necessity but unfortunately these nurses  are often sent into areas of specialization which requires training they do  not have.  This puts an additional  burden on regular staff in that area.  In-service education and orientation  are practically non-existent.  Debbie  stressed that the issue for nurses at  VGH is patient care and that their  strong sense of responsibility towards  their patients is reflected in their  willingness to work harder and longer  when a crisis occurs, such as at  present, but they cannot keep this up  indefinitely.  Administration  Actions  Aid  Nurses Solidarity  Hospital president Larry Truitt's  response to a petition containing 300  signatures requesting a meeting with  him was 'the hospital does not respond  to petition democracy'.  Further to this the administration  told the nurses not to bother the  doctors with their concerns.  It  appears that the administration assumed they would have medical support  for their position. However, the B.C.  Medical Assoc, have come out in favour  of the nurses.  The nurses, with the  support of the Registered Nurses  Association of B.C. (R.N.A.B.C.) is  demanding that hospital president  Truitt and Nursing Director Babcock  resign. They are also demanding that  the four clinical directors should be  given an offer of reinstatement and  the hospital institute a position of  Vice President of Nursing which would  give nursing an authoratative voice in  the administration.  This would bring  them into line with other major  hospitals.  The nurses have received widespread  support for their demands from nurses  throughout the Province as well as  from the International Congress of  Nurses. At present 800 nurses have  signed the petition.  ADMINISTRATION ATTEMPTS TO PREVENT  COMMUNICATION  Leith and Debbie stated that the administration has all the resources for  communication available to them. A  memo was sent to staff stating that no  posters or printed material are to be  distributed within the hospital unless  it originates within the hospital.  This means in effect that it must have  official sanction and support the administrative position. A recent  hospital newsletter did just this in  an article titled, "The other side of  the story".  In some departments, notably psychiatry, nursing heads have advised their  staff not to discuss the situation.  The nurses will not be intimidated by  management attempts to silence them.  Morale is high as the nurses experience a strong sense of solidarity in  their attempts to deal with the administration.  An investigative committee has been  set up by the administration as a  result of the pressure applied by the  nurses and the RNABC.  This committee,  however, has made little attempt to  communicate with the nurses. Prior to  the setting up of this committee, the  hospital trustees voted unanimously  their support of the administration.  Two of the three committee members are  hospital trustees. One of the trustees has invited nurses to telephone  her at home with their concern.  While  the nurses appreciate this opportunity  to voice their grievances, they are  confused by the unanimous vote of  support for the administration.  The Committee of Concerned Nurses has  been unable to obtain the terms of  reference for the investigative committee.  They don't know whether the  committee is looking only at the firings of the clinical directors or  whether they are looking at the problems surrounding patient care. The  nurses have been experiencing some  problems with their submissions to  the committee. Last week when they  took some letters to the committee,  which had been meeting at the Holiday  Inn on Broadway, they were advised by  a member of the hotel staff that the  committee was now meeting at another  hotel.  'We won't go bock.  We ore  making history.'  The administration does not recognize  the Committee of Concerned Nurses as  spokespeople for the nurses; they wish  to deal with the Nursing Advisory  Committee. Leith and Debbie told  Kinesis  that the Nursing Advisory  Committee has not had an election in  the past 3 years; that the Committee  has decided to reorganize itself and  now has a small committee from within  to speak to the current issues at VGH.  There are 5 people at present on this  Committee, including the only remaining clinical director — who is still  absent, and the director of nursing.  There are two members of the Concerned  Nurses on the Committee but they feel  they are merely tokens and that most  people on the Advisory Committee are  known supporters of the administration. This Committee is not representative of VGH nurses.  ,   ., "  to col l.,p.5 Kinesis   July-August  '78  JANICC  PCNTLAND SMITH  Leith told Kinesis  that the majority  of nurses are now realizing that  nursing is a profession in its own  right with special and unique skills.  She said that for too long nurses have  been regarded as para-professionals.  In the past, nurses had accepted this  view of themselves, but this has  changed.  Nurses have expertise in the  area of patient care.  Administration  should take advice from and be directed by those people with first-hand  knowledge.  Leith and Debbie feel that  morale has never been so good as at  present.  People who had previously  attempted to stay uninvolved in hospital issues have come out in favour of  the nurses — that is of themselves —  and now have a new sense of pride.  A spirit of cooperation is replacing  competition and nurses throughout the  hospital are meeting each other and  sharing common concerns and ideas.  As  a result many are keen to continue the  discussions through the vehicle of the  General Duty Nurses Association.  The Issue  Is  PATIENT CARE  Nurses are clear that the issue is  patient care. The refusal of administration to take steps to deal with  the concerns brought to them by nursing reflects the primary concern of  administration with the budget.  Leith  and Debbie said that the nurses did  not want the present situation to  become a management labour issue because if they are forced to strike  they will lose a great deal of support. They are willing to try all  avenues to have management respond to  their demands.  However, they are  aware that strike action is always a  possibility.  It is often an intolerable situation  which rallies people to support each  other and gain a new sense of direction and purpose. It is an exciting  time to be a nurse at VGH.  Read   On For  New Developments!  Since this article was prepared, the  Board of Trustees at VGH has overruled the administration's decision  to fire the three nurses.  They have  offered to re-hire them, with   'sincere apologies ' to one and censure  for the other two.  The nurses are  waiting to see the exact terms of  reinstatement before making any comment.  The Board of Trustees also passed  a unanimous vote of confidence in  VGH President Larry Truitt.  The Board has not addressed the issues of hospital management which led  to the firings.  Offers to re-instate  nurses will not make the problems  go away.  from p. 3  we abortion issue  You may think that the Canadian law  on abortion was "liberalized" in 1969.  From 1869 to 1954, the law in Canada  provided that it was an indictable  offence "unlawfully" to administer a  drug or other noxious thing or to use  any instrument to procure the miscarriage of a woman.  The Criminal Code  followed almost exactly the English  provisions of 1861.  Though the Code seemed to: make all  abortions illegal, doctors did perform abortions where the health (physical, or, sometimes, emotional) of  the mother was endangered.  The Canadian and English courts upheld the  right of doctors to perform an abortion if the woman's life was endangered.  The courts relied on the word "unlawfully" in the statute and said, in effect, that it was a crime to procure a  miscarriage only if it was "unlawful"  and this did not detract from a doctor's right to operate to preserve the  health of the mother.  In 1938 in England a doctor who had  performed an abortion on a 14 year old  woman , the victim of rape by soldiers,  was acquitted. The decision was that  he could not be charged with intending to procure a. miscarriage since  he had done the abortion with a bona  fide view to the mother's health (R.  vs. Bourne, (1939) I.K.B. 687  BOURNE DECISION  After the BOURNE decision, many doctors and hospitals in Canada performed abortions where the mother's health  - either physical or in some cases  emotional - was endangered. Sometimes  hospital committees were established,  to ensure that there could be no doubt  about the bona fides performance of  the procedure. This then was the situation in 1969. The doctors were of  course cautious about doing abortions.  The procedure was largely unavailabe -  Canadian women had to go to the U.S.  or take their chances with illegal  abortionists.  In 1969 the Criminal Code explicitly  legalized abortion where the "life  or health" of the mother was endangered - but set up the requirement of  therapeutic abortion committees, which  has had the effect of limiting access  to this procedure.  In effect the 1969  amendment merely made explicitly  legal what had been the practice in  many parts of the country. The "liberalization" happened only in those  areas where hospital committees interpreted the Criminal Code widely.  MORGENTALER  In March 1973 Dr.Henry Morgentaler  publicly proclaimed that he had performed more than 5,000 abortions in  his clinic.  This was of course illegal under the Criminal Code which  required the approval of therapeutic  abortion committee, and which prohibited abortions at all except accredited hospitals.  On August 15, Morgentaler was arrested and charged with illegally performing an abortion.  The sad history of the Morgentaler  case cannot be forgotten. Dr. Morgentaler 's defence at trial was  based on S.45 of the Criminal Code  which provided that a doctor is safe  from prosecution for performing a  surgical procedure if it was his considered opinion that such an operation  was medically necessary. Dr.Morgentaler 's defence was that the therapeutic abortion was necessary.  The jury of eleven men and one woman  acquitted Dr.Morgentaler on the basis of that defence.  The Crown appealed to the Quebec  Court of Appeal. The Quebec Court of  Appeal then committed a fundamental  travesty against the freedom of all  Canadians. It ruled that the trial  judge had been wrong in directing the  jury that it could, as a matter of  law, consider the defence of necessity.  JURY   ACQUITTAL  OVERTURNED  This is not unusual.  But the Court  of Appeal not only overturned the  trial verdict; it then, instead of  sending the matter back to be retried before a jury, substituted a  verdict of guilty for the acquittal  of the jury.  The Quebec Court of Appeal decision  was upheld by the Supreme Court of  Canada, thus striking a heavy blow  against a woman's right to choose  and against the fundamental right of  citizens to be tried by a jury of  their peers. And Dr. Morgentaler,  whose "crime" was not performing  abortions, but performing them in  a clinic instead of a hospital,  went to jail.  turn to p.20 Kinesis    July-August   '78  MOVCMCNT ACROSS TH€  PROVINCC  Here's a look at how some women's  groups outside of Vancouver are functioning these days, and a quick rundown of some of the issues of concern  to them.  FUNDING  Funding continues to be a major problem for women's groups in that there  is not enough money available for the  kind of work groups really want to do,  and the bureaucratic hoops one has to  jump through to get the money make one  wonder if it is worth it after all.  Most of the funding utilized in B.C.  is federal — either Secretary of  State or Employment & Immigration  (Manpower). A couple of projects are  using Health & Welfare funds and provincial MHR has come through for  groups in Fraser Lake and Mackenzie.  Most women agree that there is a lot  of red tape to go through with Canada  Works money, but it seems to be the  only route to go if you want to try  and get salary for staff.  As M.P.S.  have the final say on the federal  grant, chances of receiving money depend a lot on their attitudes towards  women's groups and the kind of work  they do.  Canada Works grant proposals  also have to go through a regional  grant review board made up of local  people and Manpower staff, so it is  mandatory to have developed some communication with those people in order  to have the grant proposal really  understood.  MINIMAL  Secretary of State money for women's  programs is so minimal that it's  almost a joke, but some groups have  done interesting things with small  amounts of money.  The biggest problem  groups have with Secstate is that they  have to devise new projects each year  to fit in with ever-changing departmental priorities, and the money is  not available for core funding.  In Mackenzie the women in the local  Daycare Society lobbied their village  council and MLA in search of a down  payment for the house they wished to  purchase to use as a daycare and community centre (Mackenzie has no facilities for such services). It took a  few years of organizing and hard work  but earlier this month they opened the  house as a daycare and community action centre. In Fraser Lake the  women's centre changes its name whenever it finds a new agency (with new  funding guidelines) to apply to, and  has managed to maintain its advocacy  and education focus for women in the  community for four years.  Cranbrook  and Dawson Creek women have received  monies to open women's centres after  several years of organizing work and  Burns Lake women have kept their centre open in between grants and in  spite of attempts to take their building away. In Fort Nelson and Queen  Charlotte City a thrift shop serves as  both a useful community resource and a  front office for the women's group,  and the Burns Lake centre runs a craft  shop that provides an outlet for local  talent while bringing in some extra  revenue. Energetic Whitehorse women  stage an annual hike-a-thon and this  year they netted $1300 that will be  put towards centre funds.  STRUCTURE  Most groups seem to begin around a few  women who see a need that must be met  (either a personal or community need  — or both) and they start by organizing public education or service projects that will assist them. Thus the  shape of the movement groups is varied  — one cannot say that women's centres  are the major focus, or coalitions are  the only answer or that collectivity  is the predominant internal structure.  Groups are adapting whatever style  works best for their members and for  their community.  In Prince Rupert the  Options for Women group tried the  women's centre concept a few summers  ago, found it very unsatisfactory,  closed the centre and have continued  to operate by having regular business  meetings and socials, and applying for  monies to mount major public education  projects such as weekend conferences  on women and health etc.  In Nelson  the women's centre is one of the oldest in the country and operates advocacy, drop-in and education services  to the community no matter what state  the funding is in.  In Fort Nelson the  push for a centre came from members of  the Daycare Society who applied for  Manpower money to do a survey of  women's needs in the community and'  they are now seen as one of the important resources in the town. The Okanagan women seem satisfied with the  coalition concept that has brought in  resource persons and workshops to travel to the different communities that  member groups are from.  In Prince  George the. women's collective has  switched to a board of directors  structure and the centre is volunteer  operated.  VSW PROJECT  The Women's Research Team of Vancouver  Status of Women recently completed  workshops in twelve towns outside of  Vancouver and the two members I spoke  to were really excited about the level  of commitment that women had and the  kinds of issues they were involved in.  They found non-urban women active in  more areas of the community in comparison with their city sisters, and battling community attitudes that reflect  the media stereotype of the "women's  libber" beyond belief.  (In Dawson  Creek Leslie Macdonald had to counter  direct accusations that the women's  movement was responsible for juvenile  delinquency, and that women were like  dogs in heat.  In another community a  women's centre member gave out reading  material on birth control to students  and found herself threatened by one of  their mothers.)  The Research Team  were doing workshops around their  publication "Update on the Status of  Women in BC" and found that women  everywhere wanted to know more about  community of property, human rights,  sexism in education, were always ready  to talk about the unemployment problems in their town and wanted to know  how to counter the redneck accusations  of "women taking work away from men".  Daycare and abortion are other hot  issues — especially in these days of  funding cutbacks and anti-choice  (compulsory pregnancy) groups.  WOMEN'S RESEARCH  Staff at the Women's Research Centre  in Vancouver have been doing work  around the province on the issue of  women and economic development and  comment that women's groups outside of  the lower mainland are working hard on  specific local issues crucial to the  survival of their own community.  Whitehorse and Fort Nelson women,  gravely concerned about the impact of  the forthcoming Alcan pipeline, are  applying all their research and lobbying skills to monitoring and organizing around this issue. The Fort  Nelson women were also active at the  B.C. Railway lobby in Victoria.  Cowichan Valley women recently presented  a brief detailing their concerns over  industrial development on the Cowichan  River estuary and other women's  groups, appalled at the implications  of the new Forestry Act, sent letters  to the relevant people outlining the  effect that these new policies could  have on the lives of people living in  the forestry towns.  Discrimination in employment — and  lack of employment opportunities for  women are two of the biggest common  issues these days — everywhere women  are suffering from sexual harassment  on the job, low wages, lack of promotion, and as well they are fighting  incredibly reactionary attitudes towards working women — a sure sign of  the creeping fascism that so often  allies itself with economic crisis.  Another major common issue is that of  violence against women. Women in  northwest B.C. are working hard towards acquiring a transition house,  a mini-task force on family violence  has been formed in the Okanagan area  and the family violence workshops  presented by the Vancouver-based  task force on family violence have  been over-attended in Vernon, Prince  George, the Queen Charlotte's and  Terrace.  This, as stated earlier, is just a  short summary of women's actions outside of the lower mainland area — it  is obvious that the struggle continues. O Kinesis July-August  '78  AUCE 'DISGUSTED'  The Association of University and  College Employees at the University of  B.C., whose third collective agreement  expired on March 31 1978, has rejected  "with disgust" the employer's recent  package 'offer'.  Local 1 of this independent union,  certified since April 1974, represents  more than 1300 library and clerical  workers, a majority of whom are women.  Through a total of nine negotiating  sessions since March 29, only one  minor change has been signed.  In that  time the union has dropped half of its  original proposals.  Remaining AUCE proposals include —  consultation when the University contracts out; seniority to be determining criterion in hiring where abilities and qualifications of applicants  are equal; time off, to be made up,  for employees who participate in  coop daycare; 48 consecutive hours off  duty for shift workers; sick leave for  temporary employees; and voluntary  overtime.  The Union's across-the-  board proposed wage increase of $93  per month represents the 1977 inflation rate of 9.5%.  The union has also urged the University to comply with the Human Rights  Code of B.C. which prohibits discrim  ination by employers 'without reasonable cause' against the physically  handicapped. But, Jane Strudwick of  the University Negotiating Committee  stated there would be "instances where  the University would have to turn down  promotions to handicapped employees."  The University package contained all  but 3 of its original proposals and,  for the first time, a. wage 'offer' —  $13 across-the-board from April 1 1978  to September 30 1978 and $26 from  October 1 1978 to March 31 1979.  Over a 12 month period these figures  represent a 2.6% wage increase.  In  the last month the cost of living has  increased 2.5%.  AUCE Local 1 will be free of AIB  guidelines as of October 1 1978.  The University package reflects no  change in the position it took at the  outset of negotiations.  Michelle  McCaughran of the AUCE Contract Committee had this to say, "AUCE's position is that it will not consider any  change to the agreement which could  have the effect of eroding present  rights and benefits.  This package,  wage 'offer' included, has just that  effect."  Update - On June 28, AUCE Local 1  applied for the services of a mediator.  -tuMuL.  mrsuts  HOW ABOUT MANAGEMENT PUIL/NG  //V THEIR BELTS!  UBW-STRIKE COMING UP?  The United Bank Workers Section of  SORWUC (Service Office and Retail  Workers Union of Canada) held a special meeting in Vancouver today to  discuss the progress of the Union's  negotiations with the Banks in B.C.  Present were members from various  organizing committees throughout the  Province.  It was decided at the meeting to conduct strike votes in the Canadian  Imperial Bank of Commerce union branches. The Union is certified in five  branches of the Commerce in B.C. and  the strike votes will be taken over  the next two weeks.  Charlotte Johnson, President of the  UBW, said:  "We are presently  awaiting meetings with the Bank of  Commerce and the federal conciliation  officer. We are hopeful that the conciliation process will be able to  avert a strike, but our members in  the Bank of Commerce branches are  anxious for a collective agreement and  are tired of the stalling tactics of  the Bank. We have been meeting with  the Bank since December of last year  and are still in the process of clarifying the Union proposals. There have  been no serious negotiations to date."  The Union will hold a Special Conference July 23/78 of UBW members from  all Banks and plan the strike and  boycott strategy.  For further UBW information: call  684 2834 or 681 2811  STILL ON STRIKE  AT MUCKAMUCK  Joan Woodward  On June First, 1978, twenty-one waitresses and waiters at the Muckamuck  restaurant on Davie Street went out on  strike.  (See June Kinesis,  p. 2)  Some of the problems cited are the  same for virtually all non-unionized  restaurant workers.  Low pay, no seniority provision, irregular and erratic  scheduling.  But to this case there is  an added dimension.  Racism.  The Muckamuck is a restaurant which  professes to serve Native Indian  foods. The name is taken from a  Chinook word meaning "to eat", and as  the only Native Indian restaurant in  all of North America, the Muckamuck  has been a principal tourist attraction in Vancouver since its opening in  1971, and profits for the white owners have continued to soar.  "We're proud of the image of our culture that this restaurant is putting  our," said Ethel Gardner, a union  spokesperson, "but the owners are exploiting both our culture and our  people in order to make exorbitant  profits.  And they are using especially high unemployment among Indians to  belittle us, saying that we should be  grateful as Indians to have any job,  and so we shouldn't complain about our  salaries or working conditions. The  only way we can fight such intimidation is through our union."  Intimidation has entailed among other  things, seven firings from the staff  of twenty-one at the Muckamuck, apparently because of the pro-union stance  of these workers.  One of the demands  of the union is that those workers  fired for this reason be rehired.  The union, the Service, Office and  Retail Workers Union of Canada, was  certified to represent employees at  the Muckamuck in March. Five Unfair  Labour Practices were immediately  filed with the Labour Relations Board,  but were not dealt with, and although  they were still pending, negotiations  with the employer were begun in mid-  April. By the end of May, no progress  had been made in the negotiations,  and management decided to withdraw.  At this point the union was obliged  <  to call a strike vote. The majority  of employees voted in favor, and the  strike began on June First.  After five weeks of inaction, management is still refusing to negotiate.  Could it be that they can afford to  keep the restaurant closed? In any  case, since working people cannot  afford to stay on strike indefinitely,  the White Feather Indian Band will be  giving a benefit sometime in July for  the Muckamuck workers. For further  information, contact the Service,  Office, and Retail Workers Union of  Canada, 207 West Hastings, at  684-2823. Kinesis    July-August   '78  Community Development G- VSW  the background  Vancouver School Board has policy  which forbids discrimination on the  basis of sex.  But is this policy consistently  implemented?  Seems not.  Consider, for example, the following  quotations from the course descriptions for John Oliver Secondary  School:  Industrial Education 8  scxism  souclchcd  in  SOUTH VAN  SCCONDARY  Woodwork, Metalwork,  Electricity,  Drafting.    Beginning courses in all  these areas given on a rotation basis.  One block compulsory to all Grade 8  boys.  Home Economics 8  Content includes work in areas of food  and nutrition; clothing and textiles;  the house and its furnishings; and  child development...This course taken  by all Grade 8 girls.    Students need  an apron for laboratory periods.  To clinch the guidance of students  into sex-appropriate courses, the  forms distributed to next year's  Grade 8 students for course selection are different for boys arid girls.  Girls are given one colour, boys another. The girls' form lists only  Home Ec.; the boys' form only Industrial Ed. It would take an enterprising Grade 7 students to  proceed with altering her or his  form.  the issue  This situation surfaced when a mother contacted the Human Rights  Branch,and the VSW Vancouver South  Group, to see what could be done.  She had been advised by the Vice-  Principal and a girls' counsellor  that her daughter would not be allowed to take Industrial Education  8.  Simultaneously with a formal investigation by the Human Rights Branch,  the Vancouver South women rallied  to the support of this concerned  mother and took on a struggle against  sexism in their own community's school. They also alerted the elected  representatives on the Vancouver Sch-  2ool Board.  Here 's a chronological account of what  action was taken,  how it developed  May 17: The concerned mother attends  a meeting of the VSW Vancouver South  Women's group. She explains how she  has been told by John Oliver High that  her daughter, Tammy, cannot take Industrial Education in Grade 8 this  fall because there are not enough  places for girls. Tammy can take the  course in Grade 10, if she re^1-  wants to, the school says.  John Oliver Joins 20th Century  May 23: The Women's Group writes a  letter to the principal of John Oliver  asking for a meeting to discuss this  problem.  As taxpayers in the South Vancouver  area  (the letter reads) it is astonishing to us that our daughters may be  refused the right to a resource in one  of our high schools...  We cannot accept the rationalization  that there are not enough spaces for  girls to take Industrial Economics, or  for boys to take Home Economics.    This  argument would be ludicrous if the  subject being discussed was English.  Surely all students have the right to  study any available program at the  level if they so choose. ..  Carbon copies of this letter are  dispatched to members of the School  Board, the Coordinator of Industrial  Education for Vancouver, and so on.  denies it happened  May 26: A letter from Mr. Brett, the  principal of John Oliver, is sent to  the Vancouver South Women's Group.  ...there seems to some confusion  (the  principal writes). Tammy is and has  been registered in Industrial Education for some time now.    I believe I  spoke to Tammy 's father at a Grade 7  parents ' meeting on April 5.    At that  time he requested that Tammy be enrolled in Industrial Education in September and I agreed to do so.    When  Tammy 's mother sent in the Course  Planning Form she requested that Tammy  be enrolled in Industrial Education 8.  This was done as soon as the school  received the form.  As you may be aware,  the Vancouver  School Board has a policy that the  schools do not discriminate in their  procedures.    John Oliver adheres to  that policy.  May 30: Tammy's mother is read the  letter written by Principal Brett.  She is shocked.  She explains again  that she has been told emphatically NO  to Tammy's participation in Industrial  Education 8 by the Vice Principal of  the school and by the Girls' Counsellor.  May 31: Women from Vancouver South  learn that supportive members of the  school board have been on the phone to  the principal warning him that Tammy's  exclusion contravenes School Board  Policy.  They inform those members of the  School Board that when the next School  Board meeting comes up, they'll be  there.  June 2: Vancouver South replies to  Brett's letter  ...we still feel that the situation  has not been completely clarified  (they write). Therefore we request...  that some of us meet with you to discuss the situation further.    We would  like to include Mr. Ron Kerr,  Vice  Principal and Miss Dann,  Girls '  Counsellor, in this meeting.  Our concerns are:  1. That formal notification in writing  be given to Tammy Edwards to the effect that she has a space in Industrial Education 8.  2. That we discuss how confusion in  this situation has arisen, and how it  can be prevented in the future.  1 'misunderstanding'  June 12: Vancouver South women meet  with the John Oliver principal. The  Vice-Principal and the Girls' Counsellor are unable to make the meeting.  Brett claims that there has been a  misunderstanding, that Tammy has been  enrolled in Industrial Education 8 all  along, and that besides, he was out of  town the week the misunderstanding  arose- to col l,p.!7 Kinesis   July-August  '78  from p. 16...  Questioned about the forms used for  feeder schools, Brett says that in the  past, they had been traditionally used  to ease the burden of coping with all  those students. Now, he assures the  Vancouver South Group, the forms are  being changed in compliance with directions from the Human Rights Branch.  Principal Brett makes other interesting observations. There will be  integrated Physical Education at John  Oliver, he says, over his dead body.  The Vancouver South women get it all  down on tape.  June 19: The Vancouver School Board  meeting, attended by women from the  Vancouver South Group.  The group  points out that although the School  Board has a policy  of non-discrimination, it has a practice  of discrimination. They produce the separate  forms given to boys and girls in the  feeder schools for John Oliver; the  description of courses from the John  Oliver catalogue; and the study done  in 1976 by the Vancouver Secondary  Teachers Association/Status of Women  Committee which clearly indicated that  students entering High School do not  believe that they have a choice  regarding Home Economics and Industrial Education.  Norman Robinson of the Vancouver  School Board brings forward all of  these concerns. He prepares a resolution that "the superintendent take all  measures necessary to ensure that a  system is developed whereby students  clearly know that choices are open and  non-discriminatory".  The resolution is carried.by Vancouver  School Board unanimously.  analysis  Some comments from the women who took  part in the issue:  "The chief tactic used by the John  Oliver hierarchy was to make Tammy's  mother feel inept. This might work  quite successfully on an individual  basis, but once you get 30 mothers  together, all of whom have been made  to feel inept in exactly the same way,  the tactic crumbles."  "By meeting with the principal as concerned parents, and by having it raised at the School Board meeting, we  made the problem a public one, rather  than simply a legal matter handled  confidentially by civil servants.  The  principal and the school boards knows  that the community is watching with  concern, and that we won't go away."  By making a formal complaint under  the Human Rights Code, we could get  the legal muscle to demand the necessary changes."  "The first reaction by the principal  was to defend himself by saying that  the incident never occurred. That's a  way of trying to undermine the person  bringing the complaint. Just being  believed is the first step in winning.  Support for the person fighting is  crucial — and that's what Tammy and  her mother got from the Vancouver  South women."  Vancouver Status of Women  1977-78  ANNUAL REPOR  highlights  The Annual Report was distributed at  the Annual General Meeting. Here are  a few excerpts.  (If you would like  your own copy of the report, write to  VSW at 2029 West 4th Ave., Vancouver  V6J IN3 and we will send you one.)  The President's Report, made by Lee  Grills re-capitulated some of our  major action areas for 1977-78.  During the past twelve months we saw  the result of two years input into the  Equal Employment Opportunities Committee (EEOC) at Vancouver City Hall when  City Council approved the majority of  the recommendations of the EEOC.  We were also participants in the challenge of Provincial Court Judge Bewley 's sexist remarks about women.  Our continued pressure to effect  change in the Criminal Code of Canada  regarding violence against women is  reflected in the proposed changes now  before the House of Commons.  The Stella Bliss Appeal Fund was coordinated by BSW and has been successful in raising money enough to take  this crucial issue to the Supreme  Court of Canada.  We also participated in the overshelm-  ingly successful Schools, Sexism and  Society conference.  We have continued to support SORWUC  and our ongoing influence in the Family Violence Task Force has been important in that it has provided feminist input.  As you may recall, a commitment was  made last year to attempt to develop  community work in a more complete way.  This year, we have put a great deal of  time and energy into South Vancouver,  which was our original pilot project,  and also started to work in Marpole  and Kitsilano.    Membership programs  from our office have received less emphasis this year, and will be completely phased out next year.    However,  all these programs will be available  in the community, upon request from  the community group.    We have made  arrangements for Assertiveness Training to be carried on at Killarney  School in South Vancouver, and at Kits  High School in Kitsilano, starting in  September.    Courses will be free of  into communities  As was stated previously, a commitment  was made last year to attempt to develop community work.    As community development seems to have more than one  definition, I would like to take a  moment to define it in the way we are  using it at the Status of Women.  Community development is based on the  premise that, given an opportunity,  people can solve their own problems,  determine their own goals and together  effect societal change.    It is worked  through the group process rather than  one-to-one.    The community worker has  no power,  the person can skip the  group if it isn't meeting her needs,  and so there is inbuilt quality control.    Social service that is done is  preventative rather than direct — it  attempts to deal with the problem when  it begins rather than at a crisis  stage.    The group defines the issues,  not the worker.    Community development  is action-oriented.  South Vancouver  The South Vancouver Women's group has  been meeting for over a year now.  They have participated and directed a  large number of programs and issues,  including: A program on sex-role stereotyping done in the high schools, an  ombuds course, Assertiveness Training  (2),  Consciousness Raising,  working on  the Save the VRB issue, and two Woman  Alive T.V.   shows.    We intend to move  more strongly into the schools next  year, and try to make both Women's  Studies and Life Skills available in  South Vancouver.  Marpole  Several meetings have been held in  Marpole.    At the present time we are  doing Assertiveness Training.  Kitsilano  Kitsilano meetings will start at the  beginning of July. Kinesis   July-August  '78  INTCRNATIONAL N€WS  imtHOT TOOT  ANTI-CHOICE  RIGHT-TO-LIFE GAINING GROUND  The Right to Life movement is apparently gaining rapid momentum in the  United States.  The New York Times  reports that Right to Life groups  have already invested millions of  dollars in efforts to get rid of  the 1973 Supreme Court ruling  legalizing abortions.  They are  proposing a constitutional amendment to make the operation illegal.  The newspaper says that the National  Right to Life Committee, an umbrella  organization for a number of Right  to Life groups, has 11 million active  supporters in 3000 chapters.  Their  combined membership is much larger  than any pro-abortion group.  The  committee, says the Times has  already persuaded nine of the  required 34 states to petition Congress to convene a constitutional  convention for an anti-abortion amendment.  The newspaper adds that the  Tax Reform Act of 1976 has also  given pro-life groups a boost.  That  act allows organizations that are  mainly "educational" to use 20% of  their budgets for direct legislative  lobbying without losing income tax  benefits.  According to the Times,  political action committees which  can now legally provide funds for  candidates and lobby against abortion are being set up in every  congressional district.  THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH ALONE HAS  REPORTEDLY DONATED OVER HALF-A-MILL-  ION DOLLARS.  As a result of anti-abortion lobbying, the Federal Government cut off  funds for abortions in August '77.  Since that time, approx 14 states are  still funding abortions unconditionally, while another 15 are providing  for abortions only if there are  severe and long lasting health  threats to the mother.  The 31  remaining states reportedly do not  provide for abortions under any  circumstances.  Her Say/Big Mama Rag  ILOUjP  [ABORTION^  MiLL  'w%\  fk <  -7-^4  !^3  MW  PRO-CHOICE ACTIVITS PICKET NATIONAL  "RIGHT-TO-LIFE OFFICE IN NYC  NEW YORK (LNS) - Chanting "Not the  church, not the state—women must  decide their fate," over 250 pro-  choice activists picketed the  national offices of the Right-to-  Life anti-abortion organization in  New York City June 10.  The protest,  organized by the Committee for Abortion Rights and Against Sterilization  Abuse (CARASA), was set to coincide  with the House of Representatives  vote on federal funding of abortions  for poor women.  "We decided to demonstrate at the  Right-to-Life office to show that we  are still here and that we are outraged at their attempt to make abortion rights the main election issue  for this fall," Becky Staton, a  member of CARASA said after the  protest.  The first restriction on federal  funding for abortions sponsored by  Congressman Henry Hyde, was passed  in September 1976 and the bill has  been made more restrictive with each  year's renewal.  The most recent  Labor/Health, Education and Welfare  Appropriations Bill restricts funding  for abortions "except where the life  of the mother would be endangered if  the fetus was carried to term."  SEXIST JUDGE  Judge said of rape suspect:  "You can't  blame someone for trying."  Decrying a ruling by a Connecticut  judge who dismissed an attempted rape  charge against a man because "you can't  blame someone for trying," about 100  people marched on the Capitol building in Hartford, Connecticut, June 9.  The rally was organized by the Neighbourhood Women Against Rape. The  group also launched a petition campaign seeking the removal of the sexist  judge, William Pickett.  In a similar protest last year, women  in Madison, Wis., forced the recall  of Judge Archie Simonson after he dismissed a rape charge and instead blamed women's "provocative" clothing  for sexual assaults.   (Guardian)  MARCH 8  QUEENSLAND - MARCH 8  "The day of the political march is  over.    Anybody who holds a street  march,  spontaneous or otherwise,  will know they are acting illegally.  Don't bother to apply for a permit.  You won't get one.     That's government  policy now. "  Premier of Queensland, Australia,  Bjelke-Peterson  Despite the ban on marches, over 400  women marched in Brisbane, Queensland, on Internation Women's Day to  put forward women's demands for abortion, lesbian rights, and the right,  in particular, to organize.  Confronting the women were 700 uniformed police and 100 plain clothes  officers.  Arms linked in tight  formation, the women were able to  march about 200 yards before they  were stopped and fighting broke out.  51 people were arrested - 46 women  and 5 men from a left support contingent marching at the back.  In Queensland, Australia, the rights  of women have been under severe  attack from Bjelke-Peterson's government.  Shortly before the ban on  marches was imposed in September '77  state police prevented women from  holding a public rally to discuss  reactionary rape legislation.  In May  '76, police broke up an anti-rape  demonstration.  In June of '76, the  state legislature threatened to cut  all government funding to women's  health centres, transition houses  and rape relief centres - despite  the fact that this funding comes from  the federal government!  In the next session of the legis-  labure, Bjelke-Peterson's government  intends to introduce a right-to-scab  legislation, posing as "right-to-  work", which is aimed at outlawing  the closed shop in Queensland.  The women's liberation movement in  Brisbane (Queensland's capital) have  formed alliances with the trade union  movement, with civil libertarians,  the Movement Against Uranium Mining  and the black movement to organize  against the state government, which  directly supports the interests of  mining capital (in particular, the  uranium lobby). (Info from Spare Rib,  May '77) Kinesis    July-August     '78  ^BACKGROUND  On June 22, 1978, in a Prelindnary  Inquiry held at the New Westminster  County Court, Judge L.P. Clare  dismissed all charges against  Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon, two well-  known prisoner's rights activists.  Wood and Hoon had been charged with  attempted murder, breaking a prison  to facilitate the escape of prisoners, and wilfully damaging the premises, equipment and records of the  B.C. Penitentiary. They faced a  maximum of life imprisonment for  the murder charge.  The charges arose from an attempted  escape by 5 prisoners from the  visiting area at the B.C. Pen on  the morning of January 28, 1978.  Wood and Hoon were among the many  visitors present that morning.  The escape attempt began when a  prisoner smashed the glass partition separating prisoners from  visitors, and stabbed a guard  during a struggle. The attempt  failed when several guards ran  to the exit and locked the doors  on the prisoners. They also  locked the doors on 13 visitors,  including Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon.  There followed the longest seige  in Canadian prison history. Negotiations between prisoners and  police lasted a week before the  visitors were released unhanted  and the prisoners were returned  to solitary confinement.  The maximum-security B.C. Penitentiary, where more than a dozen  riots, hostage-takings, and escape  attempts have occurred in the past  10 years, contains a solitary  confinement unit which prison experts have called the most brutal  and inhuman in North America.  Wood and Hoon have been central  figures in the campaign to have  the solitary confinement unit  abolished.  At the conclusion of the seige  Wood and Hoon were arrested  immediately upon their release  from the B.C. Pen visiting area  where they had been confined  for 8 days. They were charged  with attempted murder, 2 counts  of aiding an escape attempt, and  wilful damage of B.C. Pen property. Wood was charged separately with 2 counts related to  supplying a gun for this purpose.  But for the 3 charges that remained at the Preliminary Inquiry, all other charges were dropped the day before it began.  The Preliminary lasted almost 2 weeks  At its conclusion, Judge Clare could  find no evidence to commit Wood or  Hoon for trial and the remaining 3  charges were dismissed.  To-date, Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon  have incurred legal expenses of  $15,000. And, the struggle may  not be over yet. To secure a  prosecution, the Crown could appeal  the Preliminary Inquiry, or more  likely, it could circumvent the  entire process that has just concluded by taking them to trial  on a Direct Indictment.  WHAT REALLY HAPPENED?  INTERVIEW BY LORRI RUDLAND  WE WERE NEVER  HOSTAGES OF THE PRISONERS  KINESIS:      The Jan.   28 incident  has been called a hostage-taking  by the authorities but you and  other "hostages" have described  it as a "lock-in".  GAY:  We were never hostages of  the B.C. Penitentiary. It was  the prison guards, who ran out  in fear of their lives, who  locked us in. Laura Hailes,  another visitor, said it well  to the press - that the guards  ran like pussycats and failed  to protect visitors, several  of whom were near the exits  and could have been removed  before the guards locked the  doors.  KINESIS:    The judge dismissed  all charges against you both  and stated that although there  were "suspicious circumstances"  a sufficient case had not been  made to commit either of you  for trial.    Do you think the  Prosecutor's office will continue to press for a conviction in  view of the Judge's decision?  BETSY:  No, I'd be very surprised  if they did. The prosecutors  have had 5 months and all the  resources of the police and the  courts at their disposal to gather evidence to implicate us in  this incident. They failed  after going through a Preliminary  that lasted 2 weeks.  I think they  have egg on their face. This government has spent a lot of money  needlessly on these proceedings  and I think they would be foolish  to proceed by Direct Indictment.  KINESIS:    During this incident, we  heard that there were weapons,  drugs, and supplies in a car parked adjacent to the visitor's entrance all ready for prisoners to  escape in.    Immediately upon conclusion of the seige, you, Betsy,  were charged with conveying a car  onto prison grounds to facilitate  an escape attempt.  BETSY:    Evidence at the Preliminary  showed that there, were never any  weapons in the car. The "cache  of drugs" turned out to be the vitamins and amino acids which I use  daily for my multiple sclerosis  (weakening of the muscles)  therapy program. It was stared  that I had rented the car in a  false name. I did rent the car in  another name - my married name.  That is the name on my driver's  licence. About 5 years ago the  motor vehicle branch wouldn't allow you to change your licence to  your maiden name.  I parked the car near the visitor's entrance in the handicapped  parking spot because of my multiple sclerosis. It is difficult  for me to walk long distances. I  have parked in that spot for most  of my visits over the last 2 years.  The head of Visits and Correspondence at the Pen testified that  he had once asked me to move my  car from that spot. He knows very  well that there have been continual arguments about me parking  there but I suppose no one wants  to come forward now and admit that  they always ended up letting me  park there.  con't on page 12 Kinesis July-August   '78  ZIPPERS =  MALE CLOTHING?!  KINESIS:    What about the men's  clothing in the car?  BETSY:    If anyone has ever seen my  car it always has banners, picket signs, public address systems,  a bag full of clothes in the back,  leaflets, and, I usually have to  move things so people can find a  seat.  In Court, the New Westminster City Police Officer stated  there were lots of new clothes in  the car and that they were all  men's. In fact, there was only  one new bit of clothing and that  was a pair of pants with a 25"  waist suitable only for a very  slender woman. The Officer stated  that all the pants in the car were  men's clothing because they had  zipper-fronts. He made the same  sexist assumptions about every other piece of clothing.  KINESIS:      The Crown presented  evidence at the Preliminary alleging that you.  Gay, had used an  assumed name to rent an apartment  intended for the use of escaped  prisoners of the B.C.  Pen.    Judge  Clare stated that there was sufficient identification that you had  rented the apartment but he concluded that there was "basically  nothing" to show that the apartment was to be used for any  I prisoners.  GAY:    I was identified as being  the renter from a picture on the  front-page of the Vancouver Sun by  the landlord, Mr. Sam. Many people are mistaken in these matters  of identification and I think Mr.  Sam was only trying to be a good  citizen when police questionned  him. But, it is the authorities  I hold responsible for this error.  They had 5 months to gather evidence and all the resources of the  government at hand to prove the  serious charges against Betsy and  myself. Why didn't they run a  handwriting analysis on the receipt for the apartment I was alleged to have signed? Or did they  run a handwriting analysis and  "neglect" to mention it in court  because it wasn't my handwriting.  They never entered any proof that  it was my signature on the receipt.  Not onlythat, I was working on the  the day I was alleged to have rented the apartment, why didn't the  police check on that?  KINESIS:    As early as Tuesday, on  the fourth day after the incident  began, Superintendent Bruce North-  orp of the R.C.M.P. was quoted in  the media as stating that the '!so-  called civilian hostages" had assisted the prisoners in the escape  attempt.    Why was he so convinced  you were guilty?  BETSY:    Northorp stated at the Preliminary that he made his decision  that I was guilty from having read  R.C.M.P. and New Westminster City  Police files. He never said why  he thought Gay was guilty.  V\o$W9eS  occoseo  live c  «ttve  '**»*l  ^Sfes  co\\e**eft£eol<kc0  KINESIS:      What about the testimony  of the B. C. Pen Security Officer?  "ON A LIST"  BETSY:    In Court, when Officer Skil-  lings was asked what evidence he had  against me, the only thing he could  say was "she was on a list".  It  turned out that I was on a list as  being a member of the Prisoner's  Union, a prisoner's rights group  that hasn't been in operation for a  year and a half.  It also turned out that Skillings  and I had met before over visiting  privileges at the B.C. Pen. Many  prisoners don't have any visitors  other than their families, if that.  Because they can so easily lose  their visiting privileges, these  families or men friends or women  friends are easily intimidated.  I DO NOT INTIMIDATE  EASILY  Well, I don't intimidate easily.  On one of my first visits Skillings came down to the visitor's  area (where it is very unusual for  a security officer to be) in order  to give me a lecture on inciting  prisoners.  I didn't even know it  was Skillings until he testified  in Court. I was just going in to.  visit to find out what the prison  system was all about but their  fear was there right from the  very beginning.  KINESIS:    Judge Clare states in  his reasons for judgement,  ".   .   . I have made fairly complete  notes throughout the preliminary  hearing or the inquiry,  and at no  time did anybody, whether it be  an inmate or a hostage, at any  time say that either Wood or Hoon  were accomplices or parties to  this.   .   .  Superintendent Northorp  told us under oath that he had his  own suspicions,    but he gave me no  basis as to how he arrived in his  own mind,  that some of the persons  in there were accomplices.    He had  face to face meetings with certain of the inmates and at no time  were Wood or Hoon implicated.    Apparently there were numerous telephone calls, all of which were  taped and recorded and transcribed-  again, Wood or Hoon were not implicated. "  gutf  f^&  .JctA  l\  Judge Clare also stated that he  could find no direct evidence from  the written corresponspondence of  Wood or Hoon to show that they were  arranging a prison break, and he  could find nothing from any recorded conversations during visits  to indicate that Wood in particular  had planned or assisted in the  escape attempt.  Judge Clare said  that no evidence had been presented  to show how two crown exhibits, a  gun and a set of handcuffs,  got  into the penitentiary for use in  the escape attempt.  There was mention in the media of  some graffitti on the wall of the  Pen visiting area that you had  written and signed Betsy.    What  was that all    about?  BETSY:    Moments before the incident  ended, I wrote on the wall "and  Reynett (Herb Reynett, Director  of the B.C. Pen) said Andy  (Bruce)  liked solitary confinement.    I  think Herb, that Andy is trying  to tell you and others he is a  human being.    Are you?    Feb.   4,1978,  12:05 on my way out, Love, Betsy  Wood. "  I wrote that because Reynett had  told me a few months earlier that  Andy liked solitary confinement.  MEDIA'S  DOUBLE STANDARD  KINESIS: This entire proceeding has  been front page news from the beginning.    Your pictures and your  names have been splashed all over  the media.    Yet we noted that the  dismissal of all charges against  you has not been reported so  prominently.    For example,  the  Vancouver Sun carried Judge Clare 's  decision on the second section  front page -— and printed an  interview with you which was stuck  behind the classifieds in the  fifth section of the newspaper.  ©1977 E.F.Ryan  MMH.^-t'"'    aon,t m __  1?   | Kinesis    July-August  '78  ANARCHA  INTPODUCTION  ANARCHY, as a political movement on  the left, is flourishing in Vancouver.  Open Road,  an anarchist publication,  is going full-steam. Street grafitti  of anti-authoritarian messages (ranging from "Free Wood and Hoon" to  "hiberate the Zoo") is popping up  everywhere, overnight.  There are at least two anarcha-femin-  ist study groups in town, including  Revolting Women. In this article,  Kinesis  has gathered excerpts from  current anardia-feminist literature  INTERVIEW  Kinesis  also spoke with two anarcha-  feminists, to find out why they identify themselves as such, and what  they're up to.  Melanie and Jannit live in a cooperatively-owned house in Kits, with two  men, and their 21 mth old child, Jess.  Both women are equally involved in  parenting Jess. They put their energy  into the women's movement, the cooperative movement, and the anarchist  movement (all three do overlap).  Jannit works on the anarchist publication, Open Road;  Melanie is an old  time Health Collective worker. Both  are involved in food coops and CCEC  (a member-controlled community credit  union). These days they are painting  their house and talking about acquiring land cooperatively.  Both are anarcha-f eminists,  to activism.  committed  Kinesis:    Are there some activities in  the women's movement which you, as  anarcha-feminists, would involve yourselves in, and others which you wouldn't?    Where do you draw that line?  Jannit:  Often, what's important is  the way  we involve ourselves. Take  consensus decision-making for example.  The women's movement mostly supports  it.  But if there is nobody around to  keep pointing out how  and why  consensus decision-making is important, the  process can tend to slide away. As an  anarcha-feminist, I recognize that the  process determines the product, and so  consensus is important.  The March 8  Committee worked fairly effectively by  consensus, although I thought there  was too much voting at the central  weekly meetings.  Melanie: We took part in the recent  action at Woman's World, where feminists set up a table inside the building where the consumer orgy was  taking place. We encouraged women to  let the organizers know if they felt  ripped off by the $4.50 admission  turn to p.14  W ANARCHA-FEMINIST WTOI AT AN ANARCHIST CARNIVAL  STANLEY PARK, MAY DAY, 1978  ANARCHY,  ANYONE?  THEOBY  Anarchism has been maligned and misinterpreted for so long that maybe  'the most important thing to begin  with an explanation of what is is s  and isn't. Probably the most  prevalent stereotype of the anarchist is analevolenc-looking man  hiding a lighted bomb beneath a  black cape, ready to destroy or  assassinate everything and everybody in his path. This image engenders fear and revulsion in most  people, regardless of their politics;  consequently, anarchism is dismissed  as ugly, violent and extreme. Another misconception is the anarchist  as impractical idealist, dealing in  useless, Utopian abstractions and  out of touch with concrete reality.  The result: anarchism is once again  dismissed, this time as an "impossible dream".  Neither of these images is accurate  (though there have been both anarchist assassins and idealists - as is  the case in many political movements,  left and right). What is accurate  depends, of course, on one's frame  of reference. There are different  kinds of anarchists, just as there  are different kinds of socialists.  What I will talk about here is communist-anarchism, which I see as  virtually identical to libertarian  (i.e. nonauthoritarian) socialism.  Labels can be terribly confusing, so  in hopes of clarifying the term, I'll  define anarchism using three major  principles  (7) Belief in the abolition of authority,  hierarchy,  government.    Anarchists call for the dissolution  (rather than the seizure) of power -  of human over human, of state over  cxOTmunity. Whereas many socialists  call for a working class government  and an eventual "withering away of  the state", anarchists believe that  the means create the ends, that a  strong State becomes self-perpetuating. The only way to achieve anarchism (according to anarchist theory)  is through the creation of co-operative, anti-authoritarian forms. To  separate the process from the goals  of revolution is to insure the perpetuation of oppressive structure and  style.  (2) Belief in both individuality and  collectivity.     Individuality is not  incompatible with communist thought.  A distinction must be made though,  between "rugged individualism",  which fosters competition and a disregard for the needs of others, and  true individuality, which implies  freedom without infringement on  others' freedom. Specifically, in  terms of social and political organization, this means balancing  individual initiative with collective action through the creation of  structures which enable decisionmaking to rest in the hands of all  those in a group, community, or  factory, not in the hands of "representatives" or "leaders". It means  coordination and action via a non-  hierarchical network (overlapping  circles rather than a pyramid) of  small groups or communities. Finally  it means that successful revolution  involves unmanipulated, autonomous  individuals and groups working together to take "direct, unmediated  control of society and of their own  turn to p. 16 KINESIS   July - August  ANARCHA-FEMINISTS ON L€GISLATIV€ RCFORM- LOCAL ORGANIZING- COLLCTIVCS-CRIMC PUNK- PARTY POLITICS...  from col 1, p.   13  price.  But we didn't shake the structure. We were inside  the structure we  abhor, asserting a small feminist  presence alongside the kitchenware and  fashions.  Ideally, we might have done  something outside  the building. In  the parking lot. Perhaps we could  have been fixing our own cars, or  something...my point is that we did  take part in the feminist table, we  helped to organize and support the  feminist event, although we're beginning to think about different kinds of  direct action.  Kinesis:    What's your view on working  for legislative reforms?   I understand  that you support direct action in the  area of rape, such as the confrontations of rapists carried out by a  Santa Cruz anti-rape group, and the  publication of lists of rapists by the  Kitty Genovese project.    Would you  spend your time working for the reform  of rape laws?   Do you view trying to  win that kind of concession from the  state as a waste of time?  Jannit: Pretty much so. The trouble  is that when we get those in authority  to give us something, they can turn  round and take it away. Look at  abortion. They can give us childcare  and they can take it away. We're  really no further ahead.  Kinesis:    Getting back to the abortion  issue.    What do you think will happen  at VGH?    Do you get into lobbying for  changes in the abortion law?    Will you  take part in the VGH meeting?  Melanie:  I've sent off my letter  about abortion. Knowing it won't do  any good. We'll be voting pro-choice  at the VGH meeting, of course.  But  our point is that we've got to learn  to do things for ourselves, sooner or  later.  If we lose that vote at VGH,  one of these years, we're going to  have to rely on our own resources. As  long as they're controlled by a board  of directors, they can take abortions  away from us.  Ideally, we'd have our  own abortion clinics.  Kinesis: What about party politics?  Is it a case of "don't'vote, it only  encourages them"?  Jannit: That's an issue we talk about  a lot. All of us have at one time or  another worked for the NDP; we all  have serious misgivings about it. But  what can you do? In this province, it  makes a real, qualitative difference  to some people having the Socreds in.  They really make life tougher for old  people, for the handicapped, the poor.  Does that mean we should vote NDP?  The NDP may make life better for a few  people, but they don't make major  changes. And of course, there is a  system of bureaucracy behind all the  parties that keeps the whole thing  going. It doesn't change when parties  in power change.  Melanie: I don't believe that theory  that goes around the left that the  worse things get, the better they are  for the making of the revolution.  I  think the worse things get, the more  entrenched the state becomes...But I  also think that some day I am going to  be forced to make a choice: will I  support legislative reform, which is  good for a few people, but not for a  majority? I think we aren't going to  be able to live with liberal views  forever.  Kinesis:    Do you see any value in  politics at the local level?  Melanie: We support neighborhood  politics, yes. Block organizing, I  mean. When people organize on their  block — against rape or to let kids  know which houses they can go to —  it's people taking control for themselves. But the moment you get away  from block by block organizing into .  trying to get someone on City Council,  for example, then what you're doing  becomes something different. You  have to work to get one  person elected — and then the decision-making is  not being shared. Only when everybody  is making decisions about what touches  their own lives, only then do people  have power. You have to trust, to be  willing to trust each other. That's  quite different from putting your  trust in a leader. It's much more  optimistic.  Kinesis:    What do you think about  people who decide that maybe they can  work on the inside?  Melanie: What can they do? If they  point out the contradictions loudly  enough to be heard, they'll be fired.  If they don't point out the contradictions they might be promoted.  It's  a seductive process. It changes you  in ways you can't'even be aware of.  It's a bit like getting married. People say, "Oh, it doesn't matter if we  get married, we love each other," and  so on. And then they wake up eight  years later to find that they've  changed into something else. Marriage  changes you in ways you don't know.  When you resort to that structure, or  to any set of rules, you're always  trying to predict what might go wrong.  You get these rules together so that  if you're in a tight corner, you can  use them' to get out.  I say, if you  find yourself needing rules to rescue  you from some structure that isn't  working for you, then it's time to get  rid of the structure. The whole social system is set up so that everybody  is trained to resort to rules.  Jannit: The trouble with rules is  that they assume the worst of people.  They refuse to trust. Look at the  public schools — they are set up in  the expectation that the students are  going to do the worst possible thing  on every occasion. It's the existence of these rules themselves which  turn people against each other.  Melanie: The system is structured so  that everybody leans on everybody else  to keep them in line. And women and  children are right down at the bottom.  We are all of us scared of authority.  Authority is passed around like a  goodie in this society. If you get a  bit you can use it to oppress somebody  with. I used to always be told that I  had problems with authority. They  were right. I do have problems with  authority!  Jannit: I remember very clearly the  moment I stopped internalizing the  rights and wrongs of our culture. I  realised that crime is defined by the  state.  I didn't accept any of its  definitions, but I had internalized  that one.  I've learned how society keeps itself  going, what structures it uses.  I've  been struck by the way we have all  learned to believe what the state  tells us to believe. Even among politicised people, you often come across  the notion that the state somehow represents the people. It takes time to  unravel the job they've done on you.  which really worked collectively. I  knew it was important not to sacrifice  individual participation for speed or  efficiency.  It felt wrong to be using  hierarchical structures within the  women's movement. I'd felt for a long  time that I didn't want to vote; that  consensus was worth all the time and  effort it might take. It felt wrong  to have official meetings about something before anybody took any action.  The anarchist framework shared a context that a lot of my work and intuitions fit into. That discovery has  been very exciting.  Reading anarchist material has given  me a framework I can use to question  bureaucratic structures. A lot of  anarchist theory is sexist; you have  to pick your way through it.  I think  an anarcha-feminist perspective is a  particular emphasis which I bring back  to the women's movement: it sheds  light on how society keeps women oppressed.  Melanie:  I came to anarcha-feminism  with a feeling of intense relief. We  were both feminists before we became  anarcha-feminists. Anarcha-feminism,  with its insistence on spontaneity,  made sense of what I'd been feeling  all along.  I'd worked in a collective  Kinesis:    You call yourselves anarcha-  feminists, rather than anarchists.  What do you think of the apparent  anarchist affinity for punk rock?   The  punk rockers seem to be being touted  as anti-authoritarian...  Melanie: For the record, we don't  like punk rock.  It's sexist!  Jannit: It's also contradictory. How  can something sexist really be anti-  authoritarian?  Kinesis:    What about this term anti-  authoritarian?   Seems to me you have  authority with Jess, who 's only 21  months.    You both parent him; when you  tell him to keep his hand off the  stove, for example, you are exercising  authority...you know more about stoves  than he does.  Melanie: A distinction I find useful  is one between the authority of a  person and the authority of a position. We love Jess and we try to  relate to his strengths. When we  impose on him, and we sometimes do  (we're not "permissive" as some people  may expect anarchist parents to be) —  we tell him why we're imposing.  If  he's tired out, for example, we'll put  him in his crib and that's it — because weknow where he's at; we love  him and want to protect him. But  Trudeau doesn't love you or me. His  is the authority of position.  It's  that authority we reject completely.  Jannit: You can try to subvert  authority in lots of ways. Once you  internalize an anarchist understanding  of authority, you change.  In France  and Spain, there are lots of small  groups who subvert authority — a  bunch of people will get on the subway  without paying, say. When there's  enough people doing it, the authorities can't do anything.  Kinesis:    Does that change things?  Melanie:  It changed me.    Change is  personal.  In the health collective,  we challenged the authority of doctors, and doctors, you know, have  a lot  of authority. We would go to  medical conferences dressed in jeans,  put up our hands to ask a question,  and then get up and make a speech.  It's quite scary. It changes you.  Kinesis:    Are you into.grafitti?  Melanie: That's something that is  happening spontaneously. We've been  involved in some billboard corrections.  It's something people can see  being done, so they get out and do  it, too.  Kinesis:    What'  struggle?  your line on armed  Melanie: We disagree that now is the  time for armed struggle in North  America. Our disagreement is with the  timing.  In South Africa, on the other  hand, now is the time for it.  Kinesis:  What do you say to the inquiry anarchists receive from other  parts of the left   — do you have  a programme for seizing state power?  The world evoked, for example, in  Marge Piercy 's  Woman on the Edge of  Time could be described as anarcha-  feminist in many respects.    But how  do we get there from here? '  Jannit: Our program for smashing  capitalism?  (General laughter) You  have to start from the personal point  of taking control over what touches  your own life — your school, your  workplace, your immediate neighbourhood.  If, say, students, parents and  teachers took control of the school,  you'd have the bureaucrats on the  phone, raging away all day long, but  they'd have lost their power. I'm not  saying you wouldn't have a fight on  your hands. You'd have to defend  your school, your workplace. The  state isn't going to walk away  politely.  Kinesis:    Returning from theory to  practical matters, I'm interested in  how you see our part of the women's  movement functioning right now.  What's your thoughts on BCFW (British  Columbia Federation of Women), for  example?  Melanie: I remember going to the  founding convention of the BCFW, and  feeling wretched because I didn't  like what was happening.  I didn't  like putting an umbrella over the  movement, pulling it together into  that kind of structure — although I  could see how we would appear the  stronger for it.  Jannit: Compared to that, you now  have the spontaneous ad-hoc committees, like March 8 and those one-day  workshops that have been happening  around town, which are very loosely  associated with BCFW, or more often  not associated with any  group...  Kinesis: It seems to me that BCFW  functions nowadays in a rather amorphous federation more or less unconscious of the structure up at the  top.  Jannit: That's true, but as long as  you have that structure, someone can  come along and start using it in a  hierarchical way to centralize power  and assert leadership. That's the  danger of having it there. Of course,  I think that BCFW has value as a  communication network, and is useful  for women outside the lower mainland,  in particular.  Melanie:  Some of the dangers of  structure being imposed from above  were pointed out in what happened with  those coalitions of women's groups (in  the Fraser Valley and the Okanagan)  which the Secretary of State's department was going around setting up.  They were a disaster...  Kinesis:    As a feminist, what impresses me about you two is that you live  your politics in a very personal way.  You believe in co-ops and cooperative  decision-making  — you live and work  in cooperatives.    You believe in  sharing parenting, and you do just  that.    You work in the women 's movement as anarcha-feminists and you  live as anarcha-feminists; your food,  shelter  — it's all part of your  politics.    It feels good.  Melanie: As feminists we realised  that it's essential to have personal  relationships-and ways of living that  are supportive.  I don't really know  how people can be political — say,  organizing at their workplace, and  then go off and buy their food at a  supermarket — on the one hand they're  trying to change the system as workers, and at another they're shoring  it up as consumers.  Kinesis:    Do you think we'll bring  down Safeway by being in co-ops?  Jannit: No, but we have to be  optimistic. It's going to be a long  struggle. Kinesis    July-August  ' 78  from col 3,p.13  (3) Belief in both spontaneity and  organization.   "Anarchists have long  been accused of advocating chaos.  Most people in fact believe that  anarchism is a synonym for disorder,  confusion, violence. This is a  total misrepresentation of what  anarchism stands for. Anarchists  don't deny the necessity of organization; they only claim that it  must come from below, not above,  from within rather than from without. Externally imposed structure  or rigid rules which foster manipulation and passivity are the most  dangerous forms a so-called "revolution" can take. No one can dictate the exact shape of the future.  Spontaneous action within the context of a specific situation is  necessary if we are going to create  a society which responds to the  changing needs of individuals and  groups. Anarchists believe in  fluid forms: small-scale participatory democracy in conjunction  with large-scale collective cooperation and coordination (without  loss of individual initiative).  Peggy Kornegger, Anarchism:  The  Feminist Connection  Contrary to common misconception,  anarchism does not reject, but is  about organization. Anarchism is  simultaneously both a critique of  authoritarian forms of organization which fosters manipulation  and passivity, and a theory of  free organization. Forms which  are organized from below, rather  than above, from within rather  than without. The basis of such  organization is the autonomous  group formed on basis of common  locality (collective), activity  (affinity group) or trade (syndicate) . These groups federate  with each other to form increasingly comprehensive networks without losing their autonomy. Such  organization is decentralized and  non-hierarchic, being based on the  equality of a network and not the  inequalities of a pyramid.  Zero Collective - Anarchism/Feminis:  C-R groups were a good beginning,  but they often got so bogged down  in talking about personal problems  that they failed to make the jump  to direct action and political  confrontation.  Groups that did  organize around a specific issue  or project sometimes found that  the "tyranny of structurelessness"  could be as destructive as the  "tyranny of tyranny".  The failure  to blend organization with spontaneity frequently caused the  emergence of those with more skills  or personal charisma as leaders.  Once again, I think that what was  missing was a verbalized anarchist  analysis.  Organization does not  have to stifle spontaneity or  follow hierarchical patterns.  The  women's groups or projects which  have been the most successful are  those which experimented with various fluid structures:  the rotation  ANARCHISM,  FEMINISM  IS THERE A  CONNECTION?  of tasks and chairpersons, sharing  of all skills, equal access to information and resources, non-monopolized decision-making, and time  slots for discussion of group dynamics.  This latter structural  element is important because it involves a continued effort on the  part of group members to watch for  "creeping power politics."  If  women are verbally committing themselves to collective work, this  requires a real struggle to unlearn  passivity (to eliminate "followers")  and to share special skills or knowledge (to avoid "leaders").  Peggy Kornegger Anarchism:  The  Feminist Connection  cartoon from Ehrlich's article  in Second Wave  Feminism practises what anarchism  preaches. One might go so far as  to claim feminists are the only  existing protest group that can  honestly be called practising anarchists. Lynne Farrow Feminism  as Anarchism  On the positive side, the emerging  structure of the women's movement  in the last few years has generally  followed an anarchistic pattern of  small project-oriented groups continually weaving an underground  network of communication and collective action around specific issues.  Partial success at leader/"star"  avoidance and the diffusion of small  action projects (Rape Crisis Centers,  Women's Health Collectives) across  the country have made it extremely  difficult for the women's movement  to be pinned down to one person or  group. Feminism is a many-headed  monster which cannot be destroyed  by singular decapitation. Vie spread  and grow in ways that are incomprehensible to a hierarchical mentality.  Peggy Kornegger Anarchism:  The  Feminist Connection  The revolutionary feminist perspective is essentially anarchist.   ...In  its rejection of authority,  hierarchy and leadership,  feminism  follows anarchist theory... .But it  is in organization and action that  women have spontaneously come closest  to anarchism.     Zero Collective,  Anarchism/Feminism  All across the country independent  groups of women began functioning  ithout the structure,   leaders and  other factotums of the male left,  creating independently and simultaneously organizations similar to  those of anarchists of many decades  and locales.     No accident either.  Cathy Levine The Tyranny of Tyranny  There are . . .many issues on which  radical feminists and anarchist  ' feminists agree.    But anarchist  feminists are concerned with something more.     Because they are anarchists,   they work to end all  power relationships,  all situations  in which people can oppress each  other.     Unlike some radical feminists who are not anarchists,  they do not believe that power in  the hands of women could possibly  lead to a noncoercive society.  And unlike most socialist feminists,  they do not believe that anything  good can come out of a mass movement with a leadership elite.    In  short,  neither a workers' state  nor a matriarchy will end the  oppression of everyone.    The goal,  then,  is not to seize power,  as the  socialists are fond of urging,  but  to abolish power.     Carol Ehrlich  Socialism and Anarchism Feminism  That is the theory.     What about the  practice?    Again,  radical feminism  and anarchist feminism have much in  common.    Both work to build alternative institutions,  and both take  the politics of the personal very  seriously.  Developing alternative    forms of  organization means building self-  help clinics,  instead of fighting  to get one radical on a hospital's  board of directors,  it means women's  video groups and newspapers instead  of commercial television and newspapers;  living collectives,  instead  of isolated nuclear families; rape  crisis centers; food coops; parent-  controlled daycare centers; free  schools; printing coops; alternative  radio groups,  and so on.     Carol  Ehrlich Socialism and Anarchism  Feminism  Open Road,   Box 6135, Station G,  Vancouver, B. C. Canada V6R 4GT  The autumn 1977 issue of this anarchist newspaper contains an article on  Anarcha-Feminism which reviews some  of the publications available.  Revolting Women,   P.O. Box 46571,  Station G, Vancouver, B. C. Canada.  They say "we have made a commitment  to study anarchist analysis and  strategy, and hope to add to our  writings on the connections between  feminism and anarchism to those  relatively few that already exist."  They would like to contact other  anarchist feminists. KINESIS   July - August  from p.   12  BETSY:  Similar to Attica, the press  was hand-fed information under the  authority of Superintendent North-  orp. He sent authorities down each  morning to the media. He passed  out very little information and  what he did let out was often inaccurate and inflammatory. These  statements resulted in our being  tried and convicted by the media  and the public before we ever went  to court.  During the entire incident, the  press picked up every statement  made by Supt. Northorp and we  were front-page news for the entire  time.  If the Vancouver Sun arid  the Vancouver Province and all  the media in B.C. want to try us  and convict us at least they could  have the decency when we are vindicated to give us equal space.  GAY:    The papers printed everything the R.C.M.P. and the Pen  gave them and I think they should  have investigated more. We think  it is really unfortunate that the  guard, Roy Yasuda, was wounded.  But the way that information was  printed by the media was very  inflammatory. The Vancouver Sun  carried front-page headlines that  the guard had only 30 seconds to  live  whereas the testimony of Dr.  T.K. Stephenson from the Royal  Columbian Hospital revealed that  it would have taken several hours  for death to occur. That information was not reported.  BETSY:    In the Attica Prison incident in the U.S., first press reports  stated that the prisoners slit the  hostages throats but then later it  was learned that all hostage deaths  came from authorities' bullets.  In the last B.C. Pen hostage-taking  incident, the media here again raced  to the people with the story that  Andy Bruce had slit hostage Mary  Steinhauser's throat.  It was later  learned she had been killed by a  bullet fired by a member of the  guard's tactical squad.  I also remember just prior to the  B.C. Pen riot of 1976 - a friend  and I delivered press releases to  the media. It was a 10 page press  release signed by over 200 inmates  of the B.C. Pen.saying that there  was going to be a riot if something didn't happen.  Both the  Province and the Sun placed it on  somethink like page 70 or 74. Ten  days later or so when the riot did  occur, these same papers made lots  of money reporting it - it was  front page news after it happened.  WHAT ABOUT  THE GUARDS?  KINESIS:    You mentioned earlier the  stabbing of the guard Yasuda.Prison  activists such as yourselves are  often criticized for having sympathy  for the criminal but not for the  victim.  BETSY:    I think it is very sad that  the guard was stabbed.  I think it  is sad when guards suffer psychological effects from working in prisons.  But I also think it is sad when we  pay Members of Parliament and they  close their eyes to the situation  that guards are in jeopardy.  Something should be done about it.  Our tax money is wasted. The Deputy-Solicitor said that in a few years  the cost of the justice system will  be so high that there is no way that  the taxpayer can afford it.  I want to say something on behalf  of Steven Hall. He has been sentenced to life for that offence.  I don't  think he should have pleaded guilty.  We have to take a look at Steven  Hall's life.  Steven has spent many  years in solitary confinement. He  has told me that "I can take anything in prison but the one thing  I can't take is solitary.  If I go  there again I'll commit suicide."  DURING THE SEIGE  KINESIS:    What happened on the  morning of Jan.   28th?  BETSY:     I parked in my usual  parking place, signed in as usual, werit down to the visitor's  "run" (a row of 10 seats behind a  glass partition where visitors  speak to prisoners through telephones) , all as usual and sat down.  The next thing I knew the glass was  breaking, shots were being fired,  I saw people beside me crying and  going to the floor, and a few minutes later the door to the "run"  opened and people were moving  about in other rooms.  KINESIS:    Were you ever in fear of  the prisoners ' or in fear of a  tactical action taken by the authorities similar to the one that  killed Mary Steinhauser in the  1976 B.C. Pen hostage-taking?  BETSY:    We never feared any action  on the part of the prisoners.  It  was the prisoners who were the most  concerned about our well-being.  Some people were very much afraid  of an invasion by a tactical squad  but I didn't share that fear.  It  is very fashionable now not to have  bloodshed.  "Negotiation" gives  authorities "brownie points".  I  knew Supt. Northorp was after those  "brownie points" and therefore  everyone who was under his authority would toe that line for their  share.  KINESIS:    We heard regularly on the  media that prisoners and hostages  were getting regular meals and  were quite comfortable during the  8 day lock-in.  GAY:    Superintendent Northorp at no  time during the incident made any  effort to see that we were comfortable. Right at the beginning, it  was the prisoners who tried to get  us blankets, mattresses, medication  •cruel and unusual" cell in E  © 1977  E  ish Columbia Penitentiary.  and food. Northorp sent in a few  towels, toothbrushes, and 2 hairbrushes, but no blankets or mattresses. We slept on the hard  tiled floor while there was deep  snow outside. As for regular meals,  food was sent in when and if the  authorities felt like sending it  in.  Staff at the B.C. Pen College  said that food often sat for 5 or  6 hours before being sent in ice-  cold. Most often meals consisted  of chips and hamburgers, fish or  chicken from a drive-in.  BETSY:  At no time did officials notify my family, and I am well known  at the Pen. It was only at the insistence of the prisoners that a  few days later the authorities  allowed hostages to phone home.  KINESIS:    What happened at the  conclusion of the incident?  DECIDED  WE WERE GUILTY  BETSY:    Northorp had already decided we were guilty. As a result  of that decision, Gay was the second  last and I the last visitor to leave  the B.C. Pen visiting area. At the  Preliminary he was asked why he prior-  ized the hostages coming out in the  order that he had. He answered that  in his mind there were 5 people inside who were accomplices and that  their safety was not as important  as the people that he felt were  innocent.  I don't think he had the  right to decide who was guilty and  who was not guilty and that our lives  should be considered less valuable  than others.  can't on page 18 Kinesis    July - August  from p. 17  GAY:    After our release, we walked  out the door across an interior  courtyard of the Pen.  There were  about fifteen officers with rifles  trained directly on us - 5 or 6 on  the roof,  several in the towers  5 or 6 in a semi-circle in the  yard, and one lying on his stomach  behind a flower pot on the stairs  leading to the main prison. We  were immediately arrested and then  taken up the steep metal stairs to  the prison offices, strip-searched  and questionned.  I told them I  had nothing to say because I was  not involved. We were then taken  to New Westminster Police Lock-Up.  We were put in separate cells consisting of a bed riveted to the  wall with a plastic mattress on it,  but no blankets.  It was extremely  hot and our skin stuck to the plastic. There was a combination sink  and toilet.  People could look in  at any time and men and women were  coming through regularly for breath-  alizer tests. We weren't allowed  pens, paper, watches, combs, mirrors, or any personal effects, such  as toothbrushes or towels.  On Monday morning just before our  first court appearance we were taking  a sponge bath. We hadn't had a bath  at all for the last 10 days. Envoy  Stephenson came from the Salvation  Army to see if we wanted Legal Aid.  He would not go away even though we  insisted. He just stayed where he  was and looked through the window  the whole time we were bathing.  On Monday morning, we were taken to  Court and our Bail Application was  refused.  DANGEROUS  WOMEN"  BETSY:  I would like to< quote some  of the prosecutor's remarks made  during the Bail Hearing and our subsequent Bail Appeal. Madigan, the  prosecutor, made what I consider  inflammatory remarks that amounted  to character assassination. Unfortunately the transcript still hasn't  been typed but Madigan said in effect  that "we were such dangerous women  that even if they brought in the  army, no judge or courtworker in  this province would be safe while  we were on the streets." And  therefore, our bail was set at 2  surety bonds of $20,000 each, a  total of $80,000 before we could  get out of prison.  COMMUNITY SUPPORT  WINS BAIL  We were only granted bail because  we had a lot of friends in the community who took time off work, set  up headquarters in somebody's house,  and ran around and collected 65  letters from people in the community  who worked with us and knew us well.  The judge said in Court that he had  read every one of these letters  supporting that we were non-violent.  He said "I can not disregard the  content of these letters ..." We  had offers of bail from friends in  Vancouver and Victoria and some  offers from people who didn't even  know us that well.  The support the  community mobilized was powerful, an  and I thank all of these people for  their support.  KINESIS:    The legal system has arrested you,  charged you,  detained  you in Oakalla Women's Prison,  taken  you to a Preliminary Inquiry,  and  then seen fit to dismiss all  charges against you.    With this  first-hand experience,  how does it  feel to be an accused person and  just how objectively does the  legal    system operate?  BETSY:    Since the day I was locked-  in the B.C. Pen visiting area, I  have felt like a person with no  rights whatsoever. The law is like  a conveyor belt. Court rooms are  expensive public-funded play-pens  for judges, prosecutors and lawyers  to play in and collect high salaries. They have a vested interest  in one another. The accused is  needed for the play to continue  but is only incidental and is not  considered a "player" in the court  room game.  COURTROOM:  - A PLAYPEN  FORJUDGES  & LAWYERS  Because of the highly technical  nature of the courts you are forced  to hire a lawyer. Once you hire  a lawyer it in effect silences you,  because both the judge and prosecutor tell you to speak to your lawyer  and your lawyer will speak to them,  or to the jury. If you want to  participate you have to keep jumping  up arid running over to your lawyer.  After awhile you look like some kind  of idiot but you are only trying to  participate in your own case.  Unfortunately the justice system  thinks it has to answer to no-one.  All the judges know it, all the  lawyers know it, all the prosecutors  know it, and it goes on because  nobody challenges it.  KINESIS:    You were held in the  Women's Unit of Oakalla Prison while  you were awaiting your Bail Appeal.  What were your living conditions  there?  GAY:    When we arrived at Oakalla,  we had to line up for a bath, but  the bath had not been properly  cleaned and the water wasn't clean.  There was a great mirror above the  bath slanting outwards so that  anybody in the admissions area could  see us bathing. We were deliced and  then sent up to Group Six, the admissions unit. We were not allowed our watches. We had our meals  in the dayroom which is a little  larger than an average living room  for 16 to 24 women at one time to  eat in. This room functioned as  a dining room, a T.V. room and a  games room all at one time.  It was  very noisy. My bedsheets were dirty  and I was not allowed clean sheets  until the morning. The room was  also filthy and hadn't been cleaned  before we came in. The food wasn't  bad but it is largely a carbohydrate diet and as at City Lock-up  there were no exceptions for someone  requiring or wanting a special diet.  We were forced on work detail for  50 cents a day - scrubbing huge  floors with a little cloth and a  pail of water, general housework,  sorting laundry, washing out toilets.  We politely refused to contribute to  our incarceration, and consequently  were locked in our cells.  BETSY:    We had to make another court  appearance the next Monday and when  we were returned to Oakalla we were  taken in the back door,directly down  to solitary confinement. All of the  prisoners had been cleared out of  the unit - it had been full of prisoners on punishment when we left for  court that morning. Now we were the  only 2 occupants. Each cell had a  plastic mattress, a combination steel  sink and toilet, a solid steel door  with a 4 or 5 inch peek hole in it -  just like solitary confinement at  the B.C. Pen. One of the cells in  solitary is called "the monkey cage"  and the prisoner is confined to half  the cell by mesh wire, with no access  to toilet or bucket.  SOLITARY +  COFFEETABLE  = LIVING UNIT  We demanded to know why we had been  placed in solitary. They told us we  were not in solitary confinement. The KINESIS   July - August  cells had been renamed and were now  called a Living Unit. The only physical difference was that a coffee table  had been added to one cell which was  to be our dayroom. Later in the week  I was upstairs on a visit and happened to see Mrs. Peacock, the Director  of the Women's Unit.  I asked why we  had been placed in solitary.  She  said it was because we were disruptive.  Her statement contradicted the  statements of the guards downstairs  who simply said we were not in solitary confinement.  It is ironic that the very thing  we are opposing at the B.C. Pen,  solitary confinement or "administrative segregation" as they call it,  is the same thing that was being  used against us.  OAKALLA:  PLANET  OF THE APES  The stupidity of the place - I felt  like I was on Planet of the Apes -  and the staff were the apes. I couldn't believe humans (for a pay cheque)  could stoop to acting like mindless  robots in order to be an upright  citizen/guard, when common sense  would tell them what they were doing  was wrong.  We were finally released after our  Bail Appeal, Gay on the 17th of February and myself on the 18th.  LNS  KINESIS:    Betsy you have mention-  ned that you have multiple sclero-  osis.    Did you receive any special  diet or medical   consideration for  this condition?  BETSY:    In the 3 weeks I was incarcerated, I was prevented from carrying out my preventive program for  multiple sclerosis, which 2 years  ago at times prevented me from walking. On top of that as a vegetarian  I was served only meat meals, leaving just bread and potatoes to. eat.  The fastest way possible for MS to  return is to have food high in fat  and starch and low in protein. I  repeatedly told this to authorities  including 1 doctor at the B.C. Pen  and 2 doctors at Oakalla prison.  At the New Westminster Lock-up, I  was in pain and asked to see a  doctor and my request was refused.  In my second week at Oakalla, I  couldn't sleep with the pain, but  I was told by a male nurse that the  only way I could see a doctor was  if I slashed (cut my wrists). In  the 3rd week at Oakalla, one doctor  agreed to give me vegetables and  protein, but when the meals arrived they were so high in fat, that  I might as well have eaten starch.  KINESIS:    Although the Crown can still  proceed, both of you have had all  charges dismissed at this point in  time.    How much has this ordeal cost  you?  GAY:     Our preliminary inquiry has cost  us $15,000 alone just in legal costs.  Then there is our lost salaries, our  family and friend's time and efforts.  I lost my job and Betsy's health  deteriorated.  If we had gone to trial  in the fall, legal costs would amount  to an additional $30,000.  I want people to know just how tenuous  civil rights are in Canada. We were  selected for prosecution on the  basis of our political beliefs.  In  Russia, they send you to Siberia, in  Canada dissenters can be economically  and emotionally worn out while the  government has the unlimited resources  of our tax dollars.  PRISONS:  ULTIMATE  WEAPON  OF MALE POLITICS  KINESIS:    Why as feminists are you  involved with prisoner's rights?  BETSY:    Prisons are the ultimate  weapon of male politics. The crushing blows that male politics have  inflicted on women - alienation,  isolation, and oppression, both psychologically and emotionally - are  the same blows that are dealt to  prisoners. "I remember in 1971 speaking on Mother's Day at a Women's  Liberation Rally in Stanley Park.  Lisa Hobbs and Simma Holt also spoke.  I can remember saying that some women could not be here today because  of their oppression, they may not have  had 25 cents bus fare, they may have  been in Riverview (mental hospital)  or prison. I spoke of women's isolation from each other and the outside  world, of the cement walls that  surrounded them and of the suicide  that followed when they couldn't find  a way out of their "prison". The  walls are psychological but they  LNS  axe.  just as confining as the cement  walls of the solitary confinement  cells.  The system puts walls in all  our heads. And prisons are the "Final  Solution" for maintaining it.  KINESIS:    As prisoner's rights activists do you see a connection between  prison activism and hostage-taking?  BETSY:    Yes.  There is a connection  because when the prisoners inside know  they have support on the outside they  are going to make demands "that they  be treated as human beings.  As a  prisoner, you know that you aren't  crazy because you know that people on  the outside believe you are human and  should be treated as human and eventually re-enter society.  VIOLENCE  OCCURS  WHEN   NOTHING  CHANGES  We really have encouraged prisoners  to try through all the regular channels to make their concerns heard.  It is when these channels break down  and nothing happens that violence  occurs.  One example concerns a well-known  M.P. This Member of Parliament had  been through the system and knew how  bad it was. I and another person  went to him to see if he would speak  to the prisoners in solitary about  the conditions there. He said he  would go in about 2 days later. We  immediately wrote a message to  the prisoners in solitary telling  them to expect his visit.  The M.P.  went in and all the solitary confinement prisoners were waiting for him.  He walked down the corridor in front  of their cells but only talked to the  guards about their salary increases.  This was really frustrating for the  prisoners. We asked the M.P. why he  did that and he replied that we  should not have told them he was  going in to see them. We said to  him that if they were regular con—  stituents you would have made an  appointment, you would have kept  that appointment, and you should  have done the same thing for a  prisoner.  KINESIS:  takings?  Do you condone hostage-  BETSY:  Yes, if it is the only way to  force our elected representatives to  change the abominable conditions  that exist in our prisons.  In 1975, the taxpayers paid a lot of  money to have Justice D.V. Heald come  from Ottawa to New Westminster to hear  the charges of 8 prisoners that solitary confinement was cruel and unusual punishment and was against the  Canadian Bill of Rights. Justice  Heald's finding was that solitary  confinement was cruel and unusual  punishment. Then, he said, 'But, I  can not give the prisoners any relief.'  Why did he hear the case at all and  cost us all that money when he knew  his decision was meaningless.  turn to p. 20 KINESIS   July - August  from p.19  Andy Bruce is the most hated prisoner  in Canada, yet if it weren't for the  Bruce, Lucas and Wilson hostage-taking and the B.C. Pen riot in 1976,  which forced the creation of the 6th  Parliamentary Inquiry into prison  conditions, we the public would never  have been aware of how our tax dollars are being wasted. However,  together with the Jan. 28th incident  at the B.C. Pen, the latest hostage-  taking in Quebec, the play WALLS by  Chris Bruyere on the Bruce, Lucas &  Wilson hostage-taking in which the  guard's tactical squad killed Mary  Steinhauser,- a prison employee and  hostage, and finally, the facts and  emotions put forth in the recently  published CRUEL AND UNUSUAL; The  shocking reality of life behind bars  in Canada by Gerard McNeil with  Sharon Vance, prison officials  can no longer hide behind a veil of  secrecy.  The public knows.  This  knowledge is a direct result of  hostage-takings, riots and prisoners'  strikes. All actions initiated by  prisoners, not authorities,  to make  their conditions known.  Today prisoners are condemned for  these actions, tomorrow they'll be  thanked. It is they who will be responsible for saving the taxpayers  millions of dollars by getting rid  of an archaic system that constantly  places guards in fear of their lives,  and, that so brutalizes prisoners  that the public has more to fear when  they are released than when they  entered the prison system.  KINESIS:    Betsy,  I have heard you  say that you would assist prisoners  to escape from solitary confinement.  BETSY:    Prisoners in solitary are being held there unlawfully and inhumanely. As I have said many times  before to the Director of the B.C. Pen.  to their Public Relations Man, to numerous people within the prison system,  to judges from"both provincial and  county court, to the media and to anyone will listen, Yes - I would assist  any prisoner to escape from solitary  confinement.  KINESIS:    How can you justify this  stance knowing the bloodshed and danger to the public that would inevitably follow upon their escape?  BETSY:    Citizens have to take some  responsibility for having allowed  authorities to have mistreated prisoners in solitary confinement  Therefore, unless the public is willing to  make amends to these prisoners they  must live with the consequences.  Certainly prisoners have every right  to try to escape from these inhuman  conditions. You would not expect  children to stay in a quarantined  house if fire struck. The public  should not expect prisoners in solitary confinement to stay in a  cement box that is destroying their  mind.  WE HAVE THE  HEALD DECISION  BUT NOTHING  HAS BEEN DONE  We've had the Heald decision calling  solitary - cruel and unusual punishment - but doing nothing about abolishing it. We've had 6 Parliamentary  Inquiries, recommendations made, and  nothing has been acted upon. Hostage-  takings, riots, strikes, and escape  attempts will continue until the  system changes.*  More information about Solitary  Confinement from Solitary Confinement Abolition Project, Box 758,  Station A,   Vancouver, B.C.    Money  is urgently needed for Wood-Hoon  Legal Expenses,  c/o CCEC Credit  Union,  #10 - 246 East Broadway,  Vancouver, B.C.  from p.5  ABORTION  The Quebec Minister of Justice was unsatisfied with his victory. Morgentaler was charged a second time, in  relation to a different patient. For  the second time, he was acquitted by  a jury. He was then the first man  in Canadian history to be in jail for  a "crime" of which two juries had  acquitted him. For a second time,  the Crown appealed. This time, however", the Court of Appeal upheld the  acquittal.  'Of course abortions are  wrong, and as an unmarried  man I should know'  BADGELY REPORT  The "Badgley Report", published in  1976, was commissioned by the federal  government "to determine whether the  procedure provided in the Criminal  Code for obtaining therapeutic  abortions is operating equitably  across Canada". The committee was,  interestingly, not asked to consider  the merits of law or to make recommendations .  The committee surveyed hospitals,  hospital staffs, gynecologists,women who had had abortions, the public,  and out-of-country abortion services.  The committee confirmed what we already know:  that abortion is inequitably administered, that the women who  suffer most from the inequitable operation are less educated, poor, and  rural women.  The Badgley Committee found that:  •On average, women first visited ai  doctor 2.8 weeks after first suspecting they were pregnant. It took an  average of 8 weeks after the first  contact until the therapeutic abortion was performed.  •75% of women who had abortions after  13 weeks had first consulted a doctor 8 weeks previously.  •39.3% of the Canadian .population do  not live in communities served by  "eligible" hospitals.  •20% of women who had abortions paid  a surcharge over and above the health  insurance to have the procedure performed.  •saline (2nd trimester) abortions accounted for only 8.6% of abortions  but 50.7% of complications. The  delay.which is bui]t into the 1969  law and its rigid procedural requirements, literally causes these complications .  •only 40% of hospitals in Canada are  eligible, under provincial law, to  perform therapeutic abortions.  CM1LOA  WANTED  CHILD  The Criminal Code, as we have seen,  makes- abortion a legal procedure -  but does nothing to guarantee its  availability. Which hospitals are  "eligible" to perform abortions is  left up to each hospital. Roman  Catholic Hospitals (in Vancouver,  these include St. Pauls, St. Vincents, Mount St. Josephs), and  Salvation Army hospitals (Grace  Hospital) simply do not have committees. Of the hospitals with commit-  ees, the policy of the committees  varies-        turn to p.26   col. 3 Kinesis    July - August   '78  DAKK€ is bad news  The BAKKE DECISION,  handed down by  the U.S. Supreme Court June 28 is  bad news.  Bakke, a white male, claimed he had  been excluded from Davis Ca. Medical  School on the basis of "reverse discrimination. "   In a 5-4 vote,  the  Court agreed.  Davis Medical School campus had set  aside 16 places out of 100 for racial  minorities, as part of an Affirmative  Action programme.  That special admissions programme will now be dismantled.  Without doubt, this decision will  be a reactionary one for women in  the U.S., who have worked long and  hard for affirmative action. For  the details, we'll have to await  the only reports we trust - those of-  the feminist press.    -  COP  D.C. NURS€S ON STRIKE  Nurses in Washington D.C. are out on  strike.  Staff nurses at Washington  Hospital Centre, the largest private  hospital in D.C. (with 910 beds) voted  to strike on May 27th.  The issue is union busting.  In April  1978, the Hospital unilaterally withdrew recognition from the D.C. Nurses  Association (DCNA) as the collective  bargaining agent for the staff nurses.  This despite the fact that the DCNA  has won recognition from the National  Labour Relations Board as the official  bargaining agent. The nurses have  been trying to get a first contract  since June 1977.  Nurses on the line said: "We want a  closed shop; we want grievance and  arbitration procedures, and we want  improved vacation and sick leave benefits. Above all, we demand recognition of our union's right to represent  "We are not striking our patients",  they emphasized. "We are striking the  hospital administration and its priorities.  In a hospital strike, the  administration invariably raises the  spectre of callous nurses walking out  and deserting helpless patients.  The  administration would like to create  the impression that our strike will  endanger many patients' lives. ■ This  is not true.  In the event of a  strike, we are required to give the  Hospital ten days' notice — the  hospital has ample time to cancel  elective admission and reduce the  patient census.  The Washington Metropolitan Area has many empty hospital  beds and patients can be transferred  to other hospitals if their conditions  require it."  "If the Hospital was truly concerned  about good patient care it would not  force us into the position of having  to strike in order to win the demands  we feel are vital to our livelihood  and professional integrity," they  concluded.  The Washington Hospital Centre Staff  Nurses have been receiving strong  support from other nurses and from the  community in general.  You can send a solidarity message to:  WHC Staff Nurses Assoc. #715  6100 Westchester Park Drive  College Park MD 20740  ERA DEFEAT  The Equal Rights Amendment (ERA) was  defeated in the Illinois House in  June, six votes short of the majority  needed.  The June 7 vote — in the only unratified northern industrial state — seriously jeopardizes the bill's chances  for obtaining the three more "yes"  votes required by the March 1979 deadline.  Unless extending legislation is passed  by Congress, therefore, the 7-year  drive to guarantee constitutional  equality for women and men will fail  in the U.S.  (Guardian)  BRYANT & HITL€R  Whom would you choose as the woman &  man who had caused the most damage  in the world?  U.S. high school students recently  picked - Anita Bryant and Adolph Hitler.  They also matched Anita Bryant  with  Richard Nixon  as the top two who  "make you angriest."  (UP info)  DESSIE WOODS  NEW YORK (LNS) - The National Committee to Defend Dessie Woods (NCDDW)  has issued a call for a July 4 march  and rally in Plains, Georgia, the  hometown of President Carter.  Woods, a 32 year old Black woman,  was found guilty of voluntary manslaughter in connection with the  death of a white man who attempted  to rape Woods and another Black woman,  Cheryl Todd, in June of 1975.  Woods  is currently serving a 12 year sentence at the Georgia Women's Institute  of Corrections.  Supporters have  charged that Woods did not receive  a fair trial and that she is being  held in jail because she dared to  resist a sexiaal assault by a white  man.  In a recent interview conducted by  the Washington, D.C. Rape Crisis  Center, Woods elaborated on this:  "The whole trial was unjust.    In the  first place because it was proven  from the beginning that the murder  was self defense.    And because I was  a Black woman they brought me to  prison.    I had a chance not to come  to prison because they... turned me  loose on bond.    I didn. 't have to  come.    But,  I came to prove to the  world that I was innocent.  "...The United States government says  that a Black woman does not have the  right to self defense.    And this is  not true.    Every woman has the right  to self defense."  Although the support committee's  request for a parade permit was  turned down by Plains government  officials, organizing for the march  continues and supporters have vowed  to march anyway. Kinesis   July - August  A BID FOR UNIONIZATION  as seen through the eyes of one of the worlds  Awhile back I stood in the office of  the man who fired me nearly 2 years  ago.  We were signing the first collective agreement of a telephone  answering service.  I was to start  work the following Monday at which  time I would also collect my large  cash settlement.  I could say that it all started 2  years ago when I and representatives  of Retail, Wholesale and Department  Store Union sat discussing the possibilities of getting a union at  this answering service.  But,  actually, it started years before  that.  It started as a result of  years of substandard working conditions, minimum wages, no benefits  or job security, and disrespectful  and unfair treatment.  This particular company is a telephone answering and paging service  which employs 120-130 workers.  Most  of the workers are switchboard  operators, whose duties are to answer  lines and record messages for an  average of 60 - 100 clients.  They  are semi-skilled workers whose work  is important and whose responsibility  is immense.  The company also  employes office and paging maintenance personnel.  To appreciate our struggles for  union representation, I must describe  our pre-union working conditions.  All of us worked without coffee  breaks, some without any breaks for  as long as 16 hours.  Most of us  started at minimum wage and received  wage increases - 5C to 15C/hr. - at  the discretion of our General Manager.  We were not covered by any health  and safety provisions, not even  Workers' Compensation.  We were  entitled to 1/2 sick day per month  (received only after working there  for more than 6 months).  The worst part about our jobs was a  lack of job security and no recourse  for unfair treatment.  All of us  were totally at the mercy of our  supervisors and/or general manager.  One supervisor had favourites and  would give them the preferential  shifts when they became vacant.  Others were threatened with a cut in  hours or dismissal if they did not  "volunteer" to work holidays or  certain times.  Hence, the atmosphere became petty and a lot of  gossiping and back-biting occurred  in order to stay on the 'good' side  of this supervisor.  No one would '  stand up to her.  I saw women who should have been  retired and wanted to be retired  working because Canada Pension was  not enough to live on, and there  was no other post-retirement income.  This company did not have a pension,  even though some of the employees  had been with the company for 25  years.  DISMISSCD  FOR NO REASON  I saw people being dismissed for no  reason whatsoever.  I saw and heard  about people being transferred  from one position or shift to another  without their consent and without  any reason.  Everyone was constantly in fear of  losing their job.  The longer the  service and the older the person,  the less secure they became.  The  longer one stayed, the more money  they got, hence the greater the  chance of them being replaced by  someone who would be paid minimum  wage.  Switchboard operators are constantly  working under pressure. One must be  physically and mentally quick in  order to do the job effectively.  Some older women were having trouble  keeping up with the pace. They got  pressure to leave.  One time the general manager informed  supervisors they had to cut staff,  leaving the existing operators to  increase their work load.  They were  promised pay increases, but, as was  expected, these increases did not  materialize.  Individual incidents began adding up.  Some individuals took their grievances  to the Labour Standards Branch to no  avail.  We were afraid to even ask  for what was guaranteed to us through  the Labour Standards Act.  RWDSU  G'Ç ̈TS INVOLVCD  The final straw was when our pay  increases were delayed for yet another 2 weeks.  I contacted the  Vancouver Status of Women who told me  to contact the B. C. Federation of  Labour.  I was contacted shortly  thereafter by representatives of the  Retail, Wholesale, Department Store  Union (R.W.D.S.U.)  I, like every other working person,  had misconceptions about unions,  strikes, union dues, etc.  I had no  previous union experience or background.  All I knew was that individually, we as workers, had no power.  We were totally at management's  mercy.  I also realized that they  totally depended upon us to make  their money.  Hence, if we were to  withdraw our labour and could prevent others from doing our work we  would have some power.  This was my  rudimentary understanding of what  unions were all about.  Subsequent meetings between the union  reps, of R.W.D.S.U; and other  telephone workers laid to rest our  misconceptions of unions and prepared  us for what was to be an extra long  struggle for union representation.  SIGNING  UP BY NIGHT  Because other women had tried years  before to form a union, failed and  were fired, we knew that we had to go  to people's homes at night and contact the employees as quickly as  possible.  Hence, we signed up a majority of the  employees for head office (between  40-50) in one weekend and applied for  certification April 26/76 - the following Monday morning.  As soon as the company was notified  that a majority of their employees  wanted a union, one fellow worker  and one supervisor went around asking  who started it all.  The supervisor  asked 'her girls' whether they were  approached, who approached them and  if they had joined the union.  Most  were closed-lipped.  We were all  prepared for these types of questions.  One of the office workers was put  back on the switchboard; I had my  wages reduced.  We filed unfair  labour practice charges against the  company.  The general manager, visibly upset by  the charges, stormed into my room and  denied all charges.  We got into a  private argument over these charges  and I was subsequently fired for  'insubordination'.  From then onward for 2 years I viewed  everything from the outside.  Some of us were already busy organizing the other branches of this  company and after I was fired I  became free to spend more time on  it. Kinesis July-August   '78  a personal account  In approximately 2 weeks we had the  other branches (8) signed up.  About  the same time the general manager  phoned the branches one night after  midnight to determine if we were  approaching the branches and whether  the workers at the branches had  joined.  Some women were subtly promised  raises or threatened with dismissals.  Only one women withdrew her membership for "personal reasons".  The  next pay day she received a raise.  Meanwhile, the company had been  making submissions to the Labour  Board expressing great concern for  their employees because the union  might not have properly represented  themselves to the workers.  The  company also argued that the B.C.  Labour Board did not have the jurisdiction to handle our certification and unfair labour practice  charges.  This jurisdiction dispute  gave the company some time, a year  in fact, to play around, improve  conditions, harass employees and  do whatever would be necessary to  get the union out.  One person was laid off, another  2 or 3 people quit after months  of harassment.  While this was going on the Labour  Board officials from both the provincial and Federal Boards were not  acting because neither board was too  sure whose jurisdiction the company  fell under.  It took the Provincial  Board 6 months to decide that they  didn't have the jurisdiction, and  the Federal Board wasn't too sure  our union fell into their jurisdiction either.  SIGNING UP  EVERYONE AGAIN  As a result of the B. C. Labour  Board's decision, we had to sign up  everyone again, in order to apply  for a Federal certification.  The  Federal Board would not accept any  application cards that were signed  more than 3 months prior to the  date of the Federal application.  No exception would be made for our  unusual circumstances.  After another 6 months went by, the  Federal Board finally decided to  give the workers a chance to express  their true wishes (for the third time)  by having a mailed secret ballot  vote on union representation.  When we finally got notice of the  vote we started handing out information about the union, etc.  The  company tried to retaliate by  sending a letter to all employees  suggesting that they didn't need a  union.  Typical arguments against  unions were used, i.e. that the  union might advocate things like  seniority that might not be in the  best interests of some of the  employees and that since R.W.D.S.U.  was an international union, "you  never know where your money's  going".  Regardless, 72% wanted the union.  Now came the task of negotiating  a contract!  The talks went very slowly and  were broken off many times during the  10 months of negotiations.  As was  to be expected rumours were spread  among workers, by management, trying  to side-track them from the issues.  Meetings, were constantly being held  in order to set straight the misleading information.  The company then applied to the  board for a mediator and when that  failed a conciliator became involved.  (There are many steps the parties  must go through before either party  . can lock out or go on strike.  These steps are supposed to help  maintain "labour peace" by using  a third party to mediate and/or  recommend a settlement.  In fact,  what this process really does is  protect management by dissipating  the workers' enthusiasm and by  wearing them down.)  The conciliator made a recommendation  that was toatally unsatisfactory.  His recommendations failed to  satisfy 2 out of our 3 goals, and  the third goal, good protective  conditions, had previously been-  agreed to between the company and  us.  What was recommended was across  the board percentage increases of  8% and 6%, cost sharing Health and  Welfare plans, no pension plan and  no mention of a settlement for the  unfair layoff and the unfair dismissal.  The negotiating committee immediately  rejected it.  Nothing happened after that.  The  company was not particularly interested in meeting with us again.  We  realized that a strike vote was  necessary in order to put pressure  on the company and force a settlement more to our liking.  We got a  71% strike vote.  Management Immediately counteracted  by threatening to close the company  down permanently if we went out.  Economically, they could do this for  both the owners and the general  manager had alternate income from  other businesses they owned.  20 Months Later  After a few long sessions we finally  got a tentative agreement, 23 months  after it all started. The following  are some of the provisions we obtained that might be of interest to  Kinesis  readers:  - union shop with preferential hiring  - seniority from date of hiring (hence  not affected by sickness, leaves of  absence, layoffs, etc.)  - pension plan for all employees  - full benefits paid 100% by management for both full and short time  (part time) employees, i.e. medical,  eyeglass, hearing aid, prescription,  weekly indemnity (extended sick  leave), group life insurance, long  term disability, 100% sick leave,  35 hr. work week and no loss in  take home pay  - greater increases to lower paid  -  workers  - 20C shift differential, money in  lieu of no rest breakes (if unable  to take), or payment for 1/2 hr.  lunch break or short shifts  - Management's inability to change  working conditions, shifts, etc.  without consent of the union  grievance committee  - as well as the standard provisions  for maternity leaves (benefits  fully paid), family and special  leaves, grievance procedures, etc.  The company also settled the outstanding unfair grievances in terms  of reinstatement with monetary compensation.  With the contract signed and I and  others back at work, I naively  thought the battle was over.  However, I quickly learnt that the  fight is never over, it just goes on  and on.  Two days back on the job, I personally, had filed 2 grievances and  others were beginning to complain  that the company was not following  the contract.  PRIDE  AND  SELF RESPECT  Slowly, things are being straightened  out to our liking.  After so many  years we are finally feeling more  powerful.  Now, for the first time,  we have some grounds to stand on.  Before, whenever there was something wrong, we had to try to appeal  to the general manager's sense of  fairness and goodwill.  Now we say  "you are breaking the agreement,  this will go to arbitration if it  isn't settled, and that will cost  you money".  I, personally, have gained from this  experience.  My involvement with  R.W.D.S.U. and this particular  answering service has given me a  considerable amount of knowledge  on unions and negotiating activities.  It has given me a "gut level"  understanding of why unions exist and  take the positions they do.  This  knowledge will always stay with me.  But the most important thing that I  and the other workers have obtained  from the union is pride and self  respect at the work place.  It feels  so much better now not to be under  the thumb of the general manager -  not to have to take abuse and  insults with a smile in order just  to keep our j obs.a B Kinesis    July-August    '78  SOLIDARITY DAY  FLECK UPDATE - WOMEN'S SOLIDARITY DAY  Fleck is a small plant in Centralia,  Ontario.     It manufactures automotive  wiring.    The workers there,  mostly  women,  are unionized with the UAW  (United Auto Workers) and are on  strike for a first contract.    The  strike has been marred by police  violence towards picketers.    The  two previous issues of Kinesis have  discussed the issues of this strike,  which has drawn wide support from  the trade union and women's movements in Ontario.  May 19 was Women's Solidarity Day at  Fleck. Here's a description of that  day from The Socialist Voice:  Women's Solidarity Day at Fleck was  organized and endorsed by United Auto  Workers (UAW—the striking women's.  union), the Labour Council of  Metropolitan Toronto, Organized  Working Women (OWW), the Ontario  New Democratic Party Women's Committee and the International Women's  Day Coalition.  That combination of  trade-union and women's movement  groups represents an important  unity—growing partly out of the  very real identification of all the  groups with the Fleck fight and  partly out of the new connections  forged between the two social movements during the International  Women's Day '78 organizing.  The May 19 Fleck picket was a cornucopia of those fighting for social  change.  Women's Press was there.  So was the Law Union of Ontario, and  graduate students' groups, and  organizers from the Confederation of  Canadian Unions.  There were two NDP  MPPs, and strong representation from  the ONDP Women's Committee.  Women  Against Violence Against Women was  there in force.  There were women  from CUPE 79, several UAW locals, the  Ontario Public Service Employers  Union women's caucus, and the  Revolutionary Workers League.  And why such a complete representation of the women's movement?  Because the working conditions at  Fleck are so bad, so reminiscent of  the exploitation of the '30s, that  women understand that the Fleck  fight is every woman's fight for  basic rights.  The Fleck plant is  rat-infested.  It is so cold in  winter that the women have to wear  coats, and in summer they faint  from the heat.  A woman who's worked  there 10 years makes $3.24 an hour.  They get $30 a week sick pay.  The  machines they work on are so old  and dangerous that safety inspectors  are constantly shutting them down.  Three days before the strike began,  OPP officers arrived to tell the  women to behave like nice girls on  the picket line or they'd go to jail.  And all of that—the sexism, the  double oppression of the Fleck  workers as women and as workers—  is why the women's movement is  working with the trade-union movement on this fight.  BACKING DOWN  ABORTION REFERRALS  Winnipeg (CP) - Canadian doctors who  refuse to perform abortions on moral  grounds are no longer required to  refer their patients to other doctors  or agencies.  The decision, approved June 19 by the  Canadian Medical Association's general council, rescinded an earlier  amendment to the code of ethics which  said physicians opposing abortion on  moral or religious grounds, must  advise patients of other sources of  assistance.  The new amendment now says when a  physician's "morality or religious  conscience alone prevents him from  recommending some form of therapy,  he will so acquaint the patient."  Dr. A. Parsons of Halifax, chairman  of the committee on ethics, said  Monday the issue of abortion was the  main reason for the change.  (Vancouver Sun, June 21 '78)  NOV) && *~  YOUR HELPFUL  FAMILY DOC  J SCURATO/LMS  LESBIAN NEWSLETTER  {An UPSTREAM article)  As a step towards forming a national  coalition of lesbians and lesbian organizations, delegates to a recent  conference sponsored by Lesbians of  Ottawa Now (LOON) decided to begin  publication of a bi-monthly newsletter.  The 150 women who registered for the  conference May 20-22 attended workshops ranging from "Our Mothers",to  sexuality, to physically disabled  lesbians. Most of the conference was  low-key, however, with the only resolution coming from the workshops on  political strategies.  At the closing plenary session, delegates approved the formation of a national eolation to share experiences,  problems and solutions. Initial contact will be established through a  newsletter, to be produced every two  months.  Doukhobors  Awaiting  Trial  Five Freedomite Doukhobor women were  taken to Oakalla Women's Unit on May  19, awaiting trial. The five: Naida  StoochnOff, Olga Hoodicoff, Pauline  Burkoff, Marilyn Stoochnoff and Mary  Braun have written about the treatment they received while in Oakalla.  We are the five Doukhobor women  that were held in Oakalla for 12  days.  We wish to bring to your attention the conditions we. were  held under.    They brought us there  on the 19th of May, with a promise  that we would be held together.  They put us in the basement,  which  is the punishment area.  They let  us eat one meal together that evening. From then on,  they kept us  locked up in solitary, except for  1 hour on the first two days, when  they took us out for some air. And  that's how we were the whole time;  and we were not allowed to write  or receive letters or visitors or  phone calls.  And so we refused to eat, not being  allowed to eat and pray together.  Also,one of our sisters, being close,  to 60 years old was sick all the  time and was not allowed to phone  her doctor.  We asked to see the director but  she refused to see us.  We asked and  waited for two days patiently, so  this was being put on punishment  for no reason at all. So we were  given no    choice but to send a  live telegram by setting our bedding on fire. Mrs. Director then  came down and gave orders that  everything be removed from the  cells,  leaving one blanket each.  Which left us naked on bare steel  springs in wet, dirty cells. Shortly  after came a man with his army of  matrons who examined us internally,  using toothpaste as a lubricant. . .  So cold and hungry we remained that  way for the remaining ten days, being  let out only for a bath. In the cells  the toilets were very old and unsanitary and the sinks were   plugged up  most of the time...  WE ASK YOUR HELP TO GET THESE HORRIBLE THINGS OUT IN THE OPEN BEFORE  WE HAVE TO COME BACK TO THESE C0N_  DITIONS AGAIN, AS WE ARE AWAITING  HEARING.  Send letters of protest to the director of Oakalla Women's Unit, c/o  drawer 0, Burnaby B.C. Write also to  A.G.Garde Gardom, Parliament Buildings, Victoria, B.C. Kinesis July-August  '78  As women we have become aware that our  experience of the world has by and  large not been represented in the  video and film media.  Until recently  we have been virtually non-existent  as producers of the visual images that  surround us.  As subjects of video and  film women have been almost uniformly  reduced to the stereotype of menial,  dumb, but shapely handmaidens in the  unfolding of the male universe.  The visual media industry, dominated  by a small number of financial giants  — a handful of Hollywood studios and  the big TV networks — has long been  the most pervasive purveyor of sexist  ideology.  The distortions of women's  lives and potential arise from a  consistently male-defined perspective  which denies and undercuts the validity and authenticity of our experience.  The norms and values propagated usually come in the innocent guise of  fictional "entertainment", and escape  critical scrutiny of their "unreal"  nature easily, since "...it's only a  story." Besides beging dehumanized  and trivialized by the culture industry, we have almost always been excluded from any significant part of  the process of production.  As feminists we have become acutely  aware of the innumerable forms and  instances of visual manipulation,  abuse and assault. While recognizing  this as an obvious and vital area of  fighting back and asserting ourselves,  we have often ended up overwhelmed by  the sheer everyday flood of output  battering our senses. Of course, it _  is necessary to expose, confront and *»  protest the blatant forms of sesploi-  tation in these media. However,  oppression is just as much perpetuated  by silent and invisible repression, by  the absence of "womanvision" from our  daily lives. While the image-industry  drones on, we are constantly being  robbed of any adequate representations  of our lives, i.e. made by women starting from a feminist consciousness.  The major TV networks promise a switch  from the cult of violence towards a  soft porn, titillating season of  "jiggling girls", and moving women  right back into the familiar slot of  teeth-flashing, hair-tossing sex-  objects.  Not surprisingly, feminist  productions don't fit the bill of promoting the hard-sell of cosmetics,  appliances and life-style fads the  controlling advertising interests  demand.  So we get to see the occasional token "effort", drowned out by  a sea of commercial inducements.  On the filmscene, the big studios are  currently building up for a mad rush  to the cash-tills with their newly  discovered highly profitable side-line  of the socalled "woman's film".  At  last, they believe to have found the  right package to integrate, appropriate and refunctionalize the women's  movement: our benevolent patrons assure us that it's time to sit back and  celebrate the phoney "liberated woman"  they have dreamt up.  These films are  invariably conceived and controlled by  men, apply generous new layers of  sugar-coating to well-worn cliches and  stereotypes and rip us off with well-  orchestrated publicity on the Virginia  Slims theme.  The frustration of not being able to  see any feminist productions in Vancouver lead to the organization of the  upcoming women's video and film festival.  The entries will be selected  with a focus on works that are probing, challenging and contradicting  commercial media stereotypes in documentary, fictional-imaginative or  satirical form.  Such women's works  rarely receive wide circulation, and  the festival will provide unique  opportunities to open up dialogue  among producers, and between audiences  and media-workers.  Because the media  industry operates within the structures of capitalist relations of production, its imposed division of labour isolates both producers and their  subjects from each other.  This is an  obstacle which women must confront together, before we can move towards a  viable feminist media strategy.  The  festival is intended to provide a  forum for feedback, exchange of experience and critical thinking, and we  invite all women to attend.  Seminars,  panels and discussion groups will be  an integral and vital aspect of the  festival, and the active participation  of media workers and feminists is  needed, if we are to take a step towards controlling the process of production that both reflects and forms  our images.  Where...when...how?...  — The date is Sept. 22, 23 & 24.  — The place: Mt. Pleasant Community  Centre, Ontario at 15th, Vancouver.  — Program: there will be 2 morning  sessions and 2 afternoon sessions  of festival programming during the  daytime, 10 - 5:30 pm, and  Sunday 10 - 3:30 pm.  — 7:30 - 10 pm Friday evening will  feature a film followed by discussion with the director.  — Saturday night will feature a  women's dance, 9 pm - 1:30 am.  — For the duration of the festival, a  display of women's artwork will be  shown at the centre.  — Refreshments and foods will be  available at the centre during the  day.  — We need to know about attendance,  and you are requested to PRE-REGISTER.  Forms will be available thru'  your local women's group or centre,  or contact VWV&FF at: Women in  Focus, 6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver,  B.C. Canada, V5T 3H7, (604) 872-  2250.  — A sliding scale of admission applies and all details and particulars are available on pre-registration forms.  Basic 3 day ticket $5.00 (with  dance, $7.00)  1 day ticket      $2.00  Women's Dance     $3.00  —Because of limited budget and space  it is ABSOLUTELY ESSENTIAL to  pre-register for daycare (free of  charge) — see registration form.  —If you want to volunteer your time  and energy in organizing this  festival, contact the steering  committee at WIF.  — We hope to see you all in Sept.  Watch for program details in the  next issue of Kinesis.  Greetings from The Steering Committee Kinesis July—August  '78  vsw agm   "-*.*-*!  Given the intensity of this struggle,  Grills remarked, "Now, when women's  rights of reproductive freedom are  under fire, it is more important than  ever that we publicly affirm our  stand. We support a woman's right to  choose. We deplore the widespread  anti-choice interference in the hospitals throughout B.C."  The pro-choice group, the Concerned  Citizens for Choice on Abortion, was  given a unanimous support by the meeting.  The meeting also endorsed a  resolution which directed that the  first act of the president for the  coming year be to send a telegram to  the Federal Justice Minister recommending that the Criminal Code "be  amended to permit abortion by a qualified medical practitioner on the sole  request of any woman who has been  pregnant for twelve weeks or less."  This demand is from the 1971 Commission on the Status of Women and is in  keeping with the founding principles  of VSW.  kamuck  muckamuc  The annual general meeting also expressed its support for the workers  at Muckamuck restaurant. These workers,  who are Native Indians and mainly women, are unionized with SORWUC (Service, Office and Retail Workers Union  of Canada). They are striking for a  first contract. Picketers were signed  up and donations made to the Muckamuck  strike fund.  The excellent new film on rape, "This  Film is About Rape," by feminist filmmaker Bonnie Kreps, was shown at the  end of the meeting. Megan Ellis, a  Vancouver Rape Relief worker, led the  discussion following the film.  ELECTED TO OFFICE of the Executive  of Vancouver Status of Women, 1978-  79 were: President: LEE GRILLS;  Vice-President: JILLIAN RIDINGTON;  Secretary: JOEY THOMPSON; Treasurer:  NOREEN GARRITY.  Members-at-large elected were: Judith Burke, Sandra Currie, Darlyn  Jewitt, Sandra Rose, Sylvia Spring  and Susan Sanderson. VSW staff persons also, serving on this year's  executive: Susan Hoeppner, Sue Moore,  Carol Pfeifer, Gayla Reid.  an independent womens newsjournal  politics, health, work, prison  news coverage and political analysis  on the issues that affect womens lives  oob, 1724 20th st. nw,  wash, dc 20009  FEMINIST KARATE  The Feminist Karate Association is  back in action.   A small (but  enthusiastic) group of us have been  getting together on Wednesday evenings  for an informal  workout together.  Some of us are beginners; some are  self-defense teachers; others of us  also train elsewhere in Vancouver at  traditional clubs (with male teachers)  and use this group as an opportunity  to supplement what is lacking in these  clubs, as well as to meet women in  other martial arts clubs around the  city for exchange of energy.  We're  looking for new members (from beginner  to black belt) and invite any women  interested in practicing/learning/teaching self-defense, fighting techniques, sparring, wrestling, etc. to  come and join us.  For more information, call:  Marsha or Anita  Portland  263-7452  253-7809  Dear Friends:  The FULL CIRCLE COFFEEHOUSE  at 152Tast 8th Ave, Van,  m  7719  WILL BE HOLDING REGULAR EVENING PERFORMANCES, ENTERTAINMENT AND WHAT-Y0U-WILL ON  EACH WEDNESDAY AND FRIDAY OF  JULY AND AUGUST.  WEDNESDAY IS FOR WOMEN AND  MEN; FRIDAY FOR WOMEN ONLY.  S OPEN AT 8.30 AND THE  "WIANCE BEGINS AT 9.30.  **********  First prize this month goes to the  Ministry of Human Resources,  which  has closed the daycare centres it  has operated in the Vancouver area.  Out-of-daycare are 120 children  from 4 daycare centres and 2 out-  of-school, centres.    Only one centre has been picked up by a priv-  from p.  ABORTION  As a result of these factors, a  huge percentage of all abortions  performed in B.C. are done at Vancouver General Hospital (VGH).  If  abortions are eliminated at VGH,  the impact on the availability of  abortions in B.C. would be profound.  The strategy of Pro-Life is simply:  sign-up thousands of members to VGH,  nominate a slate of people to the  Board of Directors who are anti-  abortion, and eliminate abortions  as a hospital procedure.  It is a numbers game. Our "right"  to safe therapeutic abortions is not  guaranteed by any law, and it is in  danger of being eliminated at VGH by  determined anti-abortion groups.  Forty thousand applications for  membership in VGH have gone out this  year.  Runner-up is L.S.Eckhard, the judge  who dreamed up wiping out Rosemary  Brown's riding and Bill King's,too.  **********  NATIONAL  PRISON  JUSTICE DAY  August 10th  Oakalla Women's Unit  We need your support to maintain  a vigil in front of the women's  unit of Oakalla. For more information, call 736-1313. Kinesis July-August  '78  LESBIANS -  SMALL NON-PRODUCTIVE GROUP(  NOT WORTH THE EFFORT!  I would like to know the writer's  definition of the above (I am writing  in reply to a letter to Kinesis - the  editor advises me that the name was  withheld due to format, not request  and that you are indeed a woman although I was not given a name).  I am neither part of a group nor am  I non-productive, but I hope I am  considered worth someone's effort.  I am a woman the same as the majority  of readers of Kinesis.  I happen to  love women and society classes me by  my sexual preference.  I also work  full time, have two children, pay a  mortgage, keep my house relatively  clean and am working at least 10  hours a week on the abortion issue  (yes, a lesbian who does not have  sex with men is working on the  abortion issue - it is a woman's issue  lesbians are women - get itI)  I am so angry - the only difference  between you and me is that I am not  clearly covered by any Federal or  Provincial Human Rights Code.  I  can lose my job if my employer  happens to see this. I can be declared an 'unfit mother' and have  my children taken away should  someone who wants my children  (father, relative, or 'friend')  see this letter.  Luckily, I am  buying my own house so I cannot  be evicted, but if I were renting that would be another  reason not to sign my name.  First they came for the lesbians,  and I didn't speak up because I  wasn't a lesbian.  Then they came for the pro-choicers,  and I didn't speak up because I  wasn't a pro-choicer.  Then they came for ethnic women,  and I didn't speak up because I  wasn't a ethnic woman*-  Then they came for single mothers,  and I didn't speak up because I  wasn't a single, mother.  Then they came for working women,  and I didn't speak up because I  wasn't a working woman.  Then they came for YOU • • • an^ by  that time there was no one left to  speak up.  (based on the quotation  from Martin Neimoller)  I am fighting where I can for  women. I cannot fight alone.  Please help me!  -Name Withheld  Don't Forget  To Join VGH...  YOU MUST JOIN VGH AND YOU MUST  GET YOUR FRIENDS TO JOIN.  IT IS  OUR OBLIGATION TO OURSELVES AND TO  OUR OUT-OF-TOWN SISTERS TO PRESERVE °r  OUR RIGHT TO SAFE AND LEGAL THERAPEUTIC ABORTIONS AT VGH.  Women Of The Peace  Women of the Peace, in Dawson Creek,  have been granted funds for the operation of a Women's Centre.  They hope  to reach women on all levels by providing needed information and referral  service.  Any information you can send along to  them would be welcome.  Their address:  Peace Women's Centre,  1000 Alaska Avenue, Dawson Creek, B.C.  March 0  WANTED: SUPER 8 AND COLOURED .SLIDES  OF MARCH 8  Claudia is looking for these,~because  she's putting together a videq-package  of March 8. You can contact ber at  879-6606 or 688-8827.  Ferron  FERRON'S second album, All Backed Up,-  will be released July 1st, 1978.  The  record has been produced by Lucy  Records, a women-run company located  at 2862 West 22nd Ave., Vancouver,  B.C. A' single costs $6.50 plus postage, and quantities are limited.  So  get your order in now.  Fabrics Needed  We are two feminist artists who make  banners and large fabric hangings  (e.g. Bimini Strike quilt, hanging at  SORWUC and on Kinesis  cover, Jan. '78;  Double Work Day banner, International  Women's Day Parade and hanging at Full  Circle Coffeehouse). We get no money  for what we do and are on limited  incomes. We are desperately in need  of largish pieces of material and  thread of all colors. Please leave  donations at VSW or call Persimmon at  253-7809 or Elizabeth at 733-5249.  Thank you. It will be put to good  use.  KINESIS  ISSN 0317-9095  July - August  Vol 7 #7  Kinesis is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the Responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew.  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions from the feminist community and  in particular, from VSW members. We  do reserve the right to edit, and  submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want  your work returned.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1N3.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Lyn Buckle,  Dorothy Restall, Val Embree, Patricia, Portland Frank, Janice Pentland Smith, Gayla Reid, Lorri Rudland.  Membership to Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation and Kinesis is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year and we would ask  members to base their donations on  this and their own financial position.  As we now have the status of a charitable organization and as we are  unable to pay for Kinesis from these  funds due to government regulations,  we will be issuing tax deductible  receipts for the balance of all membership donations over $8.00.  Please remember VSW operates on inadequate funding - we need member  support!  For information on union organizing or the  women's programme of the B.C. Federation of  Labour, please contact:  Mi  Director of Women's Programmes  C. Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B.C.  V5M 4A2  430-1421