 SPECIAL COUECTtoNS  9.    -  elections  JUNE  Vancouver Status of Women  2Q29W. Fourth Ave.  736- 3746 --7-8  Volume IV   No. 34  73-s3u5 .  j Serials Division  Main Library  University oi  Vancouver 8,  ».*>•  Bobbie Patrick  summer of 74  Get along, little dogie!  Jennifer has her eye on you, in her  jeans, boots, and Stetson, a coiled  lariat on her saddle horn. Jennifer?  Possibly Jennifer, Babs, Judy, Susan,  Rosemary, Deborah, Julie, or Carole.  A rancher in B.C.'s north central  interior contacted the Placement  Officer at Simon Fraser University to  ask for eight women students to work  as cowgirls this summer alongside the  several cowboys he has on hand.  This  isn't a dude ranch.  It's the real  thing and the women are doing a number of regular cowperson(?) tasks.  It delighted this reporter to hear of  it (and aroused her considerable envy)  in the course of a survey of universities, colleges, Manpower centres,  and various levels of government  offices on summer employment prospects for women students.  It's a bright picture, thanks to  prodding by Kathleen Ruff, Director  of the Human Rights Commission; a  fairly healthy economy; substantial  government financial assistance; and  quite an encouraging degree of awareness that we are moving - even if it  sometimes seems slowly - into an era  of non-sexist job opportunities.  Generally, job listings do not differentiate as to sex.  (We'll forgive  the rancher. After all, he has several male employees already.) The  jobs available are simply posted, or  information about them conveyed to  would-be workers in interviews, and  it's then up to the applicants,  female or male, to take it from  there. This makes it impossible in  many cases, at this stage anyway, to  obtain precise information on just  what sort of work women are getting.  UBC intends in the Fall to ask  returning students to complete an  information card on their summer  jobs, and a report on these will be  compiled between September and  Christmas.  But there is some general information  available now.  Both UBC and Simon  Fraser had highly favourable news on  opportunities for students.  The UBC  Placement Officer, Cameron Craik,  said his office had been very busy  with requests for workers, men or  women, and mentioned particularly a  breakthrough for women in forestry.  At SFU, the Placement Officer, W.L.  Roberts, described the job outlook  as really terrific, with federal and  provincial help most effective, and  employers, generally, being extremely  fair.  Similar good news came from Kerry  Croll, Branch Counsellor for Student  Placement at B.C.I.T., who said it  was a good year with excellent job  opportunities.  Lillian Baske of the Canada Manpower  Centre for Students reported that  about 40 percent of the jobs filled  in April went to women. Ms. Baske  said the jobs for women still tended  to be somewhat traditional - mainly  in the clerical and services fields,  but that more women were being taken  on in Customs work, as Immigration  Officers, and rather interestingly,  for example, in research on salmon  fry.  She also told of a woman student  hired byaa mining exploration company to do some cooking, but also  some "expediting" - which, in this  case, meant maintaining contacts with  bush camps and arranging for supplies  and equipment to be sent in and out;  quite a responsible position.  Dave Zirnhelt, Director of the federal  Opportunities For Youth programme  in B.C., said he was quite happy with  the way things were going. OFY  accepts applications for group activities and women are involved in a  good share of these in work relating  to such fields as the media, legal  aid, single mothers' problems, and  so on. A special interest is taken  in minority groups encountering difficulties. Sometimes women form  such groups. Mr. Zirnhelt said that  if applications for financial backing  for two projects - one for men and  one for women - were received from  a town or area in which women were  having trouble finding jobs, the  government's support would go to the  proposed women's project. Overall,  the balance appeared pretty close to even, as between women,and men, in  percentage figures he gave me, covering some 1200 jobs in Greater Vane  couver and the Fraser Valley for  university, community college, and  high school students, plus a few  non-students.  One sour note: SFU got a call from  a garage employer who wanted women  students to man the gas pumps at his  station. Two women who investigated  the offer returned with the information that they had been asked if they  would mind stripping for nude photographs .  Because the provincial government is  providing several million dollars in  municipal grants for summer projects  for students this year the survey  included a check on ten municipalities,  ranging from the lower mainland to  Chilliwack. We were interested in  finding out what sort of jobs were  available and whether women and  girls were getting a fair shake. By  and large, they are.  Much of the work is of an environmental nature - planning studies on  the environment, establishing ecology centres, maintaining boulevards,  and doing guide work in nature parks.  There are also jobs in playground  supervision, swimming instruction,  lifeguarding, traffic checks, Fine  Arts programmes, helping with handicapped children, and assisting community family workers. Matsqui will  have a big problem in controlling  ragweed, and women will be as welcome  as men to work on this.  In most of  the fields mentioned several municipal officials believed that women and  girls would predominate.  Generally, with a few exceptions lu  be noted shortly; I was assured that  whether any applicant could do the  available job was what counted.  Sex  didn't matter. You may have read in  the press some weeks back that the  Chilliwack Council passed a resolution declaring that as close as possible to 50 percent each, female and  male, should be given summer jobs.  An official in Haney thought, this was  as bad as discrimination; could, in  fact, be taken as such. He said the  jobs should be allotted on a first  come, first served basis. A Richmond  spokesman said that if the summer  programme turned out to involve 45  females and 5 males, O.K.; and O.K.,  ¬±fi it was the other way round. This  seemed to be the general view. Whoever could do a job and got there  first should get it.  Most of what seem to be known as  "labouring" jobs - cutting trees,  clearing brush, digging ditches etc. -  are done by regular municipal employees, but some of this work is available to students and it was here that  the exceptions I mentioned came to  the fore.  One municipal official said these  were hardly the sorts of jobs in  which women could participate.  Another municipal personnel representative said women couldn't do heavy  work because of Labour Department  regulations. Not true. Officials  in two municipalities said job hiring  for labouring was left to foremen,  some of whom had been around for a  great many years with some pretty  traditional attitudes. Here and  there I encountered officials who  believed that digging, shovelling,  and axing should be handled only by  men but who also admitted that they  were perhaps being somewhat old-  fashioned.  I got the impression in  some cases that a little persuasion  was all that was needed.  An official in a very large municipal  Parks Department said something went  against the grain with him in the  idea of women doing heavy work. He  said he held women in "high esteem"  and mentioned that it had upset him  to see a woman pounding rocks in a  civic waterfront project. But'he  did concede, after some further conversation, that there were labouring  jobs women could fit into, that he  supposed they could look after themselves, and that if there was an  opening for which a capable woman  applied, she should be considered.  There was a similar response, in the  end, from the hiring engineer in an  upper Fraser Valley city, who told  me he wouldn't put a girl to work  digging ditches, or cutting blackberry bushes, or cleaning out pig  pens.  "Why?" I asked. He said he  still regarded girls as girls and  wanted to keep them girls.  "But  suppose," said this gadfly, "that  a girl wanted to dig ditches or  clean pig pens and was physically  capable of doing it?" Pause   "Well, I guess I wouldn't turn  her down."  Perhaps that would be a satisfactory  enough note to end on.  But I would  like to relay a bit of encouraging  information about non-traditional  jobs for women generally , obtained  from Chris Waddell, Director of the  Women's Bureau of the Provincial  Department of Labour.  She says  that, quite apart from the service  fields, practically every industry  in the province is hiring women.  Some are doing it on a token basis  but others are going beyond that.  The Endako division of Canex has  hired 17 women on the same basis as  men.  They are currently on an apprenticeship programme in such  capacities as dump persons-, mill  labourers, and product packagers,  working towards full status at the  company's open pit mine at Fraser  Lake.  Cheering, too, is word that a large  interior mining and smelting company  is in the exploratory stages of taking  women on in similar apprenticeship  programmes.  Ms. Waddell says that women are driving cement trucks in some areas. A  woman, again in an on-the-job training  programme, is employed as a faller  in a logging operation near Cranbrook.  This is believed a first in the  province.  Several forest companies  have been employing a few women in  such jobs as painting and stamping  logs, setting chokers, and operating  boom boats. And the B.C. Forest  Service is using women on fire suppression crews, as drivers and dispatchers, and as scalers.  There is not the same degree of bias  in some interior regions as there is  in the cities against women doing  heavier work.  It's well known in  the interior that women can drive  large trucks and tractors and do a  lot of other so-called "male" things.  Many do them in their daily farm,  orchard, or ranch lives.  Ms. Waddell says forward-looking  employers in the interior realize  that women are needed as workers,  particularly in developing the  north.  True, in many cases it's  because there aren't enough men.  But a foot in the door is a foot in  the door, wherever it is and for  whatever reason.  A concerted and sustained push will  get that door open.  action for women  Action Strategy for Women was the focus  of the day long May 25th conference  at Capilano College in North Vancouver,  B.C.  It was unanimously agreed among  the more than 175 participating women  from across the Province, that there  is a serious need for solidarity  which a proposed BC Federation of  Women could achieve.  The Federation would act as an umbrella for women's groups as well as  for individual members and could provide an internal communications network and also work as a lobbying  force.  A steering committee, with representatives from the attending groups was  set-up to plan a September 14th founding convention for this new federa  tion.  The committee wil also be  responsible for planning a shadow  legislature in Victoria for October  to pass laws that government has  neglected to pass.  It was felt,  "If they cant do it, then we will."  This demonstration would be in  support of the Affirmative Action  Bill #37.  Workshops discussed other possible  tactics to improve the status of  women.  Suggestions included: an  independent women's political party,  a women's credit union, a women's  publishing house, caravan demonstrations serious questioning of political candidates during their campaings  and the implementation of the "Each  one/Reach one" consciousness raising  technique.  Panelists included Su Riskie from  Women in Teaching, Linda Shuto from  B.C. Teacher's Federation Task Force,  Kathy Stewart of the Vancouver Women';  Health Collective, Gene Errington of  VSW, Sharon Yandle, BC/NDP Women's  Rights Committee, and Annette Khouri  of the BC Committee to Defend Dr.  Morgenthaler.  They described their personal  efforts over the past five years  to change legislation and sexist  attitudes.  The panel criticized the government  and other institutions for being  "abysmally ignorant" on the topic  of women's rights, for ignoring  educational briefs, for making  irrelevant recommendations and  for not enforcing new codes. A group has been formed to organize  a Women's Centee in the downtown  east section of Vancouver.  The  Centre would fill the needs of  women whose lives are affected by  drugs, alcohol and prostitution.  The following article outlines  the objectives of the centre. We  wholeheartedly endorse these aims  and ask you to extend your support  by contacting Lois Brammer, Downtown Community Health Society,  373 E. Cordova St., Vancouver.  She'll let you know who should  receive letters of support.  WOMEN'S CENTRE  In the downtown east area of  Vancouver at any one time there is  a population of approximately 200  women whose lives are radically  affected by drugs, alcohol, and  prostitution. Many of these women  live in the skid-road hotels. Their  lives have so little stability that  they carry their belongings from one  hotel to another in paper bags.  It  is common for any of these women to  be in the area for only from two to  six months at a time. Their residency here is usually interspersed  with two to three month sentences in  prison on charges of soliciting,  drunkenness in a public place, or  possession of drugs.  This pattern  of movement between the downtown  eastside and the prison system has  created a fluctuating population,  and the total number of women involved  far exceeds the 200 or so to be found  at one counting.  These women have limited contact  with the larger community in Vancouver.  Some of their contacts are  through their customers if they are  prostitutes, a situation that is  hardly likely to engender fond feelings for the "straight" world in the  woman. Most of them are routinely  involved with such social services  as the police, who arrest them, the  courts, where they are tried, the  prisons to which they are sentenced,  and the probation department to whom  they are assigned in the vague hope  of rehabilitation.  (It is generally  conceded by any of these services  that rehabilitation is not often  achieved by these means). Again,  these situations are rarely on a  friendly basis and are far more often  perceived as punitive by the women.  One of few positive links with the  larger community is through the  nurse from the Department of Public  Health, V.D. Control, a woman who  has worked in the area for about 30  years, and ourselves, who have been  working -in this field only since  last summer.  The result of this  sort of contact is isolation.  These  women distrust social services generally and fear contact with the  community resources; being quite  aware of a prejudice against them.  They feel trapped in their particular lifestyle, and unable to break  out by any acceptable means attempt  to in strange, often self-destructive  ways (i.e. suicide by drug over-dose,  or arrest and conviction on some  minor charge).  It would be expected that there  should be some sympathetic agencies  in this district, but this is not  the case. There are approximately  seven thousand people in the downtown  east area; the majority are men.  Consequently the agencies and social  services in this area are mainly  designed to. meet the needs of men.  Although some agencies offer services  for both men and women, many women  are reluctant to use these facilities  because of emphasis on male services  and staff. Therefore the existing  agencies focus their services to the  needs of the majority of their users,  men. What is needed is a service  aimed at the needs of the women of  this area and staffed by women who  understand these needs and problems.  The staff will be selected from  women who have either been involved  in the type of lifestyle existing  presently in the downtown east area  or those who demonstrate a firm  awareness of the problems encountered  in this area.  Each staff member  will receive training to insure a  good background in the resources  available, in crisis intervention,  and counselling.  The project will not be sponsored Dy  any one organization.  Instead it  will be closely allied with other  services in "the area, thereby having  access to back-up services. Members  of the board of directors have been  chosen from those agencies and professions that play a vital role in  the lives of east end women.  We also hope to employ as many from  the area as possible and will encourage community involvement  (ie. in the drop-in activities).  The  Women's Centre will  provide service to women in the  downtown east area.  It will be a  link between the existing services,  the community, and the women of  this area.  The centre will function  to bring services and provide alternatives to women wishing to move the  focus of their lives away from this  environment.  The centre will be  open on a twenty-four hour basis and  working closely with the Elizabeth  Fry Society, Children's Aid Society,  Welfare and Rehabilitation Services^  the Women's Employment Boutique,  health and other agencies, will  provide counselling and crisis intervention, health aid and information,  employment information and recreation.  The staff will deal with such special  problems as isolation, prostitution,  drug and alcohol dependency, and  legal conflicts.  In addition, women  will be able to come in to work out  difficulties in day-to-day existence  with counsellors and other women in  the area.  Supplemental referrals to  other agencies will be made as well  to work out long term solutions to  a woman's problems.  The objectives of the centre are:  - to relieve the social isolation,  providing alternative lifestyles  and aid in achieving changes  - to provide a more constructive  gathering place than is currently  available (ie. pubs, clubs and  street corners)  to expand and develop the women's  leisure activities through  recreation programmes  to provide group and individual  counselling to develop more  constructive behaviour patterns  to bring some of the services  available to the rest of the  community to these women who  particularly need them  to employ women from this area  in an active role in the community  The most valuable assessment of the  effectiveness of the project in  reaching our objectives will be the  judgment of the women for whom the  project is intended. Accordingly,  they will be asked to evaluate the  services received and to suggest  additional services that they would  like to see in the area.  In addition, the counsellors and any other  persons involved in offering workshops, discussion groups or the like  will be asked to assess the use to  which the service was put and the  value of the service. These progress  and value assessments will be ongoing. Although individual -records  will, of course, be confidential  the assessments, especially those  received from the clients, will be  invaluable in further understanding  the problems encountered by the  women and the values of various plans  in attempting to deal with them.  law classea  This summer, the Vancouver People's  Law School will continue to offer  free law classes in the Vancouver  area.  If you have not received a  schedule, call or write to the law  school and we will send you one  immediately.  A NEW COURSE is being taught this  summer:  WILLS AND ESTATES will be taught  August 19, 20 and 21.  If there are  particular areas that you would like  to see covered in this course, let  us know!  A course entitled LEGAL RESEARCH will  be offered at the UBC law library  (see schedule). This course will be  an introduction on how to use a law  library.  As well as giving courses in the  Vancouver area, the law school plans  to travel to centres in British  Columbia which do not have the  advantage of free legal education.  We are asking groups to contact us  if they are interested in either  video tapes or booklets. We hope  to travel to Campbell River, Nanaimo,  Prince George, Nelson, Castlegar,  Kamloops, and Kelowna. vsw executive elections  Elections to fill positions on the  VSW '74/'75 Executive Committee will  be held at the ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING, Tuesday, June 18, at 7:30 PM  in the Board Room of the YWCA, 580  Burrard St., Vancouver.  It is  imperative that all members in  good standing attend and vote.  The nominating committee presents  the following list of candidates:  CANDIDATES FOR EXECUTIVE OFFICE  PRESIDENT - 1 Elected  Roberta_S^_Schlosberg - Roberta  worked on the~Vancouver Status of  Women Ombuds Service 1972 - 1973.  During this time she wrote "Know  Your Human Rights" information paper,  and the V.S.W. Child Care position  paper. Obtaining Transition House,  was and is, a priority of Roberta's.  She, presently, serves on its board  of directors.  Roberta obtained a B.A. (Sociology)  1972 from U.B.C. Her working experience has included sales, clerical  work, library-assistance and serving  as house-mother for "emotionally-  disturbed" teenagers.  In the past year, she has been employed as a research assistant at  U.B.C. Her interests include writing,  reading, hiking and sewing.  All of the V.S.W. research and representation in the area of child-care  over the past year and a half is due  to the efforts of Roberta Schlosberg.  VICE-PRESIDENT - 3 Elected  Nancv_D. Conrod - Nancy has worked  on the V.S.W. Ombuds Service since  August, 1973.  She wrote the Status  of Women position paper on Labour  Legislation, and testified for the  Status of Women at the Law Reform  Commission hearings on the Landlord  and Tenant Act.  Recently she has been a member of the  working committee on property (Royal  Commission on Family and Childrens'  Law)  She received A.B, Magna cum/aude,  (Radcliffe) 1966, and her law  degree from North Western University  (Chicago) cum/aude 1969, spending  the two previous years at the  Harvard Law School.  Her work experience has included  being attorney-advisor, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development , (Chicago). Nancy Conrod's  interests include women in the  labour force, Family Law, skiing,  hiking and textile crafts.  OMBUDSWOMAN  Gene has held the position of  Ombudswoman since the fall of  1972. While spear-heading briefs  on numerous aspects of legislation,  she has well represented the V.S.W.  on committees and at hearings.  She is:  -a member of the Family Law  Subsection, B.C. Bar Association  -A working committee member of the  Royal Commission on Family and  Children's Law.  -A board member of the B.C. Civil  Liberties Association.  -A board member of the Senate of  the University of British Columbia.  She has received M.S.W. and an M.A.  (Sociology) degree from U.B.C. Prior  to her work at the V.S.W. she was  a.social worker for the Provincial  Department of Social Welfare and  later for the Vancouver Neuroligical  Centre.  Since her appointment,  December, 1973, Gene Errington has  been serving as a Human Rights  Commissioner for the Province of  British Columbia.  Her interests include ballet and  music.  Jessie Parker  Jessie has been one of our most  indespensible volunteers. She  has worked in our office every  Thursday morning since September  1973.  She has worked for many years as  a legal secretary and is now retired.  She has proven herself to be truly  a reliable, competent contributor  to the Status of Women Organization.  Her specific interests are Canadian  and World political and Social  Systems.  TREASURER  ^*TH_BEZJREDI  Judith has served as Status of Women  Treasurer 1973 - 1974.  She holds B.B.A. and M.A. degrees.  In the past she has been accountant-  auditor for Chartered Accounatatcy  firms in Vancouver. Prior to her  recent promotion in Crown Zellerback,  Judith was Credit Manager for the  company.  Judith Bezeredi has a wide background  in Medicine, Law, and Economics and  is presently doing graduate work in  the latter.  PUBLIC RELATIONS  2ii2^_¬ßHtl}Srland  Glinds Sutherland has been on the  staff of V.S.W. since March 1973.  She spent her first months working  with the education group during  which time she filled many speaking  engagements.  She is presently  employed on our ombuds service and  is co-producer of the V.S.W. television programme "Woman Alive."  Ms. Sutherland is member-at-large  on the current V.S.W. Executive.  She received a B.A. (sociology)  from the University of British  Columbia. Among her interests  are cooking, ballet, theatre,  and television production.  NOMINATIONS OFFICER  Hanne Jensen  Hanne has served as Vice-  President of V.S.W. 1973-1974.  She has also done volunteer  office work, ombuds work, and  speaking.  She was educated in Denmark and  worked there as a legal assis*  tant.  In Canada, Hanne has worked in  Sales and Marketing.  She is  presently employed as a Human  Rights officer for the Province.  Hanne has a wide interest and  experience in employment for  women. She was one of the first  women to lay her job on the line,  by filing an equal pay complaint  with the Human Rights Commission,  and won!  MEMBERSHIP OFFICER  Anne Howarth  Anne was a volunteer staff  member at our office from the  summer through Dec. 1973.  While a volunteer, she was  very active with the orientation committee, and has  encouraged many women to  participate in V.S.W. activities .  Anne was involved from its  inception with "Women for *  Political Action" in Toronto  and has actively participated  in six political campaigns.  In her current job with WIN (Women's  Independence Necessary), Anne works  for single parent women and deals  with problems 6f welfare,employment,  housing, daycare, and self-upgrading.  Anne was educated in England and at  Seneca University, Toronto.  Her interests are Canadian History,  Law, Politics, The Women's Movement  in Canada, Music, and Traveling with  Family.  Monica Mui  Monica Mui is the membership officer  for the '73 - '74 executive and has  been bookeeper for V.S.W. since 1972.  She is a member of the orientation  committee and one of two people  responsible for a 10,000 dollar grant  from Secretary of State to hire  volunteer organizers. Ms. Mui is a  member of the newsletter committee  and is involved in various workshops.  She has participated in the planning  and organizing of a Youth Conference  dealing with Multi-Culturalism.  Monica has a B.A. in Sociology with  a background in Fine Arts.  She  enjoys working with groups of people  as well a:s music, "anything that moves on stage or screen and participating in sports that don't  require a great deal of physical  stamina, for instance, weight-  lifting is out."  NEWSLETTER OFFICER  Diane is presently working on the  newsletter committee and writes for  "Kinesis".  She has appeared at orientation  meetings and has done volunteer  work on the Ombuds Service.  Diane holds a B.A. degree (Political  Science).  She has held various  positions as a computer systems  analyst and a programmer analyst.  In the past, she has taught in this  field and is presently working  in this area for the Department  of Human Resources.  Diane Ryals has a wide background in newsletter writing and  editing; her other special  interests include Women in  the Labour Force and Art.  Diane brought an equal pay  case before the Federal Government with the assistance of  V.S.W. (Feb. 1973 - April 1974)  MEMBER AT LARGE  52E£*£_E*SEi££  Bobbie has been a regular  volunteer at the Status of  Women two days per week, for  several months.  She has  introduced a much needed method  of recording data and phone calls  and has contributed enormously  to the smooth operation of our  office. She is a writer for  "Kinesis", and active generally  in the newsletter committee.  She was educated at U.B.C. and  has completed a year of graduate  studies.  Bobbi worked for 25 years as an  editor for the C.B.C. News Service  and is now retired.  Her interests include, "All aspects  of Nature and Conservation, Astronomy, Music, Films, Reading and Outdoor Rambling and Poking About."  She is concerned with emotionally  disturbed people and is a volunteer  at the Psychiatric Ward of Lions  Gate and at Sunny Hill Children's  Hospital.  5Ej._3fiS§_I^._^££2£2°2  Dr. Helga E. Jacobson has held  the position of Chairperson-  SpeakerJs Bureau 1973 - 1974.  She has also been a member of  the Working Committee on Property  of the Royal Commission on Family  and Children's Law. Helga is a  Social Anthropologist in the  Department of Socialogy and Anthropology, U.B.C.  She is greatly  concerned in her teaching and  research with the situation of  women in Canada. Her specific  teaching areas are Women's  Studies and Urban Anthropology.  In the course of the research,  Helga has visited the Philipines,  Japan and People's China.  She is generally concerned with  problems of education and is  interested in finding more and  better ways to make connections  between the university, community,  and society.  Anne Petrie  Anne has served as Vice-President of Status of Women (1973 -  1974). Prior to this she worked  as an Education Staff Member,  and was Newsletter Editor.  During the Fall of 1973, Anne  produced the V.S.W. television  programme "Woman Alive".  Anne received her M.A. (English  Literature) in 1973.  She has  taught at U.B.C; co-ordinated  Women's Studies, U.B.C; and  did research for the channel  10 programme, "S.F.U. Today".  Anne Petrie is presently employed  as a Researcher and Interviewer  for the C.B.C.'s "Good Morning  Radio" programme.  5i£S§_?i_22HSi§5  Diana has been active in the  Vancouver Status of Women for  the past year.  She has participated in orientation meetings and has put a great deal  of effort into organizing a  consciousness raising group  for the North Shore Women.  Diana apprenticed in the  Retail Book Business in  Toronto.  Since moving west,  she has had extensive ex'perince  in the publishing business, as  Warehouse Manager, Publisher's  Representative , Manager and  Owner of her own bookstore,  and now a partner with her  husband in Self-Council  Press Ltd., a firm which  publishes law books for the  layman (women).  Her interests are: Reading,  especially Feminist Literature,  Playing the Bagpipes and  "trying to keep physically  up to my six year old son  and one Labrador dog."  *££i££_*LJ-*§ttson  Louise has been a member of the Status  of Women for the past year, has participated in orientation meetings,  and has been active in forming a  consciousness/discussion group for  Coquitlam women.  She is the Status  of Women contact person for that area.  Louise has her R.N. from V.G.H. and  has worked both there and at the  Royal Columbian.  When asked to consider running for  member-at-large by one of our staff,  she replied:  "I'm not sure I have anything to  offer this position...but this might  be a start for me I feel I'm just  starting to wake up.  Being a member-  at-large will be a real learning,  personal growth experience...and the  time has come for women to stop  refusing to get involved."  Reva Dexter  Reva worked with the Status of  Women Education Staff 1972 -  1973. She has hald the position  of Education Chairperson, 1973 -  1974. She has been a co-ordinator  U.B.C. Women's Studies, and a  seminar leader, Women's Studies  U.B.C. and S.F.U.  Reva is a teacher, and has been  a guidance counsellor for two  years.  She holds a Masters  Degree in Counselling (Columbia).  While working with the V.S.W., Reva  organized the High-School Public  Speaking Programme, and chaired  the committee who produced "Kit  for Counsellors, Explaining sex  stereotypes.  Reva Dexter's interest is "The World"  Carolvn Gibbons - From September  1972 to~January 1973, Carolyn  worked as legal counsel for the  V.S.W.  She serves on the Board of  Directors of Transition House.  She graduated in 1968 from the U.B.C.  Faculty of Law and was admitted to  the B.C. Bar, October 1969.  She practised law in Vancouver October 1969 to May 1972.  Since January of 1973, Carolyn has  been Legislative Director of the  B.C. Federation of Labour.  Carolyn Gibbons is on the Board of  Directors of the Vancouver Community  Legal Assistance Society, and the  Legal Aid Society of B.C.  She is a  lecturer for the-Vancouver People's  Law School.  June S. Dunlog  June was an organizer of the B.C.  Status of Women Council. She was  greatly instrumental in obtaining  Transition House and presently serves  on its Board of Directors.  A registered nurse, she has done  graduate work (McGill) in psychiatric  nursing and teaching supervision.  Over the past year she has coordinated the West-Point Grey Information Centre. Presently, she is a  community development worker for the  task force, organizing for the  election of community resources  boards for Dunbar-Point Grey-  Southlands .  June Dunlop's interests include  Transition House, eo-op Housing  Foundation, and funding for information centres.  Nanc£_Denofreo  Nancy has been the Status of  Women contact person for Richmond,  Delta and Surrey and has been  helpful in forming consciousness  raising groups in those areas.  She has also been involved with  our education group.  She has a Masters Degree in  Social Work but has held a  wide variety of jobs, " Some  well paid, some not." For the  last three years, she has been  at home with her three children,  "with predictable damage to all  concerned."   cent. p6  - chatting with jan  Introduction  The reason why I wanted to introduce  Jan to you was the fact that she  went through two experiences which  I consider of great interest to many  of us.  She obtained her own divorce  without the aid and expense of a  lawyer, and she subsequently changed  her name.  She did not revert to her  maiden name but created an entirely  new name to suit her own needs, not  to acknowledge her affiliations with  others.  In the course of our talk we came up  with some exciting ideas which should  be shared with you. We followed  these ideas and veered off the original course of the interview. Therefore, we are presenting you with a  "potpourri" of ideas.  Q. Jan, you married very early.  Would you like to talk about  what influenced you to do this?  Jan: I grew up in a small mill town  where the social structure is very  tightly knit and very conservative.  You either followed the rules and  were a good girl or else disregarded  them and by doing so excluded yourself from the community. You could  either try to cope with this or you  had to leave. There were no shades  in the social code; no anonymity,  no alternate lifestyles to relate  to as examples, no downtown to go  to and get rid of the frustration.  So I followed the pattern of the  "good girl" and got married pretty  i young.  In a community like this  there is no way, especially for a  girl, to learn how to assume responsibility. Marriage meant simply  shifting your (conditioned) desire  for stable surroundings from parents  to husband.  Q. What was your marriage like?  Jan: After having attended university here for a year I convinced my  boyfriend to come too.  I took fine  arts - mainly on opposition to my  father who wanted me to take science.  I got married after the second year.  Life was mostly going to school together and trying to support ourselves,  plus, of course, doing all the chores  expected from a good wife.  I wanted  a mythical security that I thought  marriage was supposed to provide.  I  allowed myself to be defined by my  husband.  I followed his lead and  carried out his fantasies for our  life together. We worked at the same  jobs (as child care workers) and  spent all our time together. His  friends were my friends.  I had no  sense of self. After four years my  identity was submerged in his.  I  broke out of this routine by becoming  involved with another man who became  my lover - an act that society would  call an irresponsible thing to do,  but for me it was actually the first  RESPONSIBLE act in my life.  It was  my very own decision and I had to  stand up for it and deal with the  consequences on my own.  I was issued  an ultimatum - either my husband or  my lover.  I went away for a week to  think it over and realized there was  no either-or. The struggle was for  myself and my own growth.  I could  not do this by transferring allegiance  from one man to another. With this  realization, I (my ego, self, whatever you want to call it) was born.  About six months after leaving my  husband, I got to the point of  wanting all bonds broken - physical,  emotional and legal. The legal  aspects were subtle but real.  I was  still legally his wife even though  he was living with another woman and  I was on my own. That legal bond  bothered me. He did not feel the  pressure, and if we were to get a  divorce, he wanted to be the one to  start the proceedings.  So, I left  it with him.  But after six months  nothing had been" done;  Q. Why do you think he didn't  follow through with the divorce?  Jan:  I don't know, but I figure he  wanted me still to be dependent on  him in some way. Anyway, I decided  to get it over fast. This involved  taking the role of the "accuser".  It is a shame that terms like that  still have to be used in B.C. and  that one person has to sue the other  for breech of contract and lay  "fault" on him or her.  Ideally, we  both wanted to go to court and say:  no blame, just - it's over.  I bought  a booklet by Kayce White; How To Do  Your Own Divorce, for four dollars.  It took some time to get used to the  legal expressions and the whole  procedure, but with a little effort  I found it easy enough to understand.  I believe the so called divorce kits  for $ 50 are a waste of money. The  divorce procedure was briefly as  follows:  a) fill out application  forms available at large stationery  stores b) have someone (preferably  the sheriff, it's cheaper) deliver  the divorce notice in person - It is  even cheaper to have the other party  go down to the courthouse and be told  there by the sheriff,  c) produce a  witness, in this case, someone who  could testify that my husband was  living with another person,  d) wait  (6 weeks in my case).  e) go to court  with the witness.  The judge was very friendly and it  was all over in no time at all.  Actually, a real anticlimax after  all the effort and nervousness.  (I  was nervous at court!) Neither  property, money, or children were  involved.  The whole experiences  cost $ 45, booklet included. And  to celebrate, the witness, myself,  and my new ex-husband had a lovely  lunch at a French restaurant!  Q. What about changing your name?  Jan: I could have gone back to my  maiden name right at the divorce  without difficulty, but I felt that  I had changed so much from the girl  I had been under this name that it  would not identify ME anymore. And  certainly, I did not want to keep my  ex-husband's name in which I never  had felt at ease anyway.  I chose a  name I really liked and which had  some meaning to me. The rest was  filling out forms sent for from the  vital statistics Department in  Victoria.  I had to publish the  change in the B.C. Gazette and in a  local newspaper and send back a  clipping of it together with the  forms. After a short while I got  an impressive looking certificate  with my very own name.  Q. What were the reactions of your  friends and family?  Jan: The women friends really got  off on it, but my parents were  shocked and strongly resented it.  They kept sending me letters in my  old name and I finally had to make  it a big issue. So somehow managed  to accept the fact.  Q. How do you feel about this  experience in retrospect?  cont. from p. 5  Her interests are "myself and  other loved ones, the Women's  Movement, Natural History and  Explosives.  Janice Booth  Janice has been associated with the  V.SiW. since its inception. During  this time, she has served as Member-  at-Large, written for the newsletter,  and been involved with the education  and family group. A very special  interest of hers is Transition House  and she presently serves on its Board  of. Directors.  Educated in England, Janice has taught  elementary school for ten years.  Janice Booth is Secretary of the Preschool Executive.  She is greatly  concerned with the need for more  Transition Houses and has been working  for these during the last 18 months.  Robyn Pedersen  Robyn Pedersen is a very active member of V.S.W.'s Orientation Committee.  For several months, she has been in  charge of phoning new members in order  to introduce them to V.S.W. activities.  She has travelled widely and  worked in Australia, England, and  Canada.  She is currently an employee of Braun Electric Canada Ltd.  For the past fourteen years she has  worked primarily as a personal  secretary although her duties have  included some writing and public  relations work. Ms. Pedersen is  also a member of the Vancouver Folk  Song Society and helps to publish  their monthly newsletter. Among her  hobbies are arts and crafts, cycling,  swimming and reading. Jan: Great! I feel that I really  became myself, or at least, started  the process of becoming myself and  finding out about me which is an  ongoing process.  I had to make my  new friends, friends who dealt with  me for my own sake and not because  I was the wife of somebody or other.  Q. You are living with Ron now?  Jan: Yes, but it took me close to  two years till I was ready again to  share daily life with somebody.  During that time I concentrated on  myself.  I had a lot to catch up!  I decided then, that if ever I was  to live with somebody again it would  have to be on different terms - and  we are continually working it out.  I insisted to have a part of my life  that belongs to me and to have literally a room of my own, a place  where I can go to and deal with myself. Ron has his part and we both  share a third part together. This  way we keep a way open to our personal  development and are able to face  each other as whole individuals.  Q.  Jan, your work is quite a big  part of your life. You have  made a successful career very  quickly in government administration.  In your work you put  a lot of emphasis on women.  Can we hear more about that?  Jan: Well, I had different jobs  doing child care work.  I had an OFY  (Opportunity for Youth) project using  theatre techniques to work with kids.  Then I decided to put in an application for the job as project officer,  though without too much hope.  But,  I did get accepted.  Basically OFY  programmes give grants to groups  which are somehow related to the  community and balance the development  of the individuals with the benefits  to their community. My priorities in  funding have been with women's groups  who have applied for support. The  concept of direct funding to people  to allow them to experiment with  their ideas is an exciting one, and  unique in terms of government support.  OFY, being designed for summer  work for students is short term  funding (three months) at low salaries.  But because of the lack of any funding programme designed to realistically meet the needs of women, it is  one way to get direct funding.  I  have mixed feelings about both the  granting system and the type of  programmes women are involved in.  The women's movement is highly  service oriented.  This is necessary  in order to provide for women's  needs, but services are not by nature  financially self-supporting.  So,  we have an ongoing unsatisfactory  situation with women having to continually seek out funding to support  their work. The situation parallels  getting an allowance from fathers  and household money from husbands.  I would like to see women becoming  more self-sufficient - becoming  entrepreneurs and developing businesses that service in the market  place. Personally, I'd love to start  some kind of business, I believe it  is a real challenge.  I've read  about women owning and manning  construction firms, womens' banks,  women tool manufacturers and it  sounds really exciting.  Q. Don't you think women might fall  in the same trap as men - the  race for profit at any price?  Jan: Not necessarily. Of course,  business has to make profit, but it  is up to you to decide how much and  in what way. Women could adapt their  business structure to meet women's  needs, perhaps more socially oriented,  less hierarchic, in a rhythm more  natural to women, and not the rigid  pattern usually laid upon them by  male employers. I do not imply  there would be no discipline, but  there might be a different kind, a  more sensible way.  Q. You think of day care facilities  at work?  Jan: Yes, for one example. But  there's a lot more to it than that.  Why don't we have something like a  "downtown women's club" with interested women from business and professions meeting regularly and discussing things like that?  Q.  Sounds great. Women with talent  and initiative need support.  Women have to start trusting each  other in business and professional matters.  I find that a  lot of women automatically turn  to men for professional services.  They have to overcome the prejudice they have from their male  oriented upbringing.  There is  still a deeply rooted patriarchal  attitude in many of us. We have  to encourage women who already  have the necessary skills to  help each other. We have to  cross the lines of working and  non-working women, blue collar  and white collar women. We  should promote and support women  who offer all kinds of services  and knowledge. We should as  easily turn to women doctors,  lawyers, architects, business  persons as we* do to* their male  counterparts. We have to free  our set images of professions  being for men only.  I do not  want to say that women are necessarily better, but they are at  least as good. They are an  alternative we should encourage.  But sorry, I got carried away. I  think your idea of bringing  women interested in business and  professions together simply great  Would you be willing to pursue  your idea and organize something  like this if I mention it in  KINESIS.  Jan:  Sure, I would!  Give my address  and all.  Which I herewith gladly do, hoping  she will be flooded with sincere  and enthusiastic (but realistic, it's  business) mail and phone calls.  Ms. Jan Cornflower  OFY, 326 Howe Street  Vancouver  688-7791 (during the day)  I think we women are really great,  though we sometimes need to be  reminded. Now more than ever in  history, women have a chance to  free ourselves and become whole  human beings.  V. Hotz  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its  objective is to provide an open channel of communication between the  members of the organization and to  promote understanding about the  changing position of women in society.  PUBLICATION DATE:  The first week of  each month.  -COPY DEADLINE: The 15th of the previous month.  SUBSCRIPTIONS:  KINESIS is provided  as a service to members of VSW in  good standing. Membership is acquired by an annual donation.  In  determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per year  per person to print and mail.  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Kathy Sopko,  Diane Ryals, Margie Colclough,  Bobbie Patrick, Monica Mui, Eloah  Giacommelli.  GRAPHICS AND LAYOUT: Kathy Sopko  The newsletter is produced by  folunteer labour and printed by  College Printers.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will  consider those from non-members.  All submissions, including letters  to the editorial committee, must  be accompanied by the writer's  name and address.  Pseudonyms  will be used where requested..  Where necessar, the editorial committee will edit for brevity,  clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 W. 4th Ave,  Vancouver 9, B.C., Telephone: 736-  3746.  subscribe!  ADDRESS   PHONE (home)_  (work)_  OCCUPATION  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  CORPORATE MEMBERSHIP $__  RENEWAL     NEW MEMBER  I wish to become a member  I wish only to receive KINESIS_  In determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per person  per year to print and mail. jun  June 11 Media Action  7:30PM, Office  June 13 Orientation  8PM, Office  June 18 ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  ■  ELECTIONS  7:30 YWCA  June 25 Media Action  7:30PM,  Office  do it now  Orientation  8PM, Office  It is Federal Election time and we  have an excellent opportunity  to make our voices heard. Our  M.P.'s are supposed to represent  us—surely inflation and unemployment are not the only  issues. We must question all  candidates as to their stand  on women's rights and let them  know that the only way to the  woman's vote is through positive  statements and positive action  on the feminist issues.  At the recent Women For Action  Conference it was agreed that  as many of us as possible  would attend all candidate  meetings and raise questions  from the floor concerning  specific points. A few of  those priority demands are  as follows:  -demand repeal of the  Criminal Code Provisions on  Abortion.  -demand that the standards  of evidence in a rape case  be made the same as standards  of evidence for ANY assault  case.  -demand that the Indian Act  be amended to allow an Indian  Woman, on her marriage to a  non-Indian, be able to retain  her Indian status and transmit  her Indian status to her  children.  -demand institution of a  no-fault divorce law and demand  that the Divorce Act be am«  ended so that the 3 year separation  period be reduced to 1 year.  -demand that provision  be made to include Housewives  in the Canada Pension Plan.  -demand more action on  the implementation of recommendations made by the Royal  Commission on the Status of  Women.  Only 34% of the recommendations that fall under  Federal jurisdiction have been  fully implemented.  It is only by our attendance at  all-candidate meetings that we  can be sure that the issues  important to us will be raised.  Follow through on unsatisfactory  answers by letting candidate  know that he/she has lost your  vote and those of other concerned  women. After the meeting send  further letters to the candidate and comments to the  editorial pages of the newspapers.  The name of the game for candidates  is vote-getting.  Our power lies  in letting them know that we  will not allow our vote to be  wasted on those who have no  positive policy on women's  issues.  D. Bissell ORLenTATION  Speakers for future meetings are as fellows?  On June 13 a member of the Women's Health Collective will be  speaking.  The speaker for the June 27 meeting has not yet  been confirmed.  The July 11 meeting will be devoted to a  discussion with a member of the Rape Crisis Centre,  And on  July 27 Lee Grills, a former member of N.O.W. and a current  member of VSW will share her experiences with new members.  (See May KINESIS for an article by Lee.)  ELEMENTARY ACCOUNTING  Judith Bezeredi, our Treasurer, has offered to give a course  in elementary accounting to all women interested in learning  the basics.  It will be held in the VSW office.  The time and  length of the course will be announced as soon as we receive  the response as to how many women will attend the classes.  This would be a good opportunity to learn and/or improve skills  and job opportunities.  Please write or phone if you are in  terested in enrolling, ..Let us know before JUNE 30, 1974.  P.S.  IT'S FREE  ELECTIONS  Another election is in the offing - our third since VSW was  founded.  This gives us another opportunity to get out and  ?upport women candidates.  Now is the time to join the party  of your choice, or just go out and work for it to find out  what politics is all about.  Until we have equal representation in government, we will never really have equality.  Watch your papers for women candidates in your area and offer  tc help in their campaign,  Joan Wallace, past president of VSW, is running under the  Liberal banner in the riding of Burnaby, Richmond, Delta.  The incumbent is Conservative, John Reynolds.  See next  months issue for a story on other women candidates.  WOMAN S RESOURCE DAY  The Pioneer Women's Asso. will hold a woman's resource day  on Wednesday, June 1.9th at the Sheraton Plaza 500, 10AM -  12PM and 2-4PM.  Ten women's groups, including VSW, Vancouver City College, the Women's Health Collective and  UBC Women's Resource Centre, will be represented.  The  event is open to the public and admission is free.  Day  care may be available.  For further information contact:  Mrs. Bertha Solman, 731-7644 after 3PM.  PUBLIC HEARINGS  The Royal Commission on Family & Children's Law will be holding meetings in Vancouver soon.  Among the topics of discussion will be matrimonial property & maintenance, adoption,  legitimacy, protection of children, custody, young people and  the law special services to children, and they way our present  court sustem is set up to handle these problems.  Times and  places of the meetings are as follows:  1:30 - 4:30 7i 30-10:00PM  Monday,    First United Church       Macdonald Elementary  June 17    320 East Hastings 1950 East Hastings'  Tuesday,   srrc ?.s ~bov? ?.-'ñ†-'* : -  :.'Vvo