  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meeting is Mon Mar 3 at 7 pm  at Kinesis, 301-1720 Grant St.  Production for the April issue is from  Mar 19-25. All women welcome even  if you don't have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism, classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  wendy lee kenward (on leave), Agnes  Huang  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Dorcas, Rachel Rosen, Anne Webb,  Dana Putnam, Catherine Munn,  Allison Flack, Rita Wong, Faith Jones,  Winnifred Tovey, Fatima Jaffer, Lisa  Valencia-Svensson, Robyn Hall, Jehn  Starr, Agnes Huang  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson, Chrystal  Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Co-ordinaton Swee Sim Tan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Viola Thomas of the United Native  Nations speaking in front of the  Vancouver Police Department  on Valentine's Day.  Photo by Jehn Starr.  PRESS DATE  February 25, 1997  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Inside  Centrespread  Happy IWD! A calendar of events..  compiled by Dana Putnam  Arts  Native women in the arts 17  by Sandra Laronde as told to Michelle Sylliboy  Review of Barb Cranmer's Qatuwas 18  by Jehn Starr  Two books against fat oppression  19  reviewed by Carol Read  Women, physics and God in review 20  by Faith Jones  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 7  compiled by Andrea Imada and Rachel Rosen  Movement Matters 8  by Dana Putnam, Rachel Rosen and Fatima Jaffer  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Dana Putnam  News  Valentine's March in the Downtown Eastside 3  by Jehn Starr  Remembering Pamela George 3  by Agnes Huang  A look at the federal budget 4  by Jackie Brown  Sexual assault centre loses records case 5  by Robyn Hall  Alberta women heading to the polls 6  by Julie Black  Features  Reasons behind Tupac Amaru hostage-taking 9  by Tamara as told to Monica Vanschaik  One sexual assault centre's battle to protect women's records 10  by Cynthia Davis  Women in China: an interview with Helen Huang 11  as told to Fatima Jaffer and Agnes Huang  An alternative to the federal budget 15  by Shannon e. Ash  Sexual assault trial halted..  The situation in Peru.,  IWD Calendar..  Kinesis & the Vancouver  Status of Women are moving!  As of March 27,1997, our address is:  Suite 309, 877 East Hastings Street  Vancouver, BC  V6A 3Y1  Our telephone and fax numbers  will remain the same:  Kinesis: (604) 255-5499  VSW public line: (604) 255-5511  Fax: (604) 255-5511  Qatuwas director Barb Cranmer.. Happy IWD, as Kinesis goes to press.  (Okay, okay, we know, it's still two weeks  away...) But happy day in advance!  IWD is a time to reflect on our collective struggles to end the oppression—in all  forms—of women. It is also a time to remember and draw on the strength and  courage of individuals and groups of  women who continue to press forward that  feminist struggle for equality.  This year, it is even more important  that we, as feminists, celebrate IWD, particularly as the backlash by individuals and  groups with right-wing (and more and  more right-wing) agendas against feminism  continues to grow, and the right-wing  makes some inroads in co-opting groups  of women and segments of the women's  movement.  As feminists, we need to take stock of  what resources and strengths we do have  as a movement, recognize and acknowledge the accomplishments we've achieved  over the years, and take action to not only  safeguard those gains, but to further advance our situations, and the situations of  our sisters everywhere.  We should not be satisfied with fighting just to maintain our ground., .although  even doing that is becoming more difficult  and draining. Not only do we need to secure the right we already (supposedly)  have—like, access to safe abortions and  equal protection under the law—we need  to be vigilant in fighting for the rights we  still don't have.  No clearer example of the challenges  and work we are being confronted with on  an (increasingly) daily basis, is the recent  Senate hold-up of the federal child support  bill. The new bill would do away with taxing custodial parents (that is, women) who  receive child support and the tax breaks  non-custodial parents (that is, men) get  from paying child support, among other  things. But thanks to Liberal Senator Ann  Cools—the new darling of the "men's  movement"—much of the improvements  feminists have fought for around child support payments and enforcement were almost entirely set back a decade or so.  Cools was loudest among her friends  on the Right in denouncing the bill, arguing that men have borne the brunt of "feminist demagoguery" far too long, and here  is one more example of it. Poor things, says  Cools.  In the end, the child support bill did  receive approval from the Senate, but...the  Senate, largely Cools (who in a very past  previous life was an ardent civil rights activist, we hear) was able to strong-arm Justice Minister Allan Rock into agreeing to  have a parliamentary committee look at  amendments to the bill down the line.  During all this "debate," the mainstream media reported, on and on, the opinions of anti-feminist (and really, anti-  women) men and their battle against the  child support bill. It shouldn't come as such  a surprise to us that men are trying to take  over our struggle, by claiming that they are  now the ones in positions of inequality.  But we know better than that, says  NAC president Joan Grant-Cummings:  "The way the whole world is ordered is a  men's movement. The social, political and  economic structures are male-dominated.  It makes it really clear who has the resources (money, time) to organize politically."  So, feminists shouldn't be surprised to  hear that the "men" got on the horn—or  rather over the net—to all their comrades  She said men from all over the world  were e-mailing the justice minister and the  Senate about the child support bill...and if s  probably obvious whose side they were on.  ANCOUVER  T   A   X   U   S  O   H      \A/   O   M   E   N  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  memberships or donated to Vancouver Status of Women in February.  Regina Brennan * Jo Coffey » Fatima Correia * Marlene Coulthard * Gail Cryer  * Janet Dickie * Jean Elder * Sharon Goldberg * Bayla Greenspoon * Hannah Hadikin  * Jo Hinchliffe * Margaret Copping Hollis * Susanna Hughes * Jennifer Jordan *  Deborah Lerose * Karen Maki * Jennifer Mansell » Barbara Jo May * Sarah Pollard *  Rosemarie Rupps * Anny Scoones * Geraldine Strother  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Wendy Baker * Nancy Duff * Mary Frey * Jody Gordon 'Barbara Kannazyn *  Barbara Lebrasseur * Lolani Maar * Elizabeth May Whynot  Thanks also to the following lawyers or law firms who gave their support to VSW  or who joined our Lawyer Referral list.  Margaret A. Johnson Barrister & Solicitor * Dickson Murray * Karen O'Connor  Banister & Solicitor * Sandra L. Polinsky Barrister & Solicitor * Roberta Rich Barrister & Soliciter * Saucier & Company * Marianne Walters Law Corporation  As for Cools, Grant-Cummings says:  "It's tragic that after women have fought  for participation in the political process that  we can be so undermined by women in  political positions who are misguided."  Rumour has it that Cools is already planning to take on Bill C-46, and hamper its  passing in the Senate. Bill C-46 has to do  with the disclosure of women's personal  records in sexual assault trials [see page 5.]  Now, more than ever, feminists need  to work in solidarity to challenge conservatism in Canada and everywhere. In future  issues, Kinesis will run more discussions  on the strategies for strengthening our activist struggles.  One last thing...as Kinesis goes to press,  we learned that Sandy Nelson, a Tacoma,  Washington-based journalist, has lost her  case against her employer in the Washington State Supreme Court. Nelson has been  fighting for more than six years to be reinstated as a reporter with the Tacoma Tribune, ever since she was removed from the  city beat and stuck behind a desk as a copy  editor.  Why was Nelson's pen and notepad  yanked from her? Nelson is quite sure it's  because her employer's don't like her politics, which, contrary to what they claim,  never "biased" her writing. Nelson is a socialist, a feminist, and a lesbian—qualities  which don't seem much appreciated in the  world of corporate media. (That's why we  write for Kinesis.) We'll fill you in some  more on Nelson's case in our April issue.  That's all for now this month, as Kinesis tries to make it to press (on time.) Big  IWD hugs all around and have an enjoyable read.  The sun is out and so are all the busy  volunteers, putting together this International Women's Day issue of Kinesis. At this  time of the year, as we proofread, cut, paste,  and tap away at our computer keyboards,  we also take time to reflect on where the  movement is, what women are doing to  change things, how and why... One thing  remains clear—it is essential we continue  the celebrate the womanpower at Kinesis  to get news about women that's not in the  dailies out to our readers!  Joining Kinesis in its struggles are new  Editorial Board members Sook C. Kong and  Rachel Rosen. Both Sook and Rachel have  been volunteering at Kinesis for several  months, in fact years. Both have contributed articles and long weekends and  evening hours to proofread, paste-up and  generally ensure Kinesis gets to press! We're  thrilled to have them both on (the) board!!!  Sook is a Malaysian feminist and lesbian activist, currently working on a PhD  in English literature through the University  of British Columbia (her degree is in fact  from the University of Victoria). Among  other things, Sook is active with Monsoon,  an Asian lesbian and bisexual women's  group in Vancouver, and sits on the planning committee of Lotus Roots, a gathering of Asian lesbians, gays and bisexuals.  Rachel is a Jewish lesbian and feminist  activist who can very often be found at  demos and other political events around  town (Vancouver). Among other things, she  has worked for over a year on the Women  and Carpentry Program through the Environmental Youth Alliance, and is an active  member in the No! toAPEC Coalition (Network Opposed to Anti-People Economic  Control).  Also new on the Kinesis front are some  of the voices/writers in this month's issue:  Julie Black of Calgary, Tamara from Peru,  Cynthia Davis of Kamloops, Sandra  Laronde from Toronto, and Vancouver-  based activists Helen Huang, Dana  Putnam, and Carol Read. Welcome and  thanks to all of them.  Thanks also to first-time production  volunteers wielding (proofreading) blue  pencil and X-acto knife: Catherine Munn  and Allison Flack.  Last but not least, we've got more on  THE MOVE! Yep, the newspaper that keeps  on moving is literally moving—but not at  the end of February, as we had earlier forecast Kinesis and the Vancouver Status of  Women will be moving gradually over the  month of March. If you'd like to help us  move, there's lots of packing, sorting and  organizing to be done over the month.  There's also lots of painting (think bright  luscious colours) of the new space, as well  as other fun set-up stuff! Call Agnes at 255-  5499 or Ema at 255-5511 if you'd like to  help.  Our actual big move days are—Saturday the 15th, Saturday the 22nd and  Wednesday the 26th, which will probably  also be our last day at our Commercial  Drive location! For our new address, see  ad on table of contents page.  Oh, and one thing we will not have to  move is our fax machine! Some guy walked  into our front office over the weekend as  women were working in the production  room and walked away with the fax machine. It's a pretty big setback as recent  thefts of VSW's computers have resulted  in high insurance deductibles. So if any of  you know of someone willing to donate a  fax machine, please give us a call at 255-  5511.  Oh, hey, if you're wondering where we  got the money to pay for the mega-corporate style advertising at 1995's UN World  Conference on Women in Beijing [see back  page,] it's a secret!! (Actually, as you may  have guessed, it's an image manipulation  by the wild and wacky women at Kinesisl)  If you'd like to join in the production room  antics and volunteer for Canada's foremost  feminist newspaper, call Agnes at 255-5499.  Happy IWD and hope you have a good  start to another spring season. News  Valentine's March in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside:  In memory of the women  by Jehn Starr and Agnes Huang  If roses are a gesture of love, then the  annual Valentine's Memorial March in Vancouver delivered a whole bouquet on February 14th to the women who have died violent deaths in Downtown Eastside.  The March is held once a year "to honour the women who've died, to healsome  of the pain we feel inside, and to do something about the injustice we see happening,"  says Marion Dubick of Downtown Eastside  Women's Centre. It is the first year the  Women's Centre has coordinated the March.  Among the women being remembered,  some have been murdered; others have died  because of substance abuse; other have committed suicide. Since 1982, the March organizers say they know of 132 women who have  died violently in the Downtown Eastside—  60 percent of whom are Aboriginal women.  And these are just the women whose bodies have been found and whose names have  been known; many more are still missing  or unacknowledged.  For Valentine's Day, women's names were written on      sfjggj  banners and placards, and  made visible throughout the  March.  The memorial started out  at Carnegie Community Centre  with drumming and testimonials by  a number of speakers about women  they've known who've died. The auditorium was jam-packed, with many people  streaming out into the corridor area.  Marion Dubick says the high turnout  shows that the annual March has a profound meaning for a lot of people in the  Downtown Eastside community. "It's really important to start some healing in the  Downtown Eastside because the lives  down here appear so disposable," says  Dubick. "It's like there's the outside world  that doesn't seem to care unless something  earth shattering happens, but for the people down here, it does really matter—these  are their mothers, sisters, cousins,  friends who are dying."  On their way out of the  Carnegie Centre, those at the  rally inside smudged themselves with sweetgrass.  By the time the  March was set to move  Iff" down East Hastings  ife \. Street, a crowd of about  ijr 500 people had joined to  gether. Each year the March grows in  size , which, Dubick says, shows it is really needed.  The marchers moved along slowly  with the strong beats of drums and songs.  Afew people lingering along Hastings responded with smiles and raised fists in  solidarity.  The first stop was at Pigeon Park,  where the bodies of a number of women  were discovered. The second was at the  Gastown Hotel, where another body was  Continued on page 4  Naming our sisters  The murder of Pamela George  by Agnes Huang   To Judge Ted Malone, Pamela George  was just a "prostitute;" to Alex Ternowetsky  and Steven Kummerfield, she was just another "Indian woman."  But to Ina George, Pamela was her  daughter and her best friend. And in April  1995, Ina lost her daughter and friend,  Pamela George, a Saulteaux from  Sacldmay reserve near Regina, Saskatchewan, was brutally murdered. The two 20-  year old white men responsible for her death  will likely be back on the streets of Regina  in three years.  Pamela was 28 years old when she was  killed. She was the mother of two young  girls, Chelsey and Torey but what the courts  and media focused on was that she was a  prostitute. [She occasionally worked the streets  to bring in some money.]  On April 18, Ternowetsky and  Kummerfield were cruising in the area  where Aboriginal women sex trade workers worked. They tried to pick up one  woman, but she refused to get into the car  because there were two of them.  So one of them hid in the trunk of the  car, and they picked up Pamela George.  They drove her out of town to a remote area,  made her perform oral sex on them, and  then beat her. When Pam tried to get away,  they dragged her back and beat her again.  They left her in a ditch on the side of a road.  Ina George says she couldn't pay her  last respects to her daughter because her face  was so badly beaten.  Ternowetsky and Kummerfield were  charged with the murder, not because they  turned themselves in but because they  bragged about what they had done to their  friends. Tracy Stevens, a commitee member  of WAVE (Women Against Violence Everywhere) thinks it's amazing they were caught.  "A lot of the killers of Aboriginal women  aren't ever found."  Originally, the two young men were  charged with murder, forcible confinement  and sexual assault. At the end of the trial  last December, they had been convicted  only of manslaughter.  The court should have stuck with first  degree murder, says Ina George. "The verdict in the case has everything to do with  them being well-to-do white men and Pam  being an Aboriginal woman and a sex  trade worker."  A childhood friend of Pamela George,  Mary Lerat, echoes Ina George's comments. "The case is very emotional for us  because we are Aboriginal women and  they are white men. We feel that the justice system failed us and that the judge has  done us wrong."  Ternowetsky and Kummerfield admit  to beating Pamela George, but they claim  they had left her alive. They also claim they  were too drunk to know what they were  doing...but they knew enough to deceive  Pam George into getting into a car with  them and were able to drive around for  hours, to a beach in another town after  committing the horrific crime.  For their deadly actions, Ternowetsky  and Kummerfield were sentenced on January 30th to just six years in prison. It could  have been 10, but the judge in the case gave  them credit for time they spent in jail while  awaiting trial. In three years, they will be  eligible for parole.  Ina George spent everyday of the preliminary and trial hearings in the courtroom. She said when she looked over at  the two men accused of killing her daughter, they'd be smiling, almost making fun  of what was going on. She says they didn't  even say they were sorry until the end of  the trial, and then it was much too late.  Women's groups say the conviction of  Ternowetsky and Kummerfield on a lesser  charge of manslaughter is related to the  sexist and racist remarks made by the  judge hearing the case.  Judge Ted Malone instructed the jury  to consider that "there is strong evidence  that the accused, because of intoxication,  may not have had the mental capacity to  appreciate that their actions were likely to  cause Pamela George's death." He further  added that the jury should "bear in mind  that she was a prostitute."  Drunkenness is never an excuse for  violence against women, says Kripa  Sekhar of the SaskatchewanAction Committee on the Status of Women (SAWCS).  "The message being sent by the court is  that if you're drunk, you can kill a woman,  and if she's a prostitute, then she has basically consented to sex, and therefore forcible confinement and sexual assault  charges don't apply,."  Sekhar is also the regional representative in Saskatchewan for the National Action Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC).  Ina George thinks Judge Malone's  comments were unfair. "Sure Pam was a  prostitute, but there's nothing wrong with  that," she says. "She was a human being."  A coalition of Regina-based women's  groups has already filed a complaint with  the Canadian Judicial Council, saying that  Malone's comments were prejudicial to  the verdict. Coalition groups include:  SACSW, NAC, the Saskatchewan Battered  Women Advocacy Network, and the  Streetworkers'Advocacy Project.  "He created a bias. By mentioning her  background-that she worked as a prostitute-he dehumanized Pam and trivialized  the murder," says Sekhar.  This is not the first time Malone has  shown bias to women who are sex trade  workers, the Coalition has discovered. In  1994, Malone dismissed charges of unlawful confinement and sexual assault against  a Regina pimp because the woman-anAbo-  riginal woman-admitted to being a prostitute.  Sekhar adds that throughout  Ternowetsky and Kummerfield's trial, it almost seemed as if the Pamela George's murder wasn't the focus, but rather helping the  two men get off on the charges and get on  with their lives was.  "We want to shift the focus back on to  Pam," says Sekhar. "Pam was a mother, a  daughter, a sister, and we wanted to allow  her her rest with the dignity and honour she  deserves-Judge Malone took that away  from her."  The family received a lot of support  from the community-Aboriginal and non-  Aboriginal. Women's groups in Regina took  the lead in organizing benefits, vigils and  protest actions, letter writing campaigns,  and petitions.  "Once we heard about Pam, we wanted  to get involved with the case and support  the family," says Stevens.  At an appreciation dance held for all  those who were there for the family in mid-  February "The space was packed; there were  no seats left, but it was good to have so many  people caring and supporting," says Lerat.  More than 500 people attended.  Ina George says she couldn't have made  it through without all the support her family has received. But even with all of that,  nothing will ever bring her daughter back.  Says Ina, "It's never going to heal for us; it's  going to be with us until we die."  Pamela George's family has established a  trust fund for her Pam's young daughters,  Chelsey and Torey, and to help the family buy a  headstone for Pam's grave. To contribute to the  Pamela George Trust, send donations to Box  518, Grenfell, Saskatchewan, S0G 2B0.  MARCH 1997 News  Women and the Federal Budget Reaction:  Taxes through silent means  by Jackie Brown   Business, money markets and economists are pleased. Even as Finance Minister Paul Martin navigated his way around  jobs and social spending to toss a few preelection tidbits overboard to people with  disabilities, some working families and students, last week's so-called "staying the  course" federal budget was also kind to  wealthy people.  Overall, say critics, it's a bad-news  budget for just about anyone who doesn't  have a mid-to-high paying secure job. In  the meantime, women, low income earners and poor people will continue to bear  the brunt of policies that emphasize deficit  reduction and balancing the budget.  Once again, there is no national  childcare strategy, no job creation plan that  would provide women with jobs that pay  a living wage and no funding toward ending violence against women. And, despite  recommendations by the Royal Commission on Aboriginal Affairs, there is no new  money for First Nations people.  What the government will spend  amounts to little in the grand scheme of  things. For example, people with disabilities will get $70 million in increased tax  deductions to help cover the costs of medical equipment, support services and even  van conversions. But, as disability rights  activists note, most people with disabilities  either can't find work or work at low paying jobs and so can't afford much in terms  of equipment or services anyway.  The only job creation is a $425 million  top up to the infrastructure program—road  building, construction and so on—that is  men's work, largely inaccessible to women.  "Once again I don't see much concern  for people who are marginalized by the  "new economic order'," says Shauna  Butterwick of the Canadian Congress for  Learning Opportunities for Women. "It's a  classic, liberal individualistic approach. If  you're a survivor, great; if not, tough."  And, though promoted as "sustaining  and improving Canada's health care system," health care funding is minimal and  will provide few direct benefits. To be divided among the provinces over a three  year period, $150 million of the $300 million total is for pilot projects, another $50  million is for a health information system,  and there is a $100 million to top up the  existing Community Action and Prenatal  Nutrition Programs.  Joan Grant-Cummings, president of  the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) is profoundly disappointed with the budget. "Budgets always  reflect government values and it is clear that  women are not a priority or even much of  a consideration for this government," says  Grant-Cummings, who is particularly discouraged by the new national child benefit  program, which she describes as a "cruel  joke."  "It creates a two-tiered system of deserving poor, working families; and the 'undeserving' poor—families on social assistance. What it says to women who want to  stay home with their children—and what's  wrong with that?—is that they should be  punished. There is absolutely no valuing  of their unpaid work," says Grant-  Cummings. She adds that NAC is preparing for what will likely be a spring election  call. The goal is to build a strong voice  through coalitions with anti-poverty, labour, and other progressive organizations.  Also disappointed by the budget is  Linda Moreau of End Legislation Poverty  (ELP) who says it is a clear case of  benefitting the rich at the expense of the  poor. She too is especially discouraged by  the new national child tax benefit, which  she describes as part of a "carrot and stick  approach" aimed at getting people off welfare. Says Moreau: "It's supposed to make  people think that even a low paying, terrible job is better than welfare because of the  supplement. But what it means is that the  poorest of the poor will get nothing and  they might even be worse off."  The new benefit goes into effect in July  1998, when the current Working Income  Supplement (WIS) is combined with an  "enriched" national child tax benefit. The  "enrichment" comes via a $600 million top-  up to the $250 million increase to the WIS  announced in last year's federal budget.  Although arrangements with the provinces have yet to be finalized, it appears that  the new benefit, which will be extended to  families on welfare, will in turn be deducted from provincial welfare payments.  These welfare "savings" are then supposed  to be redirected by the provinces into school  lunch, dental and other programs for children. However, there are no checks and  balances to ensure that this will happen.  Ironically, working families with one  child are also going to get less. Last year's  budget promised an increase in the WIS to  $750 per family. With the new system, the  rate for a family with one child will only  go up to $605 annually. According to calculations by the National Council on Welfare, by 1998, working families with one  child (that is, single mothers) will have lost  nearly $400 in benefits.  If this year's budget offers no relief  through programs and services, women,  poor people, and low income earners will  also feel the impact of $3 billion in cuts to  transfer payments announced in last year's  budget. BC, which was hit with $435 million in cutbacks last year, will have to endure another $300 million in this fiscal year.  Premier Glen Clark has already warned  that in order to protect health care, other  "difficult budget decisions" will have to be  made.  Cutbacks in transfer payments also  serve as a reminder that, while there has  been plenty of boasting about no new taxes  or program cuts, the budget is far from neutral. "It may be a 'no news' budget for business and money markets but it is anything  but neutral/'says Jane Pulkingham, a professor of sociology at Simon Fraser University and a member of the research advisory  committee of the Vancouver office of the  Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives.  A continued focus on deficit reduction  and balanced budgets means continued offloading onto the provinces, she says, adding that other "silent" tax grabs are also  happening. These include recently announced increases to Canada Pension Plan  contributions that will hurt lower income  people the most, and the continued disen-  titlement of Employment Insurance and use  of the EI surplus (expected to reach $12  million by 1998) to pay down the deficit.  Pulkingham notes: "There is a term,  'social policy by stealth' and it means making claims about no cuts or new taxes all  the while taxing people through silent  means. The idea is to confuse and obscure."  Ellen Woodsworth, a member of the  Greater Vancouver Seniors Coalition and  the Downtown Eastside Seniors Centre,  agrees and calls the budget "phoney and  false". Woodsworth says there must be far  more emphasis on making corporations,  banks and wealthy people pay their fair  share of taxes so that the poor aren't subsidizing the rich. But the biggest problem, she  says, is that the budget is based on a gross  domestic product (GDP) that doesn't count  unpaid contributions by women, seniors  and volunteers whose contributions are  equally vital to the economy as a cash-generated activities like logging or agriculture.  "The vast majority of work done in the  world is unpaid and undervalued," says  Woodsworth. "If this labour counted, we  would see a much different distribution of  money. "As it is, social programs account  for only two percent of the deficit but they  are the main targets for cuts because these  programs support the people who make  unpaid contributions."  Jackie Brown is a regular writer for Kinesis.  VALENTINES DAY  Continued from page 3  discovered on the front stairs. The third was  in an alley tucked behind Main and  Cordova streets. At each of the stops-out  of respect for the women—tobacco, red  roses, and a prayer by Elder Pauline  Johnson, were given.  The march continued to the Vancouver Police Department on Main Street, completing the fourth direction of the medicine  wheel. On the steps of the police station,  Arlena Carla Jones spoke about the abuse  she faced at the hands of a violent ex-boyfriend and the police. Jones had been badly  beaten by her ex-boyfriend, and when she  tried to ask a police officer for help, he  didn't take her plea seriously and made  sexist and racist comments towards her.  The next day, her ex-boyfriend found her  again and slashed her on the shoulder with  a broken bottle.  Jones has filed a civil suit against the  police and the City of Vancouver, arguing  that the police failed to meet their obligation to uphold the provincial Attorney General's policies regarding violence against  women in relationships.!/! trial date has been  obtained for February 1999.]  Arlena Jones was followed by Viola  Thomas, president of the United Native  Nation, an organization representing off-  reserve Aboriginal people in BC She spoke  about the responsibility governments and  Arlena Jones (left) & Marion Dubick  Chiefs have in improving the lives of Aboriginal women.  Thomas called on those in authority to  think about their priorities, and how  women living in the Downtown Eastside  fit into those priorities. "We say to the  mayor of Vancouver you are willing to put  [up to $700,000] into the security for APEC  (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation,) but  what about the human beings living here?"  Thomas shouted.  She further directed a message to BC  Minister of Women's Equality Sue  Hammell: "What kind of equality are you  representing on behalf of our women who  are suffering and in pain, and are dying in  these streets? Where are you today to stand  beside us?"  And to the Chiefs, she called on them  to look at why so many Aboriginal women  are forced to leave their home communities and move to urban centres, and to take  responsibility for ending the violence and  abuse women faced on-reserve.  The crowd responded to Thomas'  powerful words with bursts of cheering  and chanting.  From the police station, the marchers  proceeded to Oppenheimer Park, and gathered together in a large circle, with the families of the women who have died forming  a smaller circle within. Candles were lit,  and prayers were given to the women.  The final stop of the March was at the  Japanese Language School, where more  women spoke out, other people drummed  and presented their songs, and everyone,  who remained at the end of the day's  events, shared food.  For Marion Dubick, the March is about  remembering the lives and spirits of those  who've died; working to end poverty and  violence; and healing the vibrant and close-  knit Downtown Eastside community. "I'd  like to see people get healthier and get back  to our traditional ways, where women are  honoured and where alcohol and drugs  aren't destroying our lives."  Jehn Starr is of the Sekani and Gitksan Nations from Hazelton. This is the first time she  attended the Valentine's March. Agnes Huang  is a Vancouver-based feminist activist.  MARCH 1997 News  The disclosure of personal records:  An assault on women  by Robyn Hall  Feminists working to end violence  against women were disheartened but not  swayed by two Supreme Court of Canada  (SCC) decisions last month that may jeopardize the ability of women who have been  sexually assaulted to seek support from  rape crisis centres or to press charges  against their abusers.  In one decision, R. v. Carosella, the SCC  which halted a sexual assault trial against  Nick Carosella because a rape crisis centre  in Windsor, Ontario had destroyed confidential counselling notes about the survivor. In the second decision, R. v. Ryan, the  SCC upheld a BC Court of Appeal decision  ordering a psychiatrist to turn over her  notes on a woman who has filed a civil suit  against another psychiatrist.  In Carosella, five judges of the nine  member court—the majority—said, in effect, that in order to provide the accused  with a fair trial, the court must have access  to any records ever made about the survivor. These include records made by "third  parties" to the case, such as rape crisis centres, school or other institutions, therapists,  and doctors.  "It is a horrendous, but not unexpected, decision," says Cynthia Davis of the  Kamloops Sexual Assault Counselling Centre. "The Supreme Court of Canada has  consistently ruled against women's rights  in sexual violence cases." (The Centre was  recently involved in a two-year battle to  protect the records of a former client [see  page 10.])  Davis says the court's judgment in  Carosella echoes other SCC decisions on the  records issue, which place the right of the  accused to a "fair trial" above the equality  and privacy rights of women who are survivors of sexual assault.  In December 1995, when the SCC  handed down its decisions in the O'Connor  and Beharriell cases, it set out very lenient  guidelines for courts to use in deciding  whether records should be disclosed to  defense counsel, [see Kinesis, February 1996]  According to the majority of judges, the  defense only has to show "likely relevance"  to a pre-trial judge to justify the disclosure  of records. The judge then makes the decision whether or not the statement of relevance is valid enough to warrant turning  over the documents to the defense.  Bonnie Agnew of Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter says the message  the SCC is sending to women who have  been sexually assaulted is that: "it is very  likely you may have lied, you may be crazy,  you may have been talked into something  by a man-hating rape crisis worker [the  charge of 'false memory syndrome.']"  The SCC's rulings are seen by many  anti-violence activists as an angry response  to the perceived civil disobedience of the  Sexual Assault Crisis Centre in Windsor—  the rape crisis centre involved in the  Carosella case—and other rape crisis centres that have had to take drastic measures  in order to protect their clients.  From the time defense lawyers for men  accused of sexual assault and sexual abuse  began asking rape crisis centres for the  records they made during visits with clients, centres have been practising a policy  of "vigilance" whereby they will not willingly hand over records to the court.  The Windsor Sexual Assault Crisis  Centre destroyed notes from 300 to 400 files  in 1994 in order to "simplify life for women  on the stand," says staff member Patricia  Sanford. "We believe in women's privacy  and counselling, and will do everything we  can to protect that."  Nick Carosella was charged in 1993  with committing gross indecency in the  1960s with a grade seven student at the  school where he taught. The woman involved visited the Windor Sexual Assault  Crisis Centre in the early 1990s to obtain  advice about how to lay charges. She spoke  to a counsellor for an hour and a half.  The majority of the Supreme Court  ruled that Carosella could not now obtain  a fair trial because the notes of that visit  were destroyed. According to the majority,  the documents may have shown inconsistencies in the woman's story, which may  have led the trial court to find Carosella not  guilty of the crime.  Cynthia Davis says this increased attention on women's personal records is a  direct backlash against the introduction of  the "Rape Shield Law" in 1992. The Rape  Shield Law prevents the defense from introducing evidence about the complainant's past sexual history in a sexual assault  trial [see Kinesis February 1992.] Feminists  had launched a long and relentless campaign for such legal protection to ensure  that women were not, once again, victimized by the men accused of sexually assaulting them and by the court system.  Since then, defense lawyers have been  taking every opportunity they can to go  after the personal records of complainants.  Davis says that prior to 1992, there was an  unspoken agreement between all parties—  women, counsellors, rape crisis centres,  prosecutors, police, defense lawyers,  judges—that women's personal records  were off-limits. This situation is no more.  The Barrie and District Rape Crisis  Line in Barrie, Ontario was the first recipient of a subpoena requesting its confidential counselling records. Since then, the centre has been asked to hand over files more  than 50 times. Anne-Marie Aiken, a staff  member at the centre, estimates that she has  personally spent one-third of her work time  on this issue in the last few years. This includes time spent in court refusing to hand  over records, drafting briefs for court, explaining the issue to clients, and reassuring clients and the public that it is still safe  to use the centre.  The issue of safety for women is the  critical one for sexual assault centres. Anti-  violence activists say they are seriously concerned that if defense lawyers continue to  be allowed access to any and all women's  record deemed "relevant," fewer women  will report sexual assaults and abuse.  Aiken reports that judges are finding  records that contain information on women's histories of child abuse, alcoholism and  promiscuity are relevant to the case they  are deciding. Such "fishing expeditions"  into their past lives only impede women's  equality rights.  Sheila Mclntyre, a professor of law at  Queens University, also notes that the most  documented people are often also the most  disadvantaged. People with disabilities, for  example, may have more records, especially if they've spent any time in an institutional setting. Aboriginal women who  have been through the residential school or  foster care systems are also likely to have  more records kept on them.  Women are also concerned because the  majority decision implies that "third parties" to rape cases are obliged to cooperate  with the court. As the law currently stands,  only the Crown has a legal obligation to  make evidence available to the court.  Essentially, the majority of the SCC asserted that because the Wmdsor centre is  funded by the government, it has an obligation to cooperate with the justice system.  "This is an attempt to make us all a part  of the court system, with no autonomy for  individual agencies, even though the court  has not proved itself to be the best governing body [on these issues]," adds Cynthia  Davis.  This decision repeats the long standing split on the SCC around this issue. Four  of the nine judges—including the only two  women on the Supreme Court—were  equally vehement in their assertion that  third parties are not obligated to disclose  records.  The majority decision will lead to continued fishing expeditions into women's  records by defense lawyers, according to  Madam Justice Claire L'Heureux Dube,  who wrote the minority decision. "[The  decision] goes against the grain of this  Court's Charter [of Rights and Freedoms]  jurisprudence and is contrary to basic underlying notions of how the criminal justice system actually operates."  Following the SCC's rulings, women  again turned their attention to the passage  of Bill C-46, the proposed federal bill which  would place much more stringent criteria  on whether women's records can be disclosed. The bill, introduced by Justice Minister Allan Rock last June, provides a comprehensive definition of records that includes counselling, medical, employment  and child welfare records, as well as personal journals. The bill also provides ten  impermissable grounds for disclosure, including that the records may contain a prior  inconsistent statement, or that they may  relate to the credibility of the woman.  National women's groups, including  the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC), LEAF (the Women's  Legal Education and Action Fund), the  Canadian Association of Sexual Assault  Centres, DisAbled Women of Canada, and  a number of Aboriginal women, and feminist lawyers and law professors were  involved in the process that created the bill.  Although it does not embody the feminist  position of "no records, no time," it is considered the toughest legislation women can  hope for.  Rape crisis centres are waiting impatiently for the bill to be passed, as it will  drastically reduce the harassment centres  and the women filing charges are under.  With the proposed law in place, many centres say they would no longer have to risk  breaking the law in order to maintain the  confidentiality of their clients' records.  The bill is close to passing second reading in the House of Commons, after which  it will go to the Committee stage. Women's  groups will be making presentations to the  committee urging for passage of the bill. It  will then have to pass third reading in the  House, and a vote in the Senate.  Women are concerned as to whether  the bill will become law, especially given  the strong lobby against it by defense lawyers, the recent anti-feminist backlash to the  child support payment bill [see page 6,] and  the upcoming federal election.  In the meantime, rape crisis workers  feel it will be open season for attacks on  centres and women who press charges  against their rapists. "Right now at least  half the women who go to court are being  seriously wounded again by the court system," says Cynthia Davis.  NAC president Joan Grant-Cummings  says women need to send support for Bill  C-46 to the Minister of Justice, and to push  the federal government to meet the $50  million feminist violence against women  support services demanded by women  during last year's Bread and Roses march  against poverty last summer. "There is a lot  of discouragement right now; women are  tired, but we don't have an option to give  in," says Grant-Cummings. "We need to dig  in and push back."  To lobby in support of Bill C-46 send your  support for the bill to: Allan Rock, Federal Minister of Justice, Justice Building, 239 Wellington St, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0H8.  Robyn Hall is a regular contributor to Kinesis  and a staff member at West Coast LEAF.  MARCH 1997 News  Women in Alberta:  Taking back the vote  by Julie Black  Women in Alberta are organizing  quickly and actively to ensure there won't  be a sweep by Ralph Klein and his right-  wing Progressive Conservative Party in the  upcoming provincial election. Klein has set  March 11th as election day.  There's already a fierce monolith of  professional and public opinion inAlberta  standing firmly behind Klein and company.  The media declared the Tories the winners  from the day the election was called. Indeed, the media's main contribution has  been to keep asking whether Albertans  should bother to vote at all.  Progressive people, on the other hand,  are working hard at getting their constituencies to the polls. Women in particular are  being asked to participate in this election,  and to vote according to our experiences.  Under the guise of deficit reduction,  Klein has slashed, privatized, regionalized  and restructured almost everything—social  programs, health care, environmental protection, and so on. Women have been disproportionately hurt by the drastic cutbacks  and profound government restructuring of  the past four years. Women have been hit  by each cut, and by the cumulative effect  of all the cuts.  Public sector job losses have fallen on  the unionized sectors where women have  found our most remunerative work: health  care, education, and government services.  More women than men have lost jobs in  these fields. Those who haven't lost their  jobs have seen their wages slashed five percent, and have had to work extra hard just  to hold services together to protect the public from the full impact of the cuts. Clearly,  they can't sustain that effort forever, and  many teachers and health care workers are  ending up on job-induced stress leave.  Women still do the majority of work  within the home, and that workload is increasing as women try to fill gaps in public  services. Women's commitment to our  families and communities is being manipulated as a way for the government to "save  money."  There remains a wage gap between  men and women, and a job gap (related to  the kinds of jobs available to them) that  forces more women than men into part-  time jobs with no benefits. The government's refusal to raise the low minimum  wage—the second lowest in the country—  hurts many women workers, particularly  young women and immigrant women.  Many Alberta women cannot stretch their  income to cover any extra costs, yet costs  are increasing from all sides.  Seniors now have to contribute more  towards nursing homes and seniors lodges.  School fees, home care fees, and costs for  subsidized housing have been increased.  Vital health services such as eye exams are  now available only to those who can afford  them. Rapid tuition hikes and cuts to career training programs mean many women  have little hope for improving their situations.  Women who turn to social services for  assistance are receiving assistance rates so  low they push them below the poverty line.  Single mothers on social assistance are being deemed "employable" and forced to  find work when their child reaches six  months in age. Often, women are being  denied assistance altogether.  Homelessness for women is rising at  such a rate that a Calgary group is raising  funds for a homeless women's shelter.  Many homeless women are turning to transition houses, which are meant for women  leaving abusive relationships, and to downtown shelters which cater mostly to men,  and which often do not have separate sleeping quarters for women.  We can only estimate how many  women are having to stay with an abusive  partner rather than risk the punishment of  poverty and homelessness. Cutbacks, like  the elimination of the moving allowance for  women leaving abusive situations, only  make it harder for women to get out.  Immigrant families are experiencing  repeated cuts to English as a Second Language programs for their children. Lesbians are witnessing the reduction of the Alberta Human Rights Commission, even as  the Alberta government continues to spend  tax dollars to challenge the rights of a gay  teacher in court (the Vriend case). The list  of outrages could go on and on.  Women in Alberta are having to fight  all the current political battles, as well as  pick up old ones many of us thought we  had won. We still don't have the choices in  child care we need, or equal pay, or freedom from violence. And now, we have to  fight again for free education for all our  children, accessible health care, reproductive choice, and an independent environmental review board.  Those of us who point out that women  are working harder and harder for less and  less, risk being told we are lazy and selfish  and "anti-Alberta." Women are being told  that Alberta can't afford our equality and  our dignity.  Ralph Klein says his government plans  to "stay the course," and not make any  promises. Klein says he is running on his  record, and women, more than ever before,  need to hold him accountable to his record.  Women's dissatisfaction with Klein's  policies and actions is real and growing.  Politicians know there's a gender gap in  terms of the approval rating of Klein's policies, and Alberta women need an election  where that gender gap finally translates  into real political power.  This election is an important one for  the political and economic equality of  women. Right now, women are bearing too  much of the load dropped on us by the Conservatives' right-wing agenda.  The Calgary Status of Women Action  Committee (CSWAC) has embarked on a  campaign to raise awareness, particularly  among women, about the devastating  record of Ralph Klein's government and the  differential impact of his policies on  women. We have to tell the politicians who  want to represent us that they cannot afford to ignore us.  For more information on the situation of  women in Alberta and the Conservative government's record over the past four years, call  CSWAC at (403) 262-1873.  Julie Black is the coordinator of the Calgary  Status of Women Action Committee.  Kinesis began its life as Canada's national feminist  newspaper in 1974, the Year of the Tiger.  I ke   I iger xumbelizei power* p&j jieu &hcI during* A  rebellious colourful *hJ unpredictable ch&r&cter* she  comuh&hcIj Awe &nd respect from oil C|u&rterj»  I Li; fe&rlej;  o.u J fiery fig liter ii revered &j tLe iigu tlio.t ivo.rdi off the  three bm&ih iis&jiers of & houjekold: fire* thieves &nd  \Sk. The Haitclkoek of Chinese Horoscope j  ty Tiieodorct Le»u, 1979  Courtesy Elaine amJ >eok  For wide-ranging national and international coverage of women's issues and culture, check out KINESIS.  Send $21.40 (outside Canada $28) for a year's subscription (10 issues). Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. Canada V5L 2Y6  KINESIS What's News  compiled by Andrea Imada and  Rachel Rosen  Drunkenness excuse  used by wife-killer  Rape crisis workers are outraged at a  recent BC Supreme Court ruling that a man  who stabbed his wife to death was too  drunk to know what he was doing.  "The message that the Supreme Court  is conveying is clear. If you are drunk, then  murder is not so bad," says Kamla Raj of  the WAVAW Rape Crisis Centre in Vancouver. "We are angry that such hypocrisy can  exist in our society which allows men who  are intoxicated and who commit violent  crimes against women to be given options."  On December 13,1991, John Seymour  stabbed his wife Nora Seymour several  times in the throat and face, in front of her  young children. Seymour later turned the  knife on his own throat but it was pulled  away by one of his daughters.  Seymour was originally charged with  second-degree murder. However, a 12-per-  son jury in Duncan, BC, found him guilty  of a lesser charge of manslaughter. This  decision was based on a 1995 Supreme  Court of Canada (SCC) ruling that an extreme level of drunkeness can mean that a  person did not form the intent to kill, a necessary element for a conviction of murder.  The courts have allowed drunkeness  as a defense in other cases involving male  violence against women. In 1994, the SCC  overturned the conviction of Henri  Daviault for sexual assaulting a disabled  woman, and later that year, Carl Blair was  excused by the Court of Queen's Bench in  Alberta for beating his wife.  "These pieces of law are violations to  our rights as women for safety, respect and  justice," says Raj.  Seymour was sentenced on February  21st in Victoria. The outcome of the sentencing was unavailable at press time. On  the day of sentencing, WAVAW organized  a demonstration in front of the courthouse  in Vancouver to send a very clear message  that there is "no excuse for abuse," and  definitely none for murder.  Breast implant suit  expanded  Women are celebrating a BC Supreme  Court judgment which will allow women  across Canada to join a BC class action suit  against the manufacturers of silicone breast  implants.  The court's decision could result in the  number of women involved in the lawsuit  rising to 1,500, according to lawyer David  Klein, who represents some of the 600 BC  women who are currently part of the suit.  The decision will chiefly affect women  who live outside of Quebec, Ontario and  BC, the only provinces which allow class-  action suits enabling plaintiffs with similar claims to sue collectively. It is estimated  that, on her own, a woman would have to  spend $40,000 in legal fees to pursue a  $10,000 breast implant claim.  The 16 corporations cited in the lawsuit, including Dow Corning Corporation,  Union Carbide, 3M, Baxter International  and Bristol-Meyers Squibb, are likely to  appeal the decision. Dow Corning is already appealing the certification of the class  action suit in BC in April 1996.  Breast-implanted women involved in  the case want to include Dow Chemical,  which conducted research and testing of the  implants, in the lawsuit, a move, which is  also likely to be appealed.  An estimated 60,000 women in Canada  received silicone breast implants before  they were banned in January 1992.  DNA data bank  legislation in works  Controversial federal legislation to establish a DNA data bank could be introduced this month, according to Solicitor-  General Herb Gray. But Gray also admits  that the bill might not be passed if an election is called soon. The bill is currently on  the desks of bureaucrats who are trying to  make it resistant to challenges under the  Charter of Rights and privacy laws.  The DNA data bank will enable police  to store samples of saliva, blood and hair  of people convicted of crimes. Police forces  have been the heaviest lobby behind the  data bank, saying it will assist them in solving crimes and pointing to violence against  women as a prime example.  However, feminist groups have  roundly condemned the DNA data bank,  pointing out that it will only increase police powers and focus attention away from  the key factors in stopping male violence  against women. Over 60 women's groups  reiterated their opposition at a national  consultation with the Justice Department  in 1996 on violence against women.  Women working in rape crisis centres  and transition houses say that, while many  of the sexual assault cases reported in the  news media can involve DNA samples, the  vast majority of sexual assaults are committed by attackers who are already known  to the victim. These cases-if they make it  to court-are fought over the issue of consent, with DNA evidence being irrelevant.  Other concerns include the reality that  men with the most privilege in society, who  are less likely to be convicted of crimes, but  not less likely to have commited violence  against women, will continue to elude the  justice system, even with such a data bank  in place. At the same time, the DNA of Aboriginal men, men of colour and poor men,  who receive disproportionately more jail  sentences, would also disproportionately  fill the DNA bank. As well, there is the probability that the legislation would end up  working against women just as the 1993  "anti-stalking" legislation was used to arrest women.  Feminist anti-violence activists says the  $15 million price tag to set up the bank, and  the millions more to run it, should be used  instead to support the investigation and  prosecution of more "common" crimes of  violence against women, and to fund the  transition homes and rape crisis centres  which play a crucial role in the lives of the  women who are sexually assaulted.  Police go after Johns  At the beginning of February, Vancouver Police (VPD) announced it would not  charge sex trade workers, but rather pursue the Johns and pimps. The VPD is the  first in Canada to bring in such a policy.  The reasoning behind the policy change is  the belief, bolstered by the results of studies, that charging customers instead of prostitutes will lead to a greater reduction of  street prostitution.  Previously, sex trade workers were the  ones penalized, facing fines, jail sentences,  and forcible removal from certain neighbourhoods .  Despite the threat of criminal prosecution, a study by criminologist John  Lowman of Simon Fraser University  showed that 80 percent of sex trade workers charged became "repeat offenders."The  same study, however, found that, proportionately, half as many Johns and pimps, or  44 percent, charged with communicating  for the purpose of prostitution were arrested again.  Neither the police, city officials or researchers seem to take into account that the  main reason women participate in the sex  trade is out of economic necessity. Prosecuting sex trade workers does nothing to improve their economic situations, so women  often have to go back to working the streets.  Pursuing and prosecuting Johns and  pimps may help to alleviate the threat of  arrest and police harassment that sex trade  workers endure, but the new VPD policy  will not affect the deeper issues of why  women work the streets. More importantly,  it is unclear how this policy change will  make any difference to the violence against  sex trade workers which has been increasing in the past few years.  A recently released Statistics Canada  study indicates an increase, over the past  few years, in the number of sex trade workers being murdered—mostly by their customers. Despite the increase in violence, police often will not undertake thorough investigations of violence against sex trade  workers, with over half of the murders of  women in the sex trade remaining unsolved, as compared with 20 percent of  homicides overall.  CBC dumps eating  disorder ad  CBC television has refused to air an ad  aimed at raising awareness about eating  disorders, saying the ad's placement contravenes its new policy on 'advocacy' advertisements.  The Vancouver-based Media Foundation, which has produced a series of print  and video "uncommercials" targetting  Calvin Klein's controversial marketing  methods and titled "Obsession Fetish,"  tried unsuccessfully to place four spots on  the CBC show "Fashion File" during Eating Disorder Awareness Week in early February.  The 30 second ad shows classic shots  of fashion models, then cuts to the bare back  of a woman. As the camera pans in, the  viewer realizes she is vomiting into a toilet  bowl. A voice over asks, "Why do nine out  ten women feel there is something wrong  with their body?...The Beauty Industry is  the Beast."  The CBC advertising policy, brought  into effect last fall, states that the content of  so-called advocacy ads (in this case, regarding eating disorders) cannot relate to the  program content (in this case, fashion), and  that a sales order must be at least $5000.  'Advocacy' advertisements are defined as  those which do not sell a product. A CBC  spokesperson also told the Media Foundation that the ads "comprise unacceptable  exploitation of sex and nudity."  US network CNN has also refused to  run the "Obsession Fetish" ad on their fashion program, "Style with Elsa Klensch." A  CNN spokesperson said "such a specific  attack on an industry is not appropriate for  our network."  '0^^f£^—fv^.^  Serving Vancouver's women's community  for over 21 years  from alio/ us atCC£c  A    e    r    «y  CCEC Credit U  ve, Vancouver, B.C. V5N  -4100 • Fax 254-6558 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  jfor length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Dana Putnam, Rachel  Rosen and Fatima Jaffer  New Asian lesbians  group in Vancouver  Monsoon is the newest lesbian group  in town. It was formed in September by  Asian lesbians and bisexual women who  saw the need for a space for Asian lesbians  to organize politically around the intersections between homophobia and racism, to  provide a safe coming-out space for Asian  lesbians who speak a variety of languages  and come from diverse cultures, and finally,  simply as a social space for Asian lesbians  and bisexual women to play, explore  commonalities, and get to know each other.  Monsoon has since held five monthly  meetings and organized regular sport (badminton) and social activities for its members. Membership in Monsoon is fluid, with  an average of 30 members attending meetings, and 25-35 attending social and sport  activities. There are always new members  joining, thanks to regular advertising in our  English and non-English language community newspapers.  Women involved with Monsoon identify as East Asian (from China, Japan, Hong  Kong, Taiwan, et cetera); Southeast Asian  (from Malaysia, Indonesia, Vietnam, et cetera); Southeast Asian (from India, Pakistan,  Fiji, et cetera); and West Asian (comprising  countries known as Middle Eastern, excluding North Africa). Monsoon women  are first and second generation Canadians  and more recent immigrants, and many  have come to Canada from such diverse  locations outside Asia as Kenya and Trinidad.  Monsoon members chose their name  from the monsoons, or seasonal heavy rains  that occur in most countries and regions  across the vast continent of Asia. To an  Asian, the word monsoon can evoke both  feelings of fear and of relief. The monsoons  bring life and rebirth, and is tied to the  growth of rice, a common food for most  Asian peoples. It is also connected to the  moon cycle—hence, to our menstrual cycles—and is a time of year that is hot,  sweaty and, by extension, sexy.  Monsoon is coming out to the Vancouver community this spring with a number  of events: the first on Thursday March 6, is  a fundraiser for Monsoon and a celebration  of International Women's Day, lesbian style,  with a collection of films by Asian and Black  lesbians. The evening is co-sponsored by  Video In, and by Zampro, a black lesbian  collective, in conjunction with Lotus Roots,  an ad hoc committee of Asian lesbians, gay  men and bisexuals. The evening will feature introductions by representatives of  Monsoon, Zampro and Lotus Roots. The  screenings of four films will take place at  8pm at Video In, 1965 Main St. Tickets are  available at the door, sliding scale $3-$6.  Monsoon is also a co-sponsor of Lotus  Roots 11: The Lotus Blossoms, an all-day gathering of Asian lesbians, gays and bisexuals  on Saturday March 15 at the Mount Pleasant Neighbourhood House at 800 E. Broadway. And on March 16, Monsoon will come  out in a big way with a splashy cabaret  event. Venue, times, entertainment and  menu are pending.  For more information about Monsoon, call  June al 254-4545, Fatima at 682-0080, and Da  at 253-5110. You can also call and leave a confidential message at our call box at Xtra West at  688-WEST, ext. 2269.  The Community and the  Internet  The Internet is everywhere. Governments and corporations are using the technology as if it is now the only way to communicate with people. And yet, according  to Statistics Canada/less than 10 percent of  Canadians have Internet access in their  homes.  Making the Links: A Critical Look at Community and the Internet, a conference sponsored by the BC Library Association, will  explore the impact of the Internet on communities, libraries and schools. The three-  day long conference will take place March  20-22 at Simon Fraser University Harbour  Centre Campus, 515 W. Hastings St.  Some of the issues that will be covered  are: How are women's groups and other  community organizations using the  Internet to communicate and build communities? Who's online and who has access?  Can technology be used to increase the public good and build strong communities? Are  jobs disappearing because of computers?  Happy International  Women's Day!  from all of us at...  EastskIe  DATAGnAphics  1498 CommercjaI DmvE  Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 5X9  Phone: (604) 255-9559  Recycled Paper Products and Tree-Free Stationery  Union Shop  Community organizations will share  stories as they affect their members: lesbians and gay men, seniors, literacy workers, First Nations people, artists, rural and  urban-based people. As well, community  networks, community radio, educational  institutions, libraries, and disability groups  will be participating in the discussion.  The conference will also involve a  number of keynote speeches, panels and  workshops on topics such as: "Who owns  the Internet?" with Fatima Jaffer from the  SouthAsian Women's Centre and Hanson  Lau from CHMB AM; and "Women and  Access" with Lynn Hauka from the Sunshine Coast Women's Centre, Ellen Balka  from SFU Communications, and Sue  Hammell, the minister of women's equality.  Registration for the full conference is  $55, or $30 for students and low income  people. Registration for the evening keynote speech by David Noble only is $10.  For more information, or to get a registration form, contact the BC Library Association,  tel: 430-9633; fax 430-8595; online: http://  www. vcn. be. ca/bcla-ip/links.html.  Taking on Woolworths  Women are being asked to remain  ready to take action, if necessary, against  the American-based Woolworth Corporation.  Woolworth has been charged by  homeworkers in Canada and members of  the Labour Behind the Label Coalition with  labour rights violations against women  sewing "Northern Group" products in Toronto. Northern Group produces garments  sold in Canada under the label, "Northern  Reflections."  In August 1996, the Coalition began a  campaign to stop Woolworth from numerous violations of Ontario Employment  Standards legislation.  Interviews with workers show that  women sewers were being forced to work  up to 12 hours a day for $4.50 an hour—65  percent of the legal minimum wage.  Women were also denied overtime pay,  vacation pay, statutory holidays and contributions to Employment Insurance (Unemployment Insurance.)  Like many major retailers and designer  labels, Woolworth contracts out the production of its clothing to small workshops and  homeworkers. With the increasing establishment of free trade zones, through agreements such as NAFTA and APEC, Wool-  worth also produces its garments in cheap  factories in Asia and Central America.  Woolworth did not respond to the campaign until the Coalition went public with  the information. Public pressure caused the  corporation to carry out an investigation of  two of its contractors' practices. The investigation is still under review.  Still, the Coalition is asking women to  be ready to take action based on the outcome of Woolworth's investigation.  For more information about the campaign,  write to: A Campaign of the Labour Behind the  Label Coalition, 606 Shaw St, Toronto, ON,  M6G3L6; tel (416) 532-8584.  [           Pen on fire?  Camera in the closet?  Let them out!  Write or take photographs  for Kinesis  255-5499  Cover the arts that you love  on these pages  Greetings on  International  Women's  Day  Advertise in Kinesis  and support Canada's  sole remaining,  national, feminist  monthly  Telephone: 255-5499  1         Bring in this coupon for  l\   20% off regular priced books  until March 25, 1997  1391 Commercial Dr.  Van, BC V5L 3X5  253-6442  1  Seeking hardworking  Oxes  to move  heavy Boxes.  You know who you are: conscientious, reliable, tough and  fun to hang out with. Kinesis  is moving this March to new  offices on Hastings Street.  Since 1997 is the Year of the  Ox, we especially welcome Ox  volunteers (born in 1937,  1949,1961,1973, 1985, &  1997). However we would be  grateful for the help of Rats,  Monkeys, Sheep and all the  other signs. For more info, call  the Horse at 255-5499. Feature  The Tupac Amaru in Peru:  Reasons behind hostage  taking  as told to Monica Vanschaik   More than two months ago, on December  17,1996, members of the Tupac Amaru movement in Peru [the MRTA: Movimiento  Revolucionario Tupac AmaruJ infiltrated a  party at the home of the Japanese ambasador in  Lima and took over 300 guests hostage. More  than two-thirds were released within a week of  the action, all except for 72 people who are still  being held inside by the Tupac Amaru. The  Tupac Amaru say they engaged in the hostage  taking as a way to force president Alberto  Fujimori to release the more than 400 women  and men being held in Peruvian prisons on  charges that they are "terrorists" involved with  the Tupac Amaru.  Last month, Monica Vanschaik had the  opportunity to interview Tamara (a political  name, not her real one), a sympathiser of the  Tupac Amaru, about the current political and  economic situation in Peru and the organizing purposes of the MRTA. Tamara currently  lives outside of Peru. Monica Vanschaik is the  associate editor with Aquelarre, a Latin  American women's quarterly published in Vancouver. She frequently writes about the situation of women in Latin America. The interview  was conducted in Spanish and translated into  English by Vanschaik.  Monica Vanschaik: What is the history  behind the current political and economic  climate in Peru, as you see it?  Tamara: Since Fujimori took office [in  1990], Peru's economic situation has  reached such a chaotic state that the IMF  (International Monetary Fund) labeled Peru  as "ineligible" for further loans. As all dictatorships go, the use of force had to be  brought in to satisfy the demands of the  country's international creditors. Fujimori  then began to change and mold laws so that  this economic plan could be met.  Employers were given the freedom to  lay people off as they pleased. Of course,  at the same time, a total infiltration of unions and community organizations took  place to repress any unrest over these new  laws. Minors, or those under 24 years of  age, had their minimum wage erased, so  employers can pay them as they see fit.  While this was happening, Fujimori  privatized 173 out of 183 state-run businesses including PetroPeru, the state oil  company. Further privatization projects in  Peru have also extended into the agricultural area, which, by the way, is a very delicate sector. Both Congress and the Peruvian  landholding elites have been pushing for  the increased transformation of communal  lands into the so-called productive and civilized sector of private agrobusiness for the  production and export of winter crops to  feed the "first world."  All of this, of course, was completed  under the "laws of private investment" and  the continued attempt to force Peru's indigenous/peasant population (approximately 35 percent of the total population)  into a life of complete economic and sociopolitical subversion to the white Spanish  elites and mestizos [mixed-race Spanish  and indigenous people.]  Vanschaik: What are the effects of all of  these changes on the people in Peru?  Tamara: Since 1990, and continuing on  after his "self-coup" in 1992, Fujimori has  forced about 10 to 12 million Peruvians (out  of a population of 22 million) to live below  the poverty line. We're not talking however  about poverty relative to Canadian standards, but of absolute poverty. We are talking about no clean water, no appropriate  sewage systems, no electricity, and no food.  Unemployment is above 25 percent  and Peru's hyperinflation in the early 1990s  soared over 7,000 percent. Thousands of  jobs have been lost, and increased military  repression and human rights abuses are  there for anyone who dares to question the  government's policies.  Vanschaik: Is Fujimori solely responsible for all of these problems?  Tamara: It is often said that no president stands alone. On April 5, 1992,  Fujimori dissolved parliament and seized  dictatorial powers. The mastermind behind  the conspiracy was Vladimiro Montesinos.  For two decades, Montesinos has operated  from the shadows. A narco-lawyer, traitor,  human rights violator, and former spy, he  somehow mesmerized Fujimori and used  his links to drug trafficking organizations  and the CIA to become the country's de  facto drug czar, and perhaps the most powerful individual in Peru.  Vanschaik: Who is Montesinos?  Tamara: As a young soldier, Montesinos  was labelled untrustworthy, and he has  lived up to his reputation by providing intelligence and counter inteligence to the top  levels of power. Already involved with the  US, Montesinos received an invitation to  go to Washington, DC in 1976. Once in the  US, he was spotted by a Peruvian general  and reported. On his return, he was arrested on charges of treason, which carries  a mandatory death sentence. But because  Indigenous women in the Ayucucho region of Peru  of his high connections and affiliations in  the legal system, the charges were dropped.  Montesinos was formally expelled from the  army and sentenced to one year in prison.  Studying law while in prison,  Montesinos later graduated and became a  lawyer. He then built up a network of allies and informants inside key institutions  and skillfully made note of corrupt police  officers and judges. Within a few years, he  began to provide services to drug traffickers.  Vanschaik: What kind of services?  Tamara: He rented homes for  Columbian drug traffickers, advised accessories of traffickers as to when to go into  hiding, managed the disappearance of files  of fugitive Columbian traffickers, and in at  least one case, produced falsified documents in defense of a cocaine dealer. He  then became a defence coordinator for high  level corrupt police generals.  Montesinos entered the attorney general's office in 1988, and his chance to reenter the military appeared. His role? To  help in the cover up of the brutal torture  sessionsand peasant massacres by the military in the Cayara district, shortly after a  Shining Path ambush left four government  soldiers dead and 14 others wounded.  Amidst Montesino's attempt to cover  up the accusations of torture and murder  came shocking and unexpected testimonies  by clandestine officers and soldiers admitting their involvement in the atrocities, and  the involvement of Fujimori and  Montesinos.  Vanschaik: Who are the Tupac Amaru,  and what are their goals?  Tamara: The MRTA is a political-military group that evolved out of the experience of different leftist groups during the  70s. They officiary organized in 1984 and,  through revolutionary violence, are mobilizing and educating numerous political  and social organizations throughout Peru.  They are not to be associated with the Shining Path; the Tupac Amaru's methods of  force are not turned against innocent citizens. Their targets are primarily  goverment, military and foreign investors  who collaborate with military operations  and intelligence agencies.  [Ed. note: Peru was in a state of civil war  from the mid-1970s through the 1980s, until  Alberto Fujimori brought in measures to eliminate oppositional activities against his government. The main combatants in the 14-year civil  war were the military and the Shining Path  (Sendero Luminoso), a Marxist Taoist militant  group. During those years, both the military  and the Shining Path were responsible for brutal atrocities and the massacre of thousands of  indigenous and peasant peoples.]  The MRTA's goal is to overthrow  Fujimori's neo-liberal dictatorship. They  would like to achieve a participatory democracy where the men and women of  Peru get involved in their work place, their  Continued on page 16  MARCH 1997 Feature  Women and sexual assault in Canada:  Battling to protect records  by Cynthia Davis  The latest decisions by the Supreme Court  of Canada concerning the disclosure of women's personal records in sexual assault cases  [see page 5] highlight the blatant backlash  against women who try and file criminal and  civil charges for sexual assault and abuse, and  against feminist organizations and counsellors  providing support and advocacy for the women.  For more than two years, the Kamloops  Sexual Assault Counselling Centre was involved in a fight to protect the confidential  records of a woman who came to the centre for  counselling. Kamloops, a town in the southern interior of British Columbia with a population of 85,000, has just one sexual assault  centre and one women's shelter.  Cynthia Davis is the Agency Coordinator of the Kamloops Sexual Assault Counselling Centre. Below, she talks in detail about  the battle the centre waged to safeguard one  woman's records and, by extension, the records  of all women who go to sexual assault centres  for counselling and support. Davis' account is  excerpted from an interview with Agnes Huang  last June, while they were both in Ottawa attending the national consultation on violence  against women.  In the spring of 1994, a First Nations  woman in her 30s decided to bring a civil  case against her former foster father, who  is white, for sexual abuse that occurred for  about six years when she was a young  child. He was quite wealthy; she was a single mother attempting to go to school and  didn't have much money.  His lawyer immediately sent out approximately 25 subpoenas, to all the agencies, organizations and educational settings  she had ever been to during her life. At that  time, there were no legal requirements for  a statement of the "relevance of the  records," and so it was a "fishing expedition." Almost everyone handed over all  their information on this woman.  Our Sexual Assault Centre was the  only one that questioned the subpoena and  why this information was considered necessary for the trial. In the fall of 1994, our  challenge—which was legal and within our  rights—went before a provincial court  judge. We argued that more harm would  come to the provision of services to women  by our agency if we had to disclose our files  and that if no relevance had been put before the court [by the defense], then the  records shouldn't be handed over.  The judge agreed with us and ruled we  did not need to hand over the file. We were  very pleased with that. The defense lawyer waited until the last day before the  deadline for appeal (five months later), then  went back to the court saying he had new  evidence and asked for another hearing.  The new evidence he had was one affidavit from a psychiatrist in Vancouver  which stated that "false memory syndrome" (FMS) exists and therefore, it is possible women lie and possible that this  woman lied. The psychiatrist had never  seen her, had never seen us, and had never  seen the file. Still, that was enough for the  Master (a kind of "judge-in-training") to  overturn the previous decision and order  us to hand over the file to the defense.  This woman answered truthfully (and  this is what happens when women continue to believe the court process works for  them) when asked by the defense lawyer if  she had any diaries. She said yes, she had  eight diaries. The lawyer then asked for all  her diaries to be handed over. The Master  ordered the production of our files and her  diaries so they could be sent to this psychiatrist in Vancouver to review and find  out whether, in any of that extensive information, the woman had ever "lied" or  made any inconsistent statements.  At that point, we appealed to the BC  Supreme Court. We stated we did not believe the Master had the right to overturn  the original decision. The Supreme Court  judge agreed it had been an incorrect overturning. We celebrated; we thought it was  a day of victory for women.  That was in September 1995. This had  already been a long and emotional process  for our former client, our staff and our  Board. We had six women on our Board  who were personally willing to go to jail  for up to ten years, rather than turn over  the woman's counselling records. Several  of our board members had small children  under the age of five and one woman was  70 and had breast cancer, but they were all  prepared to do it.  The case didn't end there. The defense  lawyer again waited until the last minute  before taking the latest decision to the BC  Court of Appeal in February 1996. We knew  we were in trouble the moment we walked  in the door because one of the appeal judges  was the same judge who had written the  Ryan decision. [Ed note: the disclosure issue  in the Ryan case concerned a Vancouver psychiatrist's refusal to turn over confidential  records of a woman who was suing another  psychiatrist who had had sexual relations with  her when she was a teenager. The BC Court of  Appeal ordered the psychiatrist to turn over  her records to the defense. The Supreme Court  of Canada recently upheld the appeal court's  decision.]  It was a hostile court process. The  judges ruled against us very quickly and  ordered us to hand over the file to the  defense lawyer and to pay the defense's  court costs, which were $8,000. It was a very  sad and devastating moment.  We were ordered to hand over the file  forthwith. We took a while deciding what  "forthwith" meant and whether we were  going to try and take our challenge to the  Supreme Court of Canada. (We had the  opportunity to piggy back on the two cases  recently decided by the Supreme Court of  Canada but chose not to because of the cost  involved.)  I guess we took long enough (about a  month) because the defense lawyer went  back to court and asked for contempt  charges against us for not handing over the  file.  This was on a Monday, and we were  ordered to hand over the file on Friday or  She was glad she attempted to get  justice within the court system. But she  ended up two years later with much  less money and a lot of her personal  information in the hands of the person  accused of assaulting her.  face contempt charges and pay a fine of  $200 a day. The fine would be levelled  against our centre, as opposed to putting  our board members in jail or levelling fines  against them individually.  So what the court effectively did was  to put our former client into a position  where she could continue to ask us to help  her fight for her constitutional rights, but  by doing so she might jeopardize the access to sexual assault counselling services  for all women in our community. If the centre had to pay ongoing daily contempt  charges, we would have to do so by taking  money directly from our counselling services for women in the community.  We were prepared to support whatever  decision she made. On Friday, our former  client signed a consent for us to release her  information. We held a press conference at  the court house and handed over the file.  We handed that one over because we felt  we had absolutely no choice.  We also brought our shredding machine, along with a long extension cord, and  we symbolically shredded other files right  at the court house. We have since "tidied  up" approximately 3,000 files and we'll  continue to keep minimal information, until women are no longer being abused in  court because of our records. »  The court process has not responded  adequately to lessening the inequality towards women within the judicial system.  Within three weeks of turning over the  woman's file, we received notice that subpoenas were being requested in two more  cases. It gave me great pleasure to write to  both of the defense lawyers and tell them  those files no longer existed.  It's also interesting to point out that in  the two year process, none of the judges  involved ever looked at the file to make a  ruling concerning relevance [of the file to  the case].  Fighting these cases, one by one, is  costing sexual assault centres thousands  and thousands of dollars, and neither  sexual assault centres nor their Board members are rich. We believe the two year fight  over this one particular file cost the woman,  our centre and the defense over $100,000.  Also, if we (sexual assault centres, transition houses, counsellors, et cetera) are  forced to protect women's files on a case  by case basis, it will mean the richest person (almost always the defendant) will  most likely win. That's why we need to  have legislative changes to protect women's personal records and their rights to  more balanced and fair court cases.  For this particular woman, launching  a civil case against her abuser cost her over  $20,000, which came mostly from loans  from people she knew. She went to three  lawyers, and by the time the civil court case  started, she had no lawyer. During the process, she was hospitalized for over a month  from the trauma of the legal process. As she  handed over her file, she dropped the civil  charges because she was exhausted and out  of money.  She was, I believe, glad she attempted  to get justice within the court system. But  she ended up two years later with much  less money and a lot of her personal information in the hands of the person accused  of assaulting her.  As for our Sexual Assault Centre, we  can't imagine having to go through this  lengthy, costly and emotionally draining  process time after time. This is an issue not  only for women's organizations but also for  doctors, hospitals, therapists and social  service agencies—many of whom have  handed over women's personal information to the courts without questions.  With these latest Supreme Court of  Canada decisions, we can see that judges  are deeply divided on this issue, and that  five out of nine Supreme Court judges continue to fail to consider women's equality  rights at all.  We believe parliament has an obligation to ensure that Bill C-46, which does  address women's equality rights within the  justice system is enacted as soon as possible. [Ed Note: Bill C-46, as an amendment to  the criminal code, sets criteria which must be  met in order for women's personal files to be  even considered by a judge for disclosure. The  bill is currently in second reading in the House  ofCommons.]  The Kamloops Sexual Assault Counselling  Centre thanks all those who contributed funds  so that they were able to pay the over $8,500  court ordered costs, and thanks their lawyer,  Joel Groves, who contributed his legal services  forfree.  MARCH 1997 Feature  Women in China:  Hotline for help  by Helen Huang, as told to Fatima  Jaffer and Agnes Huang   The first and only telephone counselling  service for women in China was set up in  Beijing in September 1992. The Women's  Hotline was the initiative of the Women's Research Institute (WRI), a non-profit women's  research organization at the China Academy  of Management Science, and was started with  monies from the Global Fund for Women. Initially, the hotline had only one phone line, but  it has now grown to three lines. The hotline is  staffed by trained volunteers who respond to  calls from women across China—including  many women living outside of Beijing who  must pay long distance telephone charges to  call the hotline.  Before she immigrated to Canada, Helen  Huang Heng Yu was the vice-president of WRI  and worked as the supervisor of the Women's  Hotline. She holds university degrees in medicine and psychology, and had been teaching  psychology at the University of International  Business and Economics in Beijing. Since coming to Canada five months ago, Huang has been  working on plans to start up a similar hotline  for Chinese-speaking women in Vancouver.  Agnes Huang: Helen, can you talk  about the Women's Hotline in China?  Helen Huang: I think the hotline is very  useful. It covers all of China, especially  along the coast from Guangdong and  Fujian in southern China. The hotline is  open Monday to Friday. During four years  [of operation] from 1992 to 1995, we received more than 30,000 calls. The phone  line is very busy, and we cover a lot of issues.  At first we had just one phone, then a  couple of years later we got another line  [with funding from the Ford Foundation.]  Now we have three lines: one for calls to a  specialist, and two for general counselling.  Fatima Jaffer: In terms of the specialists,  what issues do they cover and who staffs  the phone line?  Helen: There are different kinds of specialists, and each day there are different issues covered: Mondays are about the law,  so we ask some lawyers, women lawyers,  to volunteer. Tuesdays are about marriage,  so psychologists come in. Wednesdays are  for health care, and some doctors from the  hospital come in. They're mostly women.  Thursdays are for sexual problems. For  that, we have two specialists who are men;  the other counsellors are women. The general phone lines are all staffed by women  volunteers.  Agnes: Are the phones busy?  Helen: All the time. Eighty percent of  the calls are from women, 20 percent from  men.  Fatima: Does the Women's Hotline take  calls from men?  Helen: Yes. There is no hotline for men  in China. The first time men called to talk  about sexual questions—how to make love,  and other things—some volunteers were  scared to deal with these problems. We do  train the volunteers on how to deal with  calls, but if they're uncomfortable dealing  with these types of questions, they can pass  them on to the specialist on Thursday.  Agnes: How many people volunteer  with the Women's Hotline?  Helen: Maybe 110. We train in five  groups. Some women stay, others move on,  and new volunteers come in.  Agnes: What is the background of  women who volunteer on the hotline? Why  do they volunteer?  Helen: All the volunteers are university  graduates. Most work in the the university;  some work in hospitals. Several volunteers  work in other women's organizations. Most  of the women are around 30-years old. The  women have to be married to work on the  hotline because then it's easier for them to  answer questions about sexual problems.  But now, we have one or two volunteers  who aren't married, and several who are  divorced. The women who volunteer on the  hotline believe in women's equality and  they feel useful being able to help other  people.  Agnes: Can you talk more about the  training given to the volunteers, and about  the hotline? Is it what one would call "feminist," is there a political ideology behind  the hotline, and the kind of information and  services women are provided?  Helen: We call it psychological counselling. But even if you have PhDs in clinical psychology, you don't learn a lot from  those textbooks, for example, about lesbians, about sexual harassment or violence  against women.  We have discussions about how to do  things in our situation to help women. It's  a continuing education; every month we  discuss these issues. Everyone says what  they think is a good answer. Sometimes we  invite foreign psychologists to our sessions.  Agnes: So you've sort of learned  through experience in doing the hotline  what is working?  Helen: Yes. We argue—someone has a  psychological view on how to do that;  someone has a political view. People have  so many different ideas about how to do  things.  Fatima: Are most of the people in the  training sessions women?  Helen: All the volunteers, except some  of the specialists, are women.  Fatima: Could you talk about some of  the problems women who call in ask about.  You've mentioned before issues such as  unemployment and violence...  Helen: I think Chinese people are  ashamed to talk about things like domestic  violence. I have received many calls from  women [about abusive male partners.] One  caller said her husband beat her very seriously; her collar bone was broken. The husband told her she couldn't talk to anyone,  and if she did, he would beat her again.  She didn't call anyone, not even her fam-  ily.  At that time, she called us. She said,  "I'm afraid." She was in a lot of pain. She  went to the hospital and the doctor asked  Helen Huang  what happened. She said she fell down by  accident.  She cried on the phone. I told her, "You  must speak out. You can find more support  if you ask for advice." I tried to do something to help her, but she wouldn't allow  it. She said maybe her husband would find  out.  Fatima: If she wanted to leave her husband, where could she go?  Helen: There's no place to go. There are  no shelters in China [for women leaving  abusive situations.] I wanted to open a shelter, but it takes a lot of money. This particular woman said her mother's family has a  small house, so she couldn't stay with her.  She couldn't stay with her friend's family  either because their house is small too.  Housing is a big problem in cities in China.  Fatima: What does the All China Women's Federation (ACWF) do? [ACWF is a  governmental organization dealing with women's issues.]  Helen: We talked about this problem to  ACWF. They have a shelter, but we couldn't  tell the woman to go there because it is very  small and costs lots of money. If someone  from outside of Beijing came to Beijing, and  if it was a serious situation [in which] she  couldn't be at home, then the ACWF would  have let her stay in the shelter for a short  time.  Fatima: In terms of other calls you've  taken, what issues do women raise?  Helen: I think the big problem for  women is their marriages. The divorce rate  is very high. More women are leaving their  husbands than ever before, especially if  they have a place to go to. If women want  to divorce, they have [to meet] three conditions: The first is about housing; you have  to have a house to live in. The second is  about who will take care of the children.  And the third is related to finances; you  have to have money to live on.  I think jobs are also a big problem. But  on the hotline, we don't receive many calls  about this question since people know we  can't deal with it. As an NGO, we have no  power to deal with helping women get jobs.  We have received some calls about  sexual harassment. We had a discussion  among women involved with the hotline,  and we wrote some papers about sexual  harassment. We also want to give government suggestions about establishing legislation against sexual harassment.  Agnes: When there are situations volunteers cannot address fully, such as, regarding the issue of housing or sexual assault, are there other resources for women  to be referred to in their own communities?  Helen: It's very difficult.  Fatima: So if a woman is raped, where  does she go?  Helen- The police. When she calls the  police, they must take her to the hospital  for an examination, and then they can go  to court. I have received calls from women  who didn't seek help after being raped. I  dealt with a case of a young girl who was  raped. She told only her mother, and her  mother said she couldn't tell anyone because when she wants to get married, it  could be very difficult.  Agnes: You participated in the NGO  Women's Forum and the 4th World Conference on Women in September 1995 in  China. You told us that the Women's  Hotline held a forum and that many  Continued on page 16  i7 Dnteinatlonat XQomens 'fcay  ^/nternational Women's Day arose out of the protest  and political activism of working women at the beginning  of the 20th century. Among the many struggles taking  place was the 1908 strike of garment workers, 80 percent  of whom were women, in New York City. The strike began  at the Triangle Shirtwaist Company, and grew to become a  general strike of 30,000 garment workers.  In 1910, the idea of "Women's Day" was taken up by  socialists and feminists. At the Second International  Conference of Socialist Women in Copenhagen in 1910,  attended by women from 17 different countries, a proposal  for an international "Women's Day" was put forward:  Clara Zetkin presented a motion that women throughout  the world should focus on a particular day each year to  press demands and to commemorate women and their  struggles. Women passed the motion unanimously and  "International Women's Day" came into being.  The first International Women's Day was held on  March 19,1911, in a number of European countries. The  date was later moved to March 8. The day became more  widely celebrated with waves of the feminist movement  and following the International Year of the Woman in  1975, which began the UN Decade of Women (1975-  1985).  —material gleaned from past issues of Kinesis and knowledgeable women  Below are some of the events being  organized for International  Women's Day that will be held in  the Lower Mainland region ofBC.  Tuesday /Hatch 4, 8pm  OXFAM-Canada presents: Zandile in  the Light of Umbuntu at Pacific Cinematheque, 1131 Howe St, Vancouver. The film  profiles Zandile Gumide, a 35 year old Zulu  woman who runs the Amaoti Civic Association in South Africa. She builds hope as  she continues to struggle against the other  remaining (after apartheid) forms of denigration of women: ignorance, violence,  male domination, and oppression. Directed  by Michel Regnier and produced by the  NFB. Tickets $10 at the door, $7 in advance  at the Bridgehead store 2150 W 4th. For  more info call OXFAM-Canada at 736-7678.  Zandile Gumide will be at the screening to  answer questions from the public.  'Wednesday /Hatch 5, 8pm  Sunera Thobani, Ruth Wynn Woodward Chair of Women's Studies and past  president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women, will be giving  a lecture on Selling Women Short: how the  Canadian government is undermining women  globally. The lecture will take place in Room  1800 at SFU, Harbour Centre, 515 W. Hastings St, Vancouver. Open to the public and  free. Refreshments at 7:30pm.  <tkutsday /Hatch 6  Douglas College will be holding a  number of talks, demonstrations and  screenings at its David Lam Campus, 1250  Pinetree Way, Coquitlam. The program includes: Anti-Stalkmg Laws, 10am; Wenlido,  lpm; Starting Your Own Business, 2pm; A  History of Women plus films and videos,  3pm. For more info call 527-5148.  ^Ckutsday /Hatch 6  An all-day Campus/Community Celebration for IWD will be held at Douglas  College's Thomas Haney Centre, 23000-116  Ave, Maple Ridge. For more info call 527-  5148.  ^hutsday /Hatch 6  Capilano College in North Vancouver  will hold talks, readings, open houses and  an art exhibit, beginning at 9am and running all day. The program includes: "Tiggy's  Web," performance monologues by Penniless Theatre at 12:30pm; a Women's Centre  open house from 12:30pm; "Wartime and  Women," a lecture by Marcia Toms at  7:30pm. All events are free. For more info  call 986-1911, local 2369.  <£hutsday /Hatch 6, 6pm  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women-BC Region is hosting a  fundraising dinner at the Pink Pearl Seafood Restaurant, 1132 E. Hastings St, Vancouver. The guest speaker for the evening  will be NAC President Joan Grant-  Cummings, addressing the issue of "APEC  (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) and  the Women's Movement". Tickets are $30  each (sliding scale for unemployed, underemployed). For more info, call Cenen Bagon  at 876-4119 or Fay Blaney at 255-0704.  ^Ihutsday /Hatch 6, 8pm  Video In, Monsoon, and Zampro co-  present a screening of lesbian of colour images at Video In, 1965 Main St, Vancouver.  The event is being held as part of IWD celebrations and as a fundraiser for Monsoon,  the newly formed Asian lesbian and bisexual women's group in Vancouver. The  four films to be screened are Fast Life on a  Lazy Susan, directed by Tien We; Only  Enough to Ignite: Some unpreventable adventures in lesbian flirtation, directed by  Gitanjali; B.D. Women, directed by Inge  Blackman; andKhush, directed by Pratibha  Parmar. Snacks and a cash bar available.  Tickets $3-6, sliding scale. For more info call  872-8337.  ^[kutsday /Hatch 6,9pm  Woman Words, readings by local  women, will feature the works and voices  of Joanne Arnott, Faith Jones and Anna No-  bile at the Lotus Club, 455 Abbott St, Vancouver. Hosted by Karen X. Tulchinsky. Everyone welcome. Admission is $1-4.  ^ttdaxf /Hatch 7  Douglas College will be holding a  number of IWD events at its New Westminster Campus, 700 Royal Ave. The day will  include a talk on Anti-Stalking Laws at  11am; an open house at the Women's Centre from noon to lpm; Wenlido at lpm;  films and videos at lpm; and an all-day art  show. For more info call 527-5148.  zfaiday /Hatch j, 5130pm  Douglas College's three campuses are  co-hosting an IWD dinner at Venus Place  Restaurant, 320-6th St, New Westminster.  Tickets are $25 each, or four for $80. Call  Liz Wilson at 527-5148 for tickets or more  info.  Satutday /Hatch 8, 8pm  The 1997 Vancouver IWD organizing  committee is hosting a Celebration Dance  at the Maritime Labour Centre, 1880 Triumph St (at Victoria Dr). The mixed-sex  dance will feature a DJ, door prizes, a cash  bar, and childcare. Tickets are sliding scale  $3-20, and are available at the Vancouver  Status of Women, Little Sister's, People's  Co-op Bookstore, or at the door. Some complimentary tickets available. For more information, to register for childcare or to volunteer, call 708-9491.  Satutday /Hatch 8, 8pm  Zinttl /Hatch 9  The Vancouver Association of Chinese  Canadians and the Burnaby Art Gallery are  sponsoring Through Women's Eyes, an exhibition of photographs, collages and video  taken by BC women at the NGO Women's  Forum and the Fourth World Conference  on Women held in China in September  1995. The exhibit is on display at the  Burnaby Art Gallery, 6344 Deer Lake. For  gallery tours and more info call 291-9441.  Satutday /Hatch 8, llam-4pm  The annual IWD March and Rally in  Vancouver will begin at 11am at the Vancouver Public Library (at Robson and  Homer). The rally will feature speakers, including Fay Blaney of the Aboriginal Women's Action Network and NAC, Lee  Lakeman of Rape Relief, and Joyce Arthur  of the BC Coalition of Abortion Clinics. After the march, there will be information tables, speakers and performances on the  lower level of the Vancouver Public Library  from l-4pm. The event is wheelchair accessible, and childcare is available on site. For  more information, to register for childcare,  to book an information table, or to volunteer, call 708-9491.  Bad Habits: A Benefit Cabaret for the  Positive Women's Network will feature the  Rainbow Concert Band with Nadine Chambers, Sister C, naughty guests, nasty secrets,  gags and drag at the Wise Hall, 1882  Adanac, Vancouver. Tickets are $13 and can  be purchased at Harry's Off Commercial  and Little Sister's. Concession tickets available. For more info call 290-0556.  Sat today /Hatch 8,2pm  "Women Resisting Imperialist  Globalisation" is the theme for a Theatre  and Quilt Workshop at the Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell St, Vancouver. The workshop is hosted by Philippine Women Centre, Grassroots Women Discussion Group,  Spanish Speaking Women's Society of BC,  and the SouthAsian Women's Centre. Admission is by donation. For more info call  215-1103.  Satutday /Hatch 8, jpm  "Women Resisting Imperialist  Globalisation" organizers are hosting an  IWD potluck dinner at the Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell St, Vancouver. The evening  will also include workshop presentations  and an exhibition of Images of Women  Against Imperialist Globalization (on display until March 15th). Admission is by donation. For more info call 215-1103.  Sunday /Hatch 9, gam-iopm  Vancouver's Co-operative Radio Station, CFRO 102.7 FM, presents a day of IWD  broadcasts. The special programming will  feature interviews and speeches from local  activists, women's music, and discussions  with artists, among other shows. For detailed program information, call Co-op  Radio at 684-8494, Monday to Thursday,  noon to 5pm.  Sunday /Hatch 9, 2pm  Radical Women in Seattle is hosting  Eyewitness Reports: 21 Days in Defiant Cuba  featuring Heidi Durham and Jordana  Sardo, who will report on their recent tour  to Cuba. The event will also feature video  highlights and information about ongoing  plans with the Federation of Cuban Women  for an International Feminist Brigade. The  event will take place at the New Freeway  Hall, 5018 Rainier Ave. S. Door donation is  $2. A Cuban buffet will be served at 5pm  for $8.50 donation. Sliding scale and work  exchanges available. For rides or childcare  call (206) 722-6057 or (206) 722-2453. Venue  is wheelchair accessible.  zfalday /Hatch 14, 6:30pm  Jyoti Sanghera, an activist, professor,  and chair of the Global Alliance Against  Trafficking in Women, will be speaking  about "Globalization, Traffic in Women and  Strategies for Resistance" at the Kalayaan  Centre, 451 Powell St, Vancouver. Hosted  by the Philippine Women Centre, Grassroots Women Discussion Group, Spanish  Speaking Women's Society of BC, and the  South Asian Women's Centre. Snacks and  refreshments. Admission by donation. For  more info call 215-1103. CELEBRATING  INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  All across our province, women are  achieving economic equality through  active participation in their union.  The United Food and Commercial  Workers Union, Local 1518, thanks  the women in our union who are  dedicated to making the union strong  and responsive to women's issues.  UFCW LOCAL 1518  THE UNION FOR THE NEW MILLENNIUM  uFom  LOCAL 1518 Feature  An alternative federal budget:  Reflecting our priorities  Shannon e. Ash  For the third year in a row, progressive  groups in Canada have created an alternative to the federal government's annual  budget and its rhetoric of debt-reduction  [see article page 4].  The Alternative Federal Budget (AFB)  was released February 12—six days before  federal Finance Minister Paul Martin unveiled the Liberal's version—by the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives (CCPA)  and the CHOICES Coalition. [The CCPA is  a left-wing research group, while the  CHOICES Coalition is made up of groups  concerned with social justice.]  "An economy cannot succeed if the  people within it are not well-off," said  Simon Fraser University economics professor and CCPA board member Marjorie  Cohen at the Vancouver launch of the AFB.  The Alternative Budget's authors state  that "budgets are political documents  which reflect the priorities and values of  those who put them together." The AFB was  based on input gathered from consultations  with a number of social justice activists and  progressive organizations across Canada.  The federal government's program of  prioritizing debt reduction while neglecting job creation and slashing social programs is one this document seeks to counter. The AFB says social programs did not  cause the debt, and Canadians should not  have to suffer the effects of program and  service cutbacks to manage this debt.  Overview  There are five priorities in the Alternative Budget: job creation; poverty reduction;  preservation and strengthening of social  programs; fair taxation policy; and responsible targets for management of debt.  How does the Alternative Budget propose to do these things? Here are some  highlights:  Employment  The Alternative Budget proposes several steps to increase paid employment:  1. Expansionary Macroeconomic  Policy: Stimulating economic growth by  keeping Canada's interest rates low and reducing dependence on banks and foreign  lenders, and vulnerability to capital mobility [that is, money leaving the country]. For  example, national chartered banks would  be required to redirect a small portion of  their assets into capital funds for community economic development and small business.  2. Emergency Employment Investment  Program: Creating jobs by investing in environmental, social and traditional forms  of infrastructure (for example, public transportation, social housing, childcare), and  new community development initiatives.  There would be an employment equity  component to provide opportunities for  disadvantaged groups.  3. Restoration of public services, which  are important services and provide well-  paying jobs for many women.  4. Reduction of worktime: Reducing  the work week (under federal jurisdiction)  to 36 hours, and reducing reliance on overtime.  As well, the AFB proposes creating a  new Unemployment Insurance Fund  which would include workers excluded by  recent changes (what the Liberal's call, EI:  Employment Insurance), such as seasonal  and part-time workers, many of whom are  women.  National Social Investment Funds  The AFB would set up a number of  funds to support social programs:  • National Income Support Fund:  Jointly developed with the provinces, this  would provide a minimum income for Canadians. National criteria for income assistance would be restored and improved; for  example, mandating assistance based on  need rather than participation in workfare  programs and eliminating minimum residency requirements such as BC has now.  An Enhanced Child Benefit, which  could not be deducted from welfare income, is also included, as is a National  Advance Maintenance Child Support System. This system would be established to  ensure child support payments are made,  by paying the custodial parent and then recovering them from the support-paying  parent.  • National Health Care Fund: Under  the AFB's health scheme, the Canada  Health Act would be enforced, and privatization threats monitored. The budget  would support the development of community health centres for primary health  care, which "provides the opportunity for  those with specific concerns about health  care delivery, such as women or ethnic  groups, to plan and implement services  which meet their needs."  The Royal Commission onAboriginal  Peoples' recommendations would be implemented, providing for Aboriginal control over health services and spending to  support training and infrastructure. A National Drug Plan and steps to reduce drug  costs is another health care component.  • Child Care Investment Fund: This  fund would be cost-shared with the provinces, and would be slightly higher than the  unfulfilled Liberal government's pre-election Red Book promise. The childcare strategy would be based on high quality, accountability and accessibility, among other  principles.  Affordable, quality childcare is essential to support employment, particularly of  women, and to combat the problems of  child poverty, say the budget's authors.  Aboriginal/First Nations Issues  The Alternative Budget supports the  Royal Commission onAboriginal Peoples  recommendations, and supports First Nations self-government and treaty settlement  processes. There is also mention of urban  Aboriginals, non-status and Metis issues,  acknowledging that the federal government has a financial responsibility to all  Aboriginal peoples, not just First Nations.  More specifically, funding would be restored to Aboriginal programs, and money  set aside for self-government negotiation  and implementation.  Equity Issues  An Equity Participation Foundation  would be formed to provide funding for  advocacy groups and services for  marginalized Canadians, such as women,  people with disabilities, people of colour,  lesbians and gays, non-unionized workers,  et cetera. A minister would be appointed to  be specifically responsible for disability issues, and the vocational rehabilitation  budget would be restored.  The AFB would also direct $50 million  toward ending violence against women  services, as well as other demands from the  1996 Women's Poverty March.  Other components  Issues related to the Environment and  Agriculture get some mention in the alternative budget. One proposal is the introduction of a Family Farm Support Program,  with an emphasis on "sustainable" agriculture, replacing subsidies which benefit  large industrial farms more.  The Environment budget would be  increased, and some job creation funding  would go toward research, conservation,  and programs such as retrofitting buildings. The budget would also rescind the  "head tax" on new immigrants to Canada  and change immigration priorities so there  is less class and race bias.  Funding would be restored to the CBC,  and a strategy developed to increase Canadian content/participation in arts and  entertainment. The GST would be removed  from magazines and books.  Can we afford it?  The Alternative Budget authors say the  majority of money for their program (which  includes reducing the debt) would come  from the economic growth their policy  changes would cause.  The remainder would be raised  through "Solidarity Tax" measures, raising  taxes from the wealthy and corporations.  Taxes for the middle-class and low-income  would not go up, with some tax reductions  for poor families.  Outstanding taxes would be collected  by increasing staff at Revenue Canada.  There would be new taxes on wealth transfers at death (when over $1 million is inherited not between spouses), family trusts,  and very high income brackets, and lower  limits on RRSP contribution deductions.  There would also be a minimum corporate  tax, a tax on excess bank profits, and limits  on corporate tax credits and deductions.  There would also be a new Carbon Tax on  atmospheric emissions.  Will it Work?  At the Vancouver press conference,  someone raised the argument that if a government tried to take the measures the Alternative Budget proposes, it would "drive  out investment."  CCPA-BC Office coordinator Seth  Klein responded by saying that this is partly  misinformation: Canada's taxes are low  relative to other major industrial countries.  It may also be necessary to "call the bluff"  of corporate investors. Re-regulation of the  financial sector, including a law which  would have banks make funds available for  community economic development, coops, and small business (which aren't going to leave the country) could address this  issue. This alternative budget is actually  quite moderate, says Klein, and the argument that it's unattainable doesn't hold up.  What's Missing?  The alternative budget doesn't go far  enough to address the issues most critical  to Aboriginal peoples, especially those living off-reserve, says Viola Thomas, president of the United Native Nations, an organization representing off-reserve Aboriginal peoples in BC. One of the main criticisms is that the AFB gives just cursory  mention to Aboriginal peoples in certain  sections of the document, and just expresses  its support of the recommendations of the  Royal Commission on Aboriginal People.  Within Aboriginal communities, while  there is general support of the report, many  people still have serious concerns about its  omissions and inadequate coverage of certain key issues, particularly as they relate  to Aboriginal women.  Environmental concerns and unwaged  work (mostly done by women) also receive  little or no consideration in the Alternative  Budget, says Ellen Woodsworth, a community activist who works with the Greater  Vancouver Seniors' Coalition and is part of  a new BC group of unwaged women workers. (This group formed at a recent conference of the new International Centre for  Unpaid Work in Saskatoon).  According to Woodsworth, the AFB  "accepts the basic premises of the present  economic framework," using the GDP  (Gross Domestic Product) measurement of  a country's economy. She says the GDP is  fundamentally flawed in that it doesn't  count unpaid labour or enviromental capital or costs. "Until we count unwaged  work, we're not getting to the source of  women's inequality in the economy."  The budget document acknowledges  there may be conflict between economic  growth and environmental sustainability,  but argues that it favours economic growth  which will focus on services and "human  capital" rather than resource consumption.  Woodsworth believes that the Alternative Budget is a good idea, in that it "gets  people involved in thinking about economic systems,"it just needs to go further  to really include women and the environment. It could also be applied at the municipal level, which is where it started,  with CHOICES Winnipeg. The budget's  authors intend it to be a "popular education tool."  To get a copy of the Alternative Budget  contact the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives. National Office: 804-251 Laurier Avenue W., Ottawa, ON, K1P5J6; tel: (613) 563-  1341. BC Office: 815-207 W. Hastings St,  Vancouver, BC, V6B1H7; tel: (604) 801-5122.  Shannon e. Ash is regular contributor to  Kinesis with an irregular computer.  MARCH 1997 Feature  The Tupac Amaru in Peru:  Continued from page 9  community, their neighborhoods, et cetera,  and basically where they can decide their  own destiny.  Vanschaik: What are the demands of  the Tupac Amaru members in the Japanese  Ambassador's Residence?  Tamara: They demand the release of  MRTA prisoners, as well as those prisoners  falsely accused by the government of being MRTA militants. In 1992, as Fujimori  carried out his coup, he tightened security  laws to the extent that they are a violation  of international treaties and agreements  which the Peruvian Congress itself has  signed, as well as other international conventions on human rights and torture.  Special laws aimed at leftist organizations were passed which gave the police,  the army and the courts all possible means  of repression. There are thousands of political prisoners in Peru. They are students,  women, farmers union members, and so  on. They are subjected to special forms of  physical and psychological torture.  Vanschaik: Please tell us about the  prison conditions in Peru.  Tamara: There are twelve high-security  prisons in Peru. One of them is a marine  base. Another is located at an altitude of  4,000 meters in the Andes Mountains. The  climate there makes life very hard for the  prisoners. The wind blows through the bars  and it is always very cold. Many prisoners  suffer from respiratory illnesses and stomach pains. People who are arrested under  the "anti-terrorism laws" are sentenced  within 24 hours, with no chance of making  a defence.  The prisoners must then live in total  isolation for a whole year. They are denied  medical treatment and suffer ailments from  the food, which is often rotten or mixed  with glass, rats or cockroaches. Prisoners  receive only two litres of water per day for  bathing, washing, and drinking. Prison  conditions are the same for both men and  women, but women must, in addition, endure sexual assaults and intimidation.  Many of the political prisoners are not  even Tupac Amaru activists, but are the  wives, brothers, sisters, or children of those  activists. Often when the police could not  capture MRTA members, their families  were taken instead and subjected to the  same torture and treatment as other prisoners.  The MRTA will not leave the Embassy  because of the situation of their own families being tortured in these prisons. For  them, this is worse than death, so they prefer to die than surrender. Their motto is  "Homeland or death—we will win."  Vanschaik: What are the options for the  government of Peru in this situation?  Tamara: The Peruvian government  knows that the MRTA is a political organization which does not violate its principles.  So Fujimori's regime has only two options:  a military assault or the fulfillment of the  demands made by the MRTA commando,  which means releasing these political prisoners.  [Ed note: On February 1,1997, Alberto  Fujimori met with Japanese Prime Minister  Ryutaro Hashimoto and Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chretien in Toronto to "consult" on  the hostage crisis. At that meeting, Fujimori  indicated clearly that he would not meet the  Tupac Amaru's demand for the release of their  jailed comrades.]  To protest the repression and violation of human rights in Peru send letters to Alberto  Fujimori requesting that the Peruvian government respect international law, provide fair  reviews and sentences for political prisoners,  and improve prison conditions. Fujimori's fax  number in Lima is 011-51-14-4266770.  Stephanie Colvey's photo appearing with this  article is one among her series on women in  Peru currently on display at Presentation  House Gallery in North Vancouver. The  images in the exhibit, Rights and Realities,  show the daily lives of women in six  countries as documented by six Canadian  women photojournalists.  Women in China:  Continued from page 11  women attending the NGO forum came to  visit the hotline office. What kind of impact  did either the organizing of the forum and  conference, and the forum and conference  themselves, have on women in China? Did  women know it was happening?  Helen: Many people knew about the  forum. The media did a lot of work. A lot  of companies also had things to say about  it, especially since 40,000 delegates were  coming to Beijing.  Agnes: Did it lead to any changes for  women in China?  Helen: I think so. During the forum,  women were very important. For example,  some taxi drivers considered women's issues for the first time. In the past, Chairman Mao said,"women hold up half of the  sky." It's a famous line. Now, no one says  those words anymore. But during the conference, they'd say, women do have power.  I think the women's conference helped  Chinese people, especially perhaps the political leaders. If the leaders considered  women's issues, I think a lot of people  would talk about women's issues. In the  Chinese-language newspapers, maybe everyday [during the conference], you would  see articles about Chinese women's issues.  Fatima: Such as violence against  women?  Helen: Not violence. The focus was  more on how many women came to the  conference and welcoming them to China.  The government wrote an important article on "the interest of Chinese women" [the  official government document on the status of women in China presented at the UN  Conference.] I think it is very useful for  Chinese women to have a document on  women's rights.  Fatima: But after the conference, did the  government throw away the report?  Helen: Well, women's issues weren't  the hot issues anymore. But I think if we  have the document, it's still useful.  Fatima: It's the same for women everywhere—it gives us a document to hold  our government accountable, if we can find  ways to use it. Before, you were telling me  16  you were interested in lesbian issues and  that at the NGO Forum you heard about  many new issues. For you personally, what  did you learn from the conference?  Helen: In China, lesbians and prostitution are some of the hot issues—we can't  talk about them in public. There is a lot of  prostitution in the south of China [because  of the special economic zones].  I did some research about the lesbians  and homosexuals in my professional job.  Some people say [lesbians and gays] have  different genes from heterosexuals; others  say the social conditioning when lesbians  and gays are young is different.  I think they need help, but in China  there's a lot of pressure from their family,  society, their company, so they can't speak  out. I have many friends who are homosexuals. They have meetings and sometimes I go.  Fatima: What kind of help?  Helen: In China, a lot of people look  down on homosexuals. I think looking  down on someone because of their sexual  orientation is stupid. They have rights; they  don't damage the family or anything.  Once I received a call on the hotline  from a man who said he had a very good  job and a master's degree. He was the only  son in his family, and now that he was over  thirty, his family told him he must get married. He couldn't tell anyone about his  sexual orientation. He wanted to commit  suicide.  He also didn't know many things  about being gay. There are very few books  in Chinese on this issue. There are many  such "negative" issues we can't talk about  in China.  Fatima: When I was in Beijing at the  conference, many people at the forum saw  I was wearing a lesbian rights burton, and  asked me about being a lesbian. People  were very open to knowing. They'd come  to the Lesbian Tent. We actually had a workshop on lesbianism for the curious.  Agnes: I hear you want to start a hotline  for Chinese women in Vancouver.  In the past, Chairman Mao said,  "women hold up half of the sky."  It's a famous line.  Now, no one says those words anymore.  But during the [UN Conference on Women, ]  they'd say, women do have power.  Helen: Yes, I'm very interested in something for Chinese women here. In China, I  did face-to-face counselling in the hospital  clinic, but when I worked on the hotline as  a volunteer, I learnt a lot of things from the  women who called in and who volunteered. I learnt that education is more important than treatment (after things happen). Awareness is more important.  Fatima: That's very feminist. We believe  it's better for women to know what is happening to them and to understand their  situation than to just tell them to take a pill  or see a so-called expert. Understanding  yourself makes you more powerful.  Helen: At the hotline, we couldn't support women financially or in other ways,  but we can give them emotional support. I  think when women are empowered, they  can deal with things by themselves.  Fatima Jaffer is a South Asian lesbian feminist. She attended the NGO Women's Forum  in Huairou. Agnes Huang is a Chinese feminist activist working in community media in  Vancouver.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  SPECIAL PROGRAMMING  on CO-OP RADIO 102.71 M  SUNDAY, MARCH 9  9 A.M. TO 10 P.M.  Iftte^vxeivi)   and   typeechety  by   Local   actixrl<ytiy...  Wonxerio  ntuaic  and  arta,   too!  For program information call 684-8494  MARCH 1997 Arts  Native women in the arts:  Together creating a future  by Sandra Laronde as told to  Michelle Sylliboy   In 1993, a not-for-profit organization was  started up in Toronto to support the creative  work of Aboriginal women artists all across  Turtle Island. Native Women in the Arts  (NWIA) works to "build networks that help  break down isolation, forge connections, gain  access to resources and support cultural self-  determination." The organization's work is  currently coordinated by two part-time staff  members, Sandra Laronde and Nancy Cooper.  NWIA published the first issue of its annual literary arts journal in 1995. In Vast  Dreaming contains short stories, poetry, excerpts of plays, biographies, songs and visual  art work of 46 Aboriginal women. Last December, the journal's second issue, Sweetgrass  Grows All Around Her, came out featuring  the words and images of such Aboriginal  women writers and artists as Joy Harjo, Rose  M. Spahan, Donna Goodleaf and Marilyn  Dumont.  Michelle Sylliboy recently had an opportunity to talk with Sandra Laronde about the  history and work of NWIA, and the challenges  it faces in trying to reach out to Aboriginal  women artists. Laronde is Temagami-  Anishnabe (Objibway), which means literally,  "peoplefrom the deep water," from Temagami,  Ontario (Northern Ontario). Apart from  NWIA, Laronde works as an artist, and, specifically, as a stage performer. She also writes  and performs with a local Native women's  drum group that started in 1993 called the  Sweetgrass City Hangers. Michelle Sylliboy is  from the Mi'kmaq Nation. Originally from  Wunama'kik (Cape Breton), she has been living in Vancouver since 1990. She is an artist  and poet, and is currently a student at Emily  Can.  Michelle Sylliboy: How did Native  Women in the Arts get started?  Sandra Laronde: In 1992,1 was hired at  the Toronto Arts Council (TAC) on a six  month contract as part of a strategy for  implementing a policy on cultural equity.  Various communities were a part of that  and the TAC basically gave us each $5,000  to $10,000 and said, what do you want with  this.  The TAC didn't initiate the organizations or projects; they just put the money  up, and we shaped it. I worked with senior  [Aboriginal women] artists to shape  NWIA—looking at what the needs of the  community are and how they would like  to see the organization shaped.  NWIA involves Native women from  diverse nations and artistic disciplines. We  share the common interest of culture, art,  community and the advancement of Native women. NWIA is the only organization of its kind in all of North America;  there's nothing else specific to Native  women artists and coming from all artistic  disciplines.  One thing we did not want to do is fall  into this same mainstream definition of  what an artist is. I think that for Native people, our definition is much broader. When  I think of artists, I also think that healers  are a part of that, because they're working  with spiritual, creative energy. The disciplines are not so fragmented either. I find a  lot of Native artists are able to do other  things, like be a stage performer, a writer,  and play an instrument.  Sylliboy: We're so talented, [laughs]  Laronde: Yeah. Our way is a little more  whole than the way the mainstream sees  artists.  Sylliboy: How did you get the word out  about NWIA to the various communities?  Laronde: It started very grassroots, because I knew that when you start a new  organization in the community, strategically, you don't want to pose a threat to  anyone. We didn't come in brazenly; we just  started out very small. The next thing we  knew, the community was talking about us  and we were a part of the community.  Sylliboy: How have other First Nations  artists been finding out about NWIA?  Laronde: Just from word of mouth. One  of the first things we organized was a two-  day forum for Native women on community art and culture. We had some seasoned  artists, as well as emerging artists, come in  and talk about what they'd like see happen, what they need, what some of the barriers are, what resources we have, and what  can NWIA do. Among the artists who participated were Shirley Bear, Lenore  Keeshig-Tobias, Pura Fe and Soni, and Lee  Maracle, Marrie Mumford—it was an incredible group of women.  We also organized a cabaret that was  sold out to 300 people; It was just incredible; I still hear the positive reverberations  from that evening in 1994.  People ask when we're going to do  another gathering because it was so incredible. And really when I think about it, it was  historical. What I was amazed to learn was  that Lee Maracle had never met Lenore  Keeshig-Tobias; Lenore had never met  Shirley Bear—these women were coming  together for the first time.  Sylliboy: Did you photograph the  event?  Laronde: Yes. We also taped it.  Sylliboy: Have you thought about  documenting the gathering in a book form?  Laronde: No.  Sylliboy: It would be exciting because  we need information like that out there.  Laronde: It's a good idea. A lot of  women read from their work and they  talked a little bit. There were some singers.  I also invited a woman from the Black  community, a woman from the SouthAsian  community, and a white woman to be part  of the gathering, so we could start to build  links and collaborate with other communities.  Sylliboy: For Sweetgrass Grows All  Around Her, how did you find the writers  and artists who contributed to the journal?  I'm here out west, and I had never heard  about NWIA.  Laronde: We're fairly young as an organization; we're just going into our fourth  year. I think a lot of women may have heard  from other women and from the En'owkin  Centre [for First Nations writers and artists in Penticton, BC]. The centre was really helpful in disseminating information.  A lot of things travel by word of mouth  and even a write up in Kinesis is going to  A Time Within the Memory, detail of a collaborative piece by Mavis  Kiyoshk, Barbara Kiyoshk, Adele Altman, Sharon Kiyoshk-Burritt and  Rebecca Baird  help, of course, and if we do a launch in  Vancouver it's going to bring in a lot of  Native women. So those are the kinds of  ways of getting in contact.  Sylliboy: It seems like the same  women—fairly well-known artists—are in  Sweetgrass as those in other anthologies and  journals. I'm not saying that in a negative  way—I adore the women who are in the  book—but I'd like to see other Native women's work being published, especially  emerging and lower-profile artists.  Laronde: Yes, of course, but we have to  start from some place, right? It makes sense  to me that for the first couple of issues, it's  good to have writers in the journal with  whom people are familiar. Joy Harjo, Beth  Brant, Lenore—those are the women who  carry a lot of weight, so a lot people, Native and non-Native, will buy the journal.  But, of course, it is also important to bring  along emerging or first-time published  women.  I would also love to see a lot more work  come from women in the east, because the  east is often forgotten. In Vast Dreaming had  about four women from the east. In this issue, we have only one, Rita Joe. We have to  get out there because, you can send flyers  and do other things, but it doesn't work in  Native communities. You have to get out  there to one of those big conferences and  talk to people.  Sylliboy: Do you have a mailing list?  Laronde: Yes. We can put you on a mailing list and we send you everything. And  women who have ideas for things can contact us. We're very open to ideas and we  try and do projects that are innovative, too.  Sylliboy: Aside from producing a literary arts journal, what other things does  NWIA do?  Laronde: I talked about the forum and  the cabaret we organized...we also have  fairly well-established artists come in and  talk about their processes. It's like a  mentoring program because often younger  women will see the final product and think  well, I couldn't do that. It's really impor  tant that the process is talked about because  it demystifies the belief that only a few people are born creatively gifted, and only  those few can do art.  Other projects we've organized include  story weaving with Spiderwoman Theatre's Artistic Director Muriel Miguel, and a  workshop on telling personal stories and  tranforming those stories into something  you can tell in public in keeping with the  Aboriginal ways of storytelling.  We have held singing workshops, and  have organized a couple of writing workshops for the community, given by Beatrice  Culleton-Moisioner and Beth Brant. We also  held a national gathering of Native women  artists from Cape Croker reserve, outside  of Toronto.  Once when Doreen Jensen was out this  way and she came and talked about her  artistic process, and Margo Kane did a  workshop on physicalizing text, that is,  working with voice. We had a Navajo  woman, Pearl Sunrise, come in and talk  about the kind of weaving the Navajo do,  which was great because we don't have  much exposure to Navajo people.  We've done a Youth Circle, Feast and  Celebration, for Black and Native youth  from Manitoulin, Ottawa, Windsor, Toronto  and Six Nations areas.  So that's some of the projects we've  been involved with over the last three years.  Plus, we've been building an organization.  When I started out, not one piece of paper  existed, so the work we've done is a lot.  "Sweetgrass Grows All Around Her will  be launched in Toronto on March 19. To order  a copy of Sweetgrass or for more information  about Native Women in the Arts, contact them  at 401 Richmond St. W, Toronto, Ontario,  M5V1X3; tel: (416) 598-4078; fax: (416) 340-  8458. The cost of the journal is $10 plus $3  shipping.  MARCH 1997 Arts  A gathering of Aboriginal peoples:  The soup pot's on  by Jehn Starr  QATUWAS: People Gathering Together  Written, directed and produced by Barb  Cranmer  Qatuwas Productions Inc,  Vancouver, BC, 1996  Magic lingers throughout Qatuwas via  song, cinematography and purpose.  Barb Cranmer's latest cinematic effort  holds a strong emotional impact for those  who wonder about the past, present and  future of indigenous cultures in Canada. It  may seem like indigenous cultures are  locked away in museums and for sale on  Robson Street, but they're stronger than  voyeurism and money. The spirit of Raven  will always be heard when a story needs to  be told.  Cranmer has maintained the magic of  traditional storytelling, in collaboration  with modem institutions, the National Film  Board and the Knowledge Network. I don't  think the ancestors mind this particular  merger—they showed up and gave the  documentary a purpose.  Qatuwas starts off with a challenge issued in 1989 from the Heiltsuk people to  all indigenous west coast maritime nations.  The nations who accepted, carved traditional canoes and paddled to Bella Bella to  meet up with the other participating nations at the Qatuwas Festival, which occurred from June 27 to July 3,1993.  Qatuwas means "people gathering together in one place" in the Heiltsuk language, and that definition runs deep  through every aspect dealing with this film.  The premiere of the film attracted a large  crowd that lingered about the Squamish  Recreation Centre on January 11, 1997.  Qatuwas was screened as part of a larger  program of cultural sharing including a  wide variety of delicious seafood. The program started in the afternoon and carried  on right into the wee hours of the night.  A prelude of beautiful songs and  dances opened for Qatuwas and the music  carried on after the film was viewed. Just  before the lights dimmed, the crowd grew  larger and soon the recreation centre became standing room only. Applause did not  need to be prompted from the crowd of  more than a thousand, and a  heartfelt roar rose when a  woman on screen hoisted a colossal soup pot onto her stove.  Anybody who has been to a  good feast can truly understand  the meaning of that soup pot.  Emotion ran high during  the screening—I saw the man  sitting next to me wipe his eyes  during the scene where all the  21 canoes were locked together  waiting for permission to beach  on Heiltsuk territory. A witness  to the event, who was interviewed in the film, said what  happened on the beach in Bella  Bella was timeless—her face  was alive with a deep sense of  awe and her words only  complimented her face.  Qatuwas is held together  with several strong points—visual, auditory and emotional—creating a sturdy story  structure. The interviews Cranmer uses are  with interesting people who were involved  with the Festival and the voyage. They  make strong statements regarding personal  experiences, modern indigenous issues,  cultural and womanly pride. "The First Nations Woman's Day was to honour all  women from every tribe that was in  Qatuwas... [Pjrobably one of the most powerful things that happened during Qatuwas  was when the women were in their tribal  group marching, singing their songs and  being proud of who they are," says Andrea  Cranmer.  Traditional drumming and singing are  generously distributed throughout the film  adding to the story. If the sight of button  blankets and chiefly head gear hasn't  touched one's heart, the songs surely will  reach in and remind us of who we are.  Since the past also has a lot to say, it  was essential the film used old photographs  of indigenous life in order to show the  change in traditional coastal cultures over  the years. The mark of good cinematography is the clear and precise exposure of still  photographs. In Qatuwas, the depictions  of the past came through just fine: old  Arrival of canoes in Bella Bella, B.C. in 1993  fashioned potlatches, ocean bound canoes,  and fine boned faces.  The editing is well done—with imagination and clarity—by Bill Campbell, who  also worked with Barb Cranmer on her previous film, Laxwesa Wa-Strength of the River.  The transition between the interviews and  visual content in Qatuwas is smoothly executed—it is clear Cranmer knows how to  carry a cinematic narrative. An old photograph of a man singing at a potlatch is  nicely juxtaposed with a young man wearing a hooded sweater in more recent times  doing the same thing. This particular moment is a reminder of how, even though  time may pass, the songs remain the same.  Cranmer has won three awards for her  cinematic efforts in her ten years of film production. Over the years, she has definitely  proven her ability to tell stories that belong  to indigenous people—stories that are a  true reflection of indigenous people, not inaccurate, racist representations.  Cranmer is Namgis from Alert Bay (on  Vancouver Island). The Namgis are part of  the Kwakwaka'wakw Nation located in the  Smith Sound to Comox regions. She says  her next project, which has been on her  mind for the last six or seven years, will be  a film about oolichan oil.  The making of Qatuwas was a collaborative effort: the Knowledge Network was  responsible for production and 90 hours of  film which deals with the actual oceanic  journey. Co-producer Frank Brown of the  Heiltsuk Nation, was the one who issued  the challenge which ignited this endeavour,  and was also responsible for the original  story and concept. The National Film  Board, TV Ontario, Vision TV and the Saskatchewan Communications Network also  aided in the production of Qatuwas. And  Cranmer skillfully and beautifully weaved  together the different aspects that make up  this historic film.  This documentary has truly gathered  people together in more than one way.  Through a patchwork of community effort  stretching across Canada, the meaning of  Qatuwas has made itself clear with optimism.  Jehn Starr is from the Sekani and Gitksan Nations. She is a poet, painter and photographer  currently living in Vancouver.  Director Barb Cranmer (left), Georgina Malloway and Felix Victor  Yale, B.C. Arts  Women and fat oppression:  Redefining "normal" size  by Carol Read  NO FAT CHICKS  by Terry Poulton  Key Porter Books, Toronto 1996  BIG, BOLD AND BEAUTIFUL:  LIVING LARGE ON A SMALL  PLANET  by Jackqueline Hope  MacMillan Canada,Toronto 1996  Every year, the diet industry makes $3  billion in Canada and $40 billion in the  United States. Most of the customers are  women, and at least 98% will regain their  lost weight—and often more.  Why do women diet when diets don't  work?  In No Fat Chicks, Terry Poulton gives  her answer: society's prejudice against fat  women creates such suffering that many  women see fatness as worse than the measures they use to keep slim. By her account,  some women smoke to dull their appetites;  others take laxatives and diuretics,  overexercise, starve themselves, induce  vomiting after they've eaten, avoid birth  control pills so they won't gain weight, buy  creams meant to "smooth the thighs," pop  amphetamines, read the latest diet books,  and spend billions on diet products.  With thorough research, Poulton  chronicles the modern diet industry. It was  bom in the 19th century when mass-produced clothes and women's magazines created standard sizes and a beauty ideal. But  not until the 1960s did the media impose a  single image of female beauty: thin. Millions of young baby boomers had money  to spend, and they wanted to look as different from their mothers as possible.  In 1967, Twiggy arrived. At 57" and  91 pounds, the teenaged Lesley Hornby at  first earned the nickname "Oxfam," until  'Twiggy" stuck. Poulton describes the English model as "near skeletal," a "Trojan  horse whose secret mission was to entrap  the female population of NorthAmerica for  the next three decades."  Today's models weigh 25 per cent less  than the average North American woman.  Poulton calls models "hooks" that advertisers use to pull women into a fantasy  world where slimness can be bought.  According to Poulton, big business gets  women "coming and going": ads lure us  into buying sugary, high-fat food; we get  fat; we look at thin models and feel self-  loathing; we rush out to buy diet products;  we lose weight and buy clothes; we gain  weight, buy bigger clothes, feel more self-  loathing; and repeat the cycle.  Poulton says this "billion dollar brainwash" works because big businesses have  such control over the media. Their advertising dollars pressure magazines and television networks to feature articles and  shows compatible with their "thinness  equals love and success" message. A glance  through any fashion magazine confirms  this—the copy conforms to the ads.  Poulton refers to civil rights leader  Malcolm X who "often spoke about how  demoralizing it is to never see anyone who  resembles you portrayed as a normal participant in popular culture." Malcolm X  meant African-Americans, but Poulton  says, "large women have been  marginalized in exactly the same way since  the billion dollar brainwash shifted into  high gear in the late 1960s."  We can turn off the TV and not buy  fashion magazines, but most of us can't  escape living in a society that discriminates  against large women. Throughout Fat  Chicks, Poulton cites study after study that  proves the extent of fat discrimination. For  example, according to the New York Times,  "overweight workers are penalized $1,000  in salary for every 'extra' pound."  Poulton writes from experience—she's  been a fat woman most of her life. In 1981,  she lost 65 pounds when she embarked on  a diet and exercise program for a series of  articles she was doing for Chatelaine magazine. Halfway through the diet, she stopped  losing weight. Every day, to complete her  planned weight loss, she worked out for at  least two hours, swam 22 laps in a Olympic-sized pool, and ate as few as 500 to 600  calories.  Throughout No Fat Chicks, she laments  that she neither married or had children  because she felt ashamed of her weight.  Poulton still seems to feel bad about fatness.  She says that in writing No Fat Chicks,  her "mental attitude was finally healed"  and her "body automatically began sorting itself out." The "happy result" is that  she's been losing weight without dieting—  about 50 pounds at the time she wrote the  book's introduction. Now when she looks  in the mirror, she no longer faces: "the grotesque fun-house distortion that tormented  [her] for so long." Instead, she sees "what  [she] always wanted to be...a normal person. (The italics are Poulton's.)  By implying fat women aren't normal,  Poulton undermines her political message  and reveals the weakness of her argument.  She argues that big businesses manipulate  women into hating their bodies and spending money in pursuit of an unattainable  ideal, but she does not address why big  businesses succeed. Nor does she analyze  the social and psychological forces that  make so many people fear and hate large  women and large women hate themselves.  In contrast to Poulton's political message, undermined by a personal agenda,  Jackqueline Hope delivers a personal message supported by political activism in her  book about being a large woman, Big, Bold  and Beautiful. Canada's first plus-sized  model, Hope is a spokeswoman for size acceptance who's appeared on radio and television, as well as in print.  In 1981, Hope, at age 25, founded Big,  Bold & Beautiful. Her company now includes a plus-size modelling agency, a  clothing boutique, a bridal shop, Hope's  own line of clothes, a mail-order catalogue,  and fitness classes. A hardworking capitalist who loves fashion, Hope places Big, Bold  & Beautiful's address and phone number  at the back of her book, so readers can buy  her clothes.  About a third of North American  women wear plus sizes—size 16 and up.  These women usually can't buy clothes in  regular stores. Until recently, plus-size  manufacturers have offered ugly and unfashionable alternatives. In a society that  places a huge emphasis on looks, this lack  of appropriate clothes had further stigmatized fat women and placed them at even  more of a disadvantage in the workplace.  Hope's real message concerns self-esteem, not clothes. She writes with the profound understanding of someone who's  been a 320-pound young mother married  to an abusive husband and as someone who  has managed to regain self-love and pride.  Throughout her book, Hope uses herself as an example of how to feel good about  yourself at any weight, assert yourself in a  positive way when people make fat-phobic comments, and learn to see food in its  proper place. Hope inspires plus-size  women because she has a rich life with success, love and friendship.  After years of "beating down the door  of the small world," Hope writes, today she  feels "uncomfortable in the large world."  In the last two years or so, she's lost a great  deal of weight due to changed eating habits and a rigorous exercise routine. She says  she lost weight not to conform to society's  beauty standards, but to improve her  health. She had been feeling tired all the  time and had developed diabetes. With her  new physique, she's encountered hostility  from some large women, though she's still  "plus-sized."  Hope has now introduced fitness  classes to Big, Bold & Beautiful. As she  notes, large women often neglect them  selves and feel embarassed about working  out or seeing a doctor. She says it's possible to be both fit and plus-sized.  In her chapter on health and obesity,  Hope compares the health risks of fatness  with the benefits. She concludes that a stable weight, exercise, a good diet, and  healthy self-esteem are better than fluctuating weight and the stress of trying to be  an impossible body size. She attributes her  diabetes to her many weight fluctuations  over the past twenty years.  Although Hope's book is personal, it  gives readers some information with which  they can become politically active. At the  back of the book, "Supporting Ideas" lists  and describes size-acceptance groups and  eating-disorder organizations.  Both Hope and Poulton write from a  heterosexual point of view. In Hope's book,  this bias makes sense, as Hope is a heterosexual woman writing her life story.  Poulton's book, with its political emphasis, should have included a lesbian viewpoint for balance.  As a large woman, I have mixed feelings about these books. I appreciate  Poulton's political analysis of fat-phobia,  but I find her too negative. Yes, I experience prejudice, but I also have a life. I swim  in public, work out regularly, receive compliments, achieve success, have a partner  who loves me. For these reasons, I enjoy  Hope's message of empowerment, but I  also know that ordering Hope's clothes will  not make me look like her.  Size Acceptance and Eating Disorder Resources  The following resources are adapted from  Jackqueline Hope's "Supporting Ideas" list  at the end of her book Big, Bold and Beautiful.  Body Image Task Force. Fights  "lookism." Offers a newsletter and  brochures. Write PO Box 934, Santa  Cruz, CA, 95061-0934, USA. Please  send stamps. Phone: (408) 457-4838.  Body-Pride. Body image, awareness  of eating disorders. Write Body-Pride,  7B Pleasant Boulevard, Suite 1015,  Toronto, On, M4T1K2. Phone: (416)  486-3710.  Diet Breakers. Responsible for  annual May 6 'No Diet Day." For  information, send self-addressed,  postage-paid envelope to Diet Breakers, Barford St. Michael, Banbury,  Oxon OX15 OUA, England.  Largesse. International feminist  group. For information, send self-  addressed, postage-paid envelope to  Largesse, PO Box 9404, New Haven,  CT, 06534-0404, USA. Phone/fax:  (203)787-1624.  NAAFA (National Association to  Advance Fat Acceptance). Non-profit  human rights association. Write  NAAFA, PO Box 188620, Sacramento.  CA, 95818 USA. Phone: (916) 558-6880  or toll-free, 1 (800) 442-1214.  National Eating Disorder Information Centre. Refers people to an  organization or program in their area.  Write: 200 Elizabeth St, Cl-211,  Toronto, ON, M5G 2C4. Phone: (416)  340-4156.  People at Large (PAL). Write: PAL,  PO Box 11522,600 The East Mall,  Etobicoke, ON, M9B 4B0.  Sheena's Place. For eating disorders  and body image concerns. Write:  Sheena's Place, 333 King's St E,  Toronto, ON, M5A3X5. Phone: (416)  947-2365.  Women and Body Image Project.  Write: Women and Body Image  Project at the Regional Women's  Health Centre, 790 Bay St, 8th floor,  Toronto, ON, M5G1N9. Phone: (4165)  351-3704.  Women's Health Clinic. Winnipeg  clinic that offers programs on self-  esteem and body acceptance. Phone:  (204)947-1517.  MARCH 1997 Arts  God, physics and the gender wars:  Another religion without  women  by Faith Jones  PYTHAGORAS' TROUSERS: God,  Physics, and the Gender Wars  by Margaret Wertheim  Random House of Canada, Toronto,  Ontario, 1995  Margaret Wertheim's book about the  history of physics and its exclusion of  women has at its core a deceptively simple  hypothesis: that women have been systematically excluded from the most rarefied  scientific discipline in many of the same  ways, for many of the same reasons, and  by many of the same people who have excluded women from Christian church hierarchies.  Wertheim spends much of the firstpart  of the book explaining the means by which  physics came to be considered the highest  and most valued science, with the complicity of the Catholic, and later the Anglican,  Church. In spite of what we may have been  taught in school, Wertheim gives good evidence that science and religion have been  intimately intertwined in Europe since  Western science began. The occasional  clashes between science and religion—the  trial of Galileo, for example—were more a  backlash against scientists' attempts to gain  the upper hand in the partnership than a  result of any intrinsic clash of values or  beliefs.  Moreover, Wertheim shows how other  thinkers such as Isaac Newton spent much  of their working lives strengthening the  theoretical links between scientific discoveries and theology. Science was used in  many of the same ways as religion to uphold the status quo, particularly in legitimizing the subjugation of women and the  "lower" classes.  This should come as no surprise to us,  as in our time we have seen science used to  oppress people of colour, lesbians and gay  men, disabled people, Jews, and so on (the  Holocaust was firmly supported by the  eugenicists of the day. More recent examples are the racist book, The Bell Curve and  the entire "gay gene" theory—both of  which have the potential to influence public policy). It is intriguing, however, to see  how deeply ingrained this practice of social engineering is in the history of science.  Moving through history, Wertheim also  compares the individual attitudes of scientific men to a religious attitude. Wertheim  shows how scientists often posit a theory  well in advance of any facts, and cling to  their theories even when little or no evidence exists to support them. Those who  turn out to be right are considered geniuses,  while those who are wrong are forgotten.  Few scientific discoveries would be made  if scientists didn't develop an irrational "religious" fervour about their theories. Scientists may claim to be working from logic  and evidence, but from Galileo to the  present there are numerous examples of the  opposite. (Wertheim's example of present-  day irrational devotion to a theory is in the  multi-billion dollar quest for a "Theory of  20  Everything," in which a single mathematical equation would be used to describe existence itself. There is no real evidence that  such an equation could be written, let alone  any indication of how to develop it.)  Are the quasi-religious attitude physicists have to their work, and the historical  intertwining of theology and physics, factors in the exclusion of women from physics? Wertheim feels they are. This is where  I begin to have less confidence in Wertheim's thesis.  She provides numerous examples of  religious-type images used by physicists:  the physicist as a "priest" divining God's  plan; physics as God's organizational system. There have also been attempts to use  religious organizational principles in physics: monastic-style physics schools and  laboratories were set up at various times  in Western European history.  But do these religious trappings either  cause or arise from the exclusion of  women? Do they contribute to, or merely  legitimize, the exclusion of women? Or are  both religion and physics merely reacting  to other pressures to exclude women? What  is the exact link between the exclusion of  women from physics and the religious aspects of physics?  Wertheim does not provide an answer.  I looked hard for one in her book. She uses  terms like "it is not insignificant that" and  "this is not unconnected to" without spelling out the exact significance or connection  she is referring to.  A friend of mine suggests that  Wertheim could have made a similar case  that the army excludes women from physics, judging by the overlapping rhetoric and  parallel histories of science and the military. So why should we believe that religion was the overwhelming factor in excluding women from science?  I wish Wertheim had at least posited a  theory of the causal relationship between  religion, science, and other factors such as  economics and social organization, in the  continuing exclusion of women from physics.  Wertheim writes well, in an easy style  which engages the reader, and doesn't overwhelm us with scientific jargon. She holds  a degree in physics, and one in math and  computing, but works primarily as a journalist. Her approach to the material is that  of one who loves science but can see its  defects, an approach I find reasonable. Perhaps her love of science makes her that  much more passionate in trying to envision  a better model for the scientific community.  Her arguments about why we should care  if women are included in the scientific process are strong and convincing. She also  takes the time to fully describe the lives and  works of several notable historic women  physicists. I enjoyed all these aspects of the  book.  I thought the strongest chapters were  the ones where Wertheim illuminates anecdotes in physics history, particularly parts  of history which have been masked in mythology and pro-science rhetoric. Wertheim  analyzes the trial of Galileo as a "turf war"  with the quest for power, not truth, at its  core. And she deals well with the early history of Western European physics and its  roots—for it is worth remembering that  mathematics and physics were well advanced in the Middle East, Egypt and India before Europeans could conceptualize  the number zero. The chapter on Pythagoras is fascinating.  Pythagoras also provides the title for  the book. Pythagoras' trousers are the symbol Wertheim uses of the new paradigm  which was created when physics came to  the West via the Middle East. Pythagoras  was bi-racial, and studied in Egypt and  Babylon before returning to Greece. When  he returned, he wore the trousers of Persia  rather than the robes of Greece. Pythagoras rejected certain aspects of Greek culture,  but in bringing physics to Europe, and in  his own spiritual leadership, he helped  forge the new symbiosis of religion and  physics. This did not occur in other places  where physics was practised: it remained  well outside the spiritual realm.  In Western Europe, physics not only  entered the religious realm,it eventually  overtook religion. I've been struck, since  reading the book, by the extent to which  mathematical descriptions of the world  have formed our collective world view. I  cannot look at my watch now without reminding myself that hours and minutes are  not real things, but just one way of conceptualizing our existence through time. We  are, in fact, obsessed by numbers. Whether  we like it or not, physics is our new religion, and we should, as feminists and as  social beings, be concerned with those who  practise it, and how. Wertheim's concern for  these issues is well taken.  In spite of my disappointment with  Wertheim's lack of rigorous analysis of her  evidence, the amount of information and  the accessibility of her writing style make  Pythagoras' Trousers well worth reading.  Faith Jones holds a degree in Women's Studies  and currently works as an arts administrator.  Thanks to Judy Miller for sharing ideas about  this book.  MARCH 1997 Bulletin Board  read    this  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our next Story Meeting  Mon Mar 3 at 7 pm at our office, #301 -  1720 Grant St. For more information, or if  you can't make the meeting but still want to  find out about writing for Kinesis, give  Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499. No  experience is necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  April 1997 issue is from Mar 19-25. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available. Please note  that we will be producing the April issue at  our office at #301-1720 Grant St.   VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us: become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Thurs  Mar 20 at 7pm at VSW, 301 -1720 Grant St.  For more info, call 255-5511. Please call  before the orientation to confirm attendance. Childcare subsidies available.  INVOLVEMENT  VSW KINESIS' NEW HOME  As of March 27, 1997, the Vancouver  Status of Women and Kinesis will be  housed at a new location, #309-877 E.  Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1. Our  telephone and fax numbers will remain the  same. Because of the move, our offices will  be closed to the public from Mar 24-31. We  will re-open at our new location on April 1,  but from Apr 1-3, our office will only be  open from 1-5pm. Starting on Apr 7, we  will once again be open during our regular  office hours: Mon-Thurs, 9:30-5pm. We  apologize for any inconvenience this may  cause. Come see us at our new space!  HELP US MOVE  The Vancouver Status of Women and  Kinesis are moving to a new home at the  end March. Our moving days will be March  15,22 & 26. We are looking for women  who are available to help us pack (throughout the month), move and set up in our  new office. We are also looking for a one-  ton truck to borrow, boxes, moving dollies,  etc, to assist us with the move and to cut  our expenses. We will also be accepting  donations of used, but still usable, furniture  (chairs, shelves and tables) to bring our  new office to life. Anyone interested in  donating their services, trucks or furniture  items, please call or fax Audrey at (604)  255-5511 between 1-5pm, Mon-Thurs.  FUNDRAISING FOR VSW  VSW's Fundraising Committee invites the  participation of women interested in raising  funds and planning events for a non-profit,  feminist organization. The next meeting is  Tues Mar 11 at 6pm at VSW, #301-1720  Grant St. Please call or fax Audrey at 255-  5511 to confirm your attendance or for info.  VSW PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE  Women are invited to join the Vancouver  Status of Women's Programming Committee. Come join us and share your thoughts  on women's issues and community organizing. To join the committee or for more info  about VSW's programs, call or fax Ema at  255-5511.  EVENTS  EVENTS  WebWeaver  Internet guide, researcher, trainer  Ann Doyle, MLS  Tel: 604-254-8462  Email: ann_doyle@mindlink.bc.ca  URL: http://mindlink.net/ann_doyle  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN, M.Ed.  Reg. Clinical Counsellor  Relationship Therapy  Individual Counselling  Integrative Body Work  Oak & 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867  IWD EVENTS  For a listing of International Women's Day  events in and around Vancouver, please  see the special IWD calendar on the centre  spread of this issue. The annual Vancouver  IWD march and rally will be held on Sat  Mar 8 beginning at the Vancouver Public  Library at 11am. Information tables and  performances will follow. A dance will be  held in the evening at the Maritime Labour  Centre.  LOTUS ROOTS  Lotus Roots II: The Lotus Blossoms, is the  second annual gathering in Vancouver for  Asian lesbians, gay men and bisexuals.  Lotus Roots will feature workshops, panels  and discussions and will take place on Sat  Mar 15 from 9:30-6:30pm. The daytime  event will be followed by a potluck dinner.  Lotus Roots will be held at the Mount  Pleasant Neighbourhood House, 800 E.  Broadway. To register or for more info  contact ASIA (Asian Society for the  Intervention of AIDS) at (604) 669-5567.  ANTI-RACISM GATHERING  The Vancouver Status of Women is hosting  a two-part Anti-Racism Gathering series  over the next few months for women  working in women's organizations. Aboriginal women and women of colour, who have  or are working or volunteering in women's  organizations are invited to participate in  the first part of this series, scheduled for  Apr 12-13. The two-day session will  provide Aboriginal women and women of  colour an opportunity to come together to  talk about, review and analyze different  anti-racism strategies, policies and experiences. Women interested in participating or  finding out more info call Ema at VSW, 255-  5511.   EASTTIMOR FILM  Vancouver filmmaker Elaine Briere will  screen her latest production, Bitter Paradise: The Sellout of East Timor in Victoria  Tues Apr 8 at 7pm at the Victoria Public  Library, Main Branch. The screening is  open to the public and free of charge.  There will also be a display of Briere's  award-winning photographs of life in a  Timorese village. For more info call Terry  Wolfwood at (250) 595-7519 (after March  11).   YVONNE RAINER  New York based filmmaker Yvonne Rainer  will be in Vancouver in early March to  present her new film, MURDER and  murder, a bleak comedy/soap opera/love  story challenging perceptions of aging,  sexual deviance and breast cancer.  Screenings will be held on Thurs Mar 6,  7:30pm at Emily Carr on Granville Island,  on Fri Mar 7, 10am at Simon Fraser  University, Harbour Centre, Room 1700,  555 W. Hastings St. Rainer will also be  available for an informal discussion on her  body of work with attention to feminist and  queer practices on Sat Mar 8 in the  afternoon at Video In, 1965 Main St. For  more info about any of the events call Ken  or Winston at 872-8337 or 872-3616.  RIGHTS AND REALITIES  Rights and Realities, a photo display by  and about women, will be on display at  Presentation House Gallery, 333 Chesterfield Ave, North Vancouver until March 30.  Six Canadian photographers—Cheryl  Albuquerque, Cindy Andrew, Claire  Beaugrand-Champagne, Fahmida Bhabha,  Stephanie Colvey, and Iva Zimova—  explore with over 60 photographs and text  how human rights are manifest in the lives  of women in six different countries. Gallery  hours are Wed-Sun 12-5pm; Thurs 12-9pm.  The exhibit runs until Mar 30. For more info  call 986-1351.  LESBIAN RIGHTS  On Tues Mar 25 at 7:30pm at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver, barbara  findlay and Paul Perchal will talk about how  the December 9th Coalition—a local  lesbian and gay rights organization—is  fighting to change Canadian law, using the  Charter of Rights, to end discrimination  against lesbians and gay men. Admission  is free. For more info call 732-4128.  CATHERINE BENNETT  Vancouver author Catherine Bennett will  read from her latest work, Sub-Rosa &  Other Fiction, a wonderful hybrid of  conventional and genre-bending narrative,  at Women in Print, 3566 W 4th Ave, on  Tues Apr 8 at 7:30pm. Admission is free.  For more info call 732-4128.  MONSOON CABARET  The newest lesbian group in town,  Monsoon: Asian lesbians and bisexual  women of Vancouver, will be holding a  cabaret fundraiser on Sun Mar 16 at 4pm  at Charlie's Lounge (Heritage Hotel), 455  Abbott St. Performers are still to be confirmed, but it is sure to be a fabulously fun  time. Everyone welcome. For more info call  June at 254-4545, Fatima at 682-0080 or  Da at 253-5110  SIX SENSE SENSUALITY  Coming to Her Senses, an omnibus  production of six short films by six independent filmmakers each focusing on one  of the six senses, explores the theme of  sensuality. The half-hour film, which  premiered at last year's Vancouver International Film Festival, will be presented by  Cineworks on Mon Mar 17 at 8pm at the  Starfish Room, 1055 Homer St, Vancouver.  For more info call Helen Yagi at 685-3841.  ABOLITION 2000  BC Voice of Women is inviting women and  local organizations (peace, environmental  and action groups) to participate in a  Public Forum on Abolition 2000 to be held  Fri Mar 14, 7:30pm at Hewett Hall, Unitarian Church of Vancouver, 949 W. 49th Ave.  Abolition 2000 is an international coalition  of citizen's groups which calls for the  negotiation, by the year 2000, of a convention setting forth a binding timetable for the  elimination of nuclear weapons by all  states. For more info call Marion Kerans at  732-9172.   DYKEWORDS  Dykewords, readings by local lesbian  writers, is held every second Thursday at  9pm at The Lotus, 455 Abbott St, Vancouver. Thurs Mar 20 features stand up  comedy by Briar Taine, Suzanne Oelkers,  Kellie Haines and Sharon Novak. Thurs  Apr 3 features readings and performances  by Terrie Hamazaki, llene Mitchell, and Irit  Shimrat. On Thurs Apr 17 there will be  readings by local writers featuring Janine  Fuller, Tonya Yaremko and Dorothy Seaton.  Admission is sliding scale $1-4. Everyone  welcome. Call 685-7777 for more info.  FREE WORKSHOPS  Douglas College is holding free workshops  for women attending or interested in  attending the college. The next workshops  will be on Wed Mar 12, noon-2pm: "Stress  Management Skills"; Fri Mar 14, 2-4pm:  "Assertive Communication Skills"; and Wed  Mar 26, noon-2pm: "Relaxation Techniques". These workshops are offered by  the Women's Centre, in conjuction with the  Counselling Department at the college,  and will be held in the Douglas College  Women's Centre, Room 2720, 700 Royal  Ave, New Westminster. Call 527-5148 to  register.  MARCH 1997 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  1  GROUPS  1  SUBMISSIONS  SZUMIGALSKI AND ST. GEORGE  Two Saskatoon writers bring their Governor  General's Award-winning collaboration of  paintings and poetry, Voice, to Vancouver.  The work features small, powerful—and  even horrific—paintings by Marie Elyse St.  George with inventive and vital poetry by  Anne Szumigalski. Wed Mar 5, 7:30pm at  Women In Print, 3566 W. Fourth Ave. For  more info call 732-4128.  WOMEN ANDTHE INTERNET  Making the Links: a Critical Look at  Community and the Internet will be held in  Vancouver from Mar 20-22 at Simon Fraser  University Harbour Centre Campus, 555 W.  Hastings St. The conference will include  "Stories from Cyberspace," and panels and  workshops on "Women and Access,"  "Community Networks," "Who Owns the  Internet," and more. Registration cost for  the full conference is $55 or $25 for  students/ low income people. The conference is sponsored by the BC Library  Association. To register, send cheque to  BCLA, 110-6546 Bonsor Ave, Burnaby, BC,  V5H 1H3. For more info call 430-9633.  WOMEN  IN PRINT  ' BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  356<5 West 4th Avenue  Discountsfor j  book clubs   ]  Vancouver BC  Voice   604 732^128  Fax      604 732-4129  •   Special orders  welcome  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  FEMINIST NETWORKING GROUP  Vancouver feminists are invited to participate in the Feminist Networking Group  (FNG).The group, comprised of individual  feminists and feminists working in women's  organizations, recently met to determine  the structure, purpose and organizing work  of the ad hoc group. The FNG set as a  priority area, organizing around the federal  election, which may be held as early as  this spring. Feminists who are interested in  analyzing issues and policies, and planning actions in order to ensure our voices  are heard by federal candidates and  political parties, and by the larger society  are invited to attend the next FNG meeting,  Wed Mar 19, 6:30pm at the Vancouver  Status of Women, #301-1720 Grant St. For  more info call 255-5511.  RAPE RELIEF  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24 Hour Crisis Line  and their Transition House for women and  children. Training sessions are on Tuesday  evenings. For more info and for a training  interview call 872-8212.   QUEER MOMS  A support and/or discussion group for  queer moms is being planned for this  spring by Eastside Family Place and the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection. Interested  women are asked to fill out a survey to let  the organizers know what you want in a  group. Surveys available at the VLC and  East Side Family Place. For more info, call  Allison at the VLC, (604) 254-8458 or Janet  at the East Side Family Place, 255-9841.  JOB POSTING  Vancouver Status of Women is a leading feminist, non-profit organization  which undertakes education, advocacy and service work to ensure the full  participation of women in the social, economic and political life of our communities.  We have two 16-week positions available under the Job Creation Partnerships  Program. All applicants must be on, or be eligible for Employment Insurance  benefits. Also eligible are applicants whose EI benefits have been exhausted  within the last three years for individuals, or within the last five years for parents  of children under age six. Affirmative action principles will be in effect. Aboriginal women, women of colour and women with disabilities are strongly  encouraged to apply.  VOLUNTEER COORDINATOR (start date, April 7)  Work with staff and the Volunteer Development Committee to develop a  model for a creative, volunteer driven program. Model will include a plan for  recruitment, training, retention, development and recognition of volunteers.  Coordinator will also be responsible for updating volunteer orientation package  and developing volunteer task descriptions and systems for feedback and communication.  Candidates must have knowledge or experience with volunteer programs, an  awareness of women's issues, experience with computers and the ability to work  independently.  RESEARCHER (start date, April 14)  Using a feminist approach, the successful candidate will research and write  briefs on topics such as the impact of the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation on  women, the social and economic impact of the Canadian Health and Social  Transfer program on women, and the situation of women and employment.  Candidates must have strong research and writing skills, experience with  computers, the ability to work independently, and must work from a feminist  perspective which takes into account the experiences of Aboriginal women,  women of colour, women with disabilities, lesbians and poor women.  Application Deadline is March 17,1997, 5:00 pm. Please fax your resume  with cover letter to 255-5511 or mail to:  Vancouver Status of Women  Hiring Committee  #301 - 1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC  V5L 2Y6  No phone calls please. Only those applicants selected for interviews will be contacted.  SOCIALIST FEMINISTS AT IWD  Radical Women, Freedom Socialist Party  and People's Fedaian Guerrillas invite  women and activists to march with a  Socialist Feminist contingent at this year's  Vancouver International Women's Day  event on Sat Mar 8. Come demonstrate a  strong feminist voice for social change  around issues such as: abortion rights,  queer equality, wage parity, racism, and  poverty. A placard making party will be held  Mon Mar 3, 7pm at the Rebel Centre, 2278  E. 24th Ave. Venue is wheelchair accessible. For more info call 874-2943, 874-9048,  or 984-9341.   LESBIANS AND BREAST CANCER  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is currently trying to assess the need for a  facilitated support group for lesbians living  with breast cancer. The group will be  meeting at the VWHC, 219-1675 W. 8th  Ave, and is targeted to start in March. Any  woman interested in participating in this  group please call or leave a message for  Raine at 736-4234.  LIBERTYTHRIFT  Liberty Thift is looking for volunteers to  work at their store, located at 1035 Commercial Dr, Vancouver. The store is run by  the WELL Society (Women Embracing  Lives of Liberty), a non-profit organization  dedicated to providing women and their  children with resources to help them live  lives of liberty and independence, free of  violence. Various volunteer opportunities  available to suit your interests and time  schedule. For work on Saturdays, call  Aldona at 255-3087. For work weekdays,  call Lystra at 255-3087.  VLC CLOTHING EXCHANGE  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection is  holding a clothing exchange on Mar 31  from 5:30-8:30pm. Bring clean stuff in good  condition and take what you can use. Open  to all women. 876 Commercial Dr. For more  info call 254-8458.   FREE LEGAL ADVICE  The UBC Law Students' Legal Advice  Program offers free advice in neighbourhood clinics throughout the Lower Mainland, including two special legal clinics for  women. The program will run in the evening  until Mar 21. Advice is offered on many  subjects, including small claims, landlord-  tenant disputes, welfare, UIC, WCB,  employer-employee relations, and uncontested divorces. For clinic times and  locations, call 822-5791.  NATIVEYOUTH ZINE  Redwire, a recently formed 'zine produced  by and for Native youth, is putting the call  out for submissions for their next issue.  How sick are you of being shut out and  shut down? How tired are you of having  nowhere to speak? And how ready are you  to speak out and speak proud? Then  submit your non-oppressive, non-discriminatory work (stories/poetry/art/?) to Nena  and Billie, PO Box 34097, Stn D, Vancover  BC, V6J 4M1. For more info call 873-0616.  HOT & BOTHERED  Submissions are being accepted for Hot &  Bothered, an international anthology of  queer sex/desire-driven short short fiction.  Stories must be 1000 words or less and  can be funny, sad, hot, complicated,  poignant, tragic, hilarious, lyrical,  sensual...Deadline is Apr 30. For guidelines, send self-addressed envelope with  Canadian stamps or international reply  coupon to: Hot & Bothered c/o PO Box  100, 1036 Odium Dr, Vancouver, BC, V5L  3L6, or email to kxt@aol.com.  LESBIAN ETHICS  Lesbian Ethics, a journal for radical lesbian  thought, politics, is seeking articles on the  "Nature of Lesbian Connections." Our lives  are not 'like everyone else's' though we live  under a malearchal structure. What are the  rhythms, the cycles that form our uniquely  lesbian lives/relationships? What patterns  do you see in your life and the lives of  lesbians you know? Canadian guest editor.  Send submissions to 3045 Robie St #65,  Halifax, NS, B3K 4P6.   ITALIAN WOMEN'S ANTHOLOGY  An anthology by Italian and Sicilian women  to reflect ourselves out to other Italian and  Sicilian women and provide a forum for  critical discourse about location and  identity within Italian culture is in the works.  Submissions of poetry, theory, oral history,  fiction, drama, photography, artwork,  autobiographical pieces, narratives about  growing up/being Italian and Sicilian are  being accepted. Deadline is Apr 30. For  more info, call (416) 539-0535, fax (416)  651-5101 or write to Italian Women's  Anthology, Women's Press, 517 College St  #302, Toronto, ON, M6G 4A2.  iMiiiiiMiiiiim  Sangam Grant R.P.c.  R£6IST£R[D PROFESSIONAL COUNSELLOR  I rivate Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  when the music changes se dees the dance...  si \       Western Canada's  |V Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  30K&  V V      ART EMPORIUM  Celebrating our brand new location at 1238 Davie Street  Come visit us at our new store with over twice the space and fully  wheelchair accesible. Check out our large variety of books, magazines, cards, music, calendars & much much more.  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver B.C. V6E 1N4  Internet Address:www:lsisters.com  ^Telephone (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662 Fax 685-0252  MARCH 1997 Bulletin Board  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.   WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For more info call 876-6390.  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Co-op has one, two and three  bedroom suites for $565, $696, $795 per  month and refundable share purchase.  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Please send a business size  SASE to Membership Committee, Cityview  Housing Co-op, 108-1885 E. Pender St,  Vancouver, BC.V5L1W6.   WOMENFRIENDS  WomenFriends Music Spring Fling: A  weekend of creative inspiration for women  of all ages, stages and styles will take  place from Apr 11-13. Workshops, jamming, dance, singing, drumming with  Loretta Joseph, or just relax in the hot tub!  Fully catered! At Camp Alexandra, Crescent Beach. Cost is $150-260 sliding scale.  For more info call Penny Sidor at (604)  251-4715.  SUITE FOR RENT  Self-contained 1-bedroom suite on top floor  of lesbian house. Great views, good space,  lots of storage. This is a quiet, non-smoking  house. Some pets okay. Near 33rd and  Victoria. $550/month incl. utilities. Available  now. Call 301-1310.   NRTS IN PLAIN LANGUAGE  The Lower Mainland Community Based  Services Society (LMCBSS) has written a  plain language translation of Proceed with  Care, the final report of the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies.  The guide, New Reproductive Technologies: A Plain Language Translation, hopes  to make this subject easier for women  (especially women with disabilities) to  understand. The guide costs $10, or less  for self-advocates or unemployed people.  To obtain a copy of the guide or for more  info call Barb Goode at (604) 294-1230.  WINDRIDER IN TOFINO  The Windrider, a non-profit women's  organization in Tofino (on the west coast of  Vancouver Island), is offering a retreat  centre and affordable accommodation for  individual women or women's organizations. The Windrider can help groups  design and facilitate retreats, AGMs or  workshop programs. Accommodation in the  hostel/guest house ranges from $20-80,  with revenues being used to fund women's  programs and services held at the  Windrider. For reservations or more info  contact The Windrider, 231 Main St, Tofino,  BC, V0R 2Z0; tel: (250) 725-3240.  urrus ^oorsrv  TH£ LOTOS &LOS$Ot*>  VANCOUVER  M*rcw IS  l;3o *.*. - «;3o P.~.  At Mount Pleasant Neighbourhood House  bOO East Broadway  U)orK*Hop* incluA*;  Coming Out As a Lifelong process:  The Ins of our Outs  (a women-only discussion group)  Sharing our Commonalities,  Celebrating our Differences  (Talking community, politics and identity)  Toe Jam: A movement workshop for our  non-dancer Asian bodies  (a co-gendered workshop)  ALSO...  Ric«boujl  Po+lucK  7 -10 p.m.  This celebration is  also open  to nor\'As\ane  (Please pre-reglster)  For more info, call ASIA at 669-5567  WOMEN RESIST IMPERIALIST GLOBALIZATION  To celebrate International Women's  Day, the Philippine Women Centre,  Grassroots Women Discussion  Group, Spanish Speaking Women's  Society of BC, and the South Asian  Women's Centre will be hosting a  series of events under the theme,  "Women Resist Imperialist Globalization." On Saturday March 8 at 2pm,  the groups will host a Theatre and  Quilt Workshop, and in the evening  starting at 7pm, there will be a  Potluck Dinner and Workshop Presentations. On Friday, March 14 at  6:30pm, Jyoti Sanghera, a professor  of women's studies at the University  of Victoria and a member of the  Global Alliance Against Traffic in  Women, will speak about "Globalization,Traffic in Women and Strategies  for Resistance." As well, until March  15, a gallery display of "Images of  Women Against Imperialist Globalization" will be exhibited. All events  will take place at the Kalayaan  Centre, 451 Powell St, Vancouver.  Admission is by donation. For more  information, call 215-1103.  Photo by Fatima Jaffer.  Sunera Thobani  Ruth Wynn Woodward Endowed Chair  Women's Studies Department  Simon Fraser University  will be speaking at 8:00 p.m.  Wednesday, March 5  Selling Women Short:  How the Canadian  Government is  Undermining Women  Globally  at Harbour Centre Campus  B.C. Gas Cinema, Room 1800  Coffee available in foyer at 7:30  Childcare reimbursement will be available.  @  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8 [JJ    SeniiA4  JS Ii  •<- SUBSCRIBE  £/m'te</ Nations Fourth World Conference on Women, September 1995  Photo by Fatima Jaffer, modified by Swee Sim Tan  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount 3  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Name   Address—  Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6