 SPKtti. WUECT10NS  « kinesi  February   ^375  HAFPV   I.WY'75  \fencouuer Status of Women    BDS9W. Fourt*v A/e.     "736- 374B-7"S      Volume VNo.  The traditional British Columbian  image of each family with its own  cosy home, and apartments occupied  by young career men and women or retired folks who no longer wish to mow  their own lawns, was always pretty  much of a myth.  But in the last few  years it has ceased to exist even as  a myth.  The problems of housing for  low income and welfare families can no  no longer be . ignored or shuffled  aside.  The harsh reality of a situation where housing is in short supply  and few people can afford to own a  home means that the majority of people  must rent their living space.  While this is by no means exclusively  a "woman's problem", women are in  many ways most vunerable. A large  percentage of low income people are  women and most single parent families  are headed by women. Having little  money and having children are the two  major handicaps to finding adequate  housing.  The combination is deadly!  When a single woman, on a low income,  with small children, finally finds,  after a long and deperate search,  accomodations that will grudgingly  accept her children and which she  can afford to pay for, she will usually submit to a great deal of unfair treatment in order to cling to  that living space.  She will be afraid  to complain because she fears she  will be evicted or at the least her  life and that of her children will  be made miserable.  A "seller's market" always places  the consumer in an unfortunate position.  In this game the landlords own  the ball and bat and if you don't  want to play by their rules you don't  get to play at all.  Time after time  women say, "I know what the landlord  is doing is not right., but what can  I do.  I don't dare complain. He  said he doesn't usually rent to single women...families...children...pets.  He'll tell me to leave."  shelter  But housing is not just another commodity.  Shelter is a necessity of life.  The government must get more deeply  involved in the housing crisis in  British Columbia.  The establishment  of the Rentalsman is one step,but  because it is one office located in  the south-west corner of the province  it can hardly hope to have much effect  in the rest of B.C. Also,while the  Human Rights Code contains the clause  "There shall be no discrimination in  rental of any space because of race,  sex, marital status, religion, colour,  ancestry or place of origin," this  clause is not in the Landlord and  Tenant Act and so the Rentalsman does  not have the power to act on a coir ~  plaint from a woman refused accomodation because "we don't rent to single  women." Neither the Human Rights  Code or the Landlords and Tenants  Act deal with the discrimination  against children.  Whereas a landlord  should be able to stipulate, within  reason, the number of people who will  occupy his property, he should not  be able to do so on the basis of age.  If he states that a 2 bedroom unit  may be occupied by three people, this  should mean a man, woman and child;  a woman and 2 children, etc, and not  just three adults.  Or a landlord  could be required to set aside a certain percentage of the suites in his  building for family occupancy.  The refusal by landlords to rent to  anyone but adults is unreasonable  .. 73 -sl00755  Serials Division  Main Library  Z University of B.C.  VANCOUVER a, B.C. •  and has far-reaching repercussions.  In the Greater Vancouver area,it makes  it almost impossible for families to  live anywhere near the wage earner(s)  place of work.  Every morning the  bridges and freeway are choked with  cars of commuters.  It means that  quite often landlords who will accept  children offer substandard accomodations knowing the desperate renters  will not dare object.  It adds to the  coinpartmentalization of society -  all the old people in one place, all  the young adults in another, the children in yet another, etc.  It means  that neighbourhoods are dying. An  example is a street in North Vancouver which, only five years ago, consisted mainly 0f older houses and slightly newer dupiexs.  Children played  road hockey in the street and families knew one another.  Today, if you  drive down this street, there is an  air of desertion. Most of the houses  and dupiexs have been replaced by  rows of identical phony-Spanish stucco  apartment buildings ( Adults Only -  No Children or Pets) and condominium  (Adults Only - No Children or Pets).  It is an artificial bedroom community.  The separation of families from the  rest of the population is unnatural.  Communities will no longer exist.  City councils must take this into  consideration and planners should be  encouraged to devise integrated dwellings which will preserve not destroy  neighbourhoods and which are geared  to the needs of each individual community.  The government should make a concerted  effort to break the stranglehold the  'suppliers' have on the consumer in  the shelter game.  Measures such as  building housing, buying land and  leasing it to housing co-ops, providing incentives for builders, supplying  subsidies for low-income renters and  buyers help to even up the sides.  It is true that the provincial and  federal governments are taking some  action on the housing situation.  But  more must be done and now! We are  never going back to the day when there  was more housing available than tenants. Action must be taken to cope  with the present and prepare for the  future.  — Jo Lazenby  Graphics Kathy Sopko TALES  It sometimes seems that almost everyone has a "story" to tell concerning  housing.  A couple of weeks ago we  tacked a piece of paper to one of the  bulletin boards in the office and invited people who dropped in to jot  down their stories.  Well, additional  pieces of paper have been stapled to  the original until now the tale flows  down the wall and onto the floor.  We have decided to share some of these  experiences with you.  They range  from funny frustrations to intolerable  situations — which just about sums  up the housing situation.  "I lived one time in an 'Adults Only"  highrise.  The manager told me he  once rented a suite to a woman with  a baby because he felt sorry for her  because she couldn't find a place to  live. "But," he said," you know, she  wouldn't keep the baby hidden.  She  used to take it to the laundry room  and everything.  I had to ask her to  leave."  "One morning I looked out into the  back yard of the duplex I have rented for the last three years.  Where  there had been a row of rose bushes  along the fence there was now bare  earth.  I phoned the landlady to report this strange theft.  She infor-  ed me that she had dug up the bushes  for her new house because "you don't  really need them."  "I am a widow with three small children.  I earn a good salary.  A landlord told me he wouldn't rent me his  house because he didn't approve of  working mothers."  "I went to rent a tiny house facing  an alley.  It had been hit by a truck,  and there was a hole right through  the wall that the previous tenants  had stuffed with pillows.  The manager wouldn't fix it, so some friends  and I fixed it with plywood.  The  wiring and construction were so bad  I couldn't get an insurance company  to insure my belongings.  To get that  house I had to go through a worse  interview than I did to get my landed immigrant status!  But I needed  a place where I could keep my dog."  "When it came time to renew the lease  on the house I rent, my landlord raised the rent 35% and when I protested  (stating the Provincial Government  rent ceiling) he threatened to sell  the house rather than rent anymore  to us.  He then took away the yearly  lease, put me on a month to month  basis.  I refuse to live that way  and had to offer him more rent to  consider another yearly lease - which  he of course accepted."  "My roof leaked every winter.  Last  winter it was especially bad.  My  landlord said it would be a very expensive repair job.  It was pointed  out to me that with a family of three  children and pets I would have a very  difficult time finding another place  to live.  I stopped complaining and  put pans on the floor."  "I just had an illegal rent increase  of 35%.  I'm not going to complain  about it, because I'm afraid I'll be  evicted and I know I couldn't find  any place any better.  I rent a small  house, and I know my landlord's expenses have not gone up.  I pay my  own heat and hydro, and there haven't  been any repairs."  "I live on the main floor of a house—  4 rooms.  I'm a single parent with one  child.  It was the only place in the  area of my daughter's school that  would take children.  The upstairs,  which is made into a bedsitter, is  also rented out.  I pay $325.  Total  revenue for the house is nearly $600.  The manager won't do anything.  Paint  is peeling off the living room ceiling and the kitchen wall is always  damp.  It was a case of take-it-or-  leave-it and I had to take it."  "My suite is one which is not covered  by rent control.  My rent was just  raised $40.  The place needs new appliances, sound proofing and I have to  fight with 4 adults, 2 children, and  a washer on the first floor to get  a hot shower."  "I moved into one of those look-alike  apartment buildings and in the first  week I was told: a) not to hang any  pictures or to let my furniture touch  the walls;  b) to take down my own  curtains and put back the'institution'  ones ( it didn't look good from the  street); and c) to take my 10-speed  bike off the balcony (it didn't look  good from the street either.)"  "The tenants in one of the units of  the multiplex I lived in complained  several times about repairs that were  needed.  They received a notice saying that their suite was needed for  members of the landlord's family.  After they moved out the suite was  occupied by two of the landlord's  sons who slept in sleeping bags, a%e  elsewhere (perhaps at home), threw  parties, and moved out after a month,  at which time the suite was re-rented.  No repairs had been made."  One Woman's Solution  Renting suitable living space is a  problem for an ever-growing number  of people.  If you have children the  problem is more severe.  If you are  on a low income the problem is magnified many times.  If you are a  single woman with children and a low  income the problem at times seems  insurmountable.  If you do find accom-  adatiohs they are usually less suitable than you had hoped for and almost always more expensive than you  can comfortably manage.  Added to  this, you may live in constant fear  that you will be asked to leave and  as undesirable as the situation is,  it may be the only place in town.  So you make do and dream the impossible dream — if only I had my own  place where I could feel secure and  unharrassed.  Pat Bartle feels that the impossible  dream is coming true for her.  She  is a single parent with a three year  old son and works part-time.  Last  July she saw a sign in a bakery window inviting people interested in  starting a housing co-op to attend  a meeting.  And that is how she became a member  of the ADNAC Housing Co-operative  Society, and next Christmas, ho'pe-  fully, will be living in her own  home.  For $10 she became a shareholder in  the co-op which was registered as a  society with the Provincial Government.  The Provincial Government  bought a piece of land from the city  of Vancouver and is leasing it to the  co-op at 4% interest.  Pat is eligible  for grants totally approximately $1500  (including the Homeowners" Grant),  and  will have to add only about $500 of  her own money.  She will then pay a  fixed amount every month.  In essence  she will be her own landlady and her  rent will never increase.  If she  were to leave the society at some -  time in the future, she would get her  initial investment back (Including  the Homeowners' Grant) and the society Board Members would find a replacement for her unit.  Because  members of the Society do not each  own their own unit, but the Society  as a whole owns the entire housing  project , individual members are not  building up equity which .they can  later use to help finance a move  into another type of housing.  Central Mortage and Housing advanced  money for preliminary drawings for  the Society and these will be soon  completed.  Because this co-op is  for people who have difficulty finding adequate housing and because monthly payments will be geared to income, the make-up of the Society will  have to follow certain guidelines:  10% people on welfare  10% people on low incomes  20% people with incomes up  up to $22,000 approximately  and the remaining 60% people  somewhere in the middle.  Living space will be allocated according to family size and not according  to income.  The units will range from  single bedroom to five bedroom units  and will provide housing for approximately 180 families.  The plan is for a housing design that  meets the needs of the people.  The  units will be clustered rather than  in straight rows so there will be no  shared walls.  And each unit will  have its own yard.  Each family has a vote in decisions  concerning the co-op and all member-  will have a chance to sit on the  Board which deals with general administration.  It takes a lot of hard work to organize a venture of this size and scope,  but it proves that there are alternatives to bad housing situations.  Is the work worth it? Ask Pat Bartle  next Christmas.  - Jo Lazenby letter     lobby  Remember  When you are writing to a MLA, MP,  company, advertiser, etc to object  to a sexist ad or some other form  of discrimination or to urge that  action be £aken on an issue, it is  MUCH more effective if the letter  is your own not just a form letter  clipped from a paper. Use the Media  Action letter or Letter Lobby as a  guide if you wish,but your protest  certainly has more impact if it is  personally handwritten or typed.  This month the focus of Letter  Lobby is on the special problems  that women face in housing.  Your support is necessary,  please write out the following  letter (in your own words)  and send it to Hon. Alex  Macdonald, Attorney General,  Parliament Buildings, Victoria.,  Copies should go to Hon. Bill  King, Minister of Labour (same  address) and Barrie Clark,  Office of the Rentalsman, 525  Seymour St., Vancouver, BC  Dear Mr. Macdonald;  I am very concerned about the  housing problem and the ways  in which women especially are  placed in a very vulnerable  position. A large percentage  of low income people are women  and most single parent families  are headed by women.  Usually  these women submit to a great  deal of unfair treatment in  order to find and cling to a  living space.  Section 5 of the Human Rights Code,  which includes the prohibition  of discrimination on the basis  of sex and marital status should  be incorporated into the Landlord  and Tenant Act so that the  Rentalsman, the logical regulator  of rental practices, can act on  cases of discrimination against  women.  I also feel there should be  legislation prohibiting rental  discrimination on the basis of  age.  The -common policy of renting  to "adults only" could be easily  remedied by the inclusion of the  phrase "number of children" into  Section 5 of the Human Rights  Code.  The present lack of  legislation is creating an  impossible situation for  all families wishing to rent  housing.  I would appreciate a reply on this  matter at your earliest convenience.  Yours sincerely,  no   federal   human  rights       legislation  why not?  NOT THERE  YET!  BREAST CANCER SCREENING PROGRAM STILL  NOT APPROVED  A press release from Dennis Cocke, _  Dec. 27 announced "approval of the  installation of special diagnostic  equipment for the diagnosis of cancer  of the breast in 25 of the hospitals  of British Columbia, distributed on  a geographic and population basis."  This means your doctor, if necessary,  can now refer you to the nearest hospital with this equipment where you  can have mammography done.  This is  an excellent first step.  The mass screening program proposal  that was presented to cabinet by the  Ad-Hoc Committee on Breast Cancer  Screening (and originally turned down)  is still under evaluation. Many of  you probably thought that the purchase of the diagnostic equipment  meant we had won the fight for the  screening program implementation.  NOT SO!  A final push of pressure is needed  to get the program accepted by cabinet.  If it is accepted it will  eventually mean we will have clinics  open to all women ..with mammography,  thermography and physical examination available as well as instruction  on self-examination. We will be able  to have this screening done as easily  as we can now get a chest X-ray.  PLEASE write a letter now...and if  you have already done so write again ..  to Dennis Cocke, Minister of Health,  Parliament Buildings, Victoria, asking that the mass screening proposal  as presented by the Ad-Hoc Committee  on Breast Cancer be approved. Send  a copy to Colin Gablemann, MLA (he  has been pushing strongly for the  program) also % Parliament Buildings.  What is the federal government doing  about Human Rights legislation? Nothing, so far, and the Advisory Council on the Status of Women is demanding action.  At its meeting in Vancouver, which  concluded on January the 15th, the  30-member Council sent the following  telegram to Marc Lalonde, Minister  Responsible for the Status of Women:  THE ACSW STRONGLY CONDEMNS THE FEDERAL  GOVERNMENT FOR ITS INACTION ON HUMAN  RIGHTS LEGISLATION.  AS EARLY AS JULY,,  1973, THIS LEGISLATION;WAS CLEARLY  IDENTIFIED AS THE ACSW PRIORITY AND  IN DECEMBER,1973, CABINET APPROVAL  WAS ANNOUNCED.  THE ACTION OF THE  FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO DATE HAS CONSISTED OF NOTHING BUT INEFFECTUAL  PROMISES.  THE ACSW DEMANDS IMMEDIATE INTRODUCTION OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS LEGISLATION.  During its 3-day Vancouver session  the Council made firm recommendations  to be presented to the government  dealing with Citizenship, Passports,  Family Court, International Conventions,  and the sharing of the Canada Pension  Plan by husbands and wives, this last  being described as a first step towards  recognizing housewives as part of the  real economic life of the country.  Further matters of on-going concern  are Rape, Family Planning, Banking,  and Voluntarism.  It was also decided unanimously to pres  the government to take action now to  fill vacant deputy minister posts with  competent women. At the moment there  is only one woman at the deputy minister level.  The ACSW's next meeting  will be in Ottawa in April.  Council members stressed at a public  meeting in Vancouver that individuals  can take effective action by letting  those in power know what should be  done in areas of concern to women.  Write to government ministers and  your M.P.'s.  We put them there.  They are supposed to serve us,.  e  who are females, are more than half  of our society. RESPONSES  Thanks to all of you who have  been reading Letter Lobby and  sending out those much needed  letters.  This page is devoted  to responses from 2 of those  letters, and suggestions for  those of you who will want to  follow through with another  letter.  Yes, another letter!  The name of the game is  persistence and patience,  the rules you make up yourself.  Dear Kinesis;  I'm enclosing a photostat copy  of a letter I received from  Otto Lafng.  I want to share  this because as far as I'm  concerned this letter says it all.  It says that this gov't  will do nothing to stop the s  suffering and humiliation of  countless numbers of women in  this country.  It also says  that its views are consistent  with those of Pro-Life groups  across the country, how's that  for the start of a Happy New  Year?  It's been suggested that we  begin to pressure the media  for coverage of good birth  control methods, i.e. the pill  and I.U.D.'s, maybe that's  something we can start exploring.  I don't know—at this point  in time I'm pretty discouraged  and would welcome any new  ideas—where do we go from  here?  Sincerely, Valerie Blair.  Here is Mr. Lang's letter.  Dear Miss Blair;  I am writing in response to your  letter to me of Oct. 14 in  which you express support  for the recommendation by the  Royal Commission on the Status  of Women that the Criminal Code  be amended to permit abortion  by a qualified practitioner  on the sole request of the  women.  As you know the Criminal Code  presently makes it a crime to  take the life of an unborn.  child except where the cont  tinuation of a pregnancy  endangers the life or health  of the mother.  If a committee  of physicians in an accredited  hospital certifies that in  their opinion the continuation  of the pregnancy of the expectant mother endangers her life  or health, the pregnancy may  be terminated; otherwise, it  may not.  Our government is not prepared  to remove abortion from the  Criminal Law; nore do we intend  to widen the law to allow  abortion except where the continuation of the pregnancy is  a real threat to the woman's  life or health.  It is our  belief that abortion involves  interest other than that of  the prospective mother and that  this is the interest of the  unborn child.  It is our  obligation to respect and  protect that interest.  Thank you for writing to me with  your views.  Yours sincerely, Otto Lang.  WHAT.TO DO NOW.  It certainly is depressing to  get answers like that back from  Mr. Lang, especially when  countries such as France and  Australia have recently made  abortion on demand legal!  We  can only say to all of you—  DON'T GIVE UP.  Continue  sending pro-abortion letters  to Lang's office, we'must  not be muffled.  Recently Dr. Katie Cooke  of the Federal Advisory Council,  Dr. Bette Stephenson, President of the Canadian Medical  Association and Judy LaMarsh  have all made statements  condemning Lang's stand  and suggesting that he should  be removed from office for  allowing his personal bias"  against abortion to interfere with his department's  stand on abortion.  Let's  support this stand by writing  our M.P.'s and the P.M.  with copies to Dr. Katie Cooke,  and Dr. Bette Stephenson.  Here's a quote from Dr. Cooke  that would be good to use,  "In a democracy we have a  separation between the legis --  lator and the enforcer of  the law, otherwise the Minister  of Justice becomes both judge  and jury".  So if you are hitting your  head against the wall over  Lang's attitude—get busy  and do something about getting  him out of there.  Drs. Cooke  and Stephenson need your support,  your M.P. needs to know how you  feel, and you may as well  tell Trudeau while you're at  it.  Addresses: Dr. Katie Cooke,  Advisory Council on Status  of Women, 63 Sparks St, Box  1541, Station B, Ottawa, KIP  5R5.  Dr. Bette Stephenson,  President, Canadian Medical  Ass'n, P.O. Box 8650, Ottawa,  K1G 0G8.  M.P.'s and Trudeau  can be written c/o House of  Commons, Ottawa.  (no stamp  needed for them after Jan 22.)  MISS, MRS., and MS.  Several of our members have had  a response from Canadian Press  re the CP Style Book ruling on  Ms. that was in our Dec. issue.  We have found out that CP issued  new instructions on Oct. 22  regarding the use of Ms. and  they read as follows;  "Some women wish to be known  as Ms. (with period, pronounced  miz or muz) rather than Miss or  Mrs which they term degrading.  Such use is not general in  Canada.  So use Ms. only when  requested.  Stories using Ms.  should say whether the woman in  question is married or single  if the information is available  and relevant."  And, although there is not a  specific ruling regarding sports  in the CP Style Book, the names  of all male sports figures are  used without the honorofic Mr.  However, for all women athletes  a Miss or Mrs. must be used.  At least with this new Ms.  ruling a woman athlete could  specifically require the use of  Ms.  However, despite this new ruling,  it is obvious that CP is still  missing the boat as far as  removing sexist overtones  from their copy is concerned.  Perhaps we should follow this  up by writing back stating that  the use of Ms. is indeed general  in Canada.  If cabinet members  can use it why can't Canadian  Press?!  Quote from the following  memo (issued by KPRC-TV in Houston  Texas prior to signing an agreement with N.O.W. re increased  coverage of women's news) and make  it clear that the new CP ruling  on the use of Ms. is just as  sexist as the original ruling,  and that is what is degrading  about the whole thing.  Here's  part of that memo-"Let us follow  a regular policy of keeping  sexist stereotypes out of our  copy.  As a general rule you  can do this by avoiding words  that suggest a person in a  certain role is likely to be of  a certain sex - police officers  instead of policemen etc.  Unless  you know of some strong feelings  to the contrary on the part of  the people you are writing about,  use the title Ms. instead of  Mrs. or Miss but this is not  to say that women should always  be referred to as Ms.  It is  better to refer to them by  their names.  Hazel Bracken  for instance, is Hazel Bracken,  or Bracken, or Board member  Hazel Bracken, and does not need  to be referred to as either  Mrs. or Ms. for purpose of  reporting news.  And the women's  movements should be referred to  by their proper names, or referred  to as women's movements, and not  women's lib movements".  Write this letter to John  Dauphinee, Canadian Press, 36  King St. E., Toronto, M5C 2L9.  Send a copy of it to your own  local newspaper too. members'    forum  5  I have belonged to the Vancouver  Status of Women for a year now and I  have never contributed anything personal  to the work you perform, or try to  perform, except for the annual fee  that I pay regularly.  I receive Kinesis, which I read, and  as you always ask for ideas and cooperation I have decided to write you  a letter giving you one of my ideas.  Many unattached women (widows with  grown-up children, divorcees in the  same position, single girls) believe  that the only country that needs  women's liberation is Canada.  In  other words, it never enters their  minds that because they were born in  this country and love it they only  have a duty to fulfil towards it.  According to my scale of values  that is wrong.  First of all,  every human being, no matter what  colour, social standing, religious  belief, country of origin and language spoken, or sex is a citizen  of the world.. After that first  priority there are many others.  If everybody in every country  tried to get to know the other  people and the other countries instead  of criticizing them or hating them  without proper knowledge of the reasons  they have to behave as they do, this  would be a far more pleasant place to  live in.  What I am trying to say is that it is  the duty - moral duty - of the women  of better developed countries to help  the women of underdeveloped ones to  understand that they are not inferior  to the male of the species in any way;  that God gave them the same brain and  the same rights, no matter what God  they believe in. Also that only by  educating themselves to the level of  their men will they be able to raise  their children healthy both physically  and mentally and guide them through  life.  Children love their mothers  initially because they get to know  their mothers in the womb before they  get to know their fathers.  I would  not know.  What I do know is that it  is very normal in the poor countries  that when children grow up they follow  the examples of their fathers and become condescending towards their mothers.  Why?  It is simple:  usually  the fathers are better educated and  the children admire them more and t  v therefore try to imitate them.  As  a consequence, women get relegated  to the kitchen and used as reproducing machines.  Anyway, to conclude this letter, what  I want to say is that Canadian women  that are bored at home, that feel that  they are wasting their lives and intellectual 'possibilities could go to  other countries in which women are  little more than slaves and teach  them with their own example that wo  men all over the world love and feel  essentially the same about the same  problems - namely children, love and  men,,security, fear, dignity,etc.  There are many international organizations that would gladly receive  a good many more volunteers willing  to work for their room and board and  pocket money.  It is my belief that  helping innocent children and long-  suffering women across the world  would be way more interesting and  constructive than fighting over whether we women should be called Miss or  Mrs. or Ms.  I belong to Women's Lib, but I do not  believe women are better than men.  We are different, but not better or ~~  worse.  -Carmen Benitez  EDITOR'S NOTE:  Thank you for your  views, Carmen.  For some time now  Kinesis has been wanting to do an  issue on women in other parts of the  world.  We cordially Invite Ms. Benitez and others who are knowledgable  (either through travel or living experiences) about countries other than  Canada to submit articles of any  length to Kinesis.  Also, I again extend an open invitation to members  to contribute to Kinesis letters,  articles or opinions for Members'  Fo rum.  Pamphlets  The Women's Press has published a  long list of the pamphlets it has  available.  These pamphlets can be  ordered' directly from The Women's  Press. All orders must be pre-paid  and they ask that you include 25c  for handling. Make cheques or money  "orders payable to:  Canadian Women's Educational Press  280 Bloor St.W, Ste 305  Toronto, Ontario.  Please refer to the pamphlet  number when ordering.  100 Women's Work  produced by the Vancouver Working  Women's Association.  A series of articles by working  women who look at and talk about  their job situation.  24 pp ...$.30  101 Working in Hospitals  produced by the Vancouver Working  Women's Association  A critical look at women's inferior position within the hospital  'caste  system'.  23pp.  .$.30  200 Vancouver Women's Health Booklet  by A Woman's Place Collective  Explores the nature and extent  of the dissatisfaction which  women have concerning the klnd  of care they receive from the  medical profession.. Includes  discriptions of several ways in  which women are coming together  to try to change their health  situation and offer alternatives  to the traditional doctor-patient  relationaship.  127  $.50  300 Our Daycare Centre  produced by Northwest Communicare  Record of conversations of people  talking about what its like at  their daycare centre, their hopes,  their fears, their happiness,  thier problems.  38 pp $.25  302 Cuz There Ain't No Daycare  Cohen, Duggan, Sayre,Todd,Wright  Attempts to answer some basic  questions about daycare - what  is daycare; what should it be;  who needs it; what's in it for  kids, families,and communities;  who cares?  128pp  .$.25  303 The Myth of Motherhood  by Lee Comer  Discusses with insight the mythology created about motherhood  and stresses that this myth must  be exposed in the same way that  other myths are that cast women  into narrow and rigidly defined  roles.  400 Women's Liberation and Revolution - a bibliography  by Sheila Rowbotham  Lists books, pamphlets and articles which explore the relationship between feminism and revolutionary politics.  24pp $.80  501 The Family Allowance Under Attack  by Susie Fleming  Describes Family Allowance Campaign which was launched as a  defensive response to the Government's proposal to abolish  the only money paid by the  State to all women with two or  more children.  14pp $.40  703 Women in Struggle For Liberation  produced by World Student Christian Federation  Offers a collection of articles,  descriptive and analytical, which  gives insight into the kinds of  struggles in which women around  the world are involved.  169pp... $2.00  For a complete list of pamphlets  available write The Canadian Women's  Press. Curious about plans of our publicly-  owned broadcasting system for ack  nowledging International Women's  Year, we dispatched inquiries (and a  suggestion) to CBC programming and  public relations officials.  Knowlton Nash, Director of TV Information Programmes has replied with  news of several programmes which have  been definitely scheduled and of  others still being considered.  Definitely scheduled is an eight-  part series, to be shown in prime  time on Thursday nights, which Mr.  Nash describes as "a magazine programme on women in the news at home  and abroad; issues of concern to  women; attitudes of men." He mentions that the entire series will be  done by an all-woman creative staff.  In addition., a couple of programmes  early in the year on the Man Alive  series will be devoted to women and  will, in Mr. Nash's words, "demonstrate  their personal triumph in recent  years." Still in the realm of public  affairs, the Take 30 show will be  allotting considerable time over  the year to women's issues and  women's opinions.  Two half-hour dramas specifically  aimed at International Women's Year  will be directed, written, and produced by women, and there will be  another drama about the outspoken  battler, Emma Goldman, whose causes  included women's rights and- the  dissemination of birth control  information.  In September, in prime time on  Sunday nights, two one hour programmes on Emily Carr will be shown  and one on L.M. Montgomery.  Mr.  Nash says that while these programmes  are not overtly concerned with the  problems studied in the Status of  Women Report, "on a very personal  basis the status of these women and  women in a man's world comes through  quite vividly throughout." Again,  they are produced by women—-Nancy  Ryley for Emily Carr and Terry  Filgate for L.M. Montgomery.  A musical programme already lined  up and to be entitled "Three Women"  will feature Maureen Forrester,  Sylvia Tyson, and Pauline Julien.  Among some half a dozen other programme aid documentary ideas still  being considered are one on women  of Cuba, done by Sylvia Spring and  an all-woman production team, and  one involving Viveca Lindfors in  "I Am A Woman."  The suggestion we sent along was  that the CBC do a documentary series  on The Royal Commission Report,  Five Years Later, covering both  progress and lack of progress.  Mr. Nash thought it an "intriguing"  idea and sent it along to Peter  Herrndorf, head of the Current  Affairs section of TV programming.  Just before going to press we  received a letter from Mr. Herrndorf,  saying that a major documentary was  being considered for next year on  The Royal Commission' Report "Then  and Now."  cbc  and  women  Detailed information is not available  yet on CBC Radio programme plans for  International Women's Year, but John  Lysaght, Public Relations - Radio,  Vancouver, tells us that several proposals were discussed at a national  programming conference in December.  A number of programmes on matters of  concern to women will be carried on  the national network and regional  programming will also focus on these  subjects.  Good Morning Radio is a  case in point.  -B.P.  t WO  TERRACE WOMEN'S ORGANIZATION (TWO)  In Terrace a group of women who had  met informally last winter to "just  talk" have christened themselves  the Terrace Women's Organization  (TWO).  This year they intend to  work on several specific projects.  Their spokeswoman is Alice Chen-Wing,  4729 McConnell, 635-7763.  TWO's first project will be to stage  a conference in March on the topic  of Women in Politics.  The conference will be for the politically  initiated and the uninitiated and  its purpose will be to increase the  confidence and effectiveness of  women's participation at all levels  of government.  Guest speakers, women who have experience or aspirations at all government levels, are being invited from  all political parties.  So far Iona  Campagnolo, the newly-elected M.P.  for Skeena, and Joan Wallace, the  Liberal candidate for Burnaby- Richmond -. Delta in the last federal  election, have said they would try  to attend.  The conference will be  held March 1, 1975.  Participants to this Terrace conference are welcomed from all parts  of B.C.  Sharon Biggs, 4103 Yeo,  635-4814, will co-ordinate the  arrangements and Nan Harrison, 4620  Hillcrest, 635-5854 will arrange  for billets. More details will be  published in the next issue of Kinesis. LETTER LOBBX  Since this issue is devoted to  housing we have geared this  month's Letter Lobby to that  topic.  Go to page -3  and send  off your letter!  People are  beginning to get responses  from the government and on  page ty   we have printed some  of those responses with  suggestions on how you can  pick up the ball and throw  it back into their laps.  Yes, this is an ongoing  battle, didn't you know?  Joan Wallace, who has had alot  of experience with writing  letters, has a good suggestion  for getting letter mileage  out of your meetings.  If  there is a letter (s) that needs  to be done on a specific  topic, supply all those in  attendance with a piece of  paper and have them copy  out the letter you wish sent  (use slightly different wording,  write it on a blackboard, or  pass copies of it around) then  collect all the letters, stuff  them in envelopes and go on  with your meeting.  It would  only take 10 minutes.  FEDERAL ACTION  At the last meeting of the Federal  Action Committee June Menzies of  the Federal Advisory Council on  the Status of Women helped to  clarify some of the intricacies  of the .Canada Pension Plan.  Even  with the new amendment to the Plan  there is still much discriminatory  legislation to be studied for the  brief that the Federal Action  group is working on.  The inclusion  of the housewife in the CPP is  an obvious part of our outlook.  Any members interested in being  a part of the Federal Action  Group are asked to contact  Diana Douglas at 980-5351.  Diana Bissall  Writer's Workshop meets once a  month here in the office.  Last  meeting was on Jan. 16 and the  assignment was to write a  thousand word- story with  dialogue. Maybe that explains  why only 3 people turned up!  Oh well, we all had a terrific  discussion anyway.  Next meeting  will be in February, the night  is yet to be determined.  Call  the office sometime after the  7th to find out when.  Next  assignment—write ANYTHING and  bring it along.  ORIENTATION  As you know we hold Orientation  meetings at 8 pm here in the  office on the 2nd and 4th Thurs.  of every month.  They have  proven to be very successful,  an excellent way to introduce  women to VSW and the movement.  Over the past few months  I have had several conversations  with women discussing the need  for an additional kind of  meeting—or perhaps we should  call it a non-meeting, as  informal as orientation but  with no other purpose than  to provide a chance for women  to gather together, talk  with other women, read, etc.  In response to this seeming need  we are changing the format of  orientation meetings.  From now  on the 2nd Thursday of each  month will be devoted to  orientation as it is presently  with information on what VSW  does, what membership can do  etc.  On the 4th Thursday  of each month, from 8-10:30  Vancouver Status of Women  presents   OPEN EVENING anyone can  drop in.  anyone can talk,  anyone can read MS magazine,  WOMENSPORTS, other group's  newsletters or all the books  in our library!  anyone can  try on a t-shirt or peruse  our posters,  anyone can sit  and be silent,  anyone can  bring a friend and introduce  her to the feminist outlook,  anyone can have coffee or  tea for a small donation,  anyone can do research on a topic '  related by women by digging  through our pamphlet and  article/clipping files,  anyone can just come.  You can can't you? First  OPEN EVENING is THURSDAY,  FEBRUARY 27, DROP BY ANYTIME  BETWEEN 8 & 10:30 pm.'  MEDIA ACTION  Due to a horrendous lack of  response from members, the  Media Action Committee will  no longer be holding monthly  meetings to discuss sexism  in advertising.  The clip  and send ad of the month  feature will be continued in  Kinesis, and we would like  members to send us any and  all sexist ads they see.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR  We have applied for monies to  carry out a community service  program that would see us  involved in arranging lecture/  discussion series on the  women's movement at numerous  community and neighbourhood  centres in the lower mainland.  We are also going to be doing  some extensions on the High  School Women's Workshops.  Keep your fingers crossed  for us and we'll keep you posted  as to our success with the  grant applications.  IWY GOODIES  Our secret spyperson  made a find the other day.  The Manitoba Action Cttee  on Status of Women has produced  stickers with the IWY dove  symbol on it.  They are blue  on white, come in two sizes  larger ones (seemed to me to  be about 3" x 3") sell for  10c ea., 12 for $1.  Smaller  ones (stamp size) are 24 for  $1.  Write to Manitoba Action  Cttee. on Status of Women,  c/o June Menzies, 715 Fisher  St., Winnipeg, Manitoba.  ANNOUNCEMENT  Former VSW Staff Member Pam Smith  gave birth to a baby boy December  18th.  Young Tajo Jamiolkowski  paid a visit to the VSW Office  the other day but was unimpressed  with the activity around him. 8  Advantages of Feminism  Men, open your eyes!  Stop being  threatened by women's liberation and  expel your fears of losing your masculinity, power and slaves.  Look at  women's liberation with a supportive  attitude and know that it means  advantages for you.  You will gain  back your humanity, home, job and  world responsibilities will be lessened, your partners or spouses will  become independent and truly equal  persons.  Realize that your freedom of choice  goes hand in hand with women's freedom of choice.  Male or female could  choose between a variety of life  styles (househusband, hobbyist,  volunteer worker, or career person)  and these will become socially  accepted alternatives for men in  future social systems.  The pressures of being head of the  household and breadwinner could be  shared with one's spouse, if stereotypes are broken down.  Whatever  emotions a man feels or behaviour  he wishes to demonstrate can be  revealed as his personal and individual character and not as now, simply  those feelings and behaviours attributed to a male like aggressiveness  and strength.  Wouldn't it be great  to be pursued sometimes rather than  be the aggressor all the time?  Repeatedly I hear men remark that  their wives at home have an easy  and simple job.  Their tone is  envious as if they would like to  change places.  Now if everyone was  free to choose their field of endeavour, then men and women could reverse  the present roles and be happy doing  what they want to.  Men's comments  about homemaking indicate househus-  bands could become more popular.  Wouldn't it be great to enjoy those  hobbies today which you aspire to  take up in retirement days?  To spend  more time with the children and get  to know them better?  Get those things  done around the house you just never  have time for?  To have a flexible  schedule and not have to worry about  bringing home the wages? Wouldn't  it be beautiful to be taken out on  the town or receive roses at no  expense to you?  Perhaps you and your  wife could each support the family  financially half the year and be the  homemaker the other half or even both  work out a schedule of part-time work  year round.  Just the change might be  gratifying and appreciated by both  you and your wife.  Statistics show  that women live longer than men and  it's viable that their "place at home"  is a contributing factor.  Longevity  is another advantage for men to gain  from women's liberation.  Another area where responsibility can  be equalized to the advantage of men  is in matrimonial law.  You probably  know someone who has been zapped for  debts accrued by his wife; has been  chased from job to job for maintenance  and support; or has been denied custody only because mothers are unquestionably better parents.  I say give women parity in the marriage  relationship and recognize their  contribution to the economic, social  and emotional standard of the family  unit.  In other words, give women an  equal share of the responsibilities  and assets of a marriage and the  duties and liabilities will be more  evenly shared.  For example, a wife's  outside earnings would be halved with  her husband and any debts accrued by  her during the marriage would be her  responsibility instead of her earnings  belonging to her and her debcs belonging to him.  I think its terrible  that the husband has to put a notice  in the local papers denying liability  for debts of his wife after a certain  date.  Also the majority of judgments handed  down in divorce cases deems the man  responsible for court costs.  Even  in the marriage ceremony, traditionally, the bride's father pays for  the weddings.  Men suffer the burdens imposed by laws  relating to marriage breakdown and  particularly maintenance and support.  Upgrade the marriage contract to the  standards applying to the formation  of any other contract, where the  shares are predetermined, provisions  are made for dissolution, including  division of properties, custody and  support.  If there was a no fault  clause, where the blame was not  shunted onto one as practiced today,  then both partners would be responsible for the marriage breakdown and  all the consequences that result.  The debts and credits of the marriage  balance sheet would be suitably shared  by prior agreement, as in any other  partnership.  (No business man would  enter into a contract without knowing  his rights and shares.)  This would  reduce the courtroom hassle and legal  fees trying to prove one right and  one wrong and guarantee the spouses  settlement that was agreed to at the  time of marriage. Any contract takes  two people to join initially and its  only sensible to make provision for  dissolution at the start of a partnership, not at the end.  Another area of freedom of choice,  where family relationships could be  improved is in the policy applied to  voluntary sterilization and birth  control.  If doctors and hospital  boards, allowed adult men and women  to procure sterilization without  their spouses' consent, this would  put an end to unwanted children and  unprepared parents.  The freedom of  choice in the area of sterilization  would enforce the individuals right  to control his body.  It is not impossible for a wife (who is more often  than not, responsible for birth control) to become pregnant in a desperate attempt to save a crumbling marriage.  Familiar?  It would certainly  promote the status of men and women  to whole, separate people.  For responsible men who wish to prevent  conception the condom is not perfectly  safe nor is abstention the answer.  Awareness of the powerlessness of men  in the decision to have a child and  realizing the burdens and the responsibilities of an unwanted child,  should induce more husbands and fathers  to press for accessibility to sterilization and development of male birth  control.  Liberation means that people enjoy  the right of freedom of choice.  Know  this my male friends and support  Women's Liberation.  - Leigh Fox  Reprinted from Ishtar News  Aldergrove Women's Resource  Center & Transition House,  December,1974.  Ms.  deserters  Vancouver Ms. describes itself as  " a place where women of many different interests can be together to  talk, r.elax and become aware of the  strength and joy of women's culture."  It provides a place for women poets,  musicians and artists to display their  work in a supportive environment.  Vancouver Ms. is open five nights a  week - Wednesday through Sunday -  from 8:00pm to 2 am and is supported  through membership dues and admission  charges. Wednesday nights are devoted  to films and discussions.  For information on what topics will be discussed are what films are being shown  contact Vancouver Ms.  at 2089 W. 4th  Ave., Vancouver, 738-5821.  Thursdays  are piano music and pool. Pool lessons  are available.  Friday and Saturday  nights are boogie nights and there is  a bottle draw on Saturday night.  Sunday features poetry readings by  women poets.  USA  Fathers who desert their families  will be pursued by the federal government provisions of a social-services  spending law designed by President  Ford.  The act authorizes use of federal courts, IRS collection procedures,  federal data files and garnishment  of federal salaries and retirement  benefits to enforce child-support  requirements.  -from Wall Street Journal  Jan.6,1975. georgia & granville  GEORGIA AND- GRANVILLE   DIALOGUES  AND ENCOUNTERS  In the battles within myself it is  interesting who wins:  "You say you believe, but if you  really believe, why don't you do  something positive?"  "But I'm afraid."  "If you really believe, instead of  just saying you do, you'll do it."  "But I'd feel like a fool."  "Are you saying that Ann and Linda  and Cynthia and all the rest (who  are doing all the real work) are  fools?"  "But they're radicals!  They stand  on streetcorners petitioning all the  time.  They belong!"  *******************  Georgia and Granville, 7 pm Friday  evening, I'm decked out in middle-  class splendour, no bluejeans or  skijacket. Without a disguise I  feel naked.  "Would ..." my outstretched hand  bangs along bodies like a child's  stick on a fence.  "Would you like to sign a peti..."  The crowd is faceless.  They rush.  They flash.  They boil.  They flood.  I'm lost, they're drowning me.  It  won't work!  "Try!  Exhort them but don't plead -  please don't plead!" Better still  to retreat within myself and close  the doors.  Put a "do not disturb"  sign next to the petition, become  a wooden lady with an iron face.  But I need 200 signatures.  "Don't let them get to you, lady.  Hang in there, you're doing O.K."  His smile is gentle, bearded.  "This is my corner, I sell the  'Straight' here all the time. Woul-  you like me to sign your petition?"  I force the corners of my lips up in  a parody of a smile..^he effect is  foolish.  I feel too relieved.  "I must have signed this one at least  twelve times."  "But you're only allowed to sign once!  The signatures are counted.  It only  counts once.  Thank God, I now have  one signature.  "Excuse me. Would you like to sign  a petition to help eliminate abortion  from the Criminal Code?"  "I'll certainly sign that. You women  are doing such a good job.  It's a  terrible thing, killing all those  babies!" She took my pen, her smile  radiating approval.  "But..." I stop, amazed.  My bearded friend from the 'Straight'  has jammed his elbow into my ribs.  During my confusion, thanking me,  she pushed off into the tide of  bodies.  The Hare Krishna and Novena Man(with  the giant rosary) have moved in on  us. My friend from the 'Straight'  starts to laugh. We become a'happening' on a streetcprner. We rattle.  We bang. We resonate together.  "Would you ..." Hare"/ Like to...  "Krishna" / Sign a..."hare"./ Novena  Man swings his rosary, mumbling prayers against us. The Hare Krishna woman discusses my Kharma and my Dharma.  Reincarnation.  My attention is focused on the orange  smear between her eyebrows.  I will  be an aborted fetus in my next three  lives.  It doesn't matter.  The 'signers'  have joined our 'happening'.  They  are signing, they are lining up to  sign.  The energy radiating from our  streetcorner seems to draw them.  "We all have the right to our own  opinions", they say to the Hare Krishna woman.  In my hands there are now  200 signatures.  By nature I ..am part of the faceless  crowd.  I rarely sign petitions.  - S.L. Poole  BOOKS  FOR CHILDREN  WOMEN'S PRESS, Canadian Women's Educational Press, announces the publication of Stone Soup, a book for  children.  Stone Soup is for children  8 to 10 years old, is written by  Carol Pasternak and Allen Sutter-  field, illustrated by Hedy Campbell  and costs $3 paperback and $6.25  cloth.  The Women's Press places a strong  emphasis on the importance of books  for childrdn that present realistic  alternatives to traditional stereotyping in children's literature.  They feel it important that children  read books about their own experience,  culture, class and lifestyle, and  the Women's Press has a continuing  commitment to making this kind of  reading material available on a wider scale.  The Women's Press is looking for new  manuscripts for non-sexist children's  books.  For further information contact:  Penny Goldsmith  Canadian Women's Educational  Press  280 Bloor St. W.  Suite 305  Toronto, Ontario  (416) 962-3904  NEWS  STATUS OF WOMEN NEWS  The Status of Women News will publish news about your women's group  or centre.  Send advance notice of  meetings, conferences,etc, and short  reports of events, publications,  major decisions,etc.  They also appreciate photos, drawings, cartoons,  logos and poetry, and will reprint  material from other publications  This is one way for women to ifeep  in touch with what other women are  doing.  Send information to:  The Editor  The Status of Women News  121 Avenue Road  Toronto, Ontario, M5R 2G3  (phone - 416 922-3246) IO  The woman in Alice Munroe's short  story "The Office" recalls how on  long spring evenings, "still rainy  and sad," she has opened the windows  to feel a "fierce and lawless quiver  of freedom," and to know how the rest  of the time she is "sheltered and encumbered," how "insistently" she is  "warmed and bound." Elsewhere in the  story she realizes that when she is  in the house "She jls_ the house; there  is no separation possible."  Woman's place is in the home!  A  persistent, although largely invisible feature of the sex-role ideology  we're all still bound by most of the  time has been the embodiment of this  belief in the built environment.  Different cultures have different forms  of housing and settlement patterns  (areas of public space within which  community life takes place).  These  built forms channel personal, family,  and social life and work in ways the  culture has traditionally found useful for survival.  In House Form and  Culture, (Prentice-Hall, 1969) a pioneer study of house forms and settlement patterns, the anthropologist  Amos Rapoport makes two crucial points  about North American housing:  (1)  The social norm provided for by most  planning is the white, middle-class  family of parents and two children  typified by advertising, and (2)  the  ideal image of home in everyone's  mind—an image  implanted not only  by experience of the existing environment , but also by all the media-  is the isolated single family dwelling  on its own plot of ground.  In North America, almost all housing  is constructed to conform to the  social norm of the nuclear family as  an isolated, self-contained, mobile  social unit.  Furthermore, the house,  (or aptly named apartment) is usually  conceived by the architect or planner  as an isolated unit rather than as  part of a community system.  Apart from bath and kitchen areas,  the division of space within the single  family house provides sleeping rooms  for members of the family, a special  room for eating, and usually one all-  purpose room for 'living;.  The allocation of space by rigid walls is  traditional and usually unquestioned  by the users , however non-functional  it may be for individual families or  for individuals within the familyt  The effect of this institutionalization of space is to cause behaviour  to fall into certain patterns:  the  master bedroom says that husband and  wife sleep together; the dining room  says that the family eats together  as a ritual; the living room, that  the family pursue leisure"activities  as a group within the same space.  The result can be the imposition of  a grid upon the life within the house:  it tends to assume certain patterns  because of the rigid division of  space and implies and permits certain  kinds of use while discouraging or  making impossible others.  Specialization in furnishing and decor also  works against a multi-purpose use of  space.  In primitive societies, the people  were in control of their own building processes.  If modifications were  required in house form, they occured  naturally over a period of time as  as practical adaptations were made  to meet emerging needs.  (The modern equivalent of this owner-  control would be such individualistic  adaptations as turning a garage into  a playroom.)  But in contemporary urban societies, the people who use the  housing are almost totally out of  touch with the architects who design  it.  The existence of developers, who  are motivated by profit and who employ  architects to design for the stereotypical nuclear family makes the building process even more one of remote  control as far as the people who will  use the housing are concerned.  The  building forms produced by developers  are not a direct response to climate,  available building materials, and the  way of life of the users, but simply  a repetition of existing forms which  have become non-functional for many  of the people who must use them. And  use them they must, simply because  no other housing patterns are available.  The members of a co-operative or  extended family group find single  family housing difficult or impossible  to adapt to their life-style which  calls for individual spaces large  enough for working and entertaining  as well as sleeping, in.addition to  the shared space of 'living; rooms.  The single parent isolated with small  children in the single family house  lacks a built-in sense of community.  Social ideas of what is 'normal',  ideas which are coded in the built  forms of the environment have until  recently inhibited the formation of  other types of family groupings.  A recent study of housing in Vancouver  confirms Rapaport's observation that  the freestanding single family house,  and not an apartment or row house is  the ideal home which exists in everyone's mind, and which everyone aspires  to own.  A recent survey of consumer  preference in medium-density housing  in Greater Vancouver (The Housing  Game, United Way of Greater Vancouver,  July,1974) shows that since single  family houses have become generally  unavailable to low and middle income  groups, many families will opt for  condominiums or townhouses, provided  the design satisfies their need for  privacy and territoriality.  In urban life in Vancouver, as elsewhere in North America, the movements  of citizen participation, bureaucratic  decentralization, community control  and the corresponding emphasis on  development of community facilities  has meant that there is a growing  demand for architects and developers  to be sensitive to the actual needs  of the people they serve.*  As a profession, architecture is traditionally male-dominated.  In the  United States, less that 2% of architects are women, and the situation in  Canada is similar, although more women  are beginning to go into the profession.  However, a woman's perspective on the  urban environment should encourage  the emergence of new built forms and  the adaptations of existing ones to  bring housing and settlement patterns  closer to the actual needs of real  people.  The Britannia Community Services  Centre now being built in Vancouver  is a local example of citizen participation in the design process.  oom  on  Restructuring the Urban Grid, a planning concept from Theodore  Roszak's anthology Sources, Harper Paperback,1972.  By utilizing space formerly taken up by access roads and house  front property, useful space can be developed for community  living.  The LIFEHOUSE would contain facilities such as Day  Care,,library,etc.  THE WOMAN IS THE HOUSE:  THE MASTER  BEDROOM SYNDROME  (Polemics of the,women's consciousness)  by Gloria Onley  Slide-tape presentation given at the  Tenth Annual Conference of the Canadian Association For American Studies,  University of Ottawa, October 9-12,  1974.  To be published by the C.A.A.S., in  article form.  ABSTRACT:  The North American woman, for all her  regional variety, lives in a status-  oriented, institutionalized culture  which makes spatial location and/or  economic validation the existential  basis of individual and social functioning.  In such a society, a woman  cannot function as an autonomous individual unless she manages to acquire,  as Virginia Woolf suggested in. 1928,  a territorial and economic foundation  for personhood.  Just as the custom  of the wife taking her husband's name  implies that he agrees to having her  identity submerged in that of her  husband and to function as his sub-  ordinate, so the customary allocation  of space within the typical nuclear  family dwelling in North America  denies the woman any private space  of her own which she can personalize  and use as a retreat.  Traditional  patterns of room use as well as the  behavioural patterns of family members embody, enforce, and transmit  the assumption of the culture that  the woman should be available to  serve the house and the family at  all times.  As the sociologist  Kathrin Perutz remarks, "we put  woman in charge of the household that  belongs to her husband.  She becomes  literally a slave, working for no pay  in a place not her own."  Trie woman's design-transmitted life  style of isolation without privacy  can only be significantly modified  by radical changes in architectural  and environmental design, and by  corresponding changes in property and  marriage laws. Women's needs call  for innovations in dwelling form and  urban settlement patterns to provide  (1) private space and privacy to use  it, should the woman so desire (2)  cooperative child care and household  management (3) increased opportunity  for interaction with persons of all  age groups and both sexes.  All material on this page contributed  by Gloria Onley of Women's Design  Center Collective 12  some good news  The Dept. of Manpower and Immigration  announces that jthe continued expansion of EOW (Employment Opportunities  for Women) programs indicates growing  awareness of the need to provide this  special way to help women enter or  re-enter the labour force.  Courses  are now operating in Prince George,  Kamloops, Nanaimo and Victoria,as well  as several in the lower mainland including Richmond.  Others are being  considered in Williams Lake and the  Okanagan.  Women are beginning to crack the  barriers surrounding previously male  dominated fields.  These fields usually pay well and it is becoming  obvious to more and more people that  the positions can be filled by women.  The December issue of Kinesis featured  a personal account by Linda Oglov who  worked as a construction worker on the  Kootenay Canal Development.  To quote  Linda 'J I discovered that people earn  goof salaries in construction, and  that there is,in most cases,no good  reason why the people drawing that  big money can't be women, and that  the male construction worker welcomes  a woman on the job.  Construction  jobs are by far the best paying jobs  in this area so that is where I  applied."  Jo Mitchell, Women's Employment Coordinator with the Department of Manpower and Immigration, Pacific Region,  announces the following good news:  ...Women meter readers have started  work for West Kootenay Power in Trail.  ...a woman from Fort Nelson is progressing very well in the Vancouver  Vocational Institute Building Construction course.  ...the Mining School in Rossland is  now accepting women students.  ...women are working underground with  Cominco's H&B mine at Salmo, as hoist  and skip tenders.  ...the employment Development Mining  Consultant, Buck Buckingham, the Chief  Mining Inspector and the Mining Association are meeting to consider the  whole range of jobs which women might  be able to do underground.  Some consideration may be given to a special  program similar to the activity at  Kitimat on an experimental basis.  In  the meantime, increasing numbers of  women are working in open pit mines.  ...a women in training program has  been started for East Indian women  in the Vancouver Metro area.  ...there is now a woman steel spar  operator in B.C.  ...a special experimental industrialization program for 21 women at ALCAN  in Kitimat was a great success and will  be repeated in January.  The women are  now working in various areas of the  plant for apprenticeships.  This program was the first of its kind in  North America!  ...a sour note - a recent Provincial  Government Competition for research  staff had 80 male applicants and only  one female applicant.  ...something to look forward to -  the Women's Employment co-ordinator  and her staff are putting together  a video tape and slide presentation  on women who are breaking into new  fields of employment.  The presentation should be ready in the Spring.  ....and  some  bad  news  According to the federal department  of labor, average hourly industrial  wage rates for men exceed those of 'Ģ  women in nearly all similarly described occupations that were investigated.  Men, for example, earn an average  annual income that is 107.4 per cent  higher than that for women doing  identical managerial work.  Although only six men hold clerical  jobs for every thirty-three women,  the men's income averages 56.7 per  cent higher than the women's.  In  the field of services and recreation,  where 21.4 per cent of the female  work force is employed, women's average incomes lag 167.9 per cent behind the men's.  The record is just as bad when it  comes to the question of access to  higher level occupations offering  greater challenges and monetary rewards .  While women constitute more than 33  per cent of the labour force, only  4.2 per cent of them hold managerial  jobs.  In 1972 there were only 53  women in Canada employed as architects,  less than two per cent of the total.  There were only 87 female engineers  and 301 female lawyers.  Meanwhile, in spite of discrimination,  ever increasing numbers of women are  seeking full-time employment.  Since  1931 the percentage of women in the  labour force has increased by 72.3  per cent and there is every indication that the trend will continue.  The national birth rate is plunging  at a time when greater numbers of  females are pursuing higher education and training.  The implications  are clear:  as fewer women are tied  down in the home"by family needs mo?e  and more of them will be motivated  to compete with men on the job market.  So far the cards have been stacked  against them , but a more efficient  and objective utilization of the female labour force could help to alleviate some of the chronic labour shortages industrial societies are experiencing in the demand for skilled  tradesmen.  Already women are proving  their ability to work in logging camps  and with mining and construction crews.  -excerpt from editorial in  the Edmonton Journal, Nov.12, 1974,  Andrew Snaddon, editor.  Reprinted  from Status of Women Information  Project Newsletter, Calgary, Nov.  30, 1974. editorial....  As I sit here in my editor's chair,  appropriately alert for any passing  events, I wait expectantly for the  belated beginning of International  Women's Year.  Supposedly it is here  and going but I've seen sparse evidence of it. When is it going to  happen? Or, at least this is what I  was thinking a few days ago.  I've  since changed my attack.  Remembering Roberta Schlosberg's  cogent comments on the subject in  the last issue, I realize that the  "tokenism" aspect is going to be the  hardest element to fight in making  this a successful IWY.  To keep this  year from being merely a symbol of  IWY and making it a real IWY will  require effort from all of us of all  sexes, who believe such a "circus"  (to quote from Roberta) is not only  "good for the soul" but also necessary  and timely.  Much of our feelings of frustration  coincides with Nellie McClung's  statement in her "In Times Like These"  published in 1915, and used as the  beginning quote for the HERSTORY published by the Canadian Women's Educational Press.  "At the present time  there is much discontent among women,  and many people are seriously alarmed  about it.  They say women are no longer  contented with woman's sphere and  woman's work..." She goes on to say  that part of this discontent is connected to the growing pains of women's  self-realization, much like the growing pains in a child.  The other part  of it is the fact that previously  women did not have time to even talk  about, much less consider, their  predicament.  If anything, Ms. McClung's  comments on the times are as appropriate today as when they were first  written.( From her wisdom we gain one  of two viewpoints:  1)  Either she was  a visionary far ahead of her times,  or 2) we are missing the boat.  So where does this put us? Well, in  regard to IWY, it simply has to work.  We cannot afford to let it fail.  Secondly, and this is the discovery I  made while sitting on my hands  staring out the window waiting for  the good fairy to present me with a  fullblown and fulfilling IWY, that  I, am not, and indeed, no one is, on  the fairy's flight pattern.  Simplistic, you are saying, that I  should expect this.  Slow to realize  what is really going on.  Perhaps,  but I'm quite sure that there are  many others who are slow in this  category.  So now that we have defined this  problem, let us begin to attack it.  Let us surprise the government, and  make IWY a resounding success. However, also let us not get caught in  the old traps, but head out to battle  with a new defense.  All of this decisiveness left me in  a quandry. Usually, when caught with  a bad case of the "do nothings" or at  least a case of the muddles, rather  than not move at all, I choose to  make any move that interests me.  At  my moment of need, the salvation was  Diana Bissell's page in the December  issue: a list of practical yet very  reasonable things to do for IWY.  Perhaps a lot of us, who have been  in the women's movement for a while  feel we are too sophisticated for this  down to earth stuff. Yet in lives as  automated as society decrees ours  must be, the personal contact aspect  is really the only one that counts.  Also, if it is a step forward, however small, and brings us satisfaction,  then it certainly is a positive move  for the Women's Movement and in turn  for IWY.  In other words, the action  you take for IWY does not have to be  self-sacrificing, cost large sums of  money, be for women other than yourself, or sanctioned by the government  or any organization.  It can be an  action used for enriching your life,  or any woman's life, after all that  is the aim of the women's movement;  to make all women's lives better, in  whatever way, in however magnitude.  Let me share my first successes with  you. For the first week, I had long  talks with my mother about her life  as a young woman what a fantastic  lady she is, and not only that, I'm  related to her! Last week I bought  myself a HERSTORY to keep all my  appointments in and to read for inspiration as required.  In conjunction  with the Herstory, I finally made a  visit to the Women's Bookstore in  Vancouver, something I never found  time to do before. And today, I took  the time to properly answer a letter  that had come to Kinesis inquiring  about VSW.  Not great things, you say.  Perhaps they will not change the world.  Yes, I know all that but somehow, I  feel that if I take the time to do  things for and with my lady peers by  the end of IWY, it will have become  a reaction rather than a conscious  effort.  And, if I can convince many  people to do the same, won't we have  a grass roots movement started? And  grass root movement has been known to  have quite an effect on history (not  to mention Herstory).  All I am suggesting is do not underestimate your  power as one woman alone to accomplish  good during this or any other year.  Do not shortchange yourself as having  no skills to add to IWY, after all  you are a woman and 50% of the population has not had that experience.  Taking my own advice, I set up two  plans of personal attack on the paralysis affecting IWY.  The first consisted of some general goals for the  part of women's movement that I can  affect and am affected by. These are:  1) To learn more about myself and  what I truly want from my life as a  woman in this society, 2) to develop  some real friends from the women I  know, that is to stop competing with  other women for attention from the  men of our society (and as a corollary,  to develop this attitude in other  women), 3) to develop a sense of humour  regarding the Women's Movement and my  particular role in it, in other words  to put my life in proper perspective.  OK, this is great but quite a large  order for success.  So, I set up the  second phase of my personal IWY:  to  have some personal, and very definite,  projects to be completed weekly,  monthly or in a reasonable time span.  All of these would do 'something for  some woman.  The idea was not to be  too rigid in my choosing, but rather  make it enjoyable, yet worthwhile.  (Contrary to a view pervading many  women's lives, tasks can be both worthwhile and personally rewarding.)  And, most of all do not feel that  nothing is accomplished on a one to  one basis of meeting and knowing  other women.  Do not feel it is a  "waste of time" to allow yourself an  opportunity to think about your role  in this world and this year.  It is  not woman's duty to always be performing work for others.  That is only  the type of mental reaction society  would like us to have.  If nothing  else, try to develop one good woman  friend this year and do not compete  with her. And, when IWY is over you  will have a friend for life. No  amount of government funding can buy  you that sort of peace of mind.  In  summary take the time to do what you  enjoy with and for women. 14  YOUR   HEALTH  THE VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE  the Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has just moved to a new office - upstairs at 1520 West 6th, Vancouver.  Right now they are busy putting up  partitions, painting and otherwise  getting settled.  The dust will settle  by the end of January.  Even with thw  heavy work going on, the Collective  has remained open.  The health Collective has been provd-  ing a number of important services  for the past three years:  —maintaining a list of gynecologists, obstetricians and G.P.s.  If  you're dissatisfied with your doctor  and are considering switching, or are  new in town and looking for a doctor,  you can phone the Collective or drop  in.  They'll read you suggested names  as well as comments written by other  women who've been to these doctors.  If you've found a doctor you trust,  please phone the Collective and let  them fill out a card on that person.  Also, if you've had experience with  a doctor you consider in any way incompetent (too rushed, condescending,  or just plain out-of-it, etc. etc)  please let the Collective know.  It  could save other women a lot of grief.  — abortion counseling and abortion referral.  Some of the women who  counsel have had abortions themselves;  others have worked at the Collective  and have had prolonged contact with  women's health issues.  At the very  least there is someone to talk to,  and should you decide to go ahead and  have an abortion, the Collective will  provide emotional support.  — providing books, pamphlets,  etc. on issues pertaining to our collective health.  You can drop in and  browse.  — running a self-help clinic  at the Pine Street Clinic, corner of  Pine and West 8th, every Tuesday evening from 6 to 10.  (Phone 738-6622).  Women doctors are on hand.  But primarily women from the Collective, who  havd learned from doctors, themselves  pass on imformation about breast self-  examination, how to use a speculum  and examine your vagina and cervix,  as well as information on venereal  disease, birth control, Pap smears.  It's not run as a group.  You can go  there and get the health information  that is important to you.  — running health discussion  groups.  An opportunity to meet with  a small group of women, to share experiences with health care, information,- and the changes in how we see  and experience our bodies. You could  call it something betweent a self-help  group and a consciousness raising  group.  If the Health Collective can help you -  or you it - drop by at 1520 West 6th  ive,- Vancouver, Mon. through Fri. from  10 am-6'5pm (Wed. open till 9 pm) or  phone 736-6696.  -Susan Levin  REVIEW  It was only a matter of time before  I ran off at the mouth about my beloved  prairies again.  Believe me, I have  good reason having read, for the third  time, Old Jules, by Mari Sandoz.  I  guess what amazes me about this book  is the universality of it and the  varied impressions it has made on me.  The first reading, fifteen-plus years  ago in my teens, I was overcome by  the romanticism of it all and awed a  bit by reading one of my first truly  adult books.  At university, the  prairie theme reminded me of my childhood books.  At university, the  prairie theme reminded me of my childhood home.  This time it was to answer  the question of how Mari Sandoz, the  author, became such a feminist (so  unconsciously so she preferred to call  herself an independent liberal) and  so adjusted and successful in her work  that the added comment of "she never  married" is uttered in astonishment  by her biographers and is never included in any such statement by herself.  This of course was in a time  (Mari Sandoz was born in 1901 and  Old Jules, published in 1935) when  marriage was considered a prerequisite  for a non-neurotic author.  But, onto the book.  Old Jules is  Mari's biography of her father, a  cantankerous and questionable character who married four times, had at  least six children and ruled his  home with nothing less than pure  dictatorial laws.  How, from this  setting could a woman of Ms. Candoz  nature emerge.  A woman described by  her fellow writers as dynamic,  slender and courageous.  Perhaps the  clue is from her admission to one of  her editors of her "cringing cowar  dice from ridicule" of her father  which she ruefully admits she's  "over that now." But the ability  to stand up to people is only part  of her feminist character.  The only  facet seems to be the nature of life  on the grasslands.  The sort of  relentless elements of nature which  time and again, even in the space  age, make man aware of his insignificance and inability to control his  surroundings.  This brought home in  storms of catastrophic size and  schizoid weather patterns that  leaves one never questioning who is  master.  Perhaps it is from this  that persons tend to have stronger  bonds to one another and that all  the family work together to survive.  And, one learns to respect people  for their survival and not for their  sex.  Certainly, Mari, being the oldest  child in the family, had her share  of responsibility not only caring  for the younger siblings but of  baling, hay, hoeing the garden,  hunting, rounding up the lost cattle  after a blizzard and just generally  being able to do anything when and  where needed.  Perhaps, too, it is  inherited from her mother who, due  to a lazy husband and a necessity  to survive, did anything and everything required to keep the family  alive.  Or maybe it is watching  other women with posts of importance  in the development of the prairie.  (One of Jules wives served as postmistress for the area.)  But greater  than all these was the equalizer of  living on the prairies which, as  Ms. Sandoz describes, has "a vigor...  and broadness of horizon" not found  elsewhere.  It is there that women  first found equality out of necessity.  If we look at early political women,  where do they begin their careers?  (Hint:  Nellie McClung in Winnipeg  and Emily Murphy in Alberta)  The  prairies, too, first allowed women  to vote.  But then again I warned you  I am addicted to that rolling, barren  land, as the uninitiated prefer to  call it.  Since this is to be a book review,  let me return for one moment to  Old Jules.  Read it, try to answer  the question of why so many feminists  rise from the prairies even in the  face of men like Jules Sandoz who  readily states that any work he does  not want to do belongs to the women.  Yet, watch him trust his 13 year old,  56 pound daughter to go live (with  her younger brother) and more incredibly to survive on Jules new claim  75 miles away from home.  Or see him  allow the children to read anything  they want or speak to them in the  same cruel way he does adults.  His  off-spring may be slaves physically  but mentally they are free. And,  perhaps that is the beginning of true  equality and of self dignity.  In  this sense the story of Old Jules is,  in reflection, the story of Mari  Sandoz and it is this latter that is  of significance to those of us from  the prairies in defining ourselves.  -D.E.R.  Photo by Terry Ryals 15  ubc  THE WOMEN'S OFFICE  The UBC Women's Office program "By  Whose Definition - A Program For Women" will be presenting a talk by  Dr. Pepper Schwartz entitled Bisex-  uality - A Study of Social Identity.  The presentation will be in the Blue  Room in the Arts One Building at UBC  at 7:30 on Tues. Jan. 28.  Required  donation of 50c.  Among the workshops planned for this  term are:  1) Consciousness Raising Groups,  Thurs. 12:30-2:30 pm, UBC Women's Office.  2) Self Help Health Groups.  3) Studies in Feminist Theory,  Weds. 7:30 pm in the Women's  Office.  4)  Women Writers Workshop, Thurs.  7:30 pm in the Women's Office.  The Women's Office also has a TV series Women in Focus which will be  aired Tues. nights at 9 pm on Cable  10.  Guest will include Dr. Margaret  Mead and Dr. Pepper Schwartz and some  of the topics planned are:  older  women, women's studies, women architects, and Lesbian lifestyles.  These programs have been created and  produced by a technical crew consisting entirely of women.  For further information please con  tact The Women's Office at 228-2082.  ywca  Single Mothers' Take-A-Break  From 11am - 2 pm every Thursday.  Crafts, discussions, etc.  Childcare  provided.  Vancouver YWCA, 580 Burrard, Vancouver.  683-2531.  wcmrs  UBC Department of  Continuing Education  Course:  SETTING YOUR  SIGHTS ON  MANAGEMENT  Date:    6 sessions,  starting February 5  Place:   Vancouver Public  Library, 750 Burrard,  Room 301. 6:15-8:15 pm  Instructors: Trudy Buckler  and Eileen Hendry  Outline: A workshop for women  who seek greater  involvement in  management and who  want to develop and  improve interpersonal  skills on the job.  Fee:     $25 for 6 sessions.  Please pre-register.  Call 228-2181.  poco high  The Port Coquitlam Secondary Community Projects announces that in recognition of of the growing interest  among women for information on various  aspects of the woman's movement, the  following programs have been planned:  WOMAN TODAY  Woman Today  Where do you stand as a woman today?  This course discusses, questions an-  informs on all aspects of the women's  movement.  All sessions include special guest speakers.  Course held at  St. Catherines Church, 2251 McAllister,  Port Coquitlam.  Babysitting available at $2.00 for first child of family and $1.00 thereafter.  Seven sessions - Tuesdays, Jan. 21.  7:30-9:30 pm.  $4.00.  Woman and Her Health  A three point examination of health  topics specifically related to women.  Uterine and breast cancer; menopause;  and the woman and her doctor will be  discussed. Program participants include doctors, public health, and  Canadian Cancer Society.  Pre-register  by phone in the evening after Feb. 16.  941-5461.  Three sessions, Wednesdays. March 5.  7:30-9:30 pm.  $4.00.  Women's Studies  This seven week program will cover  women and the law, women and politics,  the working woman, and the background  of the women's movement.  Course format built around films and guest speakers.  Both men and women welcome.  Seven sessions, Mondays.  January 27.  7:30-9:30 pm. Ms. D. Reddington.  $9.00.  For information phone the Port Coquitlam Recreation Centre - 942-0285  After 5 pm phone 942-4222.  douglas   college  Douglas College is expanding its  offerings in the area of Women's St  Studies this Spring, both in credit  and credit-free courses.  Counselling  is available at no cost through Student Services Centres on all Douglas  campuses.  Credit-Free Courses  Women: Options and Alternatives  -  small group experience for women who  want to explore new directions and  consider the range of possibilities  open to them.  Offered on All campuses.  Women in the World - Film-discussion  program featuring the National Film  Board series "Working Mothers".  Six  Wednesdays starting February 12, 7:30  pm , New Westminster Public Library.  Changing Women: Changing World Topics  include Human Rights, Changing Male/  Female Relationships, Women and Health,  etc.  Six Wednesdays, starting February  5, Langley Family Life, 20458 Fraser  Hwy.  Call 534-1722.  Explorations for Women - Individual  search for fulfillment and opportunities for women.  6 Mondays, February  24, Burnaby Central Sr.Sec. School.  4939 Canada Way.  7:30-9:30 pm. Call  299-4361.  Maple Ridge Status of Women - in  conjunction with Douglas College is  planning a series for women in Feb.  Call 463-3275.  Social Issues: Psychology of Women.  Mon. 7 pm-10 pm.  Philosophy, Religion and Women Tues.  7 pm-10 pm.  - Richmond  Images of Women in Literature.  Wed.  7 pm-10 pm.  For information regarding Women's  Studies, call the convenor of Women's  Studies at 588-4411, or the Director  of Continuing Education 588-4411(Local  251), or any Student Services Centre:  Surrey 588-4411, New West 521-4851,  Richmond 273-5461.  Academic Courses  These courses began Jan. 16, but  there may be space left in some of  i  the classes. If you are interested  in one of the courses phone and  inquire.  - New Westminster  Social Issues:  Psychology of Women.  28 -110)  Mon. 9 am-12 pm.  Philosophy, Religion and Women (27-  160).  Tues. and Thurs. 10 am-12 pm.  Images of Women in Literature (91-100)  Tues. and Fri.1  12 pm-2 pm  Women in Canadian History  (21-160)  Wed. 7 pm-10 pm.  Role of Women in Society  (23-240)  Tues. and Thurs. 10 am-12 pm.  Women in Canadian History . Wed. and  Fri.  10 am-12 pm.  Open Seminar - for anyone interested  in women's studies, Wed. 12-1 pm. on  each campus. IB  cap college  More from Capilano College's new  schedule of programs and courses.  Health and You  8 sessions starting on Feb. 17, 7:30-  9:30 pm at Queen Mary Community School.  Fee $5.  A member of the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective will be leading a  seminar group to discuss and learn  about female anatomy, birth control,  nutrition, preventative care, sexuality, menopause,etc.  Maximum enrollment: 15.  Increasing Credibility  Tues. evenings 7:00 - 9:00 at Queen  Mary Community School.  Fee $15 for  whole course or $10 for each section.  Part II:  6 sessions, beginning  on Feb. 25.  The second part of the course will  examine dilemmas and provlems of  women moving into management.  Emphasis will be on issues and techniques of leadership and decision -  making, including methods of integrating intellect with emotion, and  specific skills, eg. chairing meetings .  Instructor: Joan Lynch  Maximum enrollment: 15.  Synergy Movement Workshop for Women  of All Ages  Mons. 1:30 to 3:30 pm at North Shore  Neighbourhood House, 225, E 2nd.  No  fee.  Sponsored by the Student's Council  Six sessions : course to be held twice.  Starts Jan.13 and again on Feb.24.  This course is designed for those  beginning involvement with the move  ment arts.  it is designed to provide  women with an intensive sequential  movement involvement through breathing, body shaping, stretching, strengthening, body alignment, massage, impro-  visationa"! movement and discussion.  Maximum enrollment: 20.  Weekend Workshop for Women  Feb. 14,15 and 16(Fri. night to Sun.  aft.)  Place to be announced.  Fee:  $25.  This is to be a weekend away, providing both formal and informal time  for women to explore feelings and  relationships between women.  Emphasis will be placed on communication skills,encounter, and creative  decision-making. We will be looking  at attitudes towards our own and  other women's successes, our needs  in relation to other women and avenues to closeness and mutual support.  Note:  Please notify us of child-care  requirements at registration.  Instructors:  Margaret Penn and Cathy  Stewart.  Maximum enrollment: 20.  Consciousness-Raising Groups  Women interested in getting into consciousness-raising groups are asked  to contact the Women's Program co-ordinator.  Groups will be given assistance in getting started.  Waiving of Fees  Cap College announces it will waive  fees for senior citizens or women for  whom course fees are prohibitive.  LECTURE SERIES  A lecture series exploring the contemporary experience of women. Lectures will be Wednesday evenings at  7:30 pm at Argyle Secondary School  in North Vancouver, Room 411-413.  Fee is $6 for the series or 50c a  lecture.  Feb. 5  Matriarchy -Myth or Reality?  An anthropolgist will discuss the  anthropological view of matriarchy,  broaching the question of "have men  always been dominant?"  Feb. 12.  The Sociological Reality.  Dorothy Smith will define patriarchy  and describe its historical development and maintenance in the present  day.  Feb. 19.  Witchcraft.  Fran Issac will take an intellectual  look at witchcraft as a possibility  of female heritage.  She will also  examine it as women's response to  patriarchial rule.  Feb. 26.  Women and Psychotheraphy.  Dr. Liba Tyhurst will examine some  of the sterotypes that characterize  the relationship between patient and  psychiatrist, and outline some principles of personal and social management of women individually and. in  groups.  For more information contact Women's  Programs., Capilano College, 2055  Purcell Way, North Vancouver, B.C.  If you find that childcare or transportation difficulties prevent you  from taking courses explain your problem to the program co-ordinators and  they will try to help you find a solution.  people's   law  school  Learn about your laws through, the  Vancouver People's Law School series  of free legal education classes -  all classes and materials free!  To pre-register call: 681-7532  Course:  FAMILY COURT PROCEDURES  Date:   Feb. 3,4,5.  Place:   312 Main St., Courtroom #2  Time:   7:30 - .9:30 pm  Instructor:  Judge David Hart  Outline:  Discussions of the new  Unified Family Court, existing procedures in Family  Court, paternity actions,  juvenile actions, protection of children, maintenance  and custody.  Course:  IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES  Date:   Feb. 11,12,13.  Place:  John Oliver Sec School, Cafeteria  Time:    7:30-9:30 pm.  Instructor:  Don Rosenbloom  Outline:  Nominating and sponsoring  immigrants, acquiring landed immigrant status; tie-  portation and bail; inquiry  and appeal procedures.  Course:  SMALL CLAIMS COURT PROCEDURE  Date:   Feb. 17,18.  Place:  King George Sec. School,  Room 210/211.  Time:   7:30-9:30 pm.  Instructor: TBA '  Outline:  Actions one can take to  Small Claims Court; how to  conduct your case in Court;  how to protect yourself as  a defendant and how to collect as a successful plaintiff.  Course:  CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING IN B.C.  Date:   Feb. 24,25,26.  Place:  Kitsilano Public Library,  2425 MacDonald St.  Time:   7:30-9:30 pm.  Instructor:  Mel Tobias  Dutline: Philosphy of co-operativism  making clear the various  types of co-operatives , ie,  par value, patronage refund,  etc., within the co-op movement.  Also discussed will  be:  financing, plans and  problems.  There will also  be a discussion of co-op .'  developments within the Vancouver area.  north  shore  The North Shore Women's Centre is  celebrating IWY with a variety of  activities of interest to women in our  our community.  The programs are  held on Pub Night, every second Tues,  at North Shore Neighbourhood House,  225 East 2nd, North Vancouver, at  7:30 pm.  The Pub Night is a relaxing, informal s time when we can meet and share  experiences.  Jan.28 - Gladys Hindemarch of Capilano College is reading her poetry  add short stories.  Feb.11 - Book Night.  Bring a book  by a feminist writer and tell the  rest of the group about it.  Feb. 28 - Members of Matrimonial Property Working Group of the Berger Royal  Commission on Family and Chilren's  Law will discuss the Community of  Property Proposal.  For information phone Diana Sonderhoff  at. 926-2755. international women's yean  17  Despite disappointment over the  government's approach to IWY, many  projects are planned by women in every  province, to celebrate this year.  Here is a preliminary cross-section of  1975 projects planned by individuals  and groups in British Columbia.  Connie Gibbs, Independent: Lives  of Women in B.C. 1750-1920, slide  lecture History of Women in B.C.,  a manuscript  ISIS/WOMEN IN FILM:  Female Artist's  Workshop to include darkroom, studio  space, distribution facilities, viewing room, and art gallery.  GROWING ROOM COLLECTIVE:  "Room of  One's Own", feminist literary magazine  of criticism, reative writing, personal  journalism to work through two feminist  printers, Press Gang and Pacific Women's  Graphic Arts.  KOOTENAY WOMEN'S CENTRE:  Western  Canadian Women's Festival to interest  rural women and a production workshop  for high schools  ROYAL CANADIAN AERIAL THEATRE: Outdoor  aerial theatre with balloons and kites,  around the theme of women's concerns.  U.B.C.: Women's Pavillion to house  women's programs, architects, fine  artists, theatre and seminars for both  off-campus and on-campus women's groups.  U.B.C. WOMEN'S OFFICE:  "Women in Focus"  a series of television programs for  women, to be aired every tuesday night  at 9:00 p.m. on Vancouver's Cable 10  television.  Tapes will be available  to women throughout B.C.  VANCOUVER CO-OP RADIO: Women's Programming Committee, plans numerous  women's programs, five-minute information spots, hour-long continuing  specials, women's training workshops  on,use of radio equipment, and a focus  on native and young women.  Many other projects have been suggested,  among them a Women's Design Centre to  meet the special needs of women's  housing and a B.C. Women's Resource  Centre with a skills registry of women  with expertise in specific areas.  For further information, contact  your provincial or territorial representative of the IWY Secretariat who  plans the regional conference and provides details of IWY activities in  your locality.  In B.C. contact Kathleen Ruff, Director of Human Rights, Department of  Labour, Parliament Buildings, Victoria,  B.C. V8V 1X4.  In the Yukon contact Jan Speirs  Territorial Council, Whitehorse  Yukon  Yukon.  The IWY Secretariat issues a free quarterly newsletter.  Contact Mary Gusella,  Director of the International Women's  Year Secretariat, Box 1541, Station B,  63 Sparks Street, Ottawa, Ontario if  you want to be on the mailing list.  Reprinted from Western Canadian Women's  News Service, January 15, 1975  HOT  LINE  A welcome visitor to our office in '  December was Bonnie Kreps, who writes  the monthly Hot Line on Women column  for Chatelaine (above, right, with  Karen Richardson of the Western Canadian Women's News Service.)  Bonnie  has moved from Toronto to Salt Spring  Island and will be writing her column  there.  She'd like to hear from women's  groups about activities and developments in the field of women's concerns.  Keep her posted at P.O.Box 1069, Ganges,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. A point to  keep in mind is that her columns for  Chatelaine are written fairly well  ahead of publication.  FOCUS...  centre  WOMEN'S RESOURCE AND DEVELOPMENT CENTRE  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women in Canada proposes, as  a Canadian women's project for U.N. IWY/  75, the establishment of a "Women's  Resource and Development Centre". The  Centre would serve several functions;  as an archival library of Canadian women, containing their history and the  record of their participation in the  world-wide women's movement; as an  international training and develop  ment centre, available to women from  all countries; and as a central resource for Canadian women seeking to  improve the status and quality of their  lives.  The project would be implemented in 1975, but its functions and operation would continue into the future.  For further information please inquire  from:  National Action Committee on Status of  Women  121 Avenue Road  Toronto, Onatrio M5R 2G3  In place of our regular FOCUS on  Recommendations from the Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women  in Canada, this month we are asking  you to write to the International  Women's Year Secretariat.  The executive of VSW has already expressed its  disapproval of the government plan  to spend $1 million on five major  conferences.  The money could be much  better spent on projects and perhaps  small'neighbourhood* conferences where  women could get together and decide  on programs to meet their own specific  needs.  The government is at present re-considering the plan for five major conferences and we urge members to write  and encourage the change and suggest  alternatives.  Write to:  IWY Secretariat  Privy Council Office  Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0G4 IB  sexism in  schools  In the October issue of Kinesis, we  announced the appointment of VSW executive member Reva Dexter as Special  Consultant on Sex Discrimination in  Public Education to direct the Department's actions in ending sex discrimination.  The Department also set up  am Advisory Committee of interested  women's groups throughout the province  to advise the Department on solutions  to the problems of sex discrimination.  This advisory Committee with Reva  Dexter has prepared a report entitled  Equal Treatment of the Sexes; Guidelines for Educational Materials in  order to:  "1. make educators aware of the  ways in which males and females have  been stereotyped.  2. show the role language has  played in reinforcing inequality.  3. point out the types of phrases  written and actions depicted which  perpetuate those attitudes that relegate women to a secondary and inferior status in society.  4. assist educators and others  tfho seek to provide equal treatment  of the sexes in textbooks."  The report gives general guidelines  for evaluating sexism and then some  basic guidelines for revision of text  and illustration.  A summary of the  latter includes:  "1. Women and girls should be  given the same respect as men and  boys.  2. Abilities, traits, interests  and activities should not be assigned  on the basis of male or female stereotypes .  3. The actions and achievements  of women should be recognized.  4. The role of men in the home  should be recognized.  school texts, it suggests:  1) Avoid  constructions implying that women because of their sex are always dependent  upon male initiative.  Example : A  homeowner and his family. Alternative:  Homeowners and their children.  2) Avoid patronizing tones towards  women and girls.  Example:  The brilliant scientist is a woman.' Alternative:  She is a brilliant scientist.  3) References to a woman's appearance  and family should be avoided unless  it would be appropriate to refer to  a man's appearance and family in the  same context.  Example:  The candidates were Graham Johnson, president  of Alcan, and Roberta Tonkin, a pert  dl  Alternative:  grandmother of five.  * The candidates were Graham Johnson  of Alcan and Roberta Tonkin of Eaton's.  Or: The candidates were Graham Johnson,  perky silver-haired father of three,  'ñ†and Roberts Tonkin, a pert blond  grandmother of five!  The report concludes by recommending that teacher's  manuals also eliminate sexist assumptions that some activities will appeal  r~     more to boys than to girls or vice  *- iversa, and references to activities  which segregate boys and girls.  - reprinted from Victoria  Status of Women Action Group  November Newsletter.  |M>.  This short useful guide concludes with  the recommendations for avoiding sexist language.  It points out that the  omission of women through the use  of the term "man" to represent humanity,  occupational titles like "chairman"  which often ignore the existence of  women workers, and the fact that males  are usually chosen to represent "typical" examples conspires to exclude  women from the reader's thoughts.  In  order to eliminate the belittling oi  girls and women often present in  Opportunities  Highways Minister Graham Lea has  instructed his department to commission a task force to explore the  opportunities for women in the engineering professions.  The Minister made the announcement in  a recent address to the Lower Island  Socialist Women's Group.  The commission will investigate the engineering  professions, make recommendations to  industry, to the government, and particularly to his department that hopefully will open up an area of employment for more women.  In his address Lea said, "It is  appropriate that we undertake this  project next year as 1975 is International Women's Year, a time designated  byvthe United Nations to draw attention to the emerging role~ of women in  modern society.  There will, of course,  be many more significant observations  of International Women's Year but I  am pleased that we are able to make  this small contribution, and I can  assure you we will be looking for  other areas and activities which will  help to bring about the goals we share  with you."  Referring particularly to opportunities  for women in his own department, the  Minister said, "We find ourselves in  a very difficult position because we  draw most of our senior staff from  the engineering professions.  It  appears that for many years to come  the overwhelming majority of our  engineers will be men because an overwhelming majority of engineers are  men.  Now, we all may have our  suspicions as to why women are not  attracted to the engineering professions , but I think it is time these  suspicions were investigated and some  concerted effort was made to see if  it is possible to provide opportunities for women in the engineering  professions."  If you have any suggestions for people  who should be on the task force send  them to Deputy Minister of Highways,  Howard Sturrock, % Parliament Buildings, Victoria. Letters  X wish to fcicana a  I wish only to rocaiwa WXU8I&  In datarniains yoor donatio* v» ask  you to oilaura your own financial  poaition and tho foot that URESIS  coats approximately $3«0Q par parson  oar yaar to print and nail.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its ob^  jective is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  VSW.  SUBSCRIPTIONS:KINESIS is provided as  a service to members of VSW in good  standing.  Membership is acquired by  an annual donation.  In determining  your donation we ask you to balance  your own financial position and the  fact that KINESIS costs approximately  $3.00 per year per person to print  and mail.  PUBLICATION DATE: The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to the  thn editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be used where requested. Where necessary,  the editorial committee will edit  for brevity, clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: Send to :  KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Ave  Vancouver 9, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Diane Ryals,  Jo Lazenby, Viviane Hotz, Monica  Mui,Kathy Horrocks, Judy Bourne,  Diana Bissell, Bobbie Patrick.  CONTRIBUTORS: Jo Lazenby, Diana  Bissell, Bobbie Patrick, Gloria  Onley, S.L. Poole, Leigh Fox,  Carmen Binitez, Susan Levin  GRAPHICS: Kathy Sopko, Kathy Davitt,  Kathy Horrocks, Michele Lazenby  PHOTOS: Bobbie Patrick, Terry Ryals  '  TYPING: Margie Colclough, Eve Johnson, Kathy Horrocks  LAYOUT: Jo Lazenby, Eve Johnson,  Diana Bissell, Diana Raynor  Dear Editor:  . We have all heard of the single young  men who became tramps during the depression, forced onto the road because  there was no work, no money, and nothing to eat at home.  Until recently,  no one has thought to ask what young  single women were doing at the time.  Not all of them stayed home and knitted,  In 1933, the Women's Bureau in Washington conducted a survey in 800 cities  in 48 states, and found 9,769 women  tramps, unattached, jobless and homeless.  The Bureau estimated that this  was probably one-fifth to one-sixth  of the total number.  If there were fifty to sixty thousand women tramps in the United  Dear Editors,  If you like to use the following to  fill up a column, you are welcome;  if not, don't bother to return it!  COURTROOM COMMENT  "No," defence counsel says, "who can  Naively think that this dead man  Did nothing, nothing, to provoke  That fatal but quite natural stroke?  What guilt must have been heavy on him  To draw such punishment upon him?  Remember, without prejudice,  How wicked provocation is;  For, although we hate to blame the  dead,  He brought it all on his own head."  You see, this lawyer can't escape  Habits acquired defending rape.  Sincerely yours,  Geoffrey B. Riddehough  States, surely there were at least  five or six thousand in Canada.  I  would like to find some of these women, to hear and record their part  of Canadian history, before it, like  so much women's history has been lost.  If any of your readers spent part of  the thirties looking for work on an  unofficial railway pass, or knows of  . any woman who did "ride the rods",  I would appreciate hearing from them.  Thank you for helping me spread the  word.  Yours truly,  Eve Johnson  3517 West 3rd Avenue  Vancouver, B. C.  "He's tender and thoughtful, he shares the chores, he remembers all those special dates, and he sees both sides of everything.  Unfortunately, he's a creep." 20  announcements  Ombuds  We have an opening in the Ombuds Service.  People wishing to apply should  send a letter of application and a  resume immediately  to the VSW Office  2029 West 4th Ave., Vancouver.  one way  In Somalia, this week,ten men were  sentenced to die for opposing a new  law announced by the Supreme Revolutionary Council and the Council of  Ministers.  The new law gives women  equal rights with men and the convicted men were charged with subverting state authority and creating  national disunity when they spread  propaganda against the law during  Moslem religious ceremonies.  While such determination to enforce  the rights of women is to be applauded, we are hopeful that the same goal  can be accomplished here in Canada  by less drastic means.  However...  THE NEXT GENERAL MEETING WILL)  BE MARCH 18, 7:30 PM, IN THE  BOARD ROOM, YWCA, 580 BURRARD|  STREET, VANCOUVER.  The members of VSW have been invite-  to the University Women's Club, 1498  McRae, on Jan.28 at 8 pm to hear Mary  Bishop from the Family Planning Association speak on The Population Dilemma.  CONSUMER SERVICES STORE-FRONT OFFICE  The fourth department of Consumer  Services store-front office will  open at 4th and Victoria Stree in  Prince George on Jan.23, it was an-'  nounced today by Phyllis Young, Minister of Consumer Services and A.A.  Nunweiler, Minister Without Portfolio, for Northern Affairs, and MLA  for Prince George.  During the past four months storefront offices have been opened in  Kamloops, Victoria and Vancouver.  The offices are staffed with Trade  Practices Investigators to handle  consumer complaints, and debt counsellors to assist financially over-  committed consumers.  In addition  each office houses a consumer information area where free pamphlets as  well as books and magazines can be  utilized.  -excerpted from B.C. Dept. of  Consumer Affairs-News Release, Jan.15  fern-  gentle, V^a^I   like a woman  -j©  &1.  nc.i  FEBDUADY  GENERAL MEETING  ^ Approximately 45 members attended  g the General Meeting, Jan.21st, to  ^ hear Gene Errington report on her  vjH trip to the UNESCO sponsored confer-  ^ ence WOMEN AND HER HUMAN RIGHTS -  a Program for Progress, held in Kingston Jamaica.  Glinda Sutherland was elected Ombudswoman to replace Gene. The position  of Public Relations Officer formerly  held by Glinda will be filled at the  General Meeting in March.  The meeting ended with informal chatting and eating of goodies.  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  FEBRUARY 4  - NEWSLETTER MEETING,  7:30 pm OFFICE.  FEBRUARY 5  - WOMAN ALIVE,  10:30 pm CABLE 10.  FEBRUARY 7  - LETTER LOBBY.,  10:30 am, office.  FEBRUARY 11 - FEDERAL ACTION,  7:30 pm OFFICE.  FEBRUARY 12 - WOMAN ALIVE,  10:30 pm CABLE 10.  FEBRUARY 13  ORIENTATION,  8 pm OFFICE.  FEBRUARY 19 - WOMAN ALIVE,  10:30 pm CABLE 10.  FEBRUARY 25  FEBRUARY 26 - WOMAN ALIVE  FEDERAL ACTION,  7:30 pm OFFICE.  10:30 pm OFFICE.  FEBRUARY 27 - OPEN EVENING AT THE  VANCOUVER STATUS OF  WOMEN OFFICE.  DROP  IN TO DO RESEARCH,  TALK, MEET OTHERS,  LEARN, LISTEN.  FIRST  OF MANY TO HAPPEN THIS  YEAR.  WELCOME, TO AL1  MEMBERS, FRIENDS &  PASSERS-BY! 8-10:30 PM.  WRITER'S WORKSHOP - PLS CALL  OFFICE FOR DATES.