 February 1991 Kiss medicare goodbye? -Pg.7  CMPA  $2.25  H Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next Writers' Meeting is  Wed. Feb 6 at 7 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Christine Cosby, Nancy Pollak,  Andrea Lowe, Avery August,  inn Windatt, Terry Thomp-  :>n, Juli Macdonnell, Marjorie  lackwood, Faith Jones, Har-  vinder Samra, Sandra Gillespie, Janisse Brownning-Lev-  , Heidi Walsh, Corilee  Karen Martin, Heidi's  Side-kick, and Jackie Brown's  lean mean waxing machine  RONT COVER: At a Van-  :ouver peace rally in January,  hoto by N.J. Pollak.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Nancy Pollak, Terrie Hamazaki,  Christine Cosby  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Jennifer Johnstone,  hau Tran, Rachel Fox  .DVERTISING: Birgit Schin-  OFFICE: Jennifer John;  Chau Tran  Kinesis Is published 10 times  year by the Vancouver Sta-  s of Women. Its objectives  re to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year or what you  :an afford. Membership in the  'ancouver Status of Women  is $30 or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make sub-  issions. We reserve the right  edit and submission does  t guarantee publication.  If  iossible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  eturned, a SASE must be in-  luded. Editorial guidelines are  liable on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication;  news copy: 15th; letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  16th.  Jeannette Armstrong,  among others, tells it in  Telling It 15  Maureen Maloney, Dean of the University of Victoria Law School, warnsagainst  putting all our strategic eggs in the legal basket 10  The Tories don't want us to pay attention to Bill  C-69 7  INSIDE  NEW*  And not a word about death 3  Women's centres funding up in the air 3  Benefits extended to gay, lesbian partners 4  AIDS: news from the epidemic 5  FEATURE  H^m  ?  Family law: no time and no money 5  by Heidi Walsh and Agnes Huang  Ever heard of Bill C-69? 7  by Lorraine Michael  Sport: a difficult track for women 8  by Marjorie Blackwood  By bringing together many voices 10  by Maureen A. Maloney  ement Matters.  it's News?   f Linda Choquette  Wake Up Screening.  by Zainub Verjee  ARTS  Threnody: lamenting the Montre'al murders 12  by Margot Lacroix  Creation Fire: poetry by Caribbean women 13  by Andrea Fatona  The Heidi Chronicles in review 14  by Meg Edwards  Telling It: a book/conference in review 15  by Gladys We  etin Board   compiled by Donna Dykeman  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  of  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Sft precedm  Clearing house  on femicide  In response to the December 6,1989 massacre of women in Montreal, the Berkeley  Clearinghouse on Femicide has been established. Dedicated to confronting the problem of woman-killing in the US and worldwide, the Clearinghouse plans to carry out  both activist and educational work. Contributions of any sort regarding femicide, written or taped, are welcome.  For further information contact: Chris  Domingo, Co-ordinator, Clearinghouse on  Femicide, PO Box 12342, Berkeley, California, 94701-3342, USA.  for research,  develop't  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated in December and January:  Cathy Alpaugh • Elizabeth Baerg • Crossland Consulting • Susan Craige • Gail Cryer •  Helene Dostaler • Anne Fach • Chris Gainor • Daiborah Honeyman • Nola Johnston •  Leslie Kemp • Rowena Macpherson • Dr. Kathryn McCannell • Sheila McFadzean • Barbara Jo May • Sara Menzel • Mardyn Ofery • Sandra Oliver • Lisa Olsen • Tracy Potter • Margaret Rankin • Jackie Seymour • Sally Shamai • Simon Fraser Student Society • Margaret Slight • Telephone Employees Community Fund • Sarah Tessaro • Gislela  Theurer • Michele Valiquette ♦ Patricia Webb • Cathy Welch • Western Canadian Feminist Counselling Association • Cecilia Yung  Caribbean assoc.  for action, research  African women  The Caribbean Association for Feminist Research and Action was established in 1980 and has since brought together academics, media watch groups,  researchers, crisis centres, advocates and  artists. CAFRA's aim is to show how the  exploitative relationships between men and  women facilitates exploitative capitalist relations, and how the capitalist system benefits from this situation, and to develop an alternative approach to the analyses of these  relations.  CAFRA is also working to promote the  interrelationship between research and action, to bring a feminist perspective to bear  on the work of existing progressive organizations, to shatter the myth that "feminism  divides the struggle," and to foster greater  communication and collaboration on events  and issues relevant to the femimst movement.  Currently, CAFRA is developing a data  base in an effort to document the Caribbean  women's movement and the issues relevant  to it. To contact CAFRA, write at PO Bag  442, Tunapuna Post Office, Trinidad and  Tobago, West Indies.  The Association of African Women for  Research and Development (AAWORD)  critically appraises and researches issues  pertaining to African women's roles in the  struggle for change in African society and  in North-South relations. AAWORD calls  for the participation of all African women  and emphasizes their presence in all political, economic, social and cultural processes  of change.  AAWORD has a number of research  working groups which members can join  based on the area in which they are specialized or interested. Some of AAWORD's  activities have included a workshop on Rural Development and Women in Africa, in  Dakar, and research on women and the media in Africa, AAWORD also offers a quarterly bilingual newsletter, ECHO, along  with a bi-annual journal.  For more information about AAWORD,  write: BP 3304, Dakar, Senegal.  -—   FOR  riMINIST  THE0RY&  ITERATURE  P£irT£lCUS  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B1H6 TEL. 688-6138  Kinesis  Women of  Colour  Caucus  next meeting:  Monday, February 4  7p.m.  at 301-1720 Grant St.  contact Terrie at 321-0575  for more information  ROBIN  QOLDFARB rm  Registered   Massage   Therapist  m\  731-7838  zJr=Jr=Jf=Jr=Jr=Jf=Jr=^r=Jp=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=3T^JF  CROSSLAND CONSULTING  Persona! Management  Services for Artists  Individuals Resumes  Arts Organizations Career Counselling  Grant and Proposal Writing Bookkeeping Services  ¥ FIRST CONSULTATION FREE*  By Appointment Only  Jackie Crossland  435-2273  CCEC Credit Union  IVs that time of year again...  Your RRSP investment at  CCEC will help promote  economic development in  our community.  • Excellent pates on fixed and  variable terms  • Instant tax receipts  • No user fees  • RRSP loans available  (^Deadline:   Friday,   March   1,   1991_J)  RRSPs can be used for more than just retirement funds. RRSPs are  excellent savings plans to provide funds while you are  unemployed or on parental leave. They can help finance your  education or help defer unexpected income.  Don't wait until the deadline — come in and  talk to us soon about your financial future.  Ml^*fc^Hfi^bJnW«f!mS  t-Learn How To Facilitate  Assertiveness Groups ♦  Vancouver Status of Women is looking for women interested in  facilitating our Assertiveness Groups on a volunteer basis.  We are offering a Facilitator's Training Program involving two  skills workshops followed by a six-week practice group (one  night per week).  Workshops will be held: Thurs. April 21st - 5:30-10pm  Sat. April 23rd - 10am-5pm  Practice group to follow  There is no charge, and childcare is provided.  Please register by Thurs. Feb. 14th. 255-6554.   Ask for Trisha.  2250 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9 • Telephone 254-4100  XTO/lTX     SCREEN PRINT  /^\^4/r<\\   -DESIGN  rj^fy&P &    STUDIO®  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  milaacos  1108 Commercial Drive  255-8168  A Latin American-Canadian  enterprise, MILAGROS offers  uniquely designed silver and  bead jewellery, handicrafts  from Nicaragua, and weavings  and finely made clothing from  Guatemala. Come see the  products of co-ops and  solidarity.  Tues-Fri 11-6  Sat 10-7   Sun 12-6  10% off with this ad.  KINESIS yyyyyyy/yyy/yyyyyyyyyy/y/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/y/yyyy/yyyyyyy^  /yyyyyyy///////////////y/y//y//////yyy/yy/yyy  yyyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyyy/y/y  NEWS  Engulfed  And not a word about death  by Fiona Gold  and Nancy Pollak  Arab-Canadians for a Just Peace at the January 12 peace rally in Vancouver  Girls just wanna have funds  by Nancy Pollak  February 1990: women's centres throughout the country face  closure after losing 100 percent  of their operational funding from  the federal Secretary of State  Women's Program. After months  of highly public protests, the funding is temporarily restored.  February 1991: women's centres throughout the country face  closure after losing 100 percent  of their operational funding from  the federal Secretary of State  Women's Program.  Perhaps.  As Kinesis goes to press, feminists are wondering if February will be the copy-cat month,  as women's centres in British  Columbia, the Yukon, Nova Scotia and Newfoundland once again  wonder if they will be able to pay  their 1991-92 rent, salaries and  overhead.  The answer, if it ever comes,  rests with the federal and provincial governments—which have so  far failed to develop cost-sharing  agreements designed to keep women's centres open. Neither Secretary of State Gerry Weiner nor  any of his provincial counterparts  have committed themselves to operational funding, despite a year of  intense lobbying on the part of the  centres.  In BC, the minister responsible for Women's Programs has  reiterated that the Social Credit  government will not provide core  funding. However, Carol Gran announced at a January meeting of  the BC and Yukon Association  of Women's Centres (BCYAWC)  that the government will provide  a $300,000 Special Community  Projects fund for the centres.  The $300,000 is earmarked for  one-time only projects by women's  centres to address the major areas  of concern outlined by Gran's Advisory Committee on Community-  Based Programs for Women-  violence against women, child  care, education, training and counselling.  The BCYAWC, which will coordinate funding applications for  the special projects on behalf of its  30 member centres, was cautiously  pleased by Gran's announcement.  "This money will be very useful ... and we are delighted with  the provincial government's recognition of the work we're doing,"  said Sally Mackenzie, spokesperson for the BCYAWC.  "However, if women's centres  do not receive operational funding,  they will have to run these projects  from the street."  The BCYAWC has developed  a federal/provincial cost-sharing  funding proposal which has been  circulated to politicians and ministry officials.  Representatives of women's centres have been hard-pressed to get  any definite information from Secretary of State Gerry Weiner, despite an October meeting where he  suggested funding news would be  forthcoming in December.  According to SecState spokesperson Len Westerberg, "No deadlines or schedules have been set  out" to determine if, when or  how Ottawa and the provinces  will provide women's centres with  core funding. Westerberg acknowledged that Ottawa's attention is  now focused on the war in the Persian Gulf.  The Conservatives tried to  justify last year's cuts to the  Women's Program, which also  affected feminist publishers, research and advocacy groups, as  "deficit-reduction" measures.  With the war costing an estimated $90 million a month, feminists and other social activists are  expecting the worst in the upcoming budget, which will probably be  delayed until March.  Women's centres in Newfoundland have also submitted core  funding applications to SecState  which are actually higher than  what they received last year—and  more realistic, given the centres'  work load. As well, they have made  a proposal to the provincial Ministry of Social Services that would  provide for a social worker in the  centres to do direct service and  counselling work. (SecState has argued that the service work of centres is a provincial, not a federal,  responsibility.)  In effect, a ministry social  worker would be seconded to the  centre, at no extra expense to the  province.  "Under our secondment proposal, the women's centres would  do the hiring and set the [job description] of the social worker,"  said Joyce Hancock of the Bay St.  George centre. The ministry has  expressed some interest in the proposal.  Centres in Nova Scotia also formally approached their provincial  government for operational funding for service deUvery. Four centres applied for salary and overhead to the Community Services  ministry, as well as to SecState for  their advocacy work.  Lucille Harper of Antigonish explained how the province's political climate—the ruling Tories have  been embroiled in a leadership  race—has left the women's centres' proposal dangling. "All the  candidates are saying they'll 'live  within their means', "said Harper.  "And they say that if the feds  don't come through with operational funding, they won't either."  The Concerned Women of  BC, the group which coordinated the Vancouver campaign  to restore Women's Program  funding in 1990, is meeting on  Tuesday, Feb. 19 to discuss the  current situation. See Bulletin  Board for details.  The roots are historical, economic and cultural.  The history is one of imperialism, the economics are of greed,  and the cultures are racist and,  emphatically, patriarchal.  The war in the Persian Gulf,  which erupted at a seemingly irrational pace, is in fact as understandable as wars ever are. Also  understandable is that ordinary  citizens surely do not need this  war, and rulers just as surely do.  The rulers, in this case, are  elected and self-appointed presidents, prime ministers, generals  and chief executive officers of corporations.  The citizens, happily, are reacting with outrage. Anti-war  protests in North America and Europe have been huge: 200,000 people in Bonn, 175,000 in San Francisco, 150,000 in Washington, DC,  and 15,000 in Vancouver on January 26—to mention a few.  The rulers talk about the liberation of Kuwait, respect for international law, loyalty to our  troops, and "collateral losses"—a  euphemism for people you didn't  mean to kill.  The citizens say end all illegal  occupations in the Middle East,  give economic sanctions against  Iraq time to work, hold a peace  conference, not a war, and "we  won't die for Texaco."  Feminists have raised a loud cry.  The National Action Committee  on the Status of Women, an umbrella organization of several hundred women's groups, quickly issued an anti-war statement.  "While George Bush and Saddam Hussein continue their macho  posturing," said NAC, "the lives  of women and children in the Middle East hang in the balance. Men  are making the decisions ... but  estimates are that the majority of  casualties will be women and children. Not only death, but massive  environmental destruction will result from this war."  lr=Jr=lr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=]r=lr=]|=Jf=Jr=^  ...end all illegal  occupations in  the Middle East...  zJr=Jr=Jr=Jr=Jr=]r=Jr=Ji=Jr=Jr=Jr^IrS  NAC has called on women's  groups to organize women's actions against the war, up to and including civil disobedience. On January 18, women held demonstrations or occupied government offices in Calgary, Toronto, Halifax,  Fredericton, Ottawa, St. John's,  Saskatoon, Vancouver and Edmonton. Peace activists are not  counting on the mainstream media  to report their story. "The media  makes the peace movement look  marginal, " said organizer Cynthia Flood of the Vancouver-based  Middle East Peace Action.  Indeed, between the media's apparent fixation on hardware and  rigid military censorship, very httle substantial information about  the war is getting through. For instance:  • Iraqi civilian casualties. The US-  led coalition would have us believe  only Iraqi buildings and troops  have been hit by the most extensive bombing since world war two.  • Refugees are virtually invisible.  Hundreds of thousands of "foreign workers"—many women from  Third World countries—have been  forced out of Kuwait and Iraq, and  into Jordanian camps.  • Third World economies are  badly hurt by the disruption in the  oil trade—poor countries getting  poorer because the US wants to  ensure control of Gulf oil supplies.  • With the US spending billions  and Canada an extra $60 million  each month, domestic social programs will soon come under the  ax.  The damage is everywhere and  takes many forms. Arab-Canadians have complained officially to  Ottawa about harassment by the  RCMP and CSIS. Hana Saad, a  Lebanese women studying at the  University of BC, and Lina Nah-  has, a Palestinian student, are affected both by the war and racist  attitudes toward Arab people.  "I really just see [the war] as  an offense to the Arab world, not  just to defend Kuwait" said Saad.  "Saddam Hussein did not have the  right to invade Kuwait, but this  conflict didn't need to take on  these proportions."  Said Nahhas, "The first thing  [for Canadians] to do is to truly  look into our culture, where we  come from, our religion, our  history—and then make judgements."  Nahhas has been forced to reevaluate Canada's preferred image of itself as a peace-maker. "I  thought of Canada as a peaceful country trying to be independent," she said. "Now, when  I think of Mulroney, I think of  Bush."  Prime Minister Brian Mulroney's stated reasons for leading  Canada into the Gulf war included  enforcing the UN resolution that  Iraq withdraw from Kuwait (for  the sake of maintaining the UN's  credibihty), and not allowing Iraqi  aggression to go unchecked.  In fact, many critics consider  the UN resolution authorizing the  use of force against Iraq—the January 15th deadline—to be httle  more than American manipulation  and a possible violation of the  UN Charter itself: the UN cannot  "authorize" offensive wars and,  further, the US-coalition armies,  while supposedly enforcing a UN  resolution, are not under UN command. If anything can hurt the  UN's credibihty as an agent for  peace, this war can.  "Mulroney's embarrassing willingness to side with Bush," said  Cynthia Flood, "is consistent  with historical relations between  See GULF page 4  KINESIS NEWS  in  Some spousal  benefits, but not all  by Birgit Schinke  On October 25, 1990, Vancouver City Council agreed that the  partners of gay and lesbian civic  employees were eligible for benefit  coverage, including dental and extended health care.  The Council's decision came after a successful presentation by  the Affirmative Action Commitee  for Women in the Civic Workforce, whose brief pointed out that  Council had the power to end  the unequal treatment of gay and  lesbian employees by simply interpreting existing union contract  language to include gay partners in  any benefits available to the partners of civic employees.  Activists such as employee Judy  Lynn, who presented the brief,  were very pleased with Council's decision. However, gay and  lesbian employees continue to  face discrimination because the  province's medical coverage—the  Medical Services Plan (MSP) does  not recognize homosexual families.  As a result, the partners and  children of gay and lesbian employees continue to be ineligible for  basic health care coverage, unhke  their heterosexual counterparts.  At the urging of the Affirmative Action Committee, Vancouver  Council agreed to ask the provincial government to apply the Medical Services Plan in a manner  which did not discriminate on the  basis of sexual orientation. Council wrote to premier Vander Zalm  on this matter in December.  To date, the premier has not responded.  The discrimination embedded  in the Medical Services Plan will  be difficult to challenge. The  province's Human Rights Act does  not include sexual orientation as  Qu^&Jfri  a prohibited ground of discrimination, nor does federal human rights  legislation. Without the moral and  literal leverage of human rights  protection, challenging the MSP  will hkely be an uphill battle.  Yet there are precedents for  non-discriminatory benefits coverage. Both the Ontario and Yukon  governments have extended benefits to all spouses/partners of pubhc servants. These changes were  facilitated by the fact that both  the Yukon and Ontario have NDP  MSP does  not recognize  homosexual  families  governments who, in response to  pressure from gay and lesbian  rights groups, amended their human rights legislation to prohibit  discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation.  Although Vancouver Council  agreed to extend family benefits,  there have been difficulties deciding on a definition of "same- sex  partner". In the past, heterosexual couples have been accepted  on their word (that they are, in  fact, a couple hving together). The  benefits department has expressed  concerns that ineligible employees  may now start applying for coverage.  Marilyn Clark, Assistant Director of Vancouver's Benefits Administration, has suggested that  a workable definition of same-sex  partner be anyone you have cohabited with for one year and with  ,2iJ<^A^^g  whom you have been publicly represented.  Judy Lynn of the Committee  on Affirmative Action for Women  opposes Clark's definition on the  grounds that "public representation" is a privilege not available to  all gay men and lesbians, since fear  of homophobic reactions causes  some gay people to not be open  about their relationships.  Lynn knows of one co-worker  who would not apply for coverage  in order to protect the privacy of  his partner who is not "publicly  represented." Lynn also feels that  because the definition does not  mention "homosexual," only those  people famihar with the changes in  benefit qualification would grasp  the intended meaning of the definition. To date Lynn's concerns have  not received a response.  On December 6, 1990 Vancouver women and children joined with  other communities across Canada in vigils to remember the Montreal  massacre of 14 women at the Ecole Polytechnique in 1989  GULF from page 3  Canada and the US." Mulroney  has displayed a level of enthusiasm  to complying with US wishes that  is breathtaking—or is it simply  practical, from a Tory viewpoint?  Canada was recently invited to  join free trade talks between the  US and Mexico, and trade analysts have credited Canada's swift,  unquestioning support for US gulf  pohcy for easing the way.  Canada's involvement in the  war has also provided a timely distraction from domestic problems.  "For the Tories," said Flood,  "this war is a godsend. It provides an attractive diversion from  the recession, the GST, the effects  of free trade. It allows [the government] to say, 'sacrifices are required during times of crisis ... we  have to show loyalty to our overseas troops.' "  Indeed, Canadian opinion about  the war shifted from being strongly  opposed  before  the  January  16  outbreak, to moderately supportive of Canada's fighting role in the  week after.  Other shifts were observable on  the Canadian scene as well. The  federal Liberals, who initially took  a strong stand against Canadian  troops playing any role other than  enforcing the UN embargo, ultimately voted with the Tories in  favour of a parliamentary motion affirming support for the  UN resolution—a motion which  implied support for an offensive  combat role for Canadian armed  forces.  The New Democratic Party is  standing firm in its opposition to  the war.  The Canadian peace movement is taking a variety of approaches. The Canadian Peace Alliance has called for the government's resignation; Conscience  Canada encourages people to  withhold the portion of their  taxes which support military expenditures  (about  8.6  percent);  protestors have targeted government buildings, armed forces recruitment centres, politician's offices and armories; defense committees are being established to  protect Arab-Canadians and antiwar activists from surveillance and  harassment—along with the usual  demonstrations and letter-writing  campaigns.  "The adrenalin rush of the last  few weeks will wear off, " said  Flood. Building and maintaining  the anti-war momentum will be,  she said, " a long, painful, slow  process."  Just hke the war.  Why war?  The modern borders of Iraq and  Kuwait were "invented" by Britain  earlier this century—part of the  legacy of western imperialism in  the region. And what has the US  been doing in the Middle East?  The US has a record of (covertly)  switching allegiances between Iran  and Iraq in order to prevent either country from gaining control  of oil suppUes, threatening pro-  American regimes, and tampering  with the Arab-Israeli balance.  The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait  appears to have been most useful to the American establishment.  The sputtering American economy  is bound to defense spending, US  corporations want a steady supply  of oil—and the US military wants  a presence in the Gulf.  The tool the Americans seized  to justify war was the UN. Yet  the US has a selective approach  to UN resolutions, having vetoed  resolutions that relate to Israel's  occupation of the West Bank and  Gaza, and others relating to US  aggression against Nicaragua and  Panama.  See Bulletin Board for information about who to contact re:  anti-war activities.  4 KINESIS News  /yy//yyy////y//yy/yyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyy  Family law:  No time or money for justice  by Heidi Walsh & Agnes Huang  A battered woman in Hazelton seeking  a divorce is told no lawyers in the area  are taking that kind of legal aid case.  A legal aid lawyer is occasionally flown  in from Vancouver, but this woman's circumstances, hke so many involving family disputes, is complicated—too complicated for the lawyer's infrequent visits. The  woman can't afford long distance calls to  the lawyer's Vancouver office and growing  despondent, she drops the case.  In the Lower Mainland, a committed feminist lawyer makes a wrenching decision.  After having accepted family law legal aid  cases for years, she will not take on any  more. The tariff fee paid to her by the  Legal Services Society (LSS) doesn't even  cover her overhead, and she is heading for  burnout.  There is a crisis in family law legal' aid  in British Columbia. Women who can't afford the legal fees to extricate themselves  from abusive marriages or to go the distance  in a drawn out custody and access dispute  should not count on the government-funded  legal aid program to help them out.  ... women are  pressured to settle  out of court  There are too few lawyers willing to accept the low fees paid by LSS. Underfunding  isn't the only problem. Family law disputes  drain money, emotions and time, and are  often an ugly miniaturization of the power  imbalances between men and women in this  society.  Spokesperson Jim O'Hara of the Ministry  of the Attorney General claims that legal  aid is an extremely important priority in his  ministry, which funds LSS, but the number  of scenarios hke the ones above continues to  grow.  Last year, eligibility requirements for  family law legal aid were loosened. Prior  to 1990, only people who fell below the  "poverty hne" as defined by Stats Canada  and who could also prove an urgent need for  legal aid received the services. Now, more  people who are "over" the hne are being accepted under the more flexible guidelines.  But loosening the eligibility criteria did  not address the shortage of lawyers accepting family law legal aid cases. Kurt Neuen-  feldt, acting director of Chent Services at  LSS, says that despite the increase in legal aid applications and approvals, there has  been no major increase in the number of  lawyers accepting family law legal aid cases.  The key obstacles in motivating lawyers  to accept legal aid cases are the meager tariff rate and the fews hours which the lawyers  can bill to LSS.  According to Megan Elhs, a Vancouver  lawyer no longer willing to take on such  cases, family law legal aid lawyers are only  compensated 10-25 percent of what they  would normally charge chents with httle  money.  The LSS, which sets the tariff, operates  under budget constraints. "An adequately  funded system would need not less than  double our current budget of $40 million,"  says LSS's executive director Jack Olsen.  Lawyer Ruth Lea Taylor, an 11-year veteran of legal aid, beheves that legal services  should be funded hke medicare and that  lawyers not practising legal aid should contribute to the funding. Requiring lawyers to  devote a percentage of their practice to taking on legal aid cases is another approach to  the problem.  Increasing the tariff rate to reflect the actual time lawyers put into the cases would  be a start to improving women's access  to legal aid. As Elhs says: "If family law  paid, we'd have lots of lawyers doing it.  This would provide women with a lot more  lawyers to choose from."  But family law cases are also unappealing  to many lawyers because they are complex,  emotionally trying and time-consuming.  Reaching a settlement takes months, sometimes years. As a consequence, women fighting for custody, battered women and immi  grant women are often underrepresented by  legal aid.  The shortage of family law lawyers is  particularly acute in smaller communities.  In some places, no private lawyers practice  family law. In others, legal aid lawyers have  returned case files as their discouragement  with the system grows. The result is that  many women have to travel to the next community to obtain legal counsel.  In the city and small towns, many women  making legal aid applications just want information about the law, advice and sympathetic counselling. If a woman has already  worked out a course of action, she can often be helped. H not, Legal Services cannot provide adequate counselhng—indeed,  few social services exist outside the Lower  Mainland to provide basic, free counselling  to women facing a family law crisis.  Sue Egers of the Women's Resources Society in Port Alberni recalls incidents in  which husbands involved in marital disputes  arrange consultations with the few local  law firms with legal aid lawyers. The firms  then cannot represent the women involved  in the dispute due to a conflict of interest—  which is just the result the husbands sought.  "These women have to go to Parksville or  Nanaimo to find another lawyer, but often  they don't have a car and can't afford to pay  for other transportation," says Egers. Often  they give up in frustration.  News from the AIDS crisis  by Robin Barnett  Until recently there has been relatively  httle concern about the risks of HIV transmission from rape. (The HIV virus is beheved to be the cause of AIDS.) AIDS workers have not heard of many such cases and  since men often do not ejaculate during assault, it was thought the possibility of transmission was very low.  At the World AIDS Day conference  in Winnipeg last December, a number of  women hving with HIV infection spoke  about their personal experiences. One  woman from Hahfax and another from Winnipeg talked of having been sexually assaulted in the months prior to testing positive for HIV. Neither one had had many sexual partners. The Hahfax woman has been  speaking publicly as a woman with HIV  since the spring of 1990, but only recently  began to talk about the rape.  Women hving with HIV or AIDS find  it very difficult to come forward and expose themselves to public scrutiny. They  face tremendous obstacles because they can  be stigmatized: the general public and the  media are often only interested in how  they contracted HIV. Throughout history,  women have been chastized for being sexual as well as being blamed for the spread  of sexually transmitted diseases.  Women with HIV/AIDS are usually very  isolated. There is no natural community  among these women since they come from  an incredible range of backgrounds, ages  and communities, and often they lack a support network.  It is difficult enough for a woman to come  forward and identify as HIV-positive—just  as it is difficult for a woman to come forward  and state that she has been sexually assaulted. Once again, she risks being blamed  and exposes herself to people's judgments.  Despite dramatic and exploitative coverage in the media, the women hving with  HIV who have been sexually assaulted are  concerned that their stories be heard. They  want women to be aware that any woman  is at risk for HIV, and that women who  have been raped need counselhng about  HIV transmission.  Women who have been raped and are  worried about the possibihty of being infected might want to use a spermicide containing nonoxynol 9 after the assault. The  spermicide might kill the HIV virus, and its  use would not affect legal evidence.  Women and Oral Sex  People who study HIV/AIDS are beginning  to take a more cautious approach to HlV  transmission through oral sex.  See AIDS page 6  Even when a legal aid lawyer agrees to  take on her case, there is no guarantee the  woman's best interests will be served. Ajax  Quinby of Munroe House, a second stage  transition house in Vancouver, sees a lot  of women with children going through the  family law mill. While there are some very  good legal aid lawyers, says Quinby, the low  tariff rate means that some lawyers do minimum work on family law cases.  As a result, women are pressured to settle out of court to avoid lengthy trials, and  to agree to consent orders providing them  with less than they'd normally accept.  LSS's Neuenfeldt says: "H you pay a low  fee, you're going to have to ask yourself  whether or not you're going to get the same  quality of service." As there are few veterans of family law legal aid, women are often  represented by less-experienced lawyers.  Criminal law legal aid is not facing the  same crisis as family law. Lawyers are more  willing to take on cases in this area because  they are less complicated and emotionally-  involving. Most of the applicants for criminal law are men, while the majority of applicants for family law are women.  The rights of women and their children  are not sufficiently protected, and as a result, many are left hving in poverty. Susan  Milhken of SCRAPS, a children's rights advocacy group, agrees: "Single mothers often don't get the legal representation they  need to help protect their children's rights.  Women and their children are unable to get  the financial support that they are entitled  to."  Women in Vancouver can contact  the Vancouver Status of Women (251-  5511) or the Battered Women's Support Services (734-1574) for a referral  to feminist lawyers who do family law  on a legal aid basis.  Heidi Walsh and Agnes Huang live  and write in Vancouver  KINESIS XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^  Across Canada  WHAT" S NEWS?  by Linda Choquette  Challenging  the Indian Act  Sharon Mclvor, a BC Native lawyer,  launched a court challenge in December  to the registration provisions of the Indian Act on the basis that they violate  her Charter rights to race and sex equality. Mclvor's challenge is being sponsored  by the Women's Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF).  The case will challenge the "second generation cut-off" rule in the Indian Act. The  "cut-off" arose from the 1985 amendments  to the Indian Act, known as Bill C-31.  The "second generation cut-off" rule was  meant that the children of individuals whose  Indian hneage comes through the maternal rather than the paternal hne cannot be  registered as status Indians under the Indian Act. Under the rule, individuals who  have a parent who lost Indian status because their father was non-Indian or because their mother married a non-Indian,  once reinstated as a status Indian cannot  pass Indian status onto their children.  If Mclvor's grandfather, rather than her  grandmother, had been status Indian, her  children could be registered. As the Act  stands, Ms Mclvor's son and daughter cannot be registered.  The children of over 45,500 new registrants under the Indian Act are affected by  the "second generation cut-off."  "As was argued at the time of legislative  reform in 1985, it is clearly sex discrimination to make entitlement to Indian status  contingent on the gender of your Indian ancestor," says Ardyth Cooper, West Coast  LEAF spokesperson.  The Native Council of Canada, the Assembly of First Nations and the Native  Women's Association of Canada are all supporting Mclvor's challenge to the Indian  Act.  Wage gap still  big, virtually  unchanged  The gender wage gap is virtually unchanged since 1984 when women working  full time earned 65.6 percent of what men  were paid. The Statistics Canada report released in the last week of December compared 1989 figures with those of five years  earlier and found the gap had narrowed only  0.2 percentage points.  Phebe-Jane Poole, of the employment  equity committee at the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC),  called the tiny decrease shocking. "It proves  that employers are doing absolutely nothing  to change their discriminatory pay practices  and will do httle on their own initiatives."  In recent years, the federal government  and some provinces has passed laws so that  women will be paid the same as men working in jobs determined to require equal responsibihties, skills and education. But pay  equity requirements in most provinces, including British Columbia, apply only to  public sector employees. Ontario legislation extends to some private sector workplaces, but leaves out hundreds of thousands  of women in small companies or female-  dominated occupations.  Equity laws are having httle effect,  said Poole. The figures show the need to  strengthen federal and provincial pay equity  legislation and to extend the laws' reach to  cover all women, she said.  Other figures in the StatsCan report  show that the wage difference was the narrowest in the teaching profession—a female dominated occupation—where men  earn only 13 percent more. The gap was  widest in service jobs where women earn  53.2 percent of what men are paid.  Women university graduates earned an  average of 69.5 percent of what men with  degrees earned, and women with less than  eight years of school earned 59.5 percent of  what men at that level earn.  Canadian men working full time earn an  average of $35,073. The average wage for  women working full time is $23,091.  Getting tough  on defaulters  Ontario spouses who fail to make support payments will see them deducted from  their pay cheques. The new regulations, introduced in December, will apply to all  new court orders in the province as well as  cases already on record. Voluntary support  agreements will also be enforceable with the  new procedure. Under the regulations, employers will deduct child and spousal support payments directly from employees' pay  The procedure, unique in Canada, does  not apply to self-employed people, including  professionals, unless income is in the form of  commissions, insurance payments or other  periodic payments. As well, spouses who  leave the province could evade the tough  new measures which carry non-compliance  penalties for both employers and spouses.  Michele Fisher, a spokeswoman for the  Family Service Association of Metro Toronto, called the deduction system good news,  "particularly for mothers trying to support  their children."  Rhonda Freeman, speaking for Families  in Transition, said, "We know from Statistics Canada that women and children in  separated families are the fastest-growing  group hving in poverty in the country."  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you - proofreading  tOhesfs.  Piease call  I fcflfUWMf  Child poverty is a pressing issue for all  provinces. Two-thirds of families led by a  single mother hve below the poverty hne  and in Toronto, one of every 10 children  must rely on food banks.  Not only are court-ordered support payments often inadequate, but an appalling  number of men ignore their legal obligations  altogether. About 100,000 Ontario children  are affected by support orders, and according to the provincial attorney general only  20,000 of them are getting all they are owed.  The government believes the new deduction  system will bring the enforcement rate up  to 60 percent.  The NDP government's attorney general,  responsible for bringing in the law, said  other provincial attorneys-general had not  been consulted about making the deduction  procedure a national plan. "There's an urgent need to put our house in order...maybe  we can lead by example."  Ont. extends  benefits to gay,  lesbian partners  Under Ontario's new NDP government,  gay spouses of unionized pubhc service employees are now entitled to coverage under  the employee benefits package.  Coverage includes dental insurance, dependent hfe insurance, extended medical  and bereavement leave but stops short of  survivor pension benefits. The federal Department of Revenue ruled against these  benefits.  "What we're going to take as a next step  is a review of the pertinent pohcies and legislation that involve the issue of spousal definition," said Frances Larkin, Management  Board Chairperson. "But we didn't want  to wait in making the important internal  changes. Our intent is to move to reflect the  diversity in our society and to ensure that  our laws are not applied in a discriminatory  way."  Insurance companies involved estimate  that fewer than 2 percent of the 60,000  union members will be affected. The government does not expect any significant cost  Incest survivor  wins right  to appeal  The Supreme Court of Canada will hear  the appeal of a Guelph, Ontario woman who  lost a sexual abuse lawsuit against her father because the province's statute of limitations had run out. Under the law, a victim  must bring suit against the offender within  four years after the assault(s).  Gloria Hazell of Guelph's Adult Victims  of Childhood Sexual Abuse, was pleased  with the Supreme Court decision. "Incest  is a breach of trust and duty on the part  of a parent. Standing violated and without  parental protection, a survivor of this crime  must be accorded a limitation period commencing with recognition of the harm done.  Anything less is not equal justice."  The unidentified survivor was eight years  old when the assaults began in 1966. She  sued her father in 1985, and the jury  awarded her $50,000 for the assaults, which  ended in 1974. The case was subsequently  overturned by the Ontario Court of Appeal  because of the statute of limitations restriction.  Ariel Books  At the beginning  of March 1991  Ariel Books  moves to  1988 W. 4th  (between Maple & Yew)  733-3511  KINESIS  AIDS from page 5  For women, this concerns oral sex with  men or with women. Oral sex has been  thought of as a low risk activity (for men  and women) yet researchers in San Francisco have found several cases of transmission between men which are causing them  to question the low risk label.  Dr. Donald Francis of the Centres for  Disease Control (CDC) in Atlanta, Georgia, talked about these cases at the November AIDS Conference in Vancouver. Francis  noted gum disease as a factor but not in all  cases. When asked about oral sex performed  on women, he had no facts, but indicated  that the CDC is now being more cautious  about risks of transmission from oral sex.  In the lesbian community, there are  women hving with HIV/AIDS. However,  most of them were infected by sharing  needles or by having unsafe sex with  men. There are three documented cases  of woman-to-woman transmission in the  United States. ("Documented" means they  have been investigated by government researchers.) All three cases involved oral sex.  One woman had gum disease and the two  others had partners who were menstruating.  In these cases, oral sex was risky because  blood was exchanged between the women.  A woman with cuts, scratches or rashes  on her hands could possibly become infected from contact with a partner's blood  or vaginal juices. However, our bodies' natural healing process closes hangnails and minor cuts on the hands quickly, so such contact is not a big concern for transmission.  During March, the city of Vancouver  plans an AIDS awareness campaign directed  at women. As part of those activities the  Women and AIDS Project will present a  workshop for women who have sex with  women. This workshop looks at how to assess your risks for HIV, how to talk with  a partner, difficulties in getting a partner  to practice safer sex, enjoying your lovehfe  and making sex safer. Exercises give practical information about what to say and what  to do.  The workshop will be held at the  Women's Health Collective in March,  Please phone the Women and AIDS  Project for more information and the  date of the workshop, 255-9811.  Robin Barnett is on staff at the  Vancouver-based Women and AIDS  Project. News  /yyy/yyyy///yy/yyyyyyyyy/yy//yyyyyyyy-  Listen up:  Ever heard of Bill C-69?  by Lorraine Michael  Since March, 1990 the death knell for  Canada's health, education and social services programs has quietly tolled on Parliament Hill as BiU C-69 (The Government  Expenditure Restraint Act) moves unobtrusively through the legislative machinery.  Passed by the House of Commons on  June 12 last year, Bill C-69 is now in Senate hearings, awaiting final consent before  becoming law.  According to a wide range of social activists, C-69 would result in the end of the  national standards which ensure access to  relatively good public health care (medicare), education and social services, including day care and welfare.  The agenda of this bill, which opponents  say is hidden in a complex formula that lay  persons would balk at reading, would result  in the end to federal financial contributions  to major social programs by the year 2004.  The federal Conservatives justify Bill C-  69 as one of the measures it needs to reduce government spending and thereby help  reduce the deficit. Health Minister Perrin  Beatty has denied any suggestion that the  government is doing anything to undermine  medicare. Rather, he sees the bill as a way  for the provinces to take on some of the  weight of the debt-servicing that Ottawa  carries.  British Columbians should be particularly concerned since this province is one  of the three designated by the federal government to have immediate limits placed  on federal monies for social assistance payments (welfare) and social services.  The organizations fighting C-69 read hke  a who's who of concerned citizens, including  the Assembly of First Nations, the Canadian Day Care Advocacy Association, the  Canadian Federation of Students and the  National Action Committee on the Status  of Women.  Bill C-69 has been welcomed by the Business Council on National Issues which "supports the government's plan to limit transfer payments to the provinces" as a means  of reducing the deficit.  Opposition to C-69 continues to grow. At  a December, 1990 press conference in Van  couver, an ad hoc coalition of labour and  community organizations concerned about  health care and poverty sounded the alarm.  The Health Care Advocates had originally  been formed to assure that a progressive  voice was heard at the BC Royal Commission on Health Care and Costs which toured  last fall.  The coalition expressed concern about  federal cutbacks to medicare, especially  in the hght of BC Finance Minister Mel  Couveher's proposed provincial "disentanglement" from federal-provincial programs  which he unveiled at a meeting of provincial finance ministers held earlier in December in Winnipeg.  The Advocates warn that "what Couve-  her and his government want is a free hand  to further cut services, impose more user  fees, and destroy the universality of medicare and social services." They point out  that such actions by provincial governments  will become more possible as federal funding  dwindles under C-69 and Ottawa loses its  only power to stop such moves—the withholding of funding.  In a paper to the BC Royal Commission by the Canadian Council on Social  Development, Dr. Sharon Manson Willms  stated categorically that: "BiU C-69 would'  have harmful consequences for aU British  Columbians, not only with respect to funding for health care and post-secondary education, but also funding for social assistance  and social services for the poor and the •  disadvantaged—particularly women, chUdren, Native people and minorities, the disabled and the elderly." Manson WUlms has  gone on record with other opponents in stating that this bUl, if it becomes law, wUl  lead to the dismanthng of Canada's medicare program.  All opponents to the bUl seem to be in  agreement that two of its major victims  wUl be women and chUdren. According to  Jean Swanson of End Legislated Poverty:  "Women are the poorest in society, so we're  the ones who wUl most be affected by a cutback in our social programs ... we're also  the ones responsible for the kids and kids  are the ones who most often have to go to  the doctor."  Most Canadians are unaware of C-69's  existence, let alone its impact.  Trisha Joel of the Vancouver Status of  Women stated: "The majority of the population is totally unaware that the federal  government is handing over responsibility  for the quality and continuity of social programs at a time when, due to recession, cuts  to the UI program and Free Trade, more  and more women wUl be needing government services."  BUl C-69 escaped public notice when it  was introduced last March as part of the  cent of the cost of welfare and social services  in British Columbia.) The Court also heard  from the governments of Alberta, Manitoba,  Ontario, the Native CouncU of Canada and  the United Native Nations BC as inter-  venors in the case.  Ottawa has appealed the lower court's  ruhng to the Supreme Court of Canada. H  that Court upholds BC's position, a major  section of C-69 could not be put into effect,  namely, the limiting (or capping) of funds  avaUable under the Canada Assistance Plan  (CAP) (see box).  federal budget—attention was focused on  cut backs in federal funding to women's and  Native groups. The bUl quietly passed third  reading in the House in June when the media had aU eyes in the country trained on  the faUing Meech Lake Accord.  The Tories may not have clear sailing to  put this bUl in place, even if it does manage to pass the Senate. On June 15, 1990  the BC Court of Appeals ruled in favour  of the BC government's challenge to C-69.  (BC had argued that the feds were legaUy  bound to contribute a minimum of 50 per-  Twenty years of self defense  Federal Justice Minister Kim CampbeU  has said she would respect the ruhng of the  Court of Appeals and hold off the capping  of CAP untU the Supreme Court ruhng. A  spokesperson from the Minister's office in  Ottawa confirmed in January that CampbeU wUl stand by this statement, though  he would add nothing else to what this wUl  mean if the bill does receive final assent before the Supreme Court hears the case.  As Kinesis goes to press, the Senate  is conducting public hearings on C-69.  To submit a brief, write to the Hon.  Fernand LeBlanc, The Senate, Parliament Bldgs., Ottawa, Ont. KlA 0A4.  For more information on C-69, write  to the Canadian Council on Social Development, 55 Parkdale Ave., PO Box  3503, Stn. C, Ottawa Ont. K1Y 4G1  by Joni Miller  When black belt Pye Bateman was asked  to teach some self defense courses for women  in Seattle back in 1971, she had no idea  where it would lead.  "I'm just the girl who couldn't say no,"  says Bateman, explaining how she came to  be founding mother of both the Feminist  Karate Union and "Alternatives to Fear"—  a self defense group. These sister organizations celebrated their 20th anniversary this  January at the University Quaker Meeting  HaU in Seattle with a public demonstration  of their skiUs.  Emerging from a common core, the  groups separated functions in the mid  1970s. Bateman now concentrates on teaching self defense skiUs, and co-ordinating  the volunteer instructors of Alternatives to  Fear. She bluntly explains the difference between self defense and karate: "If self de  fense is good, it's boring—if it's more interesting, it's less effective."  Linda Kinoier, a 37-year-old firefighter  is now the chief instructor at the Feminist  Karate Union. Kinoier began training with  the FKU as a 19-year-old. "It was purely  for social reasons," she explains. At the  time, Kinoier was a new resident of Seattle. "A young woman I worked with had a  sister who was training at the FKU," she  says. "She came back raving about aU these  wonderful, strong women. I wanted to meet  some feminists." She stayed, she says, because it was so much fun. "I was seeking  exceUence. Self defense alone wouldn't have  kept me going."  In the early days, 100 or more women  would regularly turn out for karate practices. Kinoier partiaUy attributes this popularity to the reign of terror that serial killer  Ted Bundy was inflicting on Seattle women  at the time.  "Also," she says, "we were in the early  euphoria stage of the women's movement.  The idea of fighting back against rape was  new."  FKU membership currently totals 25  adults and 15 chUdren, including four recent  black belts. (It's estimated that one martial  art student in a thousand reaches the black  belt level.)  Both Bateman and Kinoier envision their  groups existing through the next 20 years.  "I don't know what else I would do," says  Bateman.  Kinoier imagines branches of the FKU  opening up around Seattle. She'd hke to see  an expanded membership including more  women of differing ethnic backgrounds (the  group is currently almost exclusively white),  more disabled women, more older women  and more women who don't see themselves  as athletes.  Lorraine Michael is a social activist  and former community organizer from  St. John's now living and writing in  Vancouver.  What's CAP?  The Canada Assistance Plan (1966) is intended to help provinces provide adequate  welfare and social services for people in  need. CAP is one of only two national programs that explicitly helps fight poverty.  Under CAP, the federal government  agrees to share with the provinces, on  50/50 basis, the costs of welfare and social  services. BUl C-69 wUl erode federal contributions from $9 billion in 1990-91, to $0 by  2004.  KINESIS NEWS  Sport:  Difficult track for women  by Marjorie Blackwood  The presence of two of the most powerful people in Canadian sport as keynote  speakers at the women's "Leadership: Enriching the Experience" conference in Vancouver last November served as a stark contrast to the few women in management positions in this country's sport organizations.  Abby Hoffman (Director General of  Sport Canada) and Carol Anne Letheren  (President of the Canadian Olympic Association) are the first women to hold these  positions in the male-dominated world of  Canadian sport. In their speeches to the 120  women delegates, Hoffman and Letheren  conveyed messages of reality and hope for  the future.  The immediate target for women in sport  is to gain higher representation in both the  upper levels of coaching and in sport management. At present, women's voices are  drowned out in the decision-making processes, and unequal and diminished opportunities for females in sport and recreation  are a continuing reality.  The conference was organized by Promotion Plus, an office of Sport BC which  encourages girls and women in aU facets  of sport. Promotion Plus is headed by ex-  Olympian Marion Lay.  Some of the facts revealed at the conference:  • Too many tax doUars continue to go  toward facUities for highly commercialized  male sports, arenas in which women wUl  never play unless dressed as cheerleaders;  • At the 1980 Olympics, the International Olympic Committee (IOC) supported the entrance of two "feminine"  disciplines (synchronized swimming and  rhythmic gymnastics) over the petition for  soccer;  • There are only seven women on the 90  member IOC;  • Women's ice hockey and weighthfting  continue to be left out of the Canada Games  competitions;  • Of the 13 Ministers of Sport, only .5 is  a woman (she's half the Manitoba delegation of two);  • The University of Alberta recently conducted a study on attitudes toward proportional gender representation among members of Canadian sports governing bodies.  Fifty-five percent of the men responded that  women lacked qualifications for leadership  positions. Thirty-nine percent of the women  agreed with them;  • In the same study, only 24 percent of  those surveyed felt there was a need for  equal opportunity pohcies to be instituted.  The conference and its organizers take  a long view of the impact of sport in  women's hves. Their phUosophy could be  summarized by the words of author Patricia S. Griffen: "Anything we can do as  women in education to encourage girls and  women in sports is an important step in  helping females to view themselves, not  only as athletes, but also as women whose  self-perception includes physical strength,  competence, grace and confidence without  apology, without qualification, and without  compromise."  Talking with Abby Hoffman  As Director General of Sport Canada, Abby  Hoffman is in charge of an annual budget  of over $50 miUion for the development of  Canadian sport at the national and international levels. A former Olympic middle distance runner, Hoffman has competed in four  Olympic Games and won numerous medals  at the Pan American and Commonwealth  Games during the 1960s and 70s.  Abby Hoffman  KINESIS  With her flight from Ottawa delayed, she  arrived just in time to speak at the Leadership conference and then left almost immediately for ministerial meetings in Victoria. I was able to steal a few minutes from  Hoffman's hectic schedule and was pleasantly surprised by both the modesty and  somewhat self-deprecating humour of this  woman who has survived 10 years at the top  of the government's sport heap in Canada.  Marjorie Blackwood: When and why  did you decide to become involved with  Sport Canada?  Abby Hoffman: My first involvement  had actuaUy been as an athlete in the 70s  when I was pretty critical of the whole outfit, particularly their lack of support for National Team and high performance athletes  Women's ice hockey  and weighthfting  continue to be left  out of the Canada Games  [national and international-level athletes]. I  worked as a sport consultant for the Ontario  government in the late 70s and enjoyed that.  I was pretty interested in working at the upper levels of sport. Then, in 1981, the Director General for Sport Canada job came up,  and I went for it and got it.  Marjorie: How do you account for  your longevity in Sport Canada?  Abby: It has been about 10 years now—  hard to beheve. I suppose, in one sense, you  could say it's pretty hard to fire a civU servant unless they really screw up badly. But  I've stayed because I enjoy the work and  find it's a real challenge. Also, I think it's  really important that there is a strong advocate for Canadian sport in this position.  I've always felt there is a degree to which  sport, in particular commitments to high  performance sport, are almost constantly  under threat. It's not hke I got in and got  the job I wanted to accomplish done in three  years and have been coasting ever since. I  feel hke we have to fight the same battles  day after day to make sure that we continue  to get public support and funding for sport.  Marjorie: How long is an average  work week for you?  Abby: WeU...(laughter) I'm never sure  when the off-time is, to be honest, but I  probably log a good 70 hours a week...I  think about it the rest of the time, but that  doesn't bother me at aU. I'm not looking for  a big holiday.  Marjorie: Having been a top athlete  in the past, do you still push yourself  physically ?  Abby: I don't push myself physicaUy in  an athletic sense. I do quite a bit of hiking,  some that I would regard as pretty challenging. I think one thing I have carried  over from my sport is a kind of doggedness,  don't-give-up-tenaciousness. Try to see virtuaUy everything to its end. You know,  "don't be a drop-out" mentality. If someone  says no, just find another tack or tactic.  Marjorie: Last year, the Secretary of  State cut all its funding—$75,000—to  the Canadian Association for the Advancement of Women in Sport. The  government justified the cut to CAAWS  by saying that "sport and physical activity are not priorities concerning women  in Canada." What's your response?  Abby: While I don't necessarUy agree  with [the decision] of the Secretary of State,  I can see it within the context of what they  felt were the priority women's issues they  wanted to deal with.  The problem is that the case has not  been weU put by women, and indeed by  CAAWS. It was not put in a way that was  responded to properly—that is, that the issues of women and sport have a tremendous  bearing and relationship to all kinds of other  women's issues.  My own view is that the whole issue of  women in physical occupations, such as pohce officers and firefighters—jobs that require physical aptitude—is closely tied to  the issues and problems that affect the status of women in sport.  In that respect, I would say there are  some real crossover issues between women  in sport and other women's issues that [concern] the Secretary of State. Unfortunately  that case has never been conclusively made,  so CAAWS was seen as a vulnerable target  when the government did their across-the-  board operating cuts.  Marjorie: How do you begin to make  the vast social changes necessary for  equality for girls and women in sport  and recreation?  Abby: For the most part we are dealing  with incremental change. We're not going  to turn society upside down immediately—  maybe not ever. My feehng is that we need  some direct affirmative action measures to  get more women involved, particularly in  the leadership domains of organized sport.  We've done a pretty good job at the participation level—not perfect, but a lot of  progress has been made there. For all practical purposes though, the sport organizations are stiU largely controlled and managed by males. There is a lot of awareness  that must be generated. Pro-active measures that are really aimed at changing the  status quo over the next decade have got to  be instituted. Women have got to take the  buU by the horns themselves.  Marjorie: Where do you see women  in sport 20 years from now?  Abby: I don't really know. The participation side is going to continue to develop.  There wUl be a lot more women coaching.  I think there wUl be more women administrators. I'm not sure we're going to see the  management structures in sport change aU  that dramatically.  I think we wUl see a lot of progress  from today. If we have 10 percent of National Coaching positions held by women  now, I think we should expect 25-30 percent  within the next decade. In administration  we should be hitting 35-40 percent within  the same time frame.  Marjorie: What do you think this  conference will give to the women attending ?  Abby: Unfortunately, I'm only here for  one evening, but I think there are a couple  of things. One is to provide some leadership  training to the women here. The other—and  it may be just as important—is to provide a  kind of networking opportunity for women  who may not see each other that often, or  may not be aware that they share a lot of  things in terms of common experience. It  gives them an opportunity to get together  and share some information and gain support for what they are doing.  Just the fact that there are 130 women  in one room who are obviously here because  they think everything is not as it ought to  be in the world of sport and physical recreation should be some kind of message that  the powers that be wUl receive.  Marjorie Blackwood was a three-time  Canadian tennis champion (1975-78)  and is now a full-time student of English. yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  ////////////////////^^^^^  Arts  Gurinder Chadha:  Moving towards our culture  as told to Zainub Verjee  The last ten years in Britain have seen  the emergence of a new filmmaking practice,  a practice characterized by different points  of entry, different strategies, different desires and intervention. Born out of the 1981  Birmingham and Brixton "riots", this filmmaking is structured by pohtical and cultural considerations which reflect the concerns of Black communities around the issues of representation, aesthetics, class, gender and sexuahty.  The Pacific Cinematheque's December  screenings of Gurinder Chadha's I'm British, But... and A Nice Arrangement,  and Maureen Blackwood's Perfect Image  show the development of Black filmmaking  as a viable force in British film culture.  I'm British, But... concerns the unique  hybrid culture of Asians in Britain. The film  shows the hves and views of second generation British Asians intercut with Indian  film, pop videos, archival footage and the  upbeat rap of Bhangra and Bangla music.  Bhangra, which is a dynamic fusion of authentic Punjabi folk and modern.pop, provides a context for the changing British culture and a basis for this half-hour documentary.  As Gurinder Chadha says: "What I reaUy wanted to do was a pop promo. A  pop promo of one of these Indian Bhangra  bands and I chose that particular song in  I'm British, But... which is very pohtical. The more I looked at the song the more  I thought, 'I can't just do a pop promo, I  have to open it up a bit more'. I thought  I had to question Britishness and home.  It was actually belonging I was questioning. Bhangra music meant that we belonged  somewhere...I had to contextualize the music and the song. It grew and became the  film."  A Nice Arrangement is an 11 minute  work shot on 35mm, commissioned by  Britain's Channel 4 as part of an initiative  to give new potential directors an opportunity to "think big." This film is about  marriage and making choices. The film centres around Meena the young bride who  has made the choice to marry within her  Hindu community rather than wed the Mushm man she loves. Sita, her friend, has chosen to carve out an independent hfe after divorce. The screen is fiUed with scenes of Indian hfe, humour and dialogue, perhaps displaying, through the conversations between  the bride's aunt and other elderly women,  the resentment felt by those who may not  have had the same choices in their marriages.  British Asian filmmaker Chadha attended the Vancouver screenings and also  gave workshops. Kenyan-born and with a  background in radio journalism, Chadha  moved on to Channel 4 as a researcher and  then applied for the British Film Institute's  New Directors program, where she began  directing and filmmaking.  During my interview with Gurinder  Chadha, she shed hght on her work, her  community, her family and her contact with  women of colour in Vancouver. As she  spoke, new thoughts solidified about the relationships she has forged and new directions she wUl take.  Zainub Verjee: In I'm British, But...  you interviewed younger people. How  does the older generation see your  work? What does it mean to them to be  British?  Gurinder Chadha: I think they don't  [see themselves as British]—they see themselves as Indian. The film helps them understand some of the problems we faced in  terms of identity. I think that, in most cases,  people were sympathetic and parents welcomed Bhangra music because it meant that  we were re-evaluating the language and asking what certain words meant. It was a move  towards culture rather than away from it,  albeit in a very populist way. But, regardless, I think it was far better to be doing that than being completely anglicized,  which most parents fear.  Zainub: How do your parents feel  about you being in the film industry ?  Gurinder: My parents have been very  happy with what I have done. They were  very happy that I was going to be a journalist because they kind of saw it was a different profession. Now my parents are pretty  pohtical in themselves and, hke a lot of people in their generation, haven't really been  able to articulate their feehngs. They are  very happy with what I'm doing because  it helps them articulate some of the things  they have been feehng. My filmmaking has  in certain ways pohticized them about the  media and so they see my job as very useful  and they have been incredibly supportive.  They also helped me in I'm British,  But.... It was at home on a Sunday afternoon that I sat down with a song and a cassette recorder and played it hne by hne to  my mum and dad to get the real meaning  of every single word. I had the gist of what  was being said, but I couldn't understand  aU the metaphors and the Ulusions in Punjabi. My parents took me through the translation and consequently were very involved.  If it's language, my mum and dad are my  first stop in terms of explaining things to  quotes aU over the place. It made me really  happy.  In that sense aU my family are very involved in what I do and I involve them, too.  That's been the secret with my family and  relatives. I actually talk them through aU  the problems, and if I come across a racist  attitude or if I come across a problem in bureaucracy, I talk through those things with  having been through the British Asian theatre scene which has been only in Enghsh.  It is only in the last couple of years that  British Asian theatre companies are performing in Hindi, Punjabi and Bengali. The  second generation people are doing that, to  reclaim the language. That's been a challenge for a lot of our actors and writers in  theatre. We are still trying to get back into  our language.  them so that they have an understanding of  where I am coming from.  So any disappointments I get and any  successes I get they share. My successes  are their successes after thirty odd years in  Britain.  Zainub: In your visits to Canada this  year have you had opportunity to meet  women of colour?  Gurinder: A few. In particular, the  women of Vancouver Sath and my relatives  here. The women in Vancouver Sath [a theatre group] are completely dynamic—very  talented, articulate and close to the issues  I'm British, But...by Gurinder Chadha  me or reading things to me. 1 try and involve them, too.  When I'm British, But... came out, I  did an interview for a magazine. The interviewer was also writing a book about the  immigrant experience, across the board. After my interview he talked to my mum and  dad for a couple of hours and a year later his  book was published. It talks about the immigrant experience of the older generation  and, lo and behold, in this book is my dad  talking about how he sees things and about  his daughters. He talks about me as a filmmaker and why he values that. It's a great  tiling to open up a book and see my dad's  affecting the Asian community here. They  have been able to find a communication  path and have been able to work out a way  of dealing with problems and issues in a way  we don't in Britain. Their main aim is to  educate the community, whereas in Britain  you wUl find equivalent theatre companies  writing plays and performing theatre for everyone. They are wanting to be seen as professional theatre companies, whereas Vancouver Sath are happy as a community grass  roots organization.  The thing that I found really fascinating is the fact that they work almost entirely in Punjabi and for me that is great,  Zainub: I think in Canada the Asian  community responds differently to being Canadian. The interaction with the  larger society and our own communities  is different from the way British Asians  relate to Britishness. I think it's because  we are much newer here and are stil  trying to find our place.  Gurinder: I think, ultimately, people are  trying to work out how we can maintain certain traditional practices against the forces  of American culture. We are trying to negotiate how we can maintain that sense of history and traditionalism, although geograph-  icaUy we are removed from India. We stiU  have that desire to be Indian. In Canada  people are doing it differently. The experience of trying to find and secure that position is not just shared by the Indian community. It is an international experience  shared by aU lands of communities aU over  the world and I think that's what we really  should push at. As Salman Rushdie says  "the 20th century status is that of the im  migrant." That's by far the common experi  ence and, culturaUy, it's about time we put  those experiences on the agenda. It's impor  tant that we start thinking more interna  tionaUy in cross cultures and start makingl  Unks.  Zainub: What is your new work go  ing to be about? What are the issues?  Gurinder: I'm doing two things. Firs  I'm doing a foUow-up to I'm British  But.... This is from the older generation's  point of view. The questions of home, na  tionahsm and belonging that the young kids  talk about in I'm British, But... are going to be addressed in the second film. l|  am also going to give it more of an international flavour. The older generation's  hves are more international in the sense that  family ties are maintained and sustained by  the telephone. The telephone is crucial to  our family networks now.  I'm British, But... is very much a celebratory film in that it is about finally feeling and arriving at a particular point inl  terms of cultural identity and national belonging. There is also the painful side, and  the second film wUl look at the painful side  of losing your culture. It is called In The\  Early Hours of the Day—taken from a  Punjabi proverb along the hne that any  one who leaves in the early hours of the  day and returns home despite getting los  is not considered to have been lost. I am  ing that as a metaphor for culture since I  hope the entire film is going to be in Punjabi and so at the end there is a kind of|  homecoming through the language. My second film is a comedy thriUer called Bha-  jee on the Beach, about the Birmingham  Asian women's day trip to Blackpool.  KINESIS bringing together many voices...  Last October 18, West Coast LEAF—the Women's Legal, Education and Action Fund—sponsored a "Person's Day Breakfast," a celebration of the 61st anniversary of women's entitlement to be considered "persons" under the British  North America Act. The Persons case, successfully fought by Canadian suffragists such as Emily Murphy and Nellie McClung, ensured women's right to be  judges and magistrates, and is considered a cornerstone in the ongoing fight for  sex equality before the law.  Maureen Maloney, Dean of the University of Victoria Law School, addressed  the 800 people attending the LEAF breakfast. Her speech appears below.  by Maureen Maloney  I intend to do a brief review of how much women have achieved in the last couple of  decades and to share with you my thoughts on what remains to be done: what the priorities should be and what strategies should be adopted. This is a very propitious time to  do a review: exactly 20 years on from the Report of the Royal Commission on the Status  of Women and at the beginning of the decade, the end of which wUl herald in a new century.  How far, then, have women come towards being fully equal in Canadian society9. I call this my "good news, bad news" section.  The good news is that we have made real strides and our victories should not be underplayed. I have singled out four main successes:  • More women are in positions of power than would have been conceived of in 1970.  We have a woman leader of a federal opposition party, 11 women ministers (one of whom  is Black) in the new Ontario government, a woman federal Minister of Justice, three  women Supreme Court of Canada justices [Bertha WUson has since retired.] We even  have two women common law deans.  • Women's paid labour force participation has increased markedly from 53 percent to  68 percent in only the last 10 years. In addition, the wage gap between men and women  has narrowed.  • The spectre of outright discriminatory practices has been eliminated by Human  Rights legislation and, more recently, by Section 15 of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  • Women's issues are on the agenda as never before.  However, just as we must not underplay our successes, neither should we overemphasize what has been achieved. In case you haven't guessed what's coming, this is  the "bad news" section.  • Even though there are more women in power, our numbers are stiU meagre in comparison to the statistical representation of women in our society. I am reminded of a hne  from a Janis Joplin song in which she says: "What are we, ladies, but waitresses in the  banquet of hfe?" As this morning shows, many of us have made it to the banquet but we  only get equal representation on the head table if we organize the event ourselves. Moreover, the vast majority of us are white and from very privUeged backgrounds.  • Workforce participation: Although more women are in the paid workforce, they are  in the same female ghettos they were in at the beginning of this century when 85 percent  of employed women were in "female" occupations (primarily clerical and service industries). In 1988, the figure stiU stood at 76 percent.  • The wage gap may have narrowed from 56 female cents to the male doUar in 1970  up to 65 cents in 1988. However, in British Columbia, which has the lowest female  to male earnings ratio, it is only 61.8 percent. Indeed this figure represents a drop of  4.9 percent from 1987. We are going backwards not forwards...At our current rate of  progress (5 percent catch up every 20 years) I estimate that we wUl not achieve parity  untU the twenty second century or, more accurately, the year 2150.  • Lastly, although the good news was that women's issues are on the agenda, the bad  news is that women's issues remain on the agenda: they haven't been dealt with.  Where Do We Go From Here?  Given this somewhat bleak picture, what do I see as the major issues facing us in the 90s  and beyond? I beheve the challenge for aU of us, both men and women, is the Four Point  Plan—the challenge of the four P's—Power, Poverty, Physical Violence and Personal Freedom.  Power. I'm not sure that we want to eradicate power so much as have some. Women  and other disadvantaged groups must share in the pohtical and other decision-making  processes of the country: in parliament, in the courts, in the senior administration of the  civU service—all areas in which our participation is noticeably nnderepresented.  But it is crucial that such representation is not tokenism: that women are given a few  positions of power to reinforce the feehng that advances are being made when in reality  they are not. And the women who achieve positions of power must take some of the responsibility to ensure this does not happen. Ultimately they must exercise their power  to make the hves of other women and disadvantaged groups different—to help put into  place more supportive environments, different systems and methods of working which  fit the patterns of women and their needs and expectations. And this applies to women  pohticians, judges, law deans and women who become law partners. H we must "add  women and stir," we must ensure that it is the ingredient which changes the recipe entirely. There must also be recognition and dismantling of the gendered power relationships in our society.  Poverty. Poverty is one of the greatest challenges facing us. Of an estimated 2.8 mU-  hon people hving below the poverty hne in Canada, 60 percent are women: 82 percent of  single-parent households are headed by women, 44 percent of which are hving below the  poverty hne. Elderly women are particularly susceptible to poverty.  What can be done? Separate measures need to be taken depending upon whether the  woman is in the paid or unpaid labour force. For women in the paid work force a number  of measures can and should be implemented:  • Pay equity. We obviously need to accelerate the catch- up rate. In addition, it  should be noted that two thirds of the people earning minimum wages in Canada are  women. The minimum wage dropped in BC from being 44 percent of the average wage in  1975 to 35 percent in 1987 (from 49 percent to 40 percent overall in Canada). The minimum wage should be set at a reasonable level and as a fixed percentage of the average  wage.  • Employment and training pohcies. Especially in non- traditional areas these must be  more readily avaUable and accessible for women. Some progress has been made but not  enough. All the statistics show the more highly educated or trained a person is, the more  money she earns.  • Part-time work must be revalued. In particular, benefits and pensions should be proportionately given.  • The situation of immigrant women, especially those working as domestics, in farm  labour and in the garment industry needs addressing. Their working conditions are substandard, their pay abysmal and future prospects bleak.  • Day care must not simply be talked about but must be acted on. There must be  good quality day care avaUable at very low cost. Refundable tax credits at reasonable  rates would be one very easy way to start this process immediately.  For women in the unpaid workforce, special measures are needed to rectify their disadvantages. These measures include:  • Recognition of the value of the currently unpaid work performed by women in the  home is essential. One easy way to do so would be refundable tax credits or even direct  payments. At the very least the named "dependent spouse" tax credit should be paid to  the one on whom the household is dependent: the homeworker.  • Divorces doubled between 1970 and 1980—and custody stiU is awarded primarily to  mothers (85 percent). However, even though divorce laws and the division of property is  increasingly taking into account the unpaid contribution which women make to the marriage, this is not carried through in reducing the rate of default in making maintenance  payments (which now stands in excess of 80 percent).  • Liveable pensions for women are needed, especially for women who work in the  home. Pensions for homemakers must become a pohcy of the future or we wUl never  eradicate the large percentage of senior women who hve weU below the poverty hne.  Physical Violence. Violence against women, inside and outside the home, continues  to be and wUl be perhaps the major battle front for aU women in the future. It is estimated that one in ten women is violently abused by her male partner. Outside the home,  the number of violent crimes and especially crimes of violence against women is rapidly  increasing.  We must ensure that Canadian society is a safe place for women to hve. We need education and enforcement, safety measures and shelters.  Personal Freedom. The right of a woman to exercise control over her own body  without fear of legal repercussion and criminal sanction is essential. Abortion should be  the personal choice of the woman. Women must also keep a close eye on the developments and potential further encroachments which may be made into their hves as the  government increasingly intervenes and regulates in the areas of surrogacy and reproductive technology. The age of Atwood's Handmaid's Tale may weU be upon us.  How Will These Issues Be Addressed?  I personally beheve that grassroots organizations and community involvement are the  best ways to develop pohcies and plans to effect lasting, weU-thought out change. However, given the time constraints this morning and the fact that many of us here are involved in the legal (and some the pohtical) process, I wUl deal with change through law  reform and legislation.  I beheve there are dangers to be avoided in seeking change in these ways. In particular, we must guard against the feehng that resort to the courts or pohticians will be the  quick fix that so many of us dream about. We would do weU to remember that all nightmares start out as dreams. Years of oppression and treatment of women as second class  citizens wUl not disappear overnight. Moreover, there is a danger that in remedying some  injustices, legislation merely entrenches or legitimises the maintenance of other, perhaps  more serious, inequities because it has "dealt with the problem."  A good example of this are the recent attempts at pay equity legislation. The  provinces which have pay equity have not dealt with the very worse abuses of poor wages  for women. Pay equity legislation does not cover farm workers, garment industry workers, day care workers and domestics. Nearly aU the people in these positions are women,  and most often immigrant women, who work in appalling and—certainly in the case of  the farmworkers who are subjected to a variety of chemicals—in unsafe conditions for  extremely poor wages. Yet pay equity legislation does not, and probably wUl not in the  foreseeable future, deal with these urgent problems.  Resort to the courts is also important. Indeed, that is the reason we are here today,  to advance the cause of women by funding the important work that LEAF does in furthering the aims of women through htigation. However we must be careful not to place  all our strategic eggs in the legal basket—especially if the strength of that basket is unknown.  The great cheer that heralded the advent of Section 15 of the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms has been muted by the reality. In a thorough and thoughtful study (by Gwen  Brodsky and Shelagh Day) of the first three years of equahty htigation we found out,  to misquote my favourite poet Yeats, that "a terrible beauty had been stiUborn." [Ed.  Note: Canadian Charter Equality Rights for Women: One Step Forward or Two  Steps Back?, published in 1989 by the Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of  Women]  Brodsky and Day uncovered that, of the 591 cases in which the equahty provision had  been invoked, only 17 of them had been brought by women, Aboriginal people, the disabled and members of national ethnic and racial minorities. The overwhelming majority  of equahty cases had been brought and won by men and corporations—hardly the stuff  of which the advancement of the disadvantaged is made.  In the past, in our haste to quick fix things, we have been guUty of entrenching and  perhaps even accentuating class and race barriers. White, middle-class, privUeged women  hke myself should be equal to our peers in wage, working conditions and hfestyle. However we must be careful that we do not make our gains at the expense of dealing with  the more pressing issues of underprivUeged women, a group in which women of colour  and Aboriginal women are over-represented.  Some of the blame for our past focus hes in our acceptance of a very unsophisticated  and simplistic notion of equahty. It is important that our notions of equahty become  more sophisticated and realistic. A notion of equahty which refuses to take into account  the existing inequalities in wealth, the differentials in power, the lack of equal access to  education and job training that women face is, in the words of Shakespeare, "a loud-  sounding nothing." Indeed, our notions of equahty often remind me of the famous quote  of Tommy Douglas who once remarked: "Everyone for himself, said the elephant as he  Maureen Maloney  danced among the chicken pen." I'll let you work out who, for my purposes, are symbolic  of the elephant and the chicks...  At the very least we need a theory of equahty which recognizes the social, pohtical  and economic disadvantages which women have been facing and continue to face in our  society. We need courts and legislatures who wUl take into account the differentials in  power which exist in a gendered world when formulating their equahty decisions.  In addition, our new vision of equahty must be one that discards forever the model of  the white, able-bodied, middle-class male as the paradigm. We need a theory of equality that substitutes instead an equahty which legitimizes and welcomes the differences  in people. So that aU people, but especially women of differing racial and ethnic origins,  Aboriginal women, disabled women and women of differing sexual orientation feel welcome and* equal as themselves, not dressed in someone else's clothes.  I do not wish to conclude without saying something positive. Although I have concentrated this morning on the unfinished business, it would be wrong to leave the impression that important strides towards social justice for women have not been made in the  last 20 years. I just want to ensure that the next twenty years are even more powerful  than the last.  We must aU, both women and men, press for structural change which wUl aUow a  more equal sharing of power and wealth in our society. We need and must demand, pohticaUy and legaUy, more power sharing. We must press for issues of concern: women's pension legislation, quality day care, recognition of the unpaid work which women perform  in the household, employment equity, pay equity and adequate access to education and  job training for women.  We must demand the right to hve without fear of physical violence inside or outside  the home. As women gain access to positions of power, enter the labour force in increasing numbers, as the birth rate foUowed by the economy declines, as women gain more  prominence and power in this society, there wUl undoubtedly be changes.  And the change wUl best be brought about by bringing together many voices, particularly those who have been sUenced from the mainstream of the debate. Women who have  been consciously or subconsciously ignored because of their lack of formal education or  skiU, their class, cultural or racial origin, disabihty or sexual orientation must be hstened  to. When the cause of women becomes more inclusive in its ideas—with the abihty to allow and acknowledge differences—and more expansive in its aims, then we wUl have resources to meet new challenges. I, for one, look forward to the challenges.  LEAFiFAEJLEAF = FAEJLEAF = FAEJLEAF = FAEJLEAFlFAEJLEAFlFAEJLEAF = FAE  0 l\INbSI J      February 91  XEAFiFAEJT^AEEFAEJLEAFEFAEJLEAF§FAEJLEAFlFAEJLEAFgFAEJLEAFI£AEJ  KINESIS    February 91 ^^^^^^^^^^s^^^^  Arts  A chance to  mourn and to feel  by Margot Lacroix  THRENODY: A lamentation on  the deaths of 14 women in  Montreal, Dec. 1989  an instaUation by Catherine Perrin  Women in Focus, Dec 5-14, 1990  The setting: an art gallery, its walls have  been painted a deep, muddy purple; two  rows of desks and chairs—fourteen in aU—  face the front waU, a notebook is placed on  each desk.  The room is reminiscent of a conventional  classroom.  A phrase spreads across the walls in a single white hne, hand-written in chalk. It is  the first thing a viewer's eye foUows on entering the room:  Months later, we still don't have all  the facts about the massacre. The media peremptorily closed the door on the  debate, but not without making sure  that feminists were trivialized. Feminists could express acceptance of the  emotional consequences of the massacre, but were not permitted to rail  against it. There was some exploration  of the environment of violence against  women that produced Marc Lepine, but'  no examination of the climate that created a political assassination.  —Lee Lakeman, 1990  A tape deck continuously plays the  recording of a poem written by Catherine  Perrin, the beginning and the end of which  foUows here:  Try to remember  the nightmare/the purple darkness  of terror  the last week of school before holidays  Remember the guy walking in  to your classroom  he pauses  he smiles  he speaks slowly  he has a rifle/but remember  now-in this long second-that  we don't have a lot of guns in our  country-  only for hunting.  (...)  Remember dying  in classroom 311  under a desk  with white patterns of snow on the  windows  Remember the pain  and the purpleness permeating  Remember death?  On the night of the vigU that inaugurated  Threnody at Women in Focus, the gallery's  emptiness was transformed into an arresting  scene. Each of the 14 chairs was occupied by  a woman's figure bent over a notebook. Silence prevaUed—except for the voices reciting the poem in the background.  Over the nine days of the exhibit, I observed how people were drawn into this instaUation in a compeUing way. They walked  into the gallery, glanced at a notebook,  then sat down. After 20, 30 minutes of  deep concentration, most had conscientiously read aU 14 notebooks in complete silence. Threnody fiUed a need. Those who  had felt short-changed in their abihty to  mourn after the Montreal murders were finally offered the opportunity to do so.  On the cover of each notebook, the  name of one of the murdered women has  been scribbled dozens of times, with deliberation. In the upper right-hand corner,  her snapshot has been stapled: Genevieve  Bergeron, Helene Colgan, Nathalie Croteau,  Barbara Daigneault, Anne-Marie Edward,  Maud Haviernick, Barbara Maria Klucznik,  Maryse Laganiere, Maryse Leclair, Anne-  Marie Lemay, Sonia PeUetier, Michele  Richard, Annie St-Arneault and Annie Turcotte.  Each book contains the number of pages  equivalent to the victim's age at the time of  her death; the remaining blank pages having been torn off, leaving inside and around  the metal coil shreds of paper. The notebooks oscUlate between the apparently clinical gathering of cold facts and an impas-  Beginning February...  Linotron Service  1670 Commercial Drive  253-31 53    Fax 253-3073  2 l\llNCJIJ     February 91  Tu>  *•                            »  i  2    we are wmryafvmr  and    fear  ANO   grief  \\     23 YEARS  sioned disruption of this data with what is  at times httle more than a word. Dispersed  throughout the books are mechanical drawings of cogs and wheels in the middle of  which hes, as if imprisoned, the naked and  anonymous figure of a woman.  Each of the 14 notebooks of Threnody  functions hke a prod into the viewer's consciousness. Sometimes cut into segments,  the pages offer a short comment, a newspaper excerpt, an engineering drawing, a cryptic note, a sketch of a female body, a question mark, a fragmented photograph. The  images seen over and over during those fatal days are relentlessly echoed and juxtaposed beside snatches of written material  from newspapers across the country. The  notebooks' fragmentation, and their persistent questioning disrupts the message of the  mainstream: that the massacre was an isolated incident, and that attempts to analyse it within the larger socio-political context are akin to heresy.  The instaUation echoes the classrooms  where most of us sat through thousands of  hours of our hves presumably to gain the  tools necessary to function in this society.  But we sat in front of textbooks and notebooks very different from those prepared  by Perrin. Our schoolbooks perpetuated a  collective amnesia that women writers and  researchers have tried for years to shake.  Threnody challenges the selective memory  that has been applied to the Montreal massacre.  Who can remember a single woman's  name, let alone recite aU fourteen? Details about their kiUer stand more vividly  in memory than information about the women. As Quebecoise writer Nicole Brossard  pointed out, we must wonder whether "he  might not be stirring more sympathy than  his victims, dead or injured." In her search  for material about the women, Perrin realized, and deplored the scarcity of information, and Threnody became her dehberate  attempt to rectify that situation. Not only is  there no specific information about the murderer in the work, but his name has been  scratched out wherever it appears.  In the moments Threnody aUowed us to  spend with the 14 disappeared, we again  experienced vulnerabUity, absurdity, anger,  sorrow. Threnody reminds us that, in each  woman's abihty to acknowledge the common root of her fear, society sensed a great  danger: that a feminist analysis of male violence offered a plausible explanation foi our  fear and also offered strategies tc .struggle  against it. Hence the return of the blanket term "hysterical" when feminists tried  to express our dismay; hence the dismissal  of our interpretations as mere profiteering.  Threnody not only laments the murder of  14 women, but also the cowardice of a society unwUhng to face its realities and responsibihties.  One year has passed. As the anniversary  approached, the old and now famihar mainstream debate was reactivated, fueled this  time by the release in November of the murderer's letter. What is in fact being committed to coUective memory about that terrible  day? Threnody arose out of that question,  in hope that the true significance of December 6, 1989 may never elude us.  Margot Lacroix is a writer and is currently Distribution Manager at Women  in Focus Arts and Media Centre.  BOOK MANTEL  ||       Under New Management \j  EXCELLENT SELECTION OF OYER 40,000 GENTLY USED BOOKS  Feminist ■ Literature • Philosophy • Poetry • General Selection  Moved to  1002 Commercial Drive  V5L3W9  1253-1099  Open 7 days, 11-7  20% discount with valid student cards  WOMEN OWNED AND OPERATED I Arts  yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyyyyyy  From the Caribbean  Opposition and resilience  CREATION FIRE: A CAFRA Antho-  logy of Caribbean Women's Poetry  ed. by Ramabai Espinet  Toronto: Sister Vision Press/CAFRA, 1990  by Andrea Fatona  Creation Fire is a holistic poetic representation of the voices of Caribbean  women. The anthology creates a space for  women and girls of diverse socio-cultural,  pohtical and economic backgrounds in the  Caribbean Region to articulate their ideas  and sentiments on a broad range of issues.  Their voices are honest and vividly express  the pain and joys of these one hundred and  one women's experiences.  Contributors to Creation Fire echo several generations of Caribbean women. Editor Ramabai Espinet says: "We sought originaUy to reach the so-caUed "grassroots constituency," but soon discovered that the  "unrepresented voice" transcends the barriers of race, class and language. The essence  of this piece of work is the clarity with  which the voices of the once sUenced shout  out. The book is pohtical, as weU as a  creative response to an environment which  fosters a male dominated/biased hterary  power structure."  Creation Fire is divided into 12 thematic sections. The thread weaving the anthology together is the theme of active opposition and the resilience of Caribbean  women. The poets wrestle with issues of  sexism, imperialism, neo-imperialism, the  spectrum of patriarchal domination. They  speak about love, motherhood, mothering,  the creative process and survival—survival  not only of those women in the Region, but  aU women of the Black Diaspora.  The twelve sections are: The Seer, The  Artist, The Lover, The Mother, The Ex-  Ue, The Mourner, The Land, The Region,  The Guerilla, The Worker, The Survivor  and The Praise-singer. The strongest and  most eloquent pieces appear in The Region.  This sub-coUection deals with topics such as  individual and collective identity-buUding  within the Caribbean Region, and the effects of colonialism on present-day systems  of power.  Ohve Senior's (Jamaica) piece is just one  example from this section which speaks to  the issue of identity:  COLONIAL GIRLS SCHOOL  for Marlene Smith MacLeish  Borrowed images  willed our skins pale  muffled our laughter  lowered our voices  let out our hems  denied our sex in gym tunics and bloomers  harnessed our voices to madrigals  and genteel airs  yoked our minds to declensions in Latin  and the language of Shakespeare  Told us nothing about ourselves  There was nothing about us at all  How those pale northern eyes and  aristocratic whispers once erased us  There was nothing left of ourselves  Nothing about us at all  Studying: History Ancient and Modem  Kings and Queens of England  Steppes of Russia  Wheatfields of Canada  There was nothing of our landscape there  Nothing about us at all  Marcus Garvey turned twice in his grave.  'Thirty-eight was a beacon. A flame.  They were talking of desegregation  ir. Little Rock, Arkansas. Lumumba  and the Congo. To us: mumbo-jumbo.  We had read Vachel Lindsay's  vision on the jungle  Feehng nothing about ourselves  There was nothing about us at all  Months, years, a childhood memorising"  Latin declensions  (For our language  — 'bad talking7 —  detentions)  Finding nothing about us there  Nothing about us at all  So, friend of my childhood years  One day we'll talk about  How the mirror broke  Who kissed us awake  Who let Anansi from his bag  For isn't it strange how  northern eyes  in the brighter world before us now  conventions of writing —the how's and the  why's of writing—is made clear.  Kiren Shoman, a 15 year-old girl from Belize and the UK, brazenly expresses the uncertainty enshrouding the creative process,  as weU as the determination to create, in  "My Poem:"  The empowering capabihty of the written  word is clearly felt when reading through  The Artist. This section Uluminates the anguish, self-satisfaction and self-definition of  each contributor's creative process. These  poems are an articulation of each woman's  artistic centre in spite of her struggle to  preserve and re-create this centre. A sense  of the dUemma a woman faces around the  MY POEM  I sat down the other day  To write a poem,  And I was going  To write about love —  But if s too common.  So I tried to write about  God and Religion,  But that was quite boring.  I wrote a couple of verses on  Nature, but it was hard to  Decide what I really  Wanted to say,  WHAT I FELT.  I was confused.  So I started writing  about confusion. I wrote  about my being unsure  of myself.  But it was still an odd poem;  it was this.  Woman-centred aspects of Caribbean  culture are brought alive in The Artist section through the powerful portrayal of female mythological figures. Poets are now  drawing upon the strengths of these figures  as mentors, and for artistic, spiritual and  pohtical inspiration.  Creation Fire's intent is to present the  diversity of the Region, so poems are presented in the various language groups of the  Caribbean—French, Enghsh, Spanish and  Dutch, as weU as dialects. Non-English poems are printed in their original form, along  with the Enghsh translation. One cannot  help but wonder if, for the sake of accessibU-  ity, certain cultural nuances in the original  language are lost in the translation. There  is no Enghsh translation of the poems written in dialects/vernacular, and it is unclear  if this was deliberate, or if it is a reflection  of the deeper seated societal status of these  dialects. There is a glossary, but it is of limited use to a reader seeking insight into the  culturaUy-bound terminology used throughout the book. The inclusion of art works expressive of a Caribbean sensibility gives the  book a rounded artistic sense.  Low hteracy rates among Caribbean  women may mean that Creation Fire wUl  be better received outside the Region. OveraU, this coUection of poetry is an impressive  departure point for the future development  of the Caribbean woman's voice.  Creation Fire is available from Sister  Vision Press for $16.95 (plus GST and  handling). Write PO Box 217, Stn. E,  Toronto, Ont. M6H 4E2  Andrea Fatona is a woman of Caribbean  heritage trying to be.  Liking work that pays  by Cathy Griffin  JOBSTORIES: I like the work,  I Uke the money  by Donna Stewart and Bev Bradshaw  Vancouver: Learning Resources, 1990  Jobstories is designed for women who  are looking for ways out of the pink collar ghetto. Authors Donna Stewart and Bev  Bradshaw selected over 50 occupations for  which the federal government projects an  increase of 500 or more new jobs a year.  They interviewed women in these occupations, using a common set of questions.  The interviews were then edited into a  magazine-style profile of each woman—in  her own words, whenever possible.  Phyllis Iverson, auto mechanic  Here are some of their comments:  "I never picked up a tool untU I was nineteen. I was the httle girl most hkely to be  the hairdresser," said plumber Karen Tobi-  asen. Dianne Gaulder, a former chambermaid, waitress, and barmaid, moved into a  position as a heavy equipment operator: "I  said to myself, 'if they can do it, I can do  it'." Said dentist Carol Tsuyuki: "There are  lots of opportunities for advancement. Dentistry is a great occupation for a woman."  Reading Jobstories was easy, as each interview is attractively laid out with a picture of the woman at her work. Salary  statistics for the occupations are given according to the 1986 census, as weU as growth  projections for the job.  Jobstories is upbeat and interesting.  However, this is a book which addresses individual solutions to the problem of finding  weU-paying, stable employment. The pohtical and social problems that deny women  opportunities for employment or advancement are addressed in the book, but only  in a general and informal manner.  It is important to address the issue of  whether these women's struggles can be interpreted as an "everywoman's guide" to  obtaining a weU-paying position. Most of  the women in the book are white, well-  educated and thus in a privUeged position  of power; there were few women of colour  and only one woman with a visible disability. Not exactly a realistic guide for multicultural Canada in the 21st century.  In reality, a significant number of women  in BC are unable to access any kind of  employment opportunities that offer good  wages and upward mobility because they  lack the necessary combination of financial  and social support—and education—to obtain such jobs. In BC in 1988, of 666,000  women in the labour force, 74,000 were un  employed. Most women are stUl clustered  into the clerical, sales, and service positions  that are poorly paid, have few or no benefits, no job security and are increasingly becoming part-time.  Many working women or those who  hope to be working soon haven't given  much thought to what their goals, values,  and needs might be. This steins from the  mythology that most women don't need careers because they won't be involved in the  workforce for most of their hves. Why plan  about the future if you're sure to be rescued? Unfortunately, Jobstories gives only  one half of a page to addressing some of  these myths.  Girls and women who buy into this patriarchal view may find themselves on the  bottom of the economic rung aU their hves.  As of 1988, 44 percent of aU people in the  labour market were women, and 61 percent  of aU women who work have chUdren under 15 years of age. Most women wUl be involved in the workforce for approximately  25 to 45 years. This is regardless of whether  they have chUdren, gain a partner or stay  single.  Women work to feed their families, pay  the bUls and clothe themselves. Working is  an economic fact of hfe, and our economy  depends upon the cheap, untrained, disposable labour many women bring into the  marketplace. But, if women have no plan for  their working hves, they wUl fall into semi-  or unskUled labour markets of clerical and  service sector jobs that wUl swaUow them  alive.  I hke the Solutions page near the end of  the book. I just wish it were longer, with  more an analysis of the five approaches outlined: co-operatives, unions, the need for  See JOBS page 14  KINESIS ARTS  Heidi: truthful, determined  by Meg Edwards  THE HEIDI CHRONICLES  a play by Wendy Wasserstein  directed by Svetlana Zylin  Vancouver Playhouse, Nov.-Dec, 1990  When I first heard that The Heidi  Chronicles was a feminist play my immediate reaction was to worry. What made it  feminist, I wondered, and what image of  feminism did it endorse? Would it really  address women and their hves, or would it  just pay hp service to hberal feminism—i.e.  equal opportunity and equal pay? Would  the heroine commit suicide or get married  or worse, would she start a career in real estate?  I was surprised and dehghted to discover  that The Heidi Chronicles was a funny,  touching play about a woman searching for  a sense of self-worth. With gleeful recognition I watched famihar feminist characters  and scenarios march across the stage. And  whUe it was obvious from some comments  I overheard that not aU the audience enjoyed the play, (an icy, 'weU that was interesting', for example,) the woman behind  me certainly got her money's worth. She exclaimed throughout the play: 'Why, this is  funny! This is really funny!'  Wendy Wasserstein wrote Heidi at 35  and the play chronicles her experiences—  she's white, middle-class and American—  as a feminist between the 60s and the 90s.  Heidi's development from an "anxious, depressed and intelligent" teenager to the  ripe, angst-ridden age of thirtysomething is  full of amusing and revealing detaUs about  the mindset of a particular group of feminists. You might say you're tired of The Big  Chill reruns and sick of the thirtysomething theme this play addresses. WeU, The  Heidi Chronicles is the same old Perrier  with a new twist: a woman's vantage point.  The play opens with Heidi giving a lecture on women artists. She is a confident, competent academic and art historian.  Heidi's career choice symbohzes her personality: she is an observer, always watching  and analyzing the actions of others with a  sense of detachment. Her best friend Susan  balances Heidi's personality by being a boisterous and gregarious character.  Susan adjusts to the times with gusto.  She is in turn a bopper, a feminist hippie  with beads, and a California film agent in  heels. By contrast, Heidi's clothes are an understatement, as if she seeks in visibUity. Despite their differences, the two friends foUow  similar trends. They are both active members of the feminist movement in their 20s  and they both head into their 30s with successful careers. They also share lonehness  and feehngs of inadequacy as happy marriages and babies do not make their expected appearances.  My favourite scene was the consciousness  raising group Heidi attends, at Susan's insistence, in the sixties. The CR group represents a smattering of femimst stereotypes:  a motherly, new age-type woman in a white  dress and hand spun shawl; a swearing,  forthright lesbian in army gear; a young,  subservient 'hippie' with an exhausted look  and a hand-sewn long skirt; and our friend  Susan, in a baggy sweater and jeans, long  hair, glasses and a large symbolic looking  necklace. Heidi, dressed in practical but  conservative clothes, shdes into a chair in  the background and prepares to watch.  The scene caught the humour of CR  groups without ridicuhng their process. It  was particularly satisfying to watch the  venting of feminist frustrations during this  scene. The lesbian woman was especially  wonderful in this respect, as she expressed  the anger intrinsic to being a feminist. At  one point, in complete irritation with another character's worries about the comfort  of the chairs, she cries out: "Look, this is  not a fucking Brownie meeting!" She gives  heU to Heidi for trying to remain a visitor  and an objective observer.  By the end of the session Heidi is hugging these strangers with a sincerity that  expresses the good effect of the meeting.  The scene reminded me of the idealism inherent in consciousness raising, an idealism  we seem to have lost in the so-called post-  feminist wave of cynicism. In fact, the need  Dianne Gaulder, heavy equipment operator  JOBS from page 13  quality chUd care, more training opportunities and progressive legislation.  Jobstories also includes short articles on  decision making, and patterns of employment. Both are critical for women to understand the structural patterns of why women  work or why they can't or don't work.  OveraU, Jobstories is an interesting  read. Good role modehng for women is sadly  lacking and Jobstories attempts t  this.  provide  Jobstories is available from the Learning Resources Society, #102-2511 E.  Hastings St., Vancouver, BC, V5K  1Z2. Tel. 251-7476.  Cathy Griffin is a lesbian writer currently working on issues around women  and the economy.  for women to talk with each other is stiU  real, and stiU revolutionary.  Heidi's relationships with her boyfriend  Scoop and good friend Peter form a major part of the play and thankfuUy, their  characters are interesting. Nonetheless I  found it revealing that most of the social  commentary and 'briUiant' remarks were  made by the male characters. As if to comment on this, The Heidi Chronicles includes a scene in which Scoop, Heidi and  Peter have been invited to an 80s talk  show called "HeUo New York." The three  are to discuss the changes they have observed in themselves and around them.  Heidi is interrupted, overtalked and eventuaUy sUenced—and her two good friends  have no idea what they have done, reacting  in surprise to her anger.  The scene rang true. The most difficult  battle for a feminist is often with the bright,  weU-meaning men in her hfe. At one point  Scoop responds: "WeU, if you wanted to say  something, why didn't you?"  However, Heidi does have a strong voice.  When her alma mater invites her to address  the new women students, Heidi describes  a routine day during which she finds herself criticizing—not communicating with—  other women. She relates how she is shocked  that, after ah her years as a feminist, she is  still vulnerable to a most dangerous weapon  of misogyny: the divide and conquer strat  egy. Heidi's speech is painfuUy honest, bearing the essence of the feminist phrase "the  personal is pohtical." Her abihty to analyze  her actions in a femimst framework frees her  from debilitating self-criticism and encourages her to change. Wasserstein has created  in Heidi a determined, truthful character,  a woman who, struggling against the forces  within and without, manages to find peace  of mind and a sense of direction.  Heidi dreams of a new generation, confident and centred. White, educated and heterosexual, her perspective is limited and in  many ways disappointing. Many feminists  would argue with validity that we must  move beyond absorption with our inner psyches and towards a radical transformation  of the structure of our society.  In the last analysis, The Heidi Chronicles is a play that chronicles a certain time  period from a specific point of view. Wasserstein could have exploited this famihar terrain with chche's and easy jokes. She chose  instead to look into her own past and write  a thoughtful and often very funny script  about her hfe as a woman. Although Heidi's  moderate expectations of the future may  weU explain the presence of this feminist  play at a mainstream theatre, it is stiU a  valuable addition to the documentation of  our feminist history.  Meg Edwards is a freelance writer living in Vancouver.  Int'l lesbian  week rolls 'round  by Hazel Beech  International Lesbian Week in February? Organizers were just too excited and too busy  with the Gay Games last summer to put together Lesbian Week in the faU, when it normally runs to coincide with events in other parts of Canada, US and Europe.  Although Vancouver's independent celebration of International Lesbian Week (ILW)  from Feb. 16-24, means the international aspect is minimized, organizers wUl be repeating  the project of collecting donations during events for a lesbian group which, usuaUy for pohtical reasons, cannot fundraise or be visible to do so. This year money collected wUl go  to a lesbian group in Zimbabwe.  For what's happening during Lesbian Week your best bet is to find a program (at the  usual locations) with detaUs of times, locations, events and particulars. MeanwhUe, here is  a ghmpse of what the ILW committee is serving up. Remember, the program reflects the  interests and energy levels of individual committee members, so if you think something is  missing you know what to do next year.  Sat. Feb. 16: "Lesbians in Recovery—One Day at a Time," a day of workshops dealing  with relationships, staying sober and AA. Native Education Centre. Starts 9 am.  Sun. Feb. 17: "We Are All Witches," an evening of information, discussion, sharing and  ritual to reclaim our pohtical and spiritual roots. CaU 253-7189 to register and for location. 6-9pm.  Mon. Feb. 18: "Bowling Night," five pin. Keeners, the reluctant and kids welcome. The  Commodore Lanes, 7-10pm.  Tues. Feb. 19: "Lesbians and AIDS—Let's Talk About Safer Sex."An information and  discussion night with two frontline AIDS workers. Vancouver Lesbian Centre. 7:30- 9:30pm.  Thur. Feb. 21: "Sexplorations," a forum on lesbian sexuahty in the arts, pohtics and hfe.  A panel of six local dykes speak their minds. The Holiday Inn on Broadway (Oak Rm.)  7:30-9pm.  Fri. Feb. 22 and Sat. Feb. 23: "Sexpertease III," the sex show at Charlies's Lounge.  Dance before and after. It's not too late to submit your own act. Advance tix advised. 8 pm.  Sun. Feb. 24: "Dykes on the Drive" wUl march down Commercial Drive to proclaim lesbian visibility, particularly significant this year because of the Joe's Cafe scene. Any women  or men who support lesbian rights are welcome to march. Starts at McSpadden Park on  Victoria Dr. near 5th Ave. at 1pm.  Admission to any event is on a shding scale basis beginning at zero. Each event committee is organizing its own (free) child care, but booking in advance is required. Better to book  early and cancel later than to try and get in at the last minute. Some events are signed or  wheelchair accessible—check the program for specifics. Anyone needing wheelchair pushing or other assistance can contact organizers ahead of time.  Volunteers are stiU needed for just about everything. If you're considering it, or would  hke more information about ILW, phone Mickey at 874-8567 or Mary at 254-2553 and leave  t KINESIS  February 91 yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyA  Risking it  by telling it  TELLING IT: Women and  Language Across Cultures  ed. by Sky Lee, Lee Maracle,  Daphne Marlatt and Betsy Warland  Vancouver: Press Gang Pubhshers, 1990  by Gladys We  Within the mainstream women's movement, there are many divisions and misunderstandings accumulated over many years.  There are rifts between white women and  women of colour. There are invisible hnes  between lesbians and heterosexual women.  There are disagreements between working  women and academic women. All these  groups have different ideas about the priorities of the movement, and whUe they occasionally agree, more often, it seems, they  tend to tear each other apart.  Telling It: Women and Language  across Cultures was originaUy a conference organized in 1988 as an attempt to  bridge some of these gaps. Organizer and  poet Daphne Marlatt observes that the  conference "was something of an anomaly:  a conference organized within an academic structure, but designed as a non-  academic, community-focused conference."  Coming together at TeUing It were lesbians  and women of colour from the Native and  Asian-Canadian communities, people who  are marginalized not only in patriarchal society but also in the women's movement.  The book combines writings and presentations by the invited panelists, transcripts  of the audience-panel discussions, and afterwords post-conference reflections by three of  the book's editors. Featured in Telling It  are Jeannette Armstrong, Betsy Warland,  Lee Maracle, Joy Kogawa, Barbara Her-  ringer, Sky Lee, Vancouver Sath and Louise  Profeit-LeBlanc.  Several themes weave their way through  the conference and the book. Although the  three groups share the experience of being marginalized within the women's movement, some participants felt that was all  they shared—and that was not enough.  There was a certain amount of intolerance,  as evidenced in one woman's comment that  lesbians do not have a separate culture because they do not have a language.  The book also shows the ways participants "censored" each other. One woman  chastised Lee Maracle for saying "master"  because of the word's many patriarchal connotations. While this comment was valid,  it effectively sidetracked Maracle's comments about the necessity for her to master the language in order to communicate—  to reach out—because no one was going to  talk to her otherwise. The irony is, of course,  that the "master" language which she used  to reach out was the same one which effectively blocked her message from being  received, and perhaps even discredited her  message.  This attempt to bring together such  seemingly disparate groups to discuss their  differences is commendable, in both its conception and its execution. The book, which  is called the "transformation of a conference" is highly effective in presenting each  side's struggle for understanding, with the  inevitable misunderstandings. While the issues of racism and homophobia were dominant, there also seems to have been much  questioning about self-censorship and the  dUemma of speaking your thoughts, even  when they conflict with those of your community.  Audience member Sandy Shreve said: "I  was always terrified of being wrong and  I worked very hard to conform, to be,  you know, the guiding hght determined to  Jeannette Armstrong  Are there solutions to this problem? As  the conference showed, there are probably  no easy answers. The resistance and fear  which are part of our reaction to change  and difference come from the same place  as the master language we have learned—  patriarchal culture. Jeannette Armstrong  offered this: "I know that you can speak to  another person without appropriating and  I know a lot of it has to do with hstening  ... there are probably no easy answers  change the world and get the answers, and 1  just couldn't stand it when I said something  that sounded stupid or wasn't enlightened  enough." Lee Maracle writes: "We are paralyzed by what may be construed as racism,  sexism or homophobia in our ranks." Both  kinds of fear lead to the sUencing of the self.  first of all, hstening and understanding and  waiting till that understanding has reached  a point at which you can say, 'do you mean  this?' and that person says 'yes, I mean  this.' "  Betsy Warland agreed. "We need to think  of what we're doing when we dismiss an  other woman who sees things differently  with statements hke 'She's not really a feminist.' We'd probably learn a lot more by hstening to her."  At a time when the women's movement  seems more divided than ever, efforts to  reach across the gaps and to heal the hurt  are welcome. As Telling It shows, sc  times the healing is accompanied by stiU  more pain, anger and fear, and people are  hurt in the process. But the goal of clear  understanding and open communication is  worth the pain. This book is a sensitive introduction to some of the most divisive issues in the movement, offering a gentle reminder to aU of us to understand before we  dismiss, and to hsten before we judge.  Gladys We defines herself as a synthesis of Chinese, as she was born, Canadian, as she was raised, and feminist,  which she has chosen.  Dykewords disappoints  by Faith Jones  DYKEWORDS: An Anthology  of Lesbian Writing  ed. by The Lesbian Writing and  Pubhshing CoUective  Toronto: Women's Press, 1990  Like most anthologies, Dykewords: An  Anthology Of Lesbian Writing, suffers  from unevenness in quality and a general  lack of direction. Because this anthology  comes from within the women's movement,  it attempts to be aU things to aU peo-  ple."PohticaUy correct" stories and poems  appear side by side with "pohticaUy incorrect" ones, the latter often making direct  references to the boringness of the former.  This ambivalence is exactly in tune with the  community, but it doesn't make for a good  read.  For example, there are two pieces by  young women. One is Mimi Azmier's rant  about the women's movement. It begins  with the image of older feminists as surgeons who remove the narrator's unbroken hymen for display. "You know what  a fourteen-year-old dyke needs when she's  coming out? WeU, let me tell you, it ain't  no feminist/lesbian group..." Azmier writes.  She goes on to raU against prudery among  feminists. The other young woman's story,  "Salina's Balls" by Michele Grace Paulse,  is a highschool coming out story in which  two friends are unable to come out to each  other except through the device of joining  a lesbian softbaU team. Azmier's argument  that young lesbians find the women's movement dehumanizing and anti-sex would have  more impact if organized groups of lesbians  weren't so crucial to Paulse's characters.  Perhaps this was a dehberate attempt at  balance on the part of the editors: about aU  you can conclude is that some young women  find the movement helpful, some do not.  Despite the wUd fluctuations in quality,  there are some interesting things about this  collection. One is the experiments in writing  style which are evident. There are many poems and a few straightforward short stories,  but most of the contributors make no effort to abide by any conventions of short fiction writing. This kind of experimentation  seems to appeal to lesbian writers, who have  good reasons for rejecting academic writing styles. Only a few of these experiments  are as good as the traditional short stories,  which is to be expected in new forms.  My favourite of these unconventional stories is "A Stray Sock" by A. ParpiUee. She  begins with descriptions of her three lovers,  without being either kind or spiteful about  any of them. Reading it, one wonders why  she puts up with the self-centredness of one,  her sexual incompatibility with another, the  vapidity of the third. I even wondered ii  she likes women. Only in the last paragraph does it become clear: she is basicaUy  content with her hfe. There is no plot, no  paragraphs, but it is a moving record of a  woman's hfe among women. ParpiUee was a  new name to me. I hope she keeps writing.  Among the more conventional short stories, two stand out. "Catherine, Catherine"  by Ingrid E. MacDonald is the story of a  17th Century British lesbian who disguises  herself as a man and marries a woman who  for some time is unaware of her "husband's"  identity. It is a remarkable achievement of  imagination that every part of this first-  person narrative has a truthful ring.  "Swimming Upstream" by Beth Brant  deals with a variety of painful subjects, such  as lesbians losing custody of their chUdren  and alcohol abuse, but it is a story of great  hope. Brant's ability to move fluidly backwards and forwards in time is one of the  great strengths of her writing: it reflects  so weU how people think. But this story is  more than an exercise in good story-telhng.  It is informed by a Native outlook, but wUl  perhaps be of use to any person, Native, lesbian, or neither, who is trying to stay sober.  Faith Jones  has  impeccable lesbian  credentials.  KINESIS LETTERS  Parody is  unacceptable  Kinesis:  In October I was at a banquet where 100-  150 women were celebrating our successful  softbaU season. The entertainment included  a one-woman mime of a Pointer Sisters'  song. The performer, a white woman, came  on stage with black-faced dummies dangling  from her shoulders. She had stained her  own face to mimic a woman of African heritage. As she sang and moved, the dummies jerked and flopped around. The audience, which included few women of colour,  was mostly very enthusiastic about this caricature. They laughed and applauded and  many rose to their feet in appreciation. I  was upset by the performance, however, and  by the approval of the audience, so I spoke  with the performer.  She assured me that she had not intended  any insult. Her purpose had been to entertain. She had checked with others about the  mime beforehand and she was sorry if I was  upset. I beheve that the performer did not  intend to degrade Black women, but the effects of this kind of presentation, together  with audience support, are far more telhng  and relevant than the intent.  Shortly after our conversation I encountered, in the washroom, the sole Black  woman from the audience. She had walked  out of the performance. She pointed out  that there are infinite other ways to entertain, citing as an example the earlier parody  of the boycott of Joe's Cafe, and questioned  why it was necessary and evidently acceptable to entertain ourselves at the expense  t of Black women. Her dismay was clear. She  left the banquet early, feehng less than welcome. This hurtful consequence Uluminates  the damaging naivete' of the performer's  "lack of intent." Beyond its effect on the  Black woman, the lip-sync was harmful because it reinforced a particular stereotype  and the dangerous assumption that mockery of Blacks by whites is acceptable.  If the lip-sync had been a parody of a.  trio of white women, the audience response  would have been different, I think. We need  to ask ourselves why. When men dress as  women to entertain, as they do in the high  school where I work, most people regard it  as comical. But when women dress up as  men there is httle comedy in it. Again, why  is this so?  I also asked myself, and the performer,  whether it would be acceptable or comical if  a heterosexual man was to parody Ferron or  MicheUe Shocked or kd Lang to a straight,  ah-male audience. H the men found it funny,  what would they be laughing at? If I were  the only lesbian in the audience, how would  I feel about the performance and the audience support? Analogies faU short of representing others' experiences, but if women  are conscious of our status vis-a-vis white  men, considering these analogies is a way to  begin to understand why white people parodying people of colour is unacceptable.  The performer identified her lip-sync as  theatre, art, and claimed that this context  legitimized blackening her face to mimic  a Black woman. People of European heritage have been conditioned to accept this  > The Vancouver Folk Music Festival presents  I GREAT WOMENS CONCERTS  MARIE-LYNN HAMMOND  SUNDAY • MARCH 10*8 PM  Co-founder of legendary folk group, Stringband,  celebrated playwright and host of a popular  national CBC radio show, Marie-Lynn Hammond  journeys to our fair city in her capacity as a singer-  songwriter with the able accompaniment of  Marilyn Lerner. It's our way of celebrating  International Women's Day.  BARBARA HIGBIE  SUNDAY • MARCH 24 • 8 PM  Virtuoso on the fiddle and key boards, Barbara  Higbie has performed a wide variety of music —  most notably as part of the new acoustic music  ensemble Montreux. She is now beginning a  career as a soloist adding her talents as a writer and  singer to her legendary skill as an instrumentalist.  CHRISTINE LAVIN  SUNDAY .APRIL 14 »8PM  One of the finest, funniest and most insightful  songwriters to emerge over the last decade,  Christine Lavin returns to Vancouver with new  and old songs, and who knows, perhaps another  twirl of her baton.  VANCOUVER EAST CULTURAL CENTRE  1895 Venables at Victoria • Tickets for each of these shows are $13 (CST included)  available at Black Swan Records, Highlife Records, the VFMF office 879-2931 or  by calling 254-9578 to reserve.  racial caricaturing through a long history  of whites dressing as Blacks, on stage and  in film. The history of this type of performance, however, has been one of not only  presenting a grotesque, exaggerated impression of Black people to the pubhc, but  it also has frequently excluded people of  African heritage from employment in the  theatre arts. For years in American film,  Black actors were unable to work because  white actors were given those roles. Later,  when Afro-Americans began to participate  in film, they were required to wear make-up  to make them look hke white actors made  up hke Black actors. We are connected to  and influenced by our history. The connection between the "Pointer Sisters" performance, and the oppressive heritage of  "black-face" in our culture, needs to be acknowledged. To continue to accept this kind  of "theatre" is to perpetuate the oppression  of people of colour.  A. Scholefield  Vancouver, BC  Spiritual  perversion  Kinesis:  I was glad to see the article on New Age  thinking by Rae Gabriel (Nov. 1990). It is  good to see this dangerous buUshit being  questioned. Much New Age thought is a  spiritual perversion similar in many ways  to fundamentalist Christianity. Though neither New Agers nor fundamentalists would  appreciate being compared, there are things  they have in common. GuUt is a big factor in both (though New Agers call it "responsibility") and, in both, the oppressed  are encouraged to blame themselves whUe  the oppressors go guUt- free! The New Age  phUosophies of "abundance" and "prosperity" mimic the heresy (prevalent in certain "Christian" groups) that the righteous  prosper ("God wants you to have a CadU-  lac!" shouts the T.V. evangehst.) Gabriel is  correct in noticing that New Age thinking  dove-tails with right-wing goals.  I have had a couple of femimsts mention  to me that this kind of New Age talk simply makes them close up whenever someone  says the word "spiritual". This is a shame,  because a mature spirituality involves compassion and humUity and has nothing to do  with the manipulative power trips that New  Age "gurus" are into.  Anne Miles,  Gibsons, BC  What does  Pat Burns  stand for?  Kinesis:  To CKVU-TV, Vancouver  Re: "Pat Burns Show" on Vancouver  CKVU, December 6, 1990. I had no time  to get through to protest his short editorial  as it is a hve phone-in show. No one had  phoned in about the 14 massacred women of  Montreal. Burns just gave a short editorial,  most of which contained these statements:  "Why don't they call it Mark Lepine Day?  We had a whole day of talks and interviews,  parading here and there—just waUowing in  it, that's what it amounts to. Why don't  they get themselves a Waning WaU? Are we  going to have this fuss every year after year?  Mark Lepine was insane, and that's aU there  is to it...That's the last I want to hear of it."  No one had phoned in that day about the  December 6, 1989 massacre. There was no  regard for the feehngs and fear of women or  for their grieving, not even admitting that  violence to women is a continuum. Women  don't rape men with violence, in our homes  or the streets, schools, colleges.  Why can't the men in powerful positions  use their power in fairness, honesty and  truthfulness; or has this any meaning in the  media? What do you stand for?  I work as a volunteer at a Transition  House for battered women and chUdren. I  can assure you: men beat women and chUdren and think nothing of it. And it doesn't  stop. She'U go back after being promised by  her partner that things wUl be different, but  they never are. No judges, lawyers, pohticians, media personnel seem to want to educate themselves on this problem, for it is  our problem.  For 19 years I too was beaten, with broken bones, black eyes, crippled with the  kicks aimed at my hmbs and hips. The terror of knowing this time you may die and at  the same time telling your chUdren to run  outside and stay with their friends untU it  was safe to return; hearing them screaming at their dad to stop, me protecting my  face so I could go to my nursing job without  black eyes, so no one would know.  I was an immigrant who was unsure of  her rights in this country, my identification  being kept locked up so I had no means of  escape, no abihty to drive, no personal bank  account. There were threats to my chUdren,  pets, or relatives if I were to leave, and I  took these seriously.  I know what it feels hke to have a fist connecting with excruciating pain. I know what  it sounds hke too, bone on bone. I want you  to feel what the young Poly Tech women  must have felt, being told by a man with  gun that they were going to die for being  feminists.  I have grown chUdren. When it happened  I wanted to make sure they were safe. I  grieved for the women's remaining families  and friends. This is supposed to be the land  of the free, yet women cannot even walk  the streets or sit in front of their televisions  . without abuse from men of power and position.  I wUl mark down every product advertised on the offending program and  send them a copy of this letter, plus  copies to Status of Women, MediaWatch,  WAVAW (Women Against Violence Against  Women), of which I am a member. Remarks  to the detriment of women must stop r  Jackie Seymour  Abbotsford, BC  1146 Commercial § Phone: 253-0913  KINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy^^^^^  yy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/yyyy^  BULLETIN BOARD  READ THIS  All hstings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubhc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (plus $0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (plus $0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadhne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis wUl not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: Bulletin Board,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more information call 255-  5499.  EVENTS  EVENT SIE V E N T SIE V E IM T  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issue—  come to the Writers' Meeting on Wed.  Feb. 6 at 7 pm at our office, #301-1720  Grant St. If you can't make the meeting,  call 255-5499. No experience necessary,  all women welcome  WOMEN OF COLOUR CAUCUS  Women of Colour are organizing at Kinesis and we welcome all volunteers past,  present and future to our next meeting  on Mon. Feb. 4 at 7 pm at #301-1720  Grant St. For more info, please call Terri  Hamazaki at 321-0575  VSW MEETINGS  All VSW members are welcome to attend Co-ordinating Collective meetings,  held at our office at #301-1720 Grant  St. Next meeting is Mon. Feb. 18 (5:30  pm). Call 255-5511 for more info  CONCERNED WOMEN OF BC  The next meeting for the Concerned  Women of BC will be held Tues. Feb.  19, 1991 at VSW, #301-1720 Grant St,  7:30 pm. Call 255-5511 for more info  INT'L LESBIAN WEEK  Vancouver's Fifth Annual International  Lesbian Week is Feb. 16-24. See pg. 14  for details  GULF WAR  To keep in touch with anti-war activities  in Vancouver, there are a few places to  call. The Women's International League  for Peace and Freedom will be holding  noon hour rallies every Thursday at the  Vancouver Art Gallery (contact Florence  Shafer 731-4585). The Middle East Peace  Action's next public meeting is February  10. Call 435-5199 or 255-3633 for location and information about other actions. Other activities are being organized  by Greenpeace: 253-7701, and End The  Arms Race: 736-2366.  As well, write the prime minister at  the Parliament Buildings, Ottawa Ont.  KlA 0A2, or call (613) 992- 4211. Mary  Collins, Associate Minister of Defence, is  also the Minister Responsible for the Status of Women. Call her office at (604)  666-3434, or write Suite 578, 999 Canada  Place, Vancouver BC V6C 3E1  FROM THE ENCUENTRO  The 5th Encuentro of Latin American and  Caribbean Women, held last November  in Argentina, will be the subject of an  evening of video and talks by Carmen Rodriguez and Chantale Phillips to be held  at La Quena on Tues. Feb. 5 at 7:30 pm.  The event is co-sponsored by Aquelarre  and the Vancouver Status of Women and  will be by donation. Everyone is welcome.  WOMEN IN A VIOLENT SOCIETY  A major conference concerning women,  mental health and violence from a feminist perspective will be held May 9-12 at  the Banff Springs Hotel. Keynote speakers include Andrea Dworkin, Rosemary  Brown, Shirley Turcotte, Sandra Butler,  Kate Millet and Carla McKague. Numerous workshops and facilitators. Early registration ($175 plus GST) before March  15; $200 plus GST after. For more info,  call (403) 482-6091 or write to Women  in a Violent Society, c/o The Canadian  Mental Health Assoc, 9th Floor, 10050-  112th St., Edmonton, Alberta T5K 2J1  JOANE CARDINAL-SCHUBERT  An artist of Native ancestry, Cardinal-  Schubert is interested in critically examining Native traditions and history within  contemporary artistic practice. She gives  an Artist's Talk at the Van. Art Gallery,  Thurs. Feb. 22, at 7:30 pm, the Annex  4th Floor  PATTERNITY  This new three-hour video installation by  local feminist video artist and historian  Sara Diamond focuses on representations  of memory, generational and gender differences and the family, through convergence of public/private histories. At the  Vancouver Art Gallery, until Mar. 3  FREE LAW CLASSES  The Public Legal Education Society offers an array of free law classes this  winter throughout the Lower Mainland.  Topics include "Women, Money & Relationships", "Small Claims", "Immigration  Law" etc. For more info and class times,  dates, and locations, call 688-2565  CHILDREN IN POVERTY  That's the focus of the BC Teachers' Federation Conference of teachers and community reps on March 2. For more info,  contact Lou Aldridge at the BCTF. Tel:  731-8121 or 1-800-663-9163  BLACK HISTORY MONTH  In celebration of Black History Month, up  and coming young artists honoured at the  Junior Black Achievement Awards will be  profiled at the Van. East Cultural Ctr.  Gallery, 1895 Venables, Feb. 5-Mar. 4.  Call 254-9578 for details.  Watch also for a film and video presentation of local and national work by Black  artists, presented on Rogers cable 4 starting Feb. 4  RANCH ROMANCE  Contemporary cowgirls "Ranch Romance" play the VECC Sun. Feb. 10, at 8  pm. Tix $12  WEAR GREEN  On International Women's Day, Fri. Mar.  8, to support Pay Equity, an $8 minimum  wage, and raising welfare rates to the  poverty line. Help organize the campaign  Women for Better Wages: call Donna,  879-2996 or Debbie, 876-2275 for more  info and next meeting time and place  RESEARCH PROJECT  If you are a woman who has experienced  hysterectomy, Candida, or abnormal pap  smears and would like to share that information in a confidential interview, please  call the Van. Women's Health Collective  at 255-8284 by mid-Feb  KELLY WOOD EXHIBITION  Several of Wood's works of photo collage  dealing with the stereotypical portrayal of  gender relations will be shown at the Western Front, 303 E. 8th Ave., Feb. 12-  Mar. 22. Call 876-9343 for more info  INGRID KOENIG PAINTINGS  Koenig's Empowerment Series Paintings  will be shown at the Pitt Gallery, 36 Powell St, Feb. 7-28. Call 681-6740 for more  info  LA QUENA BENEFIT  A benefit concert featuring Ancient Cultures will be held at la Quena, 1111 Commercial, on Sat. Feb. 9, at 8 pm. Tix at  door, $6-8  NEW NATIVE MEDIA  Loretta Todd will lead a workshop for  Aboriginal producers on "Video Futures/Issues of Form: New Native Media" at Video In, 1102 Homer St, Sun.  Feb. 10, 12:30-6:30 pm. Various artistic strategies, forms, and practices will be  evaluated. Cost: $10 members, $15 non-  members. Call 688-4336 to register or for  more info  RESOURCE GUIDE  The British Columbia Public Interest Research Group announces the soon to be  published 1991 Women's Resource Guide.  The guide, which provides information on  many issues affecting women, needs you  to provide ideas, updates and to tell us  who may want a copy. Call us at 291-  4360 or write: BC PIRG, TC 303, Simon  Fraser University, Bby, BC, V5A 1S6  LEAF SPEAKER'S BUREAU  The West Coast Women's Legal Education and Action Fund has speakers available for classes, workshops, and large  groups to speak and lead discussions on  the Charter and human rights legislation.  For more info or to book a speaker, call  684-8772  IWD ORGANIZING  Come help us organize International  Women's Day. Meetings at 7:30 pm every  Thursday until Mar. 7 at VSW, #301-  1720 Grant St. Bring us your imagination. For more info on meetings, call 255-  5511 or 251-5055 (message)  QUEER ACTION  The group Queer Action is hosting a forum on Violence Against Lesbians in Our  Community on Feb. 11 at 7:30 pm, at  the VLC, 876 Commercial Dr. Call 254-  8458 for more info on this and other upcoming lesbian events  Pink ink  in co-operation with  TbeMre La Seizieme  present  ®e 3tmx (Sestes  anb beautiful ©eefcs  A bilingual play by Marie-Lynn Hammond  A heartwarming and intimate exploration  of the intruiging lives of two  extraordinary women; one French, one  English.  ~ February 13 to March 10 ~  Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8:30 p.m.  2. for 1 Sunday Matinees at 2:00 p.m.  3102 Main St. at 15th Ave.  Back Door of Heritage Hall  876-4165  for reservations  Y^ffiSJy Ht&      |courier  KINESIS Bulletin Board  -v\.S.\\N\X\X\.\.NV\NXNX\XXNN.VN.N\V>^^^^  UNLEARNING RACISM  Weekend Workshops for Women: Feb.  8,9,10. For Women and Men: Mar.  1,2,3. Facilitated by AWARE (Alliance  of Women Against Racism, etc.). Racism  hurts all of us but its effects are experienced very differently by people of colour  and white people. Sliding scale $20-250.  Held at Camp Alexandra, White Rock.  Let us know access/childcare needs. Registration starts Jan. 3. Phone Janet 734-  8156, Mari 872-1743 or Sarah 251-4601.  Sponsored by the Unlearning Racism  Workshop Committee.  MOISEIWITSCH & LAURENCE  A collaborative installation by Carel Moiseiwitsch and Robin Laurence which combines fictional and graffiti impulses. Exhibition Companion essay by Hollie Owen;  chronology by Skai Fowler. Exhibition  runs to Feb. 25, 1991. The Lateral  Gallery at Women in Focus, 849 Beatty  St. 682-5848. Gallery hours: Wed .-Sun.,  noon to 5 pm  SELF DEFENSE  Video showing and public forum on self  defense on Sun. Feb. 24, 3 pm. at Britannia Community Centre, Old Cafeteria.  "Karate for Women" (8 min.) and "The  Women Who Got Away" (60 min.) Forum  with Anita Roberts (Women's Self Defense), Alice MacPherson (Wenlido) and  Joni Miller (Karate for Women). $2 donation. For info call 734-9816  FREE LEGAL ADVICE  The UBC Law Students' Legal Advice  Program has opened a free legal clinic  for women. A safe, unintimidating environment for women with a wide variety  of legal needs. Clinic runs from 7:15-9:15  pm. on alternate Tues evenings at Battered Wo men's Support Services Feb 12,  26 and Mar. 12. Appointments can be  made by calling 228-5791. Drop-ins welcome if space permits.  LAWYER REFERRAL  The Van. Status of Women is updating  our Lawyer Referral service. If you are  a woman lawyer practicing in the Lower  Mainland area and are interested in participating, or would like to recommend a  lawyer, call Terry at 255-6554  E'ESfgTlg'gT'g'gT'gTfg'Wg'g'gTTl  Call 255-5499  for ad rates  ciggiggiiiiimiram  OUR IMAGES, OUR SELVES  This series presents 12 experimental  videotapes made by women that examine issues centering around women, their  bodies, and explorations of the self. At  Video In, 1102 Homer St, Feb. 15-16 at  9 pm. Tix $4 members, $5 non-members.  Call 688-4336 for program info  VALENTINE'S DANCE  Sponsored by the Van. Lesbian Connection, at the York Theatre, 639 Commercial, on Feb. 16 at 8 pm. Sorry, but event  not wheelchair accessible as those halls  were not available. Childcare at VLC, 876  Commercial Dr. Tix $4-6, at VLC and  Ariel Books. Call 254-8458 for more info  AND FOR I.W.D...  The VLC is also sponsoring an International Women's Day dance on Szi,  Mar. 9, at the Capri Hall, 3925 Fraser  St. Wheelchair accessible, childcare available, Tix $4-6  DOUBLE BILL BENEFIT  For the Van. Women's Health Collective at the Starlight Cinema, 935 Denman, on Thurs. Feb. 28, 7:30 pm (free  parking at West End Community Ctr.).  "A Question of Silence" (Marleen Gor-  ris) and "The Patience of Rosa Luxembourg" (Margarethe von Trotta) will be  shown. Tix $10, available at the VWHC,  Ariel Books, Women's Bookstore, Octopus, Little Sisters, UBC Women's Ctr.  Call 255-8284 for more info  WOMEN & VIOLENCE  The theme of this year's BC Federation  of Labour Women's Rights Conference,  Mar. 8-9, is "Breaking the Cycle of Violence", on the role trade unionists and  the community can play in education and  intervention to break the cycle of violence  in women's lives. Women delegates only  at this conference, which is open to all interested women. At the Westin Bayshore,  Vancouver: Fee $25, incl. Sat. lunch. Reg.  and childcare deadline Feb. 22 to : BC  Federation of Labour, 4279 Canada Way,  Bby., V5G 1H1 (430-5917)  STATE OF THE STRAIT  A Public Inquiry into the Health of Georgia Strait, sponsored by the Save Georgia Strait Alliance, will be held at the  Coast Bastion Inn, Nanaimo, Feb. 22-24.  Reg. fee $50-85, through Deborah Ferens  (Gabriola Island), 247-8335  EQUALITY EVE  Feb. 14 is the 10 yr. anniversary celebration of the entrenchment of equal rights  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C., V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday-Saturday 11:00-5:30 pm  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  FAMILY PRACTICE  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  11 E. BROADWAY AVENUE  VANCOUVER. B.C. V5T 1V4  873-1991  in the Canadian constitution.  GROUPS  253-1224  r             .hiTM  jsss'sar  umake|       H  udget.           —^  | "COOPERATIVES AND UNIONS WORKING TOGETHER" |  L  PANALADAn  AFRO-BRAZILIAN  CELEBRATION  i    Capoeira, West African Dance &  Drumming Workshops  |j   Feb.24 for 8 consecutive Sundays jj  Main Dance Place  call Indigo Arts for more info  Gabriella 875-0479  WOMEN'S HEALTH ISSUES  Learn about them and help teach others. Join us at the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective. Next volunteer training  starts in late Feb. Please call 255-8284  JOIN MEDIAWATCH  Concerned about Media Exploitation of  Women? MediaWatch, a national feminist organization concerned about the  status and portrayal of women and girls  in the media, works to improve and diversify these images through lobbying, education, and advocacy. Call 731-0457 for  volunteer opportunities and other info.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre is looking for  womon volunteers to do rape crisis work.  Training begins Feb. 20th and runs 11  weeks (Wed. 7-10 pm and Sun. 11-5 pm).  Childcare and transportation costs provided. WAVAW strives to be anti-racist,  anti-classist and anti-homophobic. Call  875-1328 for info.  OUT ON SCREEN  The organizers of Vancouver's Lesbian  and Gay Film Festival are looking for  women to help out in publicity, fundraising, programming and volunteer coordination. Call us at 685-1695 for more  info  SUPPORT GROUP  We are a support group for incest survivors who are going through the legal  system. Our focus is to support each  other & share information as well as work  as a group in effecting change through  telling our stories. Contact Diana 530-  8265 evenings or leave message  GROUP FACILITATOR  PEER COUNSELLOR TRAINING  Battered Women's Support Services will  be offering group facilitator/peer counselling training in the spring of this year.  If you are interested in working with battered women and would like to be considered for the training program, call 687-  1867 for an application form. We look forward to hearing from you. Deadline for  applications is Fri. Mar. 8, 1991  KARATE FOR WOMEN  Self defense, confidence and fitness. Shito  ryu karate taught by women at Carnarvon Community School, 16th and Balaclava. Tuesdays and Thursdays 7-9 pm.  Call Joni (734-9816), Rose (737-0910) or  Monica (872-8982)  'PRESS  FAMILY DROP-IN  The Downtown Eastside Family Drop-in  Program invites families who live in the  area to come by to 101 E. Hastings St.  on Wednesdays and Saturdays. Activities  and an informal space for you to come  and talk, get support and spend time with  your kids. For more info, call Delilah at  689-2802 or 689-0488  SUBMISSIONS  BUMBERSHOOT '91  Bumbershoot, the Labour Day Arts Festival in Seattle, invites applicants for its  21st celebration, Aug. 30-Sept. 2. Categories include literary and visual arts, music, dance, theatre, food, crafts etc. Performer applications deadline Feb. 22, all  others Feb. 15, to: Bumbershoot, PO  Box 9750, Seattle, WA, USA, 98109-  0750, (206) 447-9730  CONDITIONS  The Conditions Collective is now accepting submissions for an anthology of new  writing by women on Women and Censorship, to be published by Cleis Press.  How does censorship relate to the issues  see next page  tmiiHiiiiiiiiiiiiiiimiiiiHiiimmiiHii  , KINESIS  Five  Feminist  Minutes...  is back!  catch it  at the  Pacific  Cinematheque  1131 Howe St.  March 5  7&9pm  $6/ general  $4/ W.I.F. members  & underemployed  presented by  Women in Focus  Arts & Media Centre  info: 682-5848  fffilllllllillllllllllllllillllllllllllllllllllSg yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy^  /yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  BULLETIN BOARD  SUBMISSIONSHCLASSI FIE  from last page  of race, class, age, relationships, sexuality, women with AIDS/HIV, women in  prison, and women's and lesbian movements? Fiction and non-fiction submissions (typed, double-spaced, up to 15pp.,  with SASE) to: Conditions, 247 Liberty  Ave, Jersey City, NJ, USA, 07307. Deadline: June 1,1991  FIREWEED  Fireweed announces a special issue on  Jewish Women. Send us your essays,  artwork, fiction, theory, histories, jokes,  midrashim, poetry, rants, recipes etc.  Submissions accepted in any language.  Deadline Apr. 30, 1991, to: Fireweed,  Jewish Women's Issue, PO Box 279, Station B, Toronto, Ont. M5T 2W2  MTOFtIan=B  MOONWIT  Never buy pads again! Moonwit Menstrual Pads are 100% cotton terry and  flannelette. The innovative design comes  in two sizes, Regular and Goddess. Moon-  wit is washable, comfortable, secure, extra absorbent and odorless, naturally. So  well-made, they could last as long as required, with minimal care. New Moon  Kit: one of each, our starter kit, $8.50.  Half Moon Kit: four regular, two goddess, $25.50. Full Moon Kit: enough for  most months, eight regular, four goddess,  $51. For another loony get our newsletter, "The Rag," dealing with our cycles,  power, feelings. Please add $2.75 p/h and  send to Moonwit, R.R. #4, Lang's Rd. C-  21 Ganges, B.C. VOS 1E0 (Catalog and  wholesale inquiries invited.)  COUNSELLING FOR LESBIANS  I am a lesbian-feminist counsellor with  extensive experience working in the area  of sexual abuse and incest. I work one  to one, with couples and in groups on  coming out issues, homophobia, sexuality, inner child healing, self-esteem and  assertiveness. I have a sliding fee scale.  First half-hour free. Miljenka Zadravec  253-3146  SURVIVORS GROUP FOR LESBIANS  This is a support group for women who  have been sexually abused as children. In  a safe atmosphere we will work on healing the inner child. Sliding fee scale. For  more information, call Miljenka Zadravec  at 253-3146   ACCOMMODATION REQUIRED  Mature, employed, n/s lesbian looking for  bachelor or one bdrm apt. or to share  with 1-2 other women. Have older, well- -  behaved  cat.   Need  quiet,  clean,  sober  space. $375-425. 251-3993 eve.  HEARTLEAF  ...because home is where the art is. A  Canadian mail-order book business specializing in the fine and performing arts.  Books, tapes, and music to encourage everyone to be active as an artist—music,  dance, drama, puppetry, writing, visual  arts, crafts, and storytelling. Owned and  operated by mother and daughter. Fast,  courteous service. Gift ideas for all ages.  VISA/MasterCard. Free catalog. Write or  phone Heartleaf, Box 40-D, Slocan Park,  BC, VOG 2E0, (604) 226-7733  The Flirtations  Direct from New York City - the hottest a cappella quintet in their Canadian premiere.  Openly gay and damn proud of it.  "Glorious voices and grand social copiousness" - New York Press  "The earthiness of Sweet Honey in the Rock and the winking humour  of La Cages Aux Folles" - Cabaret/1990  COOP  ^February 12-16,8pm  Coming Out  Show  Vancouver East Cultural Centre 1895 Venables at Victoria  Reservations 254-9578 Ticketmaster 280-3311  CLASS FIE  VIDEOS FOR SALE  Free listing of over 1,300 different titles. If you don't see it, just ask:  The Hunger, Desert Hearts, Personal  Best, Entre Nous, Maedchen in Uniform, Isadora, The Group, Chanel Solitaire, Lianna, Frances, Billy Jean King-  Tennis Anyone. Ann Whitty, 552 Church  Street, Box 99, Toronto, Ontario M4Y  2H0  A WOMAN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: New counselling, educational and referral service on  the North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirmative counselling, workshops,  support groups and information - for general personal growth and healing and  women's issues. Call Lou Moreau, founder  and registered clinical counsellor, 984-  8738 or 922-7930.  Margo Kane (pictured above) performs in her play Moonlodge, the musical story of  a Native fosterchild who journeys through mainstream culture to retrieve her roots.  At the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, Feb. 26 - March 2, and March 4-9. Call  254-9578 for reservations  r«y-vni:ii=i»]  FEMINIST COUNSELLOR  Special interests: women's issues, childhood trauma, substance abuse, and internalized homophobia. Sliding scale. Karen  Lewis, MSW. Phone 254-4644  POSITION AVAILABLE  CCEC Credit Union requires a full-time  Operations Manager. This is a new position. Reporting to the General Manager,  this position is responsible for overall day-  to-day management of the Accounts area,  including planning and new services development, supervision of Accounts staff,  and general office administration. This  position is also responsible for Personnel  Administration, including hiring, training, scheduling, and payroll. The successful candidate will have strong administrative skills and experience, interpersonal skills, mathematical and accounting  skills, and experience with banking operations. Familiarity with DOS-based computer systems and with non-profit and cooperative organizations is desirable. The  Credit Union has one branch, eight staff,  and assets of $9 million. Apply in writing to Jill Kelly, Manager, CCEC Credit  Union, 2250 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9 (Phone: 254-4100)  ROOMMATE WANTED  Non-smoking, non-homophobe woman  (lesbian preferred) wanted to share home  with two women, one-and-a-half dogs and  a cat. One-and-a-half rooms available immediately in house with large yard, gardens, hardwood floors, etc., across from  Trout Lake Park (Victoria & 19th). Rent  $295 + util. Call 874-2329.  RADIANCE  The Magazine for Large Women, is a visionary publication devoted to the positive health and well-being of women all  sizes of large. Each issue features compelling profiles of inspiring large women,  along with powerful articles on health,  media, fashion and politics. Radiance is  one of the leading resources in the Size  Acceptance Movement, with more than  100 ads each issue for products, services  and information for the plus-size woman.  Subscribe! In Canada, $20/1 year; $35/2  years (US funds only). Please add 7 percent GST to subscription price. Send to  Radiance, P.O. Box 31703, Oakland, CA  94604.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Our all women's Caribbean beachfront  guesthouse awaits you. Beautiful, LF  owned Spanish style villa on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Small tropical gardens, oceanside  pool, spacious comfortable common areas with large balconies and magnificent ocean view. Private, large, airy guestrooms, sumptuous meals and drinks,  relaxing massages and healing crystals.  Room rates: $330 single; $440 double per  week. For reservations call our Toronto  friend Suzi, at (416) 462-0046 between 9  am and 10 pm.  TRY CO-OP LIVING  City View Co-op, a 31 unit building near  Victoria & Hastings, keeps an open waiting list for applications for membership.  Rent for 1, 2 or 3 BR apts, is $467, 589, or  683, plus a (refundable) share purchase.  To apply, send a S.A.S.E. to: Membership  Ore, 1885 E. Pender, Vane. V5L 1W6.  SHIATSU TREATMENTS  Ready to work on your stuff? Do it with  your body. I work from the basis that  our bodies remember joys, sorrows, fear  and frustrations. Unexpressed, these feelings play havoc in our lives, undermining  our true potential. Using touch, breath,  imagery and body awareness, my Shiatsu  treatments can help you free unexpressed  emotions, and gain clarity. Astarte Sands,  251- 5409.  KINESIS LIfifZBG  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, II  VANCOUVER, BC VST 1Z8  Keep talking,  keep listening  and  keep reading  Subscribe  Published 10 times a year by the Vancouver Status or Women  Suite 301   1720 Grant St. Vancouver, B.C., Canada V5L 2Y6  r~IVSW Membership (includes Kinesis subscription): $30 plus $1.40  KINESIS Subscription:  Bl year: $20 plus $1.40 GST fj2 years: $36 plus $2.52 GST □institutions/Groups: $45 plus $3.15 GST  Cheque enclosed       [^jBill me [^New [^Renewal □Gift QDonation  '"'"'  XZZiX  r outside Canada  nesis is free to  Address  Country  Postal Code  Phone