 «p  OCT/NOV 1999  Polyamorous Fidelity..  CMPA$2.25  ENOUGH ALREADY! STOP THE RACISM!  c,  MIGRANTS SIVHONFUTJTO  ^ED FOR OUR YOUTHS  h2!SS**h.  ?slim  Today. I w  much apprene  n'uive Pro-  o rehabilita-  ,i the  •CEASELESS  CAMPAIGN'  TO SNEAK  INTO CANADA  "" a death blov  ternative program'  A Sept. 3 news ai  grants generate boor  ria lawyers, hotels . i  75 children from re;  This amount would  instate alternate  tional programs.  CANAur\ ■"""o.irker  rfcSadabeingP^^a-cKer  2$T.  ..alio"  dard and parents u  dren attending tn<  (more than 1.000 i:  ho have chil-  i Vancouver)  resources to-  &oKs  ENOUGH ALREADY  'It's time to toughen the law' i^am  Special Coliections Swfkri  The Real Snakeheads Exposed  Prostitution and the Internet  mg urges  f Celebrating  25 Years  19 7 4-1999  #309-877 E. Hastings St.  Vancouver, BCV6A3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-7508  Email: kinesis@web.net  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meeting is on Tues Nov 2 at our  office, 309-877 E. Hastings St.  Founded in 1974, Kinesis is published  ten times a year by the Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are to  be a non-sectarian feminist voice for  women and to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting  sexism, racism,classism, homophobia, ableism, imperialism and anti-  Jewish oppression. Views expressed  in Kinesis are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller  Agnes Huang, Jenn Lo  Bernadette Phan  Amal Rana, Colleen Sheridan  (on leave)  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Georgina Farrah, Shann Furman,  Fatima Jaffer, Leanne Keltie, Lynda,  Sedi Minachi, Nancy Pang,  Bernadette Phan, Monica K. Rasi,  Lisa Wulwik  Marketing: Jenn Lo  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Production Coordinator: Amal Rana  :Jenn Lo  FRONT COVER  Racist attacks on refugees in tl  media  Compiled by Bernadette Phan & Amal  Rana  PRESS DATE  October 27, 1999  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be submitted on  disk or by email. Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction. Editorial  guidelines are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are  double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (design required): 16th  (camera ready): 18th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  Inside  News  DARE forum challenges understanding of migration 3  by Fatima Jaffer  Vigil for Mitra, Anita and all victims of male violence 4  by Agnes Huang  Features  Canada's record on refugees 9  by Kelly D'Aoust  Taking action against globalization 18  by Lisa Wulwik  Sex trafficking on the Internet 20  by Donna M. Hughes  Bigger bull for your bucks: A response to the Coalition for a  Humanistic British Canada 21  by Jackie Yeow  Genetically engineered food and other scary stories 22  by Lisa Wulwik  From the DARE forum  Myths & facts about the refugee claimants from Fujian 10  by DARE: Direct Action Against Refugee Exploitation  The real snakeheads: Canadian government and corporations 11  by Nandita Sharma  The creation of a "crisis" 12  by Sunera Thobani  An intelligent and humane response 12  by Rita Wong  Centrespread  The legal herstory of abortion in Canada 10  information from the Pro-Choice Action Network  Access to abortion: an update from across the country 11  information from the Canadian Abortion Rights Action League  Flashback: the Abortion Caravan arrives on Parliament Hill 12  by Gwen Hauser  Arts  City Design from a feminist perspective 23  by Emilie Adin  Four women on Fidelity 24  reviewed by Luanne Armstrong  No Choice: women tell their stories of illegal abortion 24  by Karen Page  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 5  compiled by Fatima Jaffer  International What's News 6  compiled by Fatima Jaffer  Movement Matters 7,8  compiled by Leanne Keltie and Lisa Wulwik  Bulletin Board 25  compiled by Bernadette Phan  DARE forum on migration 3  ioice On Abartw  Fighting for choice  Internet trafficking 20  Environments  for GirlS and  Women  City Design from a Feminist Perspective  Builf environments   OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  V As Kinesis goes to press, more than 300  people who came to Canada from China  by ship this summer are still being held in  detention—in jails in Prince George and  around the Lower Mainland.  On top of that, detention and refugee  claims hearings are happening on a daily  basis. So far, the outcomes have not been  positive for those who made the several  month journey from Fujian province to BC.  One refugee board adjudicator has rejected  all 11 claims he has heard, including the  case of a woman who is a member of an  ethnic minority group in China.  There are serious concerns being raised  about the fairness of the process—namely,  with regards to the fast-tracking of hearings, the lack of adequate legal representation, and the group profiling (read: stereotyping) being used to evaluate claimants.  In October, a group of women in Vancouver calling themselves DARE (Direct  action Against Refugee Exploitation) held  a public education forum in Vancouver.  (DARE also provides support and advocacy for the Fujianese women, particularly those who are in Vancouver and those  who are incarcerated at the Burnaby Correctional Centre for Women.)  The goal of the forum was to confront  the racist and classist response to the arrival of the people from China—the response in the media, from federal and provincial politicians and cabinet ministers,  and by members of the general public.  The goal was also to broaden the discussion around the arrival of people from  Fujian province, placing their situation  rightly within the context of economic globalization and forced migration.  In this issue, Kinesis presents three of  the speeches from the DARE forum—from  Nandita Sharma, Sunera Thobani and Rita  Wong [starting on Page 11.]  DARE says it will continue to confront  the scapegoating of the 590 refugee claimants from Fujian province, and is planning  to launch another campaign in the near  furture. Stay tuned.  In this issue of Kinesis, we also challenge the rise of another anti-woman campaign, courtesy of anti-abortion protesters  [see Pages 14 and 15.]  For example, in late September, a US-  based group called the Centre for Bio-Ethical Reform (CBR) tried to spread their anti-  choice propaganda on the campus of the  University of British Columbia. CBR, a privately funded organization whose purpose  is to "educate" students about the anti-  choice philosophy, was invited to the campus by the AMS Lifeline Club.  So what does CBR's "education" consist of? First of all, they call their campaign  the "Genocide Awareness Project," which  is (intentionally) misleading. One of their  main "educationals" is a billboard display  titled, "The Changing Face of Choice."  Panel #1 is called: "Religious Choice,"  which features an image of entangled bodies of Holocaust victims and the Nazi swastika.  Panel #2 is called: "Racial Choice,"  which features an image of a Black man  killed by the KKK.  And Panel #3 is called: "Reproductive  Choice," which features an image of what  appears to be the limbs of a fetus clutching  a dime.  (Each panel measures six feet by 14  feet.)  The (il)logical progression of the CBR's  argument—which they freely admit—is:  Nazis kill Jews. KKK kills Blacks. Women  kill babies.  Other posters compare abortion to examples of genocide, such as in Cambodia,  Wounded Knee (South Dakota), Rwanda and  the former Yugoslavia. Another poster compares Planned Parenthood to the Nazis.  In the end, CBR didn't get to set up its  billboard display because it refused to pay  the $10,000-per-day security deposit requested by UBC. CBR reps did go onto the  campus and held a public talk. Don't think  they're done with UBC though... the CBR  has said it will sue the university for violating its right to freedom of speech. Ap-  o   rvi   E   N  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members of VSW, renewed  their memberships, or who made donations during the months of August, September  and October.  Barbara Bell * Liz Bennett * Regina Brennan * Gwen Brodsky * Karen Clark * Gail  Cryer * Jean Elder * Karin Federa * Gloria Filax * Dennis Foon * Shauna Fowler *  Heather George * Ieke Giese * Ellen Hamer * Jo Hinchliffe * Nola Johnston * Azra  Kamrudin * Else Kennedy * Barbara Kuhne * Maureen McEvoy * Sedi Minachi *  Suji Moon * Patty Moore * Tanis Preiss * Gloria Elvira Rogue * Rosemarie Rupps *  Catherine Russell * Ruth Sauder * Debra Shogan * Gale Stewart * Ruth Lea Taylor *  Mariene Trick * Jessica Ulrich * Joanne Ursino * Joan Vander Goes * Christine  Waymark * Rita Kim Wong * CUPE 2950 * Telecommunication Workers Union 20 * Vancouver Women's Health Collective  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Masoud Azarnoush * Helen Babalos * Merlin Beltain * Wendy Baker * Tanya De  Haan * Jody Gordon * Erin Graham * Nola Johnston * Tamara Knox * Valerie Raoul  * Linda Shuto * Shelagh Wilson  parently, one of their tactics is to sue universities for any such "violation."  We should mention that the Students  for Choice group up at UBC was very effective in organizing a strong protest demonstration against the Genocide Awareness  Project. And even though, CBR was a no-  show, pro-choice activists carried out their  rally as planned.  On another anti-abortion front: there's  the ongoing saga of Sissy von Dehn and the  IWD organizing committee in Vancouver.  Three years ago, in November 1996, von  Dehn—a well-known anti-choice agitator—and her cohort Peggy Holland showed  up at an IWD meeting. They proceeded to  take photos of all the women present. Needless to say, the women attending the meeting—well-aware of von Dehn's involvement with the anti-abortion movement—  didn't appreciate these tactics of intimidation and harassment.  A backgrounder: Cecilia von Dehn  owns a house across the street from the  Everywoman's Health Clinic, one of the  two free-standing abortion clinics in Vancouver. From there, she and other anti-abortion protesters direct their propaganda to  wards staff and women going into the  clinic.  von Dehn and Holland tried to get the  police to charge two of IWD organizers  with assault—there allegedly was a scuffle that night. They failed in that quest.  However, true to expectation, von Dehn  offered to share the photos she had taken  with the police, the right-wing media, and  possibly violent anti-choice organizations.  Now that their criminal charges  against Claire Robillard and Judith  Radovan have gone nowhere, von Dehn  and Holland are trying to proceed with a  civil suit against the two women. They're  asking for $10,000 in damages.  Robillard and Radovan vow to fight  back, and call on others to help out with  political, emotional and financial support.  Call them at (604) 798-9491.  One more thing, as Kinesis goes to  press... We hear that a settlement in the  Public Service Alliance Canada's pay equity fight with the federal government  could be close at hand. We can only hope  that the feds finally deal fairly with women  workers in Canada.  That's all for now. See you next month.  The following sentence must be sung to  the Gilligan's Island theme song. "There was  a story about a woman named Aggie and  the feminist newspaper that she ran..."  Have we got your attention yet??!! We sure  hope so.  Over the last few months, almost all of  the editions of Inside Kinesis have started  out with some kind of statement or the  other about the weather. Although the  women at Kinesis are firm believers in creating our own traditions, it was high time  to put that one to rest. We certainly don't  want to bore you—our readers—and really,  how many times can you write interesting  and witty things about the weather? Obviously one too many.  So enough with the preamble already!  Let's talk about what we've been up to inside our mango colored walls this month.  Well, let's start with the serious stuff. At one  of our recent Editorial Board meetings—  amidst generous helpings of goat curry and  kimchi (the dish that is)—we decided to  combine two months and make this the October/November issue. Was it the goat  curry you ask? Alas, if only we could blame  the food.  The truth is that there really is no one  to "blame" and no one single factor that  led to the late completion of this issue. A  definite lack of articles and writers flowing in this month, demands on time in other  areas of activism ,and the process of finding a new editor, came together in a lethal  combination that left us exhausted and  scurrying to catch up to our deadlines.  We wish to apologize profusely to all  our readers and would like to offer you the  option of extending your subscription in  order to make up for the bygone issue.  Please let us know if you wish to do this  and thank you for your continued support  and understanding.  You might be wondering who we've  hired for the position of Kinesis editor. Unfortunately, we felt that the resumes we received did not leave us with a large enough  pool of qualified applicants. The position  has since been reposted and we are hoping  to receive more applications as this issue  goes to press.  In case you think all has been doom,  gloom and stress at Kinesis, we thought  we'd tell you about some new writers and  volunteers who have revitalized our energies and creative spirits this month. Many  new writers made their debut in Kinesis this  month. They include Lisa Wulwik, Donna  M. Hughes, Karen Page and Luanne  Armstrong. A big thank you and welcome  to all of you.  We'd also like to welcome some new  faces to our production volunteer team.  Heartfelt thank yous to Georgina Farah,  Shann Furman and Lisa Wulwik for working on this month's issue and making our  lives a whole lot easier.  We're on a roll here so we thought  we'd keep the good news coming. The next  issue of Kinesis—our December/January  2000 issue—will be a Native Women's issue. We're pleased to introduce Audrey  Huntley as the guest editor for that issue.  Audrey worked with the Aboriginal Women's Action Network as the coordinator for  their research project and report on Bill C-  31 and its impact on Native women. She  has been working hard to solicit articles  and other pieces of writing from Native  women both near and far, and has gathered some amazing material!  If you know any Native women or  Native women's organizations who may  like a copy of the issue, let us know and  we'll add them to our list.  And now for the weather. Just kidding!  We won't torture you! We will promise to  continue with the Gilligan's Island /Kinesis theme though. However, you'll have to  wait til the next edition of Inside Kinesis to  get your next hit! Til then, we'll leave you  in bone-chilling suspense and wish you a  Happy Halloween/Samhain/All Souls'  Eve, et cetera.  Enjoy the trick or treating and don't  forget to save some candy for the hard  working (and sugar addicted) women at  KinesisW PS: Don't even try giving us raisins instead of candies...  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 News  Forum on refugees and immigration in Canada:  DARE-ing to be direct  by Fatima Jaffer  It was an historic meeting.  For the first time in a long, long time, a  gathering of people in Vancouver placed immigration and refugee issues, racism and people  of colour communities, at centre stage. It was  also the first time in this writer's long life that  a panel like this did not meet with a single  racist, simplistic question, but rather an audience response that was intelligent, compassionate and showed a serious willingness  to grapple with the complexities of the topic.  But most remarkable was that, for a few  hours in October and for the first time in a  very long time, people from the myriad fragmented movements in Vancouver came together to engage in serious discussion across  issue lines.  There were representatives of the women's  movement, lesbians, social justice activists,  environmental activists, anti-poverty workers, labour activists, transition house and crisis  line workers, immigration settlement workers, representatives from multicultural organi-  the people arriving on the second, third and  fourth boats.  "Everybody knew they weren't getting the  right story from the media. The reaction [to  the Chinese migrants] was so venomous and  the scapegoating so intense, it necessitated  the kind of response we saw at this forum,"  says Yasmin Jiwani, an anti-violence activist commenting on the large turnout of over  250 people at the DARE Forum.  As for the broad cross-section of people who made up the audience, Jiwani suggests, "It's a sign of the revival of an anti-  racist movement that has been fragmented  until now. We've all been working in our own  sectors, but we've come together in response  to this very blatant re-entrenchment of the  denial of racism."  Jiwani adds that the evening was also  remarkable because it brought together a combination of people on the panel. Each presented a particular perspective on the issue  with all its multi-faceted complexities, building upon the analyses of the others.  DARE forum panellists: (R-L) Agnes Huang, Nandita Sharma,  SuneraThobani, Rita Wong, Zool Suleman  zations, government employees, academics,  artists, writers and other cultural producers,  migrant workers, students, elders, First Nations peoples and people of colour.  The venue was the Heritage Hall. The  occasion, the DARE Forum.  DARE stands for Direct action Against  Refugee Exploitation. It is the Vancouver women's group that sprung up in September to  address the racist and classist response to  the four ships carrying people from Fujian  province in China which arrived in Canadian  waters over the summer.  While just a total of 590 migrants arrived  in the ships, from the racist furore unleashed  in the media, it seemed as if hordes of Chinese peoples were swarming all over the BC  coastline, threatening Canadian jobs and social  services.  Headlines blared: "Expect more boat people,  BC warned," and "Enough!" There was a demand for changes to immigration and refugee policies to stop any more "fake" or"eco-  nomic" refugees from "jumping the immigration queue." Suddenly, everyone in the province was talking about "snakeheads" [human  smugglers] as the "real criminals," even as  they watched Immigration officials detain all  The evening began with Cease Wyss of  the Squamish Nation welcoming people to Coast  Salish territories with an ancestral song which  has been passed down many generations and  now belongs to a woman named Syexwalia  (Anne Wannock).  Nandita Sharma, a member of the Basmati  Action Group, spoke first, drawing an overall picture of globalization and Canada's relations with China as the setting within which  these particular groups of migrants fit. She  stressed that the real "snakeheads" are the  Canadian government and corporations that  force people into tight corners and leave them  with no choice but to enslave themselves to  profiteers in order to escape poverty and exploitation in their communities [see page 11.]  SuneraThobani, a long-time activist who  currently teaches at Simon Fraser University  gave perhaps one of her best presentations.  She picked up Sharma's threads and spun  the web more intricately, placing colonization as an ongoing phase of globalization,  demasking the Canadian state's true intent  with regards to its immigration and refugee  policies, and exposing the scapegoating of  the migrants as a ruse to strip away rights  [see page 12-13.]  Victor Wong of the Vancouver Association of Chinese Canadians then filled in the  gaps, speaking about the work his group has  been doing in support of the Fujianese migrants. Zool Suleman, a lawyer and activist,  looked deeply into the ways the state manifests its agenda in its refugee processes and  procedures.  Finally, Rita Wong, a founding member  of DARE, pulled some more of the strands  together with an account of her own odyssey with the Fujianese people and the complexities surrounding their particular situation, as well as the various ramifications of  trafficking, of going underground, and of being  held by the state [see page 17.]  The speeches went on for almost two hours.  The audience sat rapt, ignoring the food table with its impressive display of donated and  home-cooked foods. When the speakers were  done, moderator Agnes Huang called for a  ten-minute break before taking questions from  the floor. She urged people not to leave, even  though the panel had gone over time.  Surprisingly, given the lateness of the  hour, most stayed. Each question asked became a further opportunity for the panel to  build upon its analyses, deepening the debate, compounding our already quite complex understanding of Canada's immigration  policies and the global context in which they  fit.  For example, Georgina Farrah, whose family  is from Afghanistan, spoke from the floor about  the difficulties of getting out of Afghanistan  and the crucial role"smugglers" play. She urged  us not to focus blame on the smugglers themselves, but on the governments that necessitate people to emigrate in such desperate  circumstances. Another audience member asked  about Canadian immigration quotas.  Suleman responded that Canada does  not currently meet the limits it sets for immigrants or refugees, he said. As for talk of  jumping the queue... "Let's talk aboutThe Queue,"  he said. "The queue is getting longer, the queue  is getting more expensive, the queue is becoming unfair, and people are then jumping  the queue. We're under-staffing our embassies, there's bribery going on, there are people  buying visitor visas," and there is a "raise-  the-fortress kind of security apparatus" being put in place to control the flow of peoples to Canada.  The security approach, said Suleman,  is also evident when one looks at how "CSIS  [the Canadian Security and Intelligence Service]  now identifies immigration as one of its top  three threats to Canada."  Thobani jumped in. "We are not meeting the targets set for immigrants and refugees, but we are meeting the targets set for  migrant workers. It's very selective which targets  are met."  She referred to the law and order agenda  prevailing in other areas of social policy, and  reminds us how fears of welfare fraud became the ruse allowing the government to  end the right to social assistance in this country  without much notice being taken. "It's not useful  to get distracted in talk of looking for the'criminals.' ...By focusing [on that,] the rights which  are being taken away do not receive the attention they should."  There was much talk about strategies to  change public discourse on immigration and  refugee issues in this country. Debate ensued.  Comment from the floor:  Paulina Chow  Affect government policy? Or open the borders and rethink the nation state?  "There is a very simple solution to dealing  with the organized criminal element," announced  Thobani, in response to a question. "Take away  their incentive. And taking away their incentive means that people are treated fairly, justly,  that they have rights that are respected...We  can't be closing down the borders, criminalizing  people, then saying we're going after the true  criminals."  Thobani explained that years at the helm  of the National Action Committee on the Status  of Women has taught her that lobbying for  changes to policy yields little change. "Change  comes through organizing, through fighting,  through mobilizing."  She talked about how opposition to then-  Immigration Minister Lucienne Robillard's measures to make either speaking English or French  mandatory in immigration selection had provoked  such an outcry, the measure was ditched.  Sharma picked up another thread, referring to a comment by Suleman that "Canadians" are upset with the Fujianese because  of their disregard of "the integrity of the system."  "There is no integrity in this system," Sharma  noted. "What this system does is feed off the  misery it creates. We need to stop operating  as if we want to maintain the system. We have  to be able to provide avenues that are going  to leave people in a stronger position to fend  for their rights."  The conversation built to a head. "What  is happening in this country is not about sending  people back," said Sharma. "There might be  a few undocumented people who might be  sent back. But what is really happening here,  the racism we are seeing in society, all of  the statements we are hearing about how these  people do not belong here, are ultimately making  them more vulnerable when they are living  here, and living here for generations.  "The headlines like 'Go home,' give the  notion that these people don't belong here.  And we know, that's 'us'," Sharma continued.  "Sure I've got Canadian citizenship status,  but I'm told on a daily basis in one way or  another that I don't belong here. That makes  me vulnerable as a woman of colour in this  society. Women of colour have been saying  forever, regardless of our citizenship status,  we earn less, we die quicker, we go to jail  see DAREon page 6  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 News  Male violence against women in Canada:  The courage to leave  by Agnes Huang  September 1999. Within five days, two  women in the Lower Mainland of British  Columbia are dead, murdered by their estranged husbands.  On September 1st, Anita Barrera was  dragged out onto the balcony of her apartment in Burnaby by her husband. He  stabbed her repeatedly, killing her. He also  stabbed himself and later died at the hospital. Barrera's four children were present  in the apartment when the murder took  place.  Four days after Anita Barrera was  killed, on September 5th, Mitra Felfeli  Mokarakeh was murdered by her husband  Fariborz Kianipour in Coquitlam. Then  hours later, Kianipour murdered Mitra's  parents, Jamshid Felfeli Mokarakeh and  Irandokht Khanbadr. Mitra and Fariborz's  two sons were present when their grandparents were killed. Kianipour has pleaded  guilty to three counts of murder.  Both Anita Barrera and Mitra Felfeli  Mokarakeh were killed after they had courageously left their abusive husbands. Both  were killed after they took steps to protect  themselves and their children from their  husbands' violence.  "Mitra and Anita left their husbands'  sphere of power and they paid for it with  their lives," says Fatima Jaffer of the Ad Hoc  Committee on Violence Against Women.  'These are not isolated incidents. They  must be seen as part of the continuum of  violence, and understood as being about  power and control."  The ad hoc committee came together  to organize a vigil on October 22 in front of  the Vancouver Art Gallery in honour of  Mitra Felfeli Mokarakeh and Anita Barrera,  and all other women killed by men in their  lives.  As Sedi Minachi, a member of the committee, said at the vigil: "We are here to recognize the courage of women who leave  their violent and abusive relationships to  save their lives, to recognize the strength  of women who want to live their lives free  of violence, and to recognize those who  break their silence."  Another goal of the vigil was to challenge the way the media covered these  murders, as well as other cases of male violence against women.  With headlines such as, "Three people  killed in Coquitlam, man held in custody,"  and no references to killers being "wife  abusers" or their motives being to maintain control over their wives, the media was  able to frame the murders in a generic way.  "[The media's] very shallow investigation of dynamics that led to the killings and  the lack of understanding about why it happens does no one any good and, in fact, can  discourage women from making the decision to leave [their abusive husbands,]"  says Louise Hara of the Port Coquitlam and  Area Women's Centre. "By failing to place  the murders in the larger context, the media missed an opportunity to educate the  public about violence against women."  Hara had to do a lot of work with the  media in her community to get them to understand the connections between cases of  Vigil at the Vancouver Art Gallery, October 22nd  violence against women, and the pattern  of abuse many women face at the hands of  their husbands, which all too often leads  to their deaths.  The media deliberately kept the murders of Mitra and her parents out of the  context of violence against women by assigning a motive linked to Mitra's actions,  and not Fariborz's intent, says Hara. "The  media focused on the fact that Mitra was  suing her husband for half the family residence as the reason for the killings."'  These perceptions allow femicides to  continue, says Mabel Nipshank, a front-line  anti-violence worker with Battered Women's Support Services. "It is these women-  blaming beliefs perpetuated by the media  and authorities that keep women shackled  to their abusers and intensifies their life-  threatening realities."  "Women who go through the justice  system are disbelieved when disclosing  violence, especially women not of the  dominant race," says Nipshank, who is of  the Cree Nation. "As an advocate of  women, I have been treated with mistrust  and resentment; I have been accused of  coaching women to lie, when in fact my  only vested interest is the safety of women  and children."  Hara says there is no reason for the  media to not put these murders in their  proper context. "It's not as if the media  doesn't have a long track record of doing  social commentary, or that the context itself hasn't been analyzed and defined,"  says Hara. "All our shelves are growing  with reports and studies and stats on how  and why men kill the women in their lives."  In fact, says Zara Suleman, an advocate who works with immigrant and refugee women surviving violence, it is well  known that women are more at risk when  they try and leave their abusive relationships.  Jaffer stresses that there are no excuses  for violence against women. "Whether a  woman is trying to leave her relationship,  getting a divorce, seeking custody or access  of her children, or suing for maintenance,  nothing can justify these murders. Excuses  only perpetuate violence against women."  Adds Hara: "If the media were to put  its considerable influence behind validating the reality of women's lives, the violence and oppression of women would  have to stop and men would have to be held  accountable for their violence."  Suzanne Jay, a front-line transition  house worker who spoke on behalf of the  Alliance of Feminist Transition Houses,  echoes Hara's criticism that the media only  told part of the story. For example, says Jay,  the media failed to reveal that both Felfeli  Mokarakeh and Barrera had left their abusive husbands and sought the help of transition houses.  "These two women did everything  they were supposed to do to get safety for  themselves and their children. The transition house workers did everything they  were supposed to do—getting the women  legal aid and working out safety plans.  Their families did everything they were  supposed to do—supporting the women's  decisions and staying with them."  It was the "system"—the RCMP in  Burnaby and Coquitlam—who failed these  women, says Jay.  Anita Barrera's husband's violence  was known to police. A few weeks before  she was murdered, Barrera had gotten a  restiaining order against him. Her husband  had also publicly threatened her and other  parishioners in a church. When the church  called the police to come deal with the situation, the Burnaby RCMP just calmed him  down, then sent him home.  This is not the first time the RCMP in  BC has failed to do their job in protecting  women from their abusive spouses and ex-  spouses. One only needs to think back to  April 1996, when Rajwar Ghakal and her  family were gunned by down her estranged  husband in Vernon.  "We need to call on the Attorney General to take control of the RCMP, and force  them to apply the laws in ways that will  protect women," says Jay.  Suleman adds she is not surprised by  these murders, or the response to them by  the media and authorities. "Every day, I listen to women's stories about their fear, their  lack of trust in the justice system, their rage  and their sadness."  It is critical, says Suleman, that everyone demand that the criminal justice system not continue to give men the message  that violence against women in acceptable,  and to not give men the power to get away  with abusing their partners and to, ultimately, get away with murder.  Some reported  femicides in BC  September 1998: Tammy Grono and her  mother Cecilia Grono are murdered in  Summerland, in the presence of Tammy's  two children, aged two and four. Months  after a nation-wide warrant for his arrest  is issued, Kevin Machell, Tammy's ex-  husband, is caught and charged with the  murders.  October 1997: Leonora Holtam and her  six-year old daughter Jenny Lee are  bludgeoned to death in Mission. Her son  Cody suffers from massive head injuries.  After initially being questioned and released, Leonora's husband, Douglas, is  finally charged with the murders and assault.  September 1997: Heidi-Jean Challand  and her four children—Bobby, David,  Calvin and Jewel—are murdered in  Black Creek (on Vancouver Island).  Heidi's husband, David Gorton, is  charged with the murders. He is serving  a 25-year sentence.  April 1996: Rajwar Ghakal and eight  members of her family are shot to death  by her estranged husband Mark Chahal  in Vernon. Six-year old Justine Kaur  Saran is shot but survives. Chahal kills  himself.  June 1995: Teena Marie Lino is stabbed  to death in front of her 18-month old  daughter. Her husband is found not  criminally responsible for her death for  reasons of temporary insanity.  October 1994: Annette Roufosse is murdered in Coquitlam by her former common-law husband, minutes after he kills  her parents. Darcy Bertrand pleads guilty  to three counts of second-degree murder.  July 1994: Susan Roberts and one of her  13-month old twin sons are strangled to  death. Her other twin son is smothered  to death. Roberts' husband, Dean, is convicted of first-degree murder.  "We will not stop having these vigils;  we will not stop reminding the system that  violence against women is happening,"  adds Jaffer. "We cannot afford to stop being vigilant."  Sedi Minachi says one of the goals of  the vigil, which was achieved, was to bring  out members of the Iranian community.  "As Iranian women, we do not allow  religious and cultural barriers to put our  lives in danger," says Minachi. "There is no  justification for any kind of violence, not  in the Iranian community, and not in any  society."  Several of Mitra's friends came forward to the open microphone and spoke  about their memories of Mitra and the impact she had on their lives. "Mitra seems  to have touched a lot of women's lives,"  says Jaffer.  As one woman said: "This is the loss  of a very special human being—a kind and  generous one, an extraordinary mother, a  special friend, a very compassionate human being."  KINESIS  V  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 by Fatima Jaffer and Leanne Keltie  Civil suit against  BC's Attorney  General  Two years ago, Tammy Grono's ex-  spouse Kevin Machell violated his parole  curfew and, the next day, allegedly shot and  killed Grono and her mother, Cecelia  Grono, at their motel in Summerland, British Columbia. [Ed Note: Libel laws require  us to write "allegedly" until Machell is proven  a murderer in court.] Tammy and Machell's  two children—Tristan and Morgan—witnessed the double murders. They were  aged two and four at the time.  Nobody called the Gronos to tell them  Machell had violated his curfew so they  could protect themselves in case he came  around. No one from the BC Attorney General's office bothered to register on the central computer data bank that Grono had  gotten a restraining order against Machell  two months before, or that he had previously threatened to kill his ex-wife and her  mother. [The central protection order registry  was set up in 1995 to enable police and other  systems officers to better protect women from  violent exes. It has been criticized several times  for inefficiency.] And Machell was not listed  as violent, despite his threat to kill the  Gronos.  Women's groups had worked hard and  lobbied years for a multi-tiered response  system that would give women and children at least a small fighting chance against  abusive exes. Despite such a system being  in place, the Gronos were failed at every  level.  In September, Tammy's siblings and  Cecelia's kids—Debora Passarell, Terry  Villaneuve and Gary Grono—filed a lawsuit against the system that failed them,  charging it with "collective negligence."  They are also suing Machell in civil court  on behalf of Tammy Grono's children, who  are currently being patented by Villaneuve.  Their lawyer, Gary Lauk, says the case  will not be heard until after the criminal  case against Machell, who has been charged  with two counts of first-degree murder, is  heard next year.  In the lawsuit, the attorney general of  BC, Correctional Services of Canada, the  National Parole Board and the Alberta Seventh Step Society are charged with failing  to reasonably supervise and control  Machell. Machell had been released August 12,1997 from a federal prison in Saskatchewan. He was put on day parole at a  Calgary residence run by the Seventh Step  Society.  On September 6, he failed to return to  the society's residence in the evening, as  expected. He was known to be violent, but  was incorrectly listed as a non-violent parolee.  The lawsuit specifically names two individuals, Sylvia Nathanson, a parole officer with Corrections, and Jim Hayman,  also with Corrections. Three more men and  two women officials are also cited, but not  named.  After an investigation in 1997-98 into  the Gronos' deaths, federal officials agreed  to check with the BC central protection order registry to determine whether someone  being released from the federal prison or  parole systems are under court orders to  keep away from their spouses. There has  been no evidence that this is in fact being  done, nor whether the central registry is up-  to-date on recording restraining orders and  peace bonds.  Transgendered  "lesbian" wins case  The now defunct Vancouver Lesbian  Connection has to pay $3,000 to a former  volunteer that was asked to leave the centre, according to a BC human rights tribunal ruling in September.  The former volunteer, Susan Mamela  (formerly Eric/Susan Friday) claimed to  have been asked to leave the VLC because  of Mamela's political beliefs and because  of Mamela's transgendered status.  No one from the VLC, which shut its  doors in February, showed up to argue the  centre's case. As Kinesis goes to press, we  were unable to find out the reason for the  lack of defence by the centre's former board  members. It is unlikely Mamela will collect the $3,000, as there is no society to collect from.  But Mamela's victory is striking in that  it reads into the provincial human rights  code protection for transgendered people  under the category "sex" discrimination.  Currently, transgendered people are not  specifically protected as a group in the  code. The government has twice been  poised in recent years to introduce legislation that would add transgendered people  to the Code.  The tribunal dismissed Mamela's  claims of political discrimination, but  found that the centre had discriminated  against Mamela on the basis of sex. According to one member of the tribunal, Nitya  Iyer, correspondence addressed to Mamela  by former VLC director Tina Hurd addressed Mamela as "Eric Friday," which  demonstrated "deliberate and signified disapproval of Mamela's self-identification as  a member of the female sex." Eric Friday  was Mamela's legal name at the time.  The tribunal's decision drew strongly  from precedence that was set earlier this  year in a case between transsexual Tawni  Sheridan and Victoria's gay bar BJ's lounge,  but takes a step further. According to  Harinder Mahil of the BC Human Rights  Commission, the body which refers cases  to the tribunal, the ruling is "important [in]  that Mamela's self-identification as a  woman was enough for her to be recognized as a woman." In the Sheridan case,  however, reams of medical evidence was  required to prove Sheridan's gender dysphoria," before the tribunal ruled in  Sheridan's favour.  Kinesis will bring you more in future  issues on the impact, of this ruling and the  BC Human Rights Commission's acceptance of self-identification as sufficient, on  women-only centres, support groups, and  other venues.  NB mom wins legal  aid case  Moms who cannot afford a lawyer and  who risk losing their children to the state  must be provided with legal aid, according to a Supreme Court of Canada ruling  last month.  This is the strongest statement on legal aid since the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms was incepted in 1982. The ruling could be used as a foothold in the struggle for legal aid in other cases, and may be  the first of more court rulings curbing the  erosion of legal aid programs.  No one was celebrating that decision  last month more than Jeannine Godin, the  New Brunswick woman who was appealing a lower court decision to deny her legal aid in a court battle with the New Brunswick Ministry of Health and Social Services (MHSS). Godin had called the Ministry for help in November 1993. She had recently miscarried twins, and was under  pressure because of fatigue and harassment  by her ex-husband. The state said they  would look after her kids for the weekend.  On Monday, when Godin went to pick up  her kids, she was told to sign over custody  for four months or face a court battle.  A few weeks later, MHSS applied for  an extension of temporary wardship of her  three children. When Godin walked into  the courtroom, the state had lawyers, her  ex-husband had a lawyer, and even her  children had been appointed a lawyer. "The  only person without a lawyer was [me],"  Godin said. "I was just a single mom with  three kids who didn't know how to represent myself in court. You shouldn't have to  be a criminal to get legal representation."  As a result, her children of ages three,  four and seven years were held in care,  shifted from one foster home to another,  until June 1995—a total of 14 months. It was  only with the help of a lawyer who offered  his services for free that Godin was able to  get her kids back.  Last Fall, during the Supreme Court  appeal to get legal aid for Godin, LEAF  (Women's Legal Education and Action  Fund), National Association of Women and  the Law, and DAWN Canada (DisAbled  Women's Network) intervened. They argued that the state's failure to provide legal representation to parents in temporary  wardship cases is a failure to provide access to justice for the poor, and therefore  unconstitutional.  In the Supreme Court decision, the Justices found 9-0 for Godin. The decision  clearly states that the prospect for a mother  of losing her children is so psychologically  devastating, it can trigger that person's  right to security of the person. In writing  the decision, the Chief Justice Antonio  Lamer said wardship hearings by the state  are so intricate, toughly fought, and the  stakes are so high that cost-cutting measures that deny legal aid to parents in such  situations are intolerable.  "I have little doubt that the state removal of a child from parental  custody...constitutes a serious interference  with the psychological integrity of the parent," he wrote. "Few state activities can  have a more profound effect on the lives of  both parent and child," and therefore, it is  essential parents get proper representation.  Previously, the concept of security of  the person had more or less been limited to  use by prisoners. "The court has gone way  further now than saying it applies only to  jail," said Carole Curtis, one of two LEAF  lawyers on the case.  By expanding the Charter of Rights  guarantee to life, liberty and security of the  person to include psychological harm (to  parent and child), the case could be used  in future to get funding for cases involving  immigration, mental health and even  women fighting child custody battles.  "We have a clear signal [from this ruling] that whenever the state is attempting  to take custody of someone, that person—  or anyone with a close interest in them—is  entitled to legal aid," said Alan Gold of the  Criminal Lawyers Association.  Keeping co-ops  accessible  The Canadian Mortgage and Housing  Corporation (CMHC) recently adopted  new policy which allows co-ops to set their  own minimum housing charges. In the past  CMHC did not allow co-ops to charge  members more than 30 percent of their total income for household charges. Individuals on social assistance were the only exception to this rule, and usually paid the  shelter portion of their income assistance  cheque.  The ramifications of this change are  quite serious as some of the poorest people in Canada may no longer be able to pay  their housing costs. One recent example of  a housing co-op that voted to set a minimum housing charge caused an increase in  the housing costs of a woman with disabilities from 26 percent to 70 percent of her  monthly income.  [Source: The Long Haul, October 1999.]  BC woman firefighter  wins case  In the first ruling of its kind, the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) has declared  that a mandatory fitness requirement of  firefighters violates a female forest firefighter's human rights.  In 1994, Tawney Meiorin, who had  worked six years as a forest firefighter in  British Columbia, failed the running portion of a physical fitness test that required  her to run 2.5 kilometres in 11 minutes or  less. She failed to reach the mark by 49 seconds. Although, Meiorin passed the other  parts of the assessment—chinups, situps  and pushups—she still lost her job.  The physical fitness test was put in  place in 1994 in response to a coroner's inquest report that recommended only  "physically fit" employees be assigned as  front-line forest firefighters for safety reasons.  Since she was fired, Meiorin has been  fighting the aerobic criteria of the test in  court. With the support of her union, the  BC Government Employees Union,  Meiorin won at labour arbitration and was  awarded her job back with back pay. The  BC government challenged that decision,  and the BC Court of Appeal agreed, overturning the arbitrator's ruling.  On September 9th, Meiorin's trek was  finally over when the Supreme Court of  Canada ruled in her favour. The SCC found  the government failed to demonstrate that  this particular test identifies those who are  able to perform the tasks of a forest firefighter safely and efficiently.  Meiorin's lawyers argued that women  are physiologically different than men:  most men have a greater aerobic capacity,  giving them an unfair advantage in achieving the standard of the test. The government argued that having separate tests for  men and women would be "reverse discrimination." (The BC Human Rights Commission, the Women's Legal Education and  Action Fund, and DisAbled Women's Network and the Canadian Labour Congress  also made submissions as intervenors.)  George Heyman, president of the  BCGEU, affirms that "the aerobic standard  was not a measure of fitness for her. It was  an arbitrary standard."  Says Meiorin, "I know women who do  marathons who say they'd have a tough  time doing it." Meiorin will receive back  pay from the time she lost her job.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  kIneJis What's Newts  compiled by Fatima Jaffer   Domestic violence book  launched in Pakistan  In a high-profile effort to break the silence around domestic violence, a women's  organization in Islamabad launched a book  about the increasing number of women  who are being "accidentally" burned in  domestic violence cases to cover up the fact  that it is murder or attempted murder.  The launch took place at the United  Nations' Information Centre in the Pakistani capital in October. The book, called  Trial By Fire, is illustrated with photos of  badly-burnt victims, case studies and data  on 185 cases of women being deliberately  burned by the husband or his family. In  most cases, the crimes were described as  accidents caused by kerosene stoves.  At the launch, Shahnaz Bokhari of the  Progressive Women's Association, noted  that her organization's investigation shows  that the deaths in "so-called stove burning"  were in fact "planned murders," and at  least 300 women are burned to death each  year.  After consulting with medical personnel, the organization found that "the pattern of burns on the bodies of the [women]  were not consistent with what we would  expect to see from a genuine stove accident," she said.  The women who experience this particular form of domestic violence tend to  be young women in poor families in rural  areas or small towns. "Causes" for inflicting such violence include suspicion of  sexual immorality, low dowry, failure to  give birth to a male child, or quarrels with  in-laws.  Bokhari said her organization is calling for serious debate on this particular  form of domestic violence, as well as effective remedial action by all state organs on  the issue of violence against women.  (Source: South Asian Women's Network,  on the Internet)  Indian lesbians demand  decriminalization  A lesbian rights group in New Delhi  released the first-ever report on the state of  lesbians in India and the crimes committed against them. At the press conference  in August, Campaign for Lesbian Rights  (CALER) also called on the government to  repeal a 138-year-old law making sexual relationships between women illegal.  The 84-page report talks about how  "Anyone who looks, behaves or lives differently from the norms laid down by a traditional, patriarchal structure is made to  feel shame," among numerous other consequences deterring women from openly  acknowledging their lesbian relationships.  "Women have been harassed, attacked,  blackmailed, coerced into marriages and  sexual relationships, have lost their jobs,  housing rights, family property...and have  been prevented from protesting by being  threatened by the police and their immediate social milieu," according to the statement by the New Delhi-based CALER.  Much of this has been done using the  archaic law outlawing homosexuality,  which was brought in during Queen Victoria's reign everywhere in the British Empire. [Ed Note: The law has since been scrapped  in Britain, but sits on the constitutions of many  of its former colonies.]  "No lesbian may have been picked up  and flung into jail because of this 138-year-  old law drafted by Lord Macauly in the  1830s, but it is used to blackmail lesbians,  force them to consent to marriage and be  invisible," said a CALER spokesperson.  In 1994, lesbian and gay groups filed a  petition challenging the law in the Delhi  High Court. The case has dragged on for  five years and has evoked some strong reactions, some even violent.  And in 1998, Indian lesbian activists  took to the streets to protest right-wing attacks against the film Fire, which portrays  a lesbian relationship between a woman  and her sister-in-law. After temporary shutdowns of the theatres, the government provided protection to the theatres and the censors allowed the film to be seen.  The right-wingers and others who  disagree with breaking the silence about  Indian lesbianism and decriminalizing homosexuality say that scrapping the law and  portraying Indian women as lesbians is a  sign of Western gay culture creeping into  India, and could result in an explosion of  homosexuality.  "We heard someone had called lesbianism 'contagious.' How I wish! I would  have had an entirely homosexual family by  now, and need not worry about them finding out," one lesbian activist said.  "Maybe even my landlord could catch  it, then I wouldn't have to worry about being evicted," she added.  Activists say that the recent protests by  lesbian and gay activists and visibility in  the media has prompted women from all  over India to write to them about their experiences being forced into marriages and  being made to suppress their sexual orientation. One woman in Eastern India wrote  about her husband allegedly arranging the  killing of her lover, a woman who was  working as domestic help.  However, despite the increasing openness of their activities, the members of the  gay and lesbian movement individually  continue to remain closeted, for safety reasons. None of the CALER members at the  press conference in August allowed themselves to be named or photographed, nor  did they give out their phone numbers.  [Source: AFPress]  Violence against  Indian domestic worker  While Lalita Oraon from Ranchi, Bihar  recovers from extreme wounds to her vagina and fractures to the ankle and vertebrae suffered during a recent attempted  suicide, diplomats in France and India  wrangle over how best to ensure they don't  end up damaging Indian-French trade and  diplomatic relations.  Oraon was brought to France from India in January this year to serve as the maid  to Amrit Lugun, the first secretary in the  Indian embassy in Paris. The 19-year old  woman does not speak French and through  an interpreter, said she was forced by her  employer to work from 6:00 am to midnight  every day.  She finally escaped Lugun's residence  in mid-September and was found wandering the streets with a knife by an Indian  man. He says she told him she wanted to  kill herself.  She was taken to French police headquarters and then to a shelter, where she  attempted to kill herself by throwing herself off the high building. In hospital, medical examinations found severe wounds to  her genitals made by a blade in her vagina  several days prior, which "could not have  been accidental or self-inflicted." The doctor 's report says she was also suffering from  blood poisoning from the wounds.  A French group called the Committee  Against Modern-day Slavery spoke with  Oraon through an interpreter and found  that she was being extremely overworked  and mistreated in numerous ways; as well,  she was only receiving a monthly salary of  2,000 rupees back in India (approximately  300 francs or US$50).  Indian embassy officials and the Indian  government have issued statements denying the allegations as "false," and have accused the French police of "wittingly or  unwittingly, [abbetting] the campaign of  disinformation and defamation that has  begun against the embassy's diplomat."  They say the situation came about as a result of Lugun's decision to fire Oraon and  send her back to India for constant "misbehaviour" with his two children.  French diplomats are also attempting  to hush over the investigation and have  promised that even after French investigations are complete, diplomatic relations and  bilateral trade agreements with India will  not be damaged. The incident is rumoured  as being described as "too small a matter"  to make a difference in relations between  the two countries. And although France has  not yet formally asked for any action to be  taken against Lugun, it is suspected that  Lugun will be allowed by officials from  both nations to quietly slip back to India.  Meanwhile, the doctor's reports, an  ongoing investigation by the Paris Prosecutor's Office, the activism of the Committee  Against Modern-day Slavery and other  concerned groups in France, as well as racism against "backward Indian cultures" are  driving public interest and ongoing coverage of the case in the media, which is proving to be "an embarrassment" for the Indian embassy in Paris.  As Kinesis goes to press, Oraon finds  herself caught between the two nations. On  the one hand, she has been isolated and  subjected to repeated medical examinations  as "experts" tried to determine the precise  nature of her wounds and put a date to  them. Their investigation has prompted the  Paris Prosecutor's Office to open a judicial  inquiry into who is responsible for the "acts  of violence" committed against her.  On the other hand, Indian officials continue to insist she be released by French  authorities and allowed to return home.  They accuse the French of "denial of access"  to Oraon by embassy officials, including her  former employer, thereby blocking them  from finding out the truth. They say Oraon  was in perfect health on September 5th  when they visited her in the custody of  French police, and her injuries listed in the  doctors' reports were in fact "suffered in  the custody of French authorities."  Violence against women  in the UK  An anti-violence against women group  in the United Kingdom says their investigations found that one in two men think  that raping a woman is acceptable in certain circumstances, while one in four think  it is justifiable to hit a woman.  The research was carried out by Zero  Tolerance charitable trust, a group based in  Edinburgh. The report, released to the media in September, also found that a third of  all girls surveyed thought that it is justifiable for men to force women to have sex  with them in some circumstances.  Meanwhile, in Birmingham, police  found a man hanged and his wife and children stabbed to death in their home. Two  children, a boy of two or three years old,  and a girl aged about seven, were found  dead in a downstairs kitchen. A boy about  nine was discovered in an upstairs bedroom and his mother in another upstairs  bedroom.  Neighbours describe the couple as  "nice" and "respectable" and say the killing is a total shock. Police are investigating.  As Kinesis goes to press, news reports  have yet to name the murder-suicide as yet  another act of violence against women and  children.  from DARE page 3  more. These things happen to us because  we are told we don't belong here."  Thobani took it further. "It is also about  creating a national interest amongst Canadians.  The statement,'They are taking our resources  away,' is the glue that holds this nation together. Having us as the Other, the threat  against whom the state is actually able to  create a national interest, is also about letting  Canadians—who are actually also losing out  by restructuring of the economy—feel they  have a say in defending this nationhood."  Popular theatre artist Sheila James took  the floor and called for more direct action  against this agenda. "If that means somehow blocking up the whole border-thing so  that it doesn't work for anybody, not even  for the truck drivers taking Canadian forests into America or anyone else, let's do  it."  FilmmakerYue QingYang came forward.  "When you said,'Open the borders,' my eyes  went wide open. Very revolutionary. China  has one-quarter of the world's population.  Possibly 50 percent would want to flee out.  What is going to happen?"  Sharma responded: "Opening borders  is an exciting possibility. It really challenges  our imaginations which are so wrapped up  in nation states. We've bought the hype that  nation-state equals democracy and it's corporations that mean undemocratic systems.  But we need to see how it is nation states  that bring us corporate rule."  Thobani added: "It's obvious you can't  have open borders without a fundamental  restructuring of the global economy. All political  stripes in this country have accepted globalization of the economy as inevitable. What  this kind of demand does is argue for a transformation of economic structures at the local  and global levels."  "When the question comes down to, who  has the right to say, 'I can go anywhere in  the world I want to, and others cannot?'Then  you are challenging power at its real base,"  she concluded.  The evening ended with a man, who  described himself as "Jim Wong, a World  War Two veteran, 77-years-old, born in  Chinatown," telling us the story of his grandfather who came to North America from China  on a boat almost a century ago. "I don't  like to call [the Fujianese people] refugees  really," he said.  Wong came to the Forum, he said, because he found out, "There's women amongst  the boat people. I have three daughters. The  thought that these women can be exploited  and made to be prostitutes and to work 10-  12 or 14 hours a day astounds me."  He continued. "We have to tell the general  population that we have to be more generous. This world is getting more crowded,  and the world is getting smaller. I'm really  lucky to be here. So for God's sake, we could  be a little more generous."  For more information on DARE, see page  10.  Fatima Jaffer came to Canada when she  was 21 from Kenya. She is a regular writer  for Kinesis.  KINESIS  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Leanne Keltie and Wei  Yuen Fong   Project probes social  origins of HIV/AIDS  For too long women have been told  that if we get sick it's because we did something wrong: we weren't eating right; we  weren't taking care of ourselves; we weren't  practising safer sex. Finger-pointing at  women who contract HIV can be particularly virulent.  Listen up!: Women are talking about... is  an innovative community-based research  project, sponsored jointly by AIDS Vancouver and Positive Women's Network, and  funded by Status of Women Canada and  The Vancouver Foundation, that is seeking  to change this.  The project's goal is to examine the social determinants of women's health—the  things happening in the world around us  that make it easier or harder for women to  eat right, take care of themselves, or practise safer sex. Three of the key determinants  of health the project is looking at are: income; power in intimate relationships; and  relationships to health care institutions and  providers.  By illustrating how factors related to  the broader social world affect women's  abilities to enact optimally health-enhancing choices, the project hopes to contribute  to a public dialogue that will shift the blame  for illness off individual people who are ill.  It also aims to empower communities to  lobby for and enact change around social  factors that are acting as barriers to health.  Having recently completed an initial  exploratory phase, the project is now moving forward into its second stage which focuses on equipping 12 women peer researchers from across the Lower Mainland  with skills to go into their home communities and conduct focus groups and interviews with other members of those communities. Peer researchers will be involved  in collecting, analyzing, and writing about  the information gathered for the project.  The six communities the project is currently working with are: Aboriginal  women; women who are HIV+; lesbian,  bisexual and queer-identified women;  women who are current or former consumers of the mental health system; women  who are current or former substance users;  and immigrant and refugee women.  The training for peer researchers will happen over a two-week period at the end of November with information gathering and analysis happening into March of 2000. If you or  someone you know is a member of one of the  identified target communities and would like  to find out more about the peer training or the  project generally call Stephanie Kellington, the  project coordinator, before Oct 30 at (604) 828-  5403 or email stephaniek@parc.org.  "Unstrike" against  Starbucks  Employees at 13 unionized Starbucks  in BC are taking a different approach to  raising public awareness about unfairness  in their workplace. They are holding an  "unstrike."  Staff at the 12 Vancouver and one  Westbank location are still serving  Starbucks coffee. However, they have chosen to dress casual at work and hand out  leaflets to customers in the hopes of drawing attention to their dispute.  They are asking for issues basic to any  successful workplace: decent wages, paid  sick leave, scheduling of work and training procedures. Most Starbucks employees  work part-time and earn an average of  $8.60 an hour. That means, most are taking  home less than $800 per month.  How can you help? Starbucks employees are asking for customer support in the  form of a signed letter to Starbucks CEO  Howard Shultz, letting him know that they  support the "unstriking" union members.  Tear-off letters are being supplied to supportive customers as an attachment to a  brochure put out by the Canadian  Autoworkers Union. These can be picked  up at any unionized Starbucks location in  Vancouver or Westbank.  CAW national representative Jef  Keighley says, "We are encouraging the  public to continue to patronize Starbucks  at this time. If Starbucks decides to lock out  or if we later find it necessary to withdraw  service completely, we will then be asking  for a full consumer boycott of Starbucks."  For more information on the "unstrike,"  contact the Canadian Autoworkers Union, 326  12th St, New Westminister, BC, V3M 4H6;  tel: (604) 522-7911 or 1-800-665-3553; fax:  (604) 522-8975.  Health effects of sex  work  Prostitutes Empowerment, Education  and Resource Society (PEERS) was founded  in 1996 by current and former sex trade  workers in Victoria. Its purpose is to provide skill-based training, advocacy, and lay  counselling for sex workers who wish to  exit the trade. Street outreach and advocacy  are also provided for sex workers whose  safety and health are jeopardized by working conditions on the job.  PEERS is undertaking a new research  project with the goals of documenting the  health effects of sex work, looking at trends  in the early lives and health practices of sex  workers, and recommending policies to  improve the effectiveness of the health care  system.  The study will enable sex workers to  promote better health in their community—  health being defined as emotional, physical and spiritual well-being. The study will  focus on sex workers using off-street venues, such as private homes, escort agencies,  phones, massage parlours, hotels, and the  Internet.  Three former sex trade workers have  been hired to compile a list of 100 potential  interviewees for the study Fifty to 100 people representing the profile of the Victoria  sex trade community will be chosen and  paid $40 each for participating in an extensive two-hour interview.  Interviews will be conducted by  former and current sex trade workers. Their  acquisition of skills in interviewing, tran  scribing and data analysis are other benefits of this project.  The study will be completed by June  2001. Cecilia Benoit of the Department of  Sociology at the University of Victoria is the  research leader for the study. Judy  Lighwater is the project manager. Funding  for the study was provided by the BC  Health Research Foundation.  For more information about the study,  address questions to health@pacificcoast.net, or  (250) 388-6506, or PEERS Health Research  Project, 320-620 View St, Victoria, BC, V8W  1J6.  ELP has new  Vancouver Organizer  There's a new Vancouver Organizer at  End Legislated Poverty, a provincial anti-  poverty organization in British Columbia.  Her name is Jo-Anne Ross, and she is of  the Haisla People from the Northwest  Coast of BC.  Ross is a graduate of Simon Fraser  University with a degree in Political Science. She has lived in Vancouver for eight  years, and has two grown sons who also  live in Vancouver. She also helped raise a  niece, who is now living in Haisla territory  with her two children.  For several years, Ross has been involved in the Aboriginal community in  Vancouver. Through her work, she has networked with many people—Aboriginal  and non-Aboriginal. She says she is a firm  believer in Aboriginal rights, which she sees  as basic human rights. Her long-term goal  is to work on social justice issues.  A major part of Ross' work as the Vancouver Organizer is to contact organizations and groups in Vancouver that represent Aboriginal peoples, immigrants, refugees, and people of colour. Ross' goal is to  meet with people in these different communities to work together to increase the  awareness of the impact of poverty and  discrimination. Ross is inviting people who  represent different communities to work  with ELP.  The objectives of ELP are to assist organizations representing low income and  unemployed people through information  sharing, development of joint campaigns  and actions, and education on the need to  end poverty and create decent jobs. ELP has  40 member groups in BC, with approximately 15 situated in Vancouver. ELP also  publishes a monthly newspaper, The Long  Haul, in which people are invited to share  their experiences with poverty and anti-  poverty activism.  Ross says she expects her job to be a  very challenging, yet exciting experience.  "It is my hope that through my work, we  can begin bridging the gaps between our  diverse communities, and work together on  our commonalities as citizens of this land.  In a land so rich in resources, we should  not have families, Elders, women, children  and people with disabilities living in poverty."  She adds that wealth is for all people—  not only for a few select individuals. "Poverty is oppression against people. Governments must uphold their responsibility to  all citizens. It must abandon its corporate  agenda and meet the needs of all people.  By bringing unity in efforts to alleviate poverty, hopefully we can pressure the governments to make good changes for all."  For more information, contact ]o-Anne  Ross at End Legislated Poverty, (604) 879-  1209.  SEXUAL ASSAULT  Published by the Montreal Health Press,  a women's collective, producing quality  books on health and sexuality for 30  The most up-to-date information on  sexual assault: how to handle an assault,  prevention, the social context.  1997 EDITION  New information on  ♦ Pregnancy and  STDs resulting  from an assault  ♦ Partner assault  ♦ Dating violence  ♦ Abuse of people  with disabilities  No other  resource offers  the combination '  of personal and practical information,  an understanding of why sexual  assault happens and ways to work for  positive changes.  Also Available ai  Handbooks on  -BIRTH CONTROL-  - MENOPAUSE -  PtSA5ecAu  Send $5.00 (cheque or money order)  to:  Montreal Health Press Inc.  P.O. Box 1000  Station Place du Pare  Montreal (Quebec) Canada  H2W 2N1  Tel.: (514) 282-1171 Fax: (514) 282-0262  E-mail: mhpmontreal@msn.com  .i.m.iuj.ni.ui.yLJiiJ.yj.iM  LEGAL REPRESENTATION  AND MEDIATION  SERVICES  in:  labour and employment law  human rights  civil litigation  public interest advocacy  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWYERS  Melinda Munro and Clea Parfitt  401-825 granville street  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778 (tel)        689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  Paula Clancy, b.a.  Certified General Accountant  Auditing  Accounting  Financial Planning  Income Tax Services  for  Organizations  Small Businesses  and Individuals  Tel: (604)215-1720  Fax:(604)215-1750  pclancy @bc.sympatico.ca  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Movement Matters  compiled by Leanne Keltie, Lisa  Wulwik and Bernadette Phan  Support the Purple  Rose Campaign  The Philippine Women Centre of British Columbia (PWC) will launch its own  Purple Rose Campaign in December, as  part of a two-year international campaign  focused on raising awareness about, and  fighting against, the trafficking of Filipino  women.  Women leave the Philippines every  day to work abroad as domestic workers,  entertainers, and prostitutes. This global  trafficking in Filipino women also includes  a significant portion who become "Mail-order brides," marrying men from various industrialized countries, Canada included.  The PWC's campaign will be held in  conjunction with an intensive research  project on Filipino women "mail-order  brides" in Canada. Each year, there are increasing numbers of these women entering  Canada through formal and informal networks. In many provinces, whether in urban or rural areas, their situation is one of  extreme isolation, poverty, and vulnerability to violence.  The launch of the Purple Rose Campaign in Vancouver will be on December  4th at the Roundhouse Community Centre  (181 Roundhouse Mews). The evening will  feature local and international performers,  artists, poets, and an auction of original  pieces of art work.  The campaign will culminate with a  fundraising concert in March 2000 for International Women's Day. All of this public education, awareness, and support will  lead toward an international conference to  be held in the Philippines in the Fall of 2000,  hosted by GABRIELA-Philippines (a national alliance of women's organizations).  Help end the international trafficking  of Filipino women. Buy a purple rose.  When you buy a purple rose, you pledge  your commitment to help end the international trafficking of Filipino women.  For more information about the campaign,  contact Marilou or Ning at the Philippine  Women Centre, c/o Kalayaan Centre, 451  Powell St, Vancouver, BC, V6A1G7; tel/fax:  215-1103; email: pwc@netcom.ca.  Wake-up call on child  poverty  Promises, promises, promises... are  meant to be broken, according to the government of Canada.  On November 24, 1989, the federal  parties in the House of Commons unanimously made a commitment to "end child  poverty by the Year 2000."  However, a decade later, poverty is still  on the rise. Today, one in five children in  Canada still lives in poverty That's greater  than the one in seven children who lived  in poverty in 1989. Since the all-party resolution was passed, the number of poor children in Canada has increased by 60 percent.  As well, many children still do not  have access to quality childcare services, or  to affordable, secure housing. And many  parents cannot find jobs adequate enough  to sustain their families above the poverty  line.  In response to this increasingly dire  situation, anti-poverty activists are planning "wake-up calls" across the country to  mark the 10th anniversary of the federal  government's (broken) promise.  On Wednesday, November 24th, wake-  up call events will take place at 12:00 noon  local time (to coincide with workplace/  school lunch breaks) in each of Canada's  six times zones.  Local communities are deciding on the  type of action they will take to mark the  occasion. This may include the ringing of  church bells, the sounding of fire engine  sirens, marching bands, rattlers, whistles,  and so on. Activists are also encouraged to  hold up placards at various intersections  which read, "Honk if you want child poverty to end." Be as loud as possible to create a "big noise to wake up those government members who are sleeping on the  job."  The wake-up calls will be surrounded  by various other activities, including vigils and the public launch of national and  provincial child poverty report cards. Campaign 2000 based in Toronto, in cooperation with Campaign Against Child Poverty  and Citizens for Public Justice, has also put  together a petition calling on Parliament to  fulfill the promise of the 1989 House of  Commons resolution.  In Vancouver, First Call, a coalition of  provincial organizations and community  groups, will be "Shining a light on child  poverty," with a candlelight vigil. The event  will take place on November 24 from 5:30  to 8:00pm at the Plaza of Nations, and will  feature entertainers, speakers, children's  activities and refreshments.  For more information about the activities  being organized in BC, contact First Call at  (604) 875-5786 or 1-800-307-1212. For details  about the various activities that will take place  on November 23 and 24 across the country,  check out the Campaign 2000 website at  www.campaign2000.ca, or call (416) 595-9230  ext 244 or 228.  December 6th in Bow  Valley  Women and men in the Bow Valley, Alberta region will mark December 6th—the  National Day of Action and Remembrance  on Violence Against Women—with a celebration of young women in their community. December 6th marks the anniversary  of the murder of 14 women at L'Ecole  Polytechnique in Montreal.  Last year, more than 160 people came  out to the community's first annual event  to remember women killed by men, and to  work towards ending male violence against  women.  This year's event, titled  AppreSHEation, is dedicated to celebrating  young women by promoting their strengths  and potential. The event will recognize  many of the young women in the community by highlighting their accomplishments  and contributions in areas such as: art, performance, sports, volunteerism, music,  education/learning, and drama.  AppreSHEation will take place at the  HUB in Canmore (Alberta) on Monday,  December 6th from 5:00 to 10:00pm. It will  feature live music, local performers, a  candelight vigil, booths, displays, food, and  various activities.  For more information, contact Julia Lynx,  Society Against Family Violence (SAFV) at  (403) 762-3511 or email: safv@banff.net.  Support for women in  Colombia  Human rights abuses taking place in  Colombia are escalating and this is cause  for great concern. Colombia has the highest number of internally displaced people  in the hemisphere. A high proportion of  these displaced people are Afro-Colombians, indigenous Colombians and  campesinos (farm workers).  The political violence committed  against Colombians is devastating. State  supported bodies such as the paramilitary  are responsible for the displacement, killing and "disappearance" of large numbers  of poor people. In Columbia, there is a 97  percent rate of impunity for committing  violent crimes.  Recently, the International Monetary  Fund (IMF) and the World Bank have proposed to infuse millions of dollars into the  Columbian economy. This money would be  granted without providing any stipulations  that address the human rights abuses being committed against poor people, Afro-  Colombians, indigenous Peoples and the  campesinos. This is not acceptable.  The majority of Colombians reject the  IMF conditions and want new social programs and anti-poverty strategies to be  devised.  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC), an umbrella organization for women's groups in Canada,  is lobbying the governments of Colombia  and Canada to uphold their responsibilities in regards to the people of Columbia.  NAC is calling on women to show their  support for the Colombian people and  write letters to both the IMF and The World  Bank, challenging them on their policy decisions. Letters should call on these organizations to take responsibility in contributing to the worsening situation for people  in Colombia, and to attach human rights  agreements, at a minimum, on any loans  provided to the government of Colombia.  Send letters to: Michael Camdessus,  president, International Monetary Fund,  700-19th St. NW, Washington, DC, 20431  USA; fax: (202) 623-4661; email:  publicaffairs@imf.org. And to James  Wolfensohn, president, The World Bank,  1818 H St. NW, Washington, DC, 20433  USA; fax: (202) 522-3031; email:  info@worldbank.org.  For more information about the letter-  writing campaign, contact NAC at (416) 932-  1718.  Feminist think tanks  The Canadian Feminist Alliance For  International Action (FAFIA), an alliance of  over 40 women's equality-seeking groups  in Canada, is sponsoring a series of think  tanks.  The first think tank will take place in  Ottawa November 13 to 14. The impact of  Canada's trade policies and globalization  on women's poverty, and inequality in  Canada, will be the theme to be discussed  at this session.  Organizers are currently seeking 15 to  25 women from across Canada to participate in discussions on the topic of women's poverty and economic inequality.  FAFIA encourages a wide range of women  to submit letters of interest. Included in  these letters should be the knowledge and  experience that you or your organization  can bring to the think tank.  There will be opportunities for ongoing participation in the research project  beyond the think tank.  As the goal of FAFIA is to generate information on international practices that  will be relevant to women in Canada, the  group aims to build an inclusive and representative think tank. FAFIA is committed  to working within an integrated feminist  analysis. FAFIA is especially looking for  women who work within an anti-racist and  anti-discrimination framework.  Future think tanks will address: international human rights mechanisms, the  link between women's poverty and violence against women; and information and  communication technologies.  For further information, contact Liz  Philipose at (613) 233-5500 or email:  fafiares@web.net  Ombres Solaires (The  Sunny Shadows)  Dalila Kadri, a Morrocan filmmaker  living in the South of France, is completing  a film about "resistance and love between  oriental lesbians." Shot during the months  of April and May of this year in Marseille  and the region of Forcalquier, Ombres  Solaires (The Sunny Shadows) narrates the  "necessary encounter" of two women of  Maghreb.  Two worlds meet: Ferial, Algerian  French, raised and educated in France discovers a whole other side to Marseille with  Houria who is in France temporarily, on a  mission to organize a net of resistance in  the Arabian quarters of the city.  Houria's name means "freedom," and  Kadri's film addresses the affirming identity of women of colour in France. The 60-  minutes drama is followed by interviews  with the non-professional actors, serving as  a documentary of the making of the film.  The women talk of their experience with  the shooting and their life as lesbians. There  is also of photography exhibition of stage  shots meant to be shown simultaneously.  In order to complete her film, Kadri is  seeking funds of approximatively $30,000  (Cdn), for the editorial part of the production as well as the post-production. She is  sending a call out to any woman interested  in sponsoring or co-producing her film,  inviting them to get in touch with her.  To do so, contact Kali Productions, c/o  Dalila Kadri, 17 rue Saint Dominique, 13001  Marseille, France; tel: 0491917698; email:  dalilakadri@minitel.net.  ROAD TRIP!!!  Hey women out there  Do you want to take on  the WTO?  (World Trade Organization)  Then let's go down to Seattle  together  November 29 - December 3  And let's mobilize some actions  here in Vancouver  Interested? Excited?  Then call the  Vancouver Status of Women  at (604) 255-6554  For more on the WTO, see Page 18  KINESIS  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  Canada's policies on refugees:  An issue of responsibility  by Kelly D'Aoust  There has been a lot of discussion lately  about refugees, "illegal" migrants and the  need to reform Canada's refugee policies.  The mainstream media has centered its reports and commentary on how the refugee  system is regularly abused, and that  Canada is an overgenerous nation being  taken advantage of by desperate people  and organized crime.  What is consistently ignored in the current debates is the role that Western nations,  like Canada, play in producing refugees in  the first place. Instead of examining our responsibility and accountability for the existence of refugees, Canada is depicted as  a compassionate nation that comes to the  assistance of "other" people's problems.  To fully appreciate the current climate  enveloping the 590 people from Fujian  province in China who came to Canada by  boat, a historical context is needed.  At the end of World War II, the United  Nations formulated criteria for defining  and determining refugee status under the  1951 Convention and the 1967 Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees. The UN  created international refugee policy as a  response to the shameful scenarios  occuring during WWII where Jewish refugees were turned away from countries like  Canada and sent back to face the gas chambers. [In 1942, Canada turned back a ship  called St Louis (also known as the Voyage of  the Damned) carrying Jewish people fleeing  Hitler's final solution. Of all Western countries, Canada admitted the fewest Jewish refugees.]  In adopting the tenets of the 1951 Convention, the international community  made a commitment to protect refugees so  that innocent people would not be persecuted within their own countries.  The UN documents concerning refugees, incorporated into Canada's Immigration  Act, define a person as a refugee if:  "owing to well-  founded fear of  being persecuted  for reasons of  race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or  political opinion,  is outside the  country of his nationality and is  unable or, owing  to such fear, is unwilling to avail  himself of the protection of that  country."  The fact that  Canada's refugee  policy is couched  within the Immigration Act is a subtle indication of how  the government has moved away from the  original intent of humanitarianism. Immigration has very specific objectives and  goals which are incompatible with the hu-  Very little has  changed since  refugee policy was  first conceived in  1951. Canada has  always and continues to accept  certain groups of  refugees when it  suits our needs.  manitarian ideal of assisting displaced peoples. Some of these goals are demographic  where the government tries to regulate national growth. Other goals are to foster  trade and commerce by selecting immigrants who have specific job skills that are  needed to strengthen the Canadian  economy.  Since Canada is officially bilingual,  preference is given to those immigrants  who speak either French or English. The  explicit intent of immigration is to benefit  the host country by selecting immigrants  who will contribute significantly to the economic and social vibrancy of a nation.  While these objectives may be understandable in the context of immigration, one has  to question the ethics of grouping refugees  into this system.  Since refugee claims are processed  through government immigration agencies,  immigration policy objectives underlie decisions of acceptance. Refugees who apply  from overseas are often selected based on  some of the same criteria as immigrants:  education, skills, family ties in Canada,  ability to support themselves financially,  and validity of documents verifying identity.  The reality, however, for many refugees  is that they are poor, often with little formal education, and have no access to identification documents. Depending on which  part of the world they live in, they may not  have any family ties in Canada since Canadian Immigration policy has historically selected immigrants primarily from western  Europe and the United States.  The result is that economic considerations often take precedence over humanitarianism in the selection and acceptance  of refugees, and unfortunately this trend  has become more pronounced as fewer  government resources are spent on social  programs.  In dealing  with refugees,  Canada's priority  has been and  continues to be  primarily about  control. There are  two broad categories of refugees: the first  group applies for  refugee status  from outside of  Canada, while  the second group  has already arrived using  Canada as their  country of first  asylum.  The Canadian government  prefers the first  category because  control over the  refugee selection  and review is  firmly maintained. Immigration officials set  up outposts in foreign countries and refugees are processed by the distribution of  visas.  This system  effectively controls the movements of refugees  and places priority on administration rather  than assistance in  escaping persecution. Control is  assured by the  distancing of  refugee claimants  from the country  of refuge. Control  over public opinion is secured by  a general lack of  media exposure  to immigration  procedures in  dealing with  these claims. In  fact, out-of-country claims are  rendered invisible to most Canadians. As well, many refugees live in areas where there are no immigration outposts and the issuing of visas  for asylum are reserved for those privileged  few who can pay for exit.  In contrast, refugees who arrive in  Canada requesting asylum are not so easy  to control and are officially frowned upon  by the Canadian government. Selection and  processing of these refugees involves a series of mandatory hearings and reviews,  instead of being left up to the discretion of  overseas immigration officials.  A 1981 Task Force on Immigration  Practices and Procedures made clear that  the priorities of the government were "administrative convenience, a desire for efficiency and a wish to impose vigorous control which are not always compatible with  justice and compassion."  Closely examining Canada's history of  acceptance and resettlement of refugees  exposes an evident trend in choosing refugees. In the 1950s and 60s, Canada accepted  thousands of economic refugees from Eastern Europe. In the mid 1970s, following the  end of the Vietnam War, large groups of  Cambodians, Laotians and Vietnamese  were allowed to resettle in Canada. In the  early 1980s when Poland invoked martial  law, hundreds of Polish people were  granted visas to enter Canada.  And yet during the 1980s, people from  Guatemala, Nicaragua and El Salvador  were not granted refugee status. The reasons given for rejecting the claims were  both racist and imperialist in nature. Firstly,  it was argued that Canada did not have  enough Latin American communities to  support newcomers in their expected assimilation. The preference was to resettle  these refugees in countries with "culturally  similar surroundings." Secondly, arguments were also made that these refugees  were fleeing "economic" oppression and  not escaping persecution and therefore did  not qualify as refugees by definition.  But weren't Polish people and other  Eastern European refugees motivated to  leave primarily due to economics? And  weren't Eastern Europeans moving to a  This system  effectively controls  the movements of  refugees and  places priority  on administration  rather than  assistance in  escaping  persecution  culturally unfamiliar place  when they  chose to settle in  Canada? These  European refugees were not  fluent in French  or English, but  they did have  white skin and  would presumably assimilate  well into the  dominant culture.  It also appears that refugee policy is  closely tied to  foreign policy.  In the case of the  Guatemalan,  Nicaraguan and  El Salvadorian  refugees, it was  feared that interference in Latin America  could provoke hostilities with the United  States who viewed South America as its  "backyard." Consequently, the Canadian  government made no protest against the  Americans who were arming the rebels in  South America in an attempt to retain neo-  coloniaf control over toreign governments  and their economies.  Very little has changed since refugee  policy was first conceived in 1951. Canada  has always and continues to accept certain  groups of refugees when it suits our needs.  When we needed cheap domestic labour  in the late 1970s, women from the Caribbean were accepted in large numbers as  refugees. In the 1980s, after Caribbean  women mobilized to ensure their rights, the  Canadian government changed its foreign  domestic workers' policies to favour  women from the Philippines and Thailand,  thus effectively excluding women from the  Caribbean from coming to Canada.  Sherene Razack, author of Looking  White People in the Eye, says that there have  always been groups, like the Jews, who  weren't wanted in Canada. She cautions  that "we need to look closely at the line that  has been drawn between the deserving and  undeserving refugee and simultaneously  ask ourselves, what is the role that refugees  and 'illegal' immigrants play in our economies? How much of our high standard of  living is attained from the sources of cheap  labour produced by refugees here and  around the globe?"  Contrary to popular misconceptions,  refugees are not suddenly created out of  situations that are isolated from the influence of countries in the Northern hemisphere. Refugees are created when there is  political instability, economic strife and  power struggles over control of resources.  Capitalism, patriarchy and white supremacy intersect to create conditions of  economic exploitation and political domination in the Southern regions of the world.  see REFUGEE next page  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  KINESIS Feature  from REFUGEE previous page  Western nations like Canada need to recognize their complicity in global economic  exploitation, which is part of the cycle for  creating refugees.  Multinationals are heavily invested in  labour markets in countries in the South,  and use their power to influence governments to favour their capitalist endeavours.  Countries in the South are exploited for  their cheap labour and natural resources,  while the gap between rich people and poor  people within the North and the South widens. It's a precarious balancing act that is  easily overwhelmed by civil uprising, natural disaster or some unexpected change to  the status quo.  In times of crisis, the West distances  itself from the struggle, preferring instead  to step back and send humanitarian aid  while these countries resolve their own  problems. This strategy offers the West the  advantage of appearing humanitarian and  generous while simultaneously disguising  its participation and responsibility for creating refugee crises.  Of course, if foreign investments are  threatened, more direct action is taken under the guise of assisting the oppressed  people. How many times did we hear that  the motivation behind the NATO (North  Atlantic Treaty Organization) airstrike on  Kosovo was to protect the Albanian refugees? We were also told that motivation behind the Gulf War was to protect Kuwait  nationals who were suffering at the hands  of Iraq.  Yet, how long was Canada aware of the  suffering of the East Timorese people? What  interventions have been taken to protect Tibetans over the past decade? How much foreign capital flows annually through these  regions to support our quality of living?  It is no coincidence that China's Fujian  province is both a region heavily invested in  by Canadian capitalists as well as a place riddled with high unemployment, low wages,  few government supports and desperate people trying to migrate to Canada.  Razack is currently working on a new  book that looks at the 1990s as a "new era in  policing the borders." In her research, she has  observed that certain ethnic groups are accepted more easily than others, and of particular concern is the present erosion of rights  for both refugees and landed immigrants.  Even those who have been granted  landed immigrant status can now be deported without appeal if they are found to  be a danger to society, says Razack. Children  born in Canada of refugee parents no longer  have full citizenship rights and do not qualify  for medical benefits.  In addition, the recent emphasis on the  need for high quality identity documents  discriminates against refugees from the  South, in particular Africa, Asia and the Caribbean, where such documents are often not  available.  On November 10, 1998 The Globe and  Mail issued a statement from Sadako Ogata,  the United Nations High Commissioner for  Refugees, who said that "self-interest is winning out over humanitarian tradition when  Canada selects refugees for resettlement from  abroad...Canada is giving less weight to  refugees' need for protection and more  to how much they are likely to cost taxpayers once they arrive in Canada."  Focusing on the costs of processing  refugees through Canadian government  bureaucracy diverts attention away from  the real issue of global responsibility for  the conditions that create refugees. Similarly, focusing attention on the problems  of human smuggling and organized  crime reduces refugees to objects, and ignores the conditions that compel people  to leave their homes and seek asylum in  another country.  Canada is implicated in the production of refugees because it continues to  exploit the labour and resources of the  South, while simultaneously supplying  aid to corrupt governments to protect financial investments of itself and corporations.  Refugees are a product of this cycle  and there will continue to be refugees created globally as long as Western nations  deny the power imbalances between  countries and blame refugees for social  problems.  Kelly D'Aoust is a former high school English teacher and a recent graduate of Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University. She  is pursuing her writing interests as well as  working as a business manager for an engineering consulting firm. She is also the volunteer coordinator at the FREDA centre for  research on violence against women and children in Vancouver.  Who's worth  whmt  FACT:  There are roughly 6.5 million  refugees in Africa, and the  United Nations High  Commission for Refugees is  appealing for $165 million to  provide them with minimal  shelter and the means to  return home.  FACT:  $475 million has been  allotted to assist the 3.4  million refugees fleeing  Kosovo.  FACT:  The United States and  European countries provide  97 percent of UNHCR  funding.  Question (after doing the math):  What does this tell us?  [Information source: The  Guardian, August 12, 1999]  EAR THE MYTHS  HE FACTS  Ever since the first ship from China arrived on the shores of  British Columbia, anti-refugee, anti-people of colour, and anti-  poor people sentiments have been on the rise. DARE has put  together a few myths and facts in response to the  scapegoating by the public and the hysteria of the media.  Thank you to the Coast Salish Peoples — the Burrard, Musqueam and Squamish Nations — for allowing us to be here on their territories. We call on  other non-Native people living in Canada — whatever their "immigration " status — to always acknowledge whose land they are on, and to work in  solidarity with indigenous people here and around the world.  IRECT   ACTION  GAINST  EFUGEE  XPLOITATION  DARE was formed by a group of women in Vancouver to  support the rights of the people—especially the women —  from China seeking refuge in Canada. We are concerned  about their safety and well-being. We are working to ensure  that they receive fair and just treatment from Canadian  authorities, the media, and the public.  MYTH #1:  The people from China seeking refuge in Canada  are here for purely economic reasons, not "political" reasons.  FACT:  Poverty is a human rights issue. Human rights  issues are political issues. Escaping poverty is  political. "One of the major reasons for an increase in migration is the destruction of rural  economies in many countries in the South."  (Women's Coalition on Immigration and Refugee  Issues.)  MYTH #2:  Canada's refugee laws are too loose.  FACT:  Immigration Canada projects that, of the total  intake of immigrants and refugees in 1999, only  11 to 13 percent will be refugees. In each of the  past few years, Canada has received only approximately 24,000 applications from people  asking for refugee status. Canada rejects 42 to  47 percent of applications for refugee status.  MYTH #3:  Canada spends too much money on immigrants  and refugees.  FACT:  The impact of immigration on government expenditures is small. The total budget for Citizenship  and Immigration for 1997/98 was one-half of one  percent of the total federal budget. The reality is  that refugees and immigrants contribute more to  the public coffers than they take out.  MYTH #4:  These refugee claimants are "illegal."  FACT:  It is legal to arrive in Canada and claim refugee  status. In fact, it is very difficult for people to  apply to Canada for refugee status from within  their own countries.  MYTH #5:  Sending these people back to China will solve  the problem of smuggling.  FACT:  Sending them back will only cause people to go  underground, and could lead to more women and  children being exploited in the sex trade. There  is also risk to their extended families in Canada  and in their home countries.  HOW TO CONTACT US:  by telephone: (604) 255-5499, or by email: chineserefugeeclaimants@canada.com  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  DARE forum on immigration and refugee rights:  Exposing the real  snakeheads  by Nandita Sharma  The title of my talk tonight is challenging the myths around Canadian immigration and refugee policy and arriving at  some sort of reality around those issues.  The first task is to state very clearly that  the real "snakeheads" profiting from the  desperation of others are Canadian employers and the Canadian government.  They are the real slave traders, and they are  the real pimps, when we are talking about  the trafficking of women and children.  We need to look at the source and the  cause of the desperation of people and at  what is continuing to make them vulnerable, instead of looking simply at the middle people who may be facilitating and  profiting from it as well. We need to place  the responsibility where it lies.  Canadian employers and the Canadian  government are the real snakeheads because they are creating the situations that  cause people to flee their homes and seek  refuge elsewhere. They are very purposely  creating the situations that leave migrants  vulnerable to employers demands, to men's  predatory advances and other forms of violence.  Canadian employers and governments  alike promote globalization. This has been  the buzzword since the 1980s. Globalization basically means promoting trade liberalization, which in turn means promoting people to have no other livelihood other  than to produce commodities for the world  market.  Globalization means the deregulation  of environmental, labour and other kinds  of protections. Globalization also means the  privatization of social services into private  capitalist services.  Canadian employers and governments  around the world are promoting globalization and not coincidentally getting the  Chinese government to follow suit.  Here are a couple of examples to show  how this is actually happening; how the  Canadian government and employers are  creating the desperation from which  women, children and men from China are  seeking refuge.  First, the Canadian government and  Canadian employers who are setting up  factories in China are supporting and encouraging the massive privatization of  state-run industries in China. That alone—  that one act—is estimated to cause over 100  million people in China to be displaced  and to lose their livelihood.  Another way that the Canadian government and employers are acting as  snakeheads is in their support for the notorious Three Gorges Dam Project. [Damming the Yangzi River] is going to flood the  ancestral homelands of approximately 10  million small-scale farmers and the communities that have sprung up around those  farming activities.  The Three Gorges Dam is going to  flood all of the lands that Chinese people  have been writing poetry and singing songs  about, in order to provide factory owners  with electricity. It is going to displace millions of people.  When Jean Chretien goes on trade missions to China he encourages privatization,  deregulation and mega-development  projects. The Canadian government and the  mainstream media would have us believe  that Canada is not responsible for these  projects and that people fleeing poverty are  not real refugees. They are "bogus" refugees, we're told. They are "economic" refugees.  Being able to speak of so-called economic refugees with such contempt is only  possible because of the way that the criteria for becoming a refugee has been defined  in Canada, as well as in the rest of the  world. It is important for us to see that the  category "refugee" has been defined for the  benefit of "First World" governments,  which have chosen to recognize only certain desperate political situations as meriting the attention of the world community.  The "First World" and its profoundly  undemocratic organizations such as the  United Nations, have steadfastly refused to  recognize that the creation and intensification of poverty in the "Third World" is not  a natural phenomenon. It is a profoundly  political, economic and social act on the  part of "First World" governments, corporations and the people who support them.  They continue to insist that it is the poor  who are responsible for their poverty, and  it is the "Third World" that is responsible  for its poverty.  By defining a refugee only as someone  who is fleeing an extraordinary political  situation, all of the everyday acts of violence that are perpetrated by First World  states and their Third World cronies are  dismissed as unimportant or as non-political.  The only way you can define people  fleeing China right now as not being real  refugees is by having a narrow definition  of what refugees are.  To re-think migration, which is our task  tonight, we need to reject this narrow definition of a "refugee," and recognize that all  situations that rob people of their livelihood, that destroy the environment in  which they live, that create conditions  where mothers can't feed their children-  all of these situations require refuge.  Canadian employers and the Canadian  governments—provincial and federal—are  also the real snakeheads because they create the situations that leave people seeking  refuge in Canada extremely vulnerable.  And that's what snakeheads do.  How do they do this? First, by erecting restrictive immigration policies that  leave most of the world's people with absolutely no legal recourse to ever migrate  to Canada. Another way is by pretending  that Canadian border cops can actually prevent people from crossing the border.  No government in the world, no matter what they do to make it difficult to cross  the border, can  ever stop the  worldwide migration of people.  This is for the very  simple and just  reason that human beings have a  need to live.  While First  World governments, corporations, and the people that support  them might like to  pretend that the  lives of people of  colour are meaningless and easily  sacrificed, this is not true. People will do  what they need to do to survive and if that  means crossing oceans and crossing borders, that is precisely what they will do.  Pretending this isn't so only leaves  those making these journeys extremely  vulnerable once they're inside Canada, because it renders them "illegal."  The worldwide movement of people  crossing international borders has doubled  since the early 1980s when the Canadian  government and Canadian corporations  went around the world promoting globalization. There are now over 125 million people engaged in international migration.  Most of them are fleeing desperate situations and most of them are not being given  citizenship status when they arrive.  Another key way the Canadian government is leaving people vulnerable once  they are in Canada is through a massive  migrant workers' program that recruits  people to come to Canada, not as permanent residents, but as temporary indentured  labour. [They are left] vulnerable to the demands of their employers be it for low  wages, no wages, no benefits, overtime,  sexual harassment and sexual assault. That  sounds like a snakehead to me.  It is important to note that the number  one source country for migrant workers to  Canada is China. This is not a coincidence.  The Canadian government knows very  well that the situation it is promoting in  China is causing people to leave the country. In turn, Canada benefits by recruiting  these people as migrant workers.  It is employers' demands and government policies that are making these people  vulnerable. If they were given the same  rights and entitlements of Canadian citizenship as others, then these people would be  much less vulnerable. But the job of  snakeheads is precisely to leave people  vulnerable and force them to work.  The Canadian government's rhetoric  about border control is ideological. Canadian employers and the Canadian government do not want to stop the movement of  people into Canada, and that is what we  need to rethink.  It is important for us to see that  the category "refugee" has been  defined for the benefit of  "First World" governments, which  have chosen to recognize only  certain desperate political situations as meriting the attention of  the world community.  The present situation is not about stopping people from actually entering Canada.  What it is about is making the people who  do cross borders, who do come into  Canada, extremely vulnerable.  The borders the Canadian government  is trying to protect are the borders between  the Third World and the First World. This  is why we're seeing such a racist backlash  and such racist support for keeping people from China who are seeking refuge  vulnerable.  More and more people from the South,  the so-called Third World, are coming into  Canada than ever before. This is something  we have to come to grips with. Stopping  their movement is not what it's about. The  overwhelming majority of people coming  to Canada are from the Third World. However, they are entering as indentured servants or as undocumented and extremely  vulnerable workers.  What can we do about this? The most  important thing we need to do is to fundamentally rethink our approach to people's  mobility. By mobility I mean two things:  moving and not moving.  We need to put an end to policies that  force people to move. That is the first and  foremost thing to do in order to have social justice in this world. It means challenging global capitalism at its very core.  Secondly, we need to put an end to  national governments' monopoly on determining when, where, and if, people move.  We need people being able to stay put and  being able to move freely of their own volition, of their own autonomy. We need autonomous movements of people, not government snakehead driven movements of  people.  If we don't recognize that people must  be able to stay where they are and that they  must be able to move if they need to when  they want to, we are going to continue to  create a situation of extreme poverty, desperation and vulnerability.  As I said before: nothing will stop the  movement of people.  Nandita Sharma is a member of Basmati Action Group.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  KINESIS Feature  DARE forum on immigration and refugee issues  The creation of a "crisis"  by SuneraThobani  The turnout [at this forum] is really  great. It shows how much interest and concern there is about the way this particular  group of refugees are being treated. Reading the mainstream papers, you increasingly get the impression nobody really  cares about them. The only people who  "care" are the minister of immigration and  citizenship [Elinor Caplan,] who wants to  change the law very quickly, and the RCMP,  who want to fly off to China to try to restrict any such groups [from] coming over  in the future.  This evening is also a good indicator  of how much work we need to do to change  the kind of public discussion that's out  there.  In terms of understanding migration  issues and Canadian policy, there are three  important points within which we need to  contextualize what is happening today.  The first is the context of globalization.  We hear from the Canadian government  that the changes taking place in the global  economy are putting incredible pressures  on the resources we have in Canada—  somehow there isn't enough to go around  for everybody—and there isn't anybody  profiting from all of this. The global  economy is some kind of nameless, faceless thing out there, which is forcing the  government, and anybody else who might  care about social justice issues and rights,  to cut back on its responsibilities to provide  a social safety network.  As long as we  continue to accept that  definition of Canadian  nationhood, what is  inevitable is that people  who look like me will  [The  Canadian  government  would say  that] because the  times are so  hard financially, we  need to cut  back, we  need to pull  back, and  we need to  look after  people in  Canada  first.  I challenge this  definition of  globalization and the global economy. Globalization is nothing new. Globalization has  been going on for 500 years. The very construction of Canada—the coming to being  of this country we call Canada—depended  upon and was part of that first phase of globalization, which was colonization. We  have been living within a global economy  for at least the last 500 years.  It's important to begin from mis definition and analysis of globalization because  what immediately becomes apparent is the  colonization of Aboriginal peoples, and the  attack on and the distortion of their sovereign governments and their self-determi-  continue to be called the  "Other, the immigrant,  the refugee."  nation. If we  are going to  fight back  against globalization,  this is the  key issue for  us to highlight and  have front  and centre  analysis.  The  other thing  which becomes apparent is  that all non-  Aboriginal  peoples  who live in Canada today came through  some process of migration. Our presence  here today—even those of you who are  born here and are defined as "natural born"  Canadians—is very much dependent on  that first phase of globalization—colonization.  It then becomes apparent that the migration of different groups of people have  been controlled and regulated in different  ways by the Canadian state historically.  Some came over as colonizers, as settlers,  and had access to citizenship. The subsequent generations of those people are now  called "natural-born Canadian citizens."  We need to get rid of this "natural"  idea, and look at how that citizenship was  acquired. Some of us who came over as  immigrants continue to be called immigrants, even though we are citizens. We  may have been here for generations, we  may even have been born here, but we continue to be called "immigrant and refugee  communities."  Who gets called a Canadian, and who  is named immigrant or refugee depends  upon the racialization of the conditions of  our migration.  The racialized basis of the Canadian  nation today originated with French and  British colonization of this part of the continent. That racialized basis of the Canadian  nation was never dismantled or changed.  In fact, it became further strengthened and  institutionalized through biculturalism and  bilingualism, which today are defined as  the national Canadian identity  As long as we continue to accept that  definition of Canadian nationhood, what  is inevitable is that people who look like  me will continue to be called the "Other,  the immigrant, the refugee."  As long as we hold on to "Englishness"  and "Frenchness," as being the defining factors of Canadian nationhood, the rest of us  who have come here since will continue to  be seen as outsiders.  It's very important to look at the  racialization of our conditions of migration  see CRISIS next page  DARE forum on immigration and refugee rights:  An intelligent and humane  response  Bl^  by Rita Wong  I became involved in publicly supporting the rights of the Chinese migrants for  two reasons. One was the need to defend  basic human rights, which should belong  to everyone. Second, was as a reaction to  the racist and classist hostility against the  migrants which is fueled by the media, and  which is so prevalent in the public discussion right now.  I jumped into the fray with primarily  anti-racism motives. I need to emphasize  that the answer to the backlash is not to distance oneself from the migrants, which  some Chinese have done unfortunately. I  think this only fuels the kind of  scapegoating that has been going on. When  you buy into this kind of blaming, you just  make it easier for others to scapegoat you  as well.  Our well-being rests in supporting the  human rights that any human being—  whatever their nationality, colour or income—should have. When we deny those  rights to anyone, we also weaken them for  ourselves, whether we realize it or not.  I'm really worried about the Fujianese  women, some of whom I have been working with. They are in a very tough situation; they owe a lot of money to the  snakeheads and they're being criminalized  by the Canadian government.  This puts a lot of pressure on the  Fujianese women to go underground and  serve as indentured labour. We need to remember that exploitation—whether it occurs in the sex trade, the garment industry,  housework, factories—is a real danger, and  a reality, I'm afraid, for most of them. If we  don't find options, most of these people are  headed for miserable and extremely hazardous conditions, whether in North  America or China, if they get deported.  Some people have disappeared and I  fear that the underground which has taken  them is both dangerous and exploitative.  On top of that, to be criminalized makes it  extremely difficult for them. State deportation and organized crime are serious threats  to these women's lives.  I want Canadians to take a moment to  put yourselves in that situation, and ask  yourselves what you would want done to  you.  Group detention and group profiling,  which amounts to stereotyping, is not fair.  Imprisoning people in Prince George isolates them from any Chinese language services they might be able to access here. [The  people incarcerated at Canadian Forces Base  Esquimalt and half of the women incarcerated  at the Burnaby Correctional Centre for Women  were shipped up to a re-opened jail in Prince  George, a community in central British Columbia which is a 10 hour drive from Vancouver].  Keeping mothers in prison while their children are moved to group homes is also  cruel and inhumane.  These are things that our government  is doing. As concerned people we need to  speak up against these violations of very  basic human rights.  see DARE on page 17  12  SIS  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  If we choose to prove  our patriotism and our  'Canadian-ness" on the  grounds of racism,  it is a double-edged  sword which can cut  either way.  from CRISIS previous page  and the subsequent treatment we receive  to understand how immigration policies  work.  The second point contextualizing what  is happening with these migrants and understanding  migration  generally, is  the current  restructuring  of the immigration program that is  taking place  in Canada.  The Canadian state  is fundamentally restructuring  the immigration program, along  with other  policy areas.  The way it is being restructured is through  reducing the number of people coming into  this country as landed immigrants, who can  then make claims upon citizenship.  This follows Nandita's analysis about  Canada having a growing migrant workers' program [see page 11], where more and  more people are coming into the country  on temporary work permits without the  ability to become landed immigrants and  to subsequently make claims upon Canadian citizenship.  What we've had is a reduction in numbers. We've seen the eligibility criteria being strengthened both for the independent  and family categories. We're seeing the re-  introduction of the head tax [the Right of  Landing Fee,]which again restricts the  number of people who can afford to come  in. This has very class-based consequences  for the people trying to come to Canada.  We're seeing the "family" being redefined in narrower and narrower terms—the  nuclear family is the model now being imposed on the immigration program. We're  also seeing the strengthening of the sponsorship regulations.  All these changes are having the effect  of restricting the number of people who  come into the country as landed immigrants and who can subsequently make  claims to citizenship.  In all of their policy papers, one of the  projects for the restructuring of the immigration program is to actually restrict the  eligibility criteria for claiming Canadian  citizenship. The Canadian government has  made no mystery of this. This is no secret  agenda.  Nandita spoke before me about how  the Canadian state—the federal government—is managing immigration so that  more and more people will come into the  country under more and more vulnerable  conditions, with fewer and fewer rights.  This is very much part of a consciously,  clearly articulated strategy by the government.  Of course, once you start restricting the  conditions under which people can come  into the country and the rights they will  have once they come in, people become  desperate. They will try anything and everything in order to ensure a livelihood for  themselves and their families, to try to keep  their families together, to give their children  options. People become increasingly desperate, and I think what we've seen over  the summer is an indication of how desperate people can actually get.  That they would be willing to mortgage 10 or 15 years of their lives to be nothing more than indentured labour, and travel  under horrific conditions with a very real  likelihood that they would never even  make it to Canada, shows a level of desperation which really is a result of this very  consciously  articulated  strategy  around immigration,  not only in  Canada but  also in other  countries of  the West.  The  third point is  to look at  how the government is  very effectively making immigrants, refugees, and this  particular group of refugees into scapegoats. The arguments we are hearing are  that we have limited resources, we have to  take care of Canadians first, and so on. This  allows a very liberal discourse—one that  says we have to provide for people here  first, we have to take care of poverty in  Canada first.  But what is creating poverty in Canada  is the social and economic policies of the  government; it's not these few hundred migrants who've come into the country.  They become an easy scapegoat, an  easy target for the hostility and the anxiety  that people in this country are feeling—a  real anxiety, as unemployment is increasing, as poverty is increasing. Women know  better than anybody else that what is effectively being done by politicians and the media, has shifted attention and blame onto  migrants, refugees and immigrants, for  problems that are in  fact the result of the  fundamental economic restructuring  of Canadian society.  It is important to  look at what function  [blaming the people  from Fujian] is playing. It's not just rabid  racism without a  cause—it has a very  specific purpose here.  It is to shift blame  away from where it really lies, and place it  on people who have come into the country  under very vulnerable conditions, and who  are then made even more vulnerable  through the racist hysteria we've seen.  What the Canadian government is trying to do is to use this so-called crisis that  has been generated around the arrival of  these few hundred people. It is being  treated as a major "national crisis," which  is interesting in itself. What becomes a major national crisis? Increasing poverty  doesn't. Increasing homelessness doesn't.  But a few hundred migrants become a national crisis.  This national crisis is being used to take  away the rights that refugees currently have  in this country. That is what is behind the  amount of attention that this particular  group of migrant people has been receiving. For example, the government right  now is looking at a proposal to lock up refugees for months at a time.  This is a particularly disturbing proposal. It would allow immigration officials  to suspend the legal requirements for frequent hearings to review whether claimants  should be held in jail or in detention, or  whether they should be released. Instead  of having periodic reviews, the proposal is  that there would be one review and then  the claimant would be locked up until the  final determination was made as to  whether they could stay or whether they  will be deported.  This is obviously a serious infringement of their rights. Holding refugee claimants in jail is also very inhumane. There is  already a process in place for how these  cases are to be treated, so the proposal that  we should bypass this process is a serious  shift in the kind of policies we have had in  this country so far.  What we hear again and again is that  [detention] has become necessary because  our borders are being "swamped." However, if we look at the numbers for the last  10 years, immigration [and refugee] targets  levels have never been met. We've had far  fewer people coming into the country than  the desired levels set by the government.  So the idea that we're being swamped  is a completely bogus. It is being used in a  strategic way right now to try to take away  the right of appeal that refugees currently  have, and their right to be released and to  live in Canadian society.  Also, there was a specific recommendation in the 1994 review of immigration  policy that we should have detention  camps, and that all refugees who come into  the country should be held in detention  camps.  I'm sure all of you can relate to what  this is all reminiscent of. It was a proposal  that was treated very seriously by the government and was actually included in their  final strategic plan as an option. That is why  I am concerned about how the government  is using this so-called national crisis of a  few hundred people from China.  There is one more thing I want to talk  about, because it's a very controversial is-  What becomes a major national crisis?  Increasing poverty doesn't. Increasing  homelessness doesn't. But a few hundred migrants become a national crisis.  sue and a painful one. I think most of us  who are activists and advocates for refugee rights, who are people of colour, don't  want to talk about this, but it is an extremely  important.  The racism out there, the hysteria in  the media, is all very clear and it is all very  reminiscent of previous periods in Canadian history. But what has been particularly  disturbing and appalling to me is the demands we're hearing from so-called  spokespeople for people of colour communities: "Send them back! These are not  genuine refugees!"  We have to find a way of talking about  this and actually confronting these demands coming from our "community"  spokespeople. I don't need to point very  low. I can point very high in this province—  we can look at the attorney general [Ujjal  Dosanjh] and the comments he has made.  It is our responsibility to confront these  "send them back" demands from people of  colour who claim to be spokespeople of our  communities. [These demands are] really  just enabling them to claim to be "Canadians."  '"Send them back!' They're the problem, we are not the problem. Treat us nicely.  We should not experience racism, because  we came through the proper and legal  channels."  [These demands] become a way [for  people of colour] to distance themselves  from the current group of people who are  coming in. It's a classist argument because  most people who are making this argument  did not come into the country under the  same conditions [as this current group.]  They had education; they had skills;  they were professionals, so they could come  into the country. They didn't need to "lie  and cheat their way into this country," as  people who are more desperate, who don't  have those class options, have to do.  Some people of colour are using this  argument to prove that, "We are even more  Canadian than you are; we would send  them back."  It's a terrible shame that the experience  of racism has been translated into some  people of colour picking on others who are  more vulnerable than themselves. By reacting in this way, people of colour are on dangerous ground. If we choose to prove our  patriotism and our "Canadian-ness" on the  grounds of racism, it is a double-edged  sword which can cut either way.  I think it's important for those of us  advocating for refugee rights to expose the  class basis of this "send them back" demand. We need to stand up and say, "No  actually, we are not different from this  group of people who recently came to  Canada; we are the same. We face the same  kind of conditions [of racism here.]"  I don't want to make too much of this  because, certainly there are forms of persecution that refugees face, which most of us  as immigrants haven't personally faced.  However, in terms of the structural conditions that push international migration, we  face similar experiences, and  have seen similar destruction of  our communities. On this basis, I want to  make a real plea  for those of us  who are advocates to stand up  and say, "Yes, we  are the same as  they are, and we  want them to have the same rights that we  do. Put an end to this scapegoating."  My closing remarks concern the discussions out there that: "They want what  we have; they will take away what we  have." This is very much the sentiment out  there, which is fuelling the racist response  [to the people from China].  We need to change that into a question  which focuses on who is this "we." What  is it that "We do have," and "How did we  come to have what we have?"  What makes it all right for us to buy a  t-shirt on the streets of Vancouver for $3,  which was made in China, then stand up  all outraged as Canadian citizens when the  woman who made that t-shirt tries to come  here and live with us on a basis of equality? What gives us that right?  That's the question we need to put out  there.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 -   A legal herstory of abortion  It's been almost 12 years since the last law in Canada  criminalizing abortion was struck down. However, that hasn't  meant that abortion services are available to women across  the country.There are still startling disparities between provinces,  between urban and rural areas, between hospital/health board  administrations, and so on.  In this issue of Kinesis, we wanted to remind readers of  the struggle that has been fought to first decriminalize abortion  in Canada, and then to ensure women can access abortion  services. So, here below is a legal herstory of abortion rights  in Canada, and well as an update on abortion services across  the country. (Thanks to the Pro-Choice Action Network in  Vancouver and the Canadian Abortion Rights Action League  for the information.)  Also, don't forget to check out Page 16, for a flashback  to the 70s, courtesy of The Pedestal.  1869- Abortion is made illegal, under the threat of life imprisonment. Dissemination of information about birth control is also made illegal.  1892- Parliament enacts the first  Criminal Code, which prohibits abortion  and the sale, distribution, and advertisement of contraception.  1926 tO 1947. 4,000 to 6,000 Canadian women die as a result of bungled  illegal abortions.  1936: Social worker Dorothea Palmer  is arrested and charged under the Criminal Code with offering birth control information.  1967: A federal committee considers  amendments to the Criminal Code on abortion. The committee hears from many  groups and individuals on both sides of the  issue, including Dr. Henry Morgentaler,  who urges repeal of the abortion law and  freedom of choice on abortion. Around this  time, an estimated 35,000 to 120,000 illegal  abortions are taking place every year.  1969: Parliament passes amendments to Section 251 of the Criminal Code,  decriminalizing contraception, and allowing some abortions under extremely restricted conditions. Some hospitals with  Therapeutic Abortion Committees can approve and provide an abortion, if the pregnancy would endanger the woman's life or  health. Access to abortion is applied unevenly and unfairly across the country.  Women wait an average of eight weeks for  an abortion. Some provinces refuse to provide any abortion services at all, and abortion is largely unavailable to women outside major cities.  1970: The Vancouver Women's Caucus, a group of independent feminists, organizes political opposition to Section 251.  The Caucus organizes the Abortion Caravan, the first national feminist protest.  Women travel over 3,000 miles from Vancouver to Ottawa, gathering numbers as  they go. In Ottawa, the Abortion Caravan,  now 500 women strong, holds two days of  demonstrations. Thirty women chain themselves to the parliamentary gallery in the  House of Commons, closing parliament for  the first time in Canadian history [see page  12.]  1971 to 1973: Ten more criminal  charges are laid against Dr. Morgentaler. In  November 1973, a Montreal jury of 11 men  and one woman acquit Morgentaler. In an  unprecedented move, the Quebec Court of  Appeal overturns the jury verdict and finds  Morgentaler guilty in 1974. The doctor appeals his case to the Supreme Court of  Canada. In 1975, the court votes 6-3 to uphold the Quebec Court's conviction and  Morgentaler is sentenced to 18 months in  prison. While serving his sentence, he is  tried on a second charge. A jury acquits  him again, and the Quebec Court of Appeal upholds that acquittal.  1974: The Canadian Abortion Rights  Action League (CARAL) is founded, the  first and only national group promoting  abortion rights in Canada.  1976: The Federal Minister of Justice  sets aside Morgentaler's conviction on the  first charge and orders a new trial.  Morgentaler, who had suffered a heart attack in jail, is freed after serving 10 months  of his sentence. In September, he is acquitted at the retrial of the original charges, the  third time a jury acquits him. In late 1976,  the Quebec government drops all further  1969: Dr. Henry Morgentaler defies charges against Morgentaler.  Section 251 of the Criminal Code and performs abortions in his medical practice in 1977 to 1983: Clinics open in  Quebec. In June, Morgentaler's office is Quebec, Toronto, and Winnipeg in spite  raided by the police and he is charged with of Section 251. Prince Edward Island  conspiracy to perform an abortion.                 refuses to fund abortions and all hospi  tals stop providing the service.  Morgentaler's  Winnipeg and  Toronto clinics  are raided by  police and Dr.  Morgentaler is  charged with  conspiracy to  procure a miscarriage, along  with other doctors. At the 1984  trial, everyone is  acquitted.  1985: The  OntarioAttorney  General appeals the 1984 jury acquittal. In  October, 1985, the Ontario Court of Appeal  sets aside the jury acquittal and orders a  new trial. Dr. Morgentaler appeals to the  Supreme Court of Canada.  1986 The BC Coalition for Abortion  Clinics (now called the Pro-Choice Action  Network) is founded to establish clinics in  BC.  1988: On January 28, the Supreme  Court of Canada strikes down Canada's  abortion law as unconstitutional. The law  is found to violate Section 7 of the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms because it infringes  upon a woman's right to life, liberty, and  security of the person.  1989: In March, the Supreme Court  of Canada refuses to decide on the claim of  Joe Borowski that fetuses have a constitutionally guaranteed right to life, saying his  case was moot, due to the abortion law being struck down.  1989: Dr. Morgentaler opens a clinic  in Nova Scotia after the provincial government passes legislation prohibiting abortions at clinics. Morgentaler is charged under the provincial Medical Services Act. In  1990, a provincial court strikes down the  Act as unconstitutional and acquits  Morgentaler.  1989 : In Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec, ex-boyfriends try to get injunctions to  stop their former girlfriends' abortions.  Chantal Daigle of Quebec is refused an  abortion under an injunction and appeals  to the Supreme Court. During the hearing  in August, the court learns that Daigle has  already had an abortion in the US, but overturns the injunction against her anyway.  1989 : The federal government introduces Bill C-43, an amendment to the  Criminal Code that would prohibit abortion unless a doctor finds the pregnancy is  a threat to the woman's physical, mental  or psychological health.  1990: In May, the House of Commons  passes Bill C-43 and the legislation is sent  to the Senate for approval. In 1991, the bill  is narrowly defeated by the Senate in a tie  vote. Abortion is now treated like any other  medical procedure.  1992 A firebomb destroys the Toronto Morgentaler clinic. No-one is hurt,  but the perpetrator is never caught.  1994' In November, Dr. Garson  Romalis of Vancouver is shot and seriously  wounded in his home by an unknown  sniper hiding in the back alley. This is the  first of what would be become known as  the infamous "Remembrance Day" shootings of abortion providers.  1995 In response to the shooting of  Dr. Romalis, British Columbia introduces  the Access to Abortion ServicesAct, the first  legislation in Canada to prohibit protests  outside abortion clinics, and doctors' offices  and homes. In early 1996, a court strikes  down two provisions of the act, saying they  are an infringement of freedom of expression. In September 1996, the BC Court of  Appeal restores the Act to its full force, saying that specific, geographical limits on free  speech are justified to protect vulnerable  groups.  1995: In November, Dr. Hugh Short  of Hamilton, Ontario is shot in the elbow  while relaxing at his home.  1996: In November, the Edmonton  Morgentaler clinic suffers a butyric acid attack. Butyric acid is a toxic, foul-smelling  chemical that is injected through the walls  and ceilings of abortion clinics.  1997: Two more doctors are shot and  wounded in their homes in November, an  anonymous doctor in upstate New York,  and Dr. Jack Fainman of Winnipeg. A national police Task Force is created to investigate the Remembrance Day shootings and  catch the sniper.  1998: In late October, Dr. Barnett  Slepian of Buffalo, New York becomes the  first fatality in the Remembrance Day  shootings. He is gunned down in front of  his wife and children. The FBI joins the  Canadian Task Force. They search for suspect James Kopp, a radical American anti-  abortionist, whose car was seen entering  Canada near the times of some of the shootings.  [The above history was compiled by the  Pro-Choice Action Network in BC and is published as a brochure and on P-CAN's website.  For more information, contact P-CAN at Suite  512-1755 Robson St, Vancouver, BC, V6G  3B7; tel: (604) 736-2800;fax: (604) 736-2869;  email: pcan@vcn.bc.ca; website: http://  www.prochoiceconnection.com/pro-can.]  Newfoundland  Prince Edward  Island  Nova Scotia  New Brunswick  Quebec  Ontario  Manitoba  Saskatchewan  Alberta  Updates from across Canada  Both hospital and clinic abortions are fully funded in this province. Services are available in St. John's at the Morgentaler  Clinic and at the Health Services Centre Hospital. Access for women living in rural areas is problematic due to the cost of  travel to St. John's.  Abortion services have been non-existent in this province since 1983. Women must travel to Fredericton, New Brunswick  or Halifax, Nova Scotia'for abortions in the early stages of pregnancy (up to 16 weeks), and to Montreal for later-term  abortions. This province pays for abortions on conditon they be approved by a panel of three to five physicians and  performed in a hospital. Women must submit a claim for reimbursement. According to provincial statistics, PEI pays for  fewer than ten abortions annually.  British Columbia  Territories  Abortion procedures are available at five facilities in Nova Scotia. Although the province fully funds abortions performed in hospitals, it only pays a portion of the costs of clinic abortions. There is limited access to abortion because  many physicians will not refer women to a surgeon for this procedure. Approximately 30 percent of the abortions taking  place at the Morgentaler clinic are performed on women who live in Prince Edward Island.  On March 31, six Mount Allison University students chose to express their pro-choice feelings by covering up a very  prominent anti-choice billboard (located between Amherst and Sackville) with a cloth sign proclaiming, "Our Bodies, Our  Choice." An anonymous source to the Argosy (the student newspaper) explained that the billboard was "anti-choice and  that goes against what we believe. As women, we have control over our bodies and over our destiny."  T  Abortions are performed in 49 facilities across the? province. Access is concentrated in Montreal, where 22 of the facilites  are located. The number of abortions performed in Quebec has recently increased. To some extent, this rising trend may  be due to the new medical insurance plan introduced in 1997. Under the new system, women in receipt of social assistance must pay for contraceptives that were previously free of charge. Many women availing themselves of abortion  services have said they cannot afford "the pill."  Nurses at a suburban hospital in Toronto reached an agreement with their employer allowing them the right to refuse to  participate in abortion procedures. The mediated settlement culminates a six-year dispute by nurse Ailene George and  seven colleagues. (Calgary Herald, 4/14/99)  Access to services is concentrated in Winnipeg. Waiting lists are an acknowledged problem. Abortions at the Morgentaler  Clinic are not funded and women must pay between $500 and $550. Information on abortion services is problematic for  rural women who call a government-funded pregnancy counseling service, which discourages abortion and refuses to  make abortion referrals.  Abortion services are available in Regina, Saskatoon, Weyburn and Moosejaw. Saskatchewan has a very large rural  population. With the exception of Weyburn and Moosejaw, there is no access to abortion outside of the two major urban  centres. The cost of travel to obtain abortion services is not funded by the province, which makes access virtually impossible in many cases.  The Alberta College of Physicians and Surgeons is deciding whether medical abortions (using methotrexate and  misoprostol) should be restricted to clinics and hospitals that are approved to perform surgery. The College's concern  centres on the fact that the drugs "don't work" in a small fraction fo cases and "doctors have to resort to surgical abortion." (Calgary Herald, 4/14/99)  A Calgary court has ordered Alberta Report magazine to stop publishing stories on late-term abortions performed at a  local hospital, following a complaint by the Calgary Regional Health Authority that "the stories were endangering the lives  of its staff." The magazine has anonymously quoted nurses saying the hospital forces its staff to carry out late-term  abortions, "without regard for individual moral qualms." These abortions are performed when medical testing reveals  debilitating genetic defects in the fetus. (National Post, 5/3/99)  The new abortion clinic planned for the Kelowna Hospital has been approved. To become a reality, the clinic needed the  full support of Penny Priddy, the Minister of Health who has supported it as part of the NDP platform.  Access in the Territories is limited to the major centres. Some funding is available for medical travel expenses; however,  this subsidy covers only a portion of the cost. Women must typically spend three to four days in Whitehorse, Yukon in  order to have an abortion, which augments their travel costs.  [Information from the July 1999 issue of Pro-Choice Forum, the newsletter of the Canadian Abortion Rights Action League. For more information on CARAL, contact them  at: 1 Nicholas St, Suite 726, Ottawa, Ontario, K1N 7B7; tel: (613) 789-9956; fax: (613) 789-9960; email: caral@interlog.com; website: http://www.interlog.com/~caral.] Feature  Flashback to 1970. "As we go marching, marching..." Abortion is still not  legal in Canada. Though the federal government passed amendments to the  Criminal Code that allowed abortions to be performed, abortions are still  only available under very strict circumstances.  Abortion was a central site of the struggle for women's liberation, and  during the late 1960s, women stepped up the campaign to decriminalize abortion and make it accessible to women across the country.  * For its part, the Vancouver Women's Caucus called on women to join up  with a calvacade of cars and vehicles heading for Ottawa. Their goal: that  abortions should be provided to women free of charge, and when women request them.  On May 9, 1970, more than 500 women converged on the nation's capital. Here's what happened on Parliament Hill... H  "Free Abortion on Demand"  Parliament  forced  listen  to  by Gwen Hauser  After travelling for 11 days across  Canada, picking up women from all across  the country, we finally arrived in Ottawa.  Meeting with our sisters in a shopping centre we proceeded to cavalcade through the  town. The response we got was overwhelming. People lined up outside their houses  and on the streets, giving us Vs, fists and  waves and shouting encouragement for our  venture.  Next day at 1:30pm, after an open rally  outside parliament, we held an open meeting in the Railway Room of the Parliament  Buildings to present  a brief to Trudeau,  Munro and Turner.  None of the government officials were  there. Trudeau was  on the eve of his mid-  Pacific tour; Munro  was at a World  Health Conference in  Geneva (where,  however, he was met  by 50 Austrian  women reminding  him of the health of  women in Canada);  and Turner was out  playing tennis.  The only MPs  who were there were  Grace Mclnnis,  David Lewis and  Lome Nystrom (all  NDPers) plus the  Conservative butterfly Gerald Baldwin,  complete in mustard jacket and flashy tie.  Judy D'Arcy of Toronto Women's Liberation read a brief and Grace Mclnnis addressed the house. The best she could say  was that she was "solidly behind" us but  that she did not believe abortion would be  removed from the Criminal Code unless we  got petitions from all across Canada and  presented them to the government. This,  she said, would take two years.  Women jumped up to their feet and immediate cries of "That's too late" and "We  can't wait" greeted this last luke-warm proposal.  Doris Powers capped off the afternoon,  speaking of her experience as a welfare  mother, who upon seeking an abortion was  generously granted a sterilization. "We the  poor of Canada are dirt shoved under the  rug of a vicious economy—I am not a  young woman. I'm not one of the women  May 2000 marks the 20th anniversary of the Abortion  Caravan. In our May 2000 issue, Kinesis would like to  devote several pages to looking back at the activism for  the right to choose, particularly during the late 1960s,  early 1970s. We invite women who were part of the Abortion Caravan in any way-organizing, participating or sup-  porting-or who were affected by the actions surrounding  ings, et cetera to us. If you have memories or ideas of  other stories related to the struggle for abortion rights in  Canada, please let us know as well.  house in order to present him with the coffin. Trudeau, of course, was not there and  after pushing past the pigs at the gate and  being stopped by ones around the house,  we decided to wait on the lawn and tried  to get a government official from the house.  None appeared (except for a gum-chewing  pink cheeked Gordon Gibson, oozing with  grease and phony concern).  So after about an hour of arguing with  the pigs and various exchanges back and  forth, we decided to  take the coffin to the  house. This we did,  with a heavy police  escort, and placed  the tools of a hack  abortionist on top  of the coffin.  On Monday,  we went into the  last phase of our action: direct confrontation of the government in parliament. Thirty-six of  us got into the galleries, and chaining  ourselves to the  chairs, proceeded  to disrupt parliament.  At first, we  were not taken seriously, but as more  Kinesis can be reached at 309-877 E. Hastings St,  Vancouver, BC,V6A 3Y1; tel: (604) 255-5499;  fax: (604) 255-7508; email: kinesis@web.net. Deadli  submissions is February 28th.  way up here, because I don't  have a  goddamned  thing to sing  about."  This was the high point of the afternoon and after some more talking and  speeches, we decided to march to Trudeau's  and more women got up to speak, and the  guards were unable to stop us, the MPs became increasingly disturbed. Shouting cries  of "Whores!" "Sluts!" and other goodies  from a male chauvinist repertoire, some of  them rushed up into the galleries and the  speaker was finally forced to adjourn parliament.  Outside a support demonstration was  going on and when our sisters came out of  parliament smiling and walking arm-inarm we knew that the action had been successful and the first in-road on parliament  was made.  However, we believe that despite Turner 's prediction—two years of red tape without any action—our action in Ottawa was  successful. Although the government officials weren't there, the women of Canada  have finally been heard—at least by the  people of the country—and the first declaration of war has been made with the first  exposure of parliament. The form that this  declaration of war will take is actions in  hospitals all across Canada to force the officials to be responsible to the women they  supposedly serve.  We will not be stopped by red tape or  other measures of diversion. All power to  the people! Women—power to the  women—people!  This article is re-printed from the June  1970 issue of The Pedestal, the newsletter of  the Vancouver Women's Caucus. Only a few  copies of "The Pedestal remain in our archives  here at Kinesis. As we recognize how critical  it is for us to ensure that the herstory of women's activism and lives is not lost, we encourage anyone who has copies of'The  Pedestal that they do not wish to  keep to send them to us at Kinesis  or to the Canadian Women's Movement Archives, University of Ottawa Library Network, Archives  and Special Collections, 65  Universite, Ottawa, Ontario, KIN  9A5.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  from DARE on page 12  Since the first boat arrived in July, I  have come to realize that the situation is  much more complex than matters of racism and human rights, although these are  clearly an important part of it.  As previous speakers have already  said, the situation requires much more  thought about the globalized economic  forces which displace millions of people  and give rise to wide scale human trafficking.  Many Canadians seem willfully ignorant of the desperate poverty that forces  people to leave China and other countries.  And as others have pointed out, those who  press for the free movement of goods, services and investments are being hypocrites  when they react against the free movement  of people.  I am not an economist, but like all of  us, I am affected by what happens in the  economy. I cannot afford to ignore how  these forces operate on me and, indeed, on  all of us.  I have had to question what my responsibilities are as a Canadian citizen, as  somebody who has benefitted from historical migration.  Our government promotes trade liberalization policies which keep corporate  profits and debt payments flowing from the  South to the North. Given that the globalized economic system is heavily and  unfairly weighted against the South, I have  had to ask myself what I can do about this  problem.  Canadians do not like to think about  it, but our standard of living depends on  the exploitation of cheap labour. If we paid  what goods were worth, and if that money  actually reached workers rather than CEOs  and shareholders, do you think that Chinese people would still risk their lives coming here?  It is crucial to start thinking in terms  of the larger context—the economic and  political forces which impoverish and displace millions of innocent people. I find this  situation overwhelming, but I think change  begins, nonetheless, with an individual response.  So we come to DARE, Direct Action  Against Refugee Exploitation. DARE is a  group of women who are working to support the rights of the refugee claimants—  especially the women, because women  have specific needs and are particularly  vulnerable in these situations.  We want the refugee claimants to receive fair and just treatment from the Canadian authorities, the media, and the public. We formed in September. We have various areas of knowledge and we're still  learning from each other. We don't pretend  to have all the answers to these difficult  issues, but we're trying to educate ourselves  and the public, and we're trying to find local ways of addressing this global problem.  DARE has  formed two committees: one on media,  and one on employment alternatives  [for the refugee  claimants.]  In the short  term, I hope that  Canada increases its  acceptance of immigrants and refugees.  We really need to  widen our definition  of these terms, and  not let them be so restrictive. Although  the United Nations'  definition of a refugee does not include  those who suffer due  to man-made economic policies, I suggest that poverty is a  human rights issue, and that "economic"  refugees—if you want to call them that—  also deserve respect. This is not intended  to weaken the [Geneva] Convention definition of a refugee, but to build on it in order to name an injustice that also needs attention.  In terms of legislation, we can do  things like oppose Bill C-63 [the proposed  new Citizenship Act.] Canada has signed a  number of international agreements: the International Convention on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights; the Convention on  the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women; the Convention of  the Rights of the Child. We have international obligations based on these agreements.  It should be noted that Canada has refused to sign the International Convention  on the Protection of the Rights of Migrant  Workers and Their Families. It is clear in  the wake of this summer that Canada  should sign this agreement.  I want to reiterate that whatever solutions are proposed, they must avoid  Canadians do  not like to  think about it,  but our standard of living  depends on the  exploitation of  cheap labour.  revictimizing people who have been trafficked to Canada. Deportation, as the Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women  (GAATW) has pointed out, often makes  those who have been trafficked even more  vulnerable to being abused and trafficked  again. Deportation does not solve the problem and, in fact, might worsen it on a global level.  For example, you might want to ask  yourself if deporting victims of trafficking might make  it more difficult to  prosecute smugglers in Canada because the witnesses  are gone. I don't  have an answer to  these questions, but  it is something that  people need to think  about.  One thing the  Canadian government could do to  stop the threat of  being pushed underground is to  grant people landed  status, so that they  have a fighting  chance of being in control of their own lives.  I don't know how likely this is to happen,  but we still need to push for such things.  Trafficking needs to be recognized as a  Canadian problem. In 1997, Jyoti Sanghera  [of GAATW] was told by the Vancouver police that there are estimated to be a few  hundred Asian women in Vancouver working in the sex trade. They are in the country "illegally;" they've had their passports  taken away; they're made to provide sexual  services, and there's nothing in place to take  care of them.  These women work under conditions  of debt bondage; they owe a debt of $30-  40,000. This issue of debt sounds very familiar now. It is a very invisible problem  and I'm just learning about it as I go.  I'm going to move back to globalization. There have been two streams of globalization described. One is masculinized:  high-tech finance, production and technology. And one is feminized: a menial  economy of sexualized, racialized service,  which includes both domestic work and the  sex trade.  It's usually the first "male" stream  which is recognized as globalization. The  second stream, the "female" stream, gets  ignored. In the long term, what we need is  an economic system that aims for gender  equity, global equity and the just sharing  of resources and wealth.  It's a huge challenge obviously, but I  think it is important to think about long-  term structural change at the same time as  we take short-term action.  There's a lot we can learn from work  that's already been done by groups like the  Philippine Women Centre. They recognize  that foreign domestic workers and other  women exploited in the labour market are  victims of violence from the "socio-economic perspective," in Cecilia Diocson's  words.  Chronic poverty requires a structural  solution. Some of the actions proposed by  the Association of Filipino Women Workers in Toronto include: debt relief, promoting the development of labour markets and  employment generation in less industrialized countries, revising the [immigration]  point system to value skills, and granting  foreign domestic workers full landed immigrant status.  I'm just reading and learning about  these issues, and I'm just sharing with you  the things I've come across. This is by no  means an exhaustive list.  I'm going to close by saying that, although trafficking is huge and complex, I  want to encourage people to educate themselves about the issues. Share knowledge  by writing to newspapers and politicians;  lobby against reactionary legislative  changes; and educate your friends, your  family, and your co-workers.  Any long-term solutions will come  from working together, not from  scapegoating the poor. I hope we can generate some discussion. If we believe in the  need for a fair and just society, then each of  us has to find ways of putting this belief  into action.  Rita Wong is a member of DARE, Direct Action Against Refugee Exploitation. For more  about the group's work, contact DARE c/o  309-877 E. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V6A  3Y1; tel: (604) 255-5499; or email:  chineserefugeeclaimants@canada.com.  Kinesis is the  NEWS OF TOMORRO  subscribe today  give us a call at  (604) 255-5499  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  Taking action against corporate globalization:  Corporate  cannibalism  by Lisa Wulwik  The current model that dominates our  economic system is fraught with problems.  It is organized within an expansionist frame  of thought.  Expansionists encourage constant  growth. This is very detrimental to the environment and to people because it assumes that the earth's resources are infinite.  Expansionist economists support the  amassing of more and more wealth, free  trade, and the elimination of all barriers to  trade.  The central problem with expansionist economics is that within it there is no  real way of measuring "progress." It does  not and cannot measure the impact its policies have on people and their communities.  Ultimately, agreements like the Free  Trade Agreement for the Americas (FTAA),  the Multilateral Agreement on Investment  (MAI) and governing entities like the World  Trade Organization (WTO)—which all fall  under this framework—lead to the increasing exploitation of people and to the destruction of our environment.  In its 1997 document, "Women Oppose  Corporate Globalization," the Vancouver  Status of Women defines globalization as:  "the forced integration of economies into a  global system of capitalism." Globalization  restructures economic, social and political  systems in order to "fit" the demands of  the corporate world. Under the current  framework of global economics, corporations are pressuring governments to remove trade and other barriers which restrict them from gaining the most profit.  These barriers are often in the form of  labour laws, human and social rights protections, as well as environmental regulations. These rights/protection are at risk of  being abolished in order to appease the insatiable appetite of corporations.  The WTO, FTAA and MAI all intensify  the exploitation of people. We become less  and less like members of a community and  more and more like anonymous consumers in a global market.  In most societies, women—especially  indigenous women, immigrant women,  poor women and women of colour—are often hardest hit with the effects of corporate  globalization. Trade agreements do not  have a homogenous effect on society, and  therefore should not be assumed to be gender neutral.  According to the Women's Edge,  "women throughout the world work seven  to 48 percent more than men do (including  unpaid work). In addition, women also  have less access to credit, land and education. For expanded trade and investment  to really work for women, negotiations  must recognize and respond to women's  needs."  Women's Edge is a group that aims to  educate the public, policy makers and the  media on issues surrounding women and  economic globalization. Women's Edge  presses for polices that work for women.  The current economic globalization  framework, although helping to improve  the lives of some women, has resulted in  many women suffering from depressed  wages, increased workload, and the erosion  of their communities.  Amending agreements like FTAA and  MAI to include clauses that focus on women's lives is in the end a band-aid solution.  More importantly we need, as people who  inhabit this society, to stand up and fight  against the WTO, MAI and FTAA. The entire mode of economics from which our  government operates on must be challenged and changed!  This article briefly explains the WTO,  MAI and FTAA. It is essential that we inform ourselves on what is happening in  regards to global capitalism.  It is paramount that we begin to  strategize as women against these forms of  corporate domination! Right now, there are  many opportunities to become involved in  order to try and resist the WTO [see box.]  "We are no longer writing the rules of  interaction among separate national economies; we are writing the constitution of a  single global economy," so proclaimed  Renato Ruggiero, the Director General of  the World Trade Organization in 1995.  The WTO was established in 1995 in  the "Uruguay Round" of GATT negotiations. GATT (the General Agreement on  Tariffs and Trade) came into effect in 1948.  It was set up as the first step towards an  International Trade Organization (ITO). In  1995, GATT was replaced by the WTO.  In total, 134 countries are involved in  the WTO, but these countries do not have  equal power. Countries in the North (the  so-called developed nations) make key decisions while excluding the input of other  WTO nations.  The WTO is an extremely powerful  promoter of multinational corporate-managed trade. It has not been designed to advocate for the best interests of the public.  The Canadian government is a very active  supporter of the WTO.  The WTO is an international organization that has the power to enforce trade  rules, such as GATT, Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMS), Trade-Related  Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), and  the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). In January 1999, Japan and the  European Union proposed that a millennial  round of WTO talks be held in order to expand the TRIMS into an investment treaty  akin to the MAI. Negotiations are to be  completed by 2003.  In their Citizen's Guide to the WTO, the  Working Group on the WTO/MAI states  that: "A global system of enforceable rules  is being created where corporations have  all the rights, governments have all  the obligations, and  democracy is left behind in the dust."  The WTO has the power to change the  laws and regulations of individual nations  by saying they violate WTO rules. This  completely depreciates domestic law and  can negate a government's ability to take  action in areas such as employment, health,  social programs and environmental protection.  If a country is found to be in violation  of WTO regulations, it can either change  their law to fit WTO standards, pay compensation, or face trade sanctions. No outside appeals are allowed and the WTO tribunals are held in secret.  WTO rulings affect the environment,  copyright law, cultural industries, food  safety and agricultural policy. It can also  impinge upon human rights legislation,  minimum wage laws, health and safety  laws, and the ability of local businesses to  succeed.  One example of the WTO exerting its  power is when the European Union tried  to ban beef containing artificial hormones.  This ban was designed to protect public  health but the WTO ruled that it was creating an illegal barrier to trade.  A WTO panel in 1997 ruled that a European preference to import bananas from  the Caribbean was illegal. The US claimed  that this was discriminatory against US  companies in Central America. The US was  granted the right to impose trade sanctions  against European imports until they  changed their policy.  In many Caribbean countries, the banana industry is the main source of income.  Around 200,000 farmers in the Caribbean  could lose their livelihoods. Most of these  farmers are women. Banana farming has  become one of the primary economic occupations for women in this region. If the  exporting of bananas is stopped it would  seriously impede health, educational and  social development for people and communities in the region.  Different social roles, systematic discrimination towards women and the unequal access that women have in relation  to resources mean that men and women are  affected differently by liberalized trade. The  WTO must take this into account.  Currently, it does not recognize the  gender impacts of trade agreements and the  harm that they cause women both socially  and economically. Women's Edge offers  some solutions such as, "The WTO should  work with member countries to collect gender-disaggregated data to form a baseline  survey."  The next WTO ministerial meeting will  take place from November 29th to December 3rd in Seattle, Washington. This provides a good opportunity for feminists in  BC to get active. Some things we can do  Resources:  O   A Citizens Guide to the World Trade  Organization, published by the  Working Group on the WTO/MAI  in July 1999. To get a copy,  call (202) 546-4996 or download a  copy from www.tradewatch org.  O   Pacific Centre for Alternative  Journalists, which is organizing a  WTO resistance roundup. For more  information, call (604) 683-7123,  then dial 3; or email: pcaj@vcn.bc.ca.  O   www.seattle.wto  O   www.canadians.org  O   www.wto.org  are: educate ourselves about the WTO and  write letters to members of Parliament as  well as to the editors of various newspapers, outlining the negative impacts of the  WTO on women and most people.  It is vital to get involved with the various days of actions that are happening in  regards to the millennium round of talks.  We can also organize teach-ins on the issue  of economic globalization, and go to Seattle  to protest this meeting.  MAI  The Multilateral Agreement on Investment promotes the corporate agenda, at the  expense of all other agendas. It is based  upon the investment provisions outlined in  the North American Free Trade Agreement.  The MAI is designed to facilitate the  movement of capital across international  borders. This agreement was originally negotiated at a WTO meeting in Singapore but  when other WTO nations, particularly  those in the South, objected to it the negotiations were moved to the Organization for  Economic Development (OECD). The  OECD is a Paris-based research group  made up of 29 of the worlds richest countries that that favours liberalized trade.  In 1998 the OECD stopped handling  the MAI negotiations when it seemed the  opposition to the agreement within member countries, particularly France and  Canada, was growing. Although the negotiations have subsided, the MAI is far from  dead and it will likely be revived by the  WTO.  The MAI negatively impacts standards  of living, the sovereignty of governments,  and influence of people on policy-making.  Transnational corporations are given immense power within it. One nickname for  see GLOBAL page 20  18  SIS  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  from GLOBAL previous page  this agreement is the "Corporate Rule  Treaty;" another is "NAFTA on Steroids."  The MAI limits a government's ability  to effectively regulate corporate activities  because foreign investors are to be given  the right under the agreement to sue governments. This would, for example, restrict  the Canadian government from enacting  legislation that will protect such things as  the environment, from fear of being financially penalized.  Governments, through the MAI,  would become even more like puppets of  big business. The MAI threatens the sovereignty of nations because laws are adapted  in order to fit these trade agreements.  The MAI also guarantees corporations  unlimited access to all markets. This could  lead to tiansnationals further exploiting our  natural resources and being allowed to own  Canadian operations such as hydro.  Through the MAI, investors would not  be accountable to national governments.  Foreign investors would not have to respect  labour or environmental laws of the countries that they are investing in.  Transnational corporations would have a  legal status with the same amount of political rights as nation states.  Due to the increasing competition for  capital, some countries might end up lowering their labour standards and regulations. The MAI will not benefit all Canadians, unlike it purports, nor will it necessarily increase the flow of money around the  globe.  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women put together a globalization and MAI kit for women in 1999 called,  "Coming to Grips with Globalization and  the MAI: a popular Education Kit for  Women." The kit is intended to: "help  women understand and mobilize around  some major aspects of global economies,"  and to facilitate discussion and workshops  on globalization.  NAC's kit is very user friendly and  includes a glossary of economic terms. Its  popular education format makes it easy to  understand. It is crucial that women lead  discussions on the MAI because women's  issues are swept aside and ignored in trade  agreements.  The MAI is especially dangerous for  women because of the clauses that allow  companies to sue governments. According  to NAC, corporations could decide to sue  over equity policies by claiming that they  are discriminatory. Corporations could use  the MAI to argue that their profits are being hindered due to having to hire certain  groups of people and then having to pay  them equal wages. It is vital that women  speak up and demand that the MAI's potential negative effects on women be examined!  Resources:  O   MAI-NOT Project, 1125 Colonel By  Dr, Room 326, Unicentre, Carleton  University, Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B6;  tel: (613) 520-2757;  fax: (613) 520-3989;  email: opirg@carleton.ca  O   National Action Committee on the  Status of Women, 234 Eglinton Ave  East, Toronto, ON, M4P 1K5;  tel: (416) 932-1718;  fax: (416) 932-0648;  email: nac@web.net  O   www.mai.flora  O   www.sierraclub/nation/mai/  brief.htm  O   www.policyalternatives.ca  FTAA  The Free Trade Agreement of the  Americas is a proposed trade and investment agreement for the western hemi-  spnere that would include countries in the  Caribbean, South America, Central  America and NorthAmerica. Its goal is to  create a free trade zone running from  Canada to Brazil, making it the largest trading block in the world. It would include  over 34 countries and impact the lives of  over 800 million people throughout the  Americas.  This agreement came into being in  1994 and since then trade ministers have  been meeting annually. Negotiations for  the creation of FTAA are slated to be completed by 2005. The next FTAA meeting will  be held in Toronto between October 31st  and November 5th.  The FTAA is another tool of corporate  globalization that will result in magnifying the exploitation of working and poor  people across the Americas.  The FTAA is based on the investment  provisions outlined in NAFTA and the  MAI. The FTAA will likely encourage short  term investments in a country. This often  has devastating effects. Women's Edge uses  the recent economic crisis in Asia as an example of this. The Asian crisis caused increased poverty and set back 20 years of  advancements, particularly in the areas of  women's access to education and health  care.  The FTAA also stresses that foreign  and domestic investors be treated equally.  Although on the surface this may sound  ideal, it actually has negative repercussions  for women. FTAA trade rules could be violated by subsidies and grants that have  been established for the use of women  owned local businesses. Programs that  help women to set up businesses could be  abolished.  Both women's micro-enterprises and  small businesses would suffer as they  would find it hard to compete with cheaper  imports. Their businesses would end up  having to sell their products at below cost.  Providing these businesses with the protection needed would ultimately violate  FTAA investment rules.  The FTAA would also affect employment equity policies because foreign investors would not be subject to hiring quotas.  These investors would also not have to promote the usage of local resources.  Agreements like the FTAA would result in creating more economic disparity.  Corporate rule is undemocratic and people are denied the right to participate in  crucial policy decisions because of trade  agreements. These agreements also promote unaccountability in regards to corporations because they are not held responsible for the social and environmental crisis that they create.  Common Frontiers is an organization  based in Toronto that promotes alternatives  to agreements such as the FTAA. "Human,  labour, and environmental rights must be  given more importance than commercial  interests." This group has produced a  booklet called, "Alternatives for the Americas: Building a People's Hemispheric  Agreement." It is co-published by the Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives. (A  copy of this booklet can be obtained by  either downloading a copy from the Common Frontiers website or by contacting  them directly.)  Within this booklet are many suggestions on how you can combat the FTAA.  Common Frontiers also supports the  Hemispheric Social Alliance, which was  c  IJIf  ACTIONS  The next WTO ministerial meeting will take place from November 29th to  December 3rd in Seattle, Washington. Below is a outline of some of the events—  which, by no means, is a complete list of activities—that will take place in Vancouver and Seattle to challenge the WTO.  Thursday. October 2, 7:3Qpm   "WTO slashes and burns environmental standards"  at La Quena, 1111 Commercial Dr, Vancouver  Contact: Vancouver Grassroots Alliance, (604) 261-6657  October 22 - 24   "Trade, Labour and the Environment: Analyzing the WTO"  at Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington  Thursday November 11  "Student and Youth Teach-in"  (The main topics are how the WTO affects public education, labour and food security)  Organized by the Coalition of Youth Groups in Vancouver: Check Your Head, Young  New Democrats, the Canadian Federation of Students and several student unions  Contact: Check Your Head, (604) 685-6631  November 12 - 13 ^   "Vancouver Teach-in on the WTO"  at Robson Square Conference Centre - 800 Robson Street  Organized by the Common Front (Council of Canadians, CLC, Sierra Club of Canada,  Polaris Institute, West Coast Environmental Law) and Trading Strategies  Contact: Steven Staples, Council of Canadians, (604) 688 - 8846  Register for conference (604) 878-5424  Sliding scale $5 - $20  O    November 12, 7:30pm  Presentations by Maude Barlow (Council-of Canadians), Hassan Yussuf  (Canadian Labour of Congress), David Korten (USA),  CheeYoke Ling (Indonesia), Agnes Bertrand (France)  O    November 13, 9:00am-5:00pm  Workshops on WTO's impact on culture, environment, community  development, livelihoods, agriculture, public services, and investment.  Thursday, November 25  Public forum on WTO and food safety  Tim Lang of the International Forum on Agriculture and the  London Food Security Council  Contact: Farm Folk/City Folk, (604) 730 - 0450  November 3Q to December 3 _—_  Official WTO Ministerial Meeting at the Seattle Trade and Convention Centre  Tuesday, November 30 ^^^_^^^  Massive rally on the streets of Seattle  November 30, evening  BC Federation of Labour, WTO educational event  Vancouver Trade and Convention Centre  (Labour and community activists join together at the opening of the  BC Feds' annual policy convention)  Contact: BC Federation of Labour, (604) 430-1421  Wednesday, December 1  '  United Methodist Church, Seattle  Women/Democracy/Sovereignty/Development  Alexandra Spieldoch, Centre of Concern  Contact: aspieldoch@coc.org  created in Brazil in 1997 at the "Our Americas Forum." It is made up of different individual activists and organizations throughout the hemisphere. They would like to create an alternative that would be, "inclusive,  democratic, ethical, sustainable and humane with full respect for diversity and  ample space for citizen input."  Resources:  Q   Common Frontiers, 15 Greves Dr.  Suite 304, Don Mills, ON, M3C 1J8;  tel: (416) 441-4073;  email: comfront@web.net;  website: www.web.net/comfron  O   Women's Edge, 1824 Connecticut  Ave. NW, Suite 800, Washington, DC,  20009; tel: (202) 884-8396;  email: edge@womensedge.org;  website: www.womensedge.org.  Guess who's  invited for dinner?  Can you name the members of the G-7?  Well, it doesn't matter anyway because the  G-7 has been replaced... by the G-20. {OK,  the G-7 was comprised of the seven  wealthiest nations in the world: Canada,  US, Italy, Britain, France, Japan and  Germany.]  The expanded club will now include  countries such as China, Argentina, Russia  and Australia—essentially, covering half the  world's population.  So guess who gets to sit at the head of  the table (to chair the G-20)? Our own  federal Finance Minister Paul Martin.  Ah, but here's something even more  interesting: guess who also gets to have  seats at the G-20 dinner table? The World  Bank and International Monetary Fund.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  KINESIS  19 Feature   The Internet and the global prostitution industry:  Pornographic profits  by Donna M. Hughes  The Internet has become the latest  place for promoting the global trafficking  and sexual exploitation of women and children. This global communication network  is being used to promote and engage in the  buying and selling of women and children.  Agents offer catalogues of mail order  brides, with girls as young as 13. Commercial prostitution tours are advertised. Men  exchange information on where to find  prostitutes and describe how they can be  used.  After their trips, men write reports on  how much they paid for women and children and give pornographic descriptions  of what they did to them. New technology  has enabled an online merger of pornography and prostitution, with videoconferencing bringing live sex shows to the  Internet.  Global sexual exploitation is on the  rise. The profits are high, and there are few  effective barriers at the moment. Because  there is little regulation of the Internet, the  traffickers and promoters of sexual exploitation have rapidly utilized the Internet for  their purposes. The pornographers and  other promoters of sexual exploitation are  the Internet leaders in the developing of  privacy services, secure payment schemes  and online data base management. The  standards and values on the Internet are  being set by the sex industry and its supporters and users.  This economic and electronic globalization has meant that women are increasingly becoming "commodities" to be  bought, sold, traded and consumed.  Newsgroups and websites  The oldest forum on the Internet for  promoting the sexual exploitation of  women is the newsgroup alt.sex.services  (later renamed alt.sex.prostitution). Its aim  is "to create market transparency for sex  related services."  Details of the men's reports of their  prostitution tours and buying experiences  include: information on where to go to find  prostitutes, hotel prices, telephone numbers, taxi fares and cost of alcohol, the sex  acts that can be bought, the price for each  act, and evaluations of the women's appearances and performances.  One man includes a rating scale on the  likelihood of getting mugged in that  neighborhood. Other men go on to describe, often in graphic detail, their experiences of using women and children.  The scope and detail of this exchange  are without precedent. The women are  completely objectified and evaluated on  everything from skin colour to presence of  scars and firmness of their flesh. Women's  receptiveness and compliance to male buyers is also rated.  The men buying women and posting  the information see and perceive the events  only from their self-interested perspective.  Their awareness of racism, colonization,  global economic inequalities, and of course,  sexism, is limited to how these forces benefit them. A country's economic or political crisis and the accompanying poverty  are advantages, which produce cheap readily available women for the men. Often  men describe how desperate the women  are and how little they have to pay.  This rapid electronic publishing medium has enabled more men to pimp and  exploit individual women. Now, men can  go out at night, buy a woman, go home,  and post the details on the newsgroup. By  morning, anyone in the world with an Internet connection can read about it and often have enough information to find the  same woman.  To my knowledge this is completely  unprecedented. The implications for this  type of public exchange in a fast-publishing accessible medium like the Internet are  very serious for the sexual exploitation of  women in the future.  New technology has enabled an online  merger of pornography and  prostitution, with video-conferencing  bringing live sex shows to the Internet.  Postings from this newsgroup are archived on a website called The World Sex  Guide, which provides "comprehensive,  sex-related information about every country in the world" (Atta and M., World Sex  Guide, July 1996). The guide includes information and advice from men who have  bought women and children in prostitution. They tell others where and how to find  and buy prostituted women and children  in 110 countries from seven world regions  (Africa, Asia, Oceania, Europe, North  America, Central America, the Caribbean,  and SouthAmerica).  Prostitution tours  Centres for prostitution tourism are  also the sources of women trafficked for  purposes of sexual exploitation to other  countries. For centres of prostitution tourism in European countries, women from  poorer countries are imported legally and  illegally to fill the brothels.  One of the largest sources of trafficked  women today is the countries of the former  Soviet Union. Advertisements for prostitution tours to these sights appear on the  Internet, usually described as "romance  tours" or "introduction tours."  Prostitution tours enable men to travel  to "exotic" places and step outside whatever community bounds may constrain  them at home. In foreign cities, they can  abuse women and girls in ways that are  more risky or difficult for them in their  hometowns.  CJ106AI SWUALPRMTlUmoK  As prostitution has become a form of  tourism for men, it has become a form of  economic development for poor countries.  Tourism was recommended by the United  Nations, the World Bank and United States  advisory boards as a way to generate income and repay foreign debts (W Lee,  "Prostitution and Tourism in South-East  Asia," 1991).  Nation states set their own tourist policies and could, if they chose to do so, prevent or suppress the development of prostitution as a form of tourism.  Advertisements for prostitution tours  first appeared on the Web in mid-1995,  when Alan J. Munn of New York launched  PIMPS 'R' US. He arranged prostitution  tours to the Dominican Republic and to  Nevada.  Bride trafficking  Mail order bride agents have moved  to the Internet as their preferred marketing  location. The Internet reaches a prime group  of potential buyers—men from Western  countries with higher than average incomes. The new Internet technology enables web pages to be quickly and easily  updated. Some services claim they are updating their selection of women weekly. The  Internet reaches a global audience faster  and cheaper than any other media.  One mail order bride agent explained  why he preferred operation on the Internet:  "...when the World Wide Web came along,  I saw that it was a perfect venue for this  kind of business. The paper catalogues were  so expensive and their quality was usually  very poor; but on the web you can publish  high-resolution full-colour photos which  can be browsed by everyone in the world"  (Toms, Santa Barbara International 1996).  The agents offer men assistance in finding a "loving and devoted" woman whose  "views of relationships have not been ruined by unreasonable expectations." The  agencies describe themselves as "introduction services," but a quick examination of  many of the Web sites reveals their commercial interests in bride trafficking, sex  tours and prostitution.  One mail order bride trafficker complained that the Philippine government  banned the operation of sex tour and mail  order bride agents in the Philippines. He  said: "The Philippine government  is...definitely working against the interests  of their own people. These girls want and  need to leave that country."  The same agent also complained that  the US government would not allow his  youngest "brides", on offer, into the country. "The service itself is not restricted by  the American government, although they  are real picky about getting your bride into  the States-they won't give a visa to a bride  under age sixteen" (World Class Service,  1996).  The bride traffickers sell addresses to  men. Later, they offer to arrange tours for  the men to go to meet the woman with  whom they have been corresponding, or  to meet as many women as possible. Men  can pay for these services over the Internet  with their credit cards.  There are some catalogues which list  women with young children. One website  asks if men want women with or without  children. On another website, there are pictures of naked children playing. I think children are being trafficked also in this way.  The men are being subtly shown ways of  acquiring women and children—all in one  Live video-conferencing  The most advanced technology on the  Internet is live video-conferencing, in  which live audio and video are transmitted over the Internet from video recorder  to computer. This advanced technology is  being used to sell live sex shows over the  Internet. Real time communication is possible, so the man can personally direct the  live sex show as he is viewing it on his computer.  The only limitation of this type of global sex show is the need for high-speed  transmission, processing and multimedia  capabilities. The software required is free,  but the most recent versions of Web browsers have these capabilities built into them.  As more men have access to high-speed  multimedia computer and transmission  equipment, the demand for this type of private sex show will grow.  There are no legal restrictions on live  sex shows that can be transmitted over the  Internet. As with all Internet transmissions,  there are no nation-state border restrictions.  With Internet technology, a man may be on  one continent while directing and watching a live strip show, a live sex show, or the  sexual abuse of a child on another conti-  see INTERNET next page  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Feature  from INTERNET previous page  nent. There have been several documented  cases of live transmission of the sexual  abuse of children through live videoconferencing.  Growth of the commercial prostitution  industry on the Internet  Who buys women over the Internet?  According to the Internet Entertainment  Group (IEG), the largest pimp on the Web,  the buyers for live strip shows are 90 percent male, 70 percent living in the United  States, and 70 percent are between ages 18  and 40. The buyers are young men in college, and businessmen and professionals  who log on from work. This information  was obtained from analysis of credit card  usage (Wired, December 1997).  In the mid-1990s, the hottest place for  commercial development was the Internet.  In early September 1995, there were 101,908  commercial domains on the Web, which  was 26,055 more than the end of July, and  72,706 more than the end of 1994. The sex  industry was leading the way.  At the beginning of 1995, there were  just 200 businesses on the World Wide Web  selling "erotica services" and products-  from condoms to pornographic videos  (Strangelove, Internet Business Journal, January 1995).  I did a search on Yahoo, a popular  search engine, in August 1995 and again in  August 1996. InAugust 1995, the category  Yahoo: Business and Economy: Companies:  Sex had 391 listings for phone sex numbers,  adult CD-ROMS, X-rated films, adult computer software, live video-conferencing, sex  tours, escort services and mail order bride  agencies. InAugust 1996, there were 1,676  listings-a four fold increase in one year.  The popular mainstream pornographic  magazine Playboy was quick to jump on the  Web. In 1994, the Playboy website made its  debut. Its content differed from the print  magazine. The website was designed to  appeal to a younger, wealthier audience—  the majority of whom (75 percent) did not  subscribe to Playboy magazine (Runett,  Playboy, October 1998).  In 1996, Playboy magazine's site was  the 11th most visited site on the Web (John  Simons, US News and World Report, August  19,1996). In 1997, the website generated US  $2 million in advertising revenue. Many of  the advertisers are exclusive to the website  and do not buy advertising in the print  publication. In mid 1998, Playboy's  CyberClub had 26,000 subscribers paying  US $60 per year (Runett).  In April 1996, another popular pornographic magazine, Penthouse went online.  Its web site recorded the highest number  of visits for publication sites on the Web in  that month (Nielson Survey, Wired, December 1997).  A1996 survey found that 20 percent of  the users of the World Wide Web said they  regularly visited pornographic sites  (Simons). By 1998, another survey indicated  that 30 percent of American households  with Internet access visited online sex industry sites at least once per month (Seattle  Post-Intelligencer, April 1998).  In the same year, one report estimated  that the Web had 600 commercial pornography sites, which were expected to generate revenues of US $51.5 million. This does  not include the amateur sites or those that  are free sites; only those that make money  through selling advertising space. Only  Bigger bull for your buck  by Jackie Yeow  Not just another ad     On October 15, 1999 the Vancouver Sun chose to print a full-page policy statement from  the Coalition for a Humanistic British Canada in the major News section. The following day, the  Sun pulled the ad and published a justification stating that "the ad slipped through screening  systems." Apparently it had slipped through the screening systems at the Vancouver Sun, the  Toronto Star, the Globe and Mail and the Kitchener Waterloo Record, as well.  So what was in this ad? And, why was it yanked from four of Canada's most widely read  daily newspapers? The short and long of it: the ad oozes with white supremacist propaganda.  Unjustifiable justification   The ad was printed in the Sun because no one in the marketing department had a problem  with it. Even after the response was printed, the Director of Communications at Pacific Press  claimed to have ran the ad because it did not "yell racism" or imply a "hidden agenda."  The ad was pulled, he said, because Pacific Press discovered that the founder of the Coalition, Michael Chessman, held racist views.  The ad -  In this full-page ad, the Coalition identifies seven areas related to changes in Canadian  policy, which demand greater British dominance and control. With a glance, the discriminatory  motives of white supremacists and the emerging political right reformers become transparent.  Beginning with institutional control of individual and cultural perspectives, the Coalition  mandates school uniforms in Canadian schools. Complexities and diversities of peoples and  cultural groups is stifled through indoctrinating students, early on in school, to the "teaching of  English literature and moral values."The Coalition goes on to suggest how white dominance can  be maintained through infiltrating communities with an increase in European art, culture and  European architecture.  Racist motives are evident when we read the Coalition's intent to utilize immigration as a  vehicle to marginalize and subordinate people of colour. In its demand for Canada to endorse a  "massive increase" of immigrants, the Coalition specifies why only Eastern European and European immigrants should be welcomed. Immigrants from these countries are, apparently, "all peoples we share much with now."  After infecting public institutions, homogenizing social infrastructures and inducing a predominantly white populous, the motives of this ad gleam with appallingly sexist, homophobic  and racist rhetoric. The Coalition climaxes to its final statements of achieving white supremacy  with a call for "an end to Canada's multicultural policies and related affirmative action policies  and initiatives for all." Upon their establishment of what is "mainstream," the Coalition furthers  computer products and travel exceeded  pornography sales on the Internet (Simons).  At the end of 1997, the online sex industry was estimated to be making US $1  billion a year, just in the US (Carolyn Said,  San Francisco Chronicle, November 19,  1998). In findings from a 1997 survey,  lnter@ctive Week magazine reported that  10,000 sex industry sites were bringing in  approximately US $1 billion per year (Chicago Sun Times, June 1997). A mid-size site  that was accessed 50,000 times per day  made approximately US $20,000 each  month.  Established sex industry sites could  expect to make 50 to 80 percent profits (The  Guardian, May 14, 1998). A Sacramento,  California firm that handles online credit  card transactions said that in 1997, the largest sex industry sites had revenues of US  $1 million per month; while the smaller  sites took in approximately US $10,000 per  month (Said).  Regulation  Expressions of concern or condemnation of forms of sexual exploitation of  women and children on the Internet are  minimized by claims that pornographers  have always been the first to take advantage of new technology-first photography,  then movies, then VCRs, now, the Internet.  Those concerned about the use of the  Internet for sexual exploitation are chastened with history lectures on new technology and pornography.  The solution that is being promoted is  software programs that will screen out  sexually explicit material. U.S. President  Clinton announced that he supports a rating system on the Internet, so pornography  could be rated and software programs will  screen it out. This is seen as a way to protect children.  Most adults are only concerned that  their children may see pornography on the  Internet. They aren't concerned about the  women and children who are being exploited in the making of this pornography.  In any search for a solution to pornography and prostitution, it is crucial to remember that sexual exploitation starts with  real people and the harm to real people. The  European Union defines trafficking as a  form of organized crime. It should be  treated the same way on the Internet. All  forms of sexual exploitation should be recognized as forms of violence against  women and human rights violations, and  governments should act accordingly.  Although the Internet offers open communication to people throughout the  world, it should not be permitted to be  dominated and controlled by men's interests or the interests of the prostitution industry, at women's and children's expense.  Donna M. Hughes is Education and Research  Coordinator for The Coalition Against Traffic  in Women. For more information about  CATW's work, visit the group's website at:  http://www.uri.edu/artsci/wms/hughes/catw.  This article was first published in the  Spring 1999 edition o/Women'space, a quarterly magazine published in Canada, whose aim  is to promote women's accessibility to the Internet and to explore the Internet as a resource  for organizing nationally and internationally.  Subscriptions are available by contacting  Women'space, PO Box 1034, Almonte, Ontario, K0A1A0; tel/fax: (613) 256-5682; email:  diamond@womenspace.ca; website:  www. womenspace. ca.  its indoctrination through "a requirement that mainstream cultural assimilation be carried as a  matter of course, for all Canadians."  Now if these seven statements aren't enough to stifle your individual freedom and spirit,  here's a couple more. All you women out there, button up or zip out, you "should avoid too much  exposure from aggressive clothing choices." Your option: "return to skirts and dresses." And just  for your information, "men should wear trousers rather than jean clothing substitutes." Is that  clear? And if you need to know, the "return to traditional modes of dress" is for the "preservation  of traditional family values in Canada", understood?  Hard to believe that all this does not "yell racism" never mind all the other "isms".  So now we ask again: Why was the ad not rejected for its offensive and discriminatory content in the first place (as opposed to targeting the subsequent revelation of the founder's racist  motivations)? What appears to be an apparent glitch in the screening process is in fact, not a  glitch at all.  The accumulated revenue generated from this full-page ad, for all four newspapers is close  to a quarter of a million dollars! What is really going on in the communications and advertising  departments of these major newspapers? Were they motivated by money and therefore they could  not hear the "yelling of racism" and see the "hidden agenda?" Or is there an alliance between the  advertiser and the advertising department staff who hold similar discriminatory values? After all,  this is no puny ad.  On humanism .__■-___■_■---■-.  The Coalition for a Humanistic British Canada is not humanistic at all. In fact, the Canadian  Dictionary of the English Language defines humanism as "a system of thought that centers on  humans and their values, capacities, and worth." Clearly, not just "European humans" and their  values, capacities and worth. Above all, the Coalition erases all other cultural traditions and  fundamentally disrespects First Nations peoples as the indigenous people of Canada.The Coalition made a type-o. A more appropriate name would be the Coalition for an Unhumanistic British Canada.  The real humanistic question that needs to be answered is: What is the screening system at  Canadian newspapers that is capable of overruling the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and the  Human Rights Code, and allows in ads with white supremacist sentiments?  What can you do2 -^^—————  There is so much appalling discriminatory material in this ad that it is not worth repeating,  never mind reprinting. However, we need to believe that our reactions matter. We can make a  difference and we will ask good questions. How does a full-page white supremacist propaganda  ad "slip" through? What is in place to ensure that such "negligence" is not repeated?  Respond and direct your questions to the four newspapers that ran this ad as well as those  sold in your community.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  21 Feature  "Frankenfoods": The food of the future  What's really in your food?  by Lisa Wulwik  Genetically engineered (GE) food is  food that has ingredients in it that have had  their genetic makeup altered. This may be  done to make the plant/organism grow  larger, faster or to become pest resistant.  For thousands of years, farmers have  been cross-breeding similar organisms.  What is different in GE is that cross breeding occurs between very different species.  One example of this was when genes from  a fish were inserted into a tomato in order  to create a "better" tomato.  Genetic engineering is a technology in  its infancy, and it has many potential dangers. The genetic code is very complex, and  it is not possible to fully predict the outcome of adding new genes into a plant or  organism.  GE food is deemed by its promoters to  be the "food of the future"; however, it is  very frightening and has been nicknamed  by critics, "Frankenfoods."  The Council of Canadians states that  75 percent of all pre-packaged food may  contain genetically altered ingredients.  They state that 57 percent of canola, 45 percent of corn and 25 percent of soya that is  grown in Canada is genetically engineered.  The GE industry is dominated by multinational biotech corporations such as  Monsanto, Novartis, Dow and Dupont.  These companies make billions of dollars  in short term profits, and we are being used  as their guinea pigs.  The knowledge of possible health and  environmental effects from genetically engineered food is inadequate and insubstantial. No long term risk assessments of these  foods have been done. Concerns surrounding GE foods fall within four areas: health,  environmental, ethical, and the increasing  corporate control over genetic life.  The GE corporate propaganda states  that genetically engineered food will solve  world hunger, and that food will be made  safer and nature will be brought under control.  But GE will not solve world hunger.  Our world already produces enough food  for everyone to eat. It is our unequal system of distribution of land, resources and  wealth that must change.  Famine is caused by war, economic  instability, colonialism and Northern imperialism. These biotech companies are using  the "starving children in the Third World"  as a tool to get the West to accept genetic  engineering.  Biotech companies such as Monsanto  believe that greater agricultural productivity will arise through the creation of pest  and pesticide resistant crops. Insects will  not be able to feed upon these GE crops and  this is very dangerous. Insects are crucial  to the food chain, as many animals live  upon them.  GE corn that was planted in the United  States on a mass scale was found to be  deadly to Monarch butterflies. According  to "The Campaign to Label Genetically  Modified Food," in the Spring of 1999 lab  tests showed that nearly half of the Monarch butterflies that ate milkweed leaves  dusted with GE corn pollen died within  four days. Those that survived were smaller  in size than usual.  Having pesticide resistant crops may  cause severe environmental problems by  increasing the amount of agri chemicals  being used. These chemicals seep into our  food and water supply. Pesticide resistant  crops also run the risk of reducing genetic  diversity and disrupting the natural biodiversity of the area.  GE foods may also be very dangerous  to our health. In 1989, a genetically engineered version of the dietary supplement  tryptophan was found to be toxic. Before it  was eventually recalled, 34 Americans had  died, 1,500 were left permanently disabled  and 500 became ill with a blood disorder.  GE foods may also trigger allergies.  Many genes being thrust into these plants/  organisms have never been a part of the  human diet before,  so their toxic and allergenic characteristics are not known.  Another health  risk is that antibiotic  resistant genes are  often transferred  into plants that end  up on our dinner table. This antibiotic  resistance could be  transferred to the  bacteria living in the  guts of humans and  animals which could  in turn reduce the efficiency of antibiotic  drugs.  Companies like Monsanto see the creation of herbicide resistant crops as a good  thing. However, it is important to remember that the primary cause of weed infestation is the practice of monoculture farming. In monoculture farming, the same crop  is grown in the same area year after year.  We must learn to rely less on technology and the promotion of biotechnological  solutions. Instead, we must place more of  our efforts on promoting research for sustainable agricultural practices.  Biotech corporations want to patent the  genes of animals and plants. It is crazy to  think that a corporation or any individual  could actually own DNA. This patenting  involves stealing indigenous knowledge of  plants used by generations of people local  to a region. The patenting of GE foods could  drastically alter farming practices, as a  small corporate elite will own their genetic  material. It is vital that we question what  the implications are of corporate ownership  of DNA.  Soya is used in 60 percent of all processed food items. Monsanto's Roundup  Ready soya beans were among the first genetically modified organisms to be widely  marketed. These soya beans are resistant  to Monsanto's Roundup herbicide. These  genetically modified beans contain genes  from bacteria, viruses and petunias. Not  very much is known about the effects of this  particular sequencing of genes.  Roundup is Monsanto's key agri-  chemical product. The main chemical in it  is one called glyphosate. The National Coalition for Alternatives to Pesticides in the  US found many problems with Roundup.  Skin and oral testing on glyphosate placed  it in Toxic Category 3 (Caution). Further  tests suggest that in regard to mammals,  glyphosate could cause severe toxic reactions such as convulsions and stoppage of  breathing.  These severe toxic problems are not  primarily caused by glyphosate, but from  other ingredients in Roundup. Glyphosate  is also very bad for the environment as it  remains active in soil and kills ladybugs  and other beneficial insects.  Herbicide resistant crops like Roundup  Ready soya will cause mass problems in  farming. It may lead to the destruction of  the bio diversity of the region which is crucial to the livelihoods of many of the rural  women. What Monsanto classifies as weeds  are often the food and medicine used by  people in these local areas. Many of these  "weeds" have important economic  value for the farm-  Biotech  corporations  want to patent the  genes of animals  and plants.  GE crops also  promote soil erosion  as this method ignores the importance of mixed and  covered crops.  Canada is one  of the biggest promoters of GE crops  and trades. Manda^  tory labelling of GE  foods should be introduced in Canada. They should be labelled for health, environment and ethical  reasons. People who have allergies need to  know what is in their food. Also, people  with strict dietary laws require labelling to  know if a product has been genetically  modified and may contain food that they  can not eat.  Biotech companies have been allowed  to blossom under a veil of secrecy. It is our  right to know where our food comes from  and if we want to support it or not. Labelling is a consumer's right.  The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, along with the World  Health Organization, compiled a report in  1996. In it, they stated: "Substantial equivalence embodies the concept that if a new  food or food component is found to be substantially equivalent to an existing food or  food component it can be treated in the  same manner with respect to safety."  The idea of "substantial equivalence"  is a very arbitrary concept and should not  be used as the base argument as to why labelling of GE foods is not needed. The idea  of "substantial equivalence" overlooks all  the possible side effects of genetically engineered food.  Monsanto defends not labelling GE  soya by saying that no biochemical differences are noted between the chemical composition of GE soya and non GE soya. Labelling is also made difficult because commodity crops like soya and corn are sold in  bulk quantities that mix both the modified  and unmodified crops before processing.  Crops would need to be segregated at an  early stage in order for labelling to be possible.  Defenders of the non-labelling position  state that this would require a new food  distribution system and would therefore  disrupt the present national and global food  distribution scheme. Another reason why  labelling is difficult is because most GE  products are processed foods and foreign  genes are often destroyed in processing.  Defenders of the biotech industry  claim that because traditional methods of  breeding crop varieties do not require labelling, then products that have been genetically modified should not either. These  companies are scared of the stigma that labels may bring.  But if we label fat and caloric contents  of food because of concerns of potential  health risks, then why shouldn't we also  label genetically modified foods?  Unfortunately right now, even if a  country decides to legislate the labelling of  GE foods, the World Trade Organization  can make those labels illegal by saying that  countries cannot discriminate based on  how and where something is made. [The  issue of labelling of GE foods will be raised at  the next meeting of the WTO to be held in  Seattle, Washington from November 29 to  December 3.]  There is lots of resistance to genetically  modified food. A huge environmental campaign is being mounted. Opposition is coming from politicians, farmers, members of  various communities, and even the Prince  of Wales. Resistance is particularly strong  in England, as well as in other parts of Europe.  In 1996, Greenpeace sprayed a large  red "X" over an entire Monsanto soya crop  in the US. In the Spring of 1999,500 farmers from India and other South Asian nations went to Europe for a month to protest genetically modified foods and the corporate global economy.  There are many things that one can do  to protest genetically engineered food. For  example, leafletting information about GE  products or by joining a politically active  group. [In Vancouver, the Basmati Action  Group has been engaged in a campaign to stop  stores from carrying genetically modified and  patented foods. For more information about  BAG's work, contact them at (604) 255-4910.]  It is also important to educate ourselves and to write letters to our MPs and  to editors of various newspapers expressing our concerns. Buying locally and organically can also be a form of resistance.  Our health should not come before the  profit of corporations! It is time to take action!  Lisa Wulwik recently moved from Peterborough, Ontario to Vancouver where she is involved with various political, activist movements.  www.Canadians.org  www.thecampaign.org/brochurepromises.htm  www.essential_tradingco.uk/gfanew.htm  www.enviroweb.org/shag/  www.foe.co.uk/camps/foodbio/index.htm  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Arts  Review of Environments for Girls and Women:  Building supportive  communities  by Emilie Adin  ENVIRONMENTS FOR GIRLS AND  WOMEN: CITY DESIGN FROM A  FEMINIST PERSPECTIVE  by Hinda Hanrietta Avery  Illustrations by Greta Guzek and Dallas  Bolton  Have you ever felt unsafe cutting  across a park on your way home? Have you  ever seen a mother trying to get a stroller  safely up an escalator? Have you ever  found you had to commute twice: once to  get to childcare, and again to get to work?  If so, you can see that the built environment  has a profound effect on our day-to-day  lives as women.  In pondering these questions, Hinda  Avery has, with great success, designed a  feminist education guide on the built environment, geared for intermediate grades.  Avery has taught Women's Studies at the  Okanagan University in  Kelowna,  has  "seldom are women  adequately  valued  represented  or  empowered  by the architecture  and planning  professions."  been an elementary and high  school teacher,  and is a practising artist.  Her interest  in compiling the  guide was to in-  troduce better  understanding  of the built environment into the  education system, encourage  awareness of the  needs of women  and girls, and to  increase the  number of  women in the  architectural  and planning  professions.  The guide  provides background knowledge and lesson plans for teachers who are helping their  students envision the built environment  through the eyes of girls and women of diverse cultural backgrounds. The  overarching goal of this exercise Avery  states, "is to empower female students by  validating their experiences and their right  to have an effect on the world in which they  live."  Students are given the opportunity to  ask themselves, "what does it mean to be  female in an environment constructed almost entirely by white middle-class men?"  The education guide helps them in exploring the answers to this question, in depth.  Not only can students ponder who builds  what for whom, and why, but they also  have the opportunity to consider what  could be built instead.  Throughout the education guide, Avery  is very careful not to essentialize women,  or to treat them as a homogeneous mass.  Variables such as social class, race, ethnicity, age, disability and sexual orientation are  examined, and there is a broad acknowledgement that women experience the built  environment differently.  Section One of the guide introduces  teachers to built environment education and  provides an overview of women's issues in  architecture and planning. In effect, Avery  seeks to "teach the teacher "--to give them  background knowledge which will be useful in planning the unit lessons.  Built environment education has  largely been overlooked in the conventional  education system. Environmental studies  have generally looked at the natural environment, but not the human-made elements  of our surroundings. Built environment  education aims to help students become  more aware of the Dlanning and design of  their home,  school, neighbourhood and  citv. Students  are also encouraged to think  about the built  environment in  terms of their  own values and  life experiences.  Women's  issues have  been largely  overlooked in  the built environment. Housing, zoning,  public transit,  public space,  children's space  and public  amenities are all  important considerations in  the planning of  safe, practical  and comfortable environments for girls and  women.  For example, issues in relation to housing include affordability, distance of housing from jobs and services, and access to the  outdoors. Simple design considerations,  like having windows that overlook play  areas, can have a significant impact on  women's lives.  The segregation of home and work is a  common and sustained blunder among  planners. The result of such zoning by-laws  is that women (particularly those with children or disabilities) have trouble commuting to work or accessing services. It is also  difficult for women to start home-based  businesses, which would better meet their  need for flexibility, when home and work  areas have been divided by zoning regulations.  Avery states,  "seldom are  women adequately  valued, represented  or empowered by  the   architecture  and planning professions." She postulates that this  lack of regard may  in part be due to  the small percentage   of   women  practicing architecture and planning. In Canada,  only nine percent  of registered architects        are  women; in BC,  only seven percent of architects  are women. In  the case of the  planning profes-  sion, approximately 20 percent of Canadian planners are women, but less than five  percent of senior positions in planning are  filled by women.  Avery also includes in Section One of  the guide a fascinating herstory of women's participation in planning and architecture. She dates this herstory back to the  mid-1800s, and conveys the historical discrimination of women architects and planners. What I found really fascinating was  Avery's incorporation of contemporary accounts of the exclusion of women within  architecture and planning. For example,  Avery says that American architect Denise  Scott Brown recently stated that for her,  discrimination as a woman continues at  the rate of about one incident per day.  When the search was on for a design for  the new Vancouver public library, her husband and business partner Robert Venturi  was invited to submit drawings, but she  was not. Many projects which have been  attributed to Venturi are, in fact, Brown's.  Avery also takes the opportunity to  suggest some core principles that guide  feminist design and planning, that are  "based on women's ways of knowing and  analyzing." These principles are:  connectiveness and inclusiveness; ethic of  care and value of everyday life; value of  subjectivity and feelings; and value of complexity and flexibility.  Section Two of the education guide  offers teachers a series of lesson plans that  relate to the experiences of girls and  women in the built environment. However, in following the feminist tradition of  linking knowledge to action, and making  the personal political, Avery calls these  units Action Plans rather than lesson plans.  Student activities over the course of the 19  units in Section Two include a safety au  dit, sensory detective  work, a study of the impact of globalization on city design and women, and explorations of community initiatives by Aboriginal women, women of African heritage,  SouthAsian women, Jewish women, older  women, women with disabilities and lesbians. In each of the units, teachers are  urged to collaborate with women from the  community, and with feminist architects  and planners. A list of potential contacts is  included within each Action Plan, as well  as a resource list of audio-visual and written materials.  Section Three provides additional resources and information for teachers and  students, as well as background information on the lesson plan contributors.  Although the program is designed for  the intermediate grades (7 through 10),  Avery assures us that the lessons can easily  be adjusted for older or younger students.  Units can fit well into Art, Social Studies,  Geography, Urban Studies and Women's  Studies.  The manual is not currently a part of  the intermediate school curriculum, but  teachers can order it for use in their classrooms. Parents can also suggest that their  children's school incorporate this manual  into regular curriculum. The guide is available through the BC Teacher's Federation,  Lesson Aids, which can be reached by calling (604) 871-2283.  Emilie Adin is a graduate student at the UBC  School of Community and Regional Planning.  Her own research involves supporting a community initiative to conduct a needs assessment  of aging lesbians. Emilie considers Hinda  Avery to be a mentor for all budding women  architects and planners.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  KINESIS Arts  A review of Fidelity:  A deep, honest love story  by Luanne Armstrong  FIDELITY  by K. Linda Kivi, Lyn Merryfeather,  Joanne Hetherington and Catherine  Fisher, Maa Press, Nelson, British Columbia, 1999  This is a love story, a complicated one,  but a love story nonetheless. It is also a testimonial to the deep strength, honesty, caring and integrity of women's relationships  with each other.  This is a book composed of letters written over a two year period by four women  in varying degrees of relationship to one  another. As K. Linda explains in the preface:  "In May of 1996, Catherine, K. Linda  and Joanne returned home from many  months abroad. During our time away, we  wrote each other letters, something we  hadn't done before. We all felt as though  writing to one another had given our relationships another dimension so we decided  to continue. At this point, Jo and K. Linda  had been lovers for five-and-a-half years;  K. Linda and Catherine had been lovers for  almost a year; and Jo and Catherine were  just beginning a friendship."  Very soon, Lyn became lovers with Jo,  and the four women continued a writing  circle which culminated in this book's publication.  What I love about this book is the deep  thought and care with which these women  approach the creation of what they term  "polyamory." I love the title of the book. It  expresses their exact sense of loyalty to  themselves and their own honesty.  What I also love and admire, is their  willingness to be so open and honest within  a relatively small community in the BC interior. As women who  are active and open in  their community of  Nelson, which admittedly is more open to  alternative ideas than  some   other   places  might be, they have  chosen to continue  their fidelity in honesty, openness and caring.  During the two  years covered in this  book, these women  discuss many issues:  jealousy, friendship,  sexual attraction, celibacy, family and privacy. They do it without jargon, without  pretence, and without  artifice. Because these  letters were initially  not written for publication, there is a sense that we are being let  into a very private sphere, that we are being allowed to share on a very deep level,  an ongoing dialogue about meaning and  connection. It feels like a dialogue in which  we are silently invited to participate.  In addition, these women are all wonderful writers. The book reads easily, and  There is no set  way, there is no  rulebook,  in developing  new relationship patterns  based on  passionate  freedoms.  smoothly. Because it was published as a  small, handbound edition, it's also a joy to  handle. The tree-free paper is beautiful, the  cover a delight.  There are so many memorable passages, I love this for  example, when K.  Linda writes: "Today  I've been thinking and  walking and thinking.  What we call relationship is a map. Human  relations themselves  are an uneven and  endlessly fascinating,  sometimes dangerous  terrain, spectacular  gullies here, a subtly  twisted tree there.  Talking about what  we do, being conscious, is our attempt  to map this terrain,  mark out the changes  in elevation, the road,  the cliffs, the  uncrossable waterways, the limits. Ideally, I think it would be  lovely to wander with  no map at all like I do on those days when  I eschew paths and just plunge into the  woods, going where I go. Rare and special  days. Mostly though, I follow one of the  paths we have worn into the earth by our  repeated footfalls. This is familiar, safer. I  think of polyamory as the best map at hand  for me, given the changing and fragile state  of our relational world and our rudimentary, (though growing) knowledge of map  making techniques."  Or as Jo says about jealousy: "The consequence of jealousy and shame, I feel, is a  reaction from a society that places value on  emotional and sexual ownership in lover  partnerships. Our emotional work is doubly difficult because before we even deal  with our issues of individual ownership,  we need to shed our societal patterns of  ownership. There is no set way, there is no  rule book, in developing new relationship  patterns based on passionate freedoms. My  experience of going through jealousy and  shame and not getting stuck in them, is that  it continues to open doors."  When I talked to K. Linda recently  about the publication of the book, and the  impact it has had on her life and the lives  of the other women, she mentioned, laughingly, that there are a number of pages  which apparently have become favourites,  so that the mention of a certain page among  a group of dykes can often bring shared  laughter.  She also said that many women have  found the book hopeful and supportive,  that often there is a sense in the lesbian community that non-monogamy, or polyamory,  is too hard, too painful, even when women  have a sense that this is a lifestyle they  would like to live.  This is a book that, above all, gives us  a sense of the best of ourselves, gives us a  sense that with true integrity and respect,  the best of all worlds just might be possible, on however small a scale.  Canadian women tell their stories of illegal abortion:  No choice  by Karen Page  For too long, stories of the desperation  and ugliness of illegal abortion have remained untold. We need to hear them, in  order to learn from this secret past, and to  put a face to the issue of abortion. No  Choice: Canadian Women Tell Their Stories of  Illegal Abortion, released in January 1999 by  the Childbirth by Choice Trust, gives us that  opportunity.  Canadian women from the turn of the  century through to the 1960s describe their  horrific personal experiences with illegal  abortion. Some are telling their story for the  first time, having carried their memories in  silence for years, feeling isolated, alone, and  unable to tell anyone their secret. The courage of these women is monumental. The  humiliation and degradation described in  their stories is something no woman should  ever have to endure.  We are reminded that contraception  and abortion were illegal in Canada until  1969, and that an estimated 4,000 to 6,000  women died from unlawful abortions between 1926 and 1947. In 1936, the height of  the Depression, 42 per cent of maternal  deaths in this country were attributed to  illegal abortions. Many women risked their  lives to end their pregnancies; the fact that  abortion was against the law was not a deterrent. As Billie expresses, "I would have  done anything to terminate this pregnancy,  regardless of how dangerous or stupid it  would have been."  This sense of desperate determination  is a common thread throughout each story,  as is each woman's conviction that she did  the right thing. For most, choosing abortion was necessary for personal survival.  Alone and in secret, women were forced  by sheer desperation to attempt self-induced abortion, or to rely on strangers who  were more often motivated by money than  by concern for the woman involved.  These abortions were always accompanied by pain, since they were performed  with no anaesthetic, followed by little or  no recovery time or aftercare. Occasionally,  the woman was assaulted, and she always  had to maintain total silence—after all, she  was a criminal who had just broken the law.  Many women risked their lives to end  their pregnancies; the fact that abortion  was against the law was not a deterrent.  Although the chance of infection was high,  antibiotics were rarely available and many  of these women suffered complications requiring hospitalization, where both staff  and doctors freely showed their disapproval.  Although the women in this book do  not regret their choice, many have paid extremely high costs for their abortions, financially, emotionally and physically. Some of  the women died, often leaving children behind; others found that abortion in a crucial period in their lives allowed them to  become loving mothers of wanted children  later on. That so many women undertook  and survived this ordeal shows their clear  determination to be in charge of their own  bodies and lives, despite harsh consequences.  No Choice makes it abundantly clear  that women in need will seek abortion and  no law will deter them. I urge you to read  this book and discuss it with friends, family and politicians. It's time to end the silence.  To order your copy of No Choice (at  $19.95, including shipping, handling and  taxes), contact the Childbirth by Choice Trust  at (416) 961-7812 or email: info@cbctrust.com.  Karen Page is with the Canadian Abortion  Rights Action League. This review is re-printed  from CARAL's newsletter, Pro-Choice Forum,  July 1999.  k1m=Iis  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Bulletin Board  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum of 50  words. Groups, organizations and individuals  eligible for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit objectives.  Other free notices will be items of general  public interest and will appear at the  discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST)  for the first  50 words or portion thereof, $4 (+$0.28  GST) for each additional 25 words or portion  thereof and must be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 1 8th of the month preceding publication.  Note: Kinesis is published ten times a year.  Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a contact  name and telephone number for any  clarification that may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the  goods and services advertised in Bulletin  Board. Kinesis cannot guarantee the accuracy  of the information provided or the safety and  effectiveness of the services and products  listed.  Send submissions to Kinesis, #309-877 E.  Hastings Street, Vancouver, BC, V6A 3YI, fax:  (604) 255-7508, or email: kinesis@web.net.  For more information call (604) 255-5499.  NVOLVEMEN  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to our Story Meetings held  on the first Tuesday of every month at 7pm  at our office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For  more information or if you can't make the  meeting but still want to find out how to  contribute to the content of Kinesis, give  Agnes a call at (604) 255-5499. New and  experienced writers are welcome. Childcare  and travel subsidies available.  INQUIRING MINDS WANTTO KNOW!  Do you ever wonder how the pages of text  in the newspaper you're holding get lined  up so neatly? Want to know the fastest way  to get wax off your hands? How about all  the cool things you can do with a scanner?  Does thinking about the right dot pattern  keep you up at night? Or do visions of  rubylith enter into your dreams? If so, then  you definitely need to come down and help  put Kinesis together. Just drop by during  our next production dates and help us  design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper, and all your questions  will be answered. Come and join us. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you want to learn to do referral and peer  counselling work, at VSW we are offering a  great opportunity to women interested in  volunteer work during the day. Come  answer the phone lines, talk to women who  drop in, and help connect them with the  community resources they need. For more  information call Shana at (604) 255-6554.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  NVOLVEMENJ,  FEMINIST FUNDRAISERSWANTED  VSW is seeking enthusiastic, energetic  and creative women to join the Finance  and Fundraising Committee. If you enjoy  raising money for a great cause, organizing events, or just want to have fun, call  Audrey at (604) 255-6554 today!   VOLUNTEER NEWSLETTER  Are you a volunteer at VSW or Kinesis? If  yes, please feel free to make contributions  to our monthly "Volunteer Newsletter." The  newsletter is for us—for all VSW/Kinesis  volunteers—and will be a place for  updates on committee work, gossip,  recipes, things for sale/barter, a calendar  of events, and whatever else volunteers  want to put in. There's a box at #309-877  E. Hastings St. waiting for your submissions. If you want more .info call Amal at  (604) 255-5499 or the VSW Volunteer  Development Committee at (604) 255-  6554.   KINESIS MARKETING GANG  Interested in being on the hottest committee at VSW? Then check out the Kinesis  Marketing Gang. We're looking for women  who have experience or are interested in  advertising and marketing. The Marketing  Gang works as a collective to strategize  on innovative ways to promote and raise  the profile of Kinesis. The gang meets  monthly. Training and support will be  provided by Kinesis marketing coordinator  Jenn Lo. Call her at (604) 255-5499.  EVENTS  EVENTS  ANGELA DAVIS IS COMING  Vancouver Status of Women will host a  fundraising event freaturing social activist  and author, Angela Davis on Sat Feb 12,  2000. Tickets will be available through  TicketMaster in late November. For more  information or to reserve your tickets call  VSW at (604) 255-6554.   MAGGIE NICHOLS  Jazz performer Maggie Nichols will be in  Vancouver at the Western Front Gallery,  303 E. 8th Ave Nov 3-6. For more info call  (604) 875-9516.   GATHERINGTHREADS  During the month of October, the exhibition hall of the Roundhouse Community  Centre will be filled with textiles. Gathering  Threads: the Pleasure of Textiles, a  residency project of the Roundhouse, will  feature various installations, free demonstrations and performances in rug hooking, quilting, embroidery, harness loom  weaving, backstrap weaving and more. For  the complete schedule or more info  contact the Roundhouse Community  Centre, 181 Roundhouse Mews, tel (604)  713-1800.   THE COLOR OF VIOLENCE  The Color of Violence: Violence Against  Women of Color conference will take place  on Apr 28-29,2000 at the University of  California, Santa Cruz. The conference will  bring together indigenous women and  women of colour to explore and strategize  around the relationships among racism,  colonialism, and gender violence in the  lives and herstories of women of colour  and indigenous women. Angela Davis and  Haunani Kay Trask will be the keynote  presenters. For full details, visit the  conference website at: www2.ucsc.edu/  people/andysm/ To receive registration  materials, contact Andrea Smith at #4-3  Felix St, Santa Cruz, CA, 95060; tel: (831)  460-1856; fax: (831) 459-3733; or email:  andysm@cats.ucsc.edu.  WTO TEACH-IN  There will be a public Teach-in on the WTO  in Vancouver at the Robson Square  Conference Centre, 800 Robson St in  November. On Fri Nov 12, 7:30-10pm, a  number of speakers including Maude  Barlow and Agnes Bertrand, will make  presentations on "Canadian and Global  Perspectives on the WTO." Then on Sat  Nov 13, 9am-5:30pm, there will be workshops, issue panels and strategy meetings.  For more info and to register call (604)  878-5424. Organized by the Common Front  on the WTO.  IMAGE NATION  The second annual Aboriginal film and  video festival in Vancouver, IMAGe NATION, will run from Nov 2-6 at various  venues around the city. Organized by IMAG  (the Indigenous Media Arts Group), the  festival will showcase works that are  directed, produced or written by Aboriginal  people. The festival opens Tues Nov 2 at  the Vancouver Aboriginal Friendship  Centre and in various screening venues in  Vancouver. Among the program's categories will be: "Reel Warriors," "Sex Life  Stories," "Wannabeez," and an animation  series. A panel discussion will also be held  Sat Nov 6 from 2-4 pm, titled "Achieving  Cultural Autonomy: Practices in Media and  Scholastic Communities," with moderator  Cleo Reece. The discussion will take place  at the Video In Studios, 1965 Main St. For  more info, call IMAG at (604) 871-0173.  PURPLE ROSE CAMPAIGN  The Philippine Women's Centre will be  launching its new campaign to end the  trafficking of Filipino women on Sat Dec 4,  7pm at the Roundhouse Community  Centre, 181 Roundhouse Mews. It will be  an evening of exciting performers and  artists, including Katari Taiko and Alvin  Tolentino. The event will also feature an art  auction of works donated by local artists.  Tickets are $10. For more info, tickets or to  volunteer, call Marilou or Ning at (604) 215-  1103.   ALTERNATIVETHERAPIES  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  is hosting a series of education sessions  on body-focused alternative therapies. The  workshops will be held on the first Thursdays of the month from 6:30-8:30pm at the  collective, 219-1675 W. 8th Ave. The next  session on Nov 4 will focus on traditional  Chinese medicine and accupressure, and  on Naturopathic Medicine. A $3 sliding  scale donation is requested. Seating is  limited, so please register by calling (604)  736-5262.   ELIMINATE CHILD POVERTY  1999 is the 10th anniversary of the all  party Federal resolution to seek to eliminate child poverty. Join us on Wed Nov 24,  5:30pm at the Plaza of Nations for a vigil to  remember our promises and celebrate our  children's future. Enternainers, speakers  and children's activities. For more info call  (604) 895-5786.   FAS CONFERENCE  A Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) conference is being held on Tues Nov 16, from  9am-4pm at the All Saints Anglican Church  in Vernon, BC. There is no fee and lunch  may be included—a non-persishable food  donation for the food bank is requested.  Margaret Boudreau and her daughter  Kandice (who is 17 years old with FAS) will  be presenting. They have presented at the  Aboriginal Women's Conference last year.  For more info contact Tammy Brown by  email: fnfc@junction.net  EVENTS  DENISE CHONG  Denise Chong will read from her recently  released book The Girl in the Picture: The  Kim Phuc Story. With this book, award-  winning journalist Chong offers an incredibly powerful portrait of one woman's  remarkable life—a woman who has been  known over the years as" the girl in the  picture." Kim Phuc was a nine year old  Vietnamese child when she was the  subject of one of the most famous photographs ever taken. The reading will be at  the Vancouver Public Library Main Branch  Tues, Nov 9 at 7:30pm.   ANDREA LEBOWITZ  Co-authored with Gillian Milton, Andrea  Lebowitz, a Canadian feminist writer, will  talk about their book, Gilean Douglas:  Writing Nature, Finding Home. The book is  a fascinating biography that includes a  collection of some of Gilean's best writings.  Andrea will be at the Vancouver Public  Library on Wed Nov 10, at 7:30pm.  Admission is free.  RACHEL ZOLF  Rachel Zolf will be reading at Women in  Print on Tues Nov 16 at 7pm. Zolf will be  reading from her first book of poetry, Her  absence, this wanderer. The book deals  with the complexities of being estranged  from one's roots, as the narrator in her  poems faces the long shadow of Holocaust  family loss, on a journey to Poland and  Czechoslovakia and a journey to and  through absence. Zolf is an accomplished  writer, and has also spent time in film/tv  produciton. For more info call 732-4128.  OTTAWA RCC  The Ottawa Crisis Centre is looking for  committed volunteers to work on its crisis  line, or Public Education and Fundraising  program. Ottawa RCC is a volunteer-based  organization which relies on over 8,000  volunteer hours a year. Volunteering can  and often does lead to paid work. As part  of the Centre's diversity plan, priority will  be given to women from diverse ethno-  racial/cultural backgrounds. If you would  like to join the Ottawa RCC in building a  fully inclusive anti-racist service, call (613)  562-2334, ext 24 for an information  package.   SURVIVORS FOR SURVIVORS  Survivors for Survivors, a self-help group  run by and for women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, offers referrals and  weekly support meetings. The group aims  to maintain a warm, safe and judgement-  free environment in which women can  speak about their lives, be heard by open  ears, and move towards healing. Meetings  take place in the North Vancouver area. For  meeting dates or more info call Maya at  (604) 987-6486. All calls held in strictest  confidence.  JAPANESE QUEER GROUP  Are you interested in meeting lesbians,  bisexual women and transgendered  women of Japanese heritage? Let's  celebrate Vancouver Lesbian Week  together. For info call Aki on her pager at  (604) 708-6867.   NAC YOUNG WOMEN'S CAUCUS  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women presents its Young  Women's Caucus for women between the  ages of 16 and 30. It is imperative that  young women have space where their  voices are validated, celebrated and  honoured. The NAC Young Women's  Caucus is committed to providing that  space, as well as demanding it! Please join  in the struggle. For more info contact  Rachel at (416) 755-9605, email:  thedivas@pathcom.com; or Kelly at (905)  525-0629, email: hwetl-pr@interlynx.net.  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  KINESIS Bulletin Board  EVENTS  SHAKTI  Shakti (meaning "strength") is a self-help  group in Vancouver for South Asian women  who have experienced the psychiatric  system. The group meets every 1st and  3rd Saturday of the month 1-3pm at South  Vancouver Neighbourhood House, 6470  Victoria Dr. Join the group for outings,  discoveries, peer support, and relaxing  massage. Participation is free. For more  info call Helen (604) 733-5570 (for English); or (604) 682-3269 box 8144 (for  Punjabi, Hindi and Urdu). Sponsored by  the Vancouver/Richmond Mental Health  Network.  BI-WOMEN'S GET-TOGETHER  A bisexual women's get-together in  Vancouver is being held once a month for  conversation, munchies, laughs and the  occasional bi-related movie. For more info  and to get on the email list, call (604) 734-  9407 or email Liane at angelbum@netcom.ca.  ALLIES TO FIRST NATIONS WOMEN  "Allies to First Nations Women," a subcommittee of the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women-BC region, has been  re-activated. The subcommittee works in  solidarity with Aboriginal women, particularly in the areas of research, proposal  writing and organizing. Any woman wishing  to join is welcome. For more info call Jenea  at (604) 294-8092.   MENOPAUSE AWARENESS GROUP  The Surrey Women's Centre is sponsoring  a Menopause Awareness Group which  meets the 4th Monday of each month for  informal discussions around menopause  issues. The group starts at 7:30pm and will  be held at the centre. For location or more  info call Janet or Sharon at (604) 589-  EVENTS  GROUPS  BUILDING BLOCKS  Building Blocks Vancouver offers information and support for Spanish-speaking,  Vietnamese and Aboriginal women living in  the Grandview Woodland area expecting  their first baby or with newborns under  three-months old. The program has a great  team of Home Visitors to assist women. For  more info call Mosaic at (604) 254-9626 or  the Vancouver Aboriginal Family and Child  Services at (604) 251-4844, local 311.  RAPE RELIEFVOLUNTEERS  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Volunteer training sessions are  held Tuesday evenings. For more info and  a training interview call (604) 872-8212.  RALLY AGAINST RACISM  Filipino students at Van Tech Secondary  School are the most recent targets of the  intensifying racism occurring today. Rally  begins, 12 noon, Wed Nov 3, at the  Vancouver School Board (Broadway and  Fir). For more info, call May or Charlene at  (604) 215-1103.  FORUM ON GLOBALIZATION  This international forum presents speakers  from around the world who will talk about  the social, political, cultural and environmental implications of economic globalization, and the role of the World Trade  Organization (WTO). Panel discussions will  include diverse topics as biotechnology,  labour rights, agriculture and food safety,  global finance and investments. The forum  is on Nov 26 and 27, in Seattle. For more  info call (415) 771-8094 or email:  ifg@ifg.org.  GROUPS  BWSS SUPPORT GROUPS  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver offers a range of support groups  for women who are in or who have been in  abusive intimate relationships. Women  meet to share common experiences and to  receive emotional support, information and  practical help on resources. BWSS has  various drop-in groups, including a custody  and access support group, a group for  Japanese women, a group run through the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre, and  10-week groups. Bus tickets and onsite  childcare or childcare subsidies are  available. Call (604) 687-1867 formore  info.  WOMEN ABUSE SUPPORT GROUP  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver is offering a support group for  women who are in or have been in abusive  intimate relationships with women. The  group provides emotional support, legal  information and advocacy, safety planning,  and referrals. The group is free and  confidential. Bus tickets and childcare  subsidies are available. For more info (604)  687-1867.   COMPULSIVE EATING SUPPORT  A drop-in support group for women with  issues of compulsive eating is held twice a  month at the Eating Disorder Resource  Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital, Room  2C-213, 1081 Burrard St, Vancouver. Drop-  in times are 7:30pm to 9pm every 1st and  3rd Wednesday of the month. Facilitated  by Colleen Hyland and Cynthia Johnston.  For more info call (604) 631-5313.  Ir    F       Book &  J     %r Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 1N4  (604) 669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  SATRANG  If you are into drama, theatre sports, et  cetera, and feel strongly about issues  affecting South Asian women, come and  check out the South Asian Theatre and  Networking Group. Satrang is about  enthusiasm and having fun with your  creativity in a positive scene. Meetings are  every Monday from 3:30-5pm at the South  Asian Women's Centre, 8163 Main Street,  Vancouver. For more info call Anu at (604)  592-0013 or Sonia at (604) 325-6637.  PRIDELINE  The Centre's Prideline offers information,  referrals, and peer support to lesbian, gay,  transgendered and bisexual people seven  days a week from 7-1 Opm. In the Lower  Mainland call (604) 684-6869. Elsewhere in  BCcall 1-800-566-1170.  MOTHERS INTRANSITION  Mothers in Transition Support Group holds  regular coffee meetings for mothers who  have lost custody of their offspring due to  mental illness. Come meet other moms of  like mind and situation. Share experiences  and interests. We hope together to lessen  the burden of living without our offspring.  We create friendship. Private meetings with  Dawn are also available. For more info,  contact Dawn at (604) 871-0151.  LESBIAN SOCIAL GROUP  In the Company of Womyn, a social group  for lesbians in the Lower Fraser Valley  meets one Friday every month in the  Surrey/Langley area to plan social activities. For more info call Jill at  (604) 576-8107.  UBMISSIONS  GENDER AND GLOBALIZATION  The Journal for Gender Studies is publishing a special issue on "Gender and  Globalization" in September 2000. A broad  spectrum of articles representing feminist  perspectives on gender and globalization  from all parts of the world are being  sought. Themes may include: the  feminization of labour and the gender of  labour markets; transnationalization of  identity politics (youth culture, gender,  sexuality); effects on indigenous peoples  and nationalist movements, et cetera.  Submissions may be in the form of academic articles, poetry, photographs,  artwork, and so on. Send submissions to:  The Editors, The Journal of Gender  Studies, CASS, University of Hull, Hull,  HU6 7RX, England. For more info email:  journal-gender-studies@cas.hull.ac.uk.  Deadline is Jan 30.  w\\h\\\m\\\\mm  Massage  Therapy  Craniosacral  Therapy  736-1910  3(5-2150 West Broadway,  V6K 4L9  Vancouver, BC  SUBMISSIONS  VISUAL ARTISTS  The Community Arts Council in Vancouver  is holding a fundraising exhibition Dec 1-  23. Professional artists are invited to  submit a max of three art pieces (2D & 3D  art work), and artists will receive 60  percent of the selling price. Submission  requirements: CV, art work(s): labelled with  artist's name, title, medium, and retail price  (must be $300 or under, and a $10 submission fee per artist is required). Artist can  drop off works Nov 24-27. Pick-up day on  Dec 1. For more info contact the CAC, 837  Davie St; tel: (604) 683-4358; fax: (604)  683-4394.   SPIRIT OFWOMEN 2000  Visual artists, performance artists, musicians, writers and dancers are invited to  submit works that focus on the spirit of  women. The exhibition Spirit of Women  2000 will celebrate women during the  month of March 2000, and in particular  IWD March 8th. Submission Deadline is  Nov 30. Send submissions to: The Community Arts Council of Vancouver Gallery,  Spirit of Women 2000, 837 Davie St,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Z2. For submission  requirements, contact the curators and  organizers, Barbara Bickel and Mary Lou  Riordon-Sello, at (604) 683-4358.   BLOOD/LUST  Blood/Lust: a Mixed Queer Anthology  seeks essays, poetry and art that reflect  the lived experiences of racially mixed  trans, bi, lesbian, gay, two-spirit, nhijra,  bakla, patlache, mahu or otherwise  "queer"-identified people. The editor seeks  writing by people of all racial mixes, social  backgrounds, abilities and beliefs to speak  about the complexities of being mixed and  queer. Submissions must be typed or word-  processed and double-spaced. Please  include your name and address on each  page. Please submit a cover letter as well  as a brief bio. No queries or manuscripts  can be returned without a SASE (and IRC  if applicable). Deadline Nov 19. Poems: up  to five; essays: up to 8000 words; art (no  originals): up to five pieces. Send to Blood/  Lust, c/o Qwo-Li Driskill, 1122 E Pike St,  PMB #470, Seattle, WA, 98122-3939, USA.  For more info email:  mixedqueer¬Æ hotmail.com.  CALLING ALL QUEER PINAYS  If you are a Filipina and identify as queer,  lesbian, bisexual, transgender, tibo... If you  have stories, essays, poetry, journal  writings, drawings, photos, comics, recipes... Sa PinayKa, A Pinay lesbian group in  Toronto, would like to hear from you. This is  your last chance to be a part of this  groundbreaking work, A Queer Pinay  Anthology. Final deadline Jan 31, 2000.  Send submissions to SisterVision Press, c/  o Pinay, PO Box 217, Stn E, Toronto, ON,  M6H 4E2; or by email to  bengg@hotmail.com.  PHOTOS OF GAY AND LESBIAN  FAMILIES  A Safer World, a National Film Board  documentary/animation project, is looking  for a diverse array of out gay couples and  their families to share their photos or to be  photographed. For more info or to make a  submission, call Chris at (604) 255-0057.  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Discountsfor  book clubs  Special orders  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999 Bulletin Board  UBMISSION  CHILD CARE ADVOCACY  Dr. Susan Prentice, a professor in the  Department of Sociology at the University  of Manitoba, is seeking submissions for an  edited text on the history, politics and  practice of child care in Canada from 1945-  1995. The aim of the anthology is to identify  the particular ways that child care mobilization has contributed to the development of  policy and services in Canada. For suggested topic ideas or if you wish to submit  a paper, contact Susan Prentice, Department of Sociology, University of Manitoba,  Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3R 2N2; tel: (204)  474-6726 (call collect); fax: (204) 261-1216;  e-mail: sprenti@cc.umanitoba.ca. The  submission deadline is June 2000, but is  flexible.   HEALTH NETWORK  The Canadian Women's Health Network  invites submissions for its quarterly  newsletter, Network. If you'd like to contribute or wish to suggest a topic we should  cover, please email the editor at  news@cwhn.ca. Or contact her at CWHN  Network, 203-419 Graham Ave, Winnipeg,  MB, R3C 0M3, or visit the CWHN website  at www.cwhn.ca.  ART SHOW SPACE  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has opened its space to women artists.  Shows will run for 4-6 weeks under contract guidelines. The Collective will host an  opening, and provide some advertising as  well as hanging materials. For details, leave  a message for Christine Campbell or  Tamara Flick-Parker at (604) 736-4234.  RIDETHEWIND  Ride the Wind is collecting submissions for  an anthology on women's experiences in  the workplace. Poetry and personal essays  of approx. 10-pages max; typewritten.  Submissions should focus on the difficulties women have working in the labour  market, how these difficulties have been  coped with, or resolved, and also what  successes the author enjoyed. Pseudonyms required for co-workers and companies, and may also be used for writer.  Deadline Dec 31. Send to Ride the Wind,  PO Box 965 Stn. A. Campbell River,  BC.V9W 6Y4, fax (250)923-0541, email  ridewind@angelfire.com  GLOBAL MIGRATION  The Canadian Council for Refugees and  the UBC School of Social Work and Family  Studies are looking for papers for the  conference scheduled for Jun 1-3, 2000 at  UBC. The call for papers from both academics and practitioners on their research/  practice findings on issues related to  refugee movements and refugee settlement. Deadline for abstracts Oct 31;  notification of acceptance Dec 31.  OF WOMAN BORN  The Year 2001 marks the 25th anniversary  of the publication of Adrienne's Rich's Of  Woman Born. In celebration, Demeter  Press will be publishing an edited volume  that explores how this landmark and far-  reaching book has shaped and influenced  maternal scholarship over the last 25  years.The press welcomes submissions  from a variety of perspectives, chapters are  to be 15-20 pages in length and in MLA  format. Please send a 250 word abstract  and 50 word bio by Dec 1. Notification of  acceptance will be mailed Jan 8, 2000.  Completed chapters must be received by  May 1. The volume will be published late  Fall 2000. For more info contact Andrea  O'Reilly, 726 Atkinson.York University, 4700  Keele St, Toronto, ON, M3J 1P3; tel: (416)  736-2100 ext 60366; email:  aoreilly@yorku.ca; fax: (905)775-1386.  (^CLASSIFIEDS  WOMEN'S AIKIDO  Aikido is a non-competitive Japanese  Martial Art emphasing flowing circular  movement to neutralize an attack. This is a  women only class with varying ages and  abilities - lots of individual instruction.  Dynamic senior instructor uses skill and  humour to introduce techniques. Good  warm up, fun work out, practical, spiritual  and transformative. On-going Sunday  mornings 11:00am-12:30pm. Drop-in $6 @  Trout Lake Community Centre, 16th and  Victoria. For more info, drop by or call (604)  7394-233 or (604) 872-5129.   OCEAN FRONT CABIN  Charming, secluded, ocean front cabin,  Roberts Creek, Sunshine Coast. Two  bedrooms, full bath, kitchen with all  amenities. Relax in picturesque setting.  Ideal for cycling, hiking, swimming, or  kyaking. Children welcome. Friendly,  trained outdoor felines OK. Smoke free  indoors. Weekly $350. Group retreat rates.  Weekend rates. Available from May/99.  (250) 352-3609 or hgh@netidea.com  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call (604) 876-6390.  MINDFULNESS-BASED STRESS  REDUCTION FOR WOMEN  This meditative approach to working with  stress, pain and illness is offered in  introductory classes, eight week courses or  individual sessions. For more info call  Deborah Prieur at (604) 733-6136.  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Housing Co-op is accepting  applications for its waitlist for one, two and  three bedroom suites ($565, $696, $795  per month and refundable share purchase).  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Participation required. Please  send a business size SASE to Membership  Committee, Cityview Housing Co-op, 108-  1885 E. Pender St, Vancouver, BC, V5L  1W6.   OFFICE FOR RENT  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has an office space for rent. The space is  available immediately. Monthly rent is  $250.00 plus GST and incidental fees (i.e.:  hydro, parking, etc.). For more info call or  leave a message for Caryn Duncan at  (604) 736-4234.   ROOMMATE WANTED  Hey there women! I need you and you may  need me! I'm looking for a roommate for  Dec 1, Feb 1 or Mar 1, and this time my  roommate is really moving out! I live in a  sunny breezy top floor, two-bedroom suite  in an East Vancouver co-op close to the  Drive. Underground parking and laundry  facilities on site. I am looking for a non-  smoker, gay-friendly, tidy, responsible,  easygoing woman to share my plant-iful  apartment. No pets please, I'm allergic. You  would pay $348 per month plus share  deposit. Call me, Lisa, at (604) 253-1827.  Got Something  to say?  Classify it!  First 25 words for only $8.00 (+gst)  "Still Green & Rock ■ Part ii'  The Dance Centre presents  Dance In Vancouver,  the 2nd Vancouver Platform for the "Recontres  Choreographiques Internationales de Seine Saint-  Denis," from November 3rd to 5th, 7:30pm at the  Norman Rothstein Theatre, 950 W. 41st Ave. The  evenings will feature performances by Astrid,  Karen Jamieson Dance Company, Kinesis Dance,  Kokoro Dance, Lola MacLaughlin Dance, Mascall  Dance, and many more. Pictured above are Andrea  Gunnlaugson and Kathleen McDonagh who will be  performing in Still Green & Rock, Part ii.  Three day passes are $25 for Dance Centre/Jewish  Community Centre members; $35 for non-members.  Single evening performances are $12 for members,  and $15 for non-members. Tickets are available at  The Dance Centre, 400-873 Beatty St. For more info  call (604) 606-6400.  madisun  browne  law office  Barrister & Solicitor  We offer legal services in several  areas including:  • same sex immigration  • lesbian and gay family law  • labour and employment law  Phone  604.251.2519  •  Fax 604.251.2539  104-1718 Commercial Dr., Vancouver, BC V5N 4A3  OCTOBER/NOVEMBER 1999  KINESIS 