 sp  'Decial Collections Serial  October 1996    BC's new Ministry for Children and Families     cmpa$2.25  'ñ†  I  1'  1  SI  ES  s  j&l _ ^  iMtoii Sm  , wmM  Rl Inside  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC VSL 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meeting is Tues Oct 1 and  Tues Nov 5, 7 pm at Kinesis. All  women welcome, even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of  Women.lts objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, wendy lee kenward,  Agnes Huang  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Dorcas, Dorothy Elias,  Janet Winters, Jehn Starr, Caitlin  Byrne, wendy lee kenward, Rachel  Rosen, Fatima Jaffer, Agnes Huang  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Cat L'Hirondelle, Audrey  Johnson, Chrystal Fowler  Distribution: Carolina Rosales  Production Co-ordinator: Alex Hennig  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Fringe Festival performer Helen Mintz.  Photo by Geoff Manasse  PRESS DATE  September 24, 1996  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year {+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by OK Graphics.  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  OCTOBER 1996  News  New Ministry for Children and Families in BC   by Agnes Huang  COPE candidates gear up for Vancouver civic election..  by Michele Valiquette and Sherry Preston  Framing women's reproductive rights   by Agnes Huang  Take Back the Night   . 5    COPE chooses candidates  Features  Labour activism in Thailand: interview with Tumtong Porihun..  as told to Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Centrespread  Say No! to APEC   compiled by Kerri Lattimer and Amy Simpson  NAFTA in review: women still getting screwed .  by Colleen Fuller  Arts  101 Things Lesbians Do In Bed 12  reviewed by Cy-Thea Sand  Films on women and their bodies 13  reviewed by Leanne Johnson  A few Fringe plays in review 14  by Faith Jones, Leanne Johnson and Shannon e. Ash  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6  compiled by Joanne Namsoo  What's News 8  compiled by Fatima Jaffer  Bulletin Board 17  compiled by Janet Winters  iUouUli'uHU!^.  I PHw m cfci%A  Tumtong Pohirun 9  Passionate about v  Tfeit to see ttose issu  Come to one of our  Story-  Meet irigs  at    301-1720 Grant Stre<  Vancouver.  Telephone:   (604)  255~54S  101 Things Lesbians Do 12 rvjv  ■  TL       !N §  ^ v ■;      A  nmS^  HSr  news would fcn  i   i  &^_M  Sk  j  ffji  imil il ^  s   °  e  s  i  o  /?     r  ^     s     s  As Kinesis goes to press, the BC provincial government has unveiled its new  Ministry for Children and Families...[For the  rest of this sentence, and the full story, look to  the right on page 3.]  As part of its newestchanges, the NDP  government consolidated children and  family services and programs into one jurisdiction, stripping certain ministries of  some of their responsibilities. One such  ministry—social services—has now essentially been reduced to the ministry of welfare.  One rumour that had been circulating  even before the last election was that with  the creation of a mega-ministry encompassing children and families, the Ministry of  Women's Equality would be dropped. This  rumour did not materialize, although  women's equality was one of the ministries  which will have its workload (and budget)  shuffled over to the new ministry.  As Kinesis goes to press, confirmation  was not available on the exact programs  and work that was to be shifted out of the  MWE. Childcare is likely one that went, but  it remains to be seen what effect all these  new changes will have on the programs,  funding and priority areas of the MWE.  We'll keep you posted.  The big issue raised by most women  commenting on this latest development in  BC is that more and more governments and  society seem willing to ignore the fact that  the welfare of children is deeply connected  to the welfare of their mothers. In fact what  is happening is that children's "rights" are  being touted as taking precedence over the  rights and well-being of their mothers. In  this regard, the mother is viewed as only a  guardian and state (or society) can step in  and impose restrictions on women or take  away their children under the guise that it  is acting in the best interests of the children.  Interestingly enough, another article in  this issue oiKinesis points to that same very,  scary trend [see page 5.J Last August, a Winnipeg woman was ordered by a trial judge  to enter a drug treatment program: she was  addicted to solvents. Child and Family  Services in that province took her to court  to have her forcefully incarcerated in order  to "protect" her foetus. When the trial judge  agreed to this request, he basically ignored  the Supreme Court of Canada's ruling that  the foetus is not a person and therefore does  not have any rights afforded to  personhood-  Fortunately and rightly so, the Manitoba Court of Appeal overturned the lower  court decision, citing the Supreme Court's  interpretation of the foetus. Still, the fact  that this case was able to get so far through  the court system shows clearly that the  right-wing agenda of controlling women's  bodies and restricting women's rights is  growing stronger.  Much of the impetus to give children  and the foetus rights separate from those  of their mother/the woman is coming from  the right-wing, fundamentalist, anti-choice  proponents. Those people who express "solutions" that only patronize women and  mothers are the same ones who are the  greatest supporters of cuts to social programs and opponents to a national  childcare strategy. These two recent cases  highlight the need to challenge the agenda  of neo-conservatives and the anti-choice/  anti-women movement.  Speaking of anti-choicers...the company which holds the Canadian rights to  RU-486 (the abortion pill) says it will not  introduce the drug in Canada because of  fear of anti-choice protesters [see What's  News, page 8.]  More on right-wing fundamentalists...  guess who the Reform party just appointed  as their new status of women critic. None  other than, ultra-anti-feminist Sharon  Hayes (Port Moody-Coquitlam). Remember her? She was the one who ran screaming from Beijing with horrible stories of  how the Canadian delegation (the official  one and the NGO one) participating in the  4th World Conference on Women had been  infiltrated by "radical feminists." (Hayes  probably thought they were all lesbians too  — They weren't.)  On her first day on the job, Hayes announced her new target: paid lobbyists in  the federal government bureaucracy who  promote a radical feminist agenda. Uh huh  Sharon, sure. There are just way too many  feminists in Ottawa! We're always the last  to know.  Even more on right-wingers. The Vancouver Sun, one of the Southam newspapers  recently gobbled up by right-wing magnate  Conrad Black, is now running columns  from renowned "neo"-conservatives  Andrew Coyne and BarbaraAmiel.  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  memberships or donated to the Vancouver Status of Women.  Loma Brown * Katherine Heinrich* Jennifer Johnstone * Meredith Kimball *  Mary Moore *Eha Onno *Joy Parr * Marion Pollock * Joan Robillard * Sandra St.  Germain* Dawn Simpson* Edith Thomas.  A Special thanks to donors who give a gift every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to: Wendy Baker * Barbara Curran * Jody Gordon*  Erin Graham * Barbara Karmazyn * Barbara Lebrasseur * Lolani Maar * Sheilah  Thompson.  Special thanks to our office volunteers who keep VSW running on a daily basis:  Amy Fong * Celine Rasmussen * Janet Winters * Pauline Young.  Thanks to Michelle Sylliboy and Cher Eneas who carried our banner during the  Take Back the Night March.   Coyne is also a columnist for the Financial Post and the Toronto Sun, and has  a call-in show on a Toronto radio station.  Recently on his radio show, Coyne went  after Sister Vision Press: Black women and  women of colour press — the only women  of colour publishing house in this country  — calling it "racist" because it discriminated against white people (who of course,  don't have any publishing houses of their  own...?) In his attack, which he also continued in a column in the Financial post,  Coyne went after Sister "vision's government funding (the little they receive) saying it should be pulled.  It's hard enough to continue the work  we do as women's organizations without  also having to deal with constant attacks  by right-wing people, men and women. So  send your support to Sister Vision Press,  PO Box 217, Stn E, Toronto, Ontario, M6H  2E2.  As Kinesis goes to press...the coroner's  inquiry into the murder of a Vernon woman  and her family by her estranged husband  last May has just begun. The inquiry will  examine how Mark Chahal was able to  obtain the gun he used to kill Rajwar  Ghakal and eight others and how police  failed to intervene before the murders.  Hopefully, the inquiry will not just focus  on "gun control" and will address the real  issues of violence against women. We'll  bring you more next month on the inquiry.  And in another story related to violence against women...BC's Minister of  Women's Equality just announced the  opening of the first transition house ever  on Haida Gwaii (Queen Charlotte Islands).  The transition house will be staffed 24  hours a day and will offer an alternative  for women on the islands who have previously had to travel to Prince Rupert.  Before we go, a quick note about the  Vancouver International Film Festival:  films to watch for include Deepa Mehta's  Fire, one of the best feature films about lesbians ever made; and Coming to Her Senses  —an omnibus film featuring six short films  by six Vancouver women filmmakers, each  focussing on one of the six senses. Catch it  at the Film Fest on Sunday, October 5th. For  more info on the Film Fest, call 685-0260.  That's about all for this month as Kinesis goes to press. Enjoy the changing  leaves of Fall and don't forget: Fight the  Right!  As the leaves turn red elsewhere, they  stay green in Vancouver...Evergreen! And  as ever, like the trees, Kinesis continues to  publish news about women that's not in the  dailies, thanks to the ever-committed  women that help write it, paste it up, lay it  out, proof it, advertise in it, read it, subscribe to it, staff it, and send it donations.  So it was that yet another annual Kinesis Raffle and Benefit came and went last  month, bringing together some of the  women that help Canada's national feminist newspaper stay alive against the odds.  It's getting increasingly more difficult to  publish Kinesis each year: not only because  it's more costly to publish, but because serious, political woman-power is waning —  women are finding themselves more economically strapped than ever, getting more  fully co-opted into mainstream politics or  existences, or just simply running out of  time, energy, good health and/or hope.  Still, enough of those Vancouverites  who continue to support Kinesis, together  with women who came to check out the  scene, dropped by to the Kinesis Benefit at  the WISE Hall on a cold evening in September to celebrate and support yet another  year of feminist news. It was not a large  crowd (due to less promotion and advertising on Kinesis' part than in previous  years) but definitely a generous one. The  Raffle and Benefit raised almost $1,000,  which is much higher than in previous  years. The entertainment was solid gold  and varied — the Onna Zoku Bang band  thrilled and seduced us, Sandy Scofield  mesmerized us even as she gave us lots to  think about, and Penny Singh v/armed us  to the bones with loud bluesy gusto.  A BIG big thank you to those who  made the Benefit such a memorable occasion: to the committee who pulled it together: wendy kenward, Winnifred Tovey  and Fatima Jaffer; and editor Agnes Huang  who stepped in to pull some last-minute  pieces together. Thanks especially to Cat  Renay for her help with the equipment and  sound; to emcee extraordinaire Emma  Kivisild; to the musicians who donated  their time and talent, to Tunde Skiba who  provided on-site childcare, and to the many  many volunteers who helped at the Benefit: Terra Poirier, Andrew, Larissa Lai,  Shannon e. Ash, Faith Jones, Wendy Frost,  Robyn Hall, Joanne Namsoo, Michelle  Sillyboy, Lisa Valencia-Svensson, Audrey  Johnson, Jehn Starr, and many more.  BIG big thanks also to our many donors, who are listed in an ad on page 6.  You may have noticed that the last issue sparkled just a little more than usual.  Well, apart from the content, the extra sparkle quotient was due to the hi-brite paper  (as opposed to newsprint) thatKmeszs was  printed on. No, unfortunately, our use of  hi-brite paper is not a permanent change  (yet). Our printer had run out of newsprint,  hence the switch (at no cost to us) to the  thicker, brighter, whiter, and more expensive paper. Next issue, we return to good  old newsprint.  Another change you may have noticed  in the last issue was a fresh perspective on  the design of Kinesis' pages. That came  courtesy of the PageMaker know-how of  Alex Hennig and Winnifred Tovey. Well,  Alex is back again this issue, on contract  for the month of September. And she's impressed us all with her good humour,  snazzy design ideas (how about that fabulous duotone Kinesis cover) and affinity for  jus' the right font! We're hoping things  work out so she can stick around on contract for the next two issues (November, and  December/January). Then again, as we  understand it, full-time-work may draw  her away from us. Either way, we'll hang  in there and keep you posted in each issue  of Kinesis on who's giving Kinesis its fabulous new looks!  Finally, a heap of thanks and welcomes  are due to the new production room talents  this issue—Caitlin Byrne and Rachel Rosen  — and to new writers/voices: Amy  Simpson, Kerri Lattimer and Janet Winters.  That's all for this month. Stay tuned  for Kinesis restructuring news in the next  issue. And if you want to join the production or writing arms of Kinesis, or just get  acquainted with the folks who produce the  paper, call Agnes at 255-5499. A bientot.  OCTOBER 1996 New child welfare system in BC:  News  Now, what about women  by Agnes Huang  As Kinesis goes to press, the BC provincial government has unveiled its new  Ministry for Children and Families, which  is intended to "[strengthen] the province's  child protection services and [streamline]  child and family services." However,  women who work in women's centres and  transition houses are not optimistic that the  changes will greatly improve the situation  for women and their children.  The NDP government will integrate all  child and family programs currently administered through five different ministries-social services, attorney general, education, women's equality and health into  the Ministry for Children and Families. The  new ministry will be responsible for services including public health, mental health,  early childhood development, alcohol and  drug treatment and youth corrections. The  changes take effect immediately.  Christine Wood, a legal advocate at the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  (DTEWC), says the separation of all these  services and programs in the past has been  a real hassle for women, particularly those  living in poverty. "Women get the run-  around between different ministries and a  lot of them who come to the Downtown  Eastside Women's Centre are confused  about where they should be going," says  Wood.  However, Wood adds she is not convinced the new ministerial structure will  solve these problems. She says the government should immediately set up information forums for women on the new changes,  and in particular, ministry officials should  meet with women living in poverty to discuss how the new system will work.  The formation of the Ministry for Children and Families stems from a report by  Judge Thomas Gove, which gave a scathing review of the child welfare system in  BC following the death of Matthew  Vaudreuil and the conviction of his mother  for manslaughter. Gove made 118 recommendations and called for a massive restructuring of the child welfare system.  When it came out, many feminists were  critical of the Gove report because it focused only on the welfare of children, and  did not give much mention to the well-being of their mothers. As well, the Gove report frequently suggested Matthew's  mother, Verna, was a "bad mother".  The NDP government responded by  setting up a transit commission with a timeframe of three years to assess Gove's report,  which called for a new child welfare system. Now, the Ministry for Children and  Families will take over the process of implementing Gove's recommendations.  Former Women's Equality Minister  Penny Priddy will head up the new ministry. The NDP also appointed Robert Plecas,  a former Socred bureaucrat and a BC Liberal party advisor, as deputy minister of the  Ministry of Children and Families. Some  say appointing the architect of much of the  Social Credit government's restraint programs of the 1980s is just an attempt to  thwart off criticism from the Liberal opposition.  In creating the new ministry, the NDP  essentially dismantled the Ministry of Social Services. MSS has now been converted  into the Ministry for Human Resources and  will only deal with welfare issues. Premier  Glen Clark says MSS minister Dennis  Streifel will now be able to focus more on  implementing the NDP government's new  (almost a year old) welfare "reforms," also  known as BC Benefits.  The government also announced a new  Children's Commissioner, Cynthia Morton,  who was previously overseeing the implementation of Gove's recommendations.  Morton's mandate will be to review all  deaths or critical injuries of children in BC.  The NDP says the commission will be independent of the new ministry and will involved a public review process, with  Morton reporting to the Attorney General.  Most commentators quoted to date in  the mainstream media have praised the  government's initiatives. But the changes  are likely not as well-received by women  working in feminist organizations that provide advocacy and services to women and  their children as the NDP government had  expected.  Many women say the new ministry is  dangerous because it separates the well-  being of children from the well-being of  those who take care of them, namely their  mothers. In particular, women point to the  lack of services and support systems that  deal with the holistic interests of children,  and the absence of adequate social services  for those who take care of children, especially single mothers.  Christine Wood says the trend seems  to be that "mothers are gradually being disenfranchised while their children are being  enfranchised." She adds it is ironic that, in  this focus on children, little attention is being paid to the welfare of their mothers,  especially given that their mothers are almost always the primary caregivers.  Many women say the government has  only created a band-aid solution. They are  also critical of the government for making  it more difficult for women to raise their  children by continuing to cut social programs and services. Often, these difficulties result in children being apprehended  from their mothers. The government's welfare legislation, which includes lower payments, harsher eligibility criteria and limitations on the amount of extra earnings  women can make without money being  deducted from their welfare cheques, only  adds to the poverty of women with children.  "Women are having to scramble to  make ends meet, to a point where their  rights are infringed upon," says Wood.  Ajax Quinby of the Custody and Access Advocacy Association in Vancouver  says it is important to keep women in mind  when developing policies intended to look  after the welfare of children. Quinby says  that, as far as she knows, the government  has not has addressed the interests of children in custody and access issues. What is  happening now in BC, she says, is that  "we're seeing an epidemic of children be  ing abused by their fathers during access  visits, but none of the ministries want to  address this." Quinby also works at a second-stage housing shelter.  A representative of the Battered Women's Support Services (BWSS) in Vancouver confirms that BWSS has been getting  more and more calls from women who are  being drawn into custody and access battles with the fathers of their children—men  who are often abusive to the women and  the children.  Quinby adds that no government ministry will provide funds to the Custody and  Access Advisory Association to provide  advocacy and support work for the women  and their children. On top of that, cuts to  legal aid and the shutting down of supervised access centres have left women in  even more vulnerable positions in relation  to the fathers of their children.  Another indication of the provincial  government's lack of real concern for the  welfare of women and their children is its  refusal to fund the re-publishing of the Single Mother's Resource Guide (SMRG). The  guide, published by the Vancouver Status  of Women (VSW), provides single mothers  in the BC Lower Mainland with important  information about legislation that may affect them and their legal rights, as well as  information about services and programs  available to them. It is the only resource of  its kind in Canada, is in constant demand  in BC, and is available at no cost to single  mothers.  VSW was planning to publish the  fourth edition of the guide this fall, but no  provincial ministry would commit to funding the SMRG, saying either that they did  not have the funds to do so, or that the  project was outside their funding criterion.  Ironically, says VSW's Administrator/  Fundraiser Audrey Johnson, the SMRG is  often requested by Ministry of Social Services staff people for single mothers.  "I get several calls each week from  agencies, including MSS, requesting copies of the SRMG for their clients," says  Johnson. "Social workers I've spoken to  agree that it is an incredibly valuable tool,  yet the provincial government can't find a  few thousand dollars to fund it. The hypocrisy astounds me."  According to the NDP government, the  new child welfare system will increase  monies available to child and family services and programs. In a news release on the  day of the announcement, Premier Glen  Clark said the changes "will put children  and their safety first by consolidating services and putting more resources into the  hands of front-line workers."  However, as Kinesis was going to press,  nobody with the provincial government  was available to confirm exactly who are  considered "front-line workers." The outcome may very well be that little funding  will be available for programs and services  for women run by women.  Many women say the  new ministry is  dangerous because it  separates the  well-being of children  from the well-being of  those who take care of  them, namely their  mothers.  "Mothers are gradually  being disenfranchised  while their children are  being enfranchised."  - Christine Wood  OCTOBER 1996 News  Women and civic politics:  COPE chooses  civic candidates  Michele Valiquette and  Sherry Preston   Women make up more than half the  slate that will take Vancouver's left-wing  coalition into the November 16th civic election. At a mid-September meeting of COPE  (Committee of Progressive Electors) and the  civic New Democrats, labour and peace  activist Carmella Allevato was acclaimed  mayoralty candidate.  "I want to be the first woman mayor  of Vancouver," Allevato told the 400-strong  crowd. She declared her intention to build  a team that will "sweep away worn-out  right-wing politicians with their worn-out  policies." [Allevato is referring to the NPA  (Non-Partisan Association) which currently  holds all seats in Vancouver's City Council.]  The 16 women running for seats in  Vancouver's City Council, School Board  and Park Board have experience in a broad  range of social movements. Why have these  women decided to take their fight for social justice and social change into the civic  electoral arena? We put this question to  some of COPE candidates: City Council  candidates Frances Wasserlein and Jamie-  Lee Hamilton, School Board candidate  Maya Russell, and Park Board candidates  Ellen Woodsworth, Raj Sihota and Donna  Morgan.  Having spent the last three years as the  only woman on the seven member Park  Board, Donna Morgan says she is acutely  aware of the obstacles facing women—and  especially feminists—in politics. She's had  to deal not only with strenuous opposition  to most of the motions she's brought forward but also with the crude behaviour of  NPA old-boys who have, on numerous occasions, resorted to rude gestures and insulting remarks.  But Morgan says her experience has  convinced her that "if we stay insulated,  it's easy to believe things have changed  more than they have. Some feminists seem  to think they'll be co-opted if they participate. They want to keep themselves clean  of the process. But if we leave it alone with  the men, then they still have all the power."  Morgan believes we have to continue  pushing our way into the political process  and to apply pressure from both inside and  out. She feels women can do things differently and avoid being co-opted if they remain accountable to community bases.  "We need activist candidates; women  in office must be part of broader networks  than just the party apparatus," she says.  "It's really important for feminists to educate the women they elect to office about  what they expect from them."  Frances Wasserlein's experience as a  feminist activist spans some 25 years and  includes work in groups like WAVAW  (Women Against Violence Against  Women), various arts and culture organizations, and teaching women's studies at  Langara and Simon Fraser University. She  says she chose City Council as a place to  continue her activism because "civic political decisions are among those closest to  peoples' everyday lives...the nuts and bolts  of getting through the day."  "If you have children, if you're a person of colour, a woman, if you're poor, decisions made in the city have real consequences for you — whether you have an  affordable place to live, whether there's  work done to make the streets less dangerous, whether there are provisions for  daycare. If feminism teaches you one thing,  it's to pay attention to what's right in front  of your face," says Wasserlein.  Over and over again, the women we  spoke to described the civic scene as a place  where public and private interests converge. Ellen Woodsworth has been involved with numerous community organizations including Women's Economic  Agenda, the Action Canada Network, and  Strathcona Community Gardens. Her running mate Raj Sihota is a recent graduate  of UBC who began working with the Young  New Democrats while she was still a teenager. Both cite their experience as renters  as part of their motivation for seeking a  Park Board seat.  \       Western Canada's  i/ Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  K&  EMPORIUM  Celebrating our brand new location at 1238 Davie Street  Come visit us at our new store with over twice the space and fully  wheelchair accesible. Check out our large variety of books, magazines, cards, music, calendars & much much more.  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver B.C. V6E 1N4  Internet Address:www:lsisters.com  [Telephone (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662 Fax 685-0252J  Jamie-Lee Hamilton and  Ellen Woodsworth  Maya Russell,  Frances  Wasserlein, and  Donna Morgan  "I am a renter  with no garden, like  65 percent of Vanc-  ouverites," says  Sihota. "I know the  importance of collective green space."  Woodsworth, who  coordinates the Senior's Project in the  Downtown Eastside, adds that: "Most people I know are desperate to sit outside, to  feel safe, to grow a little food, some flowers. It's about bread and roses."  At the same time, both women say they  are aware of the broader ramifications of  Park Board decisions — how the privatization of Park Board services, for example,  could result in the loss of women's jobs.  Jamie-Lee Hamilton is a trans-  gendered Aboriginal woman who was born  and raised in Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside and who continues to work there  as an "advocate for the marginalized." She  spent ten years on the street in the sex trade  and says she knows what it means to be  vulnerable and oppressed. As her campaign slogan puts it, "she's been there."  Women's safety is one of Hamilton's  central concerns. She sees the sex trade as  part of a bigger picture of violence against  women. "The city says it's out of our jurisdiction, but it's not. There's no doubt the  sex trade is exploitive. We need innovative  ideas to help women get off the streets."  Hamilton is fed up with politicians  skirting issues of prostitution and women's  safety and intends to tackle them head-on.  She'd like to see pro-active steps taken: safe  zones and regulated prostitution, quicker  police response times to domestic and other  violence against women, and diversity  training for police and community workers.  School Board candidate, Maya Russell  — herself a fourth year economics/geography student at SFU — believes that "students must have a voice in the education  system that serves  them." Russell says  "my first impetus  for running is my,  and others', experience in the school  system. It sucked. I  don't think it has to  be that way."  Russell wants  to see the School  Board take on institutional sexism and  homophobia in  schools. One way to  do this, she suggests, is by having  an independent  ombudsperson in each school—"someone  external to work as an advocate on behalf  of students to ensure that they have fair recourse against sexist and racist harassment  and homophobia."  In talking to the women, we got a  strong sense that, for them, participation in  electoral politics means not merely toeing  the party line, but rather taking the party  forward. In her speech at the nominating  meeting, for example, Jamie-Lee Hamilton  acknowledged "the warmth, compassion  and respect she's experienced in COPE."  At the same time, she challenged members  to go one step further by backing "the first  trans-gendered person ever to run for political office in Canada. I'm ready if you  are!"  The women we spoke to were encouraged by the moves COPE has made toward  greater inclusiveness. But, their optimism  was tempered by observations of the need  for greater racial diversity among COPE  candidates and leadership. Several noted  that a mere fifth of the candidates elected  are people of colour.  Woodsworth points out, "voluntary organizations move in the direction they're  pushed... I see a transition from the old  COPE. People have come in from various  social movements; the old guards of COPE  and the NDP are letting go. There is new  growth coming through the cracks."  Michele Valiquette and Sherry Preston are  mother and daughter. They describe their relation to COPE as one of critical support.  OCTOBER 1996 News   Women's rights and autonomy:  Our bodies in whole  by Agnes Huang  A recent ruling in Manitoba highlights  the need for feminists to articulate a clearer  analysis of women's reproductive rights  and autonomy.  In mid-September, the Manitoba Court  of Appeal quashed a lower court ruling ordering a 22-year old pregnant woman, who  was addicted to solvents, to enter a drug  treatment program. The Court of Queen's  Bench had earlier decided in the favour of  Winnipeg Child and Family Services which  had asked the court to intervene to protect  the interests of woman's foetus.  The Court of Appeal's decision followed the lead of the Supreme Court of  Canada in stating that the foetus has no  rights of its own, separate from a woman's  rights over her body.  The outcome was not a surprising legal decision, says Fiona Miller of the Feminist Alliance on New Reproductive and  Genetic Technologies (FANRGT). "Canadian law is very clear about who is a person and who is not."  Still, what was once an issue considered settled—the status of the foetus—  seems to have been put on the table again,  says Shree Mulay, a professor of experimental medicine at McGill and chair of the  McGill Centre for Research and Teaching  on Women. The Winnipeg case raises seri  ous questions about how the relationship  between a woman and the foetus she is  carrying is being defined.  "What I find profoundly disturbing  about the way this case was represented  is that it was as though the foetus was disembodied from the woman and had a life  of its own," says Jennifer Whiteside of the  BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics  (BCCAC).  Another issue that became clear during the case is that women's health is perceived as having no value until women  become pregnant, says Kim Zander of the  Everywoman's Health Centre—a freestanding abortion clinic—in Vancouver.  She adds that some people believe the  rights of women can be placed beneath the  interests of the foetus. More and more  women are being treated merely as vessels for foetuses, and in many circumstances women are considered to be in an  antagonistic relationship with the foetus.  Miller says the notion that a woman  and a foetus are in antagonistic positions  is very dangerous to the whole spectrum  of women's rights. "Allowing this relationship to dominate hurts not just abortion  rights, but also the whole way in which  we understand women, particularly  women in their fertile years," says Miller.  "The right-wing wants to define the foetus  as an antagonistically separate entity. This  is a very powerful framing, but it is particularly harmful to the most  marginalized women."  "What we need is a political response  that challenges the very coercive representation of women vis-a-vis the foetus," says  Miller. "We just can't rally around choice.  We need to get clear about what we mean  by women's reproductive autonomy, by social justice feminism."  More than being just a case of reproductive rights, Whiteside says the Winnipeg case represents the total failure of our  social welfare system to do anything until  a situation has advanced to a "crisis" stage.  "You have to ask the question of where the  support system for this woman was from  the beginning," says Whiteside. "Until society at large is prepared to take the steps  necessary to eradicate poverty—to make  sure women live in healthy environments  and really have a meaningful choice in  these kinds of situations—then society  doesn't have the right to intervene."  According to Miller, things will only  get worse for women given the political and  economic climate. Because of the success  of the neo-conservative agenda, she says,  we're seeing rollbacks of support for peo  ple, continuing social justice and economic  inequities, increasing racism, et cetera.  As for a strategy to counter the right-  wing attacks on women, Shree Mulay says  it is imperative we not focus on reproductive rights in isolation, but that we link them  to other social issues. "By focusing only on  reproductive rights, we do an injustice to  the larger issues."  "As a feminist movement we need to  frame action that's about progressive state  action and not just regressive state action,"  says Miller "We do need to act—not in a  medicalized or therapeutic way, but rather  with social justice types of intervention."  Kim Zander adds that women also  need to consistently see the bigger political picture of those in the anti-choice movement; namely, the very strong right wing  policies also attached to the anti-choice  movement. "The anti-choice movement  isn't narrowly focused; they see choice as  intricately linked to other issues, so we can't  ignore their whole agenda," says Zander.  "The right-wing anti-choicers who protest  outside abortion clinics are the same people who would have social programs cut  to bone—they're one in the same."  The bottom line and the most important issue that is at stake here is women's  autonomy," says BCCAC's Whiteside.  Wciri'f  Vancouver's Take Back the Night skipped the  downtown core for a second year running and this  year, came home to the 'hood. In keeping with a decision made in 1995 to hold the marches in different  neighbourhoods each year, the Take Back the Night  march began with a rally and speeches outside the  Trout Lake Community Centre, located off the Commercial Drive neighbourhood that is home to Vancouver's lesbian, activist, and lower-income communities.  The march was held at 7 pm on Friday night,  September 20th. It was organized by  Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter, as is traditional in Vancouver. It  attracted about the same  number of women as in  previous years — over  2,500. Again, as in recent  years, there was a noticeable presence of young  women, many new to  women's organizing.  Women marched  along residential streets  around Trout Lake. There  was a more celebratory tone to the march than in previous years. The anger women expressed while  marching in the downtown core seemed to have given  way to "celebration and excitement at taking back the  streets in our neighbourhood," as one marcher who  lives off Commercial Drive put it.  Women gave other reasons for the lighter mood  among marchers: that the march had lost it's 'trans-  gressive' edge because it's route is now legally registered with the Vancouver Police; that the march was  more mainstream than in previous years; that the red  and black balloons women carried gave it a celebratory feeling; and that it served more as a social get-  together and morale booster than an effective method  of bringing to light increased violence faced by  women, especially those living in the low-income  Downtown Eastside, following increased un- and un-  der-employment and federal and provincial cutbacks  to social programs.  The volunteers providing security for the women  did a good job of keeping Vancouver Police from  crowding the marchers.  The marchers returned at about 10 pm to Trout  Lake for music, dancing and other celebrations.  Photos by Fatima jaffer (top) and Julie Kubanek (bottom)  OCTOBER 1996 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Joanne Namsoo   Protect the CPP;  act now  On October 4, the federal Finance Minister Paul Martin will meet with his provincial counterparts in British Columbia to  gain their approval for the federal government's proposed changes to (gutting of) the  Canada Pension Plan (CPP). [See Kinesis  ]une 1996 and July/August 1996.]  The federal government is proposing  to increase employee-employer contributions to the CPP to at least 10 percent of  the total wage bill, up from the current 5.6  percent. The feds are also planning to reduce the benefits under the CPP's disability program.  As well, the federal government is proposing changes to the criteria of who must  pay into the CPP which will further hurt  low income people. As it stands now, CPP  contributions are required only for earnings  of more than $3,500 (which increases with  inflation), but the federal government is  considering freezing or reducing that exemption.  BC's Finance Minister Andrew Petter  is calling on Paul Martin to slow down the  process of re-working the CPP. Petter is  demanding further studies on the impact  of the changes, saying that only superficial  hearings were held on the proposals and  no gender analysis of the changes conducted.  BC is the main province opposing the  changes on the basis that it would hurt  lower income working people and small  businesses the most. All other provinces  are saying to Martin that they will agree to  the changes with the CPP if Martin slashes  the Employment Insurance Premiums—the  new name for Unemployment Insurance—  which creates a huge surplus each year for  the federal government. (That money is  being used by Martin to bring down the  deficit, rather than paying it to unemployed  workers.) The provinces are arguing that it  would be easier to sell the proposed  changes to the CPP (particularly to businesses) if they could offer lower EI premiums as a trade-off.  Since the federal finance minister  wants to have all the provinces in agreement before he makes any changes to the  CPP, BC is in a position of great influence.  Women in BC should contact the provincial finance minister and press him to  strengthen the demand for a pension plan  that works for all paid workers, not just the  wealthier ones.  Write, fax or call Andrew Petter and  tell him to call on Paul Martin and the  other provincial finance ministers to stop  the process of changing the CPP until  they do a full analysis of how the changes  will affect women. It's imperative to act  before October 4. Contact Andrew Petter,  Minister of Finance, Room 248, Parliament Buildings, Victoria, BC, V8V 1X4.  tel: (604) 387-3751, fax: (604)387-5594  For more information about the CPP, contact Ellen Woodsworth of the Greater Vancouver Seniors Coalition at (604) 253-3395.  Canadian Women's  Archives wants stuff  In preparation for its 20th anniversary  celebration in 1997, the Canadian Women's  Movement Archives (CWMA) has begun  work on exhibitions highlighting themes  from the contemporary Canadian Women's  Movement (post-1960). To build up the collection, CWMA is looking for donations of  t-shirts, buttons, posters, banners or other  items produced by women's groups, or for  women's events, projects and conferences.  CWMA plans to include the items in travelling exhibitions and in its permanent archives.  The Canadian Women's Movement  Archives is housed at the University of Ottawa. The Archives' record of the women's  movement in Canada currently includes  over 2,000 files on women's groups, coalitions and events from across the country,  as well as periodicals, newsletters, posters,  buttons, t-shirts and other memorabilia.  The collection is open to the public for reference purposes.  Check your attics, basements and  drawers for archival treasures.  Call (613) 562-5910for more information,  or just send materials to: Canadian Women's  Movement Archives, Morisset Library, Room  603, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario,  K1N9A5.  Chinese women seeking  asylum in Canada  A letter-writing campaign has been  launched to demand just action from the  Canadian government in the cases of five  Chinese women who fled the People's Republic of China in order to escape that government's coercive one-child population  control policies.  In 1993,18 Chinese women arrived in  the United States hoping to gain political  asylum. The US government rejected their  cases under its new definition of persecution for refugees which does not include  forced abortions and sterilizations. The  women were immediately detained in a  Bakersfield, California, detention centre to  await deportation.  Since then, twelve of the women were  able to gain asylum in Ecuador, and one  was deported back to China. The other five  women have submitted applications for  immigration to Canada under the Women  at Risk program and are awaiting Ottawa's  response.  Unfortunately, Ottawa has been dragging its feet on their cases, claiming that  they are afraid to offer immigration to the  women after the US refused their claims  because it may be seen as diplomatic criticism. (This is from the "brave and bold"  government that continues to defy the US  government's Helms-Burton law regarding  Canadian companies doing business in  Cuba.)  Ottawa needs to be reminded that diplomacy at the expense of these womens'  human rights is not acceptable. If they are  returned to the People's Republic of China  they may be forcibly sterilized, imprisoned  in labour camps, beaten for embarrassing  the Chinese government, or fined at a level  far beyond the yearly per capita income of  their families.  The five women have now been incarcerated for three years in Bakersfield and  were recently put in solitary confinement  for using a self-made pencil sharpener instead of buying one from the institution.  Public pressure is necessary to help bring  this case to an acceptable and quick conclusion.  To send your support to these women,  write to: The Honorable Lucienne Robillard,  Minister of Citizenship and Immigration,  House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A  0A6; or to your local member of parliament and  ask her/him to represent the women to Minister Robillard. In your letters, please name the  women individually in order to avoid any confusion. They can be identified as follows: Dai  Bo Mei, Date of Birth: 18/11/61; Qu Ai Yue,  DOB: 11/09/54; Li Bao Yu, DOB: 30/05/68;  Dia Xia Hua, DOB: 27/11/56; and Wang Luan  Ying, DOB: 13/02/55.  [Information from the newsletter of the  Alberta Status of Women Action Committee-Edmonton, July /August 1996]  Actions to  eradicate poverty  Women and anti-poverty activists will  be organizing actions on Thursday, October 17 to mark the International Year for  the Eradication of Poverty. The United Nations proclaimed 1996 as the International  Year in order to catalyze concrete actions  resulting in a "distinct and significant contribution to the efforts to eradicate poverty."  At the World Summit for Social Development in Copenhagen in 1995, Canada's  leaders made a commitment to the achievement of that goal. However, 1996 is almost over and the federal government has  yet to announce what it intends to do to  mark this international year. As well, the  federal government—and all levels of government in Canada—has brought in repressive measures that only further the poverty  of women and all people.  To mark the International Day, the National Anti-Poverty Organization (NAPO)  will be presenting a National Report Card  on the federal government. NAPO has also  published an informative newspaper outlining the targeting of poor people and their  anti-poverty campaign.  NAPO is also calling on more groups  from across the country to organize meetings, rallies, marches, anything, to put forward the demands to end poor-bashing and  to legislate basic human rights with a  Canada Social Security Act.  In British Columbia, End Legislated  Poverty (ELP) will be holding a candlelight  vigil on October 17 at 7:30pm on the Robson  Street side of the Vancouver Art Gallery to  highlight how the NDP government's welfare legislation is making people poorer.  ELP will present a report card on the provincial government.  While organizing your event, NAPO  asks that you urge people to write to Prime  Minister Jean Chretien, to the Human Resources Minister, Doug Young, and to their  own member of parliament, c/o The House  of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0A6,  and ask them about the government7s plans  for this International Year and their commitment to stopping the attacks on poor  people. (No stamp is required.)  Please send a copy to NAPO as well.  NAPO would also like to hear from indi-  Kinesis would like to say a huge thank-you to the following people  who made our benefit a huge success!!!  Michelle Sylliboy, Leanne Keltie, Audrey Johnson, wendy  lee kenward, Joanne Namsoo, Shannon e. Ash,  Robyn  Hall, Larissa Lai, Jehn Starr, Rachel Rosen, Terra  Poirier and Andrew, Emma Kivisild, Erin Graham, Faith  Jones, Wendy frost, Agnes Huang, Winnifred Tovey,  Fatima Jaffer, Tunde Skiba, Cat Renay, Sandy Scofield,  Penny Singh, and the Onna Zoku Bang Band!!  And the many volunteers who sold raffle tickets, put up posters, and helped make this a  positive FUNdraising event.  Thanks to the following people and businesses who made  contributions towards the success of our benefit:  Little Sister's * Ragz and Rerunzz * Kaori * Cynthia Low * Ria Bleumer at Duthie's Books on 4th*  Women In Music Society * Trysha MacDonald * Allyson MacFarlane * East End Food Co-op * Uprising  Bakery * The Ridge Theatre * Pacific Cinematheque * Press Gang Publishers * Doll & Penny's *  Spartacus Books * YWCA * Hi-life Records * Continental Coffee * Vancouver Photo * Magpie Magazine  Gallery * People's Co-op Bookstore * Full Bloom Flowers * It's All Fun and Games * Women In Print *  Norman's Fruit and Salad Market * The Blue Ewe * the backhills guest house for women * Flying Saucer  Cafe * Women In View Festival * Fringe Festival * Magnet Home hardware * Flying Wedge Pizza * Pat  Davit * Harry's  (Off Commercial) * East Side Family Place *  Kinesis would like to send an extra special thankyouto Little Sister's 3ook and Art Emporium who made an  unexpected and much appreciated donation to Kinesis!  OCTOBER 1996 Movement Matters  viduals and groups regarding their plans  for October 17th.  To order copies ofNAPO's special newspaper, for more information or to let them know  about activities in your area, contact NAPO  at #316-256 King Edward Ave, Ottawa, Ontario, KIN 7M1; tel: (613) 789-0096 or toll  free 1-800-810-1076; fax: (613) 789-0141; e-  mail: napo@web.apc.org.  Native Sisterhood  needs your support  Native Sisterhood is made up of Native women prisoners at the Burnaby Correctional Centre for Women (BCCW) in  Burnaby, BC. The Sisterhood was started  in the early 1980s to give support to First  Nations women in prison, to increase  awareness of traditional spiritual and cultural practices, and to strengthen pride in  Native people's culture.  Native Sisterhood holds regular cultural workshops and support groups. As  well, the Sisterhood invites Elders from the  various Nations to come to the prison to  facilitate sweats and other healing ceremonies, and each year a pow wow is held.  While the focus is on First Nations' cultures,  women at BCCW of all ethnic backgrounds  are welcome to participate.  In order to keep the workshops and  get-togethers going, Native Sisterhood is  asking for donations of money, fabric for  dresses, blankets, ceremonial items, leather  scraps, beads, nylon thread, wax for thread,  big and small plastic hoops for  dreamcatchers, materials for making  jewelry, sewing needles, long and short  beading needles, a sewing machine, cotton  batting for blankets, a cassette player, a television, a VCR, a party-size coffee maker,  a microwave and an instamatic camera.  Native Sisterhood also says that things like  cologne, handsoaps and shampoo are great  as raffle prizes.  Please address all donations to the attention ofMarcia Monk, President, Native Sisterhood, 7900 Fraser Park Drive, Burnaby, BC,  V5J5B9.  New women's education  centre in Tofino  WHOLE (Women Healing Oppressions Loving the Earth), a non-profit organization run by and for women, has recently  opened the Windrider House in downtown  Tofino, BC (on Vancouver Island). The  Windrider House will be the home of  WHOLE'S Women's Training and Education Centre, a base for Wilderness of Women  workshops, a guest house for women, and  a womanspace for the coastal communities.  WHOLE seeks to do the work of the  women's movement, including political  work, Earth work, and healing and spiritual  work through workshops in the wilderness  and at the Centre. WHOLE'S goals are to  provide training and skill development to  empower women personally, politically  and economically, to make their programs  and the experience of the wilderness accessible to as many women as possible, and to  create employment and economic opportunities for women.  Women involved with WHOLE say  accessibility and safety are key features as  the organization is committed to ensuring  that women from all walks of life can participate in the programs and benefit from  the services. All programs, in-house and  wilderness, will operate on a sliding fee  scale, starting with a small fee for women  on social assistance. Guesthouse facilities  OCTOBER 1996  vary from $18 per night for shared  accomodation to a deluxe private room at  $75. They are allergy sensitive, a drug- and  alcohol-free space and are working towards  wheelchair accessibility.  Additional facilities have recently been  purchased in order to expand the number  and variety of programs and services already being offered. Regular year-round  programs fall into one of seven categories:  Healing, Social Change, Earth Awareness,  Spirituality, Creativity and Play, Interpersonal Skills and Professional Development.  The Non-Traditional Employment  Training Strategies for Women includes a  trades training program and a wilderness  guide training program. There are also  workshops for particular groups such as  First Nations women, lesbians, survivors  of sexual abuse and groups from the  transgendered community.  For more information about the programs,  services and facilities offered by WHOLE, contact them at 231 Main St, Box 548, Tofino, BC,  VOR 2Z0; tel: Client service (604) 725-3240;  Admininstration (604) 725-3230; fax: (604)  725-3280; e-mail: whole@Island.net.  Making Connections  At last...a literacy and EAL (English as  an Additional Language) resource from a  feminist perspective. Making Connections,  published and distributed by the Canadian  Congress of Learning Opportunities for  Women (CCLOW) provides a wealth of  curriculum material that addresses the  most pressing issues of women's lives. It is  clear, practical, inclusive and feminist and  is designed for use with men as well as  women, with women-only groups, or for  one-to-one tutoring.  Making Connections was created by a  group of literacy workers from across  Canada, which include First Nations  women, women of colour and white  women. It is a learner-centred resource that  works with the heart as well as with the  head.  The book begins with introductory essays: "What is a Feminist Curriculum?,"  "Women at the Centre of the Curriculum,"  and "Responding to Disclosure of Abuse  in Women's Lives." These essays are followed by fourteen chapters containing 20-  30 hours of work for literacy and EAL learners: readings, activities and handouts. The  book also includes an extensive bibliography and is accompanied by a cassette  tape of the songs used in the text.  Making Connections will be launched  in Vancouver on Friday, October 4, at  7:30pm at Women in Print Bookstore, 3544  W. 4th Ave.  To obtain a copy of Making Connections  contact CCLOW at 47 Main St. Toronto, Ontario, M4E 2V6. Tel: (416) 699-1909 or toll  free 1-800-858-7558. Fax: (416) 699-2145. E-  mail: cclow@web.apc.org.  Reform of  Bankruptcy Act urged  Survivors of sexual assault, the majority of whom are women, have grown increasingly dissatisfied with the criminal justice system as an arena for seeking redress  for injuries and losses caused by their abusers. Instead, many have been turning to civil  law in order to receive compensation.  One problem has arisen with this recourse, however: bankruptcy declarations  by defendants who've been ordered by the  court to pay damages to the survivors of  sexual assault are becoming common, as a  way of avoiding substantial payment on the  judgment. There are at least four known  cases in British Columbia where the sexual  assault judgment was closely followed by a  declaration of bankruptcy, and in all the  cases the men ordered to pay compensation  made little or no payment to the survivor.  In response to this problem, a group  of women, comprised primarily of LEAF  (Women's Legal Education and Action  Fund) members, formed an ad hoc committee to advocate for legislative reform to  the Bankruptcy and Insolvency Act. In  January 1995, they presented a brief to the  federal Standing Committee on the issue,  with recommendations for change.  The following November, the federal  government put forward its own bill, C-  109, to amend the Act. Among the proposed changes was that "any award of  damages by a court in civil proceedings in  respect of an assault" not be dischargeable  in bankruptcy. In the meantime, another  bill, C-323, a private member's bill, was put  forward advocating for even wider  changes.  When Parliament reconvened in the  spring of 1996, Bill C-109 was reintroduced  as Bill C-5, and has since passed through  second reading in the House of Commons.  The next step is for discussion to occur in  the fall at the House of Commons Industry  Committee level.  West Coast LEAF in Vancouver has  sent a submission to the Industry Committee with recommendations for a wider  amendment than is currently proposed in  Bill C-5, and which takes into account  equality considerations when addressing  the impact of bankruptcy on sexual assault  judgments. Specifically, they recommend  that judgments for both assault and battery,  including judgments specifically resulting  from a finding of breach of fiduciary duty  in the context of sexual assault as well as  pre- and post-judgment interest and costs,  be protected from bankruptcy.  West Coast LEAF says it will continue  to monitor the progress of Bill C-5.  For more information about the campaign,  contact: LEAF National at #1800-415 Yonge  St, Toronto, Ontario, M5B 2E7; tel: (416) 595-  7170; fax: (416) 595-7191. Or contact West  Coast LEAF at #1517-409 Granville St., Vancouver, BC, V6C1T2; tel: (604) 684-8772;fax:  (604) 684-1543.  West Coast  Women and Words  It is very likely that this will be the last  year of West Coast Women and Words  (WCWW) unless some more women get  involved. WCWW is currently looking for  seven energetic, dedicated and committed  board members to take on fundraising, organizing readings and workshops, writing  for the newsletter and general administrative work.  WCWW developed out of the 1983  conference called Women and Words/Les  femmes et les mots as a feminist, non-profit  society for women writers. Over the years,  they have held workshops and readings,  and have produced a very popular newsletter. Many women writers, known as well  as emerging, have been connected with  WCWW as students and teachers, and  sometimes as both.  Over the last few years, the newsletter  has been invaluable in sustaining membership, and according to the calls and letters  received, there is still a strong need for  women writers to connect through a society  such as WCWW. It is difficult to face the  demise of yet another feminist organization.  WCWW is currently considering taking the organization in another direction,  such as producing a WEB page or  piggybacking with other groups with similar interests like the League of Canadian  Poets, the Women in View Festival or the  Writer's Union of Canada.  West Coast Women and Words will be  holding its annual general meeting Monday, November 25, at 7:30 pm at the Van- -^^  couver Women's Health Collective, 219-  1675 W 8th Ave. At that meeting, if there  are not enough women who have put their  names forward as board members and who  are willing to carry out the work of WCWW,  the Society will likely make the decision to  formally close its doors and donate any  assets to a worthy cause.  For more information about WCWW and  its current situation, call (604) 261-9582 or  write to: #219-1675 W. 8th Ave, Vancouver,  BC,V6J1V2.  Women on the airwaves    —  Tune in between October 11 and 27 as  Vancouver's Co-operative Radio, CFRO  102.7, launches its Autumn Airlift, which  promises to bring relevant and inspiring  programming of interest to progressive  women.  Autumn Airlift is one of Co-op Radio's  two annual on-air fundraising drives. Co-op  Radio is the only listener-sponsored radio station in Western Canada and the home to numerous alternative and progressive public  affairs and music programming shows.  During the fundraiser, Co-op Radio  will feature a number of women-focused  specials, including Jill Mandrake of Sister  DJ, doing three special editions of her Friday 8-10 pm show, the ever-popular "Food  and Drink" on October 11; "Rythym and  Hues" on the 18th; and a collaborative special with Michael Willmore of Co-op's Rock  Talk on women's rock and roll.  Another musical highlight will be "Sister 2 Sister" on Friday October 11 from  10pm to midnight, featuring bhangra, soca,  canto-pop and more from the hosts of Obaa,  the show produced by, for and about  women of colour.  Obaa will also be presenting a five-  hour public affairs special focusing on the  effects of globalization on women—  "www.con" (women workers weaving connections). If you don't know what APEC  is, then tune in on Wednesday, October 23,  from 2pm to 7pm.  To hear more public programming by  and for women during Autumn Airlift,  catch WomenVisions from 8pm to 9pm on  Monday, October 21 and the Lesbian Show  on Thursday, October 17 from 8pm to 9pm.  Also on Tuesday, October 15, tune in to the  Iranian Women's program from 5pm to  6pm and Obaa from 7pm to 8pm.  Other Autumn Airlift programming ^  includes the Coming Out Show's special on  queer comedy, Thursday, October 24th from  7pm to 9pm, and the Backwater Blues Band  on the Blue Monday Show on Monday,  October 21 between 2:30pm and 4pm. On  Friday, October 18, 5:30pm to 7:30pm,  Crossroads, the country blues show on  CFRO, will do a two-hour special on Memphis Minnie, who has been described as  "the greatest female blues artist ever to  record." Judge for yourself!  Last, but not least, hear Vancouver's  own female artists featured on "Radio  Bandcouver" from 4pm to 5pm on Thursday, October 17. «  For a full listing of Co-op Radio's special  Autumn Airlift programming or to volunteer  during the fundraiser, call (604) 684-8494. What's News  by Fatima Jaffer  Wife beating  condoned in Italy  Women in Italy are protesting a recent  court ruling that says a man can beat his  wife — occasionally — without risk of being jailed for his actions.  Italy's highest appeal court, the Court  of Cassation, overturned a man's eight-  month sentence given by a lower court for  his physical assaults on his wife. In its ruling, the Court wrote that because the man's  "occasional episodes" of wife beating were  "interspersed with moments of harmony  between the couple," he should not have  been sentenced to jail. The man's defence  was that he only beat his wife in moments  of jealousy. On one occasion, she had to be  hospitalized.  The Court also said the man's occasional beating of his wife did not constitute domestic violence. It defined male violence against women in the home as "a series of acts harming the physical integrity  or liberty or dignity of the passive subject,  who suffers a conduct of systemic and deliberate overpowering."  The Court sent the case back to the  lower court for retrial amid an uproar in  the Italian media. Women of all classes are  calling the ruling a dangerous sign of the  return to older patriarchal values in Italy.  Approval of RU486  on hold in Canada  In the wake of the United States' approval of a drug that provides women with  an alternative to surgical abortion, the Canadian government is refusing to respond  to women's demands that RU486 also be  made available in Canada.  After extensive testing of the drug and  intervention by the US President to diffuse  anti-choice violence, the US Food and Drug  Administration (FDA) approved RU486  last month. The drug should be available  to women in the US by next year, pending  final FDA formalities and the US government's go-ahead.  "In Canada though, we have a standoff," says Marcia Gilbert of the Canadian  Abortion Rights Action League. "Nothing  is happening because the Canadian government has decided not to allow the drug to  be tested in Canada."  Health Canada requires the company  that will sell the drug in Canada to make  the application for approval. But Hoechst-  Roussel Canada Inc, the Montreal-based  drug company holding the rights to RU486  in Canada, refuses to apply to Health  Canada for approval of the drug for fears  of becoming the targets of anti-choice harassment and violence. They say they will  file for approval of RU486 if the government intervenes and requests they do so.  To date, the government has refused to intervene.  In the US, the application for approval  of RU486 was only made after President Bill  Clinton asked a non-profit family-planning  research group — the Population Council  — to sponsor clinical tests of the drug. The  Population Council is also keeping the  name of the US manufacturer of the drug  secret to avoid anti-choice reprisals.  Gilbert says it is politics, not the drug's  safety record stalling the avaliability of  RU486 in Canada. RU486, known generi-  cally as mifepristone, is considered a relatively safe drug. It has already been extensively tested in Europe and the US. The  drug was approved for use in France in  1991 and has since been used by at least  200,000 European women.  The drug works by blocking the action  of progesterone hormones during the first  few weeks of pregnancy, inducing miscarriage. RU486 must be administered by a  doctor in three doses, with women needing to visit their doctor at least twice over  two consecutive days. As such, it prevents  misuse and lessens the risks of complications.  Women can lobby for approval of  RU486 by writing to David Dingwall, federal Minister of Health, House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario, Kl A 0A6.  Disclosure of  women's files refused  An application by a man to peruse the  personal files of women he sexually assaulted has been turned down by BC's Information and Privacy Commissioner  (IPC) as an "unreasonable invasion of the  victims' personal privacy."  The man, a convicted sex offender in a  federal prison since 1983, used BC's Access  to Information law to apply in 1994 for files  containing personal information about the  women, and the Vancouver police reports  and victim impact statements in the case  against him. Police disclosed some records  to him, but withheld information they said  would reveal sensitive surveillance techniques and/or invade the privacy of the  women involved.  The onus in such cases is usually on  the police to prove the applicant has no  right to the information. But when a third  party is involved (the women), the applicant must prove that the disclosure would  not be an "unreasonable invasion of the  third party's privacy."  Vancouver Status of Women's Audrey  Johnson says the decision to refuse access  to the records is a step in the right direction. "It helps women feel safe...Women  need to feel they can go to the police and  the police will help them, that the information will not go into the hands of the  abuser."  Domestic worker fights  for back wages  Myrna Ocampo, a Filipino domestic  worker in Vancouver who challenged her  employers for violating her rights, was  awarded $5,000 in back wages through the  BC Employment Standards Branch (ESB).  Ocampo was paid $350 a week for 12-  and-a-half-hour days, with only one hour  off per week on Sundays to go to church.  She paid her employers room and board  but was not given a separate room. After  putting up with the situation from May to  November 1995, she was encouraged by  women at the Philippine Women's Centre  to file a complaint with the ESB. [The NDP  government expanded its definitions of who is  covered by ESB laws to include domestic workers in March 1995. See Kinesis, Feb. 95].  The ESB originally assessed that the  amount Ocampo is owed is $16,000. But  the employers offered a settlement of  $5,000. Ocampo accepted rather than pursue the case further.  The Philippine Women's Centre's Jane  Ordinario says the system puts most of the  onus on the domestic worker to prove her  rights have been violated. "It is hard to  fight what is your time off and what are  your working hours because you are there  all the time."  She adds it is difficult for domestic  workers to use the system to challenge their  employers. "The system does not really  side with the domestic worker. The lawyer  can argue...the employer has the  advantage-There are no witnesses because  the women are in the employer's house...It  all boils down to who has more credibil-  ity"  Ocampo, however, says she accepts the  outcome of the case. "I filed a complaint to  give a lesson to my employer not to do the  same thing to other nannies...I hope this  won't happen to others. But if it does happen, all I can say is, 'fight for your rights!'"  Anti-choice policeman  caught again  The anti-choice crusading police officer who was found guilty last June of using his access to police computers to check  license plates of staff and clients of Vancouver's Everywoman's Health Clinic is  facing six new charges of doing the same.  The earlier case against Steve Parker,  a Delta BC police constable and an active  member of Campaign Life Coalition,  ended last June with Parker being given a  mere five days suspension from the police  force for his "discredible conduct."  Following a three month investigation  by the Vancouver Police, Parker was  charged last month with using the police  computers six more times to track license  plate numbers of staff at the abortion clinic.  The police report however includes a recommendation that discipline be limited to  a demotion in rank.  "We believe Parker should be fired and  that should be the end of the story," says  Kim Zander of the Everywoman's Health  Centre. "It is ridiculous that they uncover  more breach of public trust by this police  officer for his own personal political beliefs,  and yet continue to slap him on the wrist."  The new charges will be heard before  a police disciplinary hearing, held in camera (not public). If the compainants in the  case are unsatisfied, they can demand that  the Delta police board hold a public hearing. It is unlikely the disciplinary board will  have the power to discipline Parker beyond  the limit set in the report (demotion).  The Delta Police's media liaison says  demotion is appropriate when there is an  absence of criminal conduct, such as Parker  passing on the information to a third party.  In the earlier case, a Delta police board inquiry ruled there was insufficient evidence  to show that Parker had passed on the information to fellow Campaign Life  Coaltion members, including his mother.  The board had determined then that if that  could be proven, Parker should be fired.  Meanwhile, Zander says it is absurd  that the investigation of the charges is being left up to the police. She is asking BC  Attorney-General Ujjal Dosanjh to launch  a broader investigation into the surveillance of abortion clinic workers by Parker  and other anti-choice activists, and  whether information was passed on to  other anti-choicers following the six new  incidents.  Sexist, racist Quebec  judge could lose job  A racist, sexist judge, whose comments  at the trial he was presiding over of a  woman who killed her estranged husband,  may be the first judge in Canadian history  to be removed from the bench. In September, the Council of Judges recommended  that justice Jean Bienvenue of the Quebec  Superior Court be fired. As Kinesis goes to  press, Justice Minister Allan Rock is expected to ask the House of Commons and  the Senate to vote on the removal of the  judge.  Last December, women in Quebec denounced Bienvenue for comments made  while sentencing Tracy Theberge, who had  cut her ex-husband's throat with a razor.  The judge, who has sat on the bench since  1977, said that women, although the "nobler" of the sexes, "sink to depths which  even the vilest man could not sink." He said  "fallen women" can be even "more vile  than animals."  Bienvenue added that "even the Nazis did not eliminate millions of Jews in a  painful or bloody manner. They died in the  gas chambers without suffering." At other  trials he also told a woman juror, who was  crying, that "Kleenex is a woman's best  friend," commented on the length of a reporter's skirt, and referred to jurors as "idiotic and incompetent."  Although he was made to apologize  following the furor over his comments,  Bienvenue refusedto step down. Women  all over Quebec and Canada continued to  protest. Their demands could not be ignored and both Quebec and Canada's justice ministers had to intervene, asking the  Canadian Judicial Council for a hearing  into his conduct. Bienvenue was suspended from the bench while the hearing  was underway.  The Canadian Judicial Council recommended last month that Bienvenue be removed from the bench because he had displayed a bias against women that is  "deeply rooted in his mind" and as such  threatens the "impartiality of the judiciary."  The majority of judges also found that  "the public can no longer have confidence  injustice Bienvenue..." and that Bienvenue  had shown "...no indication he intends to  change his behaviour." Despite other complaints of racism and sexism brought  against judges, this is the first time since  the Council was set up in 1971 that it has  recommended removal of a judge. A majority vote of both the Commons and the  Senate is required to remove federally appointed judges.  OCTOBER 1996 Feature  An interview with Tumtong Porihun:  Activism after the fire  w.  fhen the Kader Toy Factory in Bangkok Thailand burned down in May 1993, it was the worst  factory fire in history. The fire left 179 dead and over 450 more injured. Of those who died, all but  four were women.  The Kader fire and a fire at the Zhili Toy Factory in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone in  China in November 1993 sparked an international Toy Awareness Campaign. The campaign is  calling for safe working conditions and adequate wages for women producing toys for multinational companies like Disney, Tyko and Mattel, and for the adoption of an "International Charter  for the Safe Production of Toys" [see Kinesis December/January 1996.]  Tumtong Pohirun was working in the Kader Factory when the fire destroyed it and the lives  of hundreds. After the fire, she became a labour activist. She currently works at the Centre for  Labour Information Service and Training in Bangkok doing outreach and education work.  Pohirun was in Canada last June as a special guest of the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women. She spoke at NAC's annual general meeting and at the International Solidarity  tent at the Tent City of the National Women's March Against Poverty.  Lisa Valencia-Svensson had the opportunity to interview Tumtong Porihun while she was  in Toronto. The interview was interpreted by Noulmook Sutdhibhasilp.  Tumtong Pohirun  as told to Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Lisa Valencia-Svensson: How did you  came to be working in Bangkok and what  jobs did you have before working at the  Kader Toy Factory?  Tumtong Pohirun: I start working when  I was 12 years old. The first job I took was  construction work, then I moved to Bangkok to work at the Kader Factory when I  was 15 years old.  Valencia-Svensson: Are you one of  many young Thai women who have to  leave their families in the rural areas to  work in Bangkok, and if so, why did you  have to leave?  Porihun: Actually, I would like to continue my study but my parents couldn't  afford it. Because I had to support the family, I had to come to Bangkok.  Valencia-Svensson: What were the general working conditions like in the Kader  Toy Factory?  Porihun: Normally we worked more  than eight hours a day because there was  a lot of orders, and we had to work overtime.  Valencia-Svensson: Who are the Kader  Toy Factory owners or employers, and how  does it fits into the larger structure of international toy manufacturing?  Porihun: I don't remember the names  of the largest share holders, but I do know  the factory was owned by people from  Hong Kong and a Thai counterpart.  Valencia-Svensson: Where were the toys  ultimately ending up being sold, to which  markets?  Porihun: The products ended up on European markets and also those in the US.  These products were not sold in Thailand.  Valencia-Svensson: What was the daily  wage for workers and were you paid for  overtime? Also, was this a factory where  workers were not allowed to go the bathroom or where there were limits for lunch  breaks, or different conditions like that?  Porihun: We got minimum wage working there and we had one day off each week,  Sunday, and at lunchtime, we had a One  hour break. We had a foreperson who tried  to control us and frighten us. Sometimes  when there was a lot of work to do, he'd  threaten us to make us work harder, and  sometimes he'd give us a kind of amphetamine or medicine to make us work harder.  We didn't realize at that time that he had  given us medicine.  Valencia-Svensson: Was the minimum  wage adequate to cover daily living expenses in Bangkok and were there any  employment benefits or other extras added  onto the minimum wage?  Porihun: What we got wasn't enough  for the daily expenses of living in Bangkok.  Sometimes I had to be very economical. I  had to save money or skip meals in order  to save money. At that time, I was trying to  go to school to continue my studies, so I  had to economize. We didn't get any other  extra money from the factory.  Valencia-Svensson: A lot of us are already familiar with what happened in the  actual fire and rather than discuss that in  detail, I'd like to ask you about the work  you are now doing in the labour movement  in Thailand.  Porihun: I am responsible for providing training and educational activities for  workers and sometimes giving basic legal  advice to workers.  Valencia-Svensson: Do you work with  mainly women workers or with men also?  In what industries do they work in what  issues are they facing?  Porihun: The workers I am working  with are both men and women, but most  of them are women. It's the toy industry  that I have been involved with and the  problems women working there are facing  right now concern health and safety, and  also the benefits they get from their work.  Valencia-Svensson: Is there any specific  factory or set of factories where a struggle  around either health and safety or any of  the other issues is particularly being  waged?  Porihun: There are three factories in  particular: the Dynamic Toy Factory, and  the EduToy and EduPat toy factories. At the  Dynamic Factory, workers are facing problems with their benefits and their work conditions. There are a lot of conflicts there because the employer is very powerful, very  influential. Most workers do not speak out  because they are afraid.And as for EduToy  and EduPat, workers are forced to do overtime work.  Valencia-Svensson: Do workers or unions get any support from the Thai govern  ment or Thai authon-  ties in trying to deal  with these workplace issues?  Porihun: We don't get much support  from the government side. Most of the time,  the government will tell lies to please investors — those are the people the government wants to support, not the workers.  However, we do get some support from the  provincial labour officers; they are very  helpful to us.  Valencia-Svensson: What are the particular difficulties faced by women workers in Thailand and secondly, what difficulties do you face as a female labour organizer, either from within the unions or  when you go out to do organizing?  Porihun: For female workers, what I  see is that they don't get enough income to  make ends meet. Many women have to  support their family, so that's part of the  reason why the money's not enough.  In general, working with the unions,  we have a problem trying to network between the unions and the NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and the workers.  It's not specific to women workers, but to  workers in general.  For me as a woman [in the labour  movement,] I don't see it as a problem as  much. But because I'm still young — I'm  younger than the workers I work with —  they don't give me much credit, so I have  to try to learn more and try to prove I am  experienced enough.  Valencia-Svensson: You mentioned earlier that one of the main focuses of the nationwide campaign of the Thai labour  movement is to get May 10th — the day  the Kader Factory caught fire — where is  the campaign at?  Porihun: The workers and NGOs are  trying to lobby the government to legislate  May 10th as official "health and safety day"  for Thailand. We're also trying to campaign  to get May 10th recognized at an international level as a health and safety day.  Valencia-Svensson: What is the current  status of efforts to get adequate compensation from the Kader owner for the workers  who were killed or injured during the fire  or who lost their jobs because of the fire?  Porihun: Every year we have a get together on May 10th to figure out and evalu-  Tumtong  Pohirun  and  Noulmook  Sutdhibhasilp  ate what happened with the victims of the  Kader fire. Right now, the relatives of those  who died got compensation. On the government side, they are trying to work with  people who survived the fire, went back  home to the rural areas but weren't able to  get jobs, to make sure they're okay. And  every year, we try to find out whether everybody received compensation as they  were supposed to.  Valencia-Svensson: Have the majority  received compensation?  Porihun: For those who died in the fire,  either their spouse or their children will receive around $1,800 Cdn or $300,000 baht.  Also, the will receive a scholarship for their  education.  Valencia-Svensson: The final question I  have is what message do you have for consumers in North America and perhaps for  the women's movement in particular?  Porihun: I would like to ask the women,  consumers, women's groups here, to please  when you buy toys, make sure you know  the toys were not produced with the quality of life of workers in jeopardy. Please  find out information about, the kind of  work conditions multinational toy manufacturers, such as Mattel or Tyko, provide  for the women. As far as I know, these two  companies pay very low wages for workers.  I would like to ask all Canadians and  other foreigners who come over to Thailand  to find out how products are made — not  only for the quality of the products but also  for the quality of life afforded to workers.  Wherever possible, find out what companies produced the toys from and the working conditions of the workers who produced the toys.  Lisa Valencia-Svensson is a Filipina Canadian  lesbian and a new volunteer with the Philippine Women Centre in Vancouver.  OCTOBER 1996 Women organizing against free trade.  fanizing against free trade: M^ MW^^k f" ^^^^^^  SdVing   NO!   tO    /%ti«c^lefcomlL*ntrol  compiled by  Kerri Lattimer and Amy Simpson  A year ago, the Philippine Women's  Centre in Vancouver began hosting a grassroots women's discussion group to deepen  local activists'understanding of women's issues. In the last few months, the group has  been focusing its discussions on APEC (the  Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) and the  negative effect this "free trade" agreement,  if implemented, would have on the region,  and especially on women. With the impending APEC leader's summit taking place this  November in Manila, Philippines and the following summit in Vancouver in November,  1997, women in Vancouver joined the national "NO! To APEC" campaign (the Network Opposed to Anti-People Economic  Control) to challenge its implementation.  The following article analyses what  APEC really is and draws on the experiences  of the Philippines as an example of what  women in Canada and elsewhere in the Asia-  Pacific region can expect from APEC. Much  of the following article was excerpted from  "NO! to APEC: a strategy to oppress  women" published in the September 1996  newsletter of the Philippine Women's Centre in Vancouver. Kerri Lattimer and Amy  Simpson are both involved with the NO! to  APEC campaign in Vancouver.  What is APEC?  APEC is a group of 18 countries of the  Asia-Pacific working to promote free trade  and investment within the region. It started  in 1989 as a forum for the exchange of ideas  and "sharing of economic concerns" among  the member countries, which now include:  Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, China,  Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand,  Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the United  States. However, judging from recent developments, APEC is looking more and  more like a formal "free trade zone" like  NAFTA, and less like the informal, non-  binding, consultative body it supposedly  started out as.  Today, APEC has become the main instrument to accelerate the trade and investment liberalization policies of the World  Trade Organization (WTO) — the governing body which implements GATT (the  General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade)  — in the Asia-Pacific region. APEC's member countries account for over two billion  people or 40 percent of the world's population. Their economies account for one half  of the world's GNP (gross national product), and their combined trade in 1994 made  up 72 percent of the world's total trade.  As members of a so-called free trade  zone, the economies of Asian Pacific countries will be integrated through the painful  process of trade and market liberalization,  with multinational corporations and banks  furthering their attacks on women, workers, indigenous peoples, and the environment. APEC is a way for multinationals (led  by the US and Japan) to increase their  power and profits in the region by freeing  big business from obstacles to mega profits.  The work of defining APEC is being  done through the meetings of member  countries' Ministers of Foreign Affairs and  of Trade and Industry. All APEC decisions  are being made behind closed doors by  government officials, big business and academics at the annual "leaders' meetings."  There are no public forums. None of the  agreements are formal and binding agreements, nor are they required to be passed  through public scrutiny.  Serving as an advisory committee to  APEC is the APEC Business Advisory  Council (ABAC), made up of the heads of  large corporations from the APEC member  countries. ABAC is a "high-level permanent  forum for channelling private sector advice  directly to ministers and leaders." The  council provides APEC leaders with policy  guidance on key issues — so in other  words, big business is dictating policy to  politicians.  Neither NGOs (non-governmental organizations) nor labour groups have been  invited to the table, ensuring that there will  be no discussion on the effects of APEC on  women, workers, et cetera. It is not a coincidence that APEC does not include representation from the labour movement, notwithstanding its promise of job creation.  In APEC's language, people are not  referred to as workers but as "human resources," and in the world of a "liberalized  global market", these human resources are  mere commodities to be traded and discarded if they are not useful and competitive. The Asian Students Association, based  in Hong Kong with member groups in 29  countries, sums up APEC's anti-people  agenda: "An unspoken rule in APEC is that  issues which might embarrass another  member country should not be raised —  so human rights stay off the agenda."  The APEC  process to date  During the 1994 leaders' summit in  Indonesia, member countries set the years  2010 and 2020 for full implementation of  free trade and investment policies by "underdeveloped" and industrialized countries, respectively. A year later, at the summit in Osaka, Japan, member countries defined three areas of action: trade and investment liberalization, its facilitation, and economic and technical cooperation. (Economic and technical cooperation include  action programs in the area of human resource development, industrial science and  technology, tourism, fishery, agriculture, et  cetera.) A nine-point agenda for action was  articulated, foremost of which was full  compliance with WTO principles.  At the upcoming leader's summit in  the Philippines, each APEC member is expected to submit its specific action plan detailing how particular sectors will be  opened up to regional competition. The  Philippine government has already chosen  to "lead by example," by committing to the  establishment of a free trade area (similar  to China's special economic zones) by the  year 2020. The government of Fidel Ramos  has also adopted a program to reduce all  Philippine tariffs to no more than five percent by the year 2004.  Policies such as these leave individual  countries — particularly those with less  economic resources — even more vulnerable to multinational control and foreign  ownership. The US developed its economy  by keeping tariffs and other trade barriers  Women and NAFTA:  Still getting screwed  by Colleen Fuller  When the Mulroney Tories did their  famous about-face on free trade in the mid-  80s, they sparked one of the most intense  public debates in Canadian political history.  Women entered the fray focused on what  impact a two-way trade deal with the  United States could have on Canadian social programs, employment and wealth  distribution. The National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) formulated some of the most prescient arguments  of the debate, beginning with: "women will  get screwed by free trade."  Nearly ten years and two free trade  deals later, we can judge whether that basic premise was and is correct, and whether  some of the specific projections of what  would happen as a consequence of both the  Canada-US deal and, subsequently, NAFTA  (the North American Free Trade Agreement) have unfolded.  A key argument of women's organizations and of female leaders in the free  trade debate was: women are the primary  users of social services and constitute a  large percentage of the organized public  sector workforce responsible for delivering  those services. (In fact, in some areas, like  health care, they make up the majority.)  Women also said that NAFTA would set in  motion massive privatization and de-regu  lation to achieve the "level playing field"  big business said was necessary to help  them compete in the global marketplace.  The level playing field included, among  other things, lower wages and fewer (or no)  benefits for workers; the elimination of  health, safety and employment standards;  a for-profit, commercial model of service  delivery; and the need for far fewer workers to deliver the services.  The corporate community, through one  of their most zealous, real-man champions,  Toronto right-wing columnist Andrew  Coyne, publicly denigrated anti-free trade  leaders like [then NAC president] Judy  Rebick as irresponsible ideologues. Coyne,  in a 1989 Financial Post feature article,  pointed to four of the most "sacred trusts"  which, he said, were particularly safe from  free trade: family allowance, pensions, unemployment insurance and Medicare. Not  only were these programs safe, he bleated,  but they would also benefit from the competitive edge free trade would give Canada  in the global market.  Well, there is little satisfaction to be  gained from knowing how completely  wrong Coyne was. Family allowance is a  thing of the past. The World War II generation will probably be the first and last to be  entitled to public pensions. Unemployment  insurance, which protected 80 percent of  the workforce from economic fluctuations,  has been replaced by a bogus employment  insurance scheme to which only a third of  the workforce is entitled. And Canada's  unique, largely non-profit health care system is being overtaken by some of the biggest profit-mongers in the world, penetrating a country armed with NAFTA rights.  Free trade proponents refuse to credit  NAFTA with the erosion of social programs  and public sector employment, but they are  wrong again. Here's how NAFTA works:  governments privatize or stop funding  public programs; corporations move in to  save the day; cross-border corporate mergers and acquisitions take place and de-regulation follows closely behind; re-engineering drops like a bomb on workers who rapidly lose collective agreements and legislated protections, not to mention their jobs.  And then, presto: corporate profits increase!  Right-wing attacks on social programs  and workers' rights are no longer simple  policy options which can be changed or  reversed down the road by more progressive governments. Under NAFTA, the only  policies which are prohibited or which can  be reversed are those that expand and  strengthen the social safety net, prevent the  commercialization of social services, pro  tect workers' health, safety and employment standards, and increase the scope of  the public sector. The compensation costs  to private companies associated with reversing privatization and de-regulation  policies are spelled out in NAFTA and are  absolutely prohibitive for any government.  For women, this new reality is a disaster. Womens' collective interests, historically, have been met by consciously designed and publicly supported programs  and legislated standards for which we have  fought for generation after generation.  NAFTA is undermining these collective  gains and, as individuals, women are paying the price. Free trade, whether in the  form of NAFTA or APEC (Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) or the European Union, promises "globalization," but in reality creates a two-tiered world of rich gluttons and working poor. Our futures depend  on true economic integration and an equitable and global distribution of the world's  wealth. This is a goal which, if not on the  table now, can be placed firmly there by our  own collective efforts.  Colleen Fuller is the Communications Director with the Health Sciences Association in  Vancouver. She has written extensively on free  trade and privatization.  in place to prevent foreign control of US  companies and resources and to help promote and build up American corporations.  But now it is countries like the US, which  established its own economic dominance  through protectionist measures, that are  hypocritically leading the drive to force  other nations to adopt "free trade" policies.  And in the case of the Philippines, the elites  of the country are willing to participate in  this exploitation of the people and resources  of the Philippines.  The Canadian government is currently  gearing up for its year-long commitment  to hosting a series of meetings culminating  in the leader's summit in Vancouver. It is  not clear what position the Canadian government will take in its leadership of the  APEC process in 1997, but if the Philippine  experience is any indication, Canada may  also choose unilateral measures or accelerate Canada's involvement in APEC-driven  liberalization to prove that it too can lead  by example.  According to Prime Minister Jean  Chretien, APEC 1997 "will provide a  unique opportunity to showcase our commitment to...the region." Secretary of State  for Asia-Pacific Raymond Chan has also  stated that APEC is "an opportunity to  match the region's needs to Canadian capabilities." In short, chairing APEC gives  Canadian multinationals a big boost in the  region, but what about the rest of the population of the countries involved?  It's not only the policies of APEC that  are devastating. The meetings themselves  are examples of the disregard these so-  called nations' leaders have for poor people. This year alone, 15,000 "slum" dwellers in Manila were uprooted from their  shanties to "clean up the streets" in preparation for the November APEC leaders'  meeting. And prior to the 1997 summit in  Vancouver, it is likely that the organizers  will surely attempt to sweep away many  of the "eyesores and nuisances"— that is,  the evidence of poverty in Vancouver. (A  similar "clean up" was done before Expo  '86).  Global competition:  US vs. Japan  Upon close examination, it becomes  clear that APEC is more than a simple trade  bloc like NAFTA, which is dominated by a  single economic power. APEC is a product  of the struggle for dominance over the Asia  Pacific region between the United States  and Japan. Other member countries, like  Canada, are minor players that follow the  lead of the major players.  Apprehensive of Japan's increasing  economic dominance in the fastest growing region in the world, the United States  has taken leadership of the APEC process.  In doing so, the US is attempting to consolidate the position of American multinationals in the markets that will be opened  up through APEC-driven privatization and  deregulation. At the same time they are  challenging each other for dominance in the  Asia-Pacific region, the US and Japan are  also trying to stem the trade and investment  offensive in the region by members of the  European Union (EU).  Since 1993, the United States has been  reasserting its economic superiority in the  region. It has out-manoeuvred Japan in formulating many APEC policies. In 1995, the  US overtook Japan as the leading exporter  to Asian countries. And while corporations  in the United States and Japan are in intense competition with each other, they are  also united in their incessant drive for profits, colluding to further exploit the cheap  labour and raw materials of countries in the  south and make them dumping grounds  for their surplus products.  The Philippines has already begun to  experience the impact of this penetration  of foreign control. For example, since 1995,  it has suffered a rice price crisis as a result  of WTO-imposed policies. Rice-producing  lands are being converted into lands used  for the production of export crops and into  industrial estates, further impoverishing  the peasants and farmers.  APEC is just another attempt to quench  multinational corporations' thirst for larger  profits and solve their crisis of overproduction. Their global capitalist agenda is further fueled by rapid advances in technology, which result in fewer jobs being created and goods being overproduced. (This  is known as "jobless growth.") In BC, for  example, resource-based industries have  become more productive due to technogical  advances, but at the same time, they have  also laid off more workers. The trade-off  between fewer jobs and increased productivity only works to the advantage of the  shareholders of the resource companies,  and not workers.  We have seen how, under free trade,  Canadians have fared [see "Still getting  screwed," page 10.] Between 1989 (when  Canada signed its first free trade agreement) and 1994, Canada lost 1.4 million  jobs, including 500,000 manufacturing jobs,  as factories were shifted from Canada to  places in the southern US and Mexico  where the conditions were more profitable  for corporations. Free trade makes it easier  for businesses to move jobs to where they  can best exploit people — cheaper labour  and poorer environmental and safety  standards equal bigger profits.  Under APEC, we will be seeing a faster  "race to the bottom." The corporate agenda  will insist on further privatization, cuts in  wages and social programs, and less government interference in order to achieve  "global competitiveness." Threatening to  pull businesses, factories and jobs out of  Canada and transfer them to other member countries with lower wages and fewer  labour standards will be used against Canadian workers who dare to challenge the  corporate agenda. The trade union movement will feel the effect of APEC as it has  under NAFTA, where many higher paid  unionized jobs have been lost across the  border. APEC will accelerate this process  on a bigger scale.  APEC and  women workers  The impact of globalization can already be seen in the increase of migrant  workers, most of whom are women, moving between APEC nations. In the Philippines, around 60 percent of migrant workers are women. Inter-migration of workers  within Asia shows that women outnumber  their male counterparts 12 to one. In many  receiving countries, these migrant women  work as entertainers or domestic workers.  They most often do the work that people  in those countries avoid because of the long  hours, poor working conditions and low  wages. Human rights violations, violence,  discrimination and racism are issues confronting these migrant women.  The creation of a two-tiered working  class will be another outcome of APEC and  globalization. In Canada, most of the higher  paying jobs that are in advanced technology and management are still held by men,  while most of the low paying, dull and  dead-end jobs are held by women. Presently, the trade union movement in Canada  is not demanding real structural changes,  but rather, it is trying to get a seat in the  APEC process. From this perspective, unions are hardly in a position to truly bring  positive change to the lives of the majority  of women, and women's struggle for equality will surely be set back.  Resistance to APEC  Today, there is growing awareness that  APEC is part of the process of global economic restructuring. In the Philippines, a  counter-conference called the "People's  Conference Against Imperialist Globalization" is being organized to be held concurrently with the APEC leader's summit. This  counter-summit will call on people to "expose APEC as a mechanism of imperialist  countries and their partners to intensify the  exploitation of Asia-Pacific peoples and  their resources" and to highlight the various oppositional activities of people's organizations in the region.  NO! To APEC in Vancouver is planning  a series of events coming up to deepen our  critical understanding of APEC and globalization, and to help build a grassroots coalition against APEC. The next event will be  a workshop on Wednesday, October 16 at  La Quena Coffeehouse, 1111 Commercial  Drive beginning at 7pm. As well, the group  will be coordinating actions for November  25 (the day the APEC leader's summit begins), in solidarity with the People's Anti-  APEC Conference in Manila, and as part  of an international day of action. The activities are being planned to expose APEC  as another corporate tool that would bring  further unemployment and cutbacks to social programs and increased privatization,  and to find long term answers to the challenges facing the majority of people today.  To get involved with NO! to APEC in  Vancouver or for more information about the  anti-APEC campaign, call the Philippine  Women Centre at (604) 322-9852.  "An  unspoken  rule  in  APEC  is  that  issues  which might  embarrass  another  member  country-  should not  be raised"  so human  rights stay  off the  agenda." Arts  Review: 101 Things Lesbians Do in Bed  Serial monogamy,  lesbian style  by Cy-Thea Sand  ft  What!  ales!  bring on the  second  date?  A U  A  101 THINGS LESBIANS DO IN BED  Written by Sonja Mills  Directed by Teri Snelgrove  Performed by Jan Derbyshire and  Kirsten Williamson  A writer once said that anything worth  doing can be done in bed, a lovely thought  for those of us who love to read, write in  our journals, or hide out under a quilt made  by a cherished aunt. It is an idea playwright  Sonya Mills may well have played with as  she wrote her comedy about serial monogamy, lesbian style. 101 Things Lesbians  Do In Bed, presented by Out West Performance Society, invites the audience on a fast-  paced sapphic spin as Ethel and Martha's  one-night stand turns into the punch line  of the U-Haul joke, referring to what a lesbian brings to her second date. Mills' play  was recently performed in Vancouver at the  Firehall Arts Centre and was held over for  a week following strong attendance during  the first two week run.  Jan Derbyshire (Ethel) and Kirsten  Williamson (Martha) heat up the stage and  they both make the physical demands of  their work seem easy. The chemistry between them works well and is crucial to the  success of this intense, short work. But just  as quickly as it starts, their wild attraction  and great sex cool down. In the time it takes  to say "Rita Mae Brown," Martha's queen-  size bed becomes an arena for folding laundry, playing Trivial Pursuit, watching videos, and masturbating while the other once-  red-hot lover reads  a magazine!  Both characters speak quickly with almost flawless timing. Derbyshire is hilarious. Her command of physical comedy is  impressive. Ethel, despite her clumsy  name, is as lithe and wiry as any bar dyke  intent on making out and having fun. Derbyshire uses her body like a paint brush:  her most subtle strokes create excitement  in the viewer. Later in the play when it is  time for Ethel to move on, she calls her  lover-to-be from Martha's bed. Derbyshire  captures the hushed, hurried tone of deceit  with scalpel-like precision, making anyone  in the audience who has ever betrayed or  been betrayed squirm in her seat.  I loved Kirsten Williamson's work as  a street-smart Karla in Sea Theatre's recent  production of Vivienne Laxdal's Karla and  Grif [see Kinesis March 1996.] In Mills' play,  she imbues her character with an impish,  wary vitality that is totally on. She sulks,  whines, flirts and fumes her way into an  impressive portrayal of a twenty-something urban dyke who may well kiss a lot  of frogs before she settles down with her  "princess". Even when she is most vulnerable — lying in bed with a rash and feeling  too fat to go out — Martha's edgey toughness saves her from the more boring aspect  of self-pity.  The actors have a good script to work  with and they serve it well. Funny, poignant and biting, the dialogue between the  lovers is totally entertaining and engaging.  At one point, responding to a manipulative move on Martha's part, a member of  the audience sitting behind me cautions  Ethel "not to fall for that one." I chuckled  and reflected on how comfortable and familiar the whole scene is: two talented  women on stage telling it like it is for an  audience of mainly lesbians, who have, it  seems, "Been there. Done that."  I do wonder why Mills does not let us  us in on the "will we have an open relationship or be monogamous?" discussion  most lesbians have. Ethel and Martha refer  to it only fleetingly and yet its outcome is  pivotal to our understanding of what happens next. Comedy demands conflict as  much as drama because it moves the plot  convincingly into resolution or catharsis. I  also wanted to know more about the characters: where does Martha earn her pay and  why does Ethel sleep so much? Where are  the late night marathon talks new lovers  get into about therapy, family, work, or  whether or not they want to have children?  How many lesbians do you know who  don't have a therapist, creative project, self-  help group or political crusade on which  to focus their attention? Perhaps between  the wisecracks Mills is suggesting that some  relationships can maroon us in a "dull,  stale, tired bed" where friends, family and  work don't seem to matter, where a connection to community is remote or non-existent and where passion dries up.  The set is effective in its simplicity: one  large bed caressed by long, flowing curtains  which seem to envelop the audience with  a promise of romance. It welcomes us into  the story like a table for two. However, romance and pleasure are short-lived for  Ethel and Martha as Mills' story slows its  pace and heads down the road of domestic  familiarity and slow-burning resentment.  And in a decision which may well have  weakened the import of her work, Mills  takes a U-turn as the play reaches its climax: rather than muck around in the messy  world of jealousy, fear and betrayal, Martha  suggests to Ethel that "they skip that part"  and just leave each other alone.  Some people didn't laugh as hard as I  did. Some women wanted more depth.  Maybe I don't get out often enough, or  maybe any writing, directing and acting  that can make me laugh that hard and enjoy myself that much lulls my critical  senses. For me, the cleverness of 101 Things  Lesbians Do In Bed makes it good theatre,  and Williamson and Derbyshire are fabulous. I was very pleased to read in the program notes that Kirsten Williamson received an award for Outstanding Newcomer at this year's Jessie Awards [for theatrical arts in Vancouver] for her performance in Karla and Grif and that Jan Derbyshire will be premiering her solo show, The  Opposite of Everything is True, at the Women  In View festival in February. Good news.  Good fun. I wanna be there.  j§        Cy-Thea Sand is a Vancouver writer. Thanks  §        to Dr. Kfor her comments.  OCTOBER 1996 Arts  Films on women and our bodies:  Crampy and grumpy  by Leanne Johnson  OBSESSIONS FOR WOMEN  Presented by Cineworks Independent  Filmmakers Society  Vancouver, BC  In mid-September, Cineworks Independent Filmmakers Society presented a series of  films in Vancouver called, Obsessions for  Women. The films were programmed as a challenge to how "mass media representations of  femininity put forth a narrow and rigid ideal  of'the beautiful woman'...and lead us to question our own notions regarding the true nature of beauty and femininity." Below, Leanne  Johnson takes a look at some of the films and  reviews the overall program.  There's no really nice way to put this:  curate, curate, curate! Obsessions for Women  presented twelve short films dealing with  women and their bodies. Twelve short,  politically and emotionally charged films:  two hours and eleven minutes of film—all  screened in one night. Ugh. I tell you, ugh.  This is in no way a reflection on the  quality of the films. On the whole, the films  were provocative and at times funny, but  we audience members are mortals: we  don't have very long attention spans. The  less persevering types among us, almost  one third of the audience, left at intermission. And the remaining hold-outs were  getting downright violent every time the  projector went out of focus (which happened frequently) after realizing the  fuzziness wasn't just an artsy approach to  filmmaking.  With twelve films, the approaches were  certainly eclectic. The first film screened,  Glorifiers of the American Girl by Blackhock  Productions, would have had a better home  at the Edison Electric Gallery, which screens  a wide range of films from 50s industrial  films to avant garde films. Among these  mostly contemporary films was Glorifiers  of the American Girl, a 10 minute film made  in 1933 about what makes a Ziegfeld Follies kind of girl, which seemed to be out of  place.  From 1933, we went straight to 1966  with Gunvor Nelson's Schmeerguntz. This  film is a clever montage piece that ad  dresses all sorts of media issues surrounding women, their bodies, house cleaning  and child rearing. But like the first film, this  one did not fit well with the rest of the programming.  The next ten films shown were contemporary pieces. Annette Mangaard's Iconography of Venus (1987) is a lyrical and operatic film which was quite jarring in contrast  to the previous film's montage editing. But,  the sound was atrocious: turning a beautiful soprano voice into the musical equivalent of an icepick through the ear.  Kim Benoit's Etude (1991) takes a  deconstructive approach to portrayals of  women and their bodies. Using a close-up  examination of an ordinary woman in juxtaposition with media representations, she  attempts to reclaim the body. This kind of  work always makes me squeamish in a  way. Are we really de-objectifying the body  or are we just creating more objects for scrutiny? I'm not sure that the film answered  this question for me.  Gap-Toothed Women (1987) by Les Blank  was a refreshing turn in this evening's  events. Blank approaches women and their  bodies in an unique way: she interviews  women who have gap-teeth. (I can relate  because my friend Hayley has a gap and  she's proud of it.) All the women she interviewed had come to terms with their gap.  This film is an accessible format for ail  kinds of discussion around how women see  themselves and it is a different approach  to the body-centred representations of the  other films.  Intermission finds me apologizing to  my friend and smoking madly outside of  the building. The bell rings. Back we go (me  physically dragging my friend and making all sort of promises to her). Helen Lee's  Sally's Beauty Spot (1990) opens up the second set. It's an old favorite of mine. I've  seen this film three times, and it still disturbs me. This has a lot to do with the constant scenes of Sally scrubbing away at her  black birthmark. It leaves my chest feeling  all raw afterwards. Lee's film takes on western stereotypes of Chinese women. Intermixing new movie footage with clips from  The World of Susie Wong, Lee examines this  Hollywood version of a Chinese women as  submissive and subservient to white men.  Annastacia Dickerson's Reasonably  Barbie (1994) is a more traditional examination of the beauty myth that focuses on  weight and anorexic behavior. Wendy  Rowland's On Her Baldness (1991) is an  unique examination of women and their  baldness. Several women discuss baldness  in conjunction with chemotherapy or other  illnesses, and others talk about choosing to  shave their heads. In the opening, one  woman states that baldness is harder for  women than men. Initially, I thought this  point was debatable: I know many men who  would disagree with this premise. But after  watching Dickerson's film, I am now a convert.  How do you describe Claudia  Morgado's Unbound (1995)? It's funny,  exuberant, and a celebration of what  it is to be a woman. The art direction of this film is superb. It is truiy  a delight to watch and hear 15 culturally diverse women discuss  their relationship with their  breasts. One woman who particularly stood out for me was a woman  who gloriously talks about her  breasts. She ends her discussion by  stating that she lives her life  through them.  What keeps this film intriguing is the contrast of earnest  story-telling and the staged  pieces. Local comedian Christine  Taylor makes a couple of cameo  appearances in this film.  Taylor produced a set of  great postcards a couple of years ago depicting the last  supper. All the  apostles and Jesus were portrayed by topless women with fake mustaches. I enjoyed  sending these cards all across Canada.  Overall, the films did challenge the media portrayals of women and our bodies,  but the programming also challenged the  audience's endurance. If only Cineworks  could have presented these worthy films  in a kinder and gentler way. Cineworks  should have done everyone, especially the  filmmakers, a favour by screening these  films over two nights.  Leanne Johnson is a Vancouver writer with a  relatively average attention span.  Image from Claudia Morgado's Unbound      photo by Ceile  ht  OUR COMMUNITIES!  OUR PUBLIC SERVICES!  A message from the Public Service Alliance of Canada   •   (604) 430-5631  OCTOBER 1996 Arts  1996 Fringe Festival in review:  Witty, weighty, WUMPA!  Vancouver's Fringe Festival returned to Commercial Drive for its second year  of being "Alive on the Drive" and was greeted with record crowds. Initial estimates from the Festival's coordinator indicate that attendance this year well  surpassed the 58,000 people who went to shows last year.  This year's Festival featured 100 performing groups and individuals — from  Canada, the United States, Australia, England and Germany — and over 500  performances, providing Vancouver theatre-goers with a variety of shows to  sample from. A number of free events were also put on at Grandview Park  during the 10-day festival.  Faith Jones, Shannon e. Ash and Leanne  Johnson had a chance to catch a few of those  plays written, produced and performed by  women and provide Kinesis readers with their  thoughts and reviews.  by Faith Jones   MOMENTS OF TRANSFORMATION:  JEWISH WOMEN'S STORIES  Originated by Helen Mintz  Vancouver, BC  «< elen Mintz's new storytelling performance consists of five stories and one  explanatory segment, all sharing the theme  of change, survival, and searching out the  truth. Mintz explains that these themes are  part of the tradition of the Jewish New Year,  which began during the Fringe Festival.  Mintz's material is adapted from traditional and contemporary sources. A  Chassidic tale sets the stage by explaining  the need to look seriously at ourselves.  Another story tells of women supporting  each other in the concentration camps.  "Laughter in Hell" is an extended riff on  the use of humour to survive Nazism. This  segment was fascinating, as Mintz interspersed examples of the jokes Jews told  with descriptions of the Nazi response  which was to make certain kinds of humour  illegal.  Mintz's arrangement of Elana  Dykewoman's story, "I Have No Name For  It," seemed, to me, the strongest piece. The  story is a deeply imagined account of a love  affair between two women in 1880s Poland.  When I first read Dykewoman's piece, it  made me understand how lesbians would  have found each other in that society. Seeing Mintz perform it brought a whole new  dimension to it. Mintz, a femme if there  ever was one, plays both butch and femme,  even when they're in bed together, and it's  believable. Her easy moves between accents and inflections, and her sometimes  hysterical facial expressions, brought the  characters to life.  The last story was the one that disappointed me. "If Jews and Germans Can  Embrace at Auschwitz" offers the simplest  kind of message about reconciliation. It tells  the true story of a group which, last winter, comemmorated the 50th anniversary of  the closing of the camps. As part of the ceremony, individuals share their reasons for  coming to Auschwitz. One German woman  told the story of finding out about her father's participation in Nazism, which her  family had lied about. In reality, her father  was an SS officer who had ordered the  massacre of a Jewish town in Poland. A Jewish man who lost most of his family in that  town then cames forward and hugs her.  I have no doubt that being at this ceremony was very moving and healing for  the participants. I don't want to take anything away from the work they did in helping each other to face the truth about the  Holocaust. I found the story moving myself. But the ending of the piece implies that  embracing is enough: that forgiveness will  somehow heal the world. I have many  questions about group responsibility and  reconciliation. As a post-Holocaust Jew, is  forgiveness mine to give? Does a German  person born after the war require forgiveness? Does the willingness of that one German woman to face the past give us hope  in itself, or does there have to be something  more, a desire to change the present, perhaps? I found the story's ending didn't  address those issues; and, because of that,  it didn't make me feel hopeful about our  power to use the past to create a better future, which is what the New Year is all  about.  Mintz is a talented storyteller, and it is  to her credit that she tackles difficult subjects. It's wonderful to watch the recent  flourishing of Jewish women's culture in  Vancouver, and I think Mintz has been a  big part of that new energy. With luck, we'll  get a new storytelling evening from her  every year.  by Leanne Johnson   LADY AND THE HOOVER  Written by Kay Lynn Raschke  San Francisco, CA  I ady and the Hoover was written and  ^performed by San Francisco playwright/actor KayLynn Raschke. At times  this one-woman play suffers from the usual  conventions used to portray this emotionally charged subject—child sexual abuse—  but on the whole it is good production.  The reason this play succeeds has a  great deal to do with Raschke's powerful  stage presence. She forces you to watch  her by addressing the audience. At some  points, it felt as though she was talking  directly to me.  Raschke storms the stage carrying her  vacuum cleaner. She plays Julie, who has  inherited a vacuum from her mother, and  she uses it in her profession as a "sex care"  worker. Apparently, Julie is a call girl who  does domestic scenes. The music and her  dress evoke a fifties feel, although the setting is contemporary. It seems Julie is stuck  in another time where Samantha from Bewitched is her role model.  Julie has just discovered her mother's  diary, hidden in the vacuum cleaner. The  play really comes into its own through the  flashback narrative of her mother. It is here  that we are given insight into the family  secret and the motivating force behind both  women's behaviour. Julie has to confront  her past, and her mother's journal serves  as the vehicle for her recovery. A gong is  used intermittently to reveal Julie's inner  turmoil. As the play nears the end, the gong  turns into a bell. And we leave knowing  that Julie is healing.  by Shannon e. Ash   WOMEN WHO RUN WITH SWINE:  MYTHS AND STORIES OF A  LESBIAN GAL  Written by Monica Grant  San Francisco, CA  omen Who Run With Swine is a light,  laid-back comedy. Monica Grant  wanders out in a personable plaid shirt and  casually starts the show. (The cramped  basement of Green Thumb Theatre contributes to the hanging-out-in-someone's-rec-  room atmosphere.) The show is an anthology of sorts: short pieces interspersed with  songs. The swine motif shows up early—  we begin with a bedtime story about "Pig  Woman" and Grant's account of finding a  boar skull inAlabama. A witch says Grant's  find indicates the boar is her totem, to  which Grant replies, "I don't want a pig for  a totem!" But the swine motif is not sustained through the remainder of her performance.  Grant re-works popular tunes to tell  tales about lesbian life in America: tales  about the "lesbian Dustbowl" (the dearth  of places for out-lesbian performers to  play), the Michigan Women's Music Festival, and the "Codependency Polka."  Her singing was not all that strong, but  most of the songs were enjoyable and  heartfelt.  Grant takes a more serious turn halfway through the show, telling of how alone  she felt as a lesbian in junior high school.  She sings of her need for someone to hold  and to understand. The show takes on a  deeper emotional tone as she reveals her  coming out process to her family, partly  through letters from her mother. (There are  actual taped excerpts of her mother reading these letters.)  The humour continues, though, as in  her display of a flashlight with a Virgin  Mary replica over the bulb, recommending  it as a criminal deterrent: "Never underestimate the power of Catholic guilt." Some  jokes and songs are too drawn out—turkey  basters and sperm banks—and one joke  about "needing medication" was in bad  taste.  While Grant pokes fun at situations,  such as being involved with a bisexual  woman who can't make up her mind, this  brings on the song, "My boyfriend's back  and I'm gonna be bisexual." The pain is not  overlooked. She speaks of the different social effects of a relationship with a lesbian  versus a straight man: "I can't offer you that  package." (Of society and family validation, and greater economic power).  Women Who Run With Swine is an enjoyable show; although not entirely cohesive. I do wish I could have seen more.  WUMPA  Written by Tammy Bentz, Jacqueline  Dandeneau, Sharon Heath  full figure theatre company  Vancouver, BC  UMPA's program promises an exploration of myth, as relating to  women. The vehicle for this is a circus. (Apparently the life-as-circus metaphor is a  common one; but as I am of a generation  where the circus has gone into decline, this  may be a less relevant metaphor now than  in the past.)  As a physical, visual experience,  WUMPA is exciting and energizing to  watch; on a cerebral level, it failed me.  There are plenty of flashing lights and  jumping and yelling (this is not the place  to go if you want some quiet reflection) and  the story of Tessie, the circus child.  We follow Tessie through three circuits  of circus experience. In the first, she is naive and learning: watching the rude slapstick clowns, and the vain and silly circus  horse. The circus administrators, bearers of  bad news and red tape, wear glasses with  squinting faces and contorted body postures, drawing on an old stereotype which  is a bit off-putting.  When Tessie fails at a trapeze act she  has been bamboozled into doing, she falls  into a red-lit underground world. The circus act repeats itself, but in a much uglier  way. The clowns are brutal and sexually  14  OCTOBER 1996 Arts  Lady and the Hoover  photo courtesy KayLynn Raschke  harass Tessie; the circus filly is dizzy with  anxiety and self-doubt, counting her only  value in how others see her. This is a  clever way of showing the undercurrent  of violence and self-loss in what has been  portrayed as only entertainment and  fashion.  Tessie finally emerges from the "shit,"  as the narration describes it. In the third  rotation of the circus, Tessie becomes  "WUMPA woman," giving the clowns a  taste of their own tricks and encouraging  the filly to take risks. This self-realization  and "just do it" message is a bit pat and  generic. It's a very simple message and I'm  not sure if all the clutter of the circus was  necessary to convey it. On the other hand,  the choreography, chanting and physical  comedy were well done and engaging. I  could have done without the yelling  though.  THE TROUT SISTERS  Originated by Foursight Theatre and  directed by Kate Hale  Foursight Theatre  Wolverhampton, West Midlands, England  The Trout Sisters has an eerie ambience  that grows on you and has its humorous moments too. This show is an onion:  layers get peeled off, gradually, until you  finally get to the heart of the matter.  We begin with a news report of one  Edith Trout, age 69, found dead in November 1975 in the old Trout Hotel, surrounded  by loaves of bread. This is our first clue that  something is not quite right in the Trout  household.  Edith Trout (Lori Weidenhammer) is  the central character here; she tends the  hotel while her sisters Patience and Ella  (Naomi Cooke and Tracey Anderson)  spend their days out fishing—the hotel is  on the Devon coast in England.  Gradually we learn that the "guests"  in her hotel are people—and some chickens!—from Edith's past. Even her sisters,  we eventually learn, are no longer really  there. The scene where Patience is revealed  as merely a tenant of Edith's mind—her sister actually died 17 years earlier—is riveting. The hotel is no longer open; Edith lives  there alone, "neither ill nor well," and having outlived all those who were important  to her.  Movement, pacing and songs (rhyming ditties, for the most part) are all woven  together well. Lori Weidenhammer's voice  and intensity, as a person living in illusion,  is remarkable. When deepest in denial, she  continues to set plates for guests, using the  nautical terms her sister Patience taught her  for place setting.  Sound is also used to great effect. The  women's boots crunch on gravel and the  sound of Patience running up the beach for  the last time before dying of a sudden heart  attack makes that moment painfully clear.  The Trout Sisters is the kind of sensual  and cerebral treat I look for at the Fringe.  DIRTY LAUNDRY  Written by Judi Price  Penniless Theatre  Vancouver, BC  This is a light, very light, look at the is -  sue of "chore wars" between men and  women. The show begins with a rap: "Man  thinks he works from sun to sun/But women's work is never done."  So we arrive at the "Drop Your Pants  Laundromat." Three famous women drop  in to the laundromat, where another  woman, "Slim" Campbell (Sarah  Seigneuret)—modelled on former Canadian prime minister Kim Campbell—is doing her laundry, which includes her boyfriend's.  Who are these three famous women?  Botticelli's Venus (Aedon Young) is probably the show centrepiece, ensconced in an  oyster shell costume, with a giant pearl on  her head and seaweed dripping off .(Much  is made of her particularly strong, uh, fragrance). Then there's Mona Lisa (Layne  Black), who hates her portrait, and Lady  Godiva (Claire Groome), who is more of a  Western cowgirl type.  All three are conspiring to break the  ancient curse that requires women to do  laundry. To do so, a ritual, involving a ring  stolen from Leonardo the Laundry Lord  (Andy Matovich), a microchip, and Emily  Carr's pyjamas, must be done.  We change scenes several times, with  a "two-bit actor" (Judi Price) playing the  role of all the appliances (and Godiva's  horse). And we meet Slim's boyfriend Fluke  Collins (Chris Whalen) who raps out some  humorous rhymes about laundry's threat  to masculinity.  I'm not sure about the choice of these  famous European women (two of them  images created by men) to undo a Canadian curse. And what is an ex-prime minister doing at a laundromat? I mean, I can  stretch credibility so far, but...  There is inventiveness: Venus coughing up pearls (which Mona Lisa always  catches) and the two-bit actor being eliminated by Leonardo drawing her picture and  then erasing it. Ultimately though, the play  ends where it started: with the laundry  curse unabated. It's funny (giggles, not  knee-slappers) and silly and superficial,  and at times, stupid. There's no serious social commentary here—this is humour that  tickles, not bites.  Moments of  Transformation  OCTOBER 1996 ALTERNATIVES is Canada's  foremost environmental  journal since 1971.  Thought-provoking articles  go beyond band-aid  solutions to consider  concrete alternatives for a  wide range of environmental issues. Look to  Alternatives for reports of  environmental happenings,  provocative opinion pieces,  and reviews of the  latest eco-books.  CD  BRIARPATCH is  Saskatchewan's award-  winning political magazine  which provides an  alternative view on issues  and events in Canada and  the world. Essential reading  for those interested in  politics, unions, the  environment, women's  rights and international  affairs. We publish articles the  mainstream media won't  touch. Ten times a year.  From political zines to  hilarious comics, from  small press books to indie  music, BROKEN PENCIL  maps the ephemeral world  of independently produced  Canadian culture.  Featuring hundreds of  reviews, interviews with  creators, and excerpts from  everywhere, Broken Pencil  puts the reader in touch  with the creators and  their work.  UNITE  Principled. Radical.  Independent. For over 30  years, CANADIAN  DIMENSION has been a  place where activists can  debate issues, share  information, recount our  victories and evaluate our  strategies for social  change. Our pages are  open to all progressive  voices - debate makes the  movement stronger. And it  makes for lively reading!  "... savvy, articulate... a  fresh perspective."- The  Globe and Mail. In its 20th  year, FUSE continues to  offer a dynamic crossover  of artistic, social and  political concerns that span  the gamut from race and  representation to gay/  lesbian politics, from the  effects of pop culture  outside the mainstream to  cultural nationalism,  CEIST is home to the  Honourary Canadian  Awards, the Trans-Canada  Phrase Book, the Canadian  Mall Writing Competition,  the Who the Hell is Peter  Czowski survey, and the  very best in story, picture,  essay, memoir, crossword,  toon and little-known fact.  In print since 1990. "A  publication that is, in this  country, inimitable." -  Toronto Star  CREEN TEACHER is a forum  for teachers and parents  seeking to promote  environmental and global  awareness among young  people from K to 12. It  offers perspectives on the  role of education in  creating a sustainable  future, practical cross-  curricular activities, reviews  of the latest teaching  resources, and successful  ideas from green educators.  20AK  lyj:  ''"—■,'-,•:%  As Canada's largest  national feminist magazine, HERIZONS explores  women's health issues, the  law, work and culture, and  entices readers with  provocative reviews and  columnists. Unabashedly  feminist, Herizons is  written in a way that is  relevant to the daily lives  of women. Canada's  much-needed answer  to Ms.  LATIN AMERICA  CONNEXIONS/CONEXION  LATINA provides commentary on the struggle for  peace and justice in Latin  America, and promotes a  continent-wide, internationalist vision. This  bilingual publication  includes current accurate  analysis of Latin American  events, and information  about resources, campaigns  and organizations.  NEW INTERNATIONALIST  magazine turns the issues  inside out and explains  what's really going on. It's  the best guide to the major  issues from the arms trade to  AIDS, from human rights to  hunger. Each month, Nl  tackles one subject, and gives  you the facts and the  arguments. To influence  whafs happening to you, you  need to know whafs  NEW MARITIMES is  regional politics,  environment, labour,  culture and history, all from  a refreshing perspective.  Regular columns on  Maritime books, political  economy and Third World  issues. This bimonthly is a  unique adventure in radical  regionalism that, into its  second decade, still refuses  to bow to the powers  that be.  OUR TIMES is Canada's  pro-labour magazine. Each  issue features voices of  union and community  activists across the  country who are  concerned with the  welfare of workers. Our  Times is an excellent  educational resource for  those interested in labour  issues. Don't miss out!  Published six times a year.  ShernaB?!: 10 Years After  PEACE MAGAZINE is a  multi-partisan voice for  peace, conflict resolution  and non-violence in our  homes, in playgrounds and  between nations. For over a  decade, our magazine has  been a forum on how to  create a more peaceful  and just world.  "Your solace in  conflicting times."  - Broken Pencil  RUNCH means colour.  Rungh is a forum of critical  commentary exploring  contemporary culture and  politics abroad and at  home. Rungh negotiates  with a culture made out of  the dilemmas, hopes and  differences between the  struggle against racism and  other social movements for  dignity, well being and  emancipation.  One of Canada's hottest  independent literary  quarterlies, SUB-TERRAIN  features the work of writers,  artists and photographers  from Canada, the US and  foreign locations. Each issue  is a stimulating fusion of  fiction, poetry, graphic art,  commentary and book  reviews. "Eschews  geography in favour of a  borderless world" -  Vancouver Mag.  NEW CITY MAGAZINE  believes in a distinct and  sustainable Canadian  urban culture and identity.  Featuring articles, stories  and histories about the  city and its people, it is a  critical forum on the  modern city. New City  strives to build a better  understanding of urban  maladies and the  possibilities for change.  QffMti  OUTLOOK provides a Jewish  secular-humanist perspective  on political and cultural  issues. It features original  articles, stories, and reviews  by writers from Canada, the  USA, Israel, France, Germany  and Eastern Europe.  Promoting peace in the  Middle East and the world,  Outlook supports  multiculturalism and  promotes self-determination  of all peoples.  nkruptcy  THIS MAGAZINE is a 30-  year-old national magazine  of politics and culture. A  1996 winner of two gold  and one silver National  Magazine Awards for  investigative journalism and  political criticism. This  Magazine prints fearless  reporting, showcases  groundbreaking literature,  and critiques culture - high  and low - with attitude,  personality and style.  §  BEST  OF  THE  ALTERNATIVE  PRESS  I Looking for  • an adventure  • in magazine  • reading?  • Order a sample copy of the  • best of Canada's other press  • by simply filling out the  • request form below.  •  REQUEST  FORM  To place your order,  please:  1/ Indicate the magazine(s) you wish to  Alternatives  Broken Pencil  Fuse  Green Teacher  Lat. Amer. Connexions  New Internationalist  Our Times  Peace Magazine  Sub-Terrain  Briarpatch  Canadian Dimension  Geist  Herizons  New City  New Maritimes  Outiook  Rungh  This Magazine  2/ Fill out your name and address.  3/ Calculate your payment. The first magazine  you request costs $5.00, each additional  magazine is $2.50. For example, if you order three  magazines, your payment would be $5.00 + 2 x  $2.50 = $10.00. GST is included. Please make  your cheque or money order payable to  Chaos Consulting.  4/ Mail this form with your payment.  Send to: Chaos Consuiting-BOAP, PO Box 65506,  Stn F, Vancouver, BC, V5N 5K5. For Inquiries  only (no orders), e-mail chaos@axionet.com or  fax:(604)875-1403.  OCTOBER 1996 Bulletin Board  t h i s ■    INVOLVEMENT  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into Kinesis  — whether it's news, features or arts — are  invited to our next Story Meetings: Tues  Oct 1 and Tues Nov 5 at 7 pm at our office,  301-1720 Grant St. If you can't make the  meeting, but still want to find out about  writing for Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. No experience is necessary. Childcare subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  November 1996 issue is from Oct 16-22.  No experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at 255-5499.  Childcare subsidies available.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  The Vancouver Status of Women needs  volunteers to assist with its upcoming 25th  anniversary gala, 25 & Alive, to be held on  Sat Nov 2. VSW is looking for women to  INVOLVEMENT  help with selling tickets, setting up and  cleaning up, delivering posters and  decorating the venue. Four hours or more  of volunteering equals free admission to  the event. Come help VSW celebrate.  Call 255-5511 to sign up.   VSW PROGRAMMING COMMITTEE  All women are invited to join Vancouver  Status of Women's programming committee and become involved in planning  community activities, such as the Women's  Film Series and Single Moms Day in the  Park. It's fun. It's important. It's cool.  Interested? Call 255-5511.   VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us — become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Wed,  Oct 16, 7pm at VSW, 301-1720 Grant St.  For more info, call 255-5511. Childcare  subsidies available.  Are you an  illustrator?  your skiiia to  Vancouver  Status of  Women is.  15 and AlivcL  A tela Wrthday Party and  Pook Launch  Saturday, November I  Featuring Sawagi Taiko,  VSvVers from yesterday and today  and  Judy Rebick and Kike Roach   :  launching their new book  Politically Speaking  (Douglas & Mclntyre)  Refreshments  Poor Prizes  Schmoozing from 6:30 pm  Main event at 8:00 pm sharp  Vancouver Public Library  JBp50 W. Georgia  (Multipurpose Room)  Wheelchair  accessible  Tix: $10 - $2,500 (employed), $5 - $25 (un- & underemployed)  This event will sell out, so buy now! Tickets available at VSW,  Women in Print, Little Sister's, Harry's, and People's Co-op  Bookstore. (Call 255-5511 for info.)  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Beddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  SUBMISSIONS  ITALIAN WOMEN'S ANTHOLOGY  Italian and Sicilian women are invited to  contribute to a new anthology intended to  reflect ourselves out to other Italian and  Sicilian women, and to provide a forum for  critical discourse about location and  identity within Italian cultures. The  anthologizers are interested in exploring a  wide range of issues that have impacted  and shaped our daily lives, such as the role  of religion, coming out as lesbians and  feminists, surviving incest, etc. Send  poetry, theory, oral history, fiction, drama,  photography, artwork about your personal  experiences growing up and being Italian  and Sicilian. Send materials to: Italian  Women's Anthology, Women's Press,  #102-517 College St, Toronto, ON, M6G  4A2. For more info call (416) 539-0535 or  fax (416) 651-5101. Deadline is Nov 1.  BRONWEN WALLACE AWARD  The Writers' Development Trust is calling  for submissions of short fiction prose  (under 2,500 words) for the Bronwen  Wallace Award. Respecting the wishes of  Bronwen Wallace, writers must be under  35. As well, they should be unpublished in  book form, but have had their work appear  in at least one independently edited  magazine or anthology. Prize is $1,000.  Send submissions by mail to: The Bronwen  Wallace Award, c/o The Writers' Development Trust, 24 Ryerson Ave, Suite 201,  Toronto, ON, M5T 2P3. Deadline is Jan 15  CHILDREN OF EXILE  Carol Camper, creator and editor of  Miscegenation Blues: Voices of Mixed  Race Women, is seeking submissions for  an anthology of women and men of colour  who were raised in white families or  institutions, tentatively titled Children of  Exile. Essays, articles, letters, journals,  artwork, photography, interviews, et cetera  are welcomed. Send submissions to Carol  Camper c/o Sister Vision Press, PO Box  217, Stn E, Toronto, ON, M6H 4E2. Dead-  lineisDec31.   BREAST CANCER CONFERENCE  The first World Conference on Breast  Cancer will be held in Kingston, Ontario  Jul 13-17,1997. Delegates from around  the world will be discussing a wide range  of topics. For those interested in attending  or presenting, or for more info phone the  conference office at (613) 549-1118.  THIN LINES OF COMMUNICATION  Women who have had anorexia and/or  bulimia are invited to submit poetry, short  fiction, personal non-fiction, and black and  white visual art to the anthology Thin Lines  of Communication, forthcoming from  gynergy books. Send up to 20 pages, a  brief biography, and a SASE to: Thin Lines,  PO Box 1164, Saskatoon, SK S7K 3N2.  Deadline is Nov1.   BRIDGING NORTH AND SOUTH  Canadian Woman Studies is seeking  submissions for an exploration of feminist  practice and theory through the lens of  women's growing global connections and  organization. The issue aims to go beyond  mere description. Send essays, research  reports, manifestos, true stories, brief  anecdotes, poetry, cartoons, drawings and  other artwork to: Canadian Woman Studies, 212 Founders, York University, 4700  Keele St. North York, ON M3J 1P3. Call  (416) 736-5356. Fax (416) 736-5765. E-  mail cwscf@yorku.ca Deadline is Oct 30.  OCTOBER 1996 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  VSW 25 YEAR BASH  VSW is 25 and Alive! Help celebrate the  Vancouver Status of Women's birthday at a  gala party and book launch on Sat Nov 2  [see display ad below for details.] Featuring  Judy Rebick and Kike Roach launching  their new book, Politically Speaking, plus  fab performers and speakers from VSW's  past and present. Everyone welcome! For  more info call 255-5511.  NO! TO APEC  The Network Opposed to Anti-People  Economic Control (No! To APEC) in  Vancouver is holding a forum/workshop  Wed Sept 25 at 7pm, at La Quena 1111  Commercial Dr. No! to APEC is a group of  local activists who oppose the  multinationalist agenda of APEC (the Asia-  Pacific Economic Cooperation), and want  to draw atttention to next year's APEC  leaders summit meeting in Vancouver. For  more info call Suzanne 255-1509 or 251-  6626 or Terrie 732-4847, and for childcare  call Amy 872-0068.   BREAST CANCER AWARENESS  MONTH  The University of British Columbia is  marking their first Women's Health Issues  and Breast Cancer Awareness Month with  a series of events in October to promote  awareness of problems threatening  women's health. There will be information  tables set up in the Student Union Building  Oct 3-4. For more info call Nicola Hill at  739-2579 or Allison Punnet at 822-2050.  PERSON'S DAY BREAKFAST  The West Coast LEAF (Women's Legal  Education and Action Fund) is holding its  10th annual Person's Day Breakfast  Fri Oct 18 from 7-9am at the Hyatt Regency Hotel in Vancouver. The keynote  speaker will be University of Calgary  professor Dr. Sheilah Martin who has  worked in the areas of women's equality  in the legal profession, constitutional law,  and health care and the law. Tickets are  $45. For more info call West Coast LEAF  at 684-8772.   THE WORLD'S LITTLE GIRLS  The annual conference of the University of  British Columbia's Centre for Research in  Women's Studies and Gender Relations  will be held all day on Sat Oct 19 at the  Faculty of Law at UBC. The day-long  conference called, The State of the World's  Children: The Difference Gender Makes,  will focus on the special concerns of  children, particularly girl children, and the  themes of education, health and child  advocacy as they apply to the world  generally and BC in particular. For more  info and to register call 822-9171.  NINOTCHKA ROSCA  Filipina activist and writer Ninotchka Rosea  will be in Vancouver to speak on "Global  Trafficking of Filipina Women" Sun Oct 6  starting at 11am at 451 Powell St. Rosea,  winner of the 1993 American Book Award  for her novel Twice Blessed, is a tireless  advocate for women there. She worked as  a journalist in the Philippines and reported  on the struggle to topple Ferdinand Marcos  and was imprisoned by him. She currently  lives in political exile in the US. Rosea will  speak about the US GABRIELA Network,  which is currently campaigning to stop the  mail-order bride business. For info or  reservations call 322-9852.  PARA SA MGA OCWS  A community info session for Filipina/o  overseas contract workers (OCWs), Para  Sa Mga OCWs, will be held Sat Oct 5 from  1 -6pm at Collingwood Neighbourhood  House, 5288 Joyce St, Vancouver. Topics  will include new OWWA fees for contract  workers (MOI #8), double taxation by the  Canadian and Phillipine governments, and  the high costs of services for domestic  workers and care givers. The event is  organization by SIKLAB. Admission is free.  For more info call Marlyn or Janet at  323-0412.   SYNAESTHESIA  SynaethisiA, a 21st century vaudeville  concert, will be held Thurs Oct 10 from 8-  11pm at Cafe Deux Soleil 2096 Commercial Dr, Vancouver. Featured will be Public  Dreams on story telling, Sylvi on coastal  notes, Cynthia Feldt on mask making,  Barbara Bourget on modern dance and  Prof Zio on ornamented guitar. Admission  is $3-$3000. For more info e-mail Sylvi at  sylvi ©mindlink.bc.ca, or check out the  website: http://mindlink.net/sylvi/  seethru.html.  DYKEWORDS  Readings by local dyke writers will be held  every second Thurs evening starting at  9pm at the Lotus Club, 455 Abbott St,  Vancouver. On Oct 10, local writers Anne  Fleming, Irit Shimrat and Alison Brewin will  be reading. And on Oct 24, catch readings  and performances about the butch/femme  experience featuring Terrie "Cookie"  Hamazaki, Lisa Lowe, Karen X.Tulchinsky,  and others. Admission is $1-$4 sliding  scale and everyone is welcome. For info  call 685-7777.   LATIN AMERICANYOUTH FORUM  The first annual Latin American Youth  Forum in Vancouver, Explosion Juvenil  19961, will be held Oct 12-13 at the  Brittania Community Centre, 1661 Napier  St. The purpose of the forum is to empower  Latin Youths and make their voices be  heard on issues including racism, violence,  and AIDS. Registration is free, but lunch  will cost $5 each day. To register call  Gabriela Torres at 253-4391 prior to Oct 4.  MAKING CONNECTIONS  The Canadian Congress for Learning  Opportunities for Women (CCLOW) is  celebrating the launch of Making Connections, a new literacy resource for women,  on Fri Oct 4, 7:30-9:30pm at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. This  innovative learner-centred guide is feminist  and inclusive. Admission is free. For more  info call 732-4128.   DOROTHY INGLIS  Prominent feminist journalist Dorothy Inglis  will be reading from her collection of ten  years of news columns, Bread and Roses,  Tues Oct 15, 7:30pm at Women in Print,  3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. Inglis will  discuss various topics including breast  implants, poetry, and the Constitution. Free  admission. For more info call 732-4128.  FEMINIST GUIDETO NET  Rye Senjen and Jane Gutherey will talk  about their new book The Internet For  Women Thurs Oct 17 at 7:30pm at Women  in Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave. Their practical  guide for women using the internet offers  an overview of how the net works and  discusses issues of gender, anonymity,  pornography, privacy, and harrasment and  security on the net. Admission is free. For  more info call 732-4128.  ANN COPELAND  New Brunswick writer Ann Copeland will be  in Vancouver to read from her new collection of short stories Season of Apples on  Tues Oct 22, 7:30pm at Women in Print,  3566 W. 4th Ave. Copeland's stories are  about people on the brink of change and  whose lives take unexpected turns.  Admission is free. For more info call  732-4128.   MARYA FIAMENGO  Poet Marya Fiamengo will launch her new  collection of poetry, White Linen Remembered, Thurs Oct 24, 7:30 pm at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave. Fiamengo's poetry  reflects personal identity and inevitability of  human loss. Free admission. For more info  call 732-4128.   MARTHA ROTH  Minnesota writer and editor Martha Roth  will be reading from her new book, Goodness, Thurs Oct 24 at 7:30pm at Red &  Black Books, 432 15th Ave, Seattle.  Goodness is the story of a close-knit  community of midwestern peace activists,  coming of age in an era of intense social  upheaval. Admission is free. For more info  call (206) 322-READ.  ** Coming  Out  * Grief and  Emma  Tigerheart  i UA   1/mJj  Loss  M.S.W.  ku m  * Relationship  Issues  * Childhood  Trauma  COUNSELLING  THERAPY  * Family  Issues  CONSULTATION  Sliding  Scale Fees  Call  Inquiries  327-4437  Welcome  Vancouver, bc  Wtf   4**^ *ty*tT~ \l  barbara findlay  B.A. M.A. LIB.  is delighted to announce  that she is now practicing law  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson Street  Vancouver  Tel: (604) 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of legal  services to the lesbian, gay and bisexual  communities of Vancouver. Initial consultation  are without charge.  UBC BREAST CANCER SERIES  UBC presents a two-evening lecture  entitled, Breast Cancer: Myths and  Realities on March 7 & , 1997 at the  Waterfront Centre Hotel in Vancouver. For  more info call (604) 822-2626 or fax (604)  822-4835   JEAN STEWART  Jean Stewart will be reading from her  new book, Emerald City Blues, Thurs Oct  17 at 7:30pm at Red & Black Books, 432  15th Ave, Seattle. A departure from her  Isis series, this story set in Seattle is of a  collision between the yuppie world of a  lesbian couple and the scary world of  teenage lesbian runaways. Admission is  free. For more info call (206) 322-READ  or visit Red & Black's website at http://  www.redblack.com.  VLC BENEFIT  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection will  be having a benfit dance, Just Desserts,  Sun Oct 13 from 7pm-12am at the WISE  Hall, 1882 Adanac St. The event features  a Drag King and Queen show, dancing,  and dessert bar. The event is open to  lesbians, gay men and bisexuals. The  venue is wheelchair accessible. Off-site  childcare will be provided only 4 bocks  away from the WISE Hall. Tickets are  available at the VLC and various other  outlets. Tickets are $6, but there are free  tickets available for low-income women  available at the VLC. For more info call  254-8458.   JANICE IAN  Renowned folk singer, writer and speaker  Janice Ian will be performing Thurs Oct  31, 8pm at the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre, 1895 Venables St. Ian has had a  controversial career from the word go.  Her first song, Society's Child, was  written in 1967 when she was 14 about  an interracial relationship. With her latest  album Revenge, she still writes about  going against the odds but has magically  tapped directly into the human spirit. For  tickets or more info call 254-9578.  CO-OP RADIO  Vancouver's Co-op Radio, CFRO  102.7FM will be hosting its annual  Autumn Airlift fundraising drive Oct 11-27.  Tune in for more exceptional programming than usual, including specials on  women, work and globalization, women's  dance music, queer comedy, peace and  activism, and lots more. Pick up the  Autumn Airlift program guide for full  details, or call Coop Radio at 684-8494.  WOMEN'S FILM FESTIVAL  The 7th annual St. John's International  Women's Film and Video Festival is  taking place Oct 19-20, screening films  and videos directed, written or produced  by women. This year's festival will feature  films from Atlantic Rim countries bordering the north Atlantic. For more info  contact PO Box 984, St. John's,  Nfld, A1C6C2.   SOCIAL JUSTICE SOCIALS  The Unitarian Church of Vancouver's  Social Justice Committee is presenting a  series of Social Justice Socials every  second Friday until Dec 6, 7-9pm, at The  Unitarian Church at 949 W.49th Ave (at  Oak). The theme is "Share the Wealth"  and will include speakers, videos, small  discussion groups, chances to make  posters or create skits, snacks and music.  Cost is $2 per evening. For more info or  to register call Lydia at 734-3769 or  Margaret at 738-4217.  OCTOBER 1996 Bulletin Board  GROUPS  RADICAL WOMEN  Radical Women is holding an evening  study group called Recipe for Winning  Women's Rights: Revolutionary Politics!  every Wed from 7-8:30pm at Rebel Centre,  2278 E. 24th Ave., Vancouver. Topics for  open debate and freewheeling discussion  include the interconnections of race, sex,  sexuality and class, and the revolutionary  possibilities of women's leadership in  action. Wheelchair accessible. For more  info, call (604) 874-2943, 874-9048; or fax  874-9058.   RAPE RELIEF VOLUNTEERS  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24- hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Training sessions are on Tues  evenings. For more info and a training  interview, call (604) 872-8212.   PREGNANCY SUPPORT  The Vancouver Aboriginal Friendship  Centre Society has a Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS) support worker available with  information and counselling on drug and  alcohol use during pregnancy. The Centre  is located at 1607 East Hastings St.,  Vancouver. For an appointment or more  info, call Jenelle McMillan (604) 251-4844.  HALLOWEEN PARTY  Radical Women in Seattle will be holding  its annual Halloween Party, Sat Oct 26 at  7:30pm at the New Freeway Hall, 5018  Rainier St. The event will feature the  spellbinding production of A Coven of  Heretics, Heathens and Harlots Bury the  Coffin of Sexist Family Values, a fall  harvest feast, dancing and a costume  contest. Door donation is $3; buffet donation $9.95. Sliding scale and work exchanges available. Everyone welcome. For  more info, rides or childcare, call (206)  722-6057 or 722-2453.   LEGAL CLINIC FOR WOMEN  Battered Women's Support Services  (BWSS) and UBC Law Students Legal  Advice Program are co-sponsoring free  legal clinics for women, to be held every  other Tues, 6:30 to 8:30pm from until Nov  12. For info or to make an appointment, call  BWSS at (604)687-1867.   GRASSROOTS WOMEN'S GROUP  The Philippine Women Centre in Vancouver initiated the Grassroots Women's  Discussion Group to allow women opportunities to share common issues on a  monthly basis. It is open to all women. The  discussions led to the objective of making  connections between the specific issues of  women and the global context. The group  is currently involved in the No! to APEC  (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation)  Campaign and is planning a series of  activities leading up to a rally for the  International Day of Protest Against  Imperialist Globalization on Nov 25. NO! to  APEC [see notice page 17]. For more info  on the discussion group or the campaign,  call Mable at (604) 322-9852.  CLASSIFIEDS  THE BACK HILLS  Come retreat to 10 private hillside acres at  "the back hills guest house for women."  Enjoy delicious breakfasts. Share the cosy  wood fires with our resident feline. We are  only Vz hour from Victoria, minutes from  ocean beaches and a short hike to a  spectacular view of the Strait of Juan de  Fuca starts at our back door. Very reasonable rates. Call us soon. (604) 478-9648.  RADICALTHERAPY  Feel like you're walking around in an  undeclared war zone? You are! Come let  that inner child out and release your  warrior in group therapy with Sangam  Grant. For info regarding group therapy for  women and individual sessions, call 253-  5007. A women of colour group wil be  starting late fall.  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding  scale fee. Free initial appointment. Call  Susan Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.   WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Co-op has one, two and three  bedroom suites for $565, $696, $795 per  month and refundable share purchase.  Carpets, blinds, appliances, parking and  laundry room. Children and small pets  welcome. Please send a business size  SASE to Membership Committee, Cityview  Housing Co-op, 108-1885 E. Pender St,  Vancouver, BC.V5L1W6.   PRO-CHOICE PRESS  Subscribe to Pro-Choice Press, the BC  Coalition for Abortion Clinics' quarterly  bulletin with news and information on the  fight for abortion rights. $10 per year for  individuals; $25 for groups—includes  membership in the Coalition. To subscribe,  write to 219-1675 W. 8th Ave, Vancouver,  BC, V6J 1V2; call (604) 736-2800; or fax:  (604)736-2152.  WOMEN'S FITNESS EVENINGS  Trout Lake Fitness Centre features an all  women's evening every Tues from 7-9pm.  The Centre is located at 3350 Victoria Dr.  in Vancouver. The drop-in cost is $3.65,  including sauna and whirlpool. For info call  257-6955.  VSW is 25\  celebrate with us oh  Saturday,  November 2nd  ...see our ad on page XI  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  +  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-4128  welcome  Fax      604 732^1129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  OCEANSIDE  ACCOMMODATION  SALT   SPRING   ISLAND  (604)    537   2727  photo courtesy of gynergy books  Meet the author — Meet the sleuth  Lesbian mystery writer Jackie Manthorne will be in Vancouver to  launch her latest book at the Little Sister's Book and Art Emporium,! 238 Davie St, on Wednesday October 9th at 7pm.   Manthorne,  author of three previous titles in the popular Harriet Hubbley Mystery series will be launching Final Take featuring her intrepid lesbian  sleuth. In this latest novel, Harriet Hubbley and three gay friends  drive from Vancouver, BC to the gay mecca of San Francisco to  attend the International Lesbian and Gay Film Festival. Hot movies  mix with sex, lies and jealousy to set the stage for a bizarre murder.  Harry, of course, can't help herself. She must find out what's going  on behind the scenes.   In addition to her mystery novels, Jackie  Manthorne has published two collections of short stories, Fascination and Other Bar Stories and Without Wings. All her books are  published by gynergy press in Prince Edward Island.   Originally  from the East Coast she lives in Toronto now where she writes  full-time.  For more information about the book launch, call Little Sister's at 669-1753.  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NA TUROPA THIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HY CROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER,.B.C. V6H3K2  731-4183  HMIIIIMIIIIIMI  Sangam Grant R.P.c.  REGISTERED PR0FFESSI0NAL COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  when the music changes se does the dance...  ^ THE KEEPERTM  ^A^l|;w_ (MENSTRUAL CUP)  --T&^V K .   3-month money-back guarantee  -i  sold for over 40 years  ,fe expectancy of 10 years  used in its productior  1-800-680-9739 100% natural rubber  ctll for our free brodurc over 97°/o satisfaction rate  Distributed in Canada by Eco Logique Inc.  ax (613) 8J0-1626 / lnIenict:cdJ59@lr<>ciiel.carlelo  (Lowest Canadian Mail Order Price)  OCTOBER 1996 count <  For a real fit, slip into a Kinesis subscription.  One year  §□$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name_  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount  Free to prisoners. ^^^  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  les Kinesis subscription)  Address   Telephone _  Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6