 VMJiDM  £ Abortion is the issue  of the month, Rate Mair  mouths off, anti-choice  targets NDP candidates,  we fight back  ■t Major groups confront  Attorney General on his  inaction overSFU trials  O How to take care of  each other while we're  changing the world.  Report on the radical  therapy conference  10 E  ' Everything is flying  apartintheOakalla  Women's Unit and  everyone involved knows  it  12 E  i Enduring the  dragged-out Board of  Inquiry blues. Susan  Jorgensen deserves a  medal for persistence  14,  r Yet another look at  approaches to rape  convictions—it's hard to  distinguish our position  from the system's  8  Keeping them down  on the farm and  penniless in the kitchen.  No more, says the  '  LabourAdvfeacyand  Research Association  9 VSW sends election  questionnaire to all  Vancouver city riding  candidates. Response is  underwhelming  16/  t A feminist guide  through the maze of  pensions  32 Kramer vs Kramer:  single parenting on  $30,00 is unreal  Photo: Mary Winder.  Woman is 100 years of age  SUBSCRIBE TO KtMMJiJ  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  institution  Sustainer  $ 8  $10  $15  $50  Payment Enclosed _  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate funding  —we need member support!  •FECIAL C0UECI IttfW  Feb 80  KMMSiJ  news about women that's not in the dailies Kinesis February '80  RIGHT TO CHOOSE  Kinesis February '80  Mair is not a choice health minister,and he's been mouthing off  By Kinesis staff writers  Rafe Mair is personally opposed to abortions. Rafe Mair is the new minister of  health in British Columbia.  Therefore (political logic) abortions will  become more and more difficult to obtain  in B.C.  Government by personal prejudice? No, says  Mair, I think as health minister,  I have  a responsibility to voice my point of view  ... and to act on it as far as able.  Well, we think we have a responsibility  to express our point of view, too. And to  act on it.  When Statistics Canada released its- annual  figures on legal abortions last November,  Rafe Mair had just become the health minister. As usual, B.C. had the highest  rates in the country - 33.6 abortions for  every 100 live births in 1978. B.C. has  consistently led the country since 1972,  when the "liberalized" abortion laws went  into effect.  The figures upset fledgling health minister Mair. He was more than upset. He was  shocked, alarmed.  He felt that the number was ten times  above what he would consider a "normal"  rate. Reducing the figure ten times would  bring B.C. down to about 3 abortions for  every 100 live births. Canada's national  figure is 17.4- (compare, for interest, the  national U.S. figure of 38.5).  Abortion only in exceptional  cases?  Mair has gone on to say that he favours  abortion only in "exceptional" circumstances. He hasn't bothered to fill us  in on what he means by "exceptional."  And who decides whose case in an exception?  Rafe Mair's line on abortion is a can of  worms. But then, so's the federal abortion law. That law permits "therapeutic  abortions" when there is a "threat to the  life or health of a woman." The law does  not recommend how "threat to life" should  be interpreted. The law does not insist  that all hospitals establish therapeutic  abortion committees. The result, as the  1977 Badgley report demonstrated, is that  there are enormous disparities from region  to region, and from province to province.  The law, in short, does not work.  Only about 20%  of eligible hospitals in  Canada perform abortions. In B.C., only  about half of the province's 103 public  general hospitals have therapeutic abortion committees.  Every hospital has different rules and regulations. Residency'requirements, and the  n.eed for consent (from a teenager's parents, s~"eiucation'in'the ^oSTiTSb"heart  or from a woman's husband) vary wildly.  Anti-choice strategy is this: concentrate  on disrupting access to abortions at the  smaller hospitals. Eventually, the major  hospitals will be swamped, unable to meet  demand, and will cut back, too. Here's how  this is happening in British Columbia:  * In 1979, 15% fewer abortions were performed at Burnaby General Hospital than in 1978.  That hospital will now take referrals only  from doctors with admitting privileges. A  six-month residency requirement has recently  been imposed. Parent consent for women under  19 needing abortions has become mandatory.  * Since Mair announced in December that  abortion upset him, the Royal Columbia Hospital in New Westminster has tightened up.  An average of three or four cases a month,  which previously would have been accepted  with no problems, are now being challenged  and rejected.  * The anti-choice faction in Powell River  controls six of the hospital board's 13  seats. The number of abortions there in 1979  dropped by 25%.  We can predict that the number  of abortions will also go down at Lions'  Gate Hospital, which serves North and West  Vancouver. Four of the 12 member board of  that hospital are anti-choice.  * The therapeutic abortion committee at Victoria General has approved only four of the  31 applications received so far this year.  Last year, 99$ of all applications went  through without hassles.  The means that women wanting abortions have  to go to the Royal Jubilee Hospital in Victoria, where demand is increasing dramatically.. When the Victoria General recently  approved only two out of 15 applications,  the rest went to Royal Jubilee where they  all went through.  Last minute news is that the hospital board  of Victoria General will now accept referrals from the abortion committee of Royal  Jubilee. This means the hospital will be  doing abortions again, and will circumvent  its own anti-abortion abortion committee.  * Vancouver General Hospital is now receiving more and more applications for abortions  from women who have come down from Kamloops  and Kelowna. Vancouver General has liberal  policy on abortion, with no residency requirement, and no parental consent needed  for women between the ages of 16 and 19.  * About 1000 Canadian women, almost all of  them from B.C., are going to Washington  state each year for a same-day abortion.  It costs about $130 and no parent consent  is needed for teenage women, (in the Mari-  times, where access to abortion is appallingly difficult, it's always been New York  or bust. )  Howls of protest scare Mair  In response to the howls of protest from  pro-choice groups, Rafe Mair appeared to  back down. Sex education, not abortions,  should be used to prevent the birth of  unwanted children, announced Mair.  He  didn't have any definite plans, Mair admitted, but teenagers in high school should  have birth control information.  Surely  there is no.'health problem more  easily prevented %nUn'the unwanted pregnancy,   said Mair. He-could do with a refresher course on birth'control himself.  Don't be deceived. Mair also said that  he had sent a letter to all B.C. hospitals,  telling them to follow the letter of the  law. But as Mair must know, you simply can  not follow the letter of the law with the  mote sex education,  or the extent of it,  or anything else,  Smith told reporters.  There are a few things that we feel should  not have to come down from on high,   he  added.  So much for that.  Meanwhile Mair, having dodged the media  storm with a smokescreen about sex education, can push ahead with his anti-choice  biases, o  Campaign Anti-Choice targets  Mitchell, Robinson  Campaign Life Canada (misnomer for an anti-  choice group) has come out with its hit-  list for the February elections.  Spokesperson Kathleen Toth speaks in favourable terms of Joe Clark, who has promised  that he will bring the abortion issue to  a vote in the commons.  The anti-choicers are actively campaigning against Margaret Mitchell (NDP Vancouver East) and Sven Robinson (NDP Burnaby). Robinson and Mitchell were successful in blocking a motion on abortion in  the Commons last November.o  Mitchell defends us in the Commons  Margaret Mitchell (NDP Vancouver East) was  outspoken in her opposition to moves within the House of Commons to introduce the  anti-abortion bill, Bill C-206.  As I read the aims of this bill,  said  Mitchell, it is to restrict the option  of legal abortions to only very limited,  narrowly-defined situations involving  actual physical or acute mental danger.  This seems to go completely in the reverse  trend to what happened in Canada in the  last ten or IS years.    Before 1967, all  abortions were a criminal offence, but  this did not stop abortions. There were  abortions, deaths, and very inhumane  practices. Abortions have been with us  Hot one of us in a democracy has the right  to impose our views on others.  We have no  right to tell a woman who is pressured by  many problems...and maybe in a situation  in which she would damange an unwanted  child, or the child would be neglected  and perhaps abused,  that she cannot consider an abortion, or that it is not her  right to make the decision...  It is really impossible for a man, for  abortion legislation. The law is, in itself, w^°m It is impossible to be in the situat-  deliberately imprecise. Through a strict interpretation of the word "health", you can  wipe out access to legal abortion. No problem.  Just as soon as Mair had announced that  desire, the B.C. education minister, Brian  Smith comes out and says: not in my schools,  it isn't.  We don't, as a ministry of education, pro-  ion,  to really see it from a woman's point  of view. That is why I am concerned that  there are not more women in this Bouse to  speak about this from a woman 's point of  view... How would you really feel if your  young daughter was pregnant and was told  she could not have an abortion? ...Would  you force her and her boyfriend to go to  the backstreets of Toronto or Vancouver  to some quack?    That is what you are saying if you support this bill.o  REPEAL ALL  "ABORTION  A CCCA pro-choice march last March. More to come.  But we're going to fight for  Pro-choicers respond  immediately  In Vancouver, a public service bulletin  "from women who want the right to choose"  went up at bus stops and on telephone  poles. Under the caption, "Health Minister Gets Carried Away", it explained the  frightening implications of Mair's comment  that he favours abortion only in "exceptional" situations.  This information was illustrated with a  graphic of a pregnant man (looking quite  Rafe-ish with a bushy beard). Caption:  Is this exceptional?  The bulletin also pointed to the hopelessly  vague nature of Section 251 of the Criminal  Code, which makes abortion legal if the  pregnancy would or would likely endanger  her (the woman's)  life or health.  Since the  word "health" is nowhere defined, the poster points out, abortion committees are  free to interpret this as narrowly as they  chose.  The World Health Organization defines health  as "a state of complete physical, mental and  social well-being, and not merely the absence  of disease or infirmity."  Federal abortion laws, the poster stresses,  need to incorporate this, or a comparable,  definition in order to safeguard a woman's  total well-being.  During the Mair controversy, establishment  media was in hot pursuit of pro-choice  spokespeople. Feminist groups repeatedly  stressed that women must have a right to  choose on abortion, and condemned Mair's  attempts to interfere with that right of  choice.  Majority opinion appears to be on the pro-  choice side. As BCFW representatives pointed  out, 87% of Canadians (surveyed March '78)  agreed that a woman should have a right to  legal abortion when her life or health is  in danger.  A Vancouver Sun editorial came out for  choice on abortion, asking if Rafe Mair  would be less upset about leading the  country in the number of illegal  abortions.  The fact that most Canadians do favour a  woman's right to choose on abortion is no  reason for complacency. A small bunch of  zealots could push through legislation to  make abortion illegal, despite the wishes  of the majority. (This has just happened in  Israel, see p. 20.) And remember: Rafe Mair,  as health minister, directly appoints the  board of Vancouver General Hospital. He  can control hospital policy through those  appointments.  Yvette Perreault, as representative for the  Coalition of B.C. Rape Crisis Centres puts  our case succinctly: Let's be clear that  the Minister of Health is not talking about  cutting back on actual abortions performed.  He simply wants to reduce statistics that  reflect the number of legal abortions' o  Brown speaks out against Mair  Rosemary Brown (NDP Burnaby-Edmonds) has  pointed out that Rafe Mair's anti-choice  statements are political grandstanding.  Brown said he would be very surprised  if the health minister took any action  to back his statements because arbitrary  interference with hospital abortions will  place the lives of pregnant women at risk.  Brown also stressed that in countries  where abortions are illegal, abortions  are almost as frequent as in countries  where they are available through legal  channels.  Mair's time, Brown suggested, would be  better spent supporting Planned Parenthood, an organization which his government has actively opposed. Last year the  Planned Parenthood educational services  in Vancouver were closed because of lack  of provincial support,  said Brown.O  our right to choose  and we're not going to lose.  North Shore pro-choicers organize for Lions Gate  a massive scale.  That party  (the NDP)  adopted a policy... that it is simply a  matter between a woman and her doctor..,  imagine a wife having the right to end  the life of that pre-born child.  The North Shore Association for Choice on  Abortion is now staging an urgent drive for  increased pro-choice membership in the  Lions Gate Hospital, which serves North  and West Vancouver.  At the September '79 annual general meeting of the hospital, anti-choice supporters defeated all pro-choice nominees and  incumbents.The hospital board, which controls decisions on abortion, has-19 members. Of- the 12 elected members of the  board, five are now known to be anti-  choice.  Just prior to the September elections, an  item stating that abortion was not be to  an issue appeared in the North Shore News.  The item, which was not issued by the hospital administration, had the effect of  keeping pro-choice members away from the  meeting. They were misled into thinking  that their vote was not needed to defeat  the anti-choice supporters.  The North Shore Association for Choice on  Abortion has been advised that the anti-  choice members of the hospital board are  currently investigating the hospital's  abortion procedures and are considering  a call for a special meeting to force a  vote on the issue.  As a result of stepped-up anti-choice  efforts to draw people into the hospital  society, it is now feared that they may-  have a majority.  If, in fact, they do hold a majority,  a special vote at this time could bring  an end to choice on abortion at Lions  Gate.  All residents of North and West Vancouver  are eligible to join the hospital society.  Since members must have been registered as  such for 30 days prior to any election to  vote, it is imperative  that you sign up  now.  For further information on the North Shore  Association for Choice on Abortion, a community-wide group of interested people of  both sexes, please contact Bruce or Carol  at 988-3649, Delphine at 987-4822 or  Maureen at 987-6858.o  Sleazy ad campaign hits B.C.  airwaves  An anti-choice group calling itself the  "Babies Ransom Fund" is running advertisements on B.C. broadcast media. The  ads single out the NDP. Here's an excerpt  from one of them:  ...in 1969, abortion was legalized.  Ever since then abortion killing of in~  nocent babies has been carried out on  Before voting NDP, carefully consider  their hidden left-wing policies on abortion and homosexuality. Already these  perversions are destroying families endangering societies.  Prince George businessman Louis Matte,  one director of the -anti-choice group,  says that three other directors wish to  remain anonymous.O  Planned Parenthood slammed:  anti-choicers gleeful  And now: a perfect opportunity for Rafe  Mair to put his money where his mouth has  so recently been.  The Planned Parenthood Association of  B.C. learned January 30 that it will be  forced to cut its family planning services by more than 50JC.  It 's something we 've been hoping for  years would happen,  gloated a Pro-life  Society spokeswoman.  The federal government has denied Planned  Parenthood the last $50,000 of a three-  year $150,000 grant for educational services.  Planned Parenthood educator Katherine  Mooney points out that this is just the  chance Mair's been waiting for. He can  step in - provide the funding the federal  government has cut off. Mair's on holidays  right now, but you can deluge him with  mail to read on his return. Tell him that  Planned Parenthood's educational services  must continue. Hon. Rafe Mair, Health  Minister, Parliament Buildings, Victoria B.C. O  CCGA is busy—get involved  The Vancouver-based pro-choice group,  Concerned Citizens for Choice on Abortion (CCCA) is planning a series of pro-  choice actions.  On March 22, CCCA is sponsoring a  strategy conference on the issue of  abortion. Individuals and women's  groups from all over B.C. are invited to attend a day of workshops on  how to organize a pro-choice hospital  board and how to fight anti-choice  tactics. Attend the conference; bring  your energy and experience. Call CCCA  at 294 0565 or VSW at 736 1313 for  more information about what's happening, o Kinesis February '80  LABOUR  HRC hosts fancy  conference  The current B.C. Human Rights Commission  is best known for nasty, sexist jokes.  Mandated to educate B.C. citizens about  their human rights, the commissioners  are the folks who brought you the "take-  a-fag to lunch day ha ha" routine. And  last December, in a belated bid for credibility, they brought you a fancy conference.  Human Rights for British Columbians, they  called it. It was sponsored by the commission, along with the Secretary of State  and the Canadian Council of Christians and  Jews.  The British Columbia Federation of Women  (BCFW) chose to take part in the conference. Not to lend it some semblance of  credibility, but to expose it. BCFW was  there, a strong, visible presence, to  point to the commissioners' non-efforts  to educate the public.  Federation member-groups taking part included the Vancouver Status of Women, Women in Focus, Status of Women Action Group,  Feminist Lesbian Action Group, Women Against  Violence Against Women, and the sub-committees of BCFW on human rights and the rights  of lesbians.  Groups prepared presentations about human  rights in the areas of media, employment,  education and lesbian rights. We attended  as many workshops as possible, handing out  our presentations, and speaking persistently  to the issues.  BCFW demands for amendments to the B.C.  Human Rights Code were accepted in full by  the workshop on women. Those demands would  prohibit discrimination on the basis of  sexual orientation, parental status; source  of income, or choice of living arrangements.  BCFW amendments also call for equal pay for  work of equal value provisions. And advocate  the addition of sexual harassment to the  code: no person shall inflict sexual harassment,  intimidate,   threaten or coerce,  expel,   suspend,  impose any penalty upon,  or otherwise discriminate against,  any  person because that person refuses to engage in sexually-related interaction  while in a work-related situation.q  Major groups confront Williams over  SFU 18 inaction  By Diana Smith  An attempt was made recently to end the  long, expensive ordeal for the 18 persons arrested for picketting at Simon  Fraser University during the AUCE 2 strike  last March. A five-person delegation met  with Attorney General Allan Williams on  Monday, January 12. All presented statements urging Williams to drop all charges.  Confronting Williams were Tom Fawkes, from  the B.C. Federation of Labour; Judy McManus, ings are increasingly being used in"place  they warned by the police that the picketing activity was considered illegal during  the three hours of mass picketing preceed-  ing the arrests. Rather, the police  blocked off traffic below the picket line  and picketers were informed a court order  to cease picketing was being sought.  Traffic was then allowed back and suddenly  the RCMP physically forced back the line,  arresting eighteen picketers.  "Police intervention and criminal proceed-  Federal NDP candidate in Vancouver South:  Sheila Perret, of AUCE's provincial office;  Prabha Khosla, from BCFW; Billie Carroll  from the SFU 18, and a representative from  the B.C. Federation (who could not appear  in person but whose message was read).  Victory for  fisherwomen over UIC  The Unemployment Insurance Commission has  no power to take a married woman's earnings and give them to her husband for  the purposes of his unemployment insurance.  So ruled UIC umpire Justice P.H. Maguire  recently. ,The struggle began when five  west coast women protested that the current  regulations were discriminatory.  Stupid,  arbitrary,  capricious,   said lawyer  Allan McLean of that section of the UIC  code which pronounces, where his wife shares  as a member of the same crew,  her share  shall be added to his earnings.    No more.  East coast women squid jiggers who process  fish caught by husbands are still denied UI.o  Harasser has to pay for  employees' AT  When the B.C. Human Rights Branch discovered recently that an employer had  patted and pinched a number of his female  employees, it made him pay for assertive-  ness training courses for his staff.  Confronted with the women's complaint,  the employer evidenced total ignorance  about the dynamics of sexual harassment.  He simply could not understand why his  employees had not rebuffed him forcefully.  "The employer said these women should have  said they didn't like having their breasts  grabbed," commented Hanne Jensen, an  officer with the B.C. Human Rights Branch.D  Unfortunately the delegation got little-  to-no response from Williams who said he  would look at the material presented to  him and get back to them later. So far  there has been no word from the Attorney  General's Department.  The individual trials of the SFU 18 continue to drain time, energy, and money,  and to set dangerous legal precedent that  could threaten the right to strike. Of the  18 individuals charged 10 have gone to  court, 7 are pending trial, and one has  had all charges dropped. The SFU 18 were  originally charged with "obstructing a  police officer in the execution of his  duty." One month later a second charge of  "blocking a highway" was added.  The first  charge carries a maximum sentence of two  years imprisonment while the second  carries a maximum sentence of six months  and a $1,000 fine.  What is being revealed in the course of  the trials is that the prosecution has no  grounds for the original charge of obstructing a police officer.  On this  charge the 10 picketters who have already  gone to court have either been acquitted,  the proceedings stayed (i.e. the court  does not proceed with charge but has the  option for a re-trial at any time within  a year), or the charge dropped  altogether.  However, for the other charge of obstructing a highway three people have been  convicted and the other 7 cases stayed.  Spokesperson Billie Carroll, a member of  the SFU 18 Open Defence Committee and one  of the 18 arrested, said the courts are  trying to set a precedence with which to  refute labour rights.  Though the three  persons convicted were given a sentence  which was parallel to a strong slap on  the wrist ($250 fine and two conditional  discharges) it is the verdict of guilty  that represents a threat to the success of  future collective bargaining processes.  A press release by the defense committee  states that "the criminal prosecution of  the SFU 18 is an alarming precedent  against fundamental democratic rights.  The picketers at SFU faced deliberate  intimidation in the form of police camera  surveillance and the use of excessive  force.  They were advised by B.C. union  leaders and a lawyer that they were  within their rights. At no time were  of collective bargaining process and civil  jurisdictions appropriate to labour  disputes. The convictions on charges of  obstructing a highway have set dangerous  precedents against workers right to  picket everywhere. Even slowing cars by  picketing the public road entering the  employer's place of business has been  deemed criminal obstruction by the  courts.  Unequal pay for work of equal value  "The strike of AUCE 2 clerical and technical workers at SFU followed over ten  months of negotiations without a contract  and three months of limited job action.  The University's final monetary offer was  a 6%  increase over a two year contract,  representing a 15-20^ decline in real  wages during the two year term.  Rejecting the union's offer of unconditional  binding arbitration, the University proposed that AUCE 2 accept conditional  binding arbitration, namely acceptance of  the principle that AUCE 2  wages be set by  comparison with largely unorganized women  workers in the private sector clerical  job ghetto.  "Like 80$ of the AUCE 2 bargaining unit,  most of these workers are women and paid  less than men holding comparable jobs,,  despite the Canadian Human Rights Act  provision of equal pay for work of equal  value. AUCE 2 won important gains for all  women workers by approaching a realization  of the principle of equal pay for work of  equal value in its first contract in 1974-.  However, since then the union has been  faced with a hard-line stance by an employer determined to reverse its original  commitment to ending wage discrimination  against women workers.  Led by SFU Board  of Governors members Bill Hamilton and  C.B. MacDonald (also president and vice-  president respectively of the anti-union  Employers Council of B.C.), the University  initially offered a bonus rather than a  percentage wage increase; rejected unconditional binding arbitration; ignored the  official requests of students, the  Committee of Concerned Faculty, and  University administrators to settle the  dispute; and, escalated a strategy of  rotating lock-outs which finally precipitated the all-out strike vote by locking  out hundreds of employees.  "After six weeks of strike action, AUCE 2  and the University agreed to accept the  terms of reference of an Industrial Inquiry Commission under the offices of the  Minister of Labour.  Its binding settlement, an endorsement of the University's  position, was finally handed down at the  end of August 1979.  The union received  6%  in the first year and 1%  in the second  year of a two year contract term."  Meanwhile the trials continue. The cases  of Peter Armitage, Judy Cavanagh, and  Robbie Clarke, the three people so far  convicted, are being appealed.  The  Defence Committee points out that it was  not only organized to defend the SFU 18  but also to defend the right to strike.  Many organizations and individuals are  supporting their efforts and donating to  the defence fund.  Donations can be mailed to SFU 18 Open  Defence Committee, c/o AUCE Provincial,  901 - 207 W. Hastings St., Vancouver, B.C.  Phone 684-2457.o Kinesis February '80  CONFERENCE  Alternative Therapy and Social Change conference  Take care of each other while working for social change  By Kinesis staff writers  For a long time people have been depending on professional therapists and psychiatrists to solve their problems and  change their lives.  We are taught that only the expert doctor  can tell us what's wrong with our body,  only the expert politician can fix our  society, only the expert teacher can  teach us anything of value, only the  expert man can be strong and smart.  But there is a new movement - towards  self help. This was the major theme of  the recent conference in Vancouver,  Alternative Therapy and Social Change:  we can learn how to look after ourselves  and each other, emotionally, as we try  to change the world.  What exactly is alternative therapy? And  what's it got to do with social change?  Kristen Perm, one of the conference  organizers, outlined the answers clearly.  Here's some of what she said:  "The title of this conference is alternative therapy and social change. That's  not to say that we believe that therapy  will bring about social change, but that  if therapy is to have a meaningful impact  on people's lives, it has to take into  consideration the social, economic and  political issues that affect us and realize the need for people to change and not  adjust to our present society.  In addition, we recognize that fundamental  changes must be made in order to create a  just society before we can live truly  whole and integrated lives.  The institution of traditional therapy  serves the interest of those in power and  seeks to maintain the status quo. Traditional therapy persuades people to accept  and adjust to the conditions of their  oppression rather than to change those  conditions. And it lays the blame for  emotional problems on the individual.  Traditional therapy views emotional problems in a personal context. This conference realizes that we must view people's  problems in a societal context — we must  take into consideration that we live in a  dehumanizing society where racism, sexism,  poverty, discrimination against gay people  and other groups are a constant reality in  our daily lives.  We see that we must strive to change existing power relationships — on an  institutional, political, economic and  personal level. We must break down the  hierarchical power structures that oppress  us on all levels. Traditional therapy  reinforces that hierarchy of power, so we  must create alternatives and seek to  change the very nature of society itself.  Many of us are actively working to eliminate sexism and racism, and to try to  change the capitalist and imperalist  structure of our society, but we must also  recognize that we have to develop a means  of taking care of ourselves and each  other at the same time. Sometimes we can  become so immersed in our organization of  the masses that we forget to listen to the  friend beside us who says — 'I'm hurting  and I need help and support.'  One of the objectives of this conference  is to extend the network of support and  communication that we have started to  create and to share the skills that we are  developing within the women's movement,  the mental patients liberation movement  and the radical therapy movement.  It is up to us to reclaim and affirm our  strengths.  We have already started doing this in a  variety of ways, by forming co-operatives,  by working collectively and by actively  fighting against the institutions that  oppress us.  It is our hope that this  Ceramic wall plaque by Persimmon Blackbridge. Her friend is a victim of Thorazine treatment  conference will be a part of this continuing process and that it will be an  impetus to create further alternatives, to  create change and to take back our  power."  Workshop topics ranged from feminist  therapy, through mental patients' liberation, to a discussion, by Vancouver Men  Against Rape, linking men, misogyny,  rape and feminism. The objective of  the workshops was to present various  forms of radical therapy which individuals  can learn to do, with friends and in  groups.  Helping each other help ourselves  Peer counselling is one way we have of  looking after ourselves. Dorrie Brannock  and Paullette Roscoe presented a workshop  introducing techniques of counselling  with a partner.  The emphasis is on equal exchange. Two  people get together as counsellor and  couhsellee. For one hour of attention to  her needs, the counsellee exchanges one  hour of attention to her partner's needs.  During the hour the counsellee can do  anything she wants, from talking and  screaming, to a massage, to a walk in the  park. The role of the counsellor in this  situation is to pay attention totally.  Various techniques include: News and  Goods - where you list off the good things  that have happened to you in the past few  weeks; Self-validation - where you list  with pride all the things you like about  yourself, with no qualifications; and Listening - where your partner listens as  the counsellee discharges worries, fears  and upsets.  Another workshop was about problem-solving  groups. These groups use a leaderless,  self-help format to work towards personal  change and mutual support. Each participant in the group makes a contract with  herself and the group to work on changing an aspect of her behavior she doesn't  like.  The group helps formulate the contract in  a positive form, and everyone has to agree  to work on it. Then the group sets small  steps for the person to make within the  next week. She comes back, reports on her  efforts,, and sets herself a new task, with  the group's help. If she is not able to  accomplish the task, the group works to  discover what the difficulty is.  Another kind of counselling group was presented in the Fat is a Feminist Issue  workshop. A group of women involved in  a fat support group presented their experiences in supporting each other in their  leaderless group. Organizing for counselling around similar problems is a technique which could turn out to be very useful.  The constructive criticism workshop added  to the theme. Learning how to deliver a  criticism without hurting the person we  are criticizing is an invaluable skill.  The workshop practised giving and receiving criticisms and appreciations.  Using role playing, everyone had a chance  to deliver a criticism. And to learn how  phrasing in clear terms what is wrong  and how it could be helped prevents a  defensive reaction.  A women's counselling centre is now  being organized to promote self-help  and share such skills as problem solving,  peer counselling and support groups.  "A pill for every ill" was the lead-off  for the superb workshop on "Drugs as  Social Control." A well-organized and  informative discussion of the drug industry followed.  In Canada, we pay some of the highest  prices in the world for drugs. The  drug industry, based in the U.S., and  international in scope, is viewed as a  stable investment for people who are into  buying stock.  Up to 70J5 of all drugs sold- in Canada  are bought by prescription. The drug industry relies on the medical profession  to write the prescriptions that sell  the drugs.  A major proportion of prescription drugs  sold are psychoactive drugs, including  tranquillizers, sedatives and anti-depressants.  Drug companies spend 25%  of their budget on advertising, focussing on medical  journals. The close relationship between  the drug industry and psychiatrists is  not to be underestimated.  Thorazine, which is very widely used in  mental hospitals, is produced by Smith-  Kline, which sold $68 millions worth of  heavy-duty drugs in 1978. Side-effects of  Thorazine include: muscle spasm, slurred  speech, and involuntary movement of lips,  tongue and mouth. And those side-effects  are permanent. A useful, informative  workshop.  It was an excellent conference, from our  participants point of view. Conference  organizers would like to express their  appreciation to everyone who made it happen..p Kinesis February '8  B.C. NEWS  Prince Rupert women protest  sexist ad. and win  When a jewellery distributor used a background of a woman's buttocks to sell  school rings recently, Prince Rupert  feminists protested.  The buttocks provided the background for a  hand displaying a ring, and was a promotional poster for the Winnipeg-based  Jostens National School Services Ltd, who  were offering the rings to Prince Rupert  secondary school students.  As Stephanie Hudson, spokesperson for the  Prince Rupert Options for Women pointed  out, the poster, "reinforces the sex  stereotypes, degrades women and has absolutely no place in the school."  Trustee Kathy Booth, also a member of  Options for Women, won the support of the  two other female trustees.  Together, they  outvoted the two male trustees at the  board meeting, and had the poster removed  from the school.  Bad Billy's violence wiped out  "Bad Billy rapes our young girl but  Violet gives willingly."  This violent little sentence is a memory  aid for electricians which has been in  use across the world for at least 30  years.  It is designed to help students  remember the international colour code for  resistors.  When Shirley Peters learned that her  daughter was being subjected to this  casual acceptance of rape in her Grade 8  class at Cariboo High, in Burnaby, she  went into action.  She protested in writing to the Burnaby  school board, the parent teacher association, the school principal and the B.C.  Teachers' Association.  Said school board chairperson Gary Began,  "I think the parent has a justified complaint." Teacher Oliver Dailey admitted  that he had used the Bad Billy memory  aid in his class.  Reg Risdale, head of electronics department at the B.C. Institute of Technology  told Sun reporter Ros Oberlyn that they  don't use the memory aid any more at  BCIT, "because you've got to be so damned  careful these days."  Transition House Society  gathering information  The newly-formed Society of Transition  Houses of British Columbia met in  Victoria on January 12 and 13, 1980.  The  group, composed of staff and board members from the Transition Houses in B.C.,  has been meeting as an independent body  for over a year. Previous to this,  Transition Houses met as a sub-committee  of BCFW. At the last two meetings we.  have discussed a constitution and by-laws  for the society and have been working on  legislative and policy changes concerning  abused women.  These will be forwarded to  the Advisory Council on the Status of  Women in Ottawa.  Other projects the group  has or is undertaking include the  following: 'Ģ  * Each house is compiling an information  packet containing material on all Transition Houses. This packet is for the use  of newly forming houses.  * A pamphlet has been prepared listing  suggested steps in forming a new  Transition House. All houses have these  pamphlets.  * All houses will be keeping uniform  statistics on why women come to Transition  Houses and from where. These will be  compiled by the Women's Research Centre  in Vancouver.  More than a few lies in paradise  "Paradise Packaged From $454"  This billboard is degrading to the dignity  of both women and men for the following  reasons:  - The woman is portrayed in a defenseless  position of surrender, re-inforcing in  the minds of those who view it the myth  that women are helpless and willing  victims.  - The man is portrayed in an aggressive,  dominant stance, his hand clenched into  a fist, implying that men are by nature  - No agency is named on the poster, implying that for the price of the plane  fare the man "gets" the woman.  For these reasons, Women Hating Advertising Tactics (WHAT) took it upon  themselves to censor this billboard. They  said, "we take this action on behalf of  all women, because sexist advertising  such as in this billboard promotes violence against all women. We take this  action on behalf of all the battered and  sexually assaulted women whose realities  are lied about in advertising."  Fort St James chambermaids are organizing  FORT ST. JAMES: Three employees at the  Chundoo Motor Inn in Ft. St. James were  fired recently for joining Local 4-0 of  the Hotel, Restaurant, Culinary, and  Bartender's Employees Union. According to  Marilyn Johnson, a spokesperson for the  chambermaids, the manager John Polluck,  fired them after they had signed union  cards.  Management has been charged with unfair  labour practices under the Labour Relations Act.  The chambermaids decided to join the  union in order to guarantee they would not  be fired when ownership of the motel  changed hands. New management had plans  to fire any of the chambermaids who would  not accept schedule changes which involved  working weekends. Formerly, high school  students were hired to work weekends so  that the other women could spend that time  with their families.  The chambermaids are also unhappy with  their wages of $3-00 to $4.00 per hour,  which remained unchanged even after being  there for as long as two years. With the  union, they would be making from $5.08 to  $5.48. per hour at the current rate. There  are other problems over scheduling,  typical to the industry, where they never  know what hours they will be working on  any given day.  There also is no recognition of seniority rights nor extra pay for  'holidays or weekends.  New employees are  required to work everyday for as long as  two months in some cases, and then have  been fired for finally taking one day off.  Charges of racism  In addition, there are serious charges  that the management is discriminating  against East Indian employees in delegating job duties and in granting raises.  One East Indian woman employed as a  chambermaid, had worked at the motel for  two years before she received the same  increase in wages (from $3.50 to $4.00)  that a white woman in the same position  received in nine months.  She was also required to clean the washrooms as her special job for those two  years. Another East Indian woman, a high  school student, was also delegated to  this task.  Currently, new staff has been hired to  replace those fired. Marilyn Johnson  says of those hired, "the less they will  speak, the more likely he will hire them."  Among them is one immigrant woman who  speaks no English at all.  The three fired employees are becoming  increasingly impatient as they await the  decision of the LRB. Although they do  not want to take other jobs, the financial  strain is making life difficult.  Marilyn Johnson says that jobs for women  are hard to come by in Fort St. James.  Other than the type of work she was doing,  jobs are only available through the mill,  piling lumber or cleaning up, if you are  lucky enough to get hired. Aspen  Is killing a woman less of a crime?  Both cases involved alcohol, both involved  wife-beating, and both of the accused said  that they had not realized they had killed  the other person.  Garry Smarch, of Whitehorse, recently got  three years in prison for beating his  common-law wife to death with his fists.  Early in 1979, Christine Linklater, of  Old Crow, was sentenced to life in prison  for shooting her husband, who had  repeatedly beaten her.  Linklater faced a second-degree murder  charge. Smarch's second-degree was  reduced to manslaughter.  The difference  cannot entirely be attributed to the  racism of all-white juries. Both Smarch  and Linklater are native people.  The obvious question: is killing a woman  less of a crime? Optimist info Kinesis February '80  B.C. NEWS  Funding for Terrace Women's  Centre cut back  The Terrace Women's Centre is a vital and  necessary service. It does not deserve to  be swept away. Here, Marilyn Crombie from  the Terrace women's centre outlines their  dilemma:  By Marilyn Crombie  Minimal funding for the Terrace Women's  Centre has been granted us through Canada  Works for the 1980 calendar year.  It will  allow us to keep our doors open and one or  two people on staff.  The Women's Centre  can't function at that level of funding  and maintain the same range of services  and programmes offered in the past.  There  will be a definite cutback in our effectiveness.  In a northern community like Terrace,  which is primarily male-oriented, the  options open to women are limited at  best, not to mention the compounding  factors of isolation, alcoholism and  family violence.  Skeena is one of the few areas west of  the Maritimes receiving Canada Works  funding. Next year, there will be none.  The monies have to be distributed equitably within this riding — so, while  we can consider ourselves one of the  "lucky" few to receive a grant, the  amount of money is so slight that it  presents major operational problems.  T.Ve refuse to accept this crippling blow.  We aim to continue the same level of  service to our clients and friends. It is  a vital service. There are a number of  other funding applications out and we are  currently awaiting word on those. More  applications are "in the works". We do,  however, resent this scrambling for funds  activity, the competition that exists  amongst necessary services desperately  trying to locate a source of funds in  order to continue a viable operation.  One thing we adamantly refuse to do, is  charge for our services to women.  "Want  to talk to us? $10. please, in advance."  That is simply not the concept behind a  support service for women which offers  counselling and programmes that encourage  personal growth.  At this point, we're primarily concerned  about meeting our overhead expenses in the  new year and bringing at least one more  person on staff to enable us to stay open.  We and our clients are angry and highly  perturbed at the various levels of government that say that they recognize the  particular needs of women, and then proceed to effectively eliminate services  that address those special needs.  Even though we strongly believe that the  onus for the provision of the services  offered through the Women's Centre  belongs squarely on the doorstep of government bodies, we are making an appeal to  the public for financial support. Any  and all donations, large or small, will  be gratefully accepted. We want to keep  our doors open and our programmes going  strong!  The Terrace Women's Centre staff can be  reached by calling 635-5145  Yukon Transition House  becoming a reality  The long awaited shelter for homeless  women in distress has itself finally  found a home in a federal public works  department house somewhere in Whitehorse.  The house is being provided by the federal department to the territory for a  nominal fee and the local government  in turn, will hand it over to the  management committee.  Women needing the shelter will be able to  make arrangements through the RCMP, social  agencies, women's groups, or by calling a  crisis line.  The home will be not only catering to  women who had been physically abused by  husbands or others but also unwed mothers,  women from rural areas who feel lost in  the city and other women who need shelter.  The Yukon Indian Women's Association.  (YIWA) originated the idea for the  home four years ago.  Since then, the YIWA has gained support of  other local organizations and both territorial and federal government departments.  The private groups on the committee  include other native organizations, the  Yukon Status of Women Council, and the  Women's Centre in Whitehorse.  Government agencies include the Yukon's  Health and Human Resources Dept., the  Federal Health and Welfare Dept., Indian  Human Resources. It was July, 1979.  * Two weeks after these submissions were  made, the regional manager for the MHR  refused the request for funding.  * Options for Women then compiled the  statistics from their emergency service  shelter and took them in person to the  regional manager.  They went back to the  Prince Rupert city council for assistance  in lobbying the regional manager. The  city council wrote to her, requesting  her reasons for refusal. She answered  that the budget for the area was already  committed and that the region had other  priorities.  * Efforts came to a standstill. But in  October 1979, Prince Rupert Options for  Women learned that Grace McCarthy would  be visiting the town. Arrangements were  made for Options women to be in the reception line to speak with her. McCarthy  and Northern Affairs and Canada Employment  Commission.  Staff are being sought, including a director and up to five other full timers.  Funds for setting up the home and operating it will come mainly from a three-  year grant from the Federal Health and  Welfare Dept. which views the Whitehorse  home as a pilot project for similar interagency efforts elsewhere.      Optimist  Prince Rupert women get  runaround instead of a  transition house  Services for women never come easy.  The  recent scramblings for a transition house  in Prince Rupert are a case in point.  Kathy Booth,  spokesperson for Prince  Rupert Options for Women, outlines the  history of her group 's attempts to  get funding for a transition house in  that town.  * In November 1978, Prince Rupert Options  for Women reported that the feasibility  study for a transition house was completed.  Because of the recommendations in the study,  and because of the demonstrated need for  some sort of emergency service, the group  decided to start a volunteer service offering emergency shelter. Four women agreed  to open their homes, and a referral number was given to the RCMP.  * In the spring of 1979, the study was  published. At that time letters of support were solicited from community organizations. More than 50 letters were received, from church groups, unions, women's  auxiliaries, and others.  * Options for Women approached the Prince  Rupert city council, which endorsed the  project wholeheartedly. The group prepared  and mailed a package which included the  brief, the letters of support, petitions  with more than 500 signatures, and the  budget proposal.' Copies went to the local  office of the ministry of human resources,  to the regional manager for the MHR in  Terrace, to Grace McCarthy, Minister of  agreed to meet with the group in November.  * November 10, 1979. The Prince Rupert  women met with Grace McCarthy in Vancouver. She was sympathetic, non-commit-  al.  * Since then, the Ministry of Human  Resources has again refused funding. Instead, the ministry has offered to cover  the cost of hotel rooms for women in  various kinds of crisis: women who have  been raped, beaten, women who are in  emotional distress, women who are just  out of prison...  * Options for Women have refused this  token gesture. They see the MHR using  them as a dumping ground for women in  crisis The ministry's offer to cover  1.     ^sts makes it impossible to provide the kind of facilities and services which women in crisis need.  Options for Women sees an hotel room  as simply further isolation for women in  crisis. Since the MHR has refused funding for a transition house, the group  is trying other solutions.  Prince Rupert Options wants a solution  for women that will break the pattern  of family violence and will serve as an  instrument for change in women's lives.  * Donations are needed and would be much  appreciated. Send them to Prince Rupert  Options for Women, 820 3rd Ave West,  Prince Rupert, B.C. Kate Booth info  Castlegar push for transition house  From the Kootenays, the news is more encouraging. Four Castlegar women are developing plans for a transition house in their  town.  They have met with representatives from  the ministry of human resources in the  area, and they report that the MHR response  has been extremely positive.  As the organizing builds for the province-  wide day of action against violence against  women on May 11, we'll bring you details  about what the Castlegar women are doing. Kinesis February '80  WOMEN AND WORK  Keeping 'em down on the farm, in the kitchen. It's got to stop  By Diana Smith  These days you'll often year 'farm and  domestic workers' said in one breath.  There are reasons these two sectors of the  workforce are often discussed together,  their similarities being more predominant  than their differences.  In B.C. both groups of workers are not  protected by the basic labour standards  legislation that covers all other workers  and which most of us take for granted.  For farm and domestic work there are no  laws which say how much or how often they  are paid, how many hours they work, when  or if they get holidays, what happens if  they get hurt on the job, or, if they are  women and get pregnant, that there is job  security.  Both types of work are characterized by  low pay, long hours, low status and horror  stories of exploitation. Given these  factors it is not surprising that those  who make up this workforce are predominantly women and/or non-white. Recently  the Labour Advocacy and Research Association LARA) has completed a slide-tape  production and a collection of background  material which documents the history, the  current working conditions, and the ways  in which people are organizing to improve  the situation of farm and domestic  workers. Following is a summary of the  current position of farm and domestic  workers and information on the slide-tape  show.  Slim pickins for farm workers  Farm work is usually characterized as  casual labour. Most workers are from  minority groups; East Indians, Chinese,  Japanese, Native Indians, and Quebecois.  The majority are also women. Before  1975 farm workers were legally denied the  right to unionize and today they are still  not covered by any of the existing labour  laws.  They can collect Unemployment  Insurance benefits in the off season if  they can pass the labyrinth of UIC  qualifications.  Workers usually leave home around 5  a.m.  and return around 9 at night.  Several  hours of this time is spent in travelling  to and from the farm, in overcrowded vans,  for no pay. Farm workers earn between $14  and $30 per day, depending on the crop  and which part of the season it is. The  working conditions are generally rough.  Often there will be inadequate, or no,  toilet facilities or drinking water.  Children have to go along  Since the pay is so low, parents cannot  afford child care, which means bringing  children to the farms if there is no one  at home to look after them. The work is  long and hard on the body. It can also be  unhealthy and dangerous with workers  developing rashes and allergies from the  pesticides used on the crops, getting cuts  from working quickly with sharp knives, or  risking accidents such as the one where a  woman was thrown from a tractor into a  barbed wire fence. Most workers are paid  by the piece-rate system.  Instead of an  hourly wage they get paid by the amount  they pick (e.g. in 1979 workers earned $2  per flat for strawberries — a worker  could pick between 10-20 flats in 12 hours  depending on their skill and time in the  season).  If the crop is poor, or as it  dwindles, it takes longer to fill the  flats. In order that the crops get  picked, even though the workers are  working longer but earning less, the  farmers withhold paying wages until the  end of the season.  Farm workers are usually not hired directly by farmers but by contractors;  middle-men who supply the farmer with a  steady flow of labourers, taking 25-40  per cent of the wages earned as their  fee. Not uncommon is the practice of  contractors transferring their assets to a  third party, declaring bankcrupcy, and  leaving their employees, at the end of the  season, without wages. Most of the contractors are of similar ethnic and  linguistic backgrounds as the farm workers  and, since many of the workers have difficulty communicating in English, they can  see the contractor as a benefactor upon  whom they depend, instead of an exploiter.  Last year in B.C. the Farm Workers  Organizing Committee (FWOC) was formed.  Its long-term objective is the formation  of a union that would protect the rights  of farm workers. They want to end the  contract labour and piece-rate wage  systems and make sure wages are protected  from fraud and paid in regular two week  periods. As part of the work of building  Canada".  Before 1970 women could come to Canada as  landed immigrants to work as domestics but  would often leave the job as soon as they  found better employment.  "As a result,"  Epstein explains, "the government stopped  bringing people in as landed immigrants  and instigated a special system to provide  a source of domestic labour which could be  relied upon to remain doing domestic  labour. The government now meets the  demand for live-in domestics by bringing  people in on Employment Visas."  In 1978, 12,483 visas were issued for  domestic work in Canada. Most of these  visas were for Eastern Canada; in B.C. in  that year 626 were issued. Many of  a union the FWOC is helping farm workers  with their problems, particularly those  related to recovery of wages and difficulties with Unemployment Insurance, and  putting pressure on the government to  extend existing labour legislation to  include farmworkers.  No life of bliss for domestics  Domestic work, like farm work, is characterized by long hours, low pay and  exploitation. Like farm workers, domestic  workers are not covered by labour standards legislation.  Their only legal  protection is under the Human Rights Code  of B.C. which, at least on paper, gives  some protection against discrimination  and the Labour Code of B.C. which gives  both groups of workers the right to  unionize.  Most domestic workers are women and many  of those women are either immigrants or in  Canada on temporary work visas. As a  booklet written by the FWOC states, both  domestic and farm work traditionally depend on immigrant labour which means on  the labour of people who are insecure in  this society, and who are kept insecure,  so that they can be exploited to work  under conditions which would not be  accepted by the established sections of  the Canadian working class. This situation is most clearly illustrated in the  case of domestic workers who are in Canada  on temporary work visas, and documented  in a recent article by Rachel Epstein,  "I Thought There Was No More Slavery in  Labour Advocacy and Research Kit  these visas were for women from the West  Indies. The visa entitles the worker to  be in Canada for a limited period of time,  with a specific employer. Wages vary  from $100 to $400 per month plus room and  board, with most women getting around $250  to $300. Legally Unemployment Insurance  and Canada Pension Plan deductions should  be taken from the domestics' wages even  though a person on a temporary work visa  is not eligible to collect any of these  benefits. Epstein states that in almost  every case the women work in excess of a  40 hour week. Some work regular 15-16  hour days and are virtually on call 24  hours a day.  Standards must be set  The Employment and Immigration Commission  has set some minimum standards which an  employer must abide by.  These include a  wage of at least $350 per month plus room  and board and the domestic working not  more than eight hours a day, five days a  week. However in many, many cases, according to Epstein, the employers do not  adhere to the salaries and working conditions agreed upon. Since the woman's  legal status in the country depends on her  having the job for which her visa was  issued she might decide she has no choice  but to accept what is offered. Without  .the job her visa is invalid and she can be  deported at any time. If she finds  another job as a domestic a new visa may  be issued. If her employer has violated  the contract he/she made with the Immigration Department the worker can inform ► Kinesis February '&  ELECTIONS  Only a few candidates deign to answer VSW questionnaire  Fed candidates shy away from responding on women's issues  Response to an election questionnaire  distributed by Vancouver Status of Women  to all known federal election candidates  in Vancouver city ridings was less than  overwhelming.  We think that this says a great deal  about the willingness of political representatives to be responsive to women's  interests and community concern in general. Perhaps they are worried that they  and their parties cannot deliver in areas  of vital concern to us as women. Maybe  they are backing off from "controversial"  issues such as abortion, sexual orientation, equal employment opportunities and  access to unemployment insurance.  Here's who took the time to respond: Judy  McManus (NDP Vancouver South), Ron Johnson (NDP Vancouver Centre), Margaret Mitchell (NDP Vancouver East), Alan Bush (NDP  Quadra) and the Communist Party of Canada (CPC). The three CPC candidates -  Jack Phillips (Centre), Bert Ogden (Kings-  way) and Fred Wilson (Vancouver East) made  a joint response.  Candidates were given a check-list of the  following issues. They were asked to  indicate whether they agreed or disagreed,  and to state whether their party agreed or  disagreed with the following:  * Abortion should be a decision made by a  woman and her doctor  * Federal pension levels should be raised  to ensure that all seniors maintain income  levels above the poverty line.  * Unemployment Insurance benefits should  be available to part-time workers  * Legislation dealing with sexual offenses  such as rape Should be amended to treat  these offences as assault  * Prostitution should be decriminalized  * Federal funds available to women's  organizations and projects should be  increased  * Sexual orientation should be included  in the Human Rights Act  * Affirmative action programmes should be  initiated in the federal civil service  * Women should be reinstated as a target  group in Manpower outreach programmes, and  projects funded to this end  The NDP has, as a party, endorsed all  these points, except for the decriminalization of prostitution, on which they  have no policy. All NDP candidates expressed their personal approval of all  points. The CPC said that the prostitution statement was too simplistic, but  concurred with the others.  They were also asked to outline briefly  their response to the following questions:  * What would you do to ensure that  Unemployment Insurance regulations do  FARM AND DOMESTIC WORKERS -  Three candidates who did reply: Margaret Mitchell, July McManus, Ron Johnson. All are New Democrats  not discriminate against women?  * A recent report of the National Council  of Welfare, Women and Poverty, indicated  that one in six Canadian women are poor.  What steps would you and your party take  to deal with this situation?  * The quality and quantity of child care  has actually declined in recent years.  What role, if any, do you feel the federal  government should have in insuring that  every child has a right to adequate care  facilities?  * There is currently an acute shortage of  affordable housing in the lower mainland  area. Women, and especially single parent  women and those in low-income two-parent  families, are especially hard hit by this  situation. What would your party do to  encourage the development of adequate,  low-cost housing?  "Continue fight against UI cutbacks"  On Unemployment Insurance  McManus: Remove all restrictions as to  number of hours worked per week, also  stop any attempts to have benefits tied  to status as dependent.  Johnson: We would continue the fight  against the Liberal-Conservative cuts in  U.I. benefits and changes in regulations.  I would speak in these problems and raise  the issue of a continuous overhaul of  practices and procedures until the women's movement is satisfied that discrimination has been eliminated.  Mitchell: I have already opposed Liberal-Tory cutbacks to UIC and will continue this on the Employment and Immigration Committee and in the House.  On October 17, '79, Mitchell questioned  Employment Minister Ron Atkey as to "when  can the women of Canada who have worked  on part-time on part-time or seasonal  jobs collect their rightful unemployment  insurance benefits?"  Bush: I would rescind all UIC laws that  discriminate against women, particularly  the new rules regarding hours of work and  part-time work which are particularly discriminatory against working mothers.  Communist Party of Canada (all candidates  response): "Recent UIC cutbacks in coverage of part-time workers, length of coverage, and benefits particularly affect women workers. The Communist Party of Canada  (CPC) calls for increased maternity benefits, and UIC benefits at 90$ of earnings, starting on the first day of unemployment and continuing until a job is found.  On Poverty  McManus: Work towards Guaranteed Annual  Income, improve pension benefits for women,  work towards full employment for all Canadians who wish to work, equal pay for women,  quality child-care - enough for all children who wish it.  Johnson: We would enact legislation enforcing equal pay for work of equal value  in federal' jurisdiction and in contracts  between the federal government and the  private sector, establish affirmative action programs and work to eliminate wage  discrepancies through collective bargaining.  Mitchell: As a result of my efforts,  funds were approved for FAPG-NAPO for  self-help and advocacy. I will continue  to advocate a policy of income insurance  (guaranteed income) above the poverty  line and employment, affirmative action  and training for women.  Mitchell spoke at length on women and  poverty in the House October 22.  Bush:  Poverty among women is the result  more on p.11, over  the Department who may then help her find  another job as a domestic. Since a  domestic worker has few legal rights this  whole process is quite arbitrary and some  domestics will put up with rotten working  conditions rather than risk deportation.  Epstein lists several organizations in  Canada working to improve the lives of  domestic workers. There are two groups in  Toronto, Cleaner's Action and Labour  Rights for Domestic Servants;.there's  LARA in Vancouver; and the Household  Worker's Association in Montreal.  The above information is a brief summary  of the situation faced by farm and domestic workers. The three sources where this  information has been gathered from offer a  much more in-depth description and  analysis. They are:  * The slide-tape production, "Taken For  Granted", and information kit, produced  by LARA. The slide show can be borrowed  from either Legal Services Commission  (744 W. Hastings, Vancouver), IDERA (2524  Cypress, Vancouver) or LARA, c/o Rachel  Epstein (2520 Triumph, Vancouver). The  information kits can be purchased for $2  . each. Each kit contains articles on the  History and Conditions of Farm and Domestic Work; Legal Rights of Farm and Domestic Workers: magazine and newspaper  articles on current organizing attempts;  etc. The slide and tape show can be  purchased from LARA for $50, $60 with two  carosels. There is also a ten-activity  curriculum unit available for teachers and  students. All this material can be purchased from LARA at the above address.  Their phone number is 251-3872.  * A booklet, "Support B.C. Farm Workers",  produced by the FWOC, 7705 6th Street,  Burnaby, B.C. Each booklet costs $1.  *An article on West Indian domestic  workers on employment visas, "I Thought  There Was No More Slavery in Canada" by  Rachel Epstein. It's in the fall/winter  '79 issue of Canadian Women's Studies,  Centennial College, Room 1090, P.O. Box  631, Station "A", Scarborough, Ontario,  MLK 5E9.  Don't forget to write those letters of  support for VSW's annual funding bid! 10      Kinesis February '80  PRISONS  Tensions reach breaking point at Oakalla Women's Unit  By Yvonne Chesim ard  Tensions have flared high to the breaking  point once again at the Oakalla Women's  Prison. It had been heavy in that way  since September '79 with numerous incidents (assaults, lock-ups, basic legal  rights denied, etc.) escalated over the  months until it all culminated in a riot  on New Year's Eve. It's not that it is a  rare or unheard-of occurence. But it has  been extreme enough to come to our attentions out here.  On the priority list of the Corrections  Service, provincially or federally, the  women prisoners come notoriously last. So  we can all assume that the women locked  down in these places contain a constant  level of tension, which the majority of us  aren't clued into until they explode  either from the intensity of prison  pressure (which is obviously going to  happen sooner or later) or from a newer  aggravation.  This time, it seems the women prisoners  have risen up angry in response to both  the buildup of everyday prison tension and  the more recent hassles thrown their way.  Since September, the situation at Oakalla  has worsened. The women had put together  a list of complaints to present to the  director — about the use of male staff,  extreme disciplinary measures, inadequate  medical care, inadequate educational and  visiting programs, and lack of communication with administrative staff.  Similar complaints have echoed down the  years there.  They include the case of the  Oakalla doctor fired after complaints were  received that he used toothpaste in vaginal examinations but who was later  rehired.  Then there was the era of the  Royal Commission on the Incarceration of  Female Offenders in B.C. (Proudfoot  Inquiry) launched by the B.C. Supreme  Court in spring '78.  That commission  investigated such recurring complaints  and made recommendations which, if even :  few were actually implemented, have  amounted to nothing.  The situation has  either remained the same or conditions  have been slightly improved and then regressed to the same intolerable point.  An example of this is the issue of male  guards — a focus of the Proudfoot  Inquiry. As a result of the commission,  male guards are prohibited from the  living units.  So now the male staff  (there are no longer male guards but  instead, male nurses, kitchen workers, and  garden workers) have taken over the habit  of wandering in the living unit area and  coming in as "assault forces" in any  "emergency" situation.  Therefore, has the  scenario really changed?  The women attempted repeatedly to talk  about their grievances with Ms. Marie  Peacock, the director, during those  months. They were unsuccessful in getting  any of her time. The result was to  heighten conflict between those in direct  contact — the women prisoners and the  staff.  Numerous incidents of assaults on staff  happened, resulting in unpleasant discipline on the prisoners...resulting in  further attacks on staff...snowballing  until what many saw as the last straw.  In early December, three women were thrown  in the digger (solitary) for fifteen days.  Handcuffed, naked, and without water  For much of that time they were kept  handcuffed, naked and without water. One  of these women was assaulted and forcibly  stripped by three male staff before being  thrown in. No explanations given to the  prisoners and every action on each side  merely adding fuel to the other's fire.  Since a major cause of the problem had  been the unresponsiveness of the director  to demands for time for the airing of  grievances, the women locked down there  had little patience or faith remaining  that any official would give their complaints even a listening ear.  When an inspector came in early December  to investigate the incidents just mentioned regarding the plight of the women  in the digger as well as methods of  discipline and other issues, the only  result of that was a report and recommendation which will wait through a  lengthy review....And Peacock was still  unavailable to deal with matters that  needed immediate recourse.  Accordingly, the women staged a New Year's  Eve peaceful sit-in which quickly escalated into a smashing spree. Obviously,  when they have had to wait through months  of stalling and repressive measures from  administration, the women are going to  take what powers of coercion they have  into their own hands and force things to  a head -- in the only manner that ever  seems to get them the attention they are  asking from the prison and the public.  The riot was broken up by guards from the  men's unit of the prison.  Subsequently,  the twenty women involved were removed to  the "cow barns" — the isolation units  beneath the barn on the men's side, which  were' condemned and ordered closed five  years ago even though they continue to  the seven days they were kept in that  isolation unit.  After the meeting, the women were all  taken to the digger at the women's part  of the prison, receiving fifteen days each  on charges of causing a disturbance and  destroying government property. Several  of the women face additional fifteen day  sentences for the charge of assaulting  staff.  The plan of the women, at this stage, was  to sit out the fifteen days and start on  getting a prisoner's committee organized  the moment they got out of the digger.  The entire progress of the women  struggling to get some changes inside had  been heading in the direction of a  committee, the existence of which forces  the administrators to give both respective  and a receptive ear to the prisoners.  The women's actions grew from the stage of  frustrated individual deeds through the  stage of realization that they were all in  the same position and they all had the  same things to say — so the strongest way  to do it was through the powerful voice  of a committee. In other words, a union  of the women prisoners.  It's always easier to deal with insurgents  when they act alone and can be punished  alone.  But the moment the women started  getting organized was when they formed the  use them on occasion.  When the women locked down there realized  they were being separated to sort out the  initiators and be individually punished,  the fourteen remaining barricaded themselves in their cells until the director  agreed to have their first meeting.  It is a really superb show of solidarity  when the women band together at a time  when they are the ones getting the  repurcussions. And when they insist upon  pushing forward through it and holding on  until their demands are met.  It is the ultimate revolutionary act to  stay as a unit when the administration is  attempting to divide them, and to stay  together when it seems like everything is  so harsh and all the odds are against  them.  The women eventually got the meeting they  were demanding, even though it was held in  a disrespectful way to the prisoners, who  were not allowed to leave their cells and  remained in their pyjamas as they had for  real threat to the prison system, which  is bound by its own laws to recognize the  prisoners' organizations. And it can't  be said enough how courageous and right-on  it is of the women at Oakalla to have been  more persistent and together than the  "bullies"!!  Everything is flying apart at Oakalla  Women's Unit right now...and everyone  involved knows it. It is obvious that  the women locked down are speaking out  about what's going on but the authorities  are attempting to keep it all quite  secret.  There is an explosive rift within the  staff there. This can be substantiated  by numerous anonymous phone calls to  people on the outside, all with their  complaints particular to whichever side  of the issue they are on.  The director has been empowered with the  right to hire whom she wills. There has  been speculation from the staff members  that, in order to hire, Peacock has subtly Kinesis February '80  forced resignations by creating a situation that has brought mental breakdowns  and a general resistance on the part of  some matrons to enforcing the discipline  she demands.  A situation is then set up where some  staff are unwillingly in the middle between the director and the prisoners.  This makes for tension between staff and  director. As the old staff resigns,  Peacock has the opportunity to hire new  staff that are in line with her policies  and may even be her personal friends or  allies. A dictatorial form of hiring  policy sets the scene for bitterness  within the staff as well, and can contribute to the instability of the  atmosphere in Oakalla.  This is.an  unusual situation in many ways because  we have statements from matrons giving  their opinion that the discipline policies of the director are too harsh on the  prisoners and that they regret their job  of having to enforce them.  The power of  the authorities is being criticized here  directly by the line workers — those  matrons who have immediate contact with  the prisoners and in spite of the usual  prison codes, have their sympathies lying  with the women prisoners rather than with  the administrators.  The Corrections Service will have to deal  with this somehow. Everything certainly  is flying apart — because they can't  tolerate dissension from within. But  nor can they allow a regime of people or  a specific policy to rule the roost.  The official position has been pretty  hazy all along. They must tread the line  between disallowing "improper" exertion  of power within prison administrations and  running a system that consists of nothing  but a powerful body keeping people locked  and powerless. Concessions have  FEDERAL ELECTION QUESTIONNAIRE   of the mistaken idea that women can rely  on husbands for security. NDP would enforce equal pay for equal work, promote  affirmative action, fund child-care centres, increase survivor's benefits under  CPP. Bring OAS and GIS above poverty  lines.  The CPC: Urgent steps are required: a  guaranteed annual income, free medicare,  pharmacare and denticare; roll-back prices  on foodstuffs, clothing, energy, rents,  interest rates and taxes; guaranteed employment for all with substantial wage  increases and COLA; massive, low-cost  housing programs.  On Child Care  McManus: Federal funding to provinces  must be specifically ear-marked for child  care, not only to maintain existing facilities but also to create many more centres.  Johnson: The federal government should  acce*pt a 50-50 role with the provinces and  could provide start-funding for child care  centres. As a model employer the federal  government should make child care available  to its employees.  Mitchell: I spoke in the House of Commons  for federal funds for expanded, more flexible child care and will continue to press  this issue.  On October 24, Mitchell demanded that a model seven-day a week child care  centre be set up on Parliament Hill. An  Action for Day Care Committee was set up as  a result of her pressure.  CPC: The Communist Party calls upon the  Federal government to ensure, through ironclad legislation, the provision of a subsidized 24-hour child care facilities for  all working parents in Canada. We have  called for a Bill of Rights for Children  that would guarantee this basic right.  Bush: A one thousand dollar tax deduction  should become a tax credit based on a scale  which accurately reflects the real cost of  child care. Fund 70$ of capital costs of  child care centres. Fund centre's operating costs, on a dollar-for-dollar basis  been made by both the Inspector of Standards and the Regional Director of  Corrections that things had gotten out of  hand in some instances as far as the  punishment used and that they had spoken  with Ms Peacock about their feelings. To  get even this much from them verifies that  much, much more has gone on.  The essential conflict between the prisoners and the bureaucrats is that the  bureaucrats think that the riot is the  problem, and that the solution to the  problem is to lock the women up and  punish them. The women inside know that  the riot was merely a sympton of the problem, which is that the situation for  them is intolerable and desperate. Why  else would they riot in demand of a  meeting in which they could air their  suggestion met with a part-positive and  part-apprehensive response from the  director. But most crucial is that it has  been given the brush-off, even though the  same program began mid-January at Twin  Maples Prison in Haney.  This is the time to do all possible in  respect to the prisoner's demands to have  feminist programs brought in. The law  students at U.B.C. have just begun a  Legal Aid Clinic inside the Women's Unit  which, now that the women have speci  fically asked for it, will be getting a  more vital response from all concerned.  Other community and professional groups  are' responding positively. The Vancouver  Status of Women, Civil Liberties, Solitary  Confinement Abolition Project, and  B.C.F.W. and others have written the  Everything is flying apart at Oakalla Women's Unit  now... and everyone involved knows it...  grievances?? And they know the solution  is not further lock-ups but some positive  change. During the minimal meeting  between the women and Peacock, the women  presented a list of demands — more programs, work releases, evening entertainment, passes, right to lawyer contact...  and specifically that Legal Aid and the  Vancouver Status of Women be allowed to  bring in regular programs.  Amidst the disintegration at the prison,  it's the women prisoners who have been  able to use it for positive ends. The  efforts to begin a committee must be  supported out here by the women's community, anti-prison activists, and all  humanitarian-inclined persons. The B.C.  Federation of Women had approached Ms  Peacock months ago with a program of  workshops that various women's groups  were interested in taking inside. The  Corrections Service saying where they  stand in regards to the situation for the  women locked within Oakalla's walls. We  shall most likely be seeing civil action  cases and criminal court cases over the  assaults on prisoners by staff members.  As a community group, Civil Liberties is  demanding the right to meet with the  prisoners' committee.  When you're inside, every ounce of  support means a lot so we'd like to see  that coming in whatever way you can give  it. Letters and visits are important for  information and solidarity shared both  ways. We may need, at any moment, to be  very spontaneous with support pickets and  demonstrations for fasting, striking or  riot-bound prisoners. We all need to be  creative and initiative-taking. Do it.  "They're in there for us, we're out here  for them." • To contact Yvonne,  call VSW  736 1313.  under CAP. Promote 24 hour child care."  On housing  McManus: Lower interest rates, federal  mortgage funds should be directed to cooperative and other forms of non-profit housing.  Johnson: We propose the creation of a national Building Corporation specifically to  build low-cost rental accommodation; provide  increased support for co-ops; and land-banking programs in conjunction with municipal  and provincial governments.  Bush also pointed to the NDP call for the  development of a National Building Corporation, and added: increase federal portion  of cost-shared programs with provinces. Provide income supplements where required.  Mitchell:  I am pushing for increased nonprofit and corp. housing including units  for single women and for rent subsidies to  reduce cost of housing to 25% of income.  Mitchell has worked closely with local  housing groups, including DERA, SPOTA and  CMHC. In the House of Commons, Mitchell  opposed PC proposals for mortgage tax  credits "which benefit so few people"  and spoke of the housing needs of tenants  CPC: "In order to meet the chronic short  age of affordable housing, the following  steps must be taken: roll-back interest  rates; public ownership of land for urban  development; turn CMHC into public instrument to build low-cost, public housing  with subsidized rent levels; 400,000  units annually.  Other areas  McManus: Our leader Ed Broadbent is the  only leader who is campaigning consistently on a platform of equality for women.  Personally, I am a committed feminist.  Johnson: I am a constant supporter of the  fight against sexism in language, in social behaviour and generally in both organized activity and individual attitude.  Bush said that immigrant women must be protected from discrimination. Mitchell mentioned her filibuster of the anti-abortion  bill (see p.2 Kinesis) and her speeches in  the House on elderly and immigrant women.#  SURVIVAL  We need your letters of support  This is the time of year that Vancouver  Status of Women applies for funding to  Provincial Secretary.  If we're refused,  then we'll be forced to close down our  services: consciousness-raising, assert-  iveness training; information and educational resources; legal advice, referral  and advocacy. Kinesis will go, too.  So if you read this, please write us a  letter of support.   Tell Evan Wolfe, the  Provincial Secretary, that VSW provides  an essential service which you, for one,  know cannot be cutback!  MERCIA STICKNEY, an executive member of  VSW, is running in Richmond South Delta.  She's an NDP candidate there.  the  letter to Provincial Secretary,  . Parliament Buildings,   Victoria.  But send  the letter  to us, so that we can forward  it with others. We need every last one of  you to do this for us. Thank you! Our  address: VSW, 1090 West 7th, Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3 Kinesis February '80  EQUAL PAY  The complaint of Susan Jorgensen  Enduring the dragged-out Board of Inquiry blues  By Ann C. Scbaefer  Some of those traits that used to be  considered feminine in pre-liberation  days — patience, endurance, aptitude for  details — may be due for a revival if  you're a woman trying to get a crack at a  job in a traditional male stronghold.  Going to hearings, for example, with long  spells of waiting in between, could become  a way of life for you.  At least that's what's happened to Susan  Jorgensen, 24, an employee at B.C. Ice  and Cold Storage's Vancouver harbour  plant, a warehouse operation handling  mostly fish. It's been nearly three  years since she got fed up with being paid  less to do the same work as men with  about the same seniority, and with being  laid off before them. In April 1977 she  filed sex discrimination complaints with  the Human Rights Branch, which then conducted an investigation and tried to sort  things out with the company. When this  tack failed, the HRB asked the Labour  Minister to appoint a Board of Inquiry.  Allan Williams got around to doing that in  January 1978, making the proviso that the  United Fishermen and Allied Workers Union  (UFAWU) be named as co-respondent with  B.C. Ice.  A year later, the situation's still not  resolved. In the meantime, the employees  at the plant (members of UFAWU) staged a  16 week strike at B.C. Ice. For six  weeks, equal pay for work of equal value  was a central contract demand, but the  ultimate outcome of collective bargaining  was a new contract under which women must  wait 1000 hours to get the same wage they  would have earned previously after logging  only 400 hours — and it's still 65^ an  hour less than what male co-workers earn.  So, while on the surface things may have  improved since 1972 (when wage supplements  to the fishing industry master agreement  were printed on blue paper for men and  pink for women), in reality, discrimination has only been made more subtle and  insidious. Now, all women are relegated  to the neutral-sounding "Group 2," and  paid less than men once they're stuck  there. That's what Susan Jorgensen and  the Human Rights Branch are trying to  prove, but it's taxing in more ways than  one.  The three-member Board of Inquiry (lawyers Mr. Jack Bourne, chairperson and Ms.  Lynn Smith, and member of the Labour Relations Board Ms. Claire Alcott) met several  times last year, was once asked to disqualify, itself by UFAWU president Jack  Nichol, mulled the request over for awhile  and decided it was amply qualified, was  postponed once while Ms. Smith gave birth,  met in January for five full days, and  scheduled further hearings for this month.  Belabouring the obvious—men don't  have to prove themselves  In January J.J. Camp, counsel for the HRB  and Susan Jorgensen, concluded their case  by calling two co-workers of Jorgenson,  Jorgensen herself, and Human Rights  Officer Valerie Embree, and by recalling  another woman who works at the plant, Fay  Newman, who testified about an incident  which occurred since she first gave evidence before the Board. The union was  represented by its president Jack Nichol,  . who took the stand himself and called no  other witnesses. Thomas Roper, lawyer  for the employer, called Dr. William  Buckler of VGH and B.C. Ice president  Stewart Reeder. All witnesses were subject to initial examination, cross-examination by the other parties, possible  re-examination, and questions from the  Board.  (Reeder's cross-examination was  deferred until the next meeting of the  Board because of a technicality.) Much of  the testimony concerned events of three  or more years ago.  Warren Hunter, a group 1 employee at B.C.  Ice with less seniority than Jorgensen,  testified that he had never performed many  of the tasks designated group 1 and that  he felt he would be incapable of doing at  least one of them (heading) because he is  left-handed and does not have strong  wrists. His evidence is significant because several women at the plant have  testified they were told they could not be  reclassified into group 1 until they  proved they could perform each and every  task in that category.  Mrs. Eleanor Gagnebin, a 60 year old  group 2 employee, has worked at the plant  since 1968, generally washing, racking and  packing fish, and often tallying, a job  for which she receives a premium. She  testified that when she works with men in  any of the first three jobs, they receive  a higher rate of pay. She also said that  she saw Susan working alongside men stripping herring racks in 1977 and that Susan  is a good worker who keeps up with the  men. (Mrs. Gagnebin tried the work once  herself, but found it too hard because of  the weight involved.) Camp showed Mrs.  Gagnebin the company's seniority list,  on which she is sixteenth. She was able  to indicate six men below her on the list  who work more often than she and said she  would prefer to work more if the work  were available.  A peculiar seniority list  Jorgensen testified she first worked at  B.C. Ice in 1973 and that her seniority  dates to 1975. Her brother started  working at the plant in 1976, but she was  laid off before him when things slowed  down. Jorgensen testified she sought more  employment by speaking to the foreman. He  told her there was none because she  couldn't work in the freezer. She proceeded to lay a grievance, which led to  her being allowed to work (at group 2  rates) during the herring season (January and March) of 1977. Traditionally,  women are laid off at this time. "I  complained to the Human Rights Branch in  April," she said, "because I was not  receiving the same rate of pay as other  people with my seniority who were doing  the same job; and because I'd lost work  in December 1976."  She worked during the summer, again at  group 2 tasks, but was laid off once  more in the fall when men junior to her  were not. Again she laid a grievance  about not being allowed to work in jobs  she felt she could do. The president of  the company, she testified, told her  that if she wanted to do group 1 work  she'd have to be able to lug 100 pound  halibut and stack 150 pound boxes into a  boxcar, as well as perform all the tasks  specified as group 1. But she was also  informed they judged her to be a hazard  to herself and, as a company is responsible to the Workers Compensation Board  for deciding whether a person is fit to  do a job, B.C. Ice judged she was a high  risk for injury. Reeder told her that if  she were really determined to try the  work, she could waive her rights to  compensation. (Apparently the company  wasn't too clear about the law which  forbids this. ) In the same meeting, she  complained, management told her that the  only reason she wanted to come back to  work was to pretend, or actually, to hurt  herself in order to qualify for compensation benefits. These unfounded allegations offended and infuriated her.  In 1978, Jorgensen continued, new men  were hired while she was laid off. Also,  all the other women at the plant were  invited to try group 1 work, but the  foreman told Jorgensen that she could  not — the company would make no decisions on what she could or could not do  until the Human Rights hearing reached a  decision. During cross-examination the  company's lawyer, Tom Roper, referred to  this incident by telling Susan, "You were  denied group 1 work for a reason you don't  understand and the only reason you can  think of is that you are a woman." He  played up to the fact that all the other  women were offered the work and, throughout his cross-examination, made much of  sore, tired, weak wrists.  Questioning by Board member Lynn Smith  revealed Jorgensen has no objection to  working in cold storage and feels she  could do~the work if she were provided ►  / was not receiving  the same rate of pay  as other people  with my seniority  who were doing  the same job  Susan Jorgensen, in front of B.C. Ice and Storage      Rick Loughi EQUAL PAY  Kinesis February '80      13  the same suitable clothing the men wear.  Probation. Or, every time I think I  know where it's at, they move it  The Board allowed Fay Newman to take the  stand again (she testified last year) over  Roper's objections that the case had become too far-reaching. He contended  the company does not take the point of  view that no woman can do group 1 work —  just that Susan Jorgensen can't do it.  (Naturally. To say otherwise would be to  admit to sex discrimination. ) Camp said  he intended to show, with Newman's new  evidence, that the attitude of B.C. Ice  is discriminatory.  Newman, like Jorgensen, wanted to join  the ranks of group 1. Last summer she  was told she'd have to undergo a 400 hour  probationary period to determine whether  she was qualified.  (She's already worked  at least 1000 hours, so this is apparently  a new rule for women, to keep up with the  changing times. ) She was told she could  begin her probation by helping to load  60-300 pound frozen halibut into a freezer  truck.   ~  So Newman — strong, healthy, and all of  5' tall — went off to unload what Nichol  referred to as "the whale halibut." The  man she was supposed to work with, she;  said, "wasn't pleased when he saw me.  He's a big guy __ about 6' tall, and  heavy — he towers over me. We started  but he just didn't want to work with me.  I couldn't keep my feet on the ground and  reach over into a deep tote to pull fish  out of the bottom." Furthermore, her  hands were too small for the gloves that  make handling frozen fish much easier.  She was under constant supervision for  two hours, Newman testified, with two  managers, two charges hands, and a couple  of truck drivers watching, and her coworker complaining all the while.  "It  was a great scene," she said.  "So I  thought, this fellow doesn't want to work  with me, it's making it difficult for me,  I don't want to do this — so I'll go  back to racking fish, "Newman explained.  The man who took her place finished the  day but, she said, told the manager he's  never do it again because he was too short  and it was too hard for him. But he had  been given some pointers to make the work  easier, while she'd received no  instruction.  "I'm not saying I couldn't do it,"Newman  emphasized. "I could do it if I had someone else to work with. I believe that,  with help, I could fill that truck full  of halibut."  Human Rights officer Valerie Embree  provided the Board with a study she  prepared of three months in late 1977 when  Jorgensen was not called in to work but  men junior to her were. There were two  such days in October, 17 out of 24 working  days in November, and 14 out of 21 working  days in December, thus substantiating  Susan's claim of working time lost. -  During cross examination, Embree stated,  "It's standard for an employer to offer  the defence of fear and risk of injury (to  the employee who is charging discrimination), so one is prepared for that to  arise in a case and to assess the merits  of the defence."  UFAWU and sex discrimination: "An  educational process within our  membership."  UFAWU president Jack Nichol gave the  union's case, maintaining, "The complaint  doesn't say the union has discriminated —  just that the contract does. Callouts,  assignments to jobs, and so forth are  management functions. I don't believe  that the collective agreement by itself  discriminates against women. If there is  discrimination, it's the result of appli  cation of the collective agreement by  management."  Nichol explained that equal pay for work  of equal value is a policy of UFAWU, although achieving the principle in  contracts has involved "an educational  process within our own membership. Nonetheless awareness is growing." He  catalogued improvements in fishing industry contracts since 1973, citing the time  at which the union won a two-year phaseout  of inequality in payrates.  "I warned the  membership," Nichol said, "that we hadn't  necessarily won the battle. We would  still have to fight for fair application.  I'm not satisfied the agreement has been  applied in the way we envisaged it should  be." One of the terms of the.contract was  the abolition of differential rate for  male and female workers — and the  establishment of groups 1 and 2, which  correspond exactly to the old categories.  (The one task which was not assigned to  either group is washing fish. Nichol  explained that men in one plant might  eventually earn the top rate after 1000  hours of washing fish, whereas women in  another plant who perform only this task  would never progress beyond the 400 hour  rate. )  The union's stand in last fall's B.C. Ice  and Cold Storage strike, Nichol said, was  that all workers, male and female, should  receive the same start, 400 hour, and  1000 hour rates; in other words, the  distinction between the groups should be  abolished. The union clung to this  demand for six weeks.  Ten weeks later,  the strike ended when the union accepted  a contract which the company felt would  "resolve the human rights issue". The  outcome is stranger than fiction. Under  the new contract, a group 2 worker must  put in 1000 hours to earn the same wage  she would have earned previously after 400  hours — and it's still 65^ an hour less  than what the men earn.  "Anything that we have now is pure tokenism, it's not enlightened management,"  Nichol commented, promising the question  will be in the forefront of industry  talks this year.  The company: "It's not sex  discrimination; it's industrial  engineering"  Mr. Stewart Reeder — B.Eng; MBA (Harv.  Bus. School); President, B.C. Ice and Cold  Storage — took the stand to articulate  the company's position. Because the  company doesn't own any of the goods it  handles, he said, it must deal with the  very complex task of keeping track of  inventory. Highly perishable fish, he  said, have "quite emotional content" for  their rightful owners. The company has  to deal with all the unpredictability of  nature involved in fishing. And if  they're not careful, a sense of negativism could pervade the whole company  because just about the only feedback they  get from customers is negative. A cold  storage business, he said, lives and dies  on volume, so their motto is "never turn  down a sale". They must be flexible and  run a lean organization.  What this all adds up to is the company's  rationale for the group 1/group 2 distinction.  "We lost control if we move  senior people around, so we decided to  have a swing crew that reacts to changing  requirements and moves on." In the  summer, he explained, this is usually  the new hires, and they can be expected  to do any group 1 or group 2 task.  Group  2 workers have it easier, though; they  are expected to perform fewer tasks and  expend "far less effort."  Susan Jorgensen's demands to be allowed  to do group 1 work placed the company  "between a rock and a hard place as regards to Workers Compensation Board  requirements and Human Rights Board  requirements," Reeder stated (stated  several times, as a matter of fact). He  also said it was not the company's intent  to accuse Jorgensen of trying to rip the  company off (by deliberately hurting herself to qualify for compensation), but he  testified he did feel there was a high  probability of injury if she continued to  do group 1 work.  As for the new collective agreement,  Reeder says there is opportunity for  workers to transfer between the two  groups once hired. He also said the  major strike issue was whether B.C. Ice  would pay more money than the industry  does.  "We don't believe we have a human rights  problem," Reeder summarized.  "I don't  think we've committed any act against the  Human Rights Act. The situation we have  to deal with is the 1000 hour rate  issue.  The union is calling it a human  rights issue, and using it as a smokescreen and a rallying cry They were  using a smokescreen as a slingshot."  After that, Mr. Nichol's feelings appeared  genuinely hurt for the remainder of the  day and he commented that he didn't  realize there was so much subterfuge  involved in collective bargaining. •  The hearing will resume Monday, February  18, at 9:30 am, in Room 4 of the Robson  Square Media Centre and will continue  Tuesday, February 19; Monday, February 25;  and Tuesday, February 26 (all in Room l).  The company's case will be concluded and  arguments will be presented. Hopefully. 14      Kinesis February '80  RAPE RELIEF DEBATE  Should we increase convictions, or lower expectations?  In the debate about the relationship of  the criminal justice system to the work  of rape crisis centres, this article puts  forward yet another point of view. It is  reprinted from AEGIS, July—August '79.  By Deb Freidman  The criminal justice system's handling of  rape cases has been a primary target for  reform by workers in rape crisis centers.  Many anti-rape workers support the approach of using criminal convictions to  solve crime.     The purpose of working with  the criminal justice system,  accordingly,  is to establish reforms that will help  increase the rate of criminal convictions  for rape.  This article will address the limitations  of relying on criminal convictions to prevent rape.     Other forms of crime prevention employed by the criminal justice  system,  including offender rehabilitation,  will not be discussed.  Reforms that improve women's lives can,  at the same time, also be part of an  overall  strategy to change the underlying  conditions of women's oppression.  Reformism stops short of fundamental  change, however, taking the reforms  themselves to be the only goal.  The issue of working with the criminal  justice -system that arises in anti-rape  work has become a classic example of  "reforms" versus "reformism." Anti-rape  activists talk constantly about the goal  of increasing rape convictions. Yet we  seldom discuss how this will contribute to  our ultimate goal of ending rape.  Getting the system to convict more rapists  is a valid reform. Rape convictions are  important for a number of reasons:  - a low conviction rate for rape reflects  women's status in society; it shows  society's tolerance for women's victimization and encourages people to see rape  as the woman's own problem.  - a court conviction is one of the only  ways a woman who is raped can obtain any  kind of justice without putting herself in  legal jeopardy or physical danger if she  attempts to avenge herself.  - taking one's rapist to court is sometimes a way to regain at least some of the  feeling of control that was taken away by  the act of rape.  - "getting an individual rapist off the  street," even for a short while, may  prevent at least a few rapes.  We can participate in helping women get  their rapists convicted for all of the  above reasons, assuming it is the woman's  own choice to prosecute.  In order to gain  convictions, it is necessary to work on  reforming the criminal justice system to  make it more "just" for women and more  responsive to women's needs — a reasonable short-range objective.  What is intent of increasing convictions?  However, gaining an increase in rape convictions is not a strategy to eliminate  rape. What is the intent of increasing  convictions? Criminal sanctions do not  prevent crimes like rape from occurring.  Convicted rapists are kept from raping  women only as long as they are incarcerated and the incarceration of a small  number of rapists does little to deter  other men from committing rape.  Even if the majority of rapists could be  caught and imprisoned, rape would not end  because the causes of rape would still  exist (sexism, pressures on men to perform  sexually, socialization of women to be  victims, etc.) At best, the prevalence of  rape would be substantially reduced if the  majority of men who committed rape were  imprisoned for a long period of time (at  least forever). This is an unlikely  prospect and even if not, it would require  enormous resources and create a totally  repressive society. (If rehabilitation of  rapists on a wide scale was instituted  along with a high rate of imprisonment,  such a strategy might be less repressive  but would still be very inefficient. In  fact, however, the penal system's efforts  at rehabilitation have not been very  successful except for a few individuals. )  Relying on the criminal justice system to  solve rape is "reformist." It ignores the  dynamics that cause rape (rather than  destroying them), and it forces us to  lower our expectations from the virtual  elimination of rape to a mere reduction in  its incidence.  Relying on the criminal justice system is  'problematic for a number of other reasons.  Some of the logical outgrowths to seeing  convictions as the solution to rape are:  * Blaming women who don't report their  rapes to the police for any additional  rapes committed by their attackers (rather  than blaming the system which encourages  rape. )  * Seeing rape as an isolated act rather  than a continuum of aggression towards  women. Many men express their hatred of  women through sexual objectification,  domination and verbal aggression. Even  though only a few men actually commit  physical assaults (although the number of  physically assaultive men is increasing  daily), many more men must be held responsible for the sexist attitudes that  produce rape.  * Becoming absorbed in law reform and in  monitoring the criminal justice system to  prevent the erosion of newly-won  improvements.  * Depending on the courts to solve social  problems and to remedy individual situations.  It would be impossible to have  laws against all  forms of sexual abuse, no  matter how extensively we reform state  criminal codes to expand the definition of  rape. On the one hand, we want the law to  give women as many options as possible and  to reflect women's right to not be beaten,  raped, sexually harassed, or abused. But  we don't necessarily want a society where  people must spend all of their time (and  theirs and society's resources) redressing  grievances through the courts.  * Promoting a system whose purpose has  little to do with the protection of women  Aegis/Barbara Schreiber/ Women  or citizens. The criminal justice system  exists to preserve the social order by  ensuring obedience to the law. When a  crime is committed, the injury is to the  state, according to our legal system, and  only the state may take action against the  offender.  * Seeing rape as an act committed by  certain types of men, particularly lower  class and minority men. As more and more  minority and lower class men are convicted  of rape, due to classist and racist attitudes and procedures, rape comes to be  identified as a crime committed primarily  by these men. Racism and classism, like  sexism, are systems of domination of one  group of people by another. Supporting  racism and classism (by failing to attack  either) promotes the idea that any group  of people should be dominated which in  turn reinforces the existence of sexism —  one of the causes of rape.  Difficult to distinguish our position  If the criminal justice system doesn't  offer us a means to eliminate rape, what  should be our involvement in its processes  and goals? Until there are some alternative means of justice, of crime prevention  and of eliminating the causes of rape that  we have the power to institute, we will  continue to need the criminal justice  system and criminal justice reforms for  our own purposes. In fact, it will frequently be difficult to distinguish our  position from that of the criminal justice  system's as we continue our daily attack  on rape.  Short of totally ignoring the criminal  justice system, there are some things we  can do now to distinguish ourselves from  its limited and often reactionary goals.  Primarily, we should continue to demand  the actual elimination of rape, not just  its numerical decrease. We can also begin  to search beyond higher conviction rates  (or locked doors) for a means to alter the  dynamics that produce rape. We can  actively oppose the racism and classism  of the criminal justice system and,  finally, we can begin to look at the  reactionary functions of our current  system of justice and propose a structure  that would ensure justice for all people.  Then, and until women have power, it will  be possible to select reforms that we can  legitimately support without abandoning  the struggle to end rape.* Kinesis February '80  RAPE RELIEF DEBATE  Going to court is voluntarily turning over power and control  By Diane Freed, Rape Relief Worker  Wentzell's testimony was interrupted by an  outburst from the complainant and his  lawyer's address to the jury was punctuated by a Rape Relief representative.  I feel robbed to think that when I stood  up in court to protest the blatant lies  that the rapist's lawyer was presenting to  the jury (which, incidently, consisted of  II men and one woman) that it was seen as  punctuating.  I feel somewhat like a  question mark.  The details of that trial are unimportant  at this point.  The players were different; the lines altered somewhat but the  charade was the same and you can bet the  winner was, too.  In my personal struggle with court  accompaniment, my argument was that I must  support the woman in court, if that was  her choice.  The two days I spent in  court with Cindy (Wentzell) were far  worse for me than my own rape.  For, in  this instance, I realized that I was  voluntarily  turning over my power and  control and that I was completely helpless to change anything that was happening there.  That experience has not changed the basic  principle that a woman must make her own  choices. But in order for her to do that,  it is imperative that she is clear about  what her choices are and what each of them  mean for her.  To believe that a woman in crisis is too  vulnerable and weak to hear the truth is  to play into the game; to add to the lies  that she has already been told is to add  to her pain.  To go to court with a woman; to stand by  and watch her be torn apart and, then when  they are done, to pick her up and put the  pieces back together for her is to acknowledge their victory.  To support institutions which, by their  very existence, contribute to our oppression is to negate out criticism of them.  At least 70$ of the women who call us have  already made the decision not to report to  the police. Of the very few cases that  are reported to the police, less than 7.1$  end in a conviction. So, in fact, 93$ of  the women who go to court are leaving  wondering what has happened to them in a  judicial system that is supposedly there  for justice and for her protection.  Based on these facts alone, it is clear  that we must find another way. We must be  working consciously and concretely toward  providing alternatives.  We must go further to a place that we have not yet  been. We must take more than they are  willing to give.  If we wait for it to  happen — it won't!  I am personally committed to creating  those alternatives and at the same time  supporting the women who call whether  they choose the traditional way or the  new way.  It has been stated that we must not confuse work with women who call us with  social relations in which we live and I  am confused because I can't find any  difference. •  Elderly women are a hidden  target for abuse  Sexually abused as girls, battered as  wives, then beaten up again by their  grown children when they get old and  helpless, many women are victims of sexist  violence throughout their lives.  A Massachusetts group called Legal Research and Services for the Elderly (LRSE)  has issued a report called "Elderly Abuse  in Massachusetts." This chronicles the  extent to which old people In the state  are regularly beaten, starved, forcibly  confined and overdrugged by those supposedly taking care of them.  The survey,  based on interviews with more than 1000  professionals who deal with the elderly,  showed that in 86%  of the cases the abuse  ,is carried out by relatives, and 80$ of  the victims are women.  While elderly women are in part victimized  because of general sexist ideology which  permits violence against women, there are  other particular reasons compounding the  problem.  Women, for example, live longer  than men and thus have more years of  physical helplessness and dependency.  Women are also more likely to live in dire  poverty in old age, forced to live with  relatives if they are to survive.  The survey points out that much of the  abuse is triggered by the frustration and  helplessness of relatives trying to care  for sick, feeble and confused old people  without adequate social or financial  support from the rest of the community.  Unfortunately, old people who are abused  by their relatives are often afraid to  speak up, for fear of being removed and  forced to live in a bleak "welfare hotel"  or in a dreaded state-run old age home.  (Guardian)  Wife has right to husband's  future pension  Because a pension is a family asset, a  divorced wife is entitled to half the  pension her husband may receive in the  future.  This is a precedent-setting decision  handed down recently in the B.C. Supreme  Court by Justice J.C. Bouck. The case  concerned the claim of Frances Rutherford  against her former husband Raymond  Rutherford. He had nominated his children  as beneficiaries under the Public Service  Superannuation Act. The judge said it  seemed clear that the husband intended to  deprive his wife of a share in the  pension.  Rutherford was directed to file a new  election nominating his wife in place of  the children.  Justice Bouck said that when the husband  retires, he and his former wife will have  to work out an arrangement for dividing  the pension.  If they cannot agree, division of pension proceeds will be made by  the court.  "As■things stand now, I would be inclined  to grant the wife a 50$ share in the  monthly cheque ($1,800) should the husband, now 53, decide to retire at 55 (when  he first becomes eligible for his public  service pension), or to work until  retirement at the age of 65."  The husband is appealing the decision.  Aging population will no  longer tolerate poverty  The aging population, with its increasing  political power, will not tolerate indefinitely a life of poverty in retirement.  So says Retirement Without Tears, a report  prepared by a Senate committee, chaired by  Liberal Senator David Croll.  The study points to the fact that elderly  women are among the poorest people in the  country.  In 1977, 48$ of unattached women  65 years and over had annual incomes of  less than $3,000.  .Although 94 of every 100 women marry, only  26 can expect to live with their husbands  until death, 15 will separate or divorce  and 53 will become widows.  Wives and husbands, the report urges, must  have an equal share in pension benefits  that either partner earns during the marriage.  Employee and employer contributions to the  government pension plan (Canada Pension  Plan) should be more than doubled, the report adds. There are now 3.6$, but they'll  have to go up to 8$. These increased contributions could bring pension cheques up to  about $450 a month. Compare that with the  current maximum of $218.06 a month.  Only with that increase in benefits, and  with the 50-50  split between wives and  husbands, the report argues, will there  be a reasonable and adequate pension for  the millions of women who have not done  waged work outside the home.  Retirement Without Tears also recommends  that private pension plans be forced to  provide adequately for widows and widowers.  Mandatory retirement based on age should  be abolished, the Croll report emphasizes.  At the moment, 65 is the year for compulsory retirement. The report wants to see  that phased out over a five-year period,  to be replaced with a more flexible plan.  Homeworkers should get  pension  Housework is the largest single service  industry in world, says Penney Kome, a  Homemaker's columnist and author of a  forth-coming book on housework. More than  5 million Canadian women do housework as  a full-time occupation, and its value has  been estimated by Statistics Canada as  $77 billion in 1978.  Kome favours the possibility of making  women who work in the home eligible for  veterans * benefits. They would then be  eligible for pensions, educational assistance and preference for government jobs if  they decided to rejoin the workforce.  Taskforce on Older Women  circulating questionnaire  The NDP TASK FORCE ON OLDER WOMEN is  circulating a questionnaire in B.C.  to gather data on the status of older  women in this province. For copies  write Task Force on Older Women,  517 E. Broadway, Vancouver V5T 1X4.  Ed Broadbent, leader of the NDP, says  he will increase the Old Age Security  Pension by $40. (Do I hear $45, anyone?) 16      Kinesis February '8  PENSIONS  Now we're all a decade older...  Here's a basic, feminist guide through the pension maze  This material is extracted from the report,  WOMEN AND POVERTY, prepared by the National  Council of Welfare, and published last fall.  You can obtain a copy of this superb re- •  port by writing to the council at: Brooke  Claxton Building, Ottawa, K1A 0K9  Even if a woman has married "well" and has  been quite comfortably off throughout her  life, she is still very likely to face the  toughest hurdle of all, widowhood.  As Canadian women marry men who are slightly older than they and whose life expectancy is shorter than their own, most of  them are bound to become widows at some  point in their lives. When they do, they  will become members of the poorest group  in Canada.  In 1975, 45$ of widows aged  55 to 64 were poor, as were 66$ of those  over the age of 65.  Very few women are well prepared to deal  with old age and widowhood. In a house-to-  house survey carried out in a well-to-do  suburb of Toronto in the spring of 1979,  41$ of the women interviewed said they had  no idea of the type of pension they could  expect to receive at age 65. Of those who  thought they were well informed, many indicated in subsequent answers that their  knowledge was in fact very sketchy.  Contrary to what many people think, husband's  pension plans very seldom provide adequate  protection for surviving wives. In fact,  less than half of all workers participate  in a private pension program through their  employers, and of those, half again are in  plans that give no continuing benefits  whatsoever to surviving spouses. All told,  less than one widow in four can expect to  get any regular benefits from her deceased  husband's employer. Even then, what she receives will in most cases amount to only  50$ of her husband's pension entitlement.  If a widow is under the age of 65, the only  pension she is likely to get is from the  Canada or Quebec Pension Plan (CPP/QPP).  As average CPP surviving spouses' benefits  amounted to less than $100 a month in 1978,  however, a woman with no other income is  sure to be destitute.  ITer only recourse in  that case would be welfare, and that would  still not bring her income up to the poverty level.  If a woman is counting on her husband's  savings or insurance policy, she is also in  great danger of being disappointed. A study  of middle-aged couples' expenditures and  savings patterns concluded that only those  among the highest-income 20$ were really in  a good position to save enough for their  old age.  As for life insurance, the average amount of death benefits "paid out under  individual policies in 1977 was about $4000.  That would just about cover the cost of a  first-class funeral!  Considering that surviving spouses under  age 65 still have some chances of finding  a job, albeit a lowly and badly paid one  in most cases, the situation of widows over  the age of 65 is comparatively much worse.  Except for the very few who are entitled  to a work-related pension in their own right  because they were in the labor market, these  women are completely dependent on CPP/QPP  widow's benefits and on federal and provincial income support programs for senior  citizens.a  CPP does not see housework  as "real" work  In July 1977, Royal Assent was given to  amendments to the Canada Pension Plan. The  first of two amendments which provide some  measure of recognition for spouses who work  in the home is equal splitting of pension  credits.  Upon divorce or annulment of the  marriage, husband and wife split CPP pension credits equally.  This credit split  which is to be retroactive to 1966 when  the Plan began, would be made upon application by either spouse within three years  of the marriage dissolution.o incongruous result that a woman working  But women remain financially vulnerable     full-time at the minimum wage could double  by the traditional division of tasks between ^er pension entitlement by quitting her  spouses. Even if their marriage is stable  and the husband's income is adequate,  wives who drop out of the labor market  to raise children often suffer economically  in the long run because of the interruption  in their pension coverage and the reduction  in value of their marketable skills.  The government's main response to this now,  which consists of giving husbands a tax  exemption for their "dependent" wive;  job.  Conversely, a homemaker's pension  limit would fall dramatically when she took  part-time employment, even though she would  also be doing the same work at home.  The result would be a drastic weakening of  the present link between earnings and pension contributions that none of the three  main political parties are willing to support at the present time. Their election  promises on this subject therefore appear  totally inappropriate. By giving the benefit to have been little more than Pious wishes.D  to the man instead of the woman, it wrongly  assumes that a wife at home is a financial  burden who costs more than the value of  the services she renders.  The Quebec Status of Women Council has  called for the "married" exemption to be  abolished and for the sums thereby saved  to be reallocated as increases in benefits  for the real dependents in families, children  In order to avoid causing hardships to elderly couples, the married exemption could be  Looking at these anomalies,  the Advisory  Council on the Status of Women (ACSW) comments: we do not advocate voluntary contributions because they would effectively exclude women with low-income husbands who  have no income of their own.Q  There is an alternative  There is an alternative. It has not yet  gained much media appeal, but it could  prove to be very effective in providing  temporarily retained for older spouses who  have already claimed it.  In contrast to -the married exemption, a  most appropriate way to help homemakers is  to provide them with continuous Canada/Quebec Pension Plan coverage when they drop  out of the labor force to work in the home.  This was a popular issue in the May 1979  federal election, during which all three  major political parties expressed support  for permitting voluntary participation by  housewives in the Canada Pension Plan. Unfortunately, it is not clear what they  meant by that.  The stumbling block to voluntary contributions by housewives, which none of the politicians tackled, is the synchronization  of the pension entitlements of women at  home and women in the labour market. Canada  Pension Plan contributions and benefits  are based on earnings, with people whose  wages in 1979 were $11,700 or more making  maximum contributions entitling them to  maximum pension credits. Persons working  for the minimum wage contribute roughly  half as much and get only half the pension  entitlement.  At what level would housewives voluntarily  contribute? To allow them to contribute  at the maxiumum level would lead to the  most homemakers with non-stop pension coverage, is the "child-care drop-out period"  •amendment that came into force in the Quebec  Pension Plan in 1978. By dropping from a  parent's pension calcuation the years she  or he spends at home with children aged less  than seven, this measure provides uninterrupted coverage to most women who leave  the labor force to take care of young child-  The federal parliament has approved a similar amendment to the Canada Pension Plan.  This is the second major amendment to CPP  which was given Royal Assent in 1977, and  which would recognize the contribution of  child-rearing.  Under proposed federal law, contributors  would be able to drop out these years of  low or zero earnings which are spent in the  home with young children. This would mean  that when calculating their lifetime average earnings for benefit purposes, their  child-rearing years would not mean that  their CPP benefits would be less. The provision would protect both the eligibility  and the amount of CPP benefits earned by  a contributor prior to leaving the labor  force for child-rearing.  But here's the snag:  This law cannot come into effect until the PENSIONS  province of Ontario withdraws its objection to it.  Ontario's right of veto stems  from the fact that such changes to the CPP  require the approval of two-thirds of the  participating provinces having two-thirds  of the population. And Ontario has more  than one-third of the population of Canada  minus Quebec.o  British Columbia also does not endorse the  drop-out period. But all the other provinces do.  The ACSW comments: public pressure must be  put on the province of Ontario to endorse  the proposed drop-out provision in the Canada Pension Plan for women who temporarily  leave the labor force to raise children.^  OAS, GIS: fancy initials for  not enough money  After a lifetime spent taking care of  their spouses and children, women who had  no opportunity to become financially self-  sufficient are now abandoned by a generation that benefitted most from their work.  The federal government operates three programs for senior citizens. The first is  the Old Age Security pension (OAS), which  is taxable and given to everyone who has  reached the age of 65 and meets the residency requirement..  Right now, OAS amounts to the princely sum  of $182 a month.  One of the groups that recently suggested  abolishing the family allowance for couples  with above-average family incomes also  recommended that old age pension be taken  away from pensioners with family incomes  above the national average. This would  mean that some well-off elderly people  would lose their pension, while others  with no income of their own (mainly women)  would also be cut off because of the comfortable incomes of their spouses.  On the one hand, it makes a great deal of  sense to with-hold the old age pension  from people who don't need it.  On the  other hand, it would not only be illogical  to take this pension away from elderly  wives on the erroneous assumption that all  spouses are financial partners, it would  be cruel as well. Because, as we know,  some of these women will become poor as  soon as their husbands die.  This problem could be avoided by denying  the old age pension only to elderly people  with high personal (as opposed to family)  incomes. Considering that about only 5$  of -senior citizens have incomes higher  than the average wage, however, and that  those who do pay tax on the pension they  receive, such a move would save so little  money that it would not worth the trouble  and anxiety it would cause.  The second federal program for senior citizens, the Guaranteed Income Supplement  (GIS) for low-income people aged 65 and  over, is of crucial importance for older  women. It is the specific purpose of the  GIS to supplement the income of poor senior citizens.  Unfortunately, the old age  pension and the supplement together are  still insufficient to provide unmarried  senior citizens, most of them women, with  an income that reaches the poverty line.  The federal government ..should increase the  Guaranteed Income Supplement without delay  to make it at least equal to Statistics  Canada's poverty line for urban areas.  Liberal leader Pierre Trudeau promised January 15 to increase the GIS by $35 a month.  The increase would go to 914,000 households  - which includes couples as well as single  senior citizens.  GIS is now a maximum of $149 for single pensioners and up to $249 for senior citizen  couples.d  What Feds give with one hand, Socreds  swipe with the other ?  Even if Trudeau is elected, and even if he  does in fact keep his promise to increase  .GIS by $35 a month, odds are that the B.C.  government will simply dock the sum from  its Guaranteed Available Income for Need  (GAIN) payments. J think it's a lovely  promise,* says Bruce Eriksen, president of  the Downtown Eastside Residents' Association. The only problem is that the provincial government will deduct it from GAIN.  GAIN payments now total up to a maxiumum  of $38.88 a month. Senior citizens are  eligible for the GAIN supplement if their  OAS-GIS comes to less than $349 a month,  if you're single. GAIN makes up that difference, to bring you up to that level .0  The third program for senior citizens is  the Spouse's Allowance, which was introduced  by the federal government a few years ago.  The idea in introducing it was to guarantee  the same minimum income to couples where  only one spouse was over 65 as the couples  where both spouses were pensioners.  It provides an allowance to low-income spouses  aged 60 to 65 whose husbands or wives are  already getting the OAS-GIS.  The problem with the Spouse's Allowance is  that it is only for spouses.  If the older  spouse dies and the younger one becomes a  widow or widower, s/he is no longer eligible,  The previous Liberal government (before its  defeat in May 1979) added another patch to  this ill-conceived quilt by extending the  could ensue. Take three penniless widows  living next door to each other. One could  be entitled to the Spouse's Allowance because she was receiving it before her husband died. One would not be entitled because her husband died when she was 59 and  not yet eligible for the Allowance. The  third would not be eligible because her  husband's income has prevented her from  being entitled to the Allowance when he  was alive.  Spouses Allowance causes  hopeless muddles  A far better solution would be to extend  the present allowance so that an amount  equal to the OAS-GIS is provided to all  low income women and men between the ages  of 60 and 65.a  When the legislation concerning spouse's  pension benefits was debated in the House  of Commons, Health Minister David Crombie  said, the government has approved the proposal to reinstate all those who have been  cut off spouse 's allowance since the inception of the program in October 1975,  and who still meet eligibility requirements.  Liberals and New Democrats applauded the  Spouse's Allowance to six months after the  older spouse's death to allow the survivor  time to apply for welfare. The six-month  Conservative government promised to continue  the Allowance until the surviving spouse  becomes eligible for the OAS-GIS pension  at age 65. That promise was contained in  Bill C-6, An Act to Amend the Old Age Security Act, which became effective October  31, 1979.  This proposal is not satisfactory. It gives  a federal pension to some widows aged 60  to 65 while other widows and single people  just as old and just as poor are not eligible.  Here, is an example of the absurdity which  government's motives for restoring the  benefits to those elderly who are likely  to be most in need.  Stanley Knowles, NDP House leader, and a  long-time crusader for improved pensions,  tempered his enthusiasm by saying that  changes were desperately needed for a  poorly conceived bill.  Recipients between 60 and 65, regardless  of need, still must be married in order  to receive the benefits. I don't like  means tests and needs tests,  said Knowles,  but it's a thousand times better than  having a get-a-man test.  The basic wrong is still there,  he stressed 18      Kinesis February '80  ACROSS CANADA  Jamaican woman to be  deported, husband no longer  wants her  Hyacinth Burnett, so, has been ordered to  leave Canada because her husband no  longer wants her here. She is a frightening example of what happens to an  immigrant woman whose husband decides he  doesn't want to sponsor her any more.  Ms Burnett married her husband, a  landed immigrant, 3 years ago in 1976.  They moved to Toronto, and her husband  applied to sponsor her as a landed immigrant.  Two years later, immigration  officials had still not made a decision  on the application.  In 1978 the couple separated. Basil  Burnett withdrew his sponsorship.  Burnett, now eligible for deportation, has  not been able to enforce a $45 a week  order of support for her two year old child.  She may be given a departure notice, which  will mean she can reapply for entry at  any time, or a deportation order. To  get the first, less severe order, Mrs.  Burnett must show that she is willing and  able to pay her way back to her native  Jamaica. The immigration hearing  continues.  The Association of Immigrant Lawyers has  said that the government should deal with  the question of whether sponsorship can be  withdrawn.  The case was reviewed on CBC-TV Ombudsman,  by Kathleen Ruff, who suggested writing to  Ron Atkey then Minister of Employment and  Immigration, to ask for:  1) Hyacinth Burnett's case to be  reviewed and consideration given to  issuing a Ministerial Permit for a 3 to  6 month trial period; and  2) That the sponsorship system be reviewed so sponsor and sponsored  individuals understand its significance  and revised so it cannot constitute a  threat if personal conflict develops.  Write supporting Hyacinth Burnett,  c/o her lawyer Barbara Jackman, 165  Spadina Ave. #33, Toronto, Ontario  PC's promise to smarten up...  The Conservatives were full of promises.  Ron Atkey, their minister for employment  and immigration said that measures were  under "active review to alleviate the serious difficulties facing immigrant women  employed as domestics in Canada." At present, the women can be fired without notice and paid as little as $50 a week with  no overtime, no sick leave and no vacation  benefits.  As a first step, Atkey assured us, he would  have his ministry insist that the contract  a foreign domestic worker signs with her  employer and Canada Manpower (sic) spell  a few things out: the hours of work, the.  pay for overtime, vacation pay, and who is  going to pay for medical coverage under  health insurance plans. A legally binding  contract? Well, no, Atkey admitted. But,  said he, foreign domestics are "encouraged"  to return to the Department and complain  if the terms of the agreement are not  met.  Most domestics are working under one-year  work permits that name their employer. If  a domestic is fired or quits, she has two  weeks to find a new job as a domestic or  she must leave the country. Ottawa Letter  _____—____«_   info  Ontario refuses to support  domestic workers  In the Ontario Legislature, a private  member's bill seeking to amend the Employment Standards Act and provide protection  to domestic workers in the areas of: hours  of work, minimum wage, overtime, and  holiday and vacation pay, was recently  defeated. Some objections raised by  Conservative MPs included the impossibility of regulating such an amendment,  that households would not be able "to  afford to hire domestic workers, and that  fewer job opportunities would be available.  Brian Charleton, the NDP member who introduced the bill pointed out that similar  arguments were used against the minimum  wage itself before its implementation.  Meanwhile, women continue to work from 45  to 80 hours a week for much less than  minimum wage and in oppressive conditions.  Upstream  Edmonton labelled rape  capital of Canada  Edmonton, with its self-proclaimed boast  of being the Gateway to the north, now has  another slogan to carry: Rape Capital of  Canada.  More than 2,000 women have been sexually  assaulted — from violent rape to crude  pawing — in Edmonton in the last five  years.  And that figure, even police concede, is  just the tip of a horrifying iceberg.  The city's Rape Crisis Centre estimates  that for every rape reported, six to nine  are not. Police Chief Robert Lunney  believes the percentage to be somewhat  Quebec rape crisis centres face  closure  Sondra Curry  MONTREAL — Two of Quebec's rape crisis  •centres, one in Sherbrooke and the other  in Trois Rivieres, is facing closure  due to lack of funds.  Two other Quebec rape crisis centres, in  Hull and Quebec City, will suffer severe  cutbacks of 75 to 80%  in staff and services. As well, the opening of two new  centres, in Montreal and Chateau Guay, is  now in doubt.  The announcement was made at a press conference called by the Regroupement  Quebecois des centre d'aide et de lutte  contre les agressions a charactere  sexual (Quebec Sexual Assault Centres)  which is an umbrella group for the existing and proposed centres.  "This is a New Year's gift from the  Pequiste government to Quebec women said  the Regroupement.  At the press conference, the Regroupement  announced they had just received word that  its grant request of $200,000 needed to  run the four centres had been turned down  by Social Affairs minister Denis Lazure.  According to the Regroupement, they had  received verbal assurances from several  members of the Social Affairs ministry  that their request for funds would be  No sickleave, no overtime, no vacation, no job security for foreign domestic workers.  less, with between four to seven women  keeping quiet.  Rapes are on the increase; from 87 reported incidents in 1977, to 135 in 1978/  and 146 last year.  Whichever figure is correct, the increasing number of sexual attacks here  gives Edmonton the highest incidence of  rapes among major Canadian cities.  According to recent police statistics  there were 15.3 rapes for every 100,000  citizens last year. Calgary reported 14  rapes per 100,000 people and Regina  ranked third with 13.9.  When the number of indecent assaults is  included, Edmonton's rate is 68.1 victims  per 100,000. Next highest is Vancouver,  with a population three times as great at  a rate of 58.3.  A Rape Crisis worker attributed the sexual  crime to Edmonton's rapid growth.  "Edmonton is a fast growing city where  the pressure to succeed is probably  greater than in other cities. There is  intense competition and the rapist is  often just a guy who is not doing so well  at the office as the guy at the next desk,  and decides to take it out on somebody  else.  "There is no sexual gratification in a  rape.," she said. gun  approved. The call informing them that  their request had been denied came as a  shock.  The Regroupement pointed out that the  provincial government has spent $100,000  for a series of province-wide workshops  studying violence against women but is not  prepared to support sexual assault centres already established to deal  concretely with this violence.  Upstream  Military dodo finds women a  no-no  TORONTO — A retired colonel has criticized the Canadian Armed Forces for  using women in recruiting offices.  "What red-blooded man wants to talk to a  woman about joining the army?." asked  Lt.-Col. Jim Cameron, a 30-year forces  veteran, at a session of the federal  study group reviewing Armed Forces  unification.  Unification has destroyed the aggressiveness of combat officers, making "hothouse  tomatoes" out of soldiers who don't dare  risk damaging equipment in manoeuvres for  fear of jeopardizing their careers,  Cameron said.  Province Kinesis February '80       19  ACROSS CANADA  Stelco backing down  Catherine Dery  EDMONTON — The Edmonton Steel Works  (Stelco) has finally agreed to hire  women. Changing facilities for women in  the plant have been installed, and women  will begin working in the plant at the  end of November.  How many women will be hired; what jobs  they will perform once in; and whether  Stelco will hire Lynda Little and Sarah  Butson, the two women who launched the  Women into Stelco Campaign Committee, are  all still unknown.  "The Women into Stelco Campaign Committee  regards this new policy as a victory for  women and the entire labor movement as  well as an important precedent for women  getting jobs in other industrial plants,"  said a press release from the committee.  This victory resulted from the wide  support that the committee was able to win  in the labor movement.  It has received  enthusiastic support from the two largest  Canadian locals of the United Steel  Workers of America, in Hamilton and  Sudbury, as well as the Grande Cache local  here in Alberta. Support has also come  from the Edmonton local of the Canadian  Union of Postal Workers, the Alberta  Union of Public Employees, the Alberta  Status of Women's Action Committee, and  the Edmonton Women's Coalition.  The campaign has won wide publicity in  the media, including coverage on the  nationally televised CBC program "Ombudsman." The Alberta Human Rights Commission  began an investigation of Stelco's hiring  practices.  The success of the campaign to this point  gives some indication of what can be won  when the power of the unions is brought  behind women's rights struggles.  But the fight with Stelco is definitely  not over.  The Women into Stelco Campaign  Committee has expressed concern that the  new hiring policy may be "a token accommodation to the present public attention."  It has decided, it says, to "monitor  developments at Stelco and will continue  to press for the hiring of Lynda Little  and Sarah Butson, the two women who were  refused jobs there several months ago."  Socialist Voice  Radio Shack condemned for  labour law violations  Radio Shack has been ordered to compensate  the United Steelworkers of America and the  firm's employees in Barrie for damages as  a result of bad-faith bargaining and other  flagrant violations of labor law.  The order by the Ontario Labor Relations  Board is a landmark decision, embracing  the most comprehensive set of remedies for  bad-faith bargaining ever fashioned by a  labor board in Canada.  The decision, written by board chairman  George Adams, found the big electronics  company guilty of a wide range of unfair  labor practices, including intimidation  and coercion to prevent employees from  exercising their rights to join a union  and to block formation of a union.  The board majority accepted unchallenged  testimony that spies had been hired, that  camera surveillance had been used, and  that the company's chief security officer  had said the Fort Worth headquarters of  Radio Shack had told him to "get rid of  the union no matter what the cost."  Radio Shack has 400 stores and dealer  outlets in Canada. The company, a subsidiary of Texas-based Tandy Corp., has  more than 7,000 retail electronic stores  throughout the world. The Barrie warehouse is the only one at which a union has  been certified as bargaining agent for  employees of the company.  The majority of the Barrie workers are  women, and the strike has gained the  support of women's groups as well as other  unions. Organized Working Women, NAC and  ' the International Women's Day Committee  from Toronto, joined the picket line for a  Women's Solidarity Day in November, and  support from women's organizations  continues.  The union struck Radio Shack last Aug. 9  after it won bargaining rights in a long  and bitter fight only to be stymied in  bargaining. The organizing campaign involved labor board citations against the  company for unfair labor practices.  The central issue in the strike was the  union's demand for compulsory dues checkoff for all employees.  Since the strike began, the Steelworkers  have launched a campaign aimed at persuading consumers not to buy Radio Shack  products.  At the board hearing, the union said its  bargaining unit had been demoralized and  all but destroyed by the company's tactics before the strike. Of about 180  employees in the unit at the time, about  35 are still on strike.  Despite vindication by the Ontario Labor  Relations Board, the Radio Shack workers  in Barrie remain without a contract.  Globe & Mail  Nova Scotia pro-choice group  organizing  HALIFAX — This past summer in Halifax a  19 year old woman — pregnant, unemployed  and separated from her husband — applied  to the Victoria General Hospital board  for an abortion. Permission was granted.  Her husband, in an effort to prevent the  abortion, threatened to sue anyone who  performed the abortion. The attempt was  successful: the abortion did not take  place.  At the same time, in family court, Judge  Bartlett appointed a member of the Nova  Scotians United For Life — an anti-  abortion organization — as "legal  guardian of the foetus." There was no  legal precedent.  Both of these actions have grave implications for women in our struggle for  control over our own bodies. Shortly  after these events took place, a group of  women, men and children marched in protest  outside the Victoria General Hospital.  As a follow-up to this action, a group of  women formed Pro-Choice — an organization  with a feminist socialist perspective.  Plans for action include organizing a  speakers' bureau to talk to interested  community groups, unions, and high school  students; production of an information  pamphlet; developing mall displays; and  possibly establishing an abortion counselling and referral service in Halifax.  Upstream  EQUAL PAY  Bill 3, which provides for Equal Pay for  Work of Equal Value, has passed through  its second reading in the Ontario Legislature. Pressure from the Equal Pay  Coalition and other members of the women's  movement, combined with an unorchestrated  campaign of telegrams and phone calls,  forced the three party leaders to hold  public hearings on this private member's  bill.  Bill 3 will compel employers to reevaluate  work according to four criteria — skill,  effort, responsibility, and working conditions, and to set salaries on the basis  of which jobs are assigned most points.  The Chamber of Commerce and the Canadian  Manufacturers Association are lobbying  furiously against this bill, claiming it  is too complicated and costly. But women  in Ontario are planning to articulate  loudly and clearly at the hearings that  sex discrimination in the economic sphere  is costing women, dearly and that those  employers engaged in the practice must be  given responsibility for what can only be  called reparations.  Political pressure had enough impact to  produce the hearings, and hopefully more  of the same will assure final passage of  the bill.  Broadside  Joe says no to anti-choicers  Joe Clark, speaking to the National Action Council January 28, said that he was  not contemplating any changes to the Criminal Code of Canada regarding the criteria  for legal abortions.  He also said that he would welcome legislation to guarantee equal treatment for  all women under the abortion law. Many women, Clark"has discovered, are denied ac-  cces to abortion because of economic and  geographic factors. He's been reading his  Badgley report.  Where's our landmark ruling?  MONTREAL (CP) -.- The Canadian Human Rights  Commission is on the verge of winning a  landmark decision that would force the  - federal government to put women's salaries  on a par with men's, says chief commissioner Gordon Fairweather.  The commission is currently acting on  several complaints from women in the  federal civil service who say they are  being paid less than men working under  the same demands, Fairweather explained.  He said he is confident that a decision on  the case by the treasury board will  favor the women and eventually have a profound affect on wage practices in both  the civil service and private industry.  "The 80s will feel the impact of this if  we do our business properly," the commissioner told a meeting of the Daily Newspapers Publishers Association.  "I'm sure one case will be settled in the  next couple of months."  The issue is "equal pay for work of  equal value."  Well, he said all this last November. So  Where's our landmark ruling, Gordon?  ACSW releases its report on  battered women  About 500,000 women in Canada are beaten  up by the men in the their lives each  year. That's what the Advisory Council  on the Status of Women (ACSW) says in its  new report on wife battering. About Jl%  were beaten weekly or daily; 26%  at  least once a month. 20       Kinesis February'80  INTERNATIONAL  Peru cracks down on  contraceptives  The Peruvian government has recently  closed down all state contraceptive  services in response to pressure from the  Catholic Church. This move ensures that  only wealthy women, who can afford private  medical consultations, will have access  to contraceptions.  ALIMUPER — Action for the Liberation of  the Peruvian Woman — calls this move "an  infringement of the rights of Peruvian  women who are victims, once again, of  masculine power." They say the suspended  services were "strictly voluntary and low  cost", and that they were funded by the  United Nations.  The church authorities on the contrary  claim that Peruvian women were being  "pressurized into using birth control  through propaganda." According to the  National Institute of Statistics, 37% of  deaths in Peru each year are of children  under the age of one.  There are over 85,000 abortions a year and  many of the women who have them end up in  hospital with complications.  This situation can only get worse if services are  not restored.  ALIMPUR is calling for protests against  this restrictive measure be sent to  President Francisco Morales Bermudez,  Palacio de Gobierno, Plaza de Armas, Lima,  Peru.  Spare Rib  Is Warner Communications  really seeing the light?  Women Against Violence Against Women and  Warner Communication, Inc. (SCI) have  jointly announced the end of a two and a  half year dispute regarding the use of  violent images in record advertising.  David H. Horowitz, office of the President, Warner Communications, Inc. New York  stated: "The WCI record divisions oppose  the depiction of violence, against women  or men, on album covers and in related  promotional material.  This policy expresses the WCI record group's opposition  to the exploitation of violence sexual or  otherwise, in any form." Mr. Horowitz  further stated, "Although this policy is  subject to prior contractual restrictions  where applicable, the WCI record group  has chosen to strongly discourage the use  of images of physical and sexual violence  against women in these cases as well."  The WCI record divisions have been implementing this policy internally and  today's announcement at the request of  WAVAW, formalized that policy.  "We commend the WCI record group for  formally announcing this advertising  policy," declared Joan Howarth, spokesperson for WAVAW headquarters in Los  Angeles, "and we anticipate that it will  have an important impact on advertising  policy throughout the record industry, as  well as in other industries, and on the  media industry as a whole.  WAVAW happy to end boycott  "WAVAW, which has been advocating a  boycott of WCI's record subsidiaries  (Warner Bros., Atlantic and Elecktra/  Asylum), now happily calls an end to that  boycott," Ms. Howarth stated.  "By publicizing this policy, the WCI record  group is acknowledging that the commercial  use of visual and other images that  trivialize women victims is irresponsible  in light of the epidemic proportions of  real-life violence against women, most  particularly rape and domestic battering.  Of course, WAVAW's pressure on the record  industry will continue, because this is  an industry wide problem. We look forward  to increased receptivity from other companies as a result of the step taken by  the WCI record group, one of the most  T. Tuthill/LNS  From the New York rally during the recent U.S. National Abortion Rights Action Week.  important leaders in the industry.  WAVAW joined with California NOW in  calling for a boycott of all WCI records  in December of 1976.  In order to counteract the depiction of violence not only in  record advertising but throughout the  entertainment industry, WAVAW chapters  have formed in over 25 cities to educate  the public and to work toward policy  changes. la chapter WAVAW  Divorce one step closer in  Ireland  There is no divorce in Ireland. Only  divorce, "Irish style." A husband may  leave his wife for weeks, months, or  years.  Then when he wants to be her husband again, he can return at will.  The problem of permanently deserted, wives  is now so large that the government has  been forced to bring in a special deserted  wives allowance (which ceases the moment  the husband walks in the door again).  But a man is allowed to sue his wife for  loss of her services, sexual or domestic.  If someone harbours a woman from a violent  husband, that person too can be sued by  him.  The Pope thinks it's great, this Irish  devotion to marriage.  In his recent visit  there, he said: "May Ireland always continue to give witness before the modern  world to her (sic) traditional commitment  to the sanctity and indissolubility of the  marriage bond."  But divorce may be one step nearer, now  T. Tuthill/LNS  that Jose Airey has won her case against  the Irish government in the European Court  of Justice in Strazbourg.  Jose Airey had argued that she has been  unable to afford the only kind of judicial  separation available in Ireland — an expensive, High Court procedure.  Airey had been fighting for a separation  since 1972, when her husband, who had  previously been convicted of assaulting  her, left the 'matrimonial' home.  She asked six solicitors in Cork to take  the ease.  They all refused. Then she  went to the European court.  That court  decided that Ireland had violated article  six of the 1950 Human Rights Convention by  depriving Airey of an effective right of  access to the High Court to seek a  judicial separation.  It is expected that hundreds of Irish  women who previously could not afford the  legal costs will now seek separation.  Roisin Boyd/Spare Rib  Crazies wipe out liberal  abortion laws in Israel  Here's what a small group of crazies can  do when they hold the balance of power...  The Israeli parliament voted December 17  to restrict abortions.  The ultra-orthodox  Agudat Israel party was able to force the  vote because their four seats supply the  shaky Begin coalition with its narrow  majority.  (See last month's Kinesis)  The Knesset voted 58-53, with nine  abstentions, to repeal a law allowing ► Kinesis February '80  INTERNATIONAL  abortions for social or economic reasons.  The first vote on repeal last November  resulted in a 54-54 tie. Nine members of  Begin's coalition voted against it or  abstained, allowing the opposition to  block passage.  The new bill, predictably, will hit  hardest at the poor, since expensive  illegal abortions can be obtained from  private doctors.  A poll published the same day as the  repeal indicated that 11%  of Israeli women  and 67/? of men opposed the change.  Also on December 17, the French senate  voted 113-101 against a law that would  have continued the five-year old liberalized abortion laws in that country.  The National Assembly, the lower house of  parliament in France, had approved continuation of the liberalized law November 30  and had recommended that the legislation  be made permanent.  The law, which the Senate has just tossed  out, allowed abortions up to the 10th week  of pregnancy, on medical and social  grounds.  French government pimping  A prostitute from Strabourg is taking the  French government to court, accusing it  of pimping.  The dispute began when she was told by the  government that she had to pay $100,000 in  back taxes.  The government had based its claims on  what they think is an average working year  for a prostitute: five customers a day at  $25 dollars each, 200 days a year.  "If the government says I'm a whore and  then takes my money, that's pimping," she  said.  "I don't even know a pimp who'd  demand this much." Reuter  TV screen does not hold the  mirror up to life  Suppose we placed a representative  sample of television programming into a  time capsule.  Future generations would conclude that  old age was a rarity,   that women mysteriously disappeared before they hit  40,   that Hispanics were seldom seen and  that men definitely had more fun.  That's Kathleen Nolan, president of the  U.S. Screen Actors Guild. She's right.  TV is unreal.  Just how unreal was borne out recently  in a U.S. study, Women and Minorities in  Television Drama, 1969 - 1978.  The  report confirms what we already know:  the white man is king, women are cast in  traditional, stereotypical roles and  children and old people are under-  represented.  More than half the prime-time characters  are between the ages of 25 and 4-5. Men  outnumber women three to one. And the  gains made in the mid-70's by Blacks and  Hispanics have not been sustained.  As the report confirms: There is a positive relationship between television  viewing and responding that women should  stay at home,   that a woman should not  work if her husband can support her,  that men are better suited for  politics. ...  Swedish gays are just sick of it  The struggle for lesbian and gay rights  continues in many countries.  In Sweden,  the government will remove "homosexuality"  from its list of illnesses.  Thirty lesbians and gay men from the national gay  group Riksforbundet for sexuellt  likaberattigande (RFSL), phoned employers  requesting sick leave on the grounds that  they were gay.  Under Swedish government regulations, the  employers had to give them sick leave: in  October, the government stopped defining  lesbianism and homosexuality as diseases.  On September 1, a lesbian and gay pride  march in Stockholm drew 1,500 people compared with 700 last year and 300 in 1977.  In Helsinki, Finland, (home of the international "human rights treaty"), Finnish,  German and Swedish lesbians and gay men  demonstrated against a Finnish law that  prohibits "public encouragement of lewd  behavior between members of the same  sex." In practice, this law has prevented  the dissemination of any information  about lesbianism and homosexuality.  00B  Miss Piggy is everything we  don't want our daughters to be  A woman writing into a Houston feminist  paper warns of the dangers of The Muppet  Movie: "I was appalled at the blatant  sexism of the film. Naturally, the main  character/hero was a male figure, Kermit  the Frog, who goes through a series of  marvelous adventures on his way to seek  fame and fortune in Hollywood. Of the 20  characters in the film, three were female.  Miss Piggy was the only one of the three  who had what could be considered a major  role. The audience first meets her as the  winner of a beauty contest. She is  beautiful (for a pig), but of course, as  the stereotype goes — "you can't be both  beautiful and intelligent at the same  time" — therefore, the big-busted,  blonde Miss Piggy is an idiot. She is  everything we don't want our daughters  to be."  BMR  Sexual harassment victory in  Shelton  It all started with that young lady and  she apparently wanted to take on the  giant,  District Judge Jack Tanner recently told a packed court in the state  of Washington.  Tanner then ordered the  Simpson Timber Company in Shelton to  reinstate with full back pay, benefits and  seniority Toni Gilbertson. The 29-year-  old woman was fired last summer in  connection with charges of sexual harass-  4PS0N  J£R CO.  ment against the company.  But Gilbertson, who was asked for favors  while being interviewed for a job, had  considerable help in taking on the  "giant." In what was the first major  walkout ever over sexual harassment, 14-00  woodworkers — all but 50 of them male —  struck for eight weeks against the company. The leadership of the International  Woodworkers of America (IWA) settled with  Simpson Dec. 1, the day after Tanner's  decision.  According to attorney Chris Mrak, who  represents both Gilbertson and the union,  Gilbertson would not have had a chance in  her sexual harassment grievance against  Simpson if she had not received the  support of the union. Four other judges  have upheld Tanner's ruling, according to  Mrak, signaling an eventually victory in  the case.  Because the issue involved women, some of  the men were initially reluctant to go  out, according to Jim Lowery, president of  the IWA local at Simpson. We have some  staunch strong male chauvinists in this  union and some will always be that way,  he said. But, he added, as a result of  the strike a lot of (the men) have  changed their opinion about women in the  workplace and feel they should be given a  fair shot.  Simpson, meanwhile, has not yet responded  to any of the charges of sexual  harassment. Guardian  NOW will oppose Carter  After months of discussion and hesitation,  the executive board of the National  Organization for Women (NOW) has decided  to campaign against President Carter in  the upcoming presidential elections.  The board took its stand at a Dec. 8-9  meeting in New York City. NOW has decided  that Carter's failure to push.for ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA)  coupled with his "implicit approval" of  federal legislation severely restricting  access to abortions, has made him an  unacceptable candidate under any  circumstances.  Some NOW members, like Betty Friedan, have  expressed the fear that opposition to  Carter will lead to the election of an  even more reactionary, antifemale Republican candidate like John Connally or  Ronald Reagan. Guardian  Solidarity in the struggle against sexual harassment. Strikes at Shelton, Washington. 22       Kinesis February '80  INTERNATIONAL  West German women defend  their abortion rights  FRANKFURT (LNS) -- The increasing anti-  abortion campaign of the churches is  making it more and more difficult for  women in West Germany to obtain legal  abortions. Recognition of this threat  was the main result of a recent women's  Congress held here and attended by over  100 women from women's centers in 30  German cities.  There's nothing new in the fact that not  only churches but also doctors set themselves up as protectors of "morality" and  refuse to help women. But the fact that  it is becoming increasingly difficult to  obtain an abortion even in a large city  like Berlin is regarded as an alarming  development.  For example, hospitals have been refusing to recognize "Indikationen" — a  document written by a woman's doctor  indicating that for health or social  reasons an abortion is necessary.  Things are even worse in the conservative  south of Germany.  The only abortion  clinic in Munich which accepts Indikationen will do so only if they are written by  the municipal health clinic.  In West Germany as a whole, Indikationen  for social reasons (such as poverty or  interruption of school or work) are  written only rarely.  Even when they are  written, women often cannot find either  free beds in hospitals or doctors to  perform the abortions.  In response to this situation, the women  attending the Congress in early November  formulated a demand for at least one  doctor willing to perform abortions at  every municipal health clinic. At the  same time, the women emphasized that they  stand by the right of a woman to control  her own body.  To lend weight to these demands, a demonstration of about 3,500 men, women, and  children took place in Mainz recently.  The demonstration was organized to counter  a rally at which Catholic Cardinal  Hermann Volk presented himself as a  "guardian of the weak." At the rally,  Catholics in Sunday clothes scolded the  pro-abortion demonstrators, calling the  women "whores."  The Women's Congress also decided to hold  a tribunal in February, where the experiences of women with doctors, hospitals,  health insurance, the pharmaceutical industry, churches and politicians will be  made public.  Mormon woman  excommunicated for  supporting ERA  Sonia Johnson, a fifth generation Mormon,  was excommunicated from her church Dec. 5  because of her outspoken advocacy of the  Equal Rights Amendment (ERA).  Johnson greeted the verdict with tears and  determination.  "I refuse to stop talking  about the ERA," she told reporters outside  her Sterling, Va., home.  She said she  would appeal the decision to a higher  court in the Mormon church, known officially as the Church of Jesus Christ of  Latter-Day Saints.  Bishop Jeffrey H. Willis, the Mormon lay  leader who acted as both accuser and  judge during the 3-hour Saturday night  trial, refused to allow any mention of  Johnson's ERA activities during the  proceeding. He claimed that Johnson's  position on the proposed amendement was  "not an issue before us."  Willis, who by day works as a personnel  officer at the CIA, instead excommunicated  Johnson for undermining the beliefs of the  church and its leaders.  "You...have  publicly stated that our society, specifi-  cally including church leaders, has a  'savage misogyny,'" Willis stated in  denying the 43-year-old mother of four a  place with her family in the celestial  everafter. On earth, excommunication  means Johnson is barred from participating  in church services though she may still  attend them.  But over 200 supporters who came from as  far away as Pittsburg to rally outside the  Oakton church during the trial, agreed  with Richard Johnson, Sonia's husband.  "It was clearly the ERA matter all the  way through," he stated.  Among the men, women and children who  waited in the cold while Johnson was tried  in a court which Mormons reserve for  women and boys under 18, were Rep.  Patricia Schroeder (D-Colo.) and Rev.  William Callahan, a Jesuit recently  disciplined by the Roman Catholic Church  for supporting the ordination of women.  Johnson is leader and founder of a loosely  organized East Coast body of 500 called  Mormons for the ERA.  The group claims  major responsibility for exposing the  Mormon church's political activities  against the ERA.  "Almost the whole  strength of the church is turned against  the ERA," Johnson says of the 4.5 million  member tax-exempt organization.  "What  they're doing is very underground," she  continued.  "They are politically  powerful."  The all-male leadership of the Mormon  church has opposed the ERA since 1973  because, they say, the proposed amendment  threatens the family. By Nancy Hoch  Marathon women: we're  getting better, faster  When Norwegian school teacher Grete Waitz  set a women's marathon running record last  week in New York for the second straight  year, she also helped erode one more myth  about male physical superiority.  For years, sports trainers have insisted  that women can never compete directly with  men because of physical differences which  make women weaker and slower.  In marathon  running particularly, it was thought that  no woman — and few men — could ever run  the 26-mile course in under 2\  hours.  But Waitz crossed the finish line in 2  hours 27 minutes, only 16 minutes behind  4-time winner Bill Rodgers.  Twenty-seven  other women finished the race in under  three hours in a field of 11,532 runners  including 1800 women.  In 1970, no women managed to finish the  New York marathon, and the woman's world  record time was 3 hours 2 minutes.  Since then it has become clear that if  women are encouraged to be athletic in  childhood, train seriously and are allowed  to compete, their performance will improve. Waitz, an Olympics 1500 meter  runner, only took up marathon running in  1977 and she set her first world record a  year later.  Hanna Lessinger Guardian  Turkeys in Turkey ban  women's group  Turkey's strongest women's organization,  the Progressive Women's Organization, has  been banned by a government "pledged to  defend democratic rights." The Progressive Women's Organization had a membership  of 15,000, mostly working women.  It was  an activist organization, not specifically  feminist but concerned with women's immediate problems — health care, maternity  conditions and literacy.  It also participated in the trade union movement,  trying to raise women's consciousness of  their position as women in the working  class. Martial Law authorities closed its  general headquarters in Istanbul and its  branches all over the country.  The PW0 is  banned as an organization though some  activities continue and no doubt it will  open again under another name.      BMR  Marathon running is no longer an all-male club. Here's Grete Waitz looking strong with ten miles to go Kinesis February '80      23  INTERNATIONAL  In New Zealand, so many of the issues are the same  Home for Christmas. For me, that means  flying to New Zealand.  The Christmas break is a big thing in  N.Z. Factories, businesses, government  offices all close for two weeks. So it's  not easy to make contacts. Everyone is  at the beach.  But I was lucky. I did have some names  and addresses of women to contact. After  three tries, I finally reached Sharon,  in Auckland. She invited me to come down  with three of her friends to the gay pub  in town, and then later to a women's  club. From then on, it was an up trip.  From these initial contacts, I met women  involved in a variety of ways with the  women's movement.  When I left New Zealand in 1968, there  were no active feminists visible. On one  trip back, six years ago, I met women  who were in the process of trying to  open a centre. Now the centre has just  opened in that small, conservative town.  From the talks I had with N.Z. women,  I realized how similar so many of our  problems are. In N.Z. abortion is next  to impossible to obtain, unless you live  in Auckland and have access to the Auckland Medical Aid Centre.  This centre was closed down for some  months, but despite the very severe restrictions on abortion laid down in the  Contraception, Sterilization and Abortion Act (1977), the centre is now able  to operate to 90% of its former capacity  - for abortions up to 12 weeks.  After that time limit, women are referred  to S.O.S. (Sisters Overseas Service), a  feminist organization that arranges for  women to have abortions in Sydney, Australia. If necessary, S.O.S. will finance  the abortion, with donations from concerned women. A nice touch is that a travel  agency owned and run by women arranges  the Auckland flights to Sydney, and their  flight discount is returned to S.O.S. However, for women living outside Auckland,  the situation is grim.  Sue, who works as a collective member at  the Auckland Women's Health Centre, took  a morning off to fill me in on what goes  on in the house. At 63 Ponsonby Road, it's  the most visible portion of the Auckland  movement.  A women's group, the Council for the Single  Mother and her Child, has credibility with  Auckland City Council, and was able to  lease a house from the city at low rental.  Several women's groups have offices in  the house, and they all share common space.  I was impressed with this small but functional example of a women's building.  S.O.S. and the rape crisis centre work out  of the house,the latter on a small grant  from the Mental Health Foundation. It is  run by volunteers, and has a crisis line  and answering service from 6 a.m. to 6  p.m.  The Women's Health Centre operates out of  the house, too. It consists of a general  meeting and waiting room; a room which  is used by a massage therapist one day a  week, and also by an iridologist and two  naturapaths. A nurse teaches first aid;  course are held on assertiveness training,  and plans are in the works for a group on  grief and loss. Aside from the sharing  workshops, two doctors work out of the  clinic and provide contraceptives and  general health care for women.  Both the health centre and rape crisis centre got their start from labour department  programmes for unemployed women and students (sound familiar?). Woman power is  via grants or volunteers.  The Auckland Women's Health Centre is one  of three women's health centres in N.Z.  Two other large cities - Christchurch  and Wellington - have centres with different orientations.  The Christchurch one is less medically  oriented. It is more educative and psychological in orientation, with emphasis  on women learning skills and taking  them back to their communities.  The centre in Wellington offers mental  health counselling, therapy and workshops. Its emphasis is on mental health.  All groups survive on small grants, and  volunteers. The Wellington centre raised  money by compiling a calendar.  Sue explained how other groups function-'  ed in the Auckland house. The Council  attempt to heal old wounds and build a  place to work together.  So many of the issues are the same.  There are eleven refugee houses in N.Z.,  and the work of feminist groups has led  to a greater awareness of wife-battering  as an issue. It is well publicised. Work  is being done at present on the incidence  of incest - all indications are that it  is very high.  My family, who live in a rural area, discussed both wife-beating and incest with a  feminist consciousness.  Poor women are a convenient scapegoat,  particularly single women on the Domestic  Purposes Benefit (equivalent of welfare).  Despite the fact that their benefits have  Broadsheet, New Zealand's  for the Single Mother and her Child provides legal information on paternity,  maintenance, social welfare policy and  benefits, court procedure and custody.  These women do a lot of public speaking,  and for many women in Auckland, this  council is their first contact with feminism.  The Lesbian Network meets in the house  one night a week, and provides much-  needed support for women coming out. It  is the only meeting place for lesbians  outside of the women's club (which is  full of smoke, has loud disco music and  is not conducive to sharing conversations  - sound familiar?) .  How is conflict resolved?  With such a variety of women's groups  sharing space, I asked, how is conflict  resolved? No regular house meetings are  set up. Instead, meetings are called if  and when the need for them arises. Each  group has regular meetings in their collective, which are open to any woman who  is interested. The shared space consists  of a kitchen, a meeting place, and a  playroom for children (filled with toys).  Essentially, each group is autonomous,  but shares with the rent payments.  I was very impressed with the spirit of  cooperation, .the warmth I felt in each  office space, the women's art on the walls.  I went away feeling that despite the tensions that do exist in the women's movement down in N.Z., here was a very positive  excellent feminist monthly i  been cut back, and that there is now a waiting period before a woman can get welfare  if she leaves her husband, these women are  accused of bleeding the system.  Feminists are working on all levels in N.Z.  They are active in the Public Services Assoc  iation, one of the largest unions in N.Z.  The Working Women's Council is actively  campaigning among trade unions for acceptance of their working women's charter, a  charter that sets out the basic rights  and support for all women workers in the  home and in the labour force.  A large bi-annual conference is held for  all women in the country. Last year, over  2000 women attended.  An active feminist magazine, Broadsheet,  is published monthly, and distributed  throughout N.Z.  The YWCA is working actively with women  who live in the depths of suburbia, where  they are isolated from friends, and where  the bus service is non-existent. (Two car  families are a rarity in New Zealand).  The warmth that I was shown while I shared  women's houses and spoke about common  struggles I will always remember.  It isn't easy being a feminist in "God's  Own Country" of the south. And harder to  be openly lesbian. But there is a women's  community there, excellent women's art  and exciting women's music. And lots of  work to be done - between the companiable  cups of tea, which have always been an  essential part of sisterhood in N.Z.¬a 24      Kinesis February'80  National Council of Welfare issues new report  Poverty is certainly not in the best interests of the child  By Cole Dudley  The National Council of Welfare has just  released its report on Canada's child  welfare system, In the Best Interests of  the Child.  We all know what the best interests of  children are. Or do we? While riding  home on the bus with a copy of the report  on my lap, a fellow-passenger leaned over  and, after informing me that he had raised  four kids, told me that the best interest  of children was money.  I disagreed, and  told him that it was love and  understanding.  Now, after reading the report, I find  myself agreeing with the gentleman.  It's  extremely difficult to administer the  right amount of love to a child when you  are sick or poor and worried about where  the next paycheck is coming from.  The report stated that some 80,000  children live in care and most of these  come from poor families.  All families encounter problems at one  time or another, but added to the existing burden of inadequate housing and  uncertain income, the child-rearing  capacity of poor families becomes  strained.  Summer camps and housekeepers are often-  used resources which relieve the burden  of child-rearing for the more affluent.  Moreover, the family with a higher income  can use preventative measures such as  marriage counsellors and child psychiatrists or even winter holidays and  boarding schools, -to help ease tension.  But the low-income family has only the  child welfare system to turn to, a system  whose only supportive aid is to put the  children in foster homes.  This "solution" ignores the all too prevalent problems of over-crowding, job loss  and isolation of single parents. The  report states that the removal of the  child leaves the parents feeling powerless  and the kids feeling that they have no say  over their lives.  Non-poor families have a-wider range of  resources to turn to, the report says.  When a problem emerges, they can get something done before it worsens into a  crisis. When low-income families get  around to looking for assistance, the  problem is usually so advanced that the  only avenue open is the public children's  services system — a system which tends to  add more problems rather than helping.  The report goes on to say how our enlightened society stands in judgement  on parents who are unable to care for  their children. Whether the child  stays or goes back to her/his parents, the  implication is the same — the parents  have failed to perform their roles  adequately. The term used by the state,  unable or unwilling to provide care  is an  administrative label that lumps together a  variety of problems, some of which can't  be blamed on their victims.  Family court is a trying experience  Family court is a trying experience for  both parents and children. The language  and procedures are hard to understand and  quite overwhelming for most people. One  single parent, who was hospitalized for  nervous tension, likened her experience  with the child welfare system to an  encounter with the police:  The welfare would not help me so I had to  put my children into foster care for  three months.     The workers came and  apprehended (which means arrest) my  children.  In any Family Court situation, the parents  and children deal with a higher authority  which decides what "the best interest  of the child" is to be. This framework  breeds resentment, bitterness and frustration, and rarely lends any true  reconciliatory aid to the situation.  The NCW reports that many times parents  lose all rights to their children and,  whether removal is voluntary or enforced,  most parents undergo a painful and  traumatic sense of loss. These feelings  are described by one mother who relinquished her child for adoption:  I put my son in foster care because I love  him.    I gave him up for adoption because  I love him.    Though I gave him up by  resorting to reason and logic, I suffer  the pain and anguish to the bottom of my  guts.    Sometime that pain is almost  unbearable, for my arms ache to hold and  love him.  The system is supposed to exist for the  re-unification of families, but seldom  achieves that goal. There are no resources available for parents to help  them deal with the separation. Nor are  the problems that caused the breakdown of  the family in the first place,  acknowledged or addressed.  The children, too, suffer from this  up to close scrutiny recently and all  governments in Canada agree that reforms  should be enacted.  The NCW report suggests that services  should be made more family-oriented,  helping families to cope with their problems or to keep them at a bearable level.  This is a more humane solution than the  costly substitute care program.  There is a great need to reorganize the  child welfare system so as to cut down on  the unnecessary duplication and complexity  that exists within the system. The needs  of the child and the family must be considered on an individual basis. More time  and money devoted to preventative and  supplementary services.  The rights of the family must be recognized. This means ensuring legal counsel  for the child, the parents and even the  foster parents. Stricter and more detailed guidelines and regulations are  needed to determine when a child should be  removed from the family and what subsequent action is to be taken.  Ontario is experimenting with local  Colette French  system. They feel homesick, abandoned,  unwanted or rejected. One foster child  interviewed in the report described her  feelings:  The only reason that I can think of for  my mother not to want me is if there is  something terribly wrong with me....or  with her.    Either way I've had it.  There are happy exceptions where the child  ends up well-adjusted and secure in her/  his new situation. A lot of children,  though, are labelled a "behavioral  problem". When a child is moved repeatedly, she/he faces a higher risk of  beginning adult life at a disadvantage. A  child who is in care for an extended  period runs the risk of a lowered  educational performance and, through  problems with friends, teachers and  workers, soon learns how to keep her/his  feelings in check — a trait which irritates the situation further. Besides  coping with all this, Indian foster children face the additional problem of  adapting to different lifestyle and  child-rearing practices.  The underlying cause of the current crisis  in the child welfare system is that the  system is overloaded. Child care workers  are struggling with impossible caseloads  and cannot administer adequate time and  attention to their clients. There has  been an alarming increase in the number of  troubled adolescents coming into care and  a shortage of foster homes at a time when  they are in greater demand.  The financial constraint of the government  does nothing to help, either. The children's social services budget does not  keep pace with the rising costs of help  for families in distress.  The load grows heavier, the help grows  scarcer, and the vicious circle continues.  What do we do about it?  The social services system has been held  children's services committees which give  the general public a say in the design  and operation of children's services in  their community.  Quebec has implemented a Youth Protection  Committee, to arbitrate when disagreements  occur in how a child's care is being •  handled. It also exists to promote  development of more preventative measures.  In addition to legislative and organizational reforms, most provinces have  enacted measures to make people aware of  child abuse and their responsibility to  report it.  Poverty is the overall crisis  All this is not enough, though. These  changes may improve the quality and range  of care, but they don't cure the problem.  Poverty is the overall crisis. The children who end up in the child welfare  system, should not be there at all.  Until income security programs (that  replace lost earnings and supplement inadequate incomes) are instituted, we will  continue to maintain a high level of  family problems in poverty-line families.  The system will not be effective until it  stops being a system serving only children from low-income families and becomes,  instead, a supportive system for all  Canadian families.  So says the National Council of Welfare in  Canada. The report covers the ground in  depth and with understanding. The reforms suggested in it are important and  very, very necessary. But will they be  acted upon? Will the governments listen?  It's up to us now to make sure the policymakers hear us. We have to insist upon  these changes that affect all of us.  For a copy of the report, write to:  National Council of Welfare  Brooke Claxton Building  Ottawa, K1A 0K9 '• Kinesis February '80      25  How to demand your rights as a human, and survive  By Ann C. Schaefer  "The Human Rights Code is based on the  principle that all persons are free and  equal in dignity and rights. Under the  legislation, every person has the right  to equal opportunity and equal access to  •employment, tenancy and public services,  regardless of race, colour, ancestry,  place of origin, religion, sex or marital  status. It is the role of the Human  Rights Branch to administer the Code."  (Ministry of Labour, 1977 Annual Report)  If you aren't too put off by the continuing saga of Susan Jorgensen, the  following information may some day be  useful to you. Val Embree, a Human  Rights Officer, outlines the major steps  in filing a complaint with the Branch,  and points to some of the potential pitfalls along the way.  You can get a copy of the Code from the  HRB by calling or visiting their office  at 4946 Canada Way, Burnaby, 291-7236.  The gist of the code is contained in the  above quote, but in the areas of public  services and employment, its coverage is  more far-reaching. A prominent example  is Kathleen Ruff's statement last year  that the Branch would be prepared to  defend a homosexual teacher threatened  with losing her/his job. In actual case,  the Branch saw to it that a restaurant  could no longer discriminate against  people the manager considered "hippies".  Besides discrimination involving sexual  orientation and cultural orientation, the  HRB might also take on cases in which  people feel they've been discriminated  against in public services and employment  (but not tenancy) because of physical disability, a criminal charge unrelated to  the job, weight, or another group not  specifically named by the legislation.  "The most important thing to remember,"  Embree says, "is that the Branch can't  help unless your complaint is related to  s some group or class you belong to. It  can't be an individual matter. If your  boss, say, decides he doesn't like you,  that's your right — to be treated as an  individual."  Most are about job discrimination  Most complaints deal with job discrimination (about 10%).    About 18%  are  concerned with public services and 9%  with tenancy.  You can make a complaint for yourself,  perhaps for yourself on behalf of all the  other women employees working in a company (what Embree terms a "modified class  action"), or a large group of the women  involved can file a complaint together.  One of the most successful sex discrimination cases the Branch ever handled  involved a class action by 373 practical  nurses in the province who charged they  received less pay than orderlies. Embree  recommends this mass tactic because of  the mutual support it affords, but also  because you're unlikely to receive retroactive pay unless you're one of the  complainants. You're more likely just  to receive the new pay rate if the case  is successful.  There are also two other categories of  complaint — the Director's complaint  (in which the injured person may remain  anonymous) and the third party complaint.  Both present investigative difficulties  unless there is co-operation from at  least one of the people directly  affected.  In any event, if you find yourself in a  situation which you feel may be discriminatory, start taking notes. Embree  recommends that you record dates, information, names, what was said, etc., as  accurately as you can. Try to keep track  of every detail that may be of assistance.  Remember the investigation may be dragged  out for several years (as in Jorgensen's  case) and any hard information you have  will lend more credibility to your case.  Once you have laid a complaint, she says,  it's important not to be antagonistic  towards your employer for then you could  be fired with just cause; but do continue  to keep a record of relevant comments.  Also, it's just as important to keep  track of positive feedback you receive  for your work, to have at hand if you are  fired, or to use as evidence later on.  Embree also recommends that a woman seek  out feedback and counselling on the work  she's doing, especially if she's the first  woman hired to do a particular job. Be  discreet about it, but, again, keep track  of it. It will raise your credibility as  an employee who wants to do well.  Filing a complaint  Your first contact at the HRB will be with  an Intake Officer who assesses your  initial information to determine whether  it's something the Branch can deal with.  If it's a case of unfair dismissal,  related only to you as an individual, they  Embree explains.  "We collect all the  evidence we can and weigh the situation."  There may be delays in investigation of  your case. Embree urges complainants to  show their interest and enthusiasm by  keeping in touch with their officer, but  not to overdo it. The urgency of your  situation may be a factor in the officer's  decision to delay or speed up work on  your case.  Consider what sort of settlement you feel  would be suitable. It must be appropriate  to the damage done — such as getting your  job back, being paid lost wages (be able  to produce evidence you've looked for  another job), a cheque for moving costs  and the difference between your old and  new rents (save your receipts). It  could be damages for injury and humiliation, a letter of apology, a policy  statement by the company circulated to  all employees, a public apology (in the  case of public humiliation). Or it can be  a more innovative recompense, limited only  by your imagination and appropriateness to  the situation. (A donation to your local  You will be asked for clear information indicating  discrimination was involved  may refer you to the Labour Standards  Branch. If you are in a union, you may  be encouraged to use its grievance procedure first and return if that doesn't  pan out. You will be asked for clear  information indicating discrimination was  involved in your suffering injury.  "We  must have some kind of hook or lead,"  Embree states, "such as witnesses, what  did he say, what suggests he didn't give  you an opportunity because of a class."  In the case of sex harassment, you must  have already informed the suitable supervisor and given him a chance to tell the  harasser his behaviour is unacceptable.  "If they laugh at you or threaten you,  then come to us," says Embree.  You may be asked to go get more information or documentation, or the Branch may  test themselves. This may involve calling  a landlord and asking him for housing for  a single person (if someone claims he  discriminates against single people).  Embree says this gives the employer or  landlord a bona fide opportunity to  demonstrate he doesn't discriminate — and  it often becomes apparent that he doesn't.  But if the Intake Officer decides discrimination may have occurred, she will ask  you if you want to lay a complaint. If  you do, Embree says, you should be prepared for the consequences. Be prepared  to keep in touch with an officer and give  her/him information, for as long as is  necessary; be willing to answer the investigating officer's questions; and consider  that the respondent will know your name  and know that you have complained. Weigh  whether you can risk that. While the Code  provides for protection of complainants,  hassling can be quite subtle. In making  this decision, you may want to seek out  support from other people in the same  situation. Their support can be  invaluable to your survival.  The care and feeding of your officer  Once you've decided to go ahead with  your complaint, you must sign a formal  complaint form. A copy of it is forwarded to Victoria requesting the  appointment of an investigating officer  to your case. You will receive a letter  indicating the name of your officer. An  important point is that the Human Rights  Officer is not an advocate, but rather an  impartial investigator at first and then,  later on, a negotiator for a settlement,  rather like a mediator. "We've been  given this information, we tell the  respondent, and now tell us your side,"  women's newspaper perhaps?) In one sex  harassment case, Embree says, the employer was ordered to place enough money  into a trust account for all 20 young  women involved to enrol in an assertive-  ness training course at a community  ' college. The officer proposes the  settlement to the respondent, and the  resolution is often a compromise.  Getting through the public hearing  If the employer is intransigent and no  settlement can be reached, there is the  possibility of a Board of Inquiry being  appointed by the Labour Minister, (it's  at his discretion. ) Again, the complainant must judge whether she is willing to  go through with it. Up to this stage, the  complaint has been confidential (although  either the complainant or the respondent  can go to the media at any time if they  feel publicity would help their case).  But once a Board of Inquiry is appointed,  the matter becomes public, media coverage  is likely, so again the complainant has to  decide if it's worth it. Another point  should be made here: The complainant can  withdraw the complaint at any time during  the investigation, if the going gets too  rough.  If the injured party decides to go through  with a Board of Inquiry, she will be  expected to assist in briefing the lawyer  (who is provided by the HRB at no cost),  will probably testify herself, and will  experience all the satisfactions and  humiliations of public cross-examination.  There's the possibility you might get  nothing out of the Board. They might tell  you there's no merit to your case, "or  award you a tiny settlement that's more of  an insult than a victory," says Embree.  Human rights settlements are notoriously  small (in terms of money, at least) and  there have even been cases in which the  Board grants a small settlement because  it has taken heed of past settlements.  A decision should be reached by the Board  about six weeks after the hearing is  finished. Then either side can appeal,  but only on a question of fact or of law,  e.g., if the Board stepped beyond its  jurisdiction, overlooked a fact, or misinterpreted or misapplied the law. Levels  of appeal are as follows — the B.C.  Supreme Court, the B.C. Court of Appeal,  and the Supreme Court of Canada. The GATE  case against the Vancouver Sun went  through all these levels. With the  permission of the Minister, the Branch  still carries the cost of appeal. • 26       Kinesis February'80  MOVEMENT REPORTS  BCFW produces four  working groups  The BCFW Standing Committee had its first  meeting since convention Jan. 12-13 in  Vancouver. All member groups will be receiving minutes shortly. This meeting was  exhausting but productive - in fact, so  productive it produced four working  groups. Listed below are the groups,  the areas of work and contact persons.  We encourage all interested and experienced women to get involved. Women outside the Lower Mainland are encouraged  to participate by mail.  Convention Planning: The 1980 convention  will be held in Vancouver. Our prime concern right now is the actual physical  space. Suggestions are most welcome.  Contact Miriam Azrael, 2236 St. George  St., Vancouver (876-8283).  Incorporation as a Society?? Yes or No!  If people have forgotten what this is  about, the convention in Victoria asked  the Standing Committee to investigate  the Societies Act with respect to BCFW.  If you have experience or want to have  input, contact Prabha Khosla, 3243 Find-  lay St, Vancouver (876-1157) OR Ruth  Busch, 3817 W. 11th Ave, Vancouver  (224-3166).  Government Funding: This group will be  addressing funding in the rural areas.  We too would like input. Contact Bet  Bateman, RR#1, Winlaw BC (226-7603 or  w-352-9916) OR Teresa Conrow, #223-  10th Ave S, Cranbrook BC (426-2912).  IWD 1980 Provincial Art Poster: BCFW is  sponsoring an International Women's Day  1980 Art Poster 'Contest', and are looking for submissions from across the  province. Posters should be 17"xll",  not more than 3 colours, B&W is okay too,  and the deadline is Feb. 10. It is to be  an Art Poster commemmorating IWD 1980.  Posters and inquiries to: Penny Arrand,  #10-1707 E. 4th Ave, Vancouver (251-3241  or w-299-7567).  IWD focus is Control  Over Our Bodies  In the midst of the January blues, there  is spring fever in the women's movement!  The second and third planning meetings  have formulated a theme and program for  March 8, International Women's Day.  The theme is Control Over Our Bodies,  Ourselves, with explicit focus on the  international connection among all women.  One slogan suggested is "Our bodies,  ourselves, our world", though none has  yet been adopted.  The intent is to encourage groups and  individuals to tie their particular  concerns in to the theme and relate it  to the struggle of women the world over.  The availability of abortion is currently at extreme risk in B.C., so there  will likely be particular focus on this  issue.  Program of Events  Saturday, March 1: (day) Decentralized  outreach/information day; (evening)  Open benefit for fundraising & promo.  Saturday, March 8: (day) IWD March;  (evening) All-women's celebration.  The purpose of the decentralized information day is twofold: to extend our  support and resources to women outside  central Vancouver and outside established, active groups; and to establish  more active liaison between women's  centres in Vancouver and its surrounding communities, and the women's groups  dealing with specific issues.  IWD planning meetings will continued to  be held every Tuesday at 7:30, at 45  Kingsway.  You can get outdoors with other women  The OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WCMEN is organized  and run by volunteers - it's a place to  meet people and learn new skills, and a  special way to keep fit and share the  excitement of outdoor activities. There  is no age limit.  The Outdoor Club meets every 2nd Tuesday  at the downtown YWCA, at 7:30pm in the  boardroom.  Monthly meetings include: program planning, learning new skills, exploring  new areas, and films and discussion.  Bi-monthly activities include, for example, hiking, backpacking & outdoor  camping, sailing, cave exploration,  cross country ski touring, basic rock  climbing, and more. Extra costs are  sometimes involved for special out-  trips. Car pools are used whenever  possible.  The membership fee for the Outdoor Club  is $45 per year (plus general YWCA fee)  and covers: instruction, equipment use,  special transportation rates, discounts  on outdoor equipment, and a newsletter.  For further information, contact  Clasina Van Bemmel, 683-2531 (local 249)  downtown YWCA, 580 Burrard, Vancouver.  February media night focussing on  women and violence  January's videotape showing on Marge  Piercy and Judy Chicago was well attended. If you missed it, see the tapes at  the Video Inn Library, open Sunday,  Monday and Tuesday, 11am-5pm.  February's Women's Media Night, on  Wednesday, Feb. 23 at 8:30pm, will be  devoted to the topic of violence  against women. Featured is "A Crime  Against Women", a video documentary  by Martha Gever, of the events follow-  the arrest of 4 New York women involved  in public protest against a "snuff"  film. The tape documents the feminist  challenge of traditional female passivity on the streets and in the courts,  and stimulates some thought-provoking  questions about strategy.  Also showing will be excerpts from a  talk by Gene Errington, former provincial co-ordinator on the status of  women, and organizer at the Women's  Research Centre, whose special area of  interest is violence against women.  In March, Women's Media Night will  present a retrospective on the women's  movement in Vancouver and B.C., including herstorical footage and anecdotes from those who were there. If  you have any material - video, slides,  anecdotes, photographs, that would  contribute to this presentation,  contact us (Shawn, Claudia or Pat,  688-4336) or drop by to the Video Inn,  261 Powell St. This event will be on  Wednesday, Mar. 19, at 8:30pm.  Video Guide  Covering news and reviews, issues and  information on alternate video and  media, Video Guide's next issue will  focus on feminism and will include  local, national and global contributions from women involved in media  work.  If you have something to say on any  media related topic - feminism and  art, reviews, photos, hardware, etc.  or just an announcement, now is the  time to put pent) paper and send it  in. Deadline for copy is March 1.  Lesbian feminist mothers need your support  The Lesbian and Feminist Mothers Political Action Group is a new, very crucial  group consisting of a few dedicated women  and surviving on energy alone.  We need money to continue. We pay for  baby-sitters to go to our own meetings.  Donations will be used to start fund-  raising activities (t-shirts, bumper  stickers) and to advertise for our sister  group, Lesbian Mothers Drop-In, to pay  for childcare, and to finance children's  workshops.  Some of our goals:  — to increase awareness of the needs of  feminist and lesbian feminist mothers  - to increase awareness of the value of  these women's children in this community  - to develop further the system of ex  change we've begun between these children  and women without children who want  children in their lives  - to provide a support for children who  are being raised in an alternative  structure as well as for their mothers  - to provide creative, constructive,  productive workshops and childcare for  these children (ie. self-defense,  children's rights, etc.)  Contact:  327 5780 Kinesis February '80       27  ON CAMPUS  Violence Against Women is the theme for UBC women's week  By Mary Winder  The UBC Women's Centre Committee is  again organizing a week of activities at  UBC aimed toward exposing the university  community to feminist issues and theory.  This year, the theme which was chosen  for Women's Week is Violence Against  Women. We have invited a speaker from  AUCE to talk about sexual harassment on  the job, WAVAW to give their pornography  workshop, a Transition House speaker to  talk about family violence, Rape Relief to  show their film and to give a talk, and  Kate Millett to talk about violence  against women and about her latest book,  Basement.     All events are open to the  community at large, and tickets for Kate's  speech will be available at the women's  bookstores for $3.00 each.  The UBC Women's Committee is a standing  committee of the student organization of  UBC, the Alma Mater Society. As such, we  receive a budget and office space, and are  subject to the bureaucratic regulations  and conservative politics of that organization. We are a new group, each September, consisting of whatever women show up  and express an interest in working on  feminist issues in this context.  Our  politics and experience are varied, and  for many of us the Women's Centre is our  first exposure to feminist activity. The  committee's purpose is to maintain a  lending library and drop-in centre, to  bring speakers, workshops, and musicians  to UBC, and to advocate for women students  concerns to the AMS and the university  administration. UBC also finances two  other women's service groups: The Women  Students' Office, which is an admistrative  counselling and advocacy service, and the  Women's Resource Centre on Robson Street,  which is part of the Continuing Education  Department. We are the only student  group, and the only one of the three which  is an active member of B.C.F.W.  Questions have been raised in the Vancouver women's community concerning our  invitation to Kate Millett to speak during  Women's Week, We did indeed invite her  in an attempt to reach university students  who otherwise ignore our functions and  ridicule our existence. I'm not sure how  successful we will be in this: I asked  each of the women in my physiology class  last week if they had heard of Kate  I asked the women in my class if they'd  heard of Kate Millett. None of them  had.  Millett, and none of them had.  In any  case, we recognize that the issues which  have been raised are important ones: how  do we begin to eliminate the discrepancies  that exist between well-known American  feminists and Canadian women who may have  as much to say, but receive less media  coverage and usually less money for doing  so.  In an attempt to counteract some of the  elitism inherent in Kate Millett's speech  during Women's Week, there will be a  public reception on Friday night, February  15, following the speech.  In that context, dialogue arising out of her speech  can be continued informally. The Women's  Committee is also arranging an open forum  for Vancouver women on Saturday afternoon,  February 16, at a central location. We  will ask Kate and a local feminist to  moderate, and hope that any woman who is  interested will attend and participate in  a discussion of these and other feminist  issues.  It is important that Canadian  and American feminists hear what each of  us has to say, and that we not receive  from Kate Millett only a speech, from  behind an array of microphones. A letter  of invitation stating the location and  format of the discussion will be sent out  to women's groups across the city.  For further information about events at  UBC, or for reservations for childcare  during Kate Millett's speech, please phone  the Women's Centre, at 228-2163.  The  schedule of events is as follows:  February 9, 9:00 p.m. — Dance, with  music by Contagious  February 11, 12:30 p.m. Women Against Nukes  - a workshop  February 11, 8:00 p.m. — AUCE speaker on  Sexual Harassment  February 12, 12:30 p.m. — WAVAW's  pornography workshop  February 13, 12:30 p.m. — Film: "We Will  Not Be Beaten", Faculty of Law,  Rooms 101/102  February 13, 8:00 p.m. — Transition House  speaker on Family Violence  February 14, 12:30 p.m. -- Rape Relief  film and speech  February 15, 8:00 p.m. — Kate Millett on  Violence Against Women  February 16, 2:00 p.m. — Open Forum on  Feminist Issues, Britannia Centre  When half of us are denied a voice, academic freedom founders  "When the validity of the experience of  half the population is being denied, when  women are being told, explicitly and implicitly, that their unique perspective,  as women, is not a suitable subject to  introduce into their academic work, then  it is not only these women who suffer, it  is the whole spirit of academic freedom  which suffers."  Wendy Frost, a member of the SFU Ad Hoe  Committee of Women Against Violence Against  Women, is speaking. This is a public forum,  called to discuss the use of sexist material and the suppression of feminist views  within the university community. Over 100  people have shown up.  Frost explains why the committee has been  set up. An English professor on campus is  teaching a course entitled The Erotic Idiom.  As a theoretical text, the professor is  using a book by one George Frankl, called  The Failure of the Sexual Revolution.  The book, Frost points out, "presents a  male-defined view of sexuality, one which  is both biologically inaccurate and psychologically demeaning. This book is telling  us, as women, that our own knowledge about  our sexuality is invalid , that we do not  know what we feel and must be told by self-  styled male experts both what we feel and  what we ought not to feel." It is, as she  says, "a sadly familiar story."  There are by now many theoretical works  which discuss female sexuality from a feminist perspective, and which would be completely appropriate to study in a course  about human sexuality, Frost points out.  The fact that such a text has not been included in The Erotic Idiom course is simply  indicative of a deeper problem.  That is the all-pervasive assumption  human experience and male experience are  one and the same thing.  They're not.  What, asks Frost, can we do about it?  "So much of the exclusion of women happens  not maliciously, but unconsciously," she  points out. "Simply making the university  community aware that such exclusions occurs  is a first step towards dispelling the  silence. But much more remains to be done.  We must work for the inclusion of course  material written by women, about women,  material which explores genuine alternatives to the current discourse."  The committee has been accused of attacking the academic freedom of professors,  It is no longer acceptable for professors  to offer racist or anti-semitic course  material  their right to structure a course as they  set fit. "There are two answers to that,"  commented Frost. "The first is that academic freedom must be qualified by experience. It is not longer common - or acceptable - for professors to choose to offer  as course content material which is racist  or anti-semitic...much of what is written  about women is defamatory in a similar  fashion...  "The second point is that academic freedom  is a right of students as well as of faculty..."  Following this introduction, Ann Bemrose of  Vancouver Rape Relief discussed methods of  dealing with sexual harassment in the  ivory tower.  Linda Grant read excerpts from a paper  discussing the difficulties inherent in  the use of feminist criticism.  After several responses from the floor  focussing on The Erotic Idiom course, Pat  Maika succeeded in returning the discussion to the larger issues of academic  freedom.  "The things which I know about myself  and about other women no  man can  know  unless I choose to tell him; unless he  asks me, listens to me or reads what I  write. I can read literature in a way  that no man can re I literature ... because I am different from him both as  an individual and as a female. But I  am equally valuable, and so are my insights and my knowledge...  "Men have long attempted to run my life.  I refuse absolutely to allow them to  take over my mind; either to force me  to adopt their critical stance at the  expense of my own, or to exclude me."  The ad hoc committee is planning to  hold more discussions in the future  on such topics as feminist literary  criticism and the female erotic idiom.  Pat Maika info  Stop the Lady Godiva obscenity  Engineering students at the University of  British Columbia will organize another  "Lady Godiva Ride." During Engineers'  Week, March 3 - 18, they will parade a  woman, naked and riding a horse, across  campus. The original Lady Godiva rode  naked through the streets to protest  social injustice. Protest the ride by  writing to Dr.M.Wedepohl, Dean, Applied  Science, University of British Columbia,  Vancouver B.C. V6T 1W5  Also protest to the Professional Engineers' Association of B.C., 2210 West  12th Ave, Vancouver B.C. 28      Kinesis February '80   LETTERS    From Women's Committee of United Fishermen and Allied Workers Union  Sex discrimination is being fought through the union  This letter is in answer to two articles  covering a full page in the November  issue of Kinesis, written by Ann Schae 'fer  and published by the Vancouver Status of  Women.  The articles looked at sex discrimination  in the fishing industry. Although there  is much accurate information given, the  writer totally misses the essence of a  union's struggle for equality for its  women members.  Instead of a positive  statement that would rally other women  around an important issue, the article  reflects a negative anti-union bias that  places the union and company in the same  category.  This only reinforces the  establishment's philosophy of making  unions appear as bad as employers.  This  philosophy is not in the interest of  workers, whether they are men, women, or a  minority but a philosophy, unfortunately,  too often supported by middle class and  non-working class feminists.  Specifically, the first article states  that the "union" deserted Susan Jorgensen  when it couldn't attain the universal 1000  hour rate thereby establishing full equal  pay for women. Winning that demand would  have supported her case before the Human  Rights Commission on Sex Discrimination.  The article states further that "...the  union has dropped a key contract demand,  leaving Susan Jorgensen to battle it  out in the courts.... the union is no  longer demanding equal pay in contract  negotiations but is focusing instead on  across the board increases that would  leave sex discrimination in wages and job  opportunities intact "  "Management just hasn't upgraded any  of its female employees"  First, it must be understood that there is  nothing in the previous or present  contract that prevents management•from  upgrading any worker to the Group I - 1000  hour Shed rate. Management just hasn't  upgraded any of its female employees  although each new male employee knows when  he is hired that he will move directly to  the 1000 hour rate.  Secondly, the demand for the universal  1000 hour rate came from the leadership,  not from the rank and file and no other  demand was hung onto so tenaciously or  argued so extensively. However such expensive demands are not won by slim strike  votes and the demand in the industry  negotiations finally had to be set aside  (not dropped) for this year, to be raised  in subsequent negotiations again and again  until won. This is not unusual.  "Employer did not bargain in good  faith; held to obnoxious demands"  When the B.C. Ice employees had been on  strike for six weeks, and the employer  came back to the bargaining table, their  negotiating committee had to decide  whether to hang tough or negotiate in an  attempt to settle.  They decided as had  the industry negotiating committee, to  set aside this demand for now. However,  their employer DID NOT BARGAIN IN GOOD  FAITH!  They held onto their obnoxious  proposals instead of dropping them as had  the industry negotiators.  The B.C. Ice  employees negotiating committee had no  alternative but to recommend rejection of  the company offer to its members.  After the offer was rejected by 95$ on  Sept. 25th, the employees had to wait  another ten weeks before the employer  would agree to talk again.  During these  long ten weeks court orders, picket line  crossings and Labour Relations Board  Hearings plagued the picketers. The committee had to decide whether anyone would  get any work before March 1980. Yes,  there were more disappointments for the  crew when they finally voted to accept the  last offer that did not include elimination of sex discrimination. What were  they to do, sit on the picket line indefinitely? It should be made unlawful  for employers to propose conditions that  contravene Human Rights Codes. Women's  groups should demand it. Both men and  women working for B.C. Ice were disgusted  and shocked at the company's shoddy attitude and tactics in its attempt to break  their union.  The company didn't succeed.  The crew is more united than ever.  They  will not forget.  The second article informs us that two  Prince Rupert women are "pressing the  union to confront management about sex  discrimination in rates of pay within the  shoreworker section...." If the women  pressed the union we are not aware of it.  We received a copy of the complaint by a  Member of the Legislation Assembly. The  MLA was answered effectively by. the  union's President, Jack Nichol, who had'  not heard of the women as they had not  been active members.  Copies were sent to  them.  The two women certainly identified  the problem that the union has known for  many years. There is discrimination.  Much has been done, more needs to be done  and these two new recruits have started to  assist tremendously in helping to educate  other members now that they, too, have  discovered that discrimination exists.  It must be remembered that a union  inherits the conditions that exist at the  time it gets certified to be the employees' bargaining agent. From that  first step the union works continually to  improve the wages and working conditions  for its members.  In addition to the usual items that make  up a contract, the UFAWU has made outstanding gains for its women members. In  1973, through the leadership of the union  and the decisive strength and unity of the  men and women members, a large measure of  equality was advanced in the shore plants.  Equal pay was, in fact, established in  the cannery section where the base rate "  for men and women was equalized and classified job rates were adjusted to reflect  the equalization.  The fresh fish and cold  storage section grew along different  lines.  There were very few classified  jobs.  Instead, employees worked towards  getting "qualified". They did this in  three stages — beginners, semi-qualified,  and qualified with an increase in pay at  each level. Before 1973, one wage supplement was negotiated to cover both men and  women and do away with sex discrimination.  Two labour groups were established. Group  1 was designated as work of a heavier nature. Employees had to work 1000 hours to  get qualified and receive the top rate.  Group 2 was designated as work of a lighter nature.  These employees so designated  stopped at the 400 hour rate. Before  It should be  unlawful for employers to  propose conditions that  contravene the Human Rights  Code  1973, the rate between men and women was  98 cents per hour. Since then the difference has been reduced to 65 cents.  Filleters were upgraded to the 1000 hour  rate in the interim. Under the one  supplement, management could advance any  employee to the Group 1. Unfortunately,  they chose not to, but, arbitrarily  interpreted the groups to mean men and  women. Every man hired went automatically  to Group 1 and every woman stayed at Group  2.  It is important that the significance of  this be fully understood because Susan  Jorgensen's grievance on sex discrimination, now before the Human Rights Board  of Inquiry stems from B.C. Ice not advancing her to the Group 1 category as  provided for in her Agreement. Her  grievance couldn't be won in direct talks  with management.  Other very significant facets to remember  when we fight for equal pay in the fishing  industry is that half the shoreworkers are  women, that they have diverse ethnic  origins — most with English as a second  language. Add to this the seasonality of  the fishing industry then a person should  have some comprehension of the magnitude  of what the U.F.A.W.U. (the men and women  members) has been able to accomplish in  its contracts and in particular equal pay  for its women members — which after all  uplifts the whole membership.  Helen O'Shaughnessy, Chairperson, UFAWU Women's Rights  Clear, tough, informative,  critical...  Dear Kinesis:  The members of Studio D (at the NFB) have  been enjoying the September/October issue  of your paper. I just wanted to drop you  a line and let you know. We started out  really appreciating the article on mythology, which is one of the areas we are  exploring.  Then the article about women against nuc-  clear power caught our eyes: several of  us are involved in the anti-nuclear movement and Ecofeminism. There is going to  be a very interesting conference in March  near Boston on "Women and Life on Earth:  Ecofeminism."  Several other articles were also food for  discussion, such as the Rape Crisis one.  So all-in-all, the issue really hit the  spot, so we wanted to thank you, and  tell you to keep up the good work. Good,  clear, tough, informative and critical  journalism should be encouraged.  Sincerley,  Dorothy Henaut, Studio D, National Film Board  COMMENTS THIS MONTH ranged from: "I find  Kinesis a valuable insight into what's  really  going on," to: "Cancel my sub. You  are just a bunch of cranky Nellies who  enjoy feeling sore." Kinesis February '80      29  VSW auction: mixed feelings analyzed  Dear Kinesis:  In December we went to the Christmas  benefit and auction given by VSW. We  danced some, talked some, and sat around a  lot during the auction. We separately  came away from the event feeling an ambiguous mixture of dissatisfaction, anger,  and depression. We later talked about our  experience together and figured out why we  had not enjoyed the auction. We have also  talked to a few other people and have  found among some of them similar feelings  — ambiguous private feelings of dissatisfaction that had been shoved away,  internalized and not questioned.  First we want to make it clear that we  support VSW and understand the necessity  of fund-raising. This letter is to  criticize the use of an auction as a  fund-raising event and place it in a  larger framework for discussion.  As working class women we are constantly  being made aware of, and drawing people's  attention to, the fact that not everyone  has the same amount of money and economic  opportunity to participate equally in  society.  We acknowledge the economic inequality  within the feminist and left movements.  Our purpose in acknowledging it is to  combat it. The effect of an auction does  not combat the inequality but reinforces  it. We don't think we can afford to  ignore the weight of public recognition  given to the "bidders" at such an event.  No matter in what circumstances, the  ability to acquire goods and spend money  is a function of priviledge. Economic  generosity, whether giving money to VSW  or giving goods away to friends is also a  function of priviledge and no matter  where we see public demonstrations of this  priviledge we resent it.  An auction can be seen as a game — a fun  way to soak the rich or get people to give  money they would otherwise spend else  where. However the event is not a game to  those who cannot afford to play, and although we all have an equal capacity to  desire things (or desire to give) we do  not have an equal opportunity to satisfy  those desires. (We appreciate the gesture  of having a two price entrance fee to the  benefit, even those with incomes over  $6,000 per year got a much better deal  than those on welfare).  There are a couple of specific points  about the auction we would like to include. First, though the amount of money  donated was publically demonstrated,  equal attention was not given to those  who donated their time and energy instead.  One woman, for example, who had no money  to play the game with, spent 12 hours of  her labour making one of the items to be  auctioned. Second, an auction allows  those with more money to force bids up  without risk, with the intention of  getting more money for VSW.  In the  larger society this is called inflation.  At the auction it's a way to spend excess  money and feel good about it.  Cannot transpose capitalist modes of  fund-raising  We cannot simply transpose capitalist  modes of fund-raising without question,  Or modification. When we do this we run  the risk of transposing capitalist modes  of division, and perpetuating the internalized values that go along with them  (e.g. I am worthless, you are more  generous than me etc. etc.)'  People may argue that the money is for a  worthy cause, there are no clean ways to  raise money — the ends justify the means.  We disagree. It isn't a given that VSW  or any other feminist organization is an  end for lower-income women. It can be an  end only if the economic divisions between  us are made conscious and worked against.  When a group uses means which serve to  increase these divisions it is in fact  only serving to oppress those with a  background of relative scarcity.  At the same time as we are working to  redistribute the wealth equally, on a  large scale, we also support endeavours to  shift the wealth around on a smaller  scale. A few suggestions for a modified  auction which would sacrifice the hype and  possibly not raise as much money, but  which would lessen the public display of  inequality, are:  1) having sealed bids  2) have the goods displayed with people  writing their bids on a sheet of paper by  each item (like the NDP Priorities  'auction')  3) a suggestion courtesy of Nora Randall  would be to divide the goods into categories and divide the 'bidders' into  categories depending on their incomes.  Those of similar incomes would get to bid  together. Also the goods would be  divided so that the more useful items  such as tools, typewriters etc. would be  matched with the lower income groups and  the more luxury items offered to those  who can afford them.  The possibilities stimulate the imagination as well as being essential in the  process of raising consciousness and  combatting oppression.  The length that we have gone to question  the auction was motivated by our experience of general unawareness as to the  possible oppressive side of this event  and to encourage any of us who had  internalized, yet again, self-destructive  feelings a chance to put them 'out there'  where they belong. (One of us was also  motivated by the fact that the auction  took up 'prime time' where we could have  been dancing instead, for free.)  In solidarity  Diana Smith and Marian Vaughan  Margie Gillis does more than entertain; she engrosses  By Cole Dudley  Margie Gillis does more than entertain her  audiences, she engrosses them.  The  Montreal-based dancer gave a solo performance at the Vancouver East Cultural  Center recently. The audience was captivated throughout with her dynamic style  of dancing and with the intensity of her  energy.  Margie holds conversations with her audience and evokes emotional responses  (through her dancing).  To do this, she  incorporates her whole body, including  facial expressions. Here she fell short,  however. On some pieces she broke out  showing strength and passion, but for the  most part her face maintained a vacuous ,  lost or naive expression; the stereotyped  female. It was useful for one or two  pieces, but it drew away from the strength  of her dancing in other ones, and became a  bit tiring to watch.  The choreography Margie produces is intriguing and well-composed. She danced  seven pieces and five were her own compositions. The other two were by John  Goodwin and Linda Rabin. John Goodwin  composed the first piece, Estuaries,  which  was an innovative number contrasting  abrupt movements with flowing ones. The  other, by Linda Rabin, called  Premonitions,  was boring to start with and  the message (if any) was as vague as  Margie's expression.  The piece picked up  towards the end with some strange, ungraceful moves that were very powerful.  For two of her pieces, Margie added the  use of props. In Woman,  La Lune,  she  skilfully manoeuvred a large piece of  material and the effect was good. The  sudden appearance of a life-sized doll in  Learning How to Die  — an eerie piece —  was fascinating. From there not too much  happened. There were infinite possibilities of movement with the doll, but none  were explored. Margie gave us some great  facial expressions from behind the doll  and did some clutching and stroking of  it, then finished. A bit disappointing.  One piece, called Waltzing Matilda, had  some unusual and twisted movements that  Margie was able to turn into a startling  piece of dancing.  The show on the whole was tight. Margie's  costume changes were quick, so the audience wasn't left waiting, just long  enough to absorb the previous number  before the next began. Her choice of  music was appealing and varied and was  produced smoothly.  Margie's performance ended with Mercy,  a  two-part piece. The beginning was again  vague but the latter part was a joyous,  flowing piece of choreography in which  Margie made the imagery of a river very  clear. She pulled and threw herself about  the room as she streamed on with the  music. An incredible piece to end the  show with.  Margie's need to converse with her audience succeeded in many of her pieces. She  danced tirelessly, speaking to everyone  with her movements and expressing her  feelings with her dance.  Margie Gillis is a performer to spend time  with.  If you missed her this time, wait  for her next visit to Vancouver. You will  see a performer with feeling and energy,  and be completely entertained.  Film festival coming up  On April 19 and 20, 1980 there will be  a Feminist Film Festival in Toronto.  It's being held at the Funnel Experimental Theatre, 507 King St. E. and  is organized by a collective of women  filmmakers and film enthusiasts.  Women across the country are invited  to submit their films before April 1,  1980. We are interested in all types  of Super-8 and 16mm films, amateur  and professional, shorts, documentaries, animation, home movies, etc.  Contact: Sue Golding,  180 Delaware Ave, Toronto 30      Kinesis February '80  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  ANOTHER EVENING FOR WOMEN ONLY, Saturday  February 16 at 2133 Granville (& 6th).  Watch for posters with more details at  Ariel & the Women's Bookstore.  GROUPS  A.A. meetings Monday nights at 7pm. For  information call Chris, 876-1285.  ART EXHIBITIONS BY WOMEN:  DEBORAH CLAPTON & MARGARET WITZCHEN,  Paintings and Sculpture, at the  Artists Gallery, 555 Hamilton St,  Vancouver. Feb. 18 (8:30pm opening)  through Mar. 7. Gallery hours:  Tues-Fri, 10-5pm.  FIONA KING, Watercolours, at the  Women's Art Gallery, #6-45 Kingsway  Vancouver, Feb. 1-29. Gallery hours  Mon-Fri, 9-5pm, Thurs 9-8pm.  VALE'RIE PUGH, Ceramic Sculptures, at  the Architectural Institute, 970  Richards, Vancouver. Jan. 17-  Mar. 1. Gallery hours: Mon-Fri,  10-4:30pm.  WOMEN'S BUILDING BENEFITS:  Feb. 16 - Valentine Day Dance Benefit  at Teamsters Hall, 490 E. Broadway  from 8:30pm. Women only. Adm. $3.  Tickets available at VSW, Ariel  Books or Women's Bookstore.  March 9: Concert/Variety Show Benefit  at Robson Sq. Media Centre Theatre  at 8pm. Adm. $4 employed, $2 unemployed. Entertainers lined up at  press time: Ferron, Carol Street,  Brass Tacks, Marg Verral, Kay  Jackson. Ask for tickets at the  women's bookstores, or VSW.  ON THE AIR  THE LESBIAN SHOW'S February program:  Feb. 7 - No Theme, Theme Show, a few  of the best  Feb. 14 - Lesbians Over 40  Feb. 21 - Lesbians and Therapy, reports  from the Alternative Therapy conference held in January  Feb. 28 - Lesbians and Music, featuring Therese Edell  The Lesbian Show, on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, Thursdays from 7:30-8:00pm.  The Lesbian Show, on Co-op Radio,  102.7 FM, Thursdays from 7:30-8:00pm  WOMANVISION'S February program:  Feb. 4 - Lecture by Mary Daly, scholar  radical theologian and author  Feb. 11 - Women in the Arts  Feb. 18 - Interview with Madeline Boscoe,  a member of the recently formed Toronto  based Health Sharing Collective  Feb. 25 - The News Show  Womanvision, on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM  Mondays from 7:00-8:00 pm  TALKING LkW  THURSDAYS, S30-930 PM  COCPRADD - CFRO FM  Northern  Women  &  Economic  Development  orrycur dial at: \ o 1.7 FM  spcnsaed hy the  legal Services Commission  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE is open to calls  two nights a week, Thursday & Sunday,  from 7-10 pm. Call 685-4519.  LESBIAN MOTHERS DROP IN meets Sundays  at 2pm at the Women's Bookstore, 804  Richards, Vancouver. For info, call  Laurel (525-1336) or Lynn (734-9784).  SECHELT WOMEN interested in contacting  other women in the area and looking  at starting a women's centre in that  area, contact Gayle (885-2626) or  - Anne (885-5029).  Are you a SINGLE PARENT? Having hassles  from welfare? A self-help group is  forming. For information, call  931-8154, 7pm-6am.  MEETINGS  Vancouver Rape Relief is sponsoring an  IN-MOVEMENT DISCUSSION of 1) Our  Strategies & Analysis and 2) Accountability, Tuesday, Feb. 19 at 7:30pm.  #4-45 Kingsway, Vancouver. Childcare  (call ahead: 872-8212) and refreshments provided.  IWD ORGANIZING COMMITTEE meetings are  held every Tuesday evening at 7:30pm  at 45 Kingsway. The theme for this  year will be Our Bodies Our Selves/  Control of Our Bodies. Planning is  still in the initial stages - come  . and get involved.  Vancouver's OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WOMEN has  the following outing, scheduled:  Trip to Saltspring Island, Yawaca  Outdoor Centre, open to members and  guests, Feb. 29-Mar. 2. Cost $24/  members $26/non-member. Call the  club at the Vancouver YWCA, 683-2531  local 249. Registration is limited.  Catch the Outdoor Club meeting Feb.  12, 7pm in the Board Room of the Y.  WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE sub-committee  meeting, March 29, 10am at 45 Kingsway.  This sub-committee and all interested  women will be organizing our provincial action for Mother's Day in May.  Contact person is Bet Bateman, RR#1,  Winlaw, B.C. V0G 2JO.  WOMEN IN TRADES meeting Sunday, Feb. 24  2-5pm at 4465 Quebec St, Vancouver.  All interested women welcome.  CONFERENCES  COURSES  The CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM COLLECTIVE  wants to train women to help teach  constructive criticism. If you are  interested in teaching or would like  to be a facilitator for your collective, call Karen (253-5654) or  Paulette (255-0523). First meeting  is Feb. 24, 7:30pm at #1-1841 Charles  St, Vancouver.  PEOPLE'S LAW SCHOOL offers these FREE  law classes: "  Feb. 14 - Wrongful Dismissal for  Non-Union Employees at Britannia  School, 1001 Cotton (off Commercial)  Feb. 21 - Step-Parent Adoptions,  at Mt. Pleasant Neighbourhood House,  535 E. Broadway  Feb. 25-27 - Medical Patients'  Rights, at Britannia School, 1001  Cotton  Feb. 28 - Juvenile Court, at South  Vancouver Neighbourhood House, 6470  Victoria Dr. (at 49th Ave. )  THREE WEEKEND WORKSHOPS in constructive  criticism, bioenergetics, peer counselling, gestalt process, for self-  help, for community, for struggle.  Feb..15-17, Isobel Kiborn and Tom  Sandborn (women & men); Mar. 14-16,  Sally Batt and Isobel Kiborn (women  only); Apr. 11-13, Isobel Kiborn and  Tom Sandborn (women and men). Fee is  $50 (negotiable). To register, call  Michael (876-0600) or Carol (254-4910).  Child care available. All fees go to  help build the Rape Relief House.  TRAINING GROUP IN RADICAL THERAPY, a  six month course meeting once a week  and led by Tom Sandborn - developing  feminist, gay liberation and anti-  capitalist perspectives on counselling  therapy and personal change. Write  Box 65306, Stn. F, Vancouver or call  876-0600 for more information. Fee is  $50/month (negotiable) donation to  Rape Relief House, an independent,  anti-rape centre and refuge for women  in crisis.  A CONFERENCE ON REFUGEES IN SOUTHERN  AFRICA is planned for the week of March  15-22 by Oxfam, Canadian Aid for Southern African Refugees, CUS0 and Southern Africa Action Coalition. A photo  display of women under apartheid is  scheduled. $10 employed, $3 unemployed  and students. Call Krenza Lai (743-1712)  for more information.  MIDWIFERY IS...A LABOUR OF LOVE, a  conference organized by the Maternal  Health Society and CALM (Campaign  Assn. for the Legalization of Midwifery), Feb. 29 & Mar. 1 at the  Sheraton Landmark Hotel, 1400 Robson  St, Vancouver. For details and reg-  istration, call 736-4637 or 826-6588. -  The 2nd B.C. STUDIES CONFERENCE, which  will include a women's studies session,  will be held at SFU Oct. 30-Nov. 1/81  and proposals for conference papers  are now being invited. Deadline for  submission of proposals is May 15/80.  Contact H. Johnston, Dept. of History  at SFU.  THE FEMALE ATHLETE, a North American  conference about women in sports and  recreation, is being held Mar. 21-23  1980 at SFU. It is open to workers  in the field, as well as all women.  Topics include Strength Training for  Women, Women and the Marathon, Sports  Legislation Affecting Women and Feminism and Sport. Contact Continuing  Studies at SFU (291-4565) for more  information.  -VSW-  Vancouver Status of Women provides free  assistance to low income women with  their income tax and child tax credit.  Simply call our office (736-1313) and  set up a time to come in.  If you work full-time, you have a hard  time making it into VSW during our  office hours. For this reason, we are  extending our hours. Beginning Feb. 19  we will be open every Thursday evening  until 9pm. There will be a staffperson  in the office, and you'll have access  to our information, referral and library  resources. Pass the word along.  VSW QUARTERLY MEETING, Tuesday March 18  7:30pm, at Kits Library, 8th and  MacDonald, Vancouver. BULLETIN BOARD  Kinesis February '80  JUST OUT  I CHANGE WORLDS, an autobiography of  journalist Anna Louise Strong, "a  hero for the left and superb reporter  on its heyday in Seattle." $7.95 pb  + 15$ handling from The Seal Press,  533 11th East, Seattle WA 98102.  NO LIFE FOR A WOMAN, a film about the  lives of women in single industry  resource towns. 26 min., NFB, produced and directed by Bonnie Kreps.  Contact your local National Film  Board office.  A new. no-nuke publication is starting.  NORTHWEST RESISTANCE will be a networking journal for dialogue on the  ethics, politics and action relating  to nuclear environmental crises. Send  essays, poems, stories and graphics  reflecting a "biospheric consciousness" to 836 W. 13th, Vancouver.  Women Against Violence Against Women has  a new leaflet out on sexual harassment  in the workplace. For copies or more  information, contact WAVAW or Rape  Relief at 45 Kingsway, Vancouver or  by calling 872-2250.  THE LESBIAN PATH, 37 autobiographical  sketches celebrating our diversity  and strength, edited by Margaret  Cruikshank. The women range in age  from 18-70; most have not published  work before. $6.95 from Caroline  House, Box 161, Thornwood NY 10594.  WOMEN & SOCIALISM: Accounting for Our  Experience, a pamphlet which attempts  to use both marxism and feminism to  analyze women's position in the family  and the labour force. Available for $1  from Vancouver Women's Study*Group,  P.O. Box 46534, Stn. G, Vancouver.  See two recent issues of BRANCHING OUT,  Vol. VI, No. 3 and 4 (1979) for a  comprehensive look at pornography  and censorship in Canada. Available  at Vancouver women's bookstores, or  from Branching Out, Box 4098,  Edmonton, Alberta T6E 9Z9.  Another articles on pornography by  Debra Lewis, "Pornography: A tough  issue for the left" appears in the  Dec 79/Jan 80 issue of Leftwords.  Available from Leftwords, Box 69367,  Stn. K, Vancouver.  WHEN BIRTH CONTROL FAILS, How to Abort  Ourselves Safely, by Suzann Gage -  a complete and illustrated guide to  self-abortion for the laywoman.  Copies from Speculum Press/Self-  Health Circle, Inc., P.O. Box 1036,  Hollywood, CA 90028.  PASSAGE TO THE GREAT ADVENTURE, A  Traveler's Handbook for Counsellors  and Educators of Women. A working  manual looking at intelligence,  emotion, behaviour and language as  healing tools. 100pp. $8.95 prepaid  from Women's Workshop, Box 7083,  Station E, London, Ont. N5Y 4J9.  Recent titles at the women's bookstores:  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE, 804 Richards,  . 684-0523:  Woman and Nature, Susan Griffin, $4.55  Latakia, Audrey Thomas, $7.95  I, Etcetera, Susan Sontag, $3.75  A Not Unreasonable Claim, ed. Linda  Kealey, $7.95  Lady of the Beasts, Robin Morgan, $6.25  The Sexism of Social and Political  Theory, ed. Lauren Clark & Lynda  Lange, $5.00  ARIEL BOOKS, 2766 W. 4th Ave., 733-3511:  (now in stock):  Plain Brown Wrapper, Rita Mae Brown,  $7.15  Room of One's Own, Virginia Woolf, $2.95  To the Lighthouse, Virginia Woolf, $3.90  Menopause, the Positive Approach,  Rosetta Reitz, $2.95  Women on Love, Eight Centuries of  Feminine Writing, Evelyn Sullerot ed.  $15.95  Nightwood, Djuna Barnes, $2.70  Sustainer donations are keeping us on the map  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly  po  all members. Individual subs to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year. We ask members to base  their donations on this, and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month; 20th for  event notices.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe, Cole  Dudley, Portland Frank, Morgan McGuigan,  Gayla Reid, Ann Schaefer, Diana Smith,  Joan Woodward, Michele Morel  Thank you,  sustainers.  Your contributions  give us a powerful feeling of community  support,  and make the continued existence  of Kinesis possible.  If you have not yet made a sustainer  donation or pledge, but have sufficient  income to do so, we ask you to think  about it. Sustainers make a personal  commitment to keep Kinesis alive.  Sustainers contribute $50 a year, in  a lump sum or in installments of $5 or  more. In return, you receive your own  subscription, along with any number of  complimentary copies for your friends.  Why not fill out this sustainer form  and help Kinesis continue?  I enclose my monthly installment of    I enclose a lump sum of $50  Clip and mail to:  Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  CLASSIFIED  I will do your INCOME TAX or show you  how to do your own. I've helped with  1200 returns. It's $5 if you weren't  employed in 1979; $10 if you were.  Call Cyndia at 251-2534.  PRESS GANG, a feminist printing and  publishing collective, is looking for  an experienced press operator to work  with the collective, full-time and  on salary. For more information about  the job and our collective, call  253-1224.  S0RWUC, Local 1 has moved its office  to 814-402 W. Pender St, Vancouver.  Phone numbers remain the same':  684-2834 or 681-2811.  Winners of the recent Rape Relief House  draw were: Judy Bekey ($200, premier's  salary); George Bogdet ($50, social  worker's salary); and Kristin Penn  ($15, welfare recipient's salary).  WOMEN ROCK CLIMBERS interested in talking  about their experiences for a research  project, call Cathy Stubbs at 299-6030.  SINCERE APOLOGIES from us at Kinesis to  Emma Lazarus for the enormous changes  at the last minute which we made on her  prison article in the Dec-Jan issue. We  will print another article by Lazarus in  an upcoming Kinesis  Subscribe now to  tiealthsharias  *- -*-    A new Canadian women's   \^J  health quarterly  A practical, informative magazine dealing with health issues affecting women.  Rates: Individuals $5/year  Institutions $10/year  Sustaining $25/year  Make ^cheques or money orders payable to  WOMEN HEALTHSHARING  Box 230, Station M  Toronto, Ontario M6S 4T3 32       Kinesis February '80  MEDIA  This afternoon,  complain to Eaton's  Do you find particular TV advertisements,  like the gem put out by Eaton's recently,  offensive? Does sex-role stereotyping  in the broadcast media disgust you? If  so, there are a few things you can do.  In the case of the TV advertisment for  Eaton's, you could do what VSW member  Mona Jurczyk did. She wrote a strongly  worded letter to the store, with copies  to CBC TV and to VSW. Her letter stated:  "I object most strongly to the TV advertisement for Eaton's, which I saw on CBC  TV Sunday, 5th January, 1980.  "The advertisement depicts a woman in an  open'car being approached by a motorcycle  policeman. She is shown to be disorganized,  cannot find her driver's licence in her  purse, bursts into tears, and passes the  kleenex to the cop. The policeman consoles  her, tells her to relax and to go shopping  at Eaton's.'  "My objection is directed to the not-so-  subtle message that women (blonde) are  disorganized, weepy, and can wheedle their  way out of trouble with tears, which men  (policeman) fall for, and excuse them  of their responsibilities.  "The stereotype of weepy, dizzy blonde  women is totally abhorrent to today's women, who hold jobs, raise families, fix  cars and are completely competent.  "I would also suggest that police would  object to the hidden message that they  forgive traffic violations for weepy  females and have nothing better to do  than go around consoling them.  "Who ever suggested that shopping solved  anyone's problem?"  Besides writing, phoning and boycotting  Eaton's, writing or phoning TV stations  showing the ad, you can also send letters  of complaint to the Canadian Radio, Television and Telecommunications Commission  (CRTC) Task Force On Sex-Role Stereotyping,  CRTC, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0N2.  In addition, you can also make a presentation at the CRTC public meeting to be  held in Vancouver, Wednesday, February 20  at 7.30 p.m. at the Hotel Vancouver. You  needn't restrict your critique to the  Eaton's ad. There's lots of examples of  sexist ads in the broadcast media which  pollute our minds daily.  CRTC suggests that submissions be up to  about 15 minutes in length. They should  briefly identify the problem of sex-role  stereotyping in broadcasting, and most  importantly, should focus on specific  recommendations for solutions to the  problem. You don't have to go as the representative of a group. Individual presentations are of the greatest importance.  The Task Force will review all submissions,  oral and written. It expects to complete  the review and make public its guidelines  by mid-1980.  Address your letter about that Eaton's  ad to Eaton's Ad Department, 701. Granville,  Vancouver B.C., to CBC TV, 700 Hamilton  Street, Vancouver, and to us at VSW.  Catch The Lesbian Show  The Lesbian Show of Vancouver Coop Radio  has just begun a tape service. You can  buy tapes on such diverse topics as:  Lesbian perspectives on spirituality;  What does a lesbian look like?; Political  and non-political lesbians   If you're a Coop member, the tapes cost  only $8 for a one half-hour show. Send  queries and orders to: The Lesbian Show,  Coop Radio, 337 Carrall Street, Vancouver  B.C. V6B 2J4  Kramer vs.  Kramer  Crap vs. Crap.  Crap wins  trivializes  single-  parenting  By Joey Thompson  This highly-praised movie is merely another  Hollywood fuzz piece. The movie, produced  by Stanley Jaffe and staring Dustin Hoffman and Meryl Streep, treats crucial social problems with trivial, easily-rectified but unrealistic solutions.  The movie story - substantially different  from the poorly-written book - opens with  the beautiful, well-dressed Joanna leaving  her progressive, upwardly mobile but insensitive husband, Ted.  Joanna, after hearing several limp lines  from Ted about how much she is wanted,  needed and loved, rushes out the door in  pursuit of life's meaning and an approaching elevator. She leaves her abandoned  husband to wonder who will take care of  the cherubic and motherless child.  The movie takes off from there - into  "moving" scenes which depict a confused  and struggling father coping with a beautiful but obstinate young child and his  trying job_which promises advancement -  at least it did until he spends more  time with the child than with the job -  whereupon he is fired.  Ted, who don't forget was tossed aside  because he had no understanding and patience for his over-worked, bored and unappreciated wife, undergoes an unexplained  and overnight transformation into: super  dad.  Suddenly he becomes the patient and enduring father who, while he has his impatient moments, manages for the most part  to nuture a loving, caring relationship  with his child.  He has a few encounters with Joanna's  "feminist" womanfriend down the hail  who tries unsuccessfully to fill him in  on why Joanna left. But husband (and  many viewers) can only see that the selfish Joanna left a helpless, vulnerable  child.  Joanna appears 18 months later. She is  seen mournfully watching Billy through  the window of a cafe situated across  from the kid's school. Convenient, of  course.  She watches - tearful, but impecably  dressed, and beautiful.  Next, a meeting with hubby to inform him  that after months in California "getting  herself (and a tan) together" she has  returned and wants Billy full-time.  Of course, by then, hubby's relationship  with Billy has blossomed and he refuses  to let Billy go. A court case ensues.  Expensive lawyers are retained.  Tis about this time that husband's company tersely informs him that he hasn't  been paying much attention to his important advertising job and he is fired.  But Ted is no teddy bear. And finds gain  ful employment minutes before the court  convenes (unemployed would destroy his  chances of gaining custody).  Turns out in court that he had to take  a pay cut to $29,000 a year from $32,  000. Poor boy.  And lo and behold dear untogether Joanna -  has also landed a job - paying $31,000  a year - which enables her to buy expensive topfashion clothes, hairdos and  make-up.  And here's where the movie really falls  apart. How many single parents earn  that kind of money?  How many middle-class, well-paid men  jump to the opportunity of fathering,  mothering, laundering, cooking, cleaning, etc, etc, without the use of a daycare centre, cleaning lady, shrink, etc,  etc ?  How many single parented young children  who, despite a few temper tantrums and  fits of unreason, exude the wisdom  denied most adults?  Losing a parent is a traumatic experience  for children. Massaging and healing the  wounds is a long-term commitment.  Kramer vs. Kramer, written, produced and  directed by men, does not portray this.  How many separated folk can afford expensive lawyers, costly court cases?  Hollywoood movies aren't real.  And Kramer  vs. Kramer is no exception.  It doesn't even scratch the surface of  an important social issue. It treats  single parenting and divorce with simple-  mindedness and ease. Instead of attempting to alleviate single parenting problems for thousands of people, its  slick treatment will frustrate and infuriate parents who are often ill-prepared for the formidable task.  The book?  It is worse and doesn't rate more than  a sentence.#  Dorothy  li\)esa^  Issue  Room of One's Own, feminist literary  journal, has devoted its most recent  issue to writer/poet DOROTHY LIVESAY.  Copies available for $4 from Room of  One's Own, P.O. Box 46160, Stn. G,  Vancouver V6R 4G5. IT'S FUNDING TIME AND WE NEED SUPPORT LETTERS.  In March, funding from the provincial government expires for three  services which are central to the women's movement in British Columbia:  Vancouver Status of Women, Vancouver Rape Relief, and Vancouver Health  Collective. Without renewed support from governemnt, these services  will be drastically curtailed.  Women need these services desperately. That's why we are asking you  to write letters of support for each of these groups.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE  As you know, The Health Collective has been very active within the  community in the field of education and preventative health care for  women. Increased requests for speakers and facilitators have expanded  their services in the areas of public speaking and education groups.  In addition, they present informational and practical talks on various  aspects of the health industry. Their diaphregm fitting clinics are  booked well in advance. Their birth control and pregnancy counselling  services continue to be widely used, as is their health information  phone line and resource centre.  PLEASE HELP THE HEALTH COLLECTIVE REMAIN ACTIVE IN THE COMMUNITY.  WRITE A LETTER IN SUPPORT OF THEIR WORK TO: The Hon. Rafe Mair, Minister  of Health, Parliament Buildings, Victoria, B.C. DIRECT THE LETTER TO  THE HEALTH COLLECTIVE, so they can send it in to Mair with all the  others. Their address: 1501 W Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1W6 736-66%  VANCOUVER RSPE RELIEF  Vancouver Rape Relief needs provincial funding for operating costs and  salaries. In Vancouver, this year, Rape Relief has received 437 calls  from women in crisis. This reflects but a fraction of the number of  assaults taking place in the city. Remember: police estimate that only  10$ of rapes are reported. That adds up to a staggering number of  sexual assaults within our community.  The second aspect of Rape Relief services is public education. To this  end, they have spoken to 209 community groups and professional groups  within the past year, and to 5,260 people.  ''Ģ'RITE A LETTER IN SUPPORT OF THE RAPE RELIEF SERVICES. Address your  letter "To Whom it May Concern", and send it to Rape Relief offices at  4-45 Kingsway, Vancouver, B.C. V5T 3H7. They will forward it to the  provincial funding agency. For more details, call them at #72-8212  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN needs your support, too. SEND A SUPPORT LETTER  TO US HERE AT VSW,  1090."West 7th Ave, and address it to Evan Wolfe,  Provincial Secretary, Parliament Buildings, Victoria, B.C. We will forward  it to him. Vancouver status of Women is applying to Evan Wolfe, Provincial  Secretary, for funding from his ministry. Tome of our services include:  INFORMATION AND REFERRAL. VSW  is recognized as the major clearing'house  for information on individual and group problems faced by women, ^or  example, we maintain a legal referral system (authorized by the Law Society  of B.C.) and do individual peer counselling with women who approach us.  RESEARCH _ V.SW does research and evaluation of legislation submitted at  all levels of governemnt. We have submitted briefs, engaged in consultations and otherwise provided a women's perspective on a variety of issues.  In addition, our research is used to compile information for distribution  in the community. We are, for example,now compiling a guide to the Family  Relations Act. ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING AND CONSCIOUSNESS RAISING _ VSW  offers numerous groups in these areas. Assertiveness Training, for  example, has been offered by VSW this year in conjuction with Vancouver  School Board. EDUCATION - VSW  regularly supplies assistance to people  producing non-sexist instructional materials, and sends speakers to  schools, colleges and community groups. PUBLIC RELATIONS: VSW  has, over  eight years, developed a credible reputation with the news .media, and  frequently issues statements concerning women's issues.  In addition. VS"'  publishes Kinesis, maintains a larp-e F^FERE'-JOE LIBP/PY and is active ir  OOH'&IMITY DEVELOPMENT.