 SfEOIM. COtlKTWRS  Sj  Vancouver Status off Women  2029 W. 4th Ave.  APRIL 1976  VOLUME V   NO 54  ISSN 03I7-9095  WOMEN CAME BY AIRPLANE.AND AUTOMOBILE. THEY CAME BY BUS AND FERRY. EIGHT MONTH OLD ADRIAN  CAME FROM ATLIN IN A PACK ON HIS MOTHER'S BACK. AND THEY CAME BY BICYCLE.  THEY CAME TO THE WOMEN'S RALLY FOR ACTION.  WHERE WERE YOU ON MARCH 22ND?!  AND NOW ...  Women's Rally for Action is a beginning!  We have met with our MLAs and learned  how they stand on issues important to  women. We have experienced the strength  that comes with knowledge and organization and co-operation and numbers.  Our MLAs know we are out here, we are  interested, informed, concerned and  determined. And we must continue to  re-inforce this realization! Women in  every riding must be relentless —  maintain constant contact with your  MLA as individuals and as groups,  write letters (lots of them), arrange  meetings (MLAs usually return to their  ridings when the House adjourns), keep  informed on the issues that are so  vital to us and keep your MLA informed"  Demand responses, committment, action.  Our MLAs are supposed to be representing our interests in the government.  We must maintain contact with one another to share our knowledge, experience; and expertise, to organize action  and to feel our strength and solidarity.  One of the Wrap-Up speakers at the  Rally, Gail Borst, said women's centres  and contacts are spreading like a net  across the province. We must keep add- ,  ing to and strengthening that net. Get  to know and work with other women in  your area. Make use of resource people  such as BC Teachers' Federation Status  of Women contacts (one in every district), women's centres, newspapers  and newsletters, women with expertise  like Gail who is the Women's Organizer  for the B.C. Federation of Labour.  For Lower Mainland women (and anyone  else who can attend) there will be a  Follow-Up Planning Session, April 8,  1 p.m., in the VSW Office, 2029 West  4th Ave. Vancouver. If you want more  information about the meeting call  Johanna den Hertog 736-3746.  Finalized versions of all lobbying team  reports will be written up and mailed  out to all lobbying teams, women's  centres,etc. involved in Women's Rally  for Action. Copies will be available  through VSW as well. And in the next  issue of KINESIS we will have a summarized report of each lobbying team's  visit with their MLA. This issue because of time and space(the lack of  both!)we are including summarized reports of only the meetings with Cabinet  Ministers. All women should write to  these Cabinet Ministers. Women from .  the riding the Minister represents as  a MLA can insist that she/he consider  women's needs and interests in her/his  riding — women all over the province  can insist that she/he consider women's  needs and interests in the portfolio  she/he hold.  And as soon as possible there will be  a Rally Kit compiled so that we  can  share our experiences.and provide ideas  and knowledge to help still more women  organize to fight for our rights. You may be what is traditionally  classified as a "housewife". That  is the label I am attached with and  thus I find myself unpaid for my  duties and dependent on my husband's  salary for my continued existence.  I have been investigating a recent  suggestion that housewives should be  paid a wage. The response has been  varied and I'd like to share some  of the views with you. I'd also like  to hear your views so please write.  Housework, the drudgery of it all,,  not worthy °^ comment when filling  out job applications, and an average  of 50 hours a week that 3A of all  women are employed at for some period of their lives. The job that receives no U.I.C., extended health or  pension benefits, but is worthy of  being computed in the G.N.P. of the  nation.  What is its value? Should housewives  receive monetary renumeration for  the work they do? Where shall this  wage come from? Is this a wage for  cooking and cleaning and/or parenting?  On the pro side: a facsimile of independence. Freedom to take that  Spanish class, or to buy our husband  a birthday present with money we've  earned ourselves. Money to take the  children to daycare occasionally to  buy time to rest after a seven day  work week. And - very important -  we could take out"a loan or apply  for a credit card - and we'd not even  need our husband's (father's, son's,  or younger brother's!) signature.  There would be an additional degree  of security if our husband's employment were insecure. If we found our-  WAGES FOR  HOUSEWORK  selves in an intolerable marriage  situation we would no longer feel  compelled to remain because of absence of funds. Single parents would  gain the option of whether or not to  remain home when their children are  young and may need their care.  What effect will receiving a wage  have on housewives? Will it elevate  our status in our own eyes and in  the eyes 6f others? Ours is a money-  oriented society — can we only prove  our worth by receiving a monthly pay-  cheque? Will there be more house  husbands because the status of doing  housework has risen to an acceptable  level?  But would this not exacerbate the  present situation — making greater  the subservience we now feel? We may  find we have less time to ourselves  and more work piled on our shoulders.  Will we hear "You do the dishes.  You're getting paid for it." The  salary would undoubtedly be minimal,  thus women would be conscripted  further into the lowest paid strata  of society. Child care programs  could quite conceivably be decreased  because "now that they are paid, .  mothers should be home with their  children."  Those of us who have chosen to re-.  main home with our children or those  who find it necessary to stay home  because of the prohibitive cost of  day care, would like very much to  receive that monthly paycheque —  but let's see if there isn't an alternative to being paid to be a housewife. I don't think we can take all  the occupational hazards listed above.  Let's look at a guaranteed annual  income for all persons. Or lets look  closely at a shorter work week for  our spouses so that we have help  with the child rearing and house  keeping. This would be most valuable  as it would improve the quality of  the time spent with our children —  neither we nor our husbands would be  overtired from too many hours of  labour. Let's look at more flexible  work situations. If we have opted  out of the 9-5 job scene because the  strain of parenthood, keeping house,  and the job is more than we care to  cope with, perhaps the benefits of  a full time job shared with another  person (husband?) may be more suitable.  I personally feel that a wage paid  for being a housewife is not the  panacea we've been searching for.  The situation as it now exists is  clearly unsatisfactory — but what  shall we do about it?  - Marlene Schneider  (The Optimist, February,1976, No.6,  Newspaper of The Victoria Faulkner  Women's Centre, 4051 4th Avenue,  Whitehorse, Yukon.)  [—occupation housewife  funds  A WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN WHOSE CAREER IS  HOMEMAKING  Saturday, April 10, 1976  Room 9200, Academic Quadrangle,  Simon Fraser University  This workshop is co-sponsored by  Douglas College and the Vancouver  YWCA in conjunction with the Women's  Studies, Capilano College; Women's  Studies, Simon Fraser University;  Somen's Centre, Simon Fraser; and the  the Centre for Continuing Education  UBC.  Keynote Address is by June Callwood,  author, TV interviewer and one of  Canada's best-known magazine journalists.  Discussion groups include: Who is a  Housewife? The Value of Housework,  Single Parenting, Effects on Self-  Esteem of Being a Housewife, Sex  Roles in the Home, Housewives Blues,  Emotional Self-Defense, Women and the  Law, Sole Support Women, Non-Sexist  Child Rearing, Political Action,  Women in Transition.  Resource persons: Lillian Zimmerman,  Bonnie McGhie, Nancy Denefreo, Dr.  Anita Fellman, Manuela Durling, Dr.  Sara David, Arlene Dashwood, Joyce  Hammond, Gene Errington, Yvonne Cocke,  Shelagh Day, Leslie Dixon, Margaretha  Hoek, Lee Masters, Cindy Schrenk, and  others.  For registrations enquiries: 683-2531  Workshop fee: $6, includes coffee,  lunch and materials. Limited daycare  available for $2.50 per child.  The Department of National Health and  Welfare has limited funds available  to voluntary organizations under the  Grants to Voluntary Organizations -  International Women's Year Program,  to publish reports on projects undertaken and completed during International Women's Year in order to assist  in the evaluation of IWY activities  and to disseminate information regarding such projects and their achievements to the interested public.  To be eligible, projects must have  a health and/or social welfare component. For further information and  to obtain application forms, interested groups or organizations should  write to: Special Adviser - Status  of Women, Health and Welfare Canada,  Room 1516, Brooke Claxton Building,  Tunney's Pasture, Ottawa, Ontario.  The deadline for receipt of applications is April 16, 1976.  women in prison  "Women Behind Bars, An Organizing Tool"  is a 56 page booklet of articles, listings of groups and resources dealing  with female prisoners, analysis and  strategy for improving status of female inmates. $1.75 from Resources  for Community Change, P.O. Box 21006,  Washington, D.C. 20009 USAo  - WCWN  Singing is a collection of writings  by women in Canadian correctional  institutions, to be published early  next year. Project co-ordinator  Bernice Lever is soliciting poetry,  stories, articles and opinions from  women in prison. Those interested  should write Bernice Lever,  79  Denham Drive, Thornhill, Ontario.  a csw  The annual report of the federal  Advisory Council on the Status of  Women is now available along with a  a number of their working papers on  rape, family planning, birth control,  housewives and the CPP, sex discrimination in fringe benefits, matrimonial property, etc. All free from the  ACSW, Box 1541, Station B, Ottawa.  -WCWN AFFIRMATIVE   ACTION  WHAT IS AFFIRMATIVE ACTION?  "Affirmative Action" is a phrase that  more and more people are hearing these  days. Most people know that it has  something to do with equality of  opportunity in employment for women.  But what does it really mean?  The Canadian Union of Public Employees  has published a pamphlet called  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION, PUTTING A STOP TO  SEX DISCRIMINATION.  Under the heading "Why An Affirmative  Action Program?" the pamphlet states:  "Affirmative action policies and programs are based on strategies to ensure the removal of unnecessary  barriers which restrict employment  and promotional opportunities for  women, and which correct traditional  sexual imbalances in the work force.  Affirmative action is oriented towards  results rather than procedures, and  implies that schedules and goals will  be established and realized. Without  using quota systems or rigid forms  of reverse discrimination, affirmative action programs are designed to  ensure that unrelated job qualifications are eliminated in both written  and oral evaluations, and appropriate  career ladders are built to create  avenues of upward mobility.  Affirmative action programs also provide measures to increase career  opportunities, and allow women to  demonstrate their individual abilities and to rise to a more equitable  and justified standing in the employer's administration.  Women whose knowledge and skills  qualify them to be in positions of  increased responsibility will be  encouraged to advance in the system.  Training and upgrading courses will  be developed to prepare women for  greater and expanded roles. Where  present recruitment techniques have  failed to achieve results, outreach  and search programs will be developed.  These programs will identify potentially qualified women among the general public.  An affirmative action program is an  ongoing and permanent function. Once  established goals are achieved, monitoring devices continue to evaluate,  adjust and upgrade all components of  the program.  Affirmative action is not just a restatement of equal opportunity, but  rather, an effective enforcement of  that principle."  The intention of the affirmative action program is to have, eventually,  a system in which women and men have  equal opportunity for advancement and  higher wages. The method by which it  is hoped to do this is that every  effort must be made to incorporate  women into the work force at every  level. Women's qualifications must  be considered and upgraded at every  opportunity.  Unions and even companies all over  North America are accepting the  principles of affirmative action  and trying to implement them.  - reprinted from IMAGES, Kootenay  Council of Women newspaper, October,  1975.  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION FOR WOMEN IN A.G.  DEPARTMENT?  "A Future for Women" is a 45 page report by the Task Force on Women's ,  Issues, presented to the B.C. Attorney  General in January 1976, recommending  affirmative action for female employees  in that department. Free copies are  available from David Vickers, Deputy  A.G,,Room 126, Parliament Buildings,  Victoria, B.C. Comments on the report  are invited.  -WCWN  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN CIVIL SERVICE  "The Equal Employment of Women in the  Public Service of Canada, Mandate for  Change" is a 15 page bilingual booklet  giving a perspective on women in the  civil service in Ottawa from 1870 to  1960 and the new affirmative action  plan giving them equal job opportunity.  Free from Office of Equal Opportunity  for Women, Public Service Commission  of Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.  - WCWN  DAYCARE  HUMAN RIGHTS  The Director of the B.C. Human Rights  Branch thinks the province's equal pay  laws are being interpreted too rigidly  in some cases and she is proposing  some progressive amendments to the  legislation.  Kathleen Ruff suggests the equal pay  clause of the B.C. Human Rights Code  should be extended to close loopholes  and says that employers found guilty  of discrimination should be ordered  to enact affirmative action/equal job  opportunity programs.for women and  minorities.  Equal pay for equal work is currently  considered to mean "exactly the same."  But the majority of women are segregated into sex-typed,job ghettos where  there are no male workers. Thus, despite equal pay laws, the gap between  male and female earnings is increasing  steadily.  To overcome this problem, Ruff says  the law should read "equal pay for  work of equal value" meaning "sub*-  stantially similar." This would require extensive re-evaluation of wage  scales and justification for paying  secretaries less than plumbers for  instance. The Human Rights Commission  already scrutinizes jobs by examining  the skills, effort and responsibility  needed to perform them, when investigating equal pay complaints.  "We must not only penalize those who  discriminate,,but also prevent discrimination from reoccuring," says  Ruff. "This is where affirmative  action/equal job opportunity programs  are useful."  In addition, the Director sees an  urgent need for the proposed federal  human rights commission to coordinate  provincial counterparts, undertake  research and provide educational materials and training on the subject.  At present most provincial human  rights agencies operate in isolation  from one another, with insufficient  staff and money and obsolete or non-  Canadian information.  Kathleen Ruff sees human rights agencies as cohesive factors in society.  "If we do not cast aside white middle-  class male prejudices, we will disintegrate into warring factions and  backwaters of despair," she says.  - Karen Richardson, WCWN  Workers at 8 day care centres in the  Lower Mainland have voted overwhelmingly in favour of strike action.  The workers are represented by the  Social Service Employees (SSEU) and  the Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of Canada (SORWUC).  The unions are planning -a joint one  day work stoppage,  "We are limiting  our strike action to one day only  because, we don't want children and  parents to be hurt," said Don Hann  of SSEU.  Ellen Shapiro, president of SSEU,  said "the quality of child care is  suffering because qualified workers  are forced to leave the field to  make a living. No one can survive  on wages of $500 to $600 a month."  "Day care workers are left with no  alternative," said Gay Hoon of SORWUC.  "The government controls all the  funds, but it refuses to negotiate  with us. We are asking the public to  support us, and help us put pressure  on the Bennett government. We will  hold a public rally on the day of  work stoppage, and we hope that  people who recognize the value of day  care will join us then."  "It is still possible for Vander  Zalm to avert the strike," said  Ellen Shapiro. "We are asking him  to meet with representatives of both  unions together." CHILD CARE ALLOWANCES  Since it is that time of year again  when we must think about our annual  contribution to the Department of  National Revenue, Letter Lobby is  going to concentrate on a problem  faced by every working mother — how  difficult it is to find adequate day  care, and the fact that it is almost  impossible to get receipts for income  tax purposes if you must rely on relatives or friends to babysit for you.  This has been one of my — and VSW's  — pet peeves. In one of his letters  to me the former Finance Minister,  John Turner, extolled the virtues of  this provision, pointing out that it  is not available to working women in  the United States. Lucky us! However,  the following text of a January 6,  1975 radio broadcast called "Tax  Bracket" by Thorne, Riddell and Co.,  Chartered Accountants, sums up the  whole riduculous situation:  ;"To the policy-makers who drafted  our present tax laws it seemed like  a good idea to allow a deduction  of child-care expenses for working  mothers. After all, what could be a  more legitimate  expense of such employment than the cost of day care?  Most mothers with young children  simply cannot go out to work unless  they pay someone to look after their  children.  But what at first glance appears to  be a genuine tax break for working  mothers turns out, on closer inspection, and in actual practice, to be  a lot less generous than was probably  intended.  For one thing, while it actually costs  upwards of $1,200 per year for full-  time day care for one child, a working mother is limited to a maximum  deduction of only $500 per child.  Many working mothers cannot even  claim an amount this large, which is  already less than half the actual  cost of the day care service.  There are some subleties involved in  this area that probably would not  cross the minds of the men who made  the laws — perhaps their children  are grown up or their wives do not  work outside the home. (Hear, hear!)  letter  I o b b y  Dorothy Holme  The policy-makers have been under the  impression that the great majority of  working mothers could or would take  their children to licenced day care  centres. But what if the child is  under three years old? Just try and  find a licenced daycare centre for  him! Such centres must employ a registered nurse and meet many other  stringent requirements. Consequently,  they are as scarce as hen's teeth.  And what if a mother can't get her  child into a day care centre for three  to five year olds — there aren't  enough of these centres either —  or shift-work makes it inconvenient  (they don't operate evenings or Saturdays) or she has children two and  four years old, which means the children would have to go to two different  places for day care?  And what if the child is in school  until 3 o'clock, but neither parent  arrives home from work until 5 p.m.?  Most responsible parents don't want  to leave a 6 year old to his own devices for two hours.  The solution to these problems has  to be found in the person of a friend,  neighbour, relative or other woman  who offers day care in her home.  These people are often mothers themselves who take in a couple of other  children as companions for their own  and to make a little pin-money besides. They don't charge too much —  but at least the babysitter gets to  keep all that she makes, and doesn't  have anything deducted at source.  And that's the crux of the matter  right there. Obviously, private babysitters are reluctant to give receipts  to working mothers for income tax  purposes. If they do, they know that  they will be inviting enquiries from  the tax collector because such receipts  must show the name and Social Insur  ance Number of the baby-sitter and  technically, under the law, the income is taxable. But in order to  claim a deduction on her income tax  return, the working mother has to  report all these details to support  her claim. Consequently, in many  cases, no claim is ever actually made.  So, what the taK legislators did for  working mothers might have sounded  fine in theory but in actual fact,  and for some very human reasons, it  doesn't help them very much."  The above is a typical example of  what happens when women aren't included in the decision-making process.  Had half of our members of parliament  been women (among them working  mothers) surely this so-called  "benefit" would have been better  formulated.  When VSW met with Hon. Marc Lalonde  in Vancouver in October 31, 1975 we  pointed out this problem to him, so  he is familar with it. What we have  to do now is write letters to the  new Finance Minister, Hon. Donald  Macdonald, with a copy to Revenue  Minister Bud Cullen, Lalonde, the  Prime Minister, and of course Katie  Cooke. Incidentally, in her last  letter to us Katie stated,"Your  continued pressure is what will  really change things in the end."  Let's hope sol.  I don't think it is necessary to give  a sample letter this time — just  state the difficulties you have experienced in your own life and then  point out how useless the "tax provision" is. The wording in the above  broadcast is terrific — so go ahead  and use excerpts from it to get your  point across to our predominantly  male politicians who of course never  have to worry about such things as  day care.  - Dorothy Holme  herstory  CANADIAN WOMEN OF NOTE  The Media Club of Canada has received  $5000 from the national Department o  of Health and Welfare to compile a  registry of "Canadian Women of Note."  The public is invited to submit names  of historical and contemporary women  for inclusion. Biographical notes  will be prepared by the club. Pa  Participate in our herstory — write  Media Club of Canada, Box 504, Station  B, Ottawa, Ontario.  -WCWN  poets  A trilingual anthology is seeking  unpublished poetry bu women in English,  French or Spanish for a North American  anthology. Submit with stamped, self-  addressed envelope to Ms. Terry Wetherby  32 Josiah, San Francisco, California.  EVALUATION OF IWY  IWY  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women is surveying women a  and women's groups across Canada to  evaluate the effect of IWY. If you  wish to participate in the study, wr  write for a free questionaire to NAC  at 121 Avenue Road, Toronto, Ontario.  They will be meeting with the federal  Ministers of Labour, Justice and  Status of Women it the end of April  to lobby them on status of women  issues. Subscribe to their newsletter  "Status of Women News" (4 issues per  year, $3). National women's news is  included. Membership in NAC is $15  yearly and includes voting rights  and subscription.  -WCWN  WORLD CONGRESS OF WOMEN  The Canadian Liaison Committee for  International Women's Decade has  published a 20 page booklet REPORT  OF THE CANADIAN DELEGATION TO THE  WORLD CONGRESS FOR INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S YEAR. This is a report of the  37-woman Canadian delegation to the  World Congress for International  Women's Year held in Berlin in October, 1975. The Canadian delegation,  part of a 2000-woman assembly, proposed an International Children's Year  for 1979.  For a copy of the booklet send 50c  to Canadian Liaison Committee for  International Women's Decade, Box 524  Port Credit Dostal Station, Mississ-  auga, Ontario.  definition  The word BRIDE is derived from an  ancient Teutonic word meaning "to  cook". MAILWOMEN:  EVERYONE SEEMa  QUITE PLEASED.    In Vancouver, approximately 10%  of the full-time letter carriers  are female.  Their numbers have  increased dramatically in the past  two years, throughout the province.  Some 50% of the incoming couriers  are female.  In some of the smaller  cities, the entire staff is female.  Ms. Diane Coleman has been at the  job for three and a half months.  She does not make a point of being  a feminist but says, "I wouldn't be  doing this job if I wasn't getting  the same pay as men!"  Women have always been eligible for  the job and paid the same wages but  only recently have they been applying in such great numbers. What is  the reason for this?  Ms. Lee Smith, a feminist, and on the  job seven months says, "Until now,  there was a big masculine mystique  about mail delivery. You don't have  to be all that tough to do the job."  It seems the reaction of the mailmen  and the public to the new mailwomen  is positive.  "If the mailmen mind,  they sure don't show it," says Ms.  Coleman.  "The public is sometimes  surprised, simply because they have  not seen a female courier before, but  generally, everyone seems quite  pleased about it all."  "The mailmen were much better about  it than I expected," says Ms. Smith.  "The public ask me a lot of questions they would never ask of the mailmen.  Sometimes I haven't got time to  stop and talk with them."  Work as a mail carrier cay be one of  the most hassle-free and non-discriminating jobs there are today for women.  "If any women are interested, I'd say  go right ahead and apply," says Diane.  "I recommend it to all my friends,"  says Ms. Lee.  MAILWOMEN  Applicants must have grade 10  education and be in good physical  condition. There are no height restrictions.  Competition is held several times a year by giving an IQ  test and oral interview.  Within two  months those accepted are documented  and given a free uniform. Trainees  undergo six days at a school learning to do c.o.d.'s, registered and  certified mail and special deliveries as well as five days en route  with another letter carrier.  A work-day at the post office starts  with mail sorting from 6-8 a.m.  with time off for fraternizing over  coffee. This is the only time mail  carriers come in contact directly  with a supervisor.  "You try to finish a route by 3 p.m.  at the latest," says Diane.  "But you  usually finish a lot sooner and you  are still paid for an 8 hour day."  _Lee says, "and you don't have to report back to the office at the end  of the day."  Most couriers prefer to work in the  area where they live. Some prefer  to "bid" on shorter walks with high  rise deliveries while others choose  longer routes with less deliveries.  Diane's route for example is about  one mile long, but making several  hundred stops at businesses and residences she may walk some five miles  in four hours.  No carrier is required to lift more  than 25 lbs. An average load is  10 lbs.  In any case, each takes as  much out of the relay box as wanted  at a time. They can go back for more.  "Even the women who are five feet tall  have no problem," says Diane.  She  once carried 28 lbs.  She is fond of  backpacking and is used to it.  All couriers belong to the Letter  Carriers Union of Canada whose new  contract gives them retroactive pay  at a ceiling of $5.14 per hour.  Diane was making $3.05 per hour as a  nurse maid prior to this job and Lee  was making $2.75 as an office worker  .before.  Both started at $4.21 per  hour in training.  The new contract grants women  maternity leave in a flexible  period coinciding with UIC benefits and their seniority is unaffected. Men get one day paternity leave. The only other regulation governing women is dress:  choice of slacks, culottes, shorts  or skirts in combination with a  shirt or blouse.  Both women like the job a lot.  They can be outdoors and have freedom of movement.  It's a very independent occupation.  But are there  any disadvantages?  "Some of us  have to carry biscuits for that dog  that bites," says Diane.  - Karen Richardson  KINESIS has sent a letter to each of  the MLAs in B.C. outlining the issues  women are concerned with in this province and requesting that they indicate  their position regarding these issues.  (The letter covered the same points  as the WOMEN WANT ANSWERS article on  Page 3 of KINESIS December 1975).  Only a few of the MLAs have replied  as yet. Some of the replies are printed below.  ALLAN WILLIAMS, MINISTER OF LABOUR,  MLA WEST VANCOUVER-HOWE SOUND  '.'"<,.. With regard to the matter of the  Human Rights Branch, which falls within the mandate of my department, I  regret to say that at this particular  time of severe budgetary controls it  will not be possible to increase the  staff and funds.  Once again, thank you for writing. T  The issues that you have raised are  ones that are worthy of careful consideration."  C. D'ARCY, MLA ROSSLAND-TRAIL  "Thank you for the copy of your policy  statement to the Bennett government.  I read it with great interest, and I  will continue to watch closely the a  actions and directions of government  on the issues raised."  R.H. MCCLELLAND, MINISTER OF HEALTH,  MLA LANGLEY  "Many thanks for your letter of January 23, 1976 in regard to the Status  of Women's Co-ordinator's Office.  MLA  LETTERS  The contract for the office was one  which was made by the previous Government for International Women's Year,  and the contract ended December 31,  1975.  Until our new Government has an opportunity to assess the financial situation  of the Province, it will not be possible to make any announcements or  definite arrangements for programs.  I agree with the concept that women's  problems are just beginning to be  solved in respect of their careers  and many aspects of their lives, and  you have my assurance of continuing  interest in these very important  matters."  WILLIAM VANDER ZALM, MINISTER OF HUMAN  RESOURCES, MLA SURREY  V... The one section of your letter  of concern to me, is that pertaining  to day care.  Please be assured that this program  is presently being reviewed, in the  hope that we might bring about changes  for improvement."  KINESIS is writing follow-up letters  to try and elicit more information  — eg. the Minister of Health did  not respond to the question on Breast  Cancer Screening Programs. Women are  urged to write the Cabinet Ministers  and their MLAs and get answers to the  questions that concern them. Further  correspondence will be printed as it  is received.  APRIL 5  On April 5, 1917 B.C. women won the  right to vote.  Celebrate by writing your MLA, the  Premier, and the Cabinet Ministers  and tell them what women in B.C.  want! 6  ubc  WOMEN'S CENTRE SKILL WORKSHOP  The Women's Centre Skills Workshop  has been postponed to April 22-25  because of the Women's Rally for  Action. Accomodation and travel expenses are available. Priority will be  given to out-of-town women's groups.  Pre-register at UBC Centre for Continuing Education, or call 228-2181.  WOMEN IN MANAGEMENT WORKSHOPS  The following workshops for women in  management are being offered by UBC  Centre for Continuing Education. For  further information and registration  call 228-2181.  Effective Communication on the Job —  $19, April 6 to 27.  Managing Change on the Job — $18,  May 6 to 22.  Developing Management Style — $30,  April 5 to May 17.  Assertiveness training for Women —  $20, May 1...  ywca  A WOMEN'S PLACE  A Women's Place is an information  sharing, linking and facilitating  service to women seeking assistance  with employment related problems"  The staff is equipped to advise women  on directions they can pursue in solving job, training and other similar  problems. The setting is informal,  the atmosphere friendly and helpful.  Location: Room 316, Y.W.C.A., 580  Burrard St. Vancouver. Phone 666-8468.  poco  COMMUNITY GROUPS — A LEARNING  EXPERIENCE  A 3-part workshop to help local community organization executives to  plan, organize and administer their  associations more effectively.  Opportunity for minor sports groups,  cultural endeavours, service clubs,  local societies. Instruction from  panel of professional staff from  Douglas College, VCC & business  consultants. $15. To register phone  942-0285. Course begins Thurs. April  8, 7:00 pm. George Pearkes Jr. Sec.  School, 1379 Laurier Ave. Port Coquitlam.  DO IT NOW  GUARANTEED INCOME  The National Anti-Poverty Organization (NAPO) is calling on concerned  individuals and groups to express  their support for implementation of  the proposed guaranteed income plan,  and full reinstatement of social  programs for the poor which have recently been cut by the federal government. Unless the program is passed  this spring, NAPO fears it never will  be. Send letters to your federal Member of Parliament, House of Commons,  Ottawa, with carbon copy to NAPO #300  196 Bronson Ave, Ottawa, and to your  provincial welfare^minister.  /  habitat  HABITAT CONFERENCE ON WOMEN  "Women and Human Settlements" is the  first conference of Habitat Forum,  May 31 at Jericho Beach in Vancouver"  Informal workshops will be held all  day starting at 9 a.m. Those wishing  to present briefs or needing accommodation should pre-register as soon as  possible. International Planned Parenthood, Country Women of the World and  International Alliance of Women will  be participating.  Contact David  Satterwaite, ACSOH, P.O. Box 48360,  Bentall Centre, Vancouver, B.C. or  call 228-9011.  - WCWN  car clinic  Mom's Garage is offering a one day  car clinic to teach women how to do  basic maintenance on their cars. Bring  your own or work on someone else's.  Pre-registration is essential. Saturday  April 17th, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. at Douglas  College, 6th Avenue and McBride, New  Westminster. Cost is $15. Call 521-4851  local 236.  - WCWN  V. c. c.  Vancouver Community College and  Education Advisory (B.C.) are presenting a Parent/Citizen Workshop for  School Participation on April 24 and  25.  April 24: Workshops. Fee $6. 9:30-5:30.  April 25: Public Meeting. Free. 7:30 p0m.  Fifth Floor Library, Vancouver Community College, Langara, 100 West 49th-Ave0  Vancouver, B.C.  maple ridge  MAPLE RIDGE WOMEN'§ CENTRE  22369 Lougheed Highway. Phone 467-1633.  Women in the World is a bimonthly  lecture series that investigates  women's position and function in  the world today and in the future.  Cost is $1 per session, lectures  held on Thursdays at 8 p.m. in the  Centennial Arena, Board Room 1.  April's lectures are:  April 1 - HEALTH, KEEPING IT  Vancouver Women's Health Collective.  A discussion of medical issues of  concern to women.  April 22 -  Ann Frost,  WOMEN AND STRESS  Capilano College  university  women's  club  HOW TO GET PUBLICITY  The University Women's Club is holding  a workshop on media relations for  community groups, Thursday, April 8  at 8 p.m. at Hycroft House, 1489  McCrae Ave, Vancouver B.C. Admission  free. Contact 731-4661.  - WCWN  SOPWUC  The Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of Canada (SORWUC) is  sponsoring a series of 6 noon-hour  information meetings at the auditorium of the Vancouver Public Library  at Burrard and Robson, Vancouver.  The series will begin March 25 and  continue through April 29. Meetings  will he from 12.10 to 12:50 and  are free. For more information call:  294-6176.  burnaby  SELF-PROTECTION FOR WOMEN  The following program is being co-  sponsored by the Burnaby School Board,  Community Education Department and  the Burnaby Detachment of the RCMP.  Session 1: April 7, 7:30-9:30 p.m.  Film: "How to Say No to a Rapist and  Survive". Discussion leader: Corporal  Jim King - Morality Section -~ Burnaby  RCMP.  Session 2: April 14, 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Rape - A Social Disease" - Tsippy  Tepper - Rape Relief Centre, Vancouver.  Session 3: April 21, 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Women and the Law" - Penny Bain,  Vancouver People's Law School.  Session 4: April 28, 7:30-9:30 p.m.  "Emotional Self-Defense" - Sara Lee  David, SFU Continuing Education. •  human  rights  The Vancouver Labour Committee for  Human Eights is presenting the Twenty-  Fifth Annual Labour Institute on  Human Rights, Saturday April 3, and  Sunday April 4. The Conference is  entitled "Human Rights Vs Authoritarianism" and is jointly sponsored by  Vancouver and District Labour Council,  New Westminster and District Labour  Council and Human Rights Branch, Dept.  of Labour. One of the sessions will  be "Discrimination Against Women" with  Dean Margaret Fulton of UBC, Anne  Moore, Gail Borst and Jim Spears.  Registration is $7.50 and should be  sent to Wm. Giesbrecht, Executive  Secretary, Vancouver Labour Committee  for Human Rights, 1123 East 12th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. For more information  call 879-6045.  films  The Pacific Cinematheque will be  showing one and one-half hours of  films for Lesbian Women on April 13.  AV WORKSHOP  Isis Women and Film is offering a one  day women's film workshop on projectors, microphones, slide/sound presentation, video, etc. Equipment is  provided. Saturday, April 24 at Douglas College AV Library, 9 a.m. to 4  P.m. Cost is $15. Call 521-4851,  local 236. STRUCTURED C.R. GROUP  Another structured C.R. group will  begin on Tuesday, April 20 at 7:30  here in the office. This group has a  leader and will continue for ten weeks  only. The first structured group is  just finishing and we hope to have so  some of those participants write an n  article on how they felt about their  group.  SPEAKING ENGAGEMENTS  March was a busy month for speakers  — L6e Masters spoke to two Beta Sigma  Phi groups — one on "Women in Crisis"  and one on "Women Alone". Johanna did  a talk on the Berger Commission to the  Delta Women's Centre and Miriam and  Johanna talked to a group of Immigrant  Women about the women's movement. Mirij  Miriam and Diana spoke on the same to  topic to 60 student nurses at Royal  Columbian Hospital, Miriam talked  about "Women and the Law" to a Mothers'  Group at North Health Unit and Nadine  spoke to a Hadassah group on "What's  Available to Women in Vancouver" as  well as speaking to two groups of  single parents about the women's movement .  SOMETM  GOING ON AT  THE OFFICE  YOUDONT  KNOW  ABOUT?  Diana Bissell  EVERYTHING ELSE!  Just about everything else this month  revolved around the WOMEN'S RALLY FOR  ACTION — helping to make MLA appoint  ments, write briefs, raise money, org  organize lobby teams, run workshops,  or answer the insistent phones. Lots  of members and volunteers came by the  office to help stuff envelopes, answer  phones, type, etc. — the pressure  was incredible! Especially the last  10 days prior to THE DAY.  And it was so fine on Sunday 21st and  Monday 22nd to meet all those terrific  women with whom we had been talking o  over the phone for the past two months.  March 22nd-was SUPER/HISTORIC/EXHAUSTING/FUN AND SAD — sad when you realize  how little the MLAs knew and how far  there is to go to permeate those insulated halls of "justice and democracy."  AUDIO-VISUAL LIBRARY  NOTE: there is a half-hour video tape  (IV) of the March 8 Rally at the  Courthouse and an hour's tape of the  March 22nd Rally in Victoria — they  are in our A-V Library — available  for loan to any groups/individuals.  Call or write VSW, 2029 West 4th Ave.  Vancouver. Phone 736-3746. Include  $1 for postage^  1976  IWY 1976  IWY 1975 is over but the Minister Re  Responsible for the Status of Women  will continue in his role of promoting the equality of women and will b  be aided by an expanded Office of te  the Co-ordinator, Status of Women.  The Office will continue to advise  the Minister on matters concerning t  the status of women but will also  include an expanded information-  referral and community liaison service. You may write c/o Minister Re-  Responsible for the Status of Women,  Ottawa, K1A 0A6.  The IWY Newsletter will be replaced  by one published by the Co-ordinator's  Office. The Women's Program in the  Depa-tment of the Secretary of State  will continue uts role, and within  federal government departments, special advisors on-policy as well as  equal opportunity officers will be  continuing their work.  - IWY Newsletter  FEDERAL INITIATIVES FOR 1976  The Honourable Marc Lalonde, Minister  Responsible for the Status of Women,  announced continuing federal government initiatives after IWY in a speech  to a Calgary Council of Women public  meeting on October 29, 1975.  He said,"The federal government will  ensure that status of women concerns  are fully considered in all areas of  federal policy and program development.  To do this, a federal inter-departmental committee of senior people  concerned with policy from the following departments: Treasury Board, Manpower and Immigration, Justice, Health  and Welfare, Regional Economic Expansion, Labour, the Public Service Commission, Secretary of State, and the  Social Policy Secretariat of the Privy  Council Office, will study the methods  needed to take into account, formally,  the status of women issues in all  governmental policy."  The Minister said that "The federal  government ...is also looking to new  measures to improve the position of  its own women employees."  "Measures to correct any discriminatory treatment of women employees  have been undertaken by the Public  Service Commission and by the Treasury Board. The Office of Equal Opportunity for Women (in the Public Service  Commission) has the responsibility  to stimulate equal employment opportunities in all federal government  departments."  "The government's aim is a representation of male and female employees in  the Public Service in each department,  occupational group and level, approximate to the proportion of qualified  and interested persons of both sexes  for any given job area.  "To accomplish this,several steps  will be taken. Treasury Board, the  Senior polisy-making department, in  co-operation with the Public Service  Commission, will communicate this  policy and its full implications to  all government departments. All departments have been asked to draw up  departmental policy statements by  January 1, 1976. Departments are to  establish their action plans and  objectives, including target dates,  with assistance from officers from  both the Treasury Board Secretariat  and the Public Service Commission.  "Individual departmental plans and  objectives will have to have annual  approval of Treasury Board, and  Treasury Board will also conduct an  annual review of the progress made  in each department. Plans and objectives for the next fiscal year, 1976-  77, are to be established, submitted  to, and approved by Treasury Board b  by March 31, 1976.  "Departments have also been asked to  set up longer term plans (which) will  cover the period 1977-1982"  This is a strong and definite step,  for what it means is that the federal  department responsible for implementing policy — Treasury Board — will  also have the responsibility of keeping tract of the progress made in  equal employment practice on a yearly basis. They will be monitoring  all government departments, including Treasury Board itself."  The Minister also reiterated government initiatives in the private sector,  previously announced at ACTION 75+ on  October 15, 1975.... These include  a feasibility study involving the  departments of Labour, Supply and  Services, Public Works and Treasury  Board to encourage companies in the  private sector entering into contracts  with the government to take positive  action to improve the position of  their women employees. In addition,  the Department of Manpower and Immigra  Immigration is instructing its officer  officers in their contact with private sector employers to inform them  of government progress and activities  aimed at eliminating discrimination,  and the Women's Bureau of the Department of L-bour will extend its program to provide a consultative service to private industries and crown  corporations who seek advice on action programs to improve the position  of their women employees.  NOTE: The Minister Responsible for  the Status of Women gave nine speeches  on various topics concerning the sta  status of women during IWY. Copies  are availabl- in limited numbers by  writing to the Office of the Minister  Responsible for the Status of Women,  Ottawa, K1A 0A6.  - IWY Newsletter  quote:  Women have served all these centuries as looking-glasses possessing the  magic and delicious power of reflecting the figure of man at twice its  natural size."  - Virginia Woolf, A Room of One's  Own 8  BOOK REVIEW  Love Means ... Sometimes Being Able  ?o Say Yecch!  Once More With Love, Joan Sutton,  Clarke Irwin, $7.75.  I suppose every country, every mode  and age of literature has its own Rod  McKuen of hearts and roses, its  prophets of the obvious. Well, congratulations female. Canada; we have Joan  Sutton of Toronto. A former fashion  co-ordinator and public relations  consultant (I could have guessed), Ms.  Sutton gives us advice on every aspect of love in her latest book Once  More With Love.  Sutton speaks of Love in that annoying self-satisfied tone of being profoundly wise and original, but often  comes dangerously close to falling  flat on fatuousness. Much like.friend  McKuen, she holds forth with statements  such as these: "In every relationship  there is Truth" and "Time is the most  precious thing we own." And instead  of the shaggy dog on the beach, we  have a fluffy cat on a farm.  Yet, however mundane and cliche they  tend to be, some of her opinions are  good common sense and are worth the  restatement. Sutton is considerably  preoccupied with the Lost Art of  Romance; and to a certain extent,  perhaps we all should be, in these  days of sexual wars, misunderstandings and fears about the confusion of  our sexual roles. She correctly rejects the old standards of chivalric  oppression, and substitutes the basics  of truth, loyalty, human dignity and  mutual respect, while emphasizing  the joys of sensuality, the fun of  flirtation.  Her 'art of love' also extends to  other areas: love of Nature; of other  people, and of children. One particularly good chapter describes the  common phenomenon of adults who demand  unmitigated respect from children,  and yet consistently adopt an infantile  manner in dealing with even the most  intelligent of young people.  Sutton is fond of writing in terse  poetic prose, epigrammatic statements  and moral fables. Considering the subject at hand, the spare style is just  as well, and can sometimes be effective, such as the fable about a desper  ate desire for romantic passionate  love that backfires. The heroine makes  a bargain with Fate and the all-consuming love is achieved, except that she  is the one who loves passionately,  and it is not returned, thus she loses  her 'joy of life*. The moral is "When  you're making 4 o'clock in the morning contracts, read the fine print."  However, a steady diet of motherly  advice and Perfect Love do tend to  be tedious and sticky-sweet after  awhile — I would recommend not reading this book at one sitting. When it  is read all at once, the book starts  to resemble those terribly stale (and  often sexist) Love Is... cartoons;  with the kind of over-stated and trite  sayings that will succeed in making  even the most hopeful romantic a disgusted cynic. But in small doses,  this book can sometimes be palatable,  and a perservering reader can find  a few gems of feminist philosophy  which, if not newly discovered, are  at least reaffirmed.  - J. Annis Freeman  BOOK  REVIEW  ,cripts  Women in the Canadian Mosaic, edited  by Gwen Matheson, Peter Martin Assoc.  Ltd, 1976, is a collection of writings  by various feminists on some of the  more well known,as well as the less  popular, but emerging feminist issues.  Authors include Margaret Atwood,  Rosemary Brown, Grace Hartman, and  Kay Macpherson on: suffragettes,  Quebec women, women in religion, politics, art, university, unions, education, farmwomen, immigrant women,  women writers, women's studies.  Of particular interest to me were the  articles on farm wives and immigrant  women, who are probably the most  oppressed amongst us and about whom  we hear the least.  Each article is easily read in five  to fifteen minutes so that the entire  book can be persued at one's leisure  without losing continuity. It is suitable to both the well-read feminists  and to the new feminist as each chapter gives a succinct overview of the  issue at hand.  The title and the contents of the  book convey the real nature of the  women's movement as one which encompasses all aspects of society.  - Karen Richardson  book  Copies of the book YUKON WOMEN are  available at Victoria FaulknerrWomen's  Centre, 4051 - 4th Ave. Whitehorse,  Yukon, for $2 plus 50c postage"  NFB WANTS FEMALE FILMMAKERS AND WRITERS  Studio D of the National Film Board  is looking for dramatic scripts reflecting the experiences of women.  They are launching a nation-wide call  for scripts of 5 to 15 minutes in  length, as detailed as possible as to  dialogue, settings, etc. There is no  limit to the number of scripts each  woman can send in. The deadline is  April 30, 1976. The ten best will receive a detailed critique by two of  Canada's top women writers and the  best three authors will receive $600  each. Send scripts to Donna Dudinsky,  Studio D, P-43, National Film Board,  P.O. Box 6100, Station A, Montreal,  Quebec.  - WCWN  info  QUESTIONS WANTED!  The Women's Communications Centre  has developed a solid core of lists,  resources and referrals for women's  groups and issues. For more information contact: Pat Oliver or Claire  McLellan at the Women's Communications  Centre, 392 Markham Street, Toronto,  Ontario.  directory  THE UPPER LEFT-HAND CORNER: A WRITER'S  GUIDE TO THE NORTHWEST  Eileen Kernaghan, Edith Surridge and  Patrick Kernaghan, eds., published  by J.J. Douglas Ltd. $5.95.  The Upper Left-Hand Corner is a market  directory compiled for the benefit of  writers in the western and northern  states, provinces and territories—  the upper left-hand corner of North  America. It lists 350 markets, basic  information for the beginning writer  and advice for the experienced writer.  magazine  FARM WOMEN  The Union Farmer, monthly publication  of the National Farmers Union, devoted its September 1975 issue to  IWY. It contains articles of general  interest, as well as portraits of  women in agriculture, and other areas  of special interest to women engaged  in farming. Copies are available by  writing: Union Farmer, 250 C - 2nd  Ave. South, Saskatoon, Sask.  herstory  "The Visible Woman" is a 25 page  booklet on the history of women and  their rights in Canada. Complete with  black and white photos, list of articles and 'periodicals to order. Free  from the Federation of Women Teachers  Association of^Ontario, 1260 Bay St,  Toronto, Ontario.  - WCWN  "Story of Women in B.C." is a one  hour slide presentation on native  women, pioneer women, women artists  and suffragists in B.C. history. The  show can be given anywhere in the  lower mainland. Please book at least  one week in advance. Cost is $l.per  person,$35 minimum. Contact Vancouver  Insights, 18 Water St., Vancouver or  call 687-7003. 9  MARCH8th  THE WOMEN'S RALLY FOR ACTION COMMITTEE  celebrated International Women's Day,  March 8th, with a Noon-hour Information  Rally in front of the Vancouver Courthouse. Speakers provided background  on issues such as Daycare, the Berger  Commission Recommendations on Matrimonial Property, Affirmative Action programs, Sexism in Education, and Funding  for Women's Centres. These are some  of the basic issues covered by the 20f  page brief presented to every MLA in  the province in preparation for the m  mass lobbying action March 22nd in  Victoria.  women's rally for act ion  Carolyn Gibbons—Women & Law  The sale of buttons and ribbons and  posters was brisk and the money was  added to the funds being collected  to help pay transportation costs for  women travelling from the Interior  and the North to Victoria.  The Information Rally attracted the  attention of many previously un-  involved women, several of whom contacted the Rally Committee to learn  more and to offer help and donations.  Hilda Thomas and Eileen Brown sang to  us — songs about and for women written  especially for the Women's Rally.  "When it comes to the needs of wome: *  They just don't give a damn  We need a lot more day care centres  And a lot less Vander Zalm."  - Sung by Hilda Thomas with a  little help from friend Diana Bissell  And March 22nd arrived — amid groans  of "if only we had one more week" and  other groans of "I 'think I can hold  on another 24 hours and then I am going to self-destruct."  The culminating point of two months  work and organizing! WOMEN'S RALLY FOR  ACTION DAY.  From the original 30 Lower Mainland  women's groups the organization of the  Women's Rally for Action spread out to  involve over 400 women's groups and  organizations throughout B.C. Both the  B.C. Federation of Labour and the B.C.  Teachers' Federation voiced support for  the Rally and the later released all  BCTF Status of Women Contacts for the  day to attend the Rally. A number of  new feminist groups were formed in  more remote areas of the province as  a result of women meeting to work for  the Rally.  Regular press releases and information  bulletins were dispatched to every  newspaper (200 dailies and weeklies),  radio and TV station in B.C. and it  was particularly gratifying to see the  coverage given the Rally by many of  the northern and interior papers such  as Xhe Northern Times in Terrace. Rally  organizers were interviewed on radio  and TV frequently — both in the Lower  Mainland area and in the Interior.  Some other facts to boggle the mind:  * 700 Women's Rally for Action briefs -  were printed and distributed throughout  B.C. and a copy sent before the Rally  to each MLA. The briefs were 25 pages  PHOTOS THIS PAGE BY CAROL NORMAN  MARCH 22nd  long and contained information and  recommendations on: Community of Marital  Property, Pensions for Homemakers, Non-  Sexist Education, Rape, Daycare, Rural  Women, Maternity Protection Act, Birth  Control and Women's Health Care, Lesbian  Rights, Welfare, Funding for Women's  Centres, Creation of Women's Offices  in Government, Affirmative Action and  Equal Employment Programs. In addition  lobbying teams brought briefs on particular issues of importance in their own  ridings.  * 10,000 flyers and leaflets promoting  the Rally and explaining the issues  were distributed throughout B.C.  * 5,000 Women Rally for Action support  buttons were sold throughout B.C.  * hundreds of personal letters were  written to MLAs by women unable to  attend the Rally in person.  * more than 1500 forms supporting the  Rally and requesting that their MLA provide follow-up information and place  them on her/his mailing list were  sent to individual MLAs by their  female constituents.  Transportation was arranged from all"  over the province to Vancouver and  chartered buses scheduled from Vancouver  to Victoria. Funds were provided for  women in the Interior and North to  help cover their travel and child care  expenses. Billets were arranged in  Vancouver and Victoria.  Women in Victoria gathered tents and  equipment and supplies for the Women's  Office and Child Care area, constructed  an enormous wooden "report card", made  signs and slogged their way through the  mountain of arrangements and crises  connected with D-Day.  Everywhere in the province women were  attending lobbying meetings, writing  letters, making phone calls and travel  arrangements, selling buttons, distributing posters,flyers and leaflets,  painting signs and a thousand other  things. A Lower Mainland woman was  assigned as contact person for each  riding in the province and helped the  women in her contact riding organize  a lobbying team and assured that they  were kept informed on everything that  was happening and received all the  necessary briefs, pamphlets,etc. Port  Coquitlam Women's Area Centre published  a weekly newsletter Intercom that  carried Rally news to all the groups  and centres involved in the Rally.  Members of the Appointment Committee  contacted all the MLAs requesting  appointments and spent hours on the  phones and even travelled to Victoria  arranging and confirming the appointments. Some MLAs were eager to meet  with their constituents — Scott  Wallace, Gordon Gibson, Emery Barnes,  Rosemary Brown, Gerry Strongman and  Stephen Rogers were among those who  confirmed their appointment times  immediately. Others — such as Garde 10  Gardom, Dave Stupich, Pat McGeer and  Bill Bennett — were reluctant and  held out until the last and in the case  of Pat McGeer had to be forced into  attending the meeting. (More about  that later!) By Monday morning every  MLA except Pat McGeer had confirmed  their appointment time and 246 lobb-  iests representing all 48 ridings  were informed, trained and prepared  for their meetings.  RALLY DAY! Women from Vancouver Island  and women who had travelled to Victoria  on Saturday to arrange lobbying workshops and final details and lobbiests  who had arrived on Sunday were at the  Parliament Buildings to greet the women  arriving Monday morning. It was cold  and windy and later in the day it rained. But nobody left. The crowd swelled  during the lunch hour but averaged  approximately 500. We drank hot coffee  and sang with Ruby Dennis, Eileen  Brown, Hilda Thomas, Ferron, and Ulrike  Ruebsaat and listened to the speakers  and heard reports from the lobbying  teams and met old and new friends and  *the feeling of all being there together  kept us warm.  LOBBYING WORKSHOPS  At one o'clock Sunday afternoon approximately two hundred lobbiers met in the  basement of the Fairfield United Church  to prepare for their meetings with the  MLASo We worked in small groups to get  to know one another, to psyche out our  member, and to learn the issues. Lobby  support committee members circulated  among the groups, answering questions  and keeping us going. After the first  half hour, we had a session all together. Resource people answered questions that had come up from a lot of t  the groups. During this session  several lobbiests pointed out areas  of concern — welfare and labour —  which had been left out or inadequately  treated in the brief. Several people  volunteered to prepare addenda to the  brief which were ready by Monday morning for all of us. We went back into  our groups and began to plan our agendas  1— what issues to talk about and in  what order, who would introduce us,  ask specific questions, and perform  other roles in the group.  Then we were treated to the best event  of the day. The Lobby Support Committee  demonstrated how not to succeed and  then how to succeed with our MLAs.  Gene Errington played the Minister of  Absolutely Everything Important with  Johanna den Hertog as her executive  assistant Ralph Twit. Diana Bissell,  Gail Borst and Ellen Frank played the  lobby team. On their first attempt,  the Minister clearly came out on top  with the trembling lobbiests faring  poorly. But the second time around  the team was assertive, calm and competent. The Minister and Twit retired  in confusion.  Gail went on to discuss the types of  MLAs — Mr. Father, Mr. I-am-the-prince-  and-you-may-kiss-my-ring-peasant, Mr.  Hands — and possible approaches to  them. She also discussed lines and  put-downs. (My team met a minister  who greeted us with "Can we get these  charming girls some coffee?" so the  role-playing session proved to be sadly  realistic.)  At 5 o'clock we all wearily wrote up  our formal agendas, ate a chili dinner  and retired for the night. The Lobby  Support Committee went on to another  session starting at 7 o'clock for late  arriving teams.  - Nancy D. Conrod  LOBBYING  Each lobbying team consisted of three  to six women, one of whom was a recorder. When a team completed its  appointment with its MLA it reported  to the Women's Office (fancy name for  our tent with a table in front) and w  with the assistance of members of the  Lobby Support Committee discussed their  meeting, composed a two minute report  to be read over the microphone by one  of the team, wrote up a card covering  the most important points of the meeting for the billboard report card, and  wrote out a complete account of the  meeting. These final accounts will be  typed and compiled and sent to every  group and lobbiest involved in the  Rally.  PROGRAM  FANTASTIC! A full program of speakers,  lobbying reports, and singers ran from  10 a.m. to 4 p.m. The program ran  smoothly and was enthusiastically received. Some of the topics covered  were Sexism in Education, Native Women,  Human Rights, Child Care, Women and  Economics, Family and Labour Lav; and  Women in Priosns. The four major political parties in B.C. were invited  to send women to speak.  Keynote Speaker Gene Errington, former  Provincial Co-ordinator of the Status  of Women, drew thunderous applause.  Excerpts from her speech are printed  below.  "One of the ways that those of us who  have worked over here have felt isolat-<  ed is because you have not been here  with us. We have had to face the humiliation and hostility of dealing with  the system and more than that we have  dealt with a system that is basically  alien to us — we never knew the rules  and we've never been taught the game.  And we don't know and we don't have  the authority to speak for ourselves.  We have been systematically excluded  from developing the knowledge and  skills to participate in the governing  of the actual world and we don't have  the access to take part in discussions  • that affect us.  We have no economic status independent  from men, we have no history and no  possibility of history.  There is no question in my mind that  there is an active suppression of  women who claim the right to speak  for themselves, to participate in the  process of the public world. In the  past we have been exiled, imprisoned,  executed. In the present perhaps we  are only humiliated.  Men talk only to each other. We have  not had the authority to make our  causes heard.  It is a scheme of values that sees our  contribution as defective.  Women who 'make it' are privileged  escapees from their own sex. You can  see it quite plainly — the distinguished women are tolerated but  more than that they are considered  an exception so that nobody has to  pay any attention to what is possible  from the rest of us if we had the same  opportunities. A woman in a privileged  position it seems to me has given us  the ultimate betray, has become the  ultimate traitor, when she takes the  values of the oppressors and learns  how to apply them in the same way.  Nothing could be more cruel than "I'm  allright Jill" and "I got here without  any help and I will not help you."  Unless we work as women for all women  it seems to me that we have no dignity.  I think because we have been excluded,  in some sense it makes no difference  what kind of government we  have and  what ideology. We have always tagged  along, from the 12th Century, to grab  onto anything that sounds like freedom,  that sounds like equality, only to  find when we get there that it was  never meant to apply to us in the  first place.  The previous government had the strongest and best policy on women's issues  and what did we get?  We must ask ourselves now — why are  Transition Houses going down the tube?  why is daycare being cut back? why has  Julia Goulden's office and the Status  of Women office been closed? Because  we were always the fringes — we were  never part of the actual program,never  part of the real policy."  CHILD CARE  Children came to the Rally too. Many  of the older ones participated.  It had been planned to erect a huge  tent on the Parliament Building grounds  to use for drop-in child care and  registration. However, when the tent  crew arrived Monday morning the Security  Guards objected to this and instead  offered the use of their lunch room  inside the Buildings" It is probable  that never before has the floor of  the Rotunda been used to change baby  diaperso Space in a church near the  Parliament Buildings was used as the  main Child Care area and the. room inside the Parliament Buildings was reserved for registering children for  care and drop-in facilities for small  wet or cold or hungry children. The  children saw a puppet show performed  especially for the Rally by the Pied  Puppet Theatre, went to the Museum  and seemed to have a good time0 And  women were freed to do the work they  had come to do — all the child care  workers were volunteers and except for  the two women who organized the service  all were men! The work was shared as  people donated the time they could0  Caring for children as a shared responsibility — in action!  "Some may be rich and others poor  Some bound and others free  But what we have in common  Is our solidarity!"  Sung by Isabel Button 11  ROSEMARY BROWN, NEW DEMOCRAT PARTY  Rosemary Brown, MLA Vancouver Burrard,  was the speaker from the NDP. She said:  'it is a marvellous thing that is  happening here today! We are all  here together to say one thing —  we are not going to sit in silence  and take our oppression any longer!  The Provincial Secretary said we have  to pay our dues. What have we been  doing for the past 200 years?!"  Rosemary reminded us that working women contribute vast amounts of money  to the coffers of this province through  Income Tax and we have a right to say  how we want our money spent and that  we want to make the decisions that af  affect our lives. She called for more  money for Transition Houses, the reinstatement of the Provincial Status  of Women Co-ordinator's Office and  Advisory Committee on Sexism to the  Department of Education, and research  on breast cancer. She ended with:  'And this last word is just for us.  Never again must we ever have in this  province women divided against each  other. Regardless of our economic  status, our political affiliation,  our racial or ehtnic background we  are together. That is what WOMENPOWER  is all about!"  ZONZABEL SATHER, PRESIDENT OF THE  LADIES AUXILIARY OF THE SOCIAL CREDIT  PARTY  Zonzabel Sather was the Social Credit  speakero Many of her remarks drew a  very hostile reaction from the crowd.  ''ks you are aware, the new government  has been in office only three months  and has inherited a number of serious  problems. And I think you will agree  it is in our best interests that they  take a little time to work out a  solution rather than rush through it  merely to get it out of the way.  I'm sure this reasoning could also  be applied to the concerns of the wo  women here today and if you keep me  informed of your concerns the Social  Credit women will study them for  consideration as resolutions to the  annual convention. The Social Credit  women believe that this line of action  is the best one — we prefer to first  investigate and compile facts and  present them to the Party, the MLAs,  and Cabinet Ministers concerned.  We feel that we must be concerned  with policy that will benefit all  British Columbians. There are legitimate issues of discrimination regarding women as well as other areas. So  it would seem better to deal with  these than to educate a generation  of girls to be anti-male.  Any female can get a headline by  suggesting the names be changed on  washroom doors and by insisting on  living in the men's bunkhouse.  The equality of opportunity in  business, in social life-, in politics,  in sports, etc. has taken work and  will take more work and committment  and partnership with the rest of our  human race than has been shown by  most people today."  DIANA BISSELL, REPRESENTING B.C.  FEDERATION OF WOMEN  "This collective gathering has happened  because we know that the system as it  presently operates has little room for  self-actualizing free female human  beings. And if we intend to initiate  serious pressure group tactics to  change the system we must have a high  degree of communication and support  among ourselves. The work taken on  over the past two months culminating  in today's effort proves that it•can  SHARON CHARLES, PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE be done. And it will have to be done  again — and again — because do not  think for a moment that we just sit  back now and wait for those buildings  and the people in them to issue forth  with legislation and policy that will  ease the awful burden that women carry.  Because they will not give up easily  that power which is so valued in our  society today.  Rosemary Brown rose on the floor of  the Legislative Assembly and asked  for adjournment of the House to dis--  cuss urgent public business — the  discrimination against womeno Speaker  of the House Ed Smith ruled this out  of order and said there would be time  after the Debate.  PARTY  Sharon Charles said that as a woman  and a Metis she knew that subtle forms  of discrimination are the most poisonous..  She also asked that women provide the  Progressive Conservative Party with  information to help them with their  policies on women's issues0  MONEY  Photo Karen Richardson  It is difficult to organize women to  action because most of just don't have  the financial resources it takes. Heard  that before? But it is possible! IT IS  POSSIBLE!  Two months ago when Women's Rally for  Action began to organize we hadn't a  penny! We were determined no woman  would be excluded because of lack of  funds. Women raised money, sold buttons,  sold posters, carried donation cans  to every meeting of more than two  people they attended! Tn some cases  unexpected sources of support were  found in the community. Women donated  their own money — from $1 to a day's  wages. Women gave their time, their  energy, their ideas, their money, They  provided space in their homes for each  other and looked after each other's  children. The Finance Committee sent  funds to women flying and driving from  the Interior and the North and re-  inbursed women who borrowed money to  get to Victoria. (If you wondered what  the brisk business in the red Mustang  parked at the edge of the Parliament  Grounds was — that was the Finance  Committee in their portable office!)  And now the phone bills, the printing  costs, the cost of the buttons and  posters, the postage, the travel  expenses,etc are paid and we have money  left over to mail out final reports  and compile a Rally Kit!  IT IS POSSIBLE'. WE DID it!  "Oh, you 11 be sorry  [ Listen to us, Bennett, listen to us  Oh, you'll be sorry  If you decide not to listen to us"  -sung by Eileen Brown  NATIVE WOMEN  Donna Tindall and Agnes Dick spoke of  the problems faced by Native Women.  "Every problem women face is tripled  for Indian women. We are oppressed as  women, as Indians, and as poor people.'  "We lack job opportunity, training  and education,,"  "We are discriminated against twice  when we apply for jobs0"  We have to begin planning our next move.  We have to recognize that this is just  one step of a long term plan — one  year, two years, four years and longer.  Charting this long term action is a  responsibility that lies with all of  us."  CLAIRE CULHANE, RIGHTS OF WOMEN IN  PRISON  To stand by and let women in prison be  brutalized "is to doom our entire society to standards of violence."  "We got to hang in there a little bit longer  Though we know its been too long  For so many years we have been fighting  For so many years we have been strong."  - sung by Eileen Brown  BREAD AND ROSES  And one final note — on March 24th  at the final wrap up meeting where  reports from all the Rally Committees  were given,a florist box was delivered.'  The sender was annonymous. Inside —  a dozen glorious red roses and a loaf  of golden crusty bread.  lV- As we come marching, marching,  We bring the greater days,  The rising of the women  Means the rising of the race.  No more the drudge and idler,  Ten that toil where one reposes,  But a sharing of life's glories,  Bread and Roses, Bread and Roses."  - Song inspired by banners carried by  young mill girls in 1912 Lawrence,  Massachusetts textile strike. 12  lobby reports  BILL BENNETT, PREMIER, MLA OKANAGAN  SOUTH  Funding Women's Centres: there is little  money — the pie is small.  Provincial Co-ordinators Office: see  Minister involved — not sure if that  is the Attorney-General or Labour.  (Editor note: It is the Provincial  Secretary)  Office of Advisor on Sex Discrimination in the Schools: aware of discrimination, will discuss with McGeer.  Day Care: unaware of needs, money is  problem  Berger Commission Recommendations on  Community of Property: had only read  "the highlights"  ALLAN WILLIAMS, LABOUR, MLA WEST VAN-  COUVER - HOWE SOUND  Greeted lobbying team by offering  coffee to "these charming girls."  Provincial Co-ordinator's Office: would  not support this office. Women's Bureau  in Dept. of Labour could handle women's  problems.  Transition Houses/Women's Centres: does  not like idea of separate centres for  special groups, but doesn't think women should be beaten.  Human Rights Officers: requested a budget for more which was turned down by  Treasury Board. Doesn't want to extend  the Code to cover discrimination in  rental housing against women with child*  ren — would inhibit any long term  solution to the housing problem.  Family & Domestic Workers: covered by  labour standards, doesn't think it is  important.  Child Care: strongly supports more and  better child care and will initiate  discussion in Cabinet.  Community of Property: thinks B.C.  should adopt this system.  Indian Land Claims: waffled. Government  will take a new position and move on  land claims. Has asked to have it  brought up at western premiers conference.  TOM WATERLAND. MINES. PETROLEUM RESOURCES, LANDS AND FORESTS, MLA YALE-  GRACE MCCARTHY, PROVINCIAL SECRETARY,  MLA VANCOUVER LITTLE MOUNTAIN  Provincial Co-ordinator's Office: contract had terminated at end of Dec.  Little work had been done by this Office  When she had time she would arrange a  meeting with Gene Errington.  Women in the Public Service: few women  in the Public Service had applied to  take managerial courses. Not aware of  any existing discrimination.  "Keep Women Alive":grant has been  hastily approved & is now under further  scrutiny. Future funding would be granted only after considerable research.  Child Care: one of many priorities.  Women's Movement: felt women had begun  pressuring the Social Credit government  immediately upon taking office while  they gave the previous government more  time to assimilate their policies regarding women.  DON PHILLIPS, FINANCE, MLA PEACE RIVER  SOUTH  Provincial Co-ordinators Office: "I  plead complete ignorance. I didn't ever  know it existed until women started  complaining about it."  Women's Centre for Dawson: No.  Women's Movement: "I'm all for women's  lib. Change has to take place gradually  as people become accustomed to it.  You've got a a good cause — don't  ruin it."  BILL VANDER ZALM, HUMAN RESOURCES, MLA  SURREY  Core Funding for Women Centres: never  questioned the equality of women. No  discrimination in his business. Special funds for women is against the  equality of women.  Sexism in Education: Not aware of any.  "my son took cooking. I thought he was  crazyo If women want to weld, fine,  but I don't think we should discourage  them from cooking. Women make the best  cooks and housekeepers and should be  encouraged in that role." Would not  support the continuance of either a  Special Advisor or anSAdvisory Commttee  on Sexism in Public Education.  Child Care: no money for new centres.  "Nothing has been done in two years.  I'm the fall guy and stuck with the  flack. Now it will be a better program."  Transition Houses: an alternate funding  proposal for Tranistion Houses had been  drafted and his Dept. would be in touch  with Transition House representatives.  RAFE MAIR, CONSUMER SERVICES, MLA  KAMLOOPS  Says billboard/report card is childishc  These changes will happen eventually  —why bother to hurry it along? Doesn't  see any urgency.  Provincial Co-ordinator;s Office:  worried about tokenism. All discriminatory legislation has been removed.  Rapr Relief: supports in principle,  will support core-funding in Cabinet.  Child Care: supports in principle.  Community of Property: basically in  favour.  Affirmative Action: "reasonable idea."  PAT MCGEER, EDUCATION, MLA VANCOUVER  POINT GREY  It wasn't easy but the Point Grey  lobbying team finally got to meet w  with Dr. Pat McGeer — see page 20  for SAGA OF THE RELUCTANT MLA.  McGeer's Executive Assistant Jim  "«. Bennett was present at the meeting  Mother andjjgnjrom Atlln gxve Lobby Report. __ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^  LILLOOET  Provincial Co-ordinator's Office:  didn't agree with "a special office  for women". He would not support it  unless we could demonstrate a need —  "women do not have special rights."  Community of Property: supported this  and was willing to bring it up in  caucus.  Sexism in Education: supports re-in-  statement of Advisory Committee. Will  speak to McGeer about Women Studies  Courses.  Affirmative Action Programs: would not  cross party lines to support it. He  would do what he could to change attitudes in his own department.  JACK DAVIS. TRANSPORT & COMMUNICATIONS.  MLA NORTH VANCOUVER SEYMOUR  Says his personal life is based on  equality — has the only female executive assistant.  Community of Property: supportive, will  raise issue in caucus.  Child Care: will support improvement  in services when raised in Cabinet.  Says administration is locally controlled.  Sexism in Education: not aware of discrimination in education. Knew nothing  of existence and subsequent non-existence of Advisory Committee on Sexism  in Public Education.  EVAN WOLFE. FINANCE. MLA VANCOUVER  LITTLE MOUNTAIN  Core Funding:, he would have to read  up on it.  Transition Houses: in favour of what  he knows — couldn't make commitment.  Human Rights: doesn't think rules regarding discrimination in rental accomodation to women with children should  apply to all landlords. Lesbian rights:  agreedv Code should include "sexual  orientation" — changed subject.  Child Care: thinks women should spend  more time with family. Regarding increases for child care workers:"I know  some very happy people who work for  $500 - $700 a monthc"  Community of Property: commented "I  don't agree — would marry a man for  his money, and leave 6 months later  with half of it." Indication is that  He has not read or does not understand  Berger Commission recommendations "  ALEX FRASER, HIGHWAYS AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS  MLA CARIBOO  Child Care: admitted there was need  for more.  Provincial Co-ordiantor's Office: requested more information.— his information had come mainly from press.  Sexism in Education: advised group to  "zero in on Pat McGeer" — he had no  business discussing issues concerning  education.  Health Care for Women: disputed that  it was inadequate for women in his  area.  first and after 35 minutes remind  him that we were there to speak to  McGeer. McGeer listened to the radio  intercom while we talked to him.  Advisory Cmmttee on Sexism in Schools:  Bennett said "achieved a limited function... they were setting up their own  empire." McGeer felt sex discrimination not really a serious problem in  schools. He hadn't had time to go over  the textbooks. Bennett mentioned that  Dept. of Ed was satisfied with texts.  Discriminatory practices within Ed.  system: no comment. Would discuss with  senior level of Dept.  Women's Studies: no timetable.  Funding Women's Centres, re-instate-  ment of Provincial Co-ordinator's  Office, Community of Property: "I will  not discuss other people's portfolios."  Position of Special Ed. Consultant  after June: . .<, "haven't met her...  can't answer."  McGeer said he was prepared to listen  to our proposals. We said that as Min.  of Ed. he should take leadership and  make sexism in Ed. a priority issue  and direct his Dept. to implement  needed changes. McGeer said he had  been labeled arrogant and "you don't  really think I am going to tell my  Dept. what they should do."  Re future meeting: "Don't make it too  soon. I will be busy until end of  session." Bennett will arrange something.  Lobby Reports summarized and compiled by  Miriam Gropper.  All Rally Photos by Mirian Penner Bancroft  unless otherwise noted. 13  S.O.R.WU.C.  Members of the Service, Office and  Retail Workers Union (SORWUC) Local  1 have reached agreement with a Vancouver legal firm on a new union  contract.  Improvements in the collective agreement include reduction of the probation period from three months to four  weeks, with a possible extension to  eight weeks; access to the grievance  procedure for probationary employees;  employees' right to choose time off  in lieu of overtime pay; the addition  of May Day to the list of holidays;  and one month's notice of lay-off  (increased from two weeks).  The employees work a four-day, 32  hour week, and wages in the new contract range from $6.08 per hour for  a trainee to $8.21 per hour for a  legal assistant. Effective October 1,  1976, the employees will receive a  cost of living adjustment of 8 cents  per hour for each 1% increase in the  cost of living between April 1, 1976,  and October 1, 1976.  The contract is for one year, from  April 1,1976, to March 31, 1976.  AS WOMEN WORKERS    ** We are hired for the lowest paying  jobs.  ** We are paid less for the same or  similar work, often disguised by  management under different job  classifications.  ** We are refused pay raises on the  basis of sex  ** We are not given enough daycare  facilities to meet our needs  ** An overwhelming majority of us  are not unionized (80%' in B.C.)  and as a result have no job security, benefits, etc  THE EXISTING TRADE UNIONS  "  Unions are almost completely male  dominated. Even in unions where the  majority of workers are women the  executive of the union is still dominated by men. The specific needs of  women have too often and far too long  been ignored. We cannot rely on the  existing trade unions to organize us.  They have failed to take on the  struggle against our employers in  department stores, restaurants, banks,  offices. The argument they give about  the "impossiblity" of organizing women  workers are the same arguments that  were given against early organizers  who started trade unions on this  continent. The unions which came  from a tradition of militancy have  all too often become bureaucratic and  dominated from the United States.  For these reasons several women  in Vancouver decided to form their  own union, Service, Office and  Retail Workers Union of Canada.  There are 250,000 working women in  B.C. But only one out of every five  is a union member. The Service,  Office and Retail Workers Union of  Canada was formed by working women  who believe that as working women  we can and must organize ourselves  into trade unions that will begin  to meet our needs.  DO YOU KNOW YOUR RIGHTS?.  As an employee, you have these rights  under the B.C. Labour Coder  ** to be a member of a union  ** to unionize any size of office,  including a one-woman office  ** to unionize without being intimidated, threatened, dismissed  or bribed  ** you cannot be fired or refused a  job because you are a member of a  union, or because you try to  convince others to join a union.  If you would like more information  about SORWUC call 876-9412 or write  to 72 East 18th, Vancouver 10,B.C.  All correspondence is confidential.  The above information is from a  variety of leaflets printed by the  Service, Office and Retail Workers  Union of Canada, an independent  Canadian union. SORWUC is organizing a drive downtown and would  appreciate help handing out leaflets  between 8 and 9 a.m. weekday mornings.  If you are interested call Jean at  294-6176 or Ulryke at.873-6171.  THE LAW AND WORKING WOMEN  The third edition of this booklet  sets out international instruments  and Canadian legislation, federal  •and provincial, relating to working  women. Includes an updated section on  on legal amendments and statues to  September/75. Free from Sylvia Gelber  Women's Bureau, Labour Canada, Ottawa  Ontario.  -WCWN  working women  INFORMATION ON WORKING WOMEN NEEDED  The Honourable John Munro, federal  Minister of Labour, says the departs  ment's resources will be re-allocated  to give priority to issues concerning  employment rights. Among the projects  to be undertaken by Labour Canada is  a study of equal pay for work of equal  value. The department is interested  in obtaining copies of any studies  available in this regard and invites  comments on the matter. Write to:  Louise Langlois-Trudel, Women's Bureau  Labour Canada, Ottawa, Ontario.  -WCWN  CANADIAN LABOUR  The June 1975 edition of Canadian  Labour, the bilingual publication of  the Canadian Labour Congress (CLC),  is largely devoted to women and International Women's Year. The topics  discussed include "Women's Year —  the Union Role" and "Women and Work  — the Legislative Base!' among others.  A single copy is $1.25.can be obtained from Canadian Labour, 2841 Riverside Drive, Ottawa, Ontario"  -IWY Secretariat Newsletter mhun  14  DID YOU KNOW?  TEENAGE PREGNANCY  When high school women get pregnant  and are counselled to keep their  babies does anyone tell them this?—  •one in five babies are born to  women under 19.  .the highest proportion of infant  deaths, school failures and social  maladjustment occurs among children  of teenage mothers  .shotgun marriages tend to break  up rapidly  .biological maturity is not reached  until about age 18.  .adolescent mothers are prone to  anemia and toxemia.  .early pregnancy is a very real  hazard to the teenage mother whose  pelvis hasn't reached full size and  therefore mechanical difficulties in  delivery are likely"  .teenage mothers are more likely to  lose their babies or have damaged  babies than older women.  FOR MOST TEENAGE MOTHERS PREGNANCY  MEANS DROPPING OUT OF SCHOOL, AN INADEQUATE EDUCATION, DROPPING OUT OF  THE MAIN STREAM OF SOCIETY BEFORE  THEY HAVE A CHANCE TO ENTER IT.  80% OF TEENAGE MOTHERS NEVER OBTAIN  FURTHER EDUCATION. 60% OF TEENAGE  MOTHERS HAVE A SECOND BABY WITHIN TWO  OR THREE YEARS AT A GREATER HEALTH  RISK THAN THE FIRST. 60% OF ALL  ADOLESCENT MOTHERS ARE ON WELFARE  WITHIN FIVE YEARS OF THE BIRTH OF  THEIR FIRST CHILD.  _Karen Richardson  contrace ptives  UBC SCIENTISTS STUDY CONTRACEPTIVES  What effect, if any, does the use of  contraceptives have on future reproduction in women?  A research team headed by Dr. Betty  Poland from the UBC Department of  Obstetrics and Gynaecology, and Dr.  James Miller of the Department of  Medical Genetics at UBC, is conducting  a study to answer this and other quest-  inns about reproduction. It is the  first large-scale effort of this  nature in Canada.  The co-operation of large numbers of  women between the ages of 15 and 45  is needed. They will be asked to record details of the contraceptive  method they use, if any, menstrual  cvcles and pregnancies. There are no  special examinations, procedures or  interviews. The research team is interested in all women, whether or not  they plan to become pregnant, to give  meaningful results to the study.  The project began in April, 1974, and  the researchers hope it will continue  for another three years. Almost eight  hundred women are now participating  in the study, but details of 1,000  pregnancies are necessary to properly  investigate the effect of different  contraceptive methods on future pregnancy .  Women willing to join the study can  phone 873-3110, or write to Reproduction Research, Ste. 9, 855 West 10th  Ave, Vancouver, B.Co  book  RAPE: THE PRICE OF COERCIVE SEXUALITY  Lorenne M.G. Clark and Debra J. Lewis  Almost all sexual relationships in our  society are coercive, in one way or  another. Rape is only the most obvious  and extreme manifestation of sexual  coercion in a society that supports  male domination and regards female  sexuality as the private property of  men.  This book is based on the first major  scientific study of rape in Canada.  It examines patterns in rape offences,  discusses treatment of the crime in  our judicial system, presents a profile of the rape offender, debunks  current theories of "victimology",  and analyzes the social causes of  rape.  The authors conclude their study with  practical suggestions for coping with  the experiences of rape, and specific  recommendations for changes in legislation, judicial procedure and police  procedure.  Available in the spring of 1976 from  The Women's Press.  abortion  COMMITTEE TO STUDY THERAPEUTIC ABORTION  LAW  On September 26, 1975, a fact-finding  committee was appointed to investigate the problems relating to the  operation of therapeutic abortion  committees and to report to the Justice Minister the extent^ to which the  procedure for obtaining therapeutic  abortions is operating equitably  across the country.  The committee is to complete its study  in six months, and the report will be  tabled in the House of Commons for  debate. It will form the basis for  further consideration of the law.  Dr. Robin Nadgley of Toronto is Committee Chairman,, The other members  of the committee are Dr. Marion Powell  of Toronto, and Mm. Denyse Fortin-  Caron of Montreal.  The committee will operate within  specific terms of reference to make  findings on the operation of the law  rather than recommendations on the  underlying policy. Among other matters,  it will examine the availibility of  legal abortions by location and type  of institution, the criteria applied  by committees, the views of doctors  and hospital administrators, the  reasons for delays, as well as certain  social, moral and family planning  aspects.  - IWY Newsletter  packet  Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has compiled a women's health packet  summarizing tips they have learned  over recent years in operation: tubal  ligation; IUDs; vaginal infections;  bibliography of women's health materials; how to set up a doctors' directory; how to make formal health  complaints; how to set up lay-women's  health clinics. Send $5 to VWHC at  1520 West 6th Ave, Vancouver ot call  736-6696.  rape relief  Rape Relief is a group of women who  have come together to provide support  for victims of rape. If you have been  raped recently or in the past and want  to talk to someone, call 732-1716.  An important aspect of Rape Relief's  programme is educational — public  speaking, media work, T.V. and radio  interviews, talks in high schools  and colleges. Rape Relief strongly  believes that redefining our sexual  roles and changing social attitudes  can eliminate most rapes.  For further information call 732-1716.  quote:  tfhen asked why the strict corroboration laws for rape were necessary,  Morris Ploscowe, lawyer and legal  scholar, answered,"Why? Because  ladies lie." (Redbook magazine) 15  education  CHALLENGE FOR CHANGE  SECONDARY SCHOOL ATHLETICS:  With all the lobbying going on  against sexism in our public  school system, it is surprising  that the issue of high school  athletims has not been a more major  concern. Most discussions of sexism  in schools seem to pertain mainly to  the elementary level, possibly  because it is at this level that  change and innovation have been  most likely to occur in the past.  Or perhaps the preoccupation with  the first seven years of schooling  results from the concern that  these years are the most crucial in  the development of the child.  Whatever the reason for the lack of  focus on the secondary school,  the fact remains that the controversy  over desegregating athletics  from grades eight to twelve has  already begun among concerned  teachers at this level.  It is  high time that the general public  became aware of the issues involved.  The most recent fuss began last  year (International Women's  Year), when the Annual General  Meeting Of B.C. teachers endorsed  a Status of Women - sponsored  resolution which stated that "in accordance with the B.C. Human  Rights Code", all courses,  programmes, activities and clubs  offered in the public school  system shold be open to all students  regardless3f sex.  The passing  of the resolution meant that it became part of the policy of the B.C.  Teachers' Federation, the chief arbiter of professional conduct for  teachers across the province.  This policy statement has created  confusion, controversy and some  change in athletic circles within  the public school system, because it  seems to advocate co-education  teams and leagues, which have been  strictly segregated on the basis of  sex since their inception decades  ago. Panic has struck physical  educators and coaches, particularly  at the secondary school level,  where the radiation of sexually-  segregated, extra-curricular  teams and leagues is most solidly  entrenched.  Coaches are crying:  If girls and boys are now to play  on the same basketball and  soccer teams, the whole extracurricular athletics structure will  crumble, Others point out that,  since selection for team play is  based on skill and ability, boys  will soon take over all school  teams, leaving girls with no  extra-curricular activity whatsoever. Many coaches are confused  and angry; what could the AGM  have been thinking to pass such  an ambiguous, misguided resolution?  This year, there will be a concerted  effort by concerned physical  educators to amend the original  policy statement, and thus eliminate  the threat to the prsent extracurricular athletic structure.  The B.C. Federation of School  Athletic Associations has circulated  among secondary physical educators  an amendment which would limit  the integration of athletics i to  the school curriculum; that is, to  physical education classes  only.  Extra-curricular teams  and leagues would then be exempt  from change.  But the controversy goes even  deeper than the wording of the BCTF  policy statement. Discussion has been  raised in two important areas.  The first is the that many teachers  and BCTF officials feel that the  present extra-curricular athletic  structure should not only be  de-segregated along with physical  education classes, but that it  should be completely revamped. These  people argue that the present  system is sexist (boy' teams get  the emphasis), elitist (only a  select few can make a school team),  and entirely too competitive (it  matters not how you play the  game, but whether you win or lose).  Many feel that our attitudes toward  athletics need civilizing; sport  should be promoted from the point of  view of physical fitness, participation and .leisure-utilization.  Public schools should emphasize  sports for the majority of the  students, they say, not for  select few who presently benefit  from team membership.  More emphasis  should be placed on lifetime sports  that provide interest and training  for post-high school years.  The second area of controversy  arises out of that part of the  policy statement which recommends  co-educational physical education  classes. Many physical educators are  not even prepared to accept this  concept, let alone the idea of  mixed basketball teams after  school hours. The elementary  schools seem to be taking the  lead here, although change has  only just begun. A few schools,  like General Gordon Elementary in  Vancouver, and Confederation Park  Elementary in Burnaby, have  successfully integrated their physical  education programmes this year, and  have even fielded mixed teams for  inter-school play. At the  secondary level, however, change is  slower.  Some schools have  partially-integrated programmes for  certain recreation activities, such  as dance or gymnastics. Co-educational  classes in these areas is often practical. But the core of most high school  physical education programs is still  sexist: rugby, soccer and football  for the boys; dance, gymnastics and  badminton for the girls. Any suggestions that all activities might be in  integrated usually brings cries of  protest from most physical educators.  The objections to integration, of  course, are based on culturally-  induced notions of what is "proper"  male and female behaviour. The  same arguments por out again and  again:  1. The physical differences between  the sexes are too great.  (Recent  studies indicate that physical  differences among members of the same  sex are greater that those between  the sexes.)  2. Boys need to get rid of  aggression by playing rough.  (Girls are aggressive too)  3. Girls wouldn't be able to  keep up to the boys.  (Many  girls are better athletes than many  boys. And what about non-athletic  boys who have trouble keeping up in  all-male classes?)  4. Girls would get injured in  body contact sports.  (Again, what  about the boys who get injured in  these activities? We don't worry so  much about them!)  The illogic of these objections goes  on and on. The true nature of  most of the arguments is emotional.  Many people's deepest beliefs  about what gender means is being  threatened by talk of coeducational physical education. These  beliefs are actually prejudices,  learned at a very young age, and  prejudice is very difficult to  combat. Those who object to  integration of athletics really  believe at heart that girls are  physically weak and emotionally  unfit for serious competition. What  good are logic and statistics  against this kind of prejudice?  It  takes time, much consciousness-raising,  and occasionally a little coercion  to re-educate people; to make them  reconsider their most basic beliefs.  At least the consciousness-raisi. b  has begun.  - Margaret Nelson  Margaret Nelson is a physical education teacher at the secondary level  and is a member of the Burnaby  Teachers' Association Standing  Committee for the Status of Women.  task force  The Status of Women Task Force  recently submitted several resolutions  to the B.C, Teachers' Federation  Executive concenning the athletic  system within public schools. Included  in their recommendations was the  following:  1. That the BCTF promote and foster,  through integrated physical activity  programs, the acquisition by all students of lifetime physical fitness  skills.  2. That the BCTF encourage each local  association to strike a committee to  develop physical activity programs  designed to emphasize participation  and the acquisition of lifetime  physical fitness skills.  Supporting Statement  The current emphasis on competition  and team sports in physical activity  programs fosters selectivity and  elitism, and does not provide for  the adequate acquisition and development of lifetime physical fitness  CONTINUED PAGE 16..'Äû 16  CONTINUED FROM PAGE 15   skills. PARTICIPATION (Sports Participation Canada, Department of Health  and Welfare) found that the physical  fitness of adult Canadians was depress-  ingly low.  Statistics Canada reported that a to  total of 75.9% of Canadians (age 14  and older) indicated zero hours per  week spent in sports activities. In  a separate category entitled physical  activity, a total of 78.6% reported  zero hours a week as their participation.  Physical fitness can be improved or  maintained only through regular exercise and/or participation in physical  activities or sports. The results of  this survey show that more tham 75%  of Canadians lead a completely sedentary life. The school can be a  key institution in remedying this  serious problem. A committee established at the local level to initiate  creative programs is an essential  first step toward improving the participation rate and physical fitness  level of all our students.  The Annual General Meeting of the B.C.  Teachers' Association will be held  at the end of March and KINESIS will  report on decisions made at that time  concerning athletics in the public  school system.  The following is reprinted from the  booklet HEALTH AND FITNESS, published  by Minister of Health and Welfare,  Fitness and Amateur Sports Branch:  'However, the Swedish schools and  universities have one advantage with  regard to physical education. The  teaching and curriculum are almost  exclusively aimed at general training  and recreation. The time and resources  spent on competitive sports and the  coaching of athletes are very limited.  Efforts are made to provide service  and education for everyone, from the  handicapped to the physically fit  person. Pupils and students who are  endowed for and interested in competitive sports are stimulated to  join any of the many sports clubs,  normally independent of the schools.  After finishing school it is natural  for the former student to continue  his sports activities under the auspices of the sport club.  It should also be mentioned that most  trade unions organize major sports  programs and various outdoor activities (games, skating, bicycling, etc,  often as family activities). Such  activities are subsidized by the company and the managers also participate!  This sector sponsors soccer, ice  hockey, handball, basketball leagues,  etc. and the motivation to participate  seems to follow the motto of the founder of the modern Olympic Games, Baron  Pierre de Coubertin:"The important  thing is to participate not to win!"  quote:  The overemphasis on protecting girls  from strain or'injury and underemphasis  on developing skills and experiencing  teamwork fits neatly into the pattern  of the second sex.... Girls are the  spectators and the cheerleaders. They  organize the pep clubs, sell pompoms,  make cute abbreviated costumes, strut  a bit between halves, and idolize the  current football hero. Perfect preparation for the adult role of women —  to stand decoratively on the sidelines  of history and cheer on the men who  make the decisions, to be nurse to  the doctor ... secretary to the boss  .... By opening up the highly visible  arena of sports and athletics to women, we may help to demolish the  fears and the patterns of discrimination so prevalent elsewhere.  - Dr. Kathryn Clarenbach, reprinted in The Optimist, Victoria  Faulkner Women's Centre Newspaper,  Whitehorse, Yukon.  quote:  "Not to have confidence in one's body  is to lose confidence in oneself."..  It is precisely the female athletes,  who being positively interested in  their own game, feel themselves least  handicapped in comparison with the  male. Let her swim, climb mountain  peaks, pilot an airplane, battle  against the elements, take risks, go  out for adventure, and she will not -  feel before the world that timidity."  - Simone de Beauvoir, 1949.  -careers  CAREER COUNSELLORS NEEDED  The Women's Studies Program of Capilano  College is looking for women with non-  traditional careers who can counsel  high school women on the new range of  options open to them. Contact Marsha  Trew at Cap College, 2055 Purcell Way  North Vancouver or call 986-1911,  local 294.  -WCWN  CAREERS FOR YOUNG WOMEN  256 page guide to more than 90 careers  for women, intended as a guide to  parents, teachers and counsellors of  high school women. $4.50 in paperback  from College Board Publications Orders  Box 2815, Princeton New Jersey, USA.  -WCWN  CHILDREN  CREATIVE PLAYGROUND INFO KIT 1 AND 2  These two kits contain info on: setting up an adventurous playground; cost  of maintaining it; basic duties of  leaders; management committees; fund-  raising; fencing and gates; relevant  publications; films; lists of useful  organizations. Free from Central Mortgage and Housing Corporation, 2609  Granville St, Vancouver or call 732-  4211.  - WCWN  CHILDREN AND TV  "...Children (particularly girls)  are not being presented with positive  role models which will encourage them  to actualize their potential...Because  of the low frequency of female characters and .because there are so few  positive role models, public television children's programs are narrow  and limited."  (from The Report of the Task Force  on Women in Public Broadcasting.  Report can be obtained by writing to  CPB, 1111 16th St. N.W. Washington,  DC 20036.  literature  The first issue of MEDIACENTER, May  1975, contains "Women in High School  English Literature: A Review" by Merle  Froschl and Phyllis Arlow. "A well  documented examination of women's  place in literary history.and the  classroom." Presented in the MEDIA-  CENTER article were two parts of the  study published by The Feminist Press,  the first part on "The Maleness of  Literature" and the second,"The Portrayal of Female Character."(The Feminist Press address is Box 334, Old  Westbury, New York, 11568).  north van  The North Vancouver Teachers' Association Status of Women has requested and  received $2000 from the North Vancouver  School Board for in-service training  as part of the programme to eliminate  sexism in schools. This will provide  money for teachers to attend workshops, look at teaching materials,  etc.  LIBERATING YOUNG CHILDREN  "Experiences in-Day Care Centres,  Play Groups and Free Schools" is a  22 page booklet covering how sex roles  are taught to children inadvertently;  how to confron children's acts of sex  discrimination; helping individual  children break out of sex roles; the  positive alternatives and anti-sexist  curriculum. Send 50c to New England  Free Press, 60 Union Square, Somer-  ville, Massachussetts, USA 02143.  - WCWN  journal  The University of Chicago is publishing a new quarterly journal,Signs: A  Journal of Women in Culture and Society  devpted to research on women. It is  planned as both an interdisciplinary  and international publication. For  more information write:Carolyn Vogt,  University of Chicago Press, 5801  Ellis Ave. Chicago, Illinois, 60637. sfu--bunnaby  17  elkford  217 Rotunda, Simon Fraser University,  Phone: 291-3670.  Several women are interested in participating in a massage workshop but  have no one to lead it. If anyone  knows of a woman who is able to lead  a workshop of this kind please contact  the Centre.  Membership in the SFU-Burnaby Women's  Centre costs $1 per semester. A woman  may pay on a one term, two term or  yearly basis. Membership includes  automatic membership in the B.C. Federation of Women. Members are placed  on the Centre's mailing list and receive newsletter. All women, members  and non-members, are welcome to use  the Centre during its regular hours  and to participate in activities,  and borrow books from the Centre's  library.  queen  charlottes  A number of women in the Queen Charlotte Islands want to start a women's  group on feminist issues. They are  looking for generial material on the  women's movement. Contact them through  their president Nancy McCreary, RR1,  Queen Charlotte City, or call 559-  4640.  - WCWN  saltspring  WOMEN IN TIMES LIKE THESE  This group of women is involved in  co-op housing, a food co-op and a  health clinic. They would like to do  more community education on the status  of women. Send materials and information to Marcy Williamson, Box 945,  Community Society, Saltspring Island,  B.C. or call Louise Doucet at 537-  5091.  - WCWN  maple ridge  The Centre needs children's toys and  volunteers. Please phone if you can  help.22369 Lougheed Highway, 467-1633  Daytime CR - A daytime CR group is  being organized. If you are interested phone the Centre.  Babysitting Co-op - a babysitting  co-op with six members has recently  been organized by the Centre. If you  are interested in the formation of  another co-op call the Centre.  Friday afternoon babysitting - available at the Centre every Friday from  12 to 4 p.m. Fee: 75c per hour for  the first two children in family,  50c for each child after the first  two.  Child care is by a qualified child  care worker.  Handicraft store - The Centre is  opening a handicraft store, and  would appreciate help. They also  need goods to sell on assignment -  knitting, weaving, macrame, sewing,  planting, etc - on consignment.  Contact Centre or Sue at 467-3114.  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  hazelton  Women in Hazelton are interested in  becoming more involved in the women's  movement but need lots of information  and materials. Contact them with your  ideas and resources through Joni  Rebina, Box 322 Hazelton or call  842-4312.  - WCWN  north  shone  The North Shore Women's Centre has  received a grant of $3,611 from the  federal Secretary of State Department.  Congratulations! The Centre is located at #205 - 3255 Edgemont Blvd.,  (Highlands United Church), North Vancouver. Phone 987-4822  The Centre is also applying to Secretary of State for a Summer Student  Community Project which would permit  them to hire four students. The project  would deal with part-time work for  women on the North Shore.  The North Shore Women's Centre General  Meeting and Executive Elections are  in May. Phone Andrea Davis at 980-8236  if you are interested.  A speakers list is being compiled by  the Centre to speak to women's groups  on the North Shore about issues important to women. No experience necessary.  A workshop will be given. Call Nina  at 980-5353.  yellowknife  Rosemary Cairns is the lone feminist  at the News of the North, Yellowknife  North West Territories. She and a number of other women in the area would  like to start a women's group and need  input. Send materials and information t  to them at Box 68, Yellowknife, NWT.  Communications up north are very bad  and feminists can feel quite isolated.  - WCWN  Women of United Steelworkers of America  Local 7884 in Elkford, B.C., have recently formed a Women's Rights Committee and are interested in generally  improving the status of women in the  area, specifically as regards the  employment situation with Cominco  managed Fording Coal Ltd.  Just recently in response to a contract  demand Cominco made available a bunkhouse for women. It is at present unoccupied.  The main thrust will be making women  outside aware of employment opportunities in the Elkford area. The turnover rate is very high and the majority of jobs in the mine could easily  be filled by women. The Committee  will attempt to ensure that Cominco  gives equal opportunity to female  applicants.  The Committee would like organizational help, ideas, information, materials,  advertising and moral support. Contact  them c/o Erik Poole, Chairperson,  Women's Rights Committee, Box 36,  Elkford, B.C. Phone 865-2444.  slocan  SLOCAN VALLEY FEMINIST THEATRE  A feminist women's theatre is now  operating in the Slocan Valley. They  have performed three plays so far:  Fuge for Female Voices, A Woman is  Talking to Death, and Calm Down  Mother. If you want a showing contact  Merideth Bain Woodward at RR1, Winlaw  B.Co or call Judy Ceroli at 226-7601.  - WCWN  whitehonse  The Victoria Faulkner Women's Centre  in Whitehorse is open 9:00 am to 12  pm and i:00 to 4:30 pm'ÄûMonday to Friday, and 7:00 to 9:30 pm Monday to  Thursday and is staffed by volunteers.  There is someone on call during the  hours the Centre is closed. More volunteers are needed.  The Centre functions as a drop-in  centre, has a feminist library, holds  programs and shows films. There are  toys for children and a crib for babies.  The Optimist, newspaper of the Victoria  Faulkner Women's Centre is planning  to publish bi-monthly for the benefit  of Yukon women. Work is done by volunteers and anyone who would like to  work on the committee or as a correspondent in outside communities will  be most enthusiastically welcomed.  Victoria Faulkner Women's Centre, 4051  4th Avenue, Whitehorse, Yukon.  fraser valley  ISHTAR WOMEN'S TELEVISION  Ishtar Women's Resources Centre is  now producing and filming their own  weekly feminist television program  "Mountain Moving Time" shown on cable  TV Channel 10 in New Westminster,  Surrey, Langley, Abbotsford, and  Aldergrove. Western Cablevision of  Surrey taught them how to operate  cameras, direct conprol panels, conduct interviews etc. Women interested  in learning these skills should con  tact Ishtar at 2420 Montrose, Abbotsford, B.C. or call Susan Belford at  859-7681.  PARENTS IN CRISIS  Parents in Crisis meets weekly in  three Fraser Valley areas, to help  parents stop abusing their children.  They operate in Langley, Aldergrove  and Brookswood. Contact them through  Ishtar, Women's Resources Centre, .  2420 Montrose Avenue, Abbotsford or  call Susan Befford 859-7681.  - wr.WN media action  18  CONSUMER MINISTER  Although he agrees that sexist ads  are a problem, Consumer Affairs Minister Rafe Mair says that under the  laws administered by his department,  he see very little that can be done  about sexist ads.  Letters and materials on sexist ads  (and examples) can be sent to him at  Parliament Buildings, Victoria.  -WCWN  TASK FORCE ON SEXISM IN ADS  The Canadian Advisory Board has established a task force to study sexism in advertising. Margaret Hamilton  senior vice-president of Thompson  Newspapers Ltd. will chair. Guidelines for non-sexist ais are expected  to eiier^p from the stuly. 'Jantrihutfl  later^.a! <:o C A3 \1  1>0 "lay :t,  e-302, Toronto, Ontario"  - WCWN  WOMEN IN MEDIA  "Image Making, Some Examples, Some  Positive Suggestions" are notes taken  from a speech by Dr. Alice Courtney  to Action 75 held in Ottawa by the  federal government. The paper includes  data from research on the portrayal  of women by the media. It is free from  the YWCA, 571 Jarvis Street, Toronto,  Ontario.  -WCWN  VSW a—v library  The following tapes (1/2 inch) have  been added to the VSW Audio-Visual  Lending Library. (For other tapes  available see July and August issues  of KINESIS or write to VSW Office,  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver for  list). Please send $1 per tape to  cover postage.  The tapes are 30 minutes long and  are copies cf Vancouver Status of  Women's weekly TV show WOMEN ALIVE  seen on Vancouver Channel 10 at  9:30 -p.m. Wednesdays.  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  Host: Johanna den Hertog  Guests: Linda Hurst, Marian Vogel  Theme: The particular issues confronting downtown, skid row women. A profile of this new organization which  began in July 1975, the activities  at the Centre, what the problems of  the women are, what has to be done,  and what stands in the way.  Policewomen  Host: Johanna den Hertog  Guests: Mary Fraser, 17 year veteran  of the Vancouver Police Department,  Jane Murphy, attending the new B.C.  Police College (V.P.D.), and Connie  Smith, one of the first 30 women in  the RCMP.  Theme: What it is like to be a woman  in policing. A profile of each woman,  quite a bit about training, what the  job entails, and a bit on attitudes.  IWY Van  Host: Diana Bissell  Guest: Lynne Pearson  Theme: An interview with the coordinator of the IWY travelling Van  done at the end of 1975. Gives details  of their travels, who they saw and  what they Tound.  Women and Christian Feminism  Host: Lee Masters  Guests: Townsend, and Dorothy  Pinnock  Theme: Saskatoon Conference on the  role of women in the Christian  churches. Notes the emerging feminism  in Christianity.  Men's Liberation  Host: Lee Masters  Guest: Marvin Lazerson, Assoc. Professor of Education at UBC.  Theme: Discussion of the emerging  awareness of men of their own lives  and expectations — often an awareness begun by the feminist movement.  Verbal Self-Defense  Host: Diana Bissell  Guest: Jo Lazenby  Theme: Discussion of what Verbal  Self-Defense is, the VSW Verbal Self-  Defense booklet, and the need for  feminists to be aware of how to handle  verbal put-downs.  Our Hidden Heritage Parts I and II  Prepared by Lain Lundy, Donna Hubert  and Wynn Leroux.  Interviews and discussions about a  display in the Victoria Museum about  women in B.C. history. Includes interviews with member of the"Flying  7", with Alice Ages of Victoria SWAG,  and with Gene Errington. Ideal for  schools — general interest.  History of Women in the Work Force  in Canada  Prepared by Lain Lundy, Donna Hubert  and Wynn Leroux.  *Ideal for schools. An interesting  slide/voice presentation which ends  with an interview with a woman from  the SORWUC union about positive  approaches for the future.  Liberated Views  "Liberated Views, Observations on the  Women's Liberation Movement" is a  30- page booklet researched by two  UBC sociology students. The first in  a series, it examines objectives, tactics, issues of the women's movement.  Copies can be ordered for $1.00 each  from Jeannette Auger, UBC Sociology  Dept., Pondersosa Annex, Vancouver,  B.C.  or call 736-6127.  women in  focus  The WOMEN IN FOCUS Audio-Visual Tape  Library is the result of the concrete  effort to fill in the need for information and communication on women.  The tapes are produced, dirested and  created by women. The series covers  many diverse topics to meet the needs  of as many people as possible.  Each tape is approximately 30 minutes  in length.and can be rented or purchased through the Women's Office,  Box 85, Student Union Building, Room  230; UBC. Phone: 228-2082.  WOMEN IN FOCUS programs can be seen  Monday nights at 9 p.m. on Vancouver  Channel 10.  members  forum  Next time somebody accuses the  women's movement of being too  limited in scope, to concerned  with one issue, remind them we  are concerned with everything  in our world, as it affects  women. That is from a to z as  follows: abortion, affirmative  action, advertising art, broadcasting,  childbirth, childcare, economics,  non-sexist education, employment,  family law, government, health,  history, housing, homework human  rights, iwy, legal aid legislation,  lobbying, mechnanics, music  native women, nurses, ombud services  police,, politics, printing,  psycholgy, radio, rape, religion,  research, single parenthood, socio1-  logy, speakers, sports, teaching, television, theatre, unions, university, volunteerism, women's studies,  writing, to name a few.  See if  they can remember all that. And that's  just a beginning!  :r Karen Richardson  jeanne  mance  The Federal Government has announced  that it will rename the Federal Service Building the Jeanne Mance Building.. Jeanne Mance (1606-1673) was the  first secular nurse in North America  and founded Hotel Dieu in Montreal.  The Canadian 8overnment issued this  stamp in honour in 1973. 19  Letters  PHONE (home)  OCCUPATION  (vork?  MEMBERSHIP .DONATION $  LIBRARIES, etc. SUBSCRIPTION $10/ YEAR  RENEWAL ■  NEW MEMBER ^_  Kinesis is sent to all members in good  standing. Membership dues are by year  ly donation. In determining your donation we ask you to balance your own  financial position and the fact that  KINESI§ costs approximately $5.00 per  person per year to print and mail.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objective is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W.  PUBLICATION DATE:  The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month (e.g.'Nov. 1 for Dec.  issue).  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members.' All  submissions, including letters to  the editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be  used where requested. Where necessary, the newsletter committee  will edit for brevity, clarity, and  taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  THIS ISSUED  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE: Jo Lazenby,  Bobbie Patrick, Monica Mui, Eloah  Giacomelli, Viviane Hotz, Diana  Bissell  EDITOR: Jo Lazenby  CONTRIBUTORS: Miriam Gropper, Nancy  Conrod, Karen Richardson, Margaret  Nelson, Diana Bissell, Dorothy Holme,  J. Annis Freeman, Jo Lazenby  GRPAHICS: Kathy Horrocks  PHOTOS: Karen Richardson, Marian  Penner Bancroft for ISIS  FR0NT0 PAGE: Marian Penner Bancroft  for ISIS  TYPING: Darlene Cornett, Jo Lazenby  PROOFREADING: Carmel MacDougal, Connie  Smith, Miriam Gropper  Shalom!—  Enclosed is $5 for KINESIS for the  coming year. It probably seems strange  to you that half-way around the world  I'd still want to get KINESIS, but  let me tell you KINESIS has been a  real support in terms of reminding  me of the kinds of positive action  that can happen.  Nothing earth-shaking to report from  here, I'm embarrassed to say. It seems  like I have fallen into the slowness  of the Middle East — in other words  a rut — and there is so much to be  done! We are still trying to get organized.  Thanks for keeping me posted. I wish  you there and us here much energy and  success.  Susan Levin  Jerusalem, Israel.  Please find enclosed my contribution  for a new subscription to KINESIS.  I thoroughly enjoy this magazine and  am very glad a friend "showed me the  way."  Also enclosed is my letter to my MLA  for the Rally on March 22nd. I am  only sorry that I cannot be there in  person, but my spirit is with you.  Good Luck.  Sincerely,  Ramona Gower  custody  CUSTODY PROBLEMS — ANYONE ELSE?  I am at present involved in a custody  case and am getting legal information,  but I would like to know of anyone  else who is involved in the same problem, and would like to work together  and share experiences. Please call:  Audrey Hanson at 985-4043.  KINESIS:  I am enclosing $6 to renew my subscription to KINESIS, to purchase  the Verbal Self-Defense pamphlet,  and the rest to just help the cause.  I have been an avid reader of your  paper for one year now. I enjoy reading it (every page!) and I recommend  it to all my friends. I hope you  sell more" subscriptions than ever in  '76! It should be compulsory reading  for all women (especially high school  girls with their romantic traditional  hopes and dreams!)  You might be interested to know that  I have started writing letters. My  letters for the March 22nd Rally are  all done! I really appreciate your  Letter Lobby ideas — keep plugging  away at all your subscribers to do  their bit!  The best part of KINESIS is your  "humanism." I belong to the B.C.  Teachers Status of Women Group here  and our local Women's Centre (which  is just now incorporating). Both  groups are very small and the whole  thing is frustrating at times because  there is so much to do but so few of  us who are interested in the Prince  George area. Why is the local YWCA  course on belly-dancing jammed with  applicants but we can't get five  people out to a meeting? Where are,  people's values? Why do many women  only become aware of the issues when  they have a personal problem and  need help to get themselves out of  a messy situation? Do we all have to  learn through personal experience?  Anyway, I enjoy reading about events  in the Lower Mainland area. It's nice  to know there are many more women in  B.C. with the same goals and hopes.  In Sisterhood,  L. Blume-Temoin  Prince George, B.C.  KINESIS:  Please find enclosed my cheque for my  "new membership" subscription fee. I  look forward to having my own copy of  KINESIS to read.  Sincerely,  Peggy Allan  "No, I'm not a housewife. Are you a househusband?". 20   tally  There are still buttons and ribbons  from WOMEN'S RALLY FOR ACTION available — ribbons are detachable leaving a button with women's sign  surrounding an equality sign. $1. >  Also available — the excellent pamphlets outlining the issues in the  brief presented to the MLAs. Free.  Also — posters of Nellie McClung —  Nellie's face in red on a grey background & her words "Let 'em howl!"  Il"xl6". $1.  And — even a few of the song sheets  with all the great songs written for  the Rally.  Finalized copies of the lobby team  reports will be done soon, mailed  out to all groups, lobbiers etc.  involved in the Rally. Copies will  also be available through VSW.  And a Rally Kit will be compiled so  what we learned from this Rally can  be shared.  Contact VSW office, 2029 West 4th Ave  Vancouver, 736-3746.  SAGA OF A RELUCTANT MLA  Just getting Dr. Pat McGeer to meet  with a group of the constituents he  represents in government was one of  the victories of the Women's Rally  for Action. McGeer had steadfastly  refused to meet with the lobbying  team from his riding and had countered requests for an appointment with  suggestions that we meet with his  Executive Assistant Jim Bennett. We  just as steadfastly insisted that we  wished to speak to our elected representative. Letters were written,  phone calls (lots of them) were made,  and one of our fearless organizers  chanced on the reluctant MLA in an  airport and tackled him on the subject. By the morning of the Rally,  the other hold-outs Garde Gardom and  Dave Stupich had confirmed appointments and McGeer was still refusing  to meet with us. We were informed  that we were to meet with Jim Bennett  at 12:30. At 12:30 we informed Bennett  that we did not wish to meet with him  — we wanted to meet with our MLA.  Bennett said he would try to help us  but first we had to present our issues  and information to him so he could  brief McGeer. We said McGeer had already been sent the issues and information and we wanted to talk to him.  Bennett said we were hurting our  chances by not talking to him(Bennett)  and "I won't lift a finger to help  you see the Minister." We then delivered a letter to Premier Bill  Bennett's office requesting that he  ask the MLA from Point Grey to meet  with his constituents. Shortly after  that we were informed that we had a  meeting with McGeer at 3:30 but would  have to meet for a few minutes with  Executive Assistant Beenett first.  At 3:30 we met with Jim Bennett and  after about 35 minutes we reminded  him that we were there to see Dr.  McGeer and would he please inform him.  McGeer entered the office and immediately turned on the radio intercom  "so I won't miss anything happening .  on the floor" and our meeting was  carried on over this noise which seemed to command more of his attention  than we did.  HOT FLASH  TODAY...Pacific Western Airlines  flight attendants lost their new  trial in county court Friday, March  26,1976. The judge ruled that PWA  could not lay off pregnant flight  attendants using the excuse of l  safety factor. However, they could -  do so because of a section in the  union contract which states that  flight attendants will take a leave  of absence at their 13th week of  pregnancy.  An established principle ot arbitration is that if there is conflict  between agreement and statute, the  statute takes precedent"  Interesting that the judge did not  uphold this principle.  - Mi::iam Gropper  april  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  APRIL 2  LETTER LOBBY, 10:30 a.m.  APRIL    KINESIS MEETING 7:30 p.m.  APRIL 7  WOMAN ALIVE TV SHOW, CHANNEL  10, 9:30 p.m.  APRIL 8 ORIENTATION MEETING — FOR  ALL NEW MEMBERS AND INTERESTED PEOPLE 8 p.m.  APRIL 14 WOMAN ALIVE, CHANNEL 10 9:30  APRIL 20 NEW STRUCTURED C0Ro GROUP  BEGINS AT OFFICE - CALL  736-3746 TO REGISTER - MAXIMUM OF 15c GOOD STUFF!  APRIL 21 WOMAN ALIVE 9:30 p.m. CH 10  APRIL 22 ORIENTATION MEETING 8 p.m.  APRIL 28 WOMAN ALIVE 9:30 p.m.