 *  NOVEMBER 1997 APEC hits Vancouver CMPA $2.25  INESIS  LlMews About Women That's Not In The Dailies  Women in solidarity  AGAINST CORPORATE GLOBALIZATION  Also inside:  Woodward's struggle continues     Film Fest reviews  ...and more Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Tues Nov 4 and  Tues Jan 6 at our new office, 309-877  E. Hastings St. Production for the  Dec/Jan 1998 issue is from Nov 18-  26. All women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  j and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism, classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  Agnes Huang  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Mariene del Hoyo, Dorcas Wilkins,  Fatima Jaffer, Jehn Starr, Dana  Putnam, Leanne Keltie, Russel  Baskin, Linda Hayton, Dorothy Elias,  Ali Grant, Mary Logan, Andrea Imada,  Kelly Haydon, Colleen Sheridan, Joan  Bridget, Rita Wong, Agnes Huang  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson, Chrystal  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  NOVEMBER 1997  News  Nike targetted in day of action 3  by Andrea Imada  Woodward's development permit approved 3  by Alice Kendall  A march for economic justice 4  by Audrey Johnson  Campaigning for "Zero Poverty" 4     Rosalie Tizya  by Wei Yuen Fong  Report back from the Alianza meeting in Brussels 5  by Joan Grant-Cummings  The reality of work and wealth 6  by Ellen Woodsworth  Features  The circle's closing in on colonialism 8  by Rosalie Tizya  Remaking the economy through women's eyes 10  by Joan Grant-Cummings  Connecting the dots of corporate globalization 11  by Louise Hara as told to Fatima Jaffer  Women, unions and strategizing against APEC 14  by Marion Pollack as told to Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Anti-APEC organizing in Vancouver:  National Women's Day of Protest Against APEC  Second International Women's Conference Against APEC  Art Against APEC  APEC Alert  No! to APEC 15  compiled by Leanne Johnson, Kelly Haydon and Agnes Huang  Centrespread  Connecting the dots 11  The Second International Conference Against APEC ..  by Cenen Bagon as told to Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Arts  Review of Ex/7e Shanghai 17  by Laiwan  Vandana Shiva's new book, Biopiracy 18  reviewed by Amy Johnsoon  Reviews of films from the Vancouver International Film Festival:  Calling the Ghosts, Erotica and Two or Three Things  But Nothing for Sure 19  by Marusya Bociurkiw  ILW Calendar 20  compiled by Kelly Haydon  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 7  by Ali Grant  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Kelly Haydon As Kinesis goes to press, the federal  government has put a "gag order" on the  women's movement.  After repeatedly promising that a decision would be made on whether Status  of Women Canada would provide funding  for the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC, SWC has not done  so.  The most recent promise was that, for  sure, the decision would be made today,  October 28. But SWC's Jackie Claxton effectively eluded all calls from NAC's president Joan Grant-Cummings, thereby breaking yet another promise.  APEC, as by now you must have  heard, stands for theAsia Pacific Economic  Cooperation, which will hit Vancouver later  this month. A lot of activities challenging  the anti-woman agenda of APEC are slated  to take place concurrent the APEC Summit  [see page 15.]  Even though SWC is responsible for  doing "gender" analysis on federal government policies, it has made no effort to respond to women's groups analysis that  APEC is harmful to women.  NAC, along with other social justice  groups, will be bringing in women from  APEC's 18-member countries for the Women's Conference. That takes bucks. And  that's where SWC fits in, or should.  SWC's refusal to commit funding to  the Women's Conference will mean even  fewer women are able to discuss the impact of APEC and other so-called free trade  agreements on the status of women in  Canada and elsewhere.  Only weeks before the Women's Conference, women who need subsidies to be  able to participate will not be able to come  to Vancouver. Even if the funding eventually comes through—which women's  groups must continue to demand-women  who are flying to Vancouver will have to  pay higher rates, and many women may  not be able to change their schedules or  make such quick arrangements for  childcare.  So why is SWC reluctant to fund the  Women's Conference? Word has it they say  they'd have difficulty funding something  that is "against" the agenda of the government, which is "for" APEC. Apparently  also, many Members of Parliament (MPs)  have expressed concern about funding  groups that are opposed to APEC.  Meanwhile, women's groups are not  sitting idly by. Many have already written  to Hedy Fry demanding that her government fund the Women's Conference. As  Kinesis goes to press, women are still being  asked to write letters to Fry, Prime Minister Jean Chretien and their local MPs. Better still, flood their phone lines with calls  or jam their fax machines.  As well, on October 30, NAC and other  women's groups will be demonstrating in  Halifax, in front of the place where Hedy  Fry and the provincial status of women's  ministers are meeting. Funding support for  the Women's Conference will certainly be  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  subscriptions or donated to Vancouver Status of Women in September.  Marine and Shipbuilders Local 506 * C.E.P. * VanCity Savings Credit Union *  Gale Tyler * C.U.P.E Local 2396 * Maggie Sherlock * Nora Grove * Somer Brodribb *  Alice Grange * Harriett Lew * Kelly Haydon * Dawn Simpson * Michelle Dodds *  Jeanne St. Pierre * Skye Stuart * Louise DeBruijne * Wendy Baker * Heidi Henkenhaf  * Anne Tyler * Kaye Bonfield * Marine Printers  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Jody Gordon * Erin Graham * Barbara LeBrasseur * Eha Onno  one of the demands, as will Canada's signing of the International Convention on Migrant Workers and their Families, the immediate and fair pay equity settlement with  federal public sector workers, and of course  increased and multi-year funding for women's organizations.  Very few women (and people) in  Canada know much about what APEC is  all about. That's because the federal government has been very deliberate in keeping information away from the public. Behind our backs, the Liberals are making  deals, signing away our social programs,  our full-time, full-year jobs, our natural  resoures, our cultural organization, and so  on...to the transnational corporations. They  not only have a seat at the APEC table, they  are setting much of the agenda.  This is all very much related to what's  been happening around Canada's public  pension system. As some of you may know,  Finance Minister Paul Martin and the federal Liberals pushed legislation that radically changes the Canadian Pension Plan  through two readings in the House of Commons. The proposed bill is detrimental to  women. It's now in the Committee stage,  which is where there may be our last opportunity to voice concerns about the legislation. It's likely that the government will  try to rush through any kind of public "consultation," so it is critical that women prepare now to make submissions to the committee.  That's all we have time for as Kinesis  goes to press. We urge women across the  country to read this issue and other materials in their community on why we should  resist the APEC agenda, and to wear red  armbands on November 24, the National  Women's Day of Protest Against APEC.  The weather has turned sour on us...I  mean, wet! And as anyone who has lived  in Vancouver knows, it ain't never going  to stop raining...or at least that's how it  feels.  It's so grey and wet, we tend to stay  indoors a lot. So it's a bonus that when we  do stay indoors to produce Kinesis during  the winter "monsoons," the working environment is so cheery! We're not just referring to the delicious salmon, peach and  mango paint job in the Kinesis production  rooms, but to the energy, vitality and spirit  of the women who've come into the offices  this month.  In fact, we've noticed lots more activity in Vancouver these last couple of months  and it may have something to do with numerous efforts underway to resist the corporate globalization agenda, as embodied  in November's APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) summit in Vancouver.  There's plenty in this issue on the who,  what, where, why and how of APEC, but  our particular focus, this issue and in future, is on the resistance against APEC,  women's global solidarity and the strengths  (and weaknesses) of the different movements and strategies involved in anti-APEC  struggles.  And to be sure Kinesis plays its part in  continuing to build a more powerful,  united women's movement in Canada and  globally, tine Kinesis Editorial Board has decided to run special supplements on what  happens in this city around APEC. We have  heard many women from across BC,  Canada and other countries inAPEC intend  to be present in Vancouver, giving us  unique opportunities to bring their stories  to the pages oiKinesis.  Women volunteers from Kinesis will be  attending the various anti-APEC summits  and conferences, marching in demonstrations, taking part in numerous protests—  and wearing red armbands [see page 15]—  all with a view to recording it in text and  photo essays for the December/January  Kinesis.  Back to this month's news...we are  sorry to announce that Sook C. Kong has  left the Kinesis Editorial Board due to work,  school and other pressures. Sook joined the  Editorial Board earlier this year. Betore tnat,  she had been an avid reader and contributor to the paper. She assures us that she intends to continue to support Kinesis by offering her writing and other journalistic  skills, as well as ideas and interest in its  future growth. We are sad to see her go and  wish her the best of luck in her ongoing and  new adventures.  We'd like to thank new volunteers who  worked on this month's issue of Kinesis.  Thanks to Colleen Sheridan who took photographs and recorded Rosalie Tizya [see  page ]. Thanks also to new writers/voices  Amy Johnson, Marion Pollack, Rosalie  Tizya, Ali Grant and Louise Hara. And big  thanks to all regular and ongoing volunteers for their time, labour, smiles and constant feedback on why so-and-so does not  a good headline make!  If you'd like to be part of putting Kinesis together, call Agnes at 255-5499. No experience necessary!  We'll be back again next month with  our winter double issue! Until then, keep  on moving and fighting back!  >u an illustrator?  contribute your skills to  Kinesis  gud with tekis  255-5499  NOVEMBER 1997 News   Women workers + Nike = exploitation:  The truth behind the swoosh  compiled by Andrea Imada   The campaign to expose the exploitative labour practices in Nike factories took  to the street on October 18th for the International Day of ActionAgainst Nike Sweatshops. With a rallying cry of justice for  workers, activists in 13 countries held  events in 84 communities—distributing the  "facts" on Nike, acting out street theatre,  lobbying and, of course, holding demonstrations in front of selected Nike stores.  The international campaign is similar  to the one which had some success in establishing independent monitoring of  working conditions in The Gap's garment  factories. A big part of the campaign against  Nike has been to take aim at the company's massive and successful marketing of  its products and its image.  The Nike swoosh, the slogan "Just Do  It," lavish gifts of corporate sponsorship to  schools and sports teams, and multi-million dollar sports superstar endorsements  have all propelled Nike into a sportswear  giant. Its flagship "Niketown" stores have  been established in major cities across  North America, peddling running shoes  with a "winning" attitude. The ongoing  educational and protest actions against  Nike are aimed at dressing down Nike's  reputation by revealing the truth behind the  swoosh.  Hidden behind the hype of high-priced  Nike athlete spokespeople are the real stories of the women who make Nikes. Sixty-  plus hour weeks, piecework wages, and  harsh workplace controls are the hard re  alities for the 500,000, mostly women,  employed in Nike's subcontracted factories  in China, Indonesia, Vietnam, and other  countries.  Last April, 10,000 Indonesian Nike  workers took to the streets during a dispute  about payment of the new minimum wage:  $2.46 a day. And in Vietnam on International Women's Day, March 8, 1997, 56  women employed by a Nike contractor  were forced to run around the factory in  the hot sun; several dozen of them collapsed. The workers receive $1.60 a day.  Here in Canada, Nike is also having  an impact on the well-being of the manufacturing sector. In 1994, Nike stopped  manufacturing its apparel in Canada, and  as a result 125 garment workers lost their  jobs. Nike refused to contribute to retraining programs for the laid-off workers,  claiming that they were employees of the  subcontractor and that Nike had no responsibility to them.  And more recently, in an attempt to  control the lucrative hockey equipment  market, Nike bought out the company that  makes the famous hockey brand names,  Bauer and Daoust. Earlier this year, Nike  announced the closing of its Bauer skate  manufacturing plant in Cambridge, Ontario—the result will be 400 unionized  workers losing their jobs. Bauer's factory  in Quebec may be the next victim of Nike  profit making, although the company has  made promises of "no job losses" there.  Nike hasn't announced its future plans, but  it is likely Nike will look to factories in  Asia or Europe to produce its line of  hockey products.  Workers' rights organizers in  Canada say that protest actions on October 18th were held in Vancouver, in a  number of cities in Manitoba and Saskatchewan, in Montreal, and in Toronto,  Kingston, London and Peterborough in  Ontario. Toronto and Vancouver were  the two major centres for Nike protest  activities on the Day of Action.  Women in Toronto were on the  streets leading numerous actions to  spread the word on the Nike rap. Spearheaded by the Labour Behind the Label  Coalition (LBLC) and the Maquila Solidarity Network, a rally and information  picket were set up outside a large Nike  retail outlet to let shoppers know what  they are really buying into.  Several activists also showed up  with leaflets, petitions, buttons and a  few balloons at the Toronto International  Marathon and at the Athletic Centres of  the University of Toronto and York University. LCLB says it hopes to connect  with groups working on campuses  around corporate sponsorships.  In Vancouver, the Justice Do it Nike!  coalition took their protest to two Nike  store locations, with placards, chalk slogans on the sidewalk, singing, street  theatre and leaflets. One skit performed  was a spoof advertisement for Nike  "Air Genocides." One person displayed  StA^y  &£ii  Affordable housing in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside:  City Hall sides with developer  by Alice Kendall  It was standing room only at Vancouver City Hall on Monday, October 20, as  the City Development Permit Committee  discussed the application of Fama Holdings Limited's development plans for the  old Woodward's building.  The last time Fama sought a development permit, women's, anti-poverty and  social housing activists launched a campaign at the Woodward's site after Fama  Holdings reneged on its promise to devote  part of the building to social housing. Fama  said it only wanted to build 400 units of  market (for-profit) housing [see Kinesis May  1997.] Affordable housing is a critical issue  for people living in the Downtown Eastside  area.  Fama withdrew its development application. Since then, it has re-worked its development plans, but the reworking had  nothing to do with any commitment to social housing; instead it was about building  even smaller (and therefore, more) market  suites.  Activists and community groups  showed up at the hearing last month to  challenge Fama's application and make yet  another plea in their continuing struggle to  ensure social housing be incorporated into  the proposed housing project at the Woodward's site. Over 75 people spoke to the  application, many of whom demanded the  City's Development Permit Committee  send the application to Vancouver City  Council. "This is a political decision. It's  time for these people [city councillors] to  come up front and take responsibility," said  Muggs Sigurgeirson, president of the  Carnegie Community Centre Association.  The City's Social Planning Department, as part of its recommendations, expressed concern "about the impact this particular development will have on the existing SRO (single room occupancy) hotels in  the immediate vicinity." Their concern reflected that expressed by the Downtown  Eastside community—that continuing to  allow the gentrification of the community  will result in increased homelessness.  Ellen Woodsworth of the Vancouver  Status of Women, Bridge Housing Project  and Neighbourhood Helpers, spoke of the  women in the community who already do  not have access to affordable, safe housing  and who will be in increased danger if  Fama's application is approved.  Meanwhile, as the hearing proceeded  inside City Hall, a 24-hour vigil was held  on the lawn outside, organized by the Political Response Group in the Downtown  Eastside. Cardboard boxes, representing the  housing options of those living in the  Downtown Eastside, were set up along 12th  Avenue, and a soup line was set up.  At the end of the day, the Committee  approved the application. Larry Beasley,  chair of the Committee, said: "Legally, the  Committee could not refer the matter back  to Council. I do not legally see a way to not  approve this development."  Alice Kendall is an anti-poverty activist and  is on the Coordinating Collective at the Vancouver Status of Women.  the shoe to the crowd, while the other gave  a mock sales pitch linking companies like  Nike to the killings of hundreds of thousands in East Timor. Also on sale were the  Nike "Worker Kicker" and the "Sexual  Harassment Cross-Trainer."  The demonstration's organizers say it  was the largest of the four Nike protests  they held since they started last Fall—more  than 30 people actively participated in the  protest actions with thousands more passing by throughout the day to hear the message.  Organizers in Canada are currently  collecting signatures on the Citizen's Petition calling for a Federal Task Force to Stop  Sweatshop Abuses in the Garment Industry. Supported by sixteen national women's,  labour and human rights groups, LBLC  released an Open Letter to the Prime Minister on October 2, and launched its citizen's  petition two days later. The coalition is calling on more women to get involved in filling up the petitions. The goal is to present  the petition at the end of January 1998.  As a follow-up campaign, the Canadian Labour Congress has declared December 1st to 6th as a "Week of Action Against  Sweatshop Labour," and is encouraging  groups and individuals to get involved.  During that week and throughout the holiday season, different women's, church and  labour groups will be holding activities to  raise awareness around women's working  conditions and consumerism.  The broad success of the October 18th  actions have also prompted US organizers  of the Campaign for Labor Rights to call  for another International Nike Day of Action in April 1998. The emphasis will continue to be on local activities.  For more information about the anti-Nike  and other workers' rights campaigns in Canada  or copies of the Citizen's Petition, contact the  Maquila Solidarity Network and Labour Behind the Label Coalition at 606 Shaw St. Toronto, ON, M6G 3L6; (416) 532-8584; or fax:  (416) 532-7688; or e-mail:perg@web .net. A  valuable resource produced by the LBLC and  MSN is their Wear Fair Kit.  The Campaign for Labor Rights in the US  also has information and action kits for groups  who are interested in getting involved in the  campaign. CLR can be reached at 1247 E Street  SE, Washington, DC, USA 20003; e-mail:  clr@igc.apc.org  Andrea Imada currently lives in Vancouver but  is moving back to Toronto soon. She is and  will always be a regular contributor to Kine-  NOVEMBER1997 News  Poverty in Canada:  Marching for economic justice  by Audrey Johnson  More than 200 people gathered at  Canada Place on October 18 to mark the  International Day for the Eradication of  Poverty in Vancouver. The action, organized by the Working Group on Poverty—a  coalition of 35 organizations representing  social services, anti-poverty, business,  banks and government—End Legislated  Poverty and the Downtown Eastside Residents Association, got under way with a  rousing speech from Mabel Nipshank of  Battered Women's Support Services.  Nipshank, who was previously a community worker in the Downtown Eastside,  spoke out about how corporate globalization impacts poor people and people in the  Downtown Eastside, and how the agenda  of big business and government is working against the eradication of poverty. She  called on participants to organize and reiterated that this gathering was for people  to voice their objections to the self-serving  policies of government and big business.  The march was almost stifled, as the  police tried to keep the protesters on the  sidewalk. Whenever the crowd moved towards the street, the motorcycle cops would  steer them back onto the sidewalk. The organizers of the action say they did apply  for a parade permit, which would have  "allowed" them to go on the streets, but the  City of Vancouver rejected their application.  Halfway through the march, people  got tired of being confined to the sidewalk  and started chanting, "Hey hey ho ho, police brutality has got to go." With that, they  all made their way onto the streets.  Along the route through the Downtown core, the march stopped at three of  the big banks: the Bank of Montreal, CIBC  and Toronto Dominion. At each of the  banks, a notice was posted listing the income and assets of the top five banks compared to the income and "allowable" assets of a person on welfare. One year's profits as well as the assets of even one of those  banks is enough to eradicate poverty in  Canada. (We're talking in the trillions.)  Also targetted for its lack of contribution to eradicating poverty was the Vancouver Club, a private club where CEOs and  big business executives hang out. There,  organizers posted a sign comparing the  exorbitant annual salaries of the top five  CEOs in Canada to the annual amounts  various categories of people receive from  social assistance.  Womyn Warriors  FUNDRAISING  AUCTION  TIME  NOV.29(SAT) '97@7:00PM  PLACE  WEST END COMMUNITY CENTRE  (870 DENMAN STREET)  •  ADMISSION FEE  $1.00-5.00  **  a,      fa  CALL FOR INFO AT 255-6506  Jean Swanson of End Legislated Poverty speaking at the rally  After passing through Downtown via  Georgia St and Hastings, the demonstration worked its way into the Downtown  Eastside. Unlike in the Downtown core  where most people just gawked, the people in the Downtown Eastside were very  vocal in their support.  The march wound up at Carnegie Centre, where participants heard more speeches  from members of the community, and enjoyed refreshments, networking and entertainment from a First Nations drumming  group and the Raging Grannies.  Heckling broke out during the  speeches when John Argue, coordinator of  the Working Group, tried to read a Proclamation of the Day from Vancouver mayor  Philip Owen and a letter from Glen Clark  giving his support. Given the track records  of both the municipal and provincial government on eradicating poverty, most people at the Carnegie rally weren't interested  in hearing more government lies.  Not surprisingly, members of the  Working Group were trying to ensure the  action was not "political" And ironically,  the night before—the official International  Day for the Eradication of Poverty—the  provincial NDP held a $100 a plate  fundraiser at the Hyatt Regency Hotel.  Audrey Johnson works at the Vancouver Status of Women.  A call for "Zero Poverty'  by Wei Yuen Fong  "Zero Poverty not Zero Deficit": that's  the new campaign launched by the National Anti-Poverty Organization (NAPO)  on October 17, the International Day for the  Eradication of Poverty.  NAPO says it chose the campaign to  give hope and inspiration to anti-poverty  activists, many of whom were burning out  and losing sight of the bigger picture given  the day-to-day reality of increasing poverty  and anti-poor legislation, actions and comments.  "NAPO felt that anti-poverty activists  across the country could use a slogan to  unite everything we've been working on,"  says Jean Swanson, past-president of the  organization. "We thought 'Zero Poverty'  is an appropriate slogan especially since  governments have been working on the  'zero deficit' idea, which never really was  the problem anyway."  The "Zero Poverty" slogan is a two  word summary of NAPO's long-term goal,  and is a visible symbol that reminds people that the problem is poverty, not poor  people. NAPO says it intends to put forward the slogan everytime it holds a press  conference or an action, and encourages  other anti-poverty groups to do so as well.  To promote the campaign, the organization  has produced a "Zero Poverty" manifesto  and buttons with the slogan printed in English and in French, which will be distributed through group members and NAPO's  board.  "The slogan can be used to help instill  the idea in people's minds that zero poverty is an attainable goal," says Swanson.  "Canada is the second richest country in  the world, so if any country could bring  about zero poverty it should be Canada."  For more on the "Zero Poverty" Campaign, contact the NAPO Board member in  your area or the national office, 440-325  Dalhousie St, Ottawa, Ontario, KIN 7G2; tel:  (613) 789-0096; fax: (613) 789-0141; e-mail:  napo@web.apc.org; homepage: www.napo-  onap.ca  NOVEMBER 1997 News  Women and global social and economic justice:  Forging a feminist  alliance  by Joan Grant-Cummings   This October, nine international feminist networks met in Brussels, Belgium to  take stock of our work on economic and  social rights. The nine networks are all part  of the Women's Global Alliance for Social  and Economic Rights (Alianza), formerly  known as the Women's Global Alliance for  Development Alternatives. At this meeting,  we set out to analyze the current nature of  the capitalist economic restructuring process, develop transformative strategies, and  map out an action plan for the next year,  based on this analysis.  Alianza (the Spanish word for "Alliance") first started to come together during the Miami Summit of the Americas in  1991, where heads of states of North and  South American countries (along with business leaders and a few non-governmental  organizations) met to discuss a free trade  agreement among the countries of the  Americas. At that meeting, four feminists  networks got together to talk about shared  common issues concerning economic development and their gross dissatisfaction  with economic development in their own  countries.  It was strongly felt that a feminist "international" perspective based on "gender,  race and class" had to be incorporated into  economic development policies. At that  time, the debt crisis in the Caribbean and  Latin American countries was in full swing.  Neo-liberalism was just being talked about,  and privatization and deregulation had just  started to take root in those countries. Free  trade in the region was beginning and the  International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the  World Bank were of major concern.  The feminist networks largely talked  about creating alternative models and  pledged to work with other progressive  organizations. Over the years, Alianza has  grown, as the member networks began connecting with more like-minded feminist organizations. The various international conferences that have happened since—the Rio  Conference (on Environment and Development), the Cairo Population Summit (1994);  the Vienna Human Rights Conference  (1994); the Copenhagen Social Development Conference (1995); the Fourth World  Conference on Women in Beijing (1995);  and Habitat II in Istanbul (1996)—all provided opportunities to expand Alianza. Today Alianza is comprised of eight Northern networks and one Southern network  [see box.]  From the very beginning, Alianza's  agenda was shaped by the only Southern  feminist network at the table, the Development Alternatives With Women for a New  Era (DAWN). It was DAWN that challenged the Northern networks to look "in  your own backyard" at the inequalities that  women in the North face and the inequality among the different sectors of women  in the North. DAWN also pressed Northern feminists to understand that the eco  nomic restructuring processes in the North  were our version of Structural Adjustment  Programs (SAPs) in the South.  At the meeting in Brussels, the first  resolution accepted for implementation  over the next two years was the equalization of the representation from the South;  that is, increasing the Southern membership  to eight by the year 1999. It was agreed that  resources needed to be committed to guarantee the participation of other Southern  networks.  Alianza is in effect an international  feminist think tank on economic and social  rights. The feminist organizations involved  come with different political and ideological analyses based in the work the women  do in their home countries. Alianza aims to  create a space within the feminist movement internationally to analyze and research women's conditions as a result of  trade and economic policies, to develop  transformative action plans to deal with  fighting for women's economic and social  rights, and to assist each other in the development of information and organizing  tools in our countries.  Many member groups of each of the  nine networks are grassroots women's organizations. To solidify the importance of  Alianza being a "grassroots" and not a  purely "academic" think tank, it was agreed  that networks being invited to participate  in Alianza needed to have grassroots women's groups within their structures. The  purpose is to ensure that the analyses and  work being brought to the table were informed by women in their communities.  continued on next page  Alianza member groups  Alternative Women in Development (Alt WID): a US-based group of  feminist researchers and activists which  does advocacy work on gender equality,  economic, racial justice and environmental sustainability projects with women in  their own communities. Alt-WID is currently engaged in economic literacy  projects with women from the inner cities and Aboriginal women's communities,  and in lobbying to stop President Bill  Clinton's fast-tracking of bills which will  deny Americans any input into the Multilateral Agreement on Investments (MAI)  and all other trade agreements.  Canadian Research Institute for the  Advancement of Women (CRIAW): a  bilingual (English and French), non-profit,  national organization, CRIAW's continuing objective is to build bridges between  women's groups and community-based  research and universities and university-  based research. CRIAW has extensive networks within the women's movement,  and has developed a computerized database of individuals working on women's  issues.  The Centre for Women's Global  Leadership (CWGL): based in the US, the  Centre focuses on developing a feminist  perspective on how race, culture, sexuality and geography affect the exercising of  power, and on the conduct of public  policy globally within a human rights  framework. The Centre holds a Human  Rights Institute each year and for the past  seven years has organized globally the "16  Days of Activism Against Gender Violence" (November 25 to December 10).  The Centre has monitored the United  Nations and advocated for women's human rights to the UN.  Development Alternatives With  Women for a New Era (DAWN): a network of women from the economic  South which is actively engaged in feminist research, activism, and social reform  in Latin America, Africa, the Caribbean  and Asia. DAWN is currently working  on the political economy of globalization,  social reproduction, reproductive rights,  sustainable livelihood, analyzing the implementation of UN agreements, and  transformative mechanisms, among  other things.  The National Action Committee  on the Status of Women (NAC): the  largest national feminist lobby group in  Canada with more than 730 member  groups registered, representing over  three million women. Most of NAC's  activities centre around the production  of documents based in feminist research  on issues pertaining to women's equality rights, such as: women and unpaid  work, male violence against women,  women and poverty, health, pensions,  housing, and international solidarity.  Network Women in Development  Europe (WIDE): a European network of  individuals and representatives from European NGOs and academic institutions  which focuses on the integration of a gender perspective into European Union (a  trading bloc of European nations) and  into each member states' development  cooperation and external policies.  Twelve European countries are represented. WIDE is currently engaged in  projects focusing on the World Trade  Organization (WTO) and the MAI, particularly through the "Women Take On  the WTO" campaign.  European Solidarity Towards  Equal Participation of People  (Eurostep): an advocacy organization  which acts as a coordinating lobby group  of 21 like-minded European and non-  denominational NGOs. Eurostep is represented in Alianza by its Gender Working Group.  Society for International Development/Women in Development Working Group (SID-WIN): a global network  of individuals and organizations concerned with development which is participatory, pluralistic and sustainable.  SID/WIN is working for a world that is  people-centred, sustainable, democratic,  just and inclusive.  Women, Environment and Development Organization (WEDO): the US-  based WEDO organizes the Women's  Linkage Caucus for all UN conferences  and monitors UN agreements, and  makes presentations at UN gatherings.  WEDO acts as a source of education  about UN processes and bodies. In addition, it does international work on  women's health and the environment,  biodiversity, et cetera.  NOVEMBER 1997 News  Women and unpaid work in Canada:  The reality of work and  wealth  by Ellen Woodsworth  The "When Women Count Symposium" held in Ottawa on Oct 17 and 18 was  attended by more than seventy women representing the breadth and diversity of the  women of Canada. The symposium, sponsored by Mothers are Women (MAW), gave  women an opportunity to discuss and  strategize about women's unpaid work.  From the National Farmer's Union  representative from Peace River, Alberta, to  the president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women from Toronto, to the president of the Association  Femmes Educational and Sociale from  Quebec, to BC Voice of Women, to PEI  women, all participants concluded that  women are unpaid, underpaid and overworked. Women also agreed that unpaid  work sets the foundation for women's underpaid work and low status (economically,  socially and politically) in the world, and  that this situation is on the increase.  The conference participants say these  facts will be substantiated when the results  of the 1996 Canadian Census, with statistics on unpaid work, is released in March  1998. Women's groups will be calling for  action on that day to highlight the results.  As well, women are being asked for  input into questions they want included in  the 2001 Census, as the current set of questions on unpaid work does not assign it any  economic value. (The deadline for submis  sions is March 1998.) The women at the  MAW symposium stressed that questions  related to volunteer work must be included  in the section on "Labour Force Activities"  rather than "Household Activities," so that  the information gets included in the Gross  National Product (GNP), the standard  measure of economic well-being of a country.  Symposium participants vowed to  continue to put collective pressure on Statistics Canada to ensure there is an adequate  accounting of the contribution to society of  women's unpaid work in their homes and  increasingly in their communities to make  up for the cuts to social, health and education services. The participants demanded  not only more data on the unpaid work that  sustains communities, but its integration  into public policy so that the reality of all  women's lives and work is included wherever they live and whatever they do.  The conference highlighted specific  policy areas such as pensions, health care  reform, job training programs, foreign aid,  and the poverty of women, in which such  data is critical for adequate evaluation and  which form the basis on which policy decisions are made.  Under the current system, the real economic picture is not given. Proposals were  made to assess the usefulness of alternative systems of measurement such as the  Genuine Progress Indicator, which would  count both unpaid work and environmental resources as having economic value.  Many women also pointed out that it  is the unpaid and uncounted work of  women in the South that fuels the economies of the North. And Aboriginal women  pointed to the unpaid and unrecognized  work of Aboriginal women that enabled the  country of Canada to be established.  Union women raised their concerns  that unpaid workers will be used to undermine their paid jobs, and that the union  movement needs to work with, and not  exclude, unpaid workers. Last year, for example, the Italian Housewives Union was  established at the convention of the Italian  equivalent of the Canadian Labour Congress.  Frustration was expressed about the  potential impact APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) and the secretive MAI  (Multilateral Agreement on Investment)  will have on both women's unpaid and  paid work. These concerns were followed  by demands that multi-year funding be  given to women's groups to track the impact of such economic policies on women's  paid and unpaid work. Women in European countries were successful in getting  such funding for the work of examining European Union policies.  In a teleconference call during the Symposium, Secretary of State for the Status for  Women Hedy Fry was taken to task for her  government's funding cuts to women's organizations and social programs. These  cuts have decreased the amount of essential community services available to  women and children. Volunteers, most of  whom are women, are being forced to fill  in the gaps.  At the symposium, women from NAC  put forward a strategic action proposal that  the national women's umbrella organization is pursuing. NAC will carry out a  popular education campaign on unpaid  work with all their members in 1997-98.  A campaign was also initiated which  would link unpaid work to the issue of how  social benefits and wealth are distributed  and shared in this country. This campaign  will lead the women of Canada into the new  millennium and make the 2001 Census "A  Women's Census."  To join the fight to get women's unpaid  work recognized, contact Mothers Are Women,  PO Box 4104, Stn E, Ottawa, Ontario, K1S  5B1; tel: (613) 722-7851; e-mail:  maw@cyberus.ca  Ellen Woodsworth is from Unwaged Women  Worker's Association of Canada.  Women and global social and economic justice:  continued from previous page  Alianza's strength lies in developing an  analysis that is driven by making the connections between the situation of women  in the South and in the North, with the  Northern groups understanding that our  role is not to be "prescriptive," or to create  policies for the South.  At the Brussels meeting, we identified  16 areas that triggered major concern for  us all, and we decided on a work plan for  the next year.  The areas of concern are:  1) the WTO;  2) the current process of the privatization of the United Nations;  3) the status of women's economic, cultural and social rights;  4) the Multilateral Agreement on Investments (MAI) and the role of OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and  Development) countries;  5) regional economic integration—the  evolution of trading blocs and the convergence of the power of these trading blocs  into the World Trade Organization (WTO);  6) the need to develop alternatives to  challenge the dominant restructuring  trends. Of particular concern is the current  restructuring of the UN away from devel  opment and towards a role of peace-keeping and promoting investment and trade;  7) assessment of the feminist movement's engagement at international level to  deal with such bodies as the WTO, World  Bank, et cetera;  8) the need to challenge the notion of  security. The feminist movement is pressing for a broader definition which includes  security from poverty and the safeguarding of social programs and sustainable development; whereas, the United States and  Japan are pushing for a definition restricted  to peace keeping and promoting investment and trade;  9) protection of women and, in particular, the need to move towards more assertive positions on migrant workers, sex  workers, and issues on trafficking;  10) the relationships between advocacy, research and transformative strategies;  11) women's access to credit and land;  12) the issue of biodiversity in the Andean region;  13) women, trade, biodiversity and  biotechnology, and the links between agriculture and labour;  14) the subterranean economy: the trafficking in women, girls, labour, drugs, et  cetera;  15) armed conflict and human rights  assistance; and  16) environmental links to health and  food.  From these concerns, six broad grouping areas were developed: Trade, Economic  and Social Rights, the United Nations, Security, Economic Integration, and the Subterranean Economy.  As for the workplan and commitments  for 1997-98, the member networks in Brussels decided to focus on the following:  1) supporting one another's campaigns  and activities globally;  2) addressing the tensions and  complementarities among different feminist networks' strategies for dealing with  globalization;  3) working within the feminist movement;  4) creating transformative strategies;  5) Increasing the membership of networks from the South to equalize Northern membership by the year 1999;  6) producing a position paper on "Labour Restructuring as a Result of Economic  Integration;"  7) intervening in the construction and  ratification process of MAI which is expected to be signed by OECD countries in  April or May of 1998. (Currently the European Union and the US Congress are "bogging" down process, which presents opportunities for feminist groups to challenge the  MAI);  8) developing a preliminary paper on  "the Subterranean Economy and Women;"  9) producing position paper on "Economic Rights and Citizenship;"  10) participating in the Human Rights  Global Campaign leading up to 50th anniversary of United Nations Declaration on  Human Rights in 1998. (The campaign will  be led by the Centre for Women's Global  Leadership);  11) developing analysis on biodiversity  issues;  12) participating in the Gender and  Trade WTO Survey Project initiated by  Women Take on the WTO; and  13) developing popular education  material on the MAI/WTO.  Alianza will be meeting again in Lima,  Peru in October 1998.  Joan Grant-Cummings is the president of the  National Action Committee on the Status of  Women.  NOVEMBER 1997 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Ali Grant  Adrienne Rich rejects  national award  Renowned lesbian, feminist poet  Adrienne Rich got a chance to snub the  elites in the United States, including the  president. Awarded the 1997 National  Medal for the Arts, which was to be presented by President Bill Clinton, Rich refused to take it.  In announcing her decision in a letter  to National Endowment for the Arts chair  Jane Alexander, Rich wrote: "I simply felt I  cannot be used this way...I am against a  government where so much power is concentrated in so few hands."  Rich is the author of numerous books  of poetry and four books of essays. Her first  volume of poetry, A Change of World, was  published in 1951; her latest collection is  Dark Fields of the Republic, Poems 1991-1995.  For Rich, poetry is an instrument of  change and, as she wrote to Alexander, "the  very meaning of art, as I understand it, is  incompatible with the cynical politics of  this administration." In particular, she  pointed out her dismay with the widening  gap between the wealthy and powerful and  those who have neither wealth nor power.  In her letter, Rich went on to say that  art "means nothing if it simply decorates  the dinner table of power which holds it  [from off our backs, August-September  1997]  Women form coalition  against legal aid cuts  West Coast LEAF (Women's Legal  Education and Action Fund) is spearheading a coalition of women representing social justice groups in British Columbia's  Lower Mainland to discuss and develop  strategies around the impacts of cuts to legal aid services on women.  As usual, women have been the hardest hit by the February 1997 government  cutbacks and the subsequent re-prioritizing  of cases eligible for legal aid by the Legal  Services Society (LSS). The changes that  hurt women most are the elimination of  legal aid coverage for changing child support orders and the narrowing of eligibility criteria for changes in custody and access orders. Advocates for women involved  in custody and access disputes say that the  requirement that corroboration be provided  by a health care professional in circumstances where abuse is alleged, ignores the  dynamics of abuse and the reality of most  women's lives when they interact with the  health and legal systems.  This was among the issues discussed  at the first meeting of the coalition, which  involved representatives from 27 groups,  including women from anti-poverty  groups, immigrant and refugee women's  groups, women's shelters and LSS. Another  area the women's coalition is looking into  is making connections with the Canadian  Bar Association-facilitated legal aid coalition—the Coalition for Access to Justice—  to ensure that women's concerns are addressed in any lobbying efforts against the  cutbacks to legal aid.  West Coast LEAF is calling on other  individuals and organizations interested in  the issue to get involved in the women's  coalition.  Contact West Coast LEAF, 1517-409  Granville St, Vancouver, BC, V6C 1T2; tel  (604) 684-8772; e-mail wcleaf@dowco.com  [Information from LEAFlet, Fall 1997]  NAWL report critical of  mediation  Proponents of mediation and other  forms of "alternative dispute resolution"  (ADR) argue that these are speedier, less  antagonistic and more humane ways to  deal with "family disputes." Many women's groups disagree with this position, and  the National Association of Women and the  Law (NAWL) recently completed a study  with researchers from Equality Matters!,  assessing just how well women's interests  are protected in the mediation and ADR  processes.  The NAWL\Equality Matters study,  funded by the Independent Policy Research  \fdJBook&  ,   J    •^    Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street,Vancouver,B.C.,V6E 1N4  (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://wwM.lsisters.com  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Fund of Status of Women Canada (SWC),  raises serious questions about women's experiences with mediation. NAWL points to  some of the many dangers associated with  the gendered power imbalances inherent in  the mediation process, a process which often takes place in a private, informal setting without a publicly accountable decision maker.  The study is complete, but SWC says  it is still assessing the document before determining if it will publish the document.  [The federal government supports the use of  ADR and conditional sentencing, as well as  other "cost-saving" legal remedies.]  If you're interested in the results of this  study, contact SWC to find out if and when it  will be distributed: Zeynep Karman, Director,  Research Directorate, Status of Women  Canada, 360 Albert St, Ottawa, ON, K1A1C3;  tel (613) 995-7835. For more info on NAWL  and other current research projects contact:  NAWL, 1 Nicholas St, Suite 604, Ottawa, ON  KIN 7B7; tel (613) 241-7570; e-mail  nawl@ftn.net  [information from Jurisfemme, Fall 1997]  Lesbians out on the  road  With funding from the BC and Yukon  Regional Office of Status of Women  Canada, Vancouver's Lesbian and Gay  Immigration Task Force (LEGIT) is taking  its show on the road. LEGIT plans to visit  eight cities in Western Canada in order to  get the message out on same-sex immigration options, and to expand its lobbying efforts for changes to Canadian immigration  regulations.  Same-sex relationships are currently  not recognized under the Family Class category of immigration to Canada. This  means, lesbian and gay Canadians cannot  sponsor their partners for purposes of immigration. However, due to years of careful lobbying by LEGIT, lesbians and gays  can now make an independent application  for permanent resident status, requesting  that the application be granted onhumani-  tarian and compassionate (H&C) grounds.  This is the only immigration option that  takes into account a same-sex relationship.  Furthermore, the same-sex partner of an  eligible applicant (for example, an independent/skilled worker applicant) can also  apply in this way, which makes Canada an  option for partners looking for a third country.  The organizers of the LEGIT roadshow  point out that most people don't know this  option exists because Canada Immigration  has kept it in the closet. Despite the success of so many applications (LEGIT has  successfully helped more than 300 couples),  the situation is far from satisfactory. The  way that H&C applications are processed  is inconsistent varying from place to place  and from officer to officer.  LEGIT continues to lobby for change.  The roadshow (first) stage of the project will  involve political organizing and information sharing in Nelson, Prince George,  Whitehorse, Edmonton, Calgary, Regina,  Saskatoon and Winnipeg. The second stage  will involve a national strategy session in  Ottawa in March 1998, followed by consultations with federal ministers and others,  with the aim of having full and equal immigration rights extended to lesbians and  gay men in Canada.  For information on when the roadshow  will arrive in your town and/or to get involved  in organizing, contact: LEGIT Vancouver, PO  Box 384, Vancouver, BC, V6C 2N2; tel. (604)  876-1266; e-mail ali@lightspeed.bc.ca  NZ's Broadsfieet1o\6s  New Zealand's feminist magazine  Broadsheet has issued itsfinal fabulous fling.  After 25 years in existence, women involved in the magazine say they cannot  afford to keep it going. Since July 1972,  when a small collective of women excited  about a growing international Women's  Liberation Movement put the first issue  together, Broadsheet has emerged as a critical part of the national feminist political  scene.  "The magazine gave feminists an outlet, an opportunity for publication," writes  long-time Collective member Claire-Louise  McCurdy in the final issue. "The twenty-  five years of Broadsheet are a record of  feminisms in Aotearoa/New Zealand...A  record of 'woman's place' and of women's  challenges to the place."  The demise of Broadsheet is due to the  same reason that has closed many a feminist publication, bookstore and business:  not enough money and resources. But as  McCurdy says, "Broadsheet ceases with this  issue because we cannot afford to continue.  I wonder whether we can really afford to  stop?"  Kinesis thanks Broadsheet for its years  and years of contributions to the feminist  movement. In sisterhood.  [information from Broadsheet, Winter  1997]  International Buy Nothing Day  Noticed all those TV ads for Christmas  gifts already? Fed up with the endless marketing and advertising messages to spend,  spend, spend? Well then mark Friday, November 28th on your calendar—International Buy Nothing Day is approaching  again.  Called a 24-hour moratorium on consumer spending, this day of protest was so  successful last year that the organizers  called it the "biggest spontaneous outburst  of anti-consumer sentiment the world has  ever seen." They suggest several ways you  can celebrate the day this year:  1) Don't buy anything; go 24-hours  without making a single purchase. (You'll  be surprised how hard it is).  2) Postering: get a hold of the poster,  make copies, and put it up anywhere it'll  be noticed.  3) Street theatre: get together with some  friends and use your imagination.  4) Stage a credit card cut-up. All you  need is a pair of scissors.  5) Give "Christmas Gift Exemption  Vouchers." Get hold of the voucher, make  copies, or even better, make your own. Give  them to your friends to exempt them from  buying you presents and encourage them  to spend time with you instead of doing  the consumerism thing.  6) Prepare a press release. If you're  going to do a mass credit card destruction,  or street theatre, let your local media know  about it.  7) Collaborate: find out who's doing  what where and make the connection.  The poster, the gift exemption certificate  and lots of other interesting anti-consumer stuff  can be found at www.adbusters.org. Or you  can contact Buy Nothing Day at: 1243 West  7th Ave., Vancouver, BC V6H 1B7; tel (604)  736-9401; e-mail buynothingday® adbusters  ■org  NOVEMBER 1997 Feature  First Nations women in Canada:  The circle's closing in on  colonialism  The connections between the realities and struggles of Aboriginal women  in Canada and the genocidal agenda of corporate globalization were highlighted at a recent panel discussion in Vancouver. The panel, which featured  two powerful speakers and a lively discussion afterwards, was the third and  last of a series of public information sessions leading up to the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC, November 17-18.  The Aboriginal Women's panel discussion was organized by the Aboriginal Women's Action Network (AWAN), with the support of the Women's  Conference's Outreach Committee. Much of the work was coordinated by  committee chair and AWAN member Donna Dickison.  The panel itself was facilitated by AWAN's Rain Daniels and included as  speakers, Rosalie Tizya and Fay Blaney, a member of AWAN and a vice president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women. Blaney,  Daniels and Dickison are also on the steering committee with the Second  International Women's Conference.  Below, Kinesis presents excerpts of the talk given by Rosalie Tizya. Tizya  is of the Vuntat Gwich'in Nation (north of the Arctic Circle). She currently  runs her own business, Little Scout Research and Consulting, through which  she works with different First Nations communities, particularly in helping  people deal with deep trauma. A longtime community activist, Tizya previously worked at the United Native Nations and the Union of BC Indian  Chiefs, both based in Vancouver.  by RosalieTizya  What I want to share with you is probably something that this country has never  really [dealt with.] There are about ten Indian reserves I go into. [Ed note: see end of  article] I work with street kids in small  towns, and they are literally called "throw-  away kids" by different agencies and communities. For some of these children, many  of their relatives are dead from alcohol and  violence. Their parents are dead and they're  being raised by grandparents who are in  digent; they're confined to their homes.  These children are 12,13,14,15-years old.  Probably one of the most horrific situations I've been involved in was when I got  called to a community in Ontario on February 11. A chief and her daughter were  shot and killed. Could I come in there and  work with the community because now  there's going to be revenge. Twenty years  ago I said to the Indian leadership, "If we  don't do something about the emotional  Rejection, denial, betrayal—all of these  issues are why we begin to fight each  other. And when we're done with one  another, the corporate interest will  move in very easily.  RosalieTizya  rage that's existing in communities we're  going to see a lot of Bosnias in Canada."  There are 633 Indian reserves. If you  want to talk about economics, these reserves were designed by economists in the  18th and 19th century to be concentration  camps. They are places where Indians are  confined.  When I started my business, I was told  that if I established it on a reserve I wouldn't  have to pay taxes. The suggestion was that  I should go live on the reserve too, and then  I would be completely tax free. That's telling me as an Indian woman to go into a  concentration camp and live there, then I  would enjoy my rights as an Indian person.  When I got the call from this chief's  brother, I told him I had been expecting a  call like this for a long time. I went over  and spent 14 days there. I did therapy with  individual people and with the whole community. There are 112 people living on this  reserve, and every single one of them has  been sexually abused. Even the babies.  The very first people to come forward  were the women who were dealing with  their own abuse. It takes an enormous  amount of courage for people to be able to  do this, to go inside and literally clean out  all of that [experience] and to take their  place as a human being. To be a mother for  the first time. To be a sister for the first time.  To be a daughter for the first time.  The second group that came forward  were the young people. The third wave will  be the men, and the last group will be the  children. The children are not going to come  unless they know all of the adults are safe.  In this community, people had revenge  on their minds. They had homicide on their  minds. The young people would go out  onto the highway so trucks would hit them.  We've been working now since February,  and over half of that community is okay.  All the suicidal and homicidal tendencies  are not there anymore. They've learned to  express their stored-up anger and release  it in safe ways. All of the rage is coming  out in healthy ways and they're allowing it  out; no one is taking it. This is going to be a  healthy community, an extremely healthy  community.  This is only one community, and I've  been in at least ten of them. I've worked  around the clock, and I've still got 15 other  reserves calling right now.  One of the questions that comes up  from everyone is, Why, why did I have to  be born into this family? Why did I have to  be beaten every day? Why did my family  have to go through this? I went to see the  Minister of Health [Allan Rock] in Ottawa  two weeks ago, and some of the people  from the reserves came with me. We wanted  to tell him how very, very deep this problem goes. He told me he would get the Department of Indian Affairs (DIA) to consult  with me on a national healing program. I  said, No, Indian Affairs is the root cause of  all of this trauma. How can it also now try  to heal?  After that meeting, I went back to the  community in Ontario and we sat in a circle. They wanted know why all this [abuse]  happens. I said, when I work with a child,  often that child by the age of eleven has  been raped maybe six or seven times. When  they begin to talk about what has happened  to them, it's either a father or an uncle or a  brother or a cousin—someone in the community that's a relation. Or it might be a  mother, an aunt, a sister.  When I work with the parents, it's a  father, a brother, an uncle, a cousin, a grandfather. When I work with the great grandparents it's a father, an uncle. It's the same  thing. Eventually at the end of it, there is a  man in a black robe [a priest] or an RCMP  officer or an Indian affairs agent.  So why don't we talk about where this  tragedy all comes from? When Pope Alexander the Sixth gave instructions to the  Spanish king and queen to go into the  oceans to find some lands and convert the  non-Christian peoples to Christianity...  that's where this comes from. What has  Christianity done to the indigenous people  of NorthAmerica? What has it destroyed?  When the British came here, they imposed some of the same assimilation policies they experimented with in Ireland—  policies such as forcibly removing peoples  from their lands and destroying their language. These same policies were used to  destroy the Indian culture and to destroy  NOVEMBER 1997 Feature  the Indian peoples' soul. But they left the  bodies standing, so that governments in  Canada can say to the world that they're  being good to the Indians. "Look, they're  standing there; we give them land to live  on; we pay their education; we pay their  welfare; what more do they want?"  But when you go into these communities and you see people tearing at each  other, you have to ask yourself, What does  it mean to be an Indian in this country?  What does it mean to have your soul ripped  out of you and to be told that anything you  do to be an Indian person in this country is  barbaric and cruel and inhuman?  The more you love what the government is doing, the more favouritism is  given to you. But those who say, I believe I  am an Indian person, I have a right to be  who I am, are made to feel small to the point  where our insides literally shrink right  down.  The processes that governments and  economic leaders are implementing are intended to destroy the human soul, and that  is really the issue we are dealing with now.  Rejection, denial, betrayal—all of these issues are why we begin to fight each other.  And when we are done with one another,  the corporate interest will move in very  easily. The ground is being laid for this to  happen.  The DIA has a responsibility historically and legally to protect the rights of indigenous people here. Even the colonial  court system, the Supreme Court of Canada  in two decisions—the Sparrow decision  and the Guerin decision—told the government of Canada it has a legally binding  obligation to protect the interests of the Indian peoples. They cannot get rid of that  trust unless the Indian people agree to it.  So what is happening now is that the  government is afraid that the Indian people across Canada are going to sue it for  breaches of trust. They are supposed to protect the Indian people from abuse and from  being molested. They have not in many,  Every process the federal government  and the provincial governments have  put in place now for Indian peoples is  to get themselves out of their  fiduciary duty [to Indian peoples]...  This new legislation is saying that if  you don't like the Indian Act that "protects"  your rights, then you can have your land  changed into private property. You can  withdraw it from the Indian Act and put  your land under a system where you can  register it with the Land Titles Office, and  you can raise money that way.  Many of these Pacific Rim countries  that are part of APEC are at the doorsteps  of these reserves. And if you're poor and  somebody comes in with $20 million, what  are you going to do? In fact, your land may  be worth a whole lot more, and that's not  even talking about the spiritual value of the  land.  On this little reserve [in Ontario] I work  in, there is so much power in those healthy  people now, not just emotionally but physically, spiritually and mentally. This country is not ready for what these people can  do. People with an enormous amount of  courage to go inside and retrieve and reclaim their soul and put that out to the  world and say this is who I am and if you  don't like it too bad, because I'm not going  anywhere...it's very powerful. And I've  seen this happen over and over again.  Businesses and governments think  they can continue to dominate, but the colonial circle that began 500 years ago is closing. Everything goes in a circle. Elders 30  years ago told me: Don't feel bad, Rosalie;  we went to a reservation school. What goes  When people have been about as low as  they can get in life..., they come up  rising, still themselves, more powerful  than ever.  many cases fulfilled that obligation. The  Auditor General of Canada in 1996 said that  Indian Affairs was incapable of fulfilling  this trust. Therefore, the government is  open to massive lawsuits by Indian people  all over Canada. We're talking about multi-  billions of dollars.  So in response, the Canadian government implemented a process in 1987 called  the Lands, Revenues and Trusts Review.  What the federal government was trying  to do is develop alternative legislation to  the Indian Act. They're saying that Indian  self-government will be recognized, and  they're saying to provincial governments:  Don't worry, it's not going to cost you anything; these Indian governments are going  to have to raise their own money by taxing  their people.  The people in the communities are  poverty stricken. Where are the Indian governments going to get their taxes from? This  alternative legislation opens the door for  Indian lands to be sold.  around will come around. Some circles are  bigger than others; they take longer, but  they'll come down.  That colonial circle is closing. A lot of  the work I do now is looking at the impact,  not of governments, but of the economic  leaders. The greed, the profit—it is pure,  unadulterated greed. And that's why people in the community are in the situation  they're in.  Another community I'm working in is  involved in a treaty process. They're at each  other's throats. They don't even know how  they got into it. They go and sit at the table  and they have no rights, they have no say;  it's totally controlled [by the governments'  agenda.] They have to borrow the money  [to enable them to participate in the treaty  process.]  You want to talk about APEC... that's  the BC treaty process. Why are governments involved? For more than 100 years  they refused to recognize the Indian title of  Indian people in British Columbia. Now,  all of a sudden they're involved in a province-wide treaty process.  In the Delgamuukw decision that came  out of the BC Court of Appeal, one of the  judges said he believed that the Crown and  the Indian people are titled to co-exist; one  did not have to be extinguished for the  other to survive. And what he instructed  the parties to do was sit down and work it  out. But he also said the provincial Crown  has a fiduciary obligation to the Indian people. [The Delgamuukw case is related to the  land claim of the Gitxsan and Wet'suwet'en  peoples and is currently before the Supreme  Court ofCanda.]  Every process the federal government  and the provincial governments have put  in place now for Indian peoples is to get  themselves out of their fiduciary duty because they don't want to be sued for  breaches of trust. That is what the treaty  process is all about. At the end of the day,  they want people to change their land from  Indian title land into private property title.  They also want the Indian people to agree  they no longer are under the fiduciary obligation of any government in Canada.  When that is accomplished, it will  mean that all of this reserve land is open  for business. People are afraid that someone will come in and say, We can buy your  land and then you'll have the money you  need. But then, where will the children be?  As I walked in here today I thought,  You know in these communities, the  women carry the weight of the world on  their shoulders; they really literally, emotionally, spiritually, physically and mentally  carry the weight of the world on their  shoulders. They take the brunt of the beatings and the anger and the rage.  And when I came in today, I also saw  this notice pinned up on the wall: An Urgent Call to Action (for the National Women's Day of Protest Against APEC [see page  15J). Beside it, there was a notice for Nexus  APEC 97: a forum to promote Native trade  in conjunction with APEC. Assembly of  First Nations Chief Phil Fontaine is going  to speak at the APEC Summit. All these  Indian chiefs are going to speak at APEC,  and I have to ask what kind of world are  we establishing for our children?  You and I know that what people say  and what you see are two different things,  right? For example, the church says one  thing and we hear it with our ears, but our  eyes see them doing something entirely  different.  There's an old man I work with who  speaks his language. He said, Rosalie, one  day the [priest] strapped me so long, my  hands just fell. I said, When you speak your  language now do your hands still hurt. He  said. Yes. It's one thing to get punished for  violating a commandment or something,  but he got punished for speaking his language. I asked him why a huge institution  like the church and a big, big government  would be so afraid of a little eight-year old  speaking his language. He thought about  it and said, They're scared of my spirituality because it is self-healing.  Indian spirituality is self-healing and  extremely powerful, because it allows us  to be a human being, to take our place in  the world, not having to justify who we are  to anybody, least of all to a man in a black  robe.  I had a meeting with a lawyer yesterday and I told her: The world is a puzzle  and in the medicine wheel there are four  first nations: the black, the red, the white,  and the yellow race. And when I put the  puzzle together, sometimes a piece doesn't  quite fit. I can try all kinds of ways and it  still doesn't fit. I put it aside and I take another one, but I don't throw that piece away.  Eventually, I find where it fits.  We are all a piece of the puzzle of the  world. We define our place in the world and  we become a piece of the puzzle that fits.  That is what Indian spirituality is all about.  That is what governments have tried to  destroy, what churches have tried to destroy, and what corporations are trying to  destroy.  If it wasn't APEC, it would be something else because that is the nature of the  beast. I get communities to tell me all of  the things that make them feel small inside  and they start looking at everything. Then  I ask, What makes you feel big inside? Our  We define our place  in the world and we  become a piece of the  puzzle that fits. That  is what Indian  spirituality is all  about. That is what  governments,...  churches... and...  corporations are  trying to destroy.  self-worth as a human being, our self-esteem, what we can do with our lives.  Doesn't it make sense for us to build  on what makes us feel big inside, rather  than looking at what makes us small? When  people have been about as low as they can  get in life from everything that has been  thrown at them, they come up rising, still  themselves, more powerful than ever.  Nothing is going to stop that; nothing in  the world is going to ever, ever make these  people go back to the way things were. It's  behind them now and it'll never be in front  of them again.  [Ed note: Tizya uses the term "Indian" to denote all indigenous peoples in Canada, except  Inuit, Innu and Metis peoples.]  Thanks to Colleen Sheridan for taping the Aboriginal women's panel on APEC, and to Fay  Blaney and Viola Thomas for clarifying information for this piece.  NOVEMBER 1997 Feature  Challenging the global corporate agenda:  Remaking the economy through  women's eyes  by Joan Grant-Cummings   The Canadian government's active involvement in APEC (the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation) is a continuation of  economic policies based on its strong support and commitment to the capitalist economic restructuring process—the globalization of the world economies. We continue  to feel the impact of the Free Trade Agreement with the US, andthe North American  Free Trade Agreement. For those of us who  continue to deal with the devastation of  FTA and NAFTA, APEC will be even  scarier!  What does this mean for women in  Canada? Trade issues, contrary to what our  governments and big business would like  us to believe, are not "gender-neutral."  Many engaged in the development of trade  policies blink and stare blindly at you when  you bring up the issue of gender. When they  sufficiently recover, they mumble unintelligibly that issues of gender and democracy  in trade are "philosophical discussions."  Women and markets  Our governments and transnational  corporations (TNCs) have over the past two  decades tried to sell us on the benefits of  globalizing every nation's  economy. They have tried to  convince us that "market-led"  economies and trade will "liberate the masses from poverty."  Women are impacted by  "markets" in many ways. In a  capitalist system like Canada, a  market is a place where goods  and services are exchanged and  valued in money. Money markets determine whether or not  women have work by affecting factory closings, downsizing in the public (government) and private sectors, and determining what we grow and eat.  In money markets, TNCs increase profits by forcing women in different communities and countries to compete for the lowest wages. Advertising markets define our  needs and wants, even how we see ourselves as women. Financial markets control the cost of food and other basic items.  And then we have commodity markets,  where women are defined as both consumers and producers of goods.  Of particular concern to women is that  the markets also take advantage of our  skills as "caregivers," in terms of our work  in child care, elder care, and as teachers,  domestic workers, nurses, political activists, church volunteers, et cetera. All of this  is unrecognized, unpaid and devalued.  The United Nations Development Program's (UNDP) 1995 Human Development  Report states that in 1993 women added  over $11 trillion worth of "household  work" to the world economy. This is in addition to our contributions to subsistence  agriculture, informal sector activities, and  subcontracting operations of multinational  corporations.  It is women who have shouldered a  major piece of the pie in "adjusting" to  trade liberalization. We have borne the "so-  10  cial burden." When governments redistribute economic resources toward the trade  sector, or give tax breaks to corporations,  or eliminate tariffs and other trade barriers, social services are the first things cut to  make up for the revenue shortfall. And  women and children are the ones who rely  most on and use social services.  This is a global phenomenon. Whether  we live in Quezon City, Montego Bay,  Cornerbrook, Accra, Brooklyn or Tuvalu,  the impact of "globalization of the markets"  is being felt. The startling increase in women's poverty, unemployment, low paying  jobs, "unpaid work," privatization of government services, destruction of social programs, environmental degradation, migration of women seeking economic security,  destruction of local and subsistence farming in favour of agribusiness, deregulation  and lack of government and big business  accountability, erosion of democracy, and  increased repressiveness of governments,  are all characteristics of these "liberating"  trade and economic policies. Where are the  "dividends" for women, Aboriginal communities, the elderly, children and workers?  Trade issues, contrary to what our  governments and big business would  like us to believe, are not "gender-  neutral."  Our governments willingly surrender  our sovereignty to "corporate citizens" who  seem to have more clout than individuals,  communities and organizations concerned  with democracy, equality, justice and the  protection and sustainability of the environment and a country's resources.  Health, education, social development  are all being commodified through this  trade liberalization process. The presumption that markets lead to an efficient allocation of resources and an efficient determination of prices and costs because they  are perfectly competitive is fatally flawed.  In fact, they are biased against women.  There are sectors in the economy that  further disadvantage women—the subterranean (underground) economy. The subterranean economy flourishes globally in  the trafficking of women and girls, labour  and drugs. Where is the gender neutrality  when it is almost always only women and  girls who are sold as "slaves?"  Canada has the second highest rate of  the G-7 countries—the seven richest nations—in low-paying women's jobs. The  Canadian labour market, like many others,  still perpetuates biases in wages, promotions and working conditions. And the federal government still refuses, after 13 years  of fighting, to enforce federal pay equity  legislation; in effect, breaking the law.  The capitalist economic restructuring  process first hit women in the South  through the Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs). It was women in the South  who, through their lived experiences and  analyses, pushed women in the North to  analyze and examine our own conditions  with regard to capitalism. Now, women in  the North and in the South together understand that the next phase of economic integration is underway, as demonstrated by  regional trading blocks such as APEC, and  the rise of the power of the World Trade  Organization (WTO)—the seat of control of  global capitalist economic  trade policies.  This increased role of the  WTO, which replaced the  General Agreement on Tariffs  and Trade (GATT) in 1994, is  very significant. With the International Monetary Fund  (IMF) and the World Bank  (WB), the WTO completes  the "triad" in charge of promoting a capitalist international economic order and coordinating  "coherence in international policy-making." The WTO is also the venue for the  settlement of trade disputes. Compared to  the previous mechanisms under GATT, the  WTO is a tighter, stricter and more powerful enforcement mechanism, with a large  measure of its control being under the US  thumb.  If trade agreements such as APEC are  signed, if NAFTA's net is widened into the  Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA),  and if the Multilateral Agreement on Investment (MAI)—the latest bill of rights for  multinational corporations—is signed by  our governments, women can expect to lose  more control over our governments, communities, work, economy and trade.  The MAI, in its present form, gives big  business the right to be seen as citizens  without boundaries, obligations, accountability or responsibility. These "corporate  citizens" will have the right to sue our governments, individuals and organizations  that disagree with their agenda. Witness the  current lawsuit being brought against the  Lubicon Nation [inAlberta] by a powerful  pulp and paper giant. The MAI will give  corporations the right to pick up stakes and  leave if they do not feel that the community or country they operate in is "big busi  ness friendly" enough, or if their profit-  margins are compromised.  Women's resistance and  transformation  Women must be at the forefront of the  fight for our economic and social rights.  Globally, women are still dealing with institutionalized sexism in the workplace, the  government, the home and the larger community. We still only control 10 percent of  the world's economy and own only one  percent of the world's lands, even though  we make up 50 percent of the world's population.  While peoples' movements seem a safe  place for women's resistance, they are also  places where patriarchy and sexism still  rule. Regardless of the "progressive" nature  of the environmental, anti-poverty, labour,  human rights, and development groups, a  women's equality perspective is generally  lacking. Strategies, in many cases, do not  take into account the fact that women in  general and different populations of  women such as Aboriginal women, women  with disabilities, lesbians, girl children,  women farmers, women who work in the  home, and women of colour are especially  discriminated against in a capitalist economic system.  Civil societies or progressive movements must have at the centre of analysis  the situation of women in this oppressive  economic system. Failure to do so will result in solutions and strategies doomed to  fail.  The other important debate among  progressives must be the inequities contained in the North and in the South. Solutions developed in the North must include  a clear analysis, driven by the South. If we  are serious about building globalized resistance and transformative strategies, then  these principles must be the basis of any  action plan. It all still comes down to dealing with patriarchy, white supremacy and  capitalism.  The refrain: "If it is not appropriate for  women; it is not appropriate" is direct, serious and simple.  Globalization poses certain opportunities in building a globalized resistance. It is  up to us decide what our bottom line is and  what our 20 year plan will be. The Business Council on National Issues is already  way ahead of its 20 year plan!  conitnued on next page  NOVEMBER 1997 Feature  Women's centres work towards alternative economic models:  Connecting the dots  by Louise Hara,  as told to Fatima Jaffer  Louise Hara is a long-time feminist activist who works at the Port Coquitlam Women's  Resource Centre in the Lower Mainland ofBC.  She spoke with Kinesis last month about how  women's organizations, in particular her own,  are broadening their political analysis as a result of efforts by the international women's  movement to raise awareness about the impacts  of corporate globalization—through mechanisms such as the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)—on women and children in  Canada and worldwide.  Over 90 percent of the women who use  the women's centre in our community are  living in poverty, and they experience the  multiple issues attendant to poverty. We  realized there are fewer and fewer ways for  us to address these issues and that the avenues we used in the past are closing down.  And we now know that it is because we're  having to deal with corporate globalization  and the globalization of poverty.  This realization for us didn't come  until [women from the Port Coquitlam  Women's Resource Centre] attended the  National Action Committee on the Status  of Women's (NAC) Annual General Meeting in September. There, we heard from  women who were mobilizing against corporate globalization. It was then that we  could finally put words or meanings to  what we were seeing.  When we had heard the term "the globalization of poverty" in the past, we always thought of other countries where we  could see the connections directly. But now,  when women come to the centre and talk  about their realities, we understand the  [global corporate] agenda is as present here  as in other countries. Because Canada is a  country of privilege, a wealthy country, it's  more difficult for us to put the same names  on it [as in poorer countries].  We're seeing globalization of poverty  in the way that women are being squeezed  out of the workforce and put through government training to occupy "feminized  ghettoes." We're seeing it in the way that  higher education is being cut off, in the way  that all the values of the social safety net  are being eroded, and in the way that  women are being asked to carry the extra  burden when social services are cut, without any additional resources given to us.  At NAC, we heard about the impacts  of APEC and connected the dots between  NAFTA and the International Monetary  Fund (IMF). When we understand the various parts of the [corporate] agenda, it helps  us to see the domino affect within our own  country, an effect which goes right into  women's lives in the neighbourhood. That  domino effect includes the fact that welfare  is being cut back to create an enhanced atmosphere for corporations to make more  money because it provides them with cheap  labour pools. It explains why there is not  enough food and water to sustain us; how  our resources are being undermined; how  we're being encouraged to take less and  less; and how we become so desperate that  we accept any little crumb thrown our way  and see that as a benefit rather than below  all the minimums we would have accepted  in the past.  The domino effect is there, particularly  in the poor-bashing agenda that is everywhere, which we have started internalizing. By doing that, we're not reacting  against it; we're not naming or trying to  stop it.  We've talked about these things at the  women's centre and understand that the  only way we can address them is to step  out of the corporate agenda, to start from  scratch and go from there. We've started  talking about creating non-profit enterprises or an economic atmosphere within  which women can see themselves operating. We're going back to popular education  methods in an effort to create alternative  economic vehicles for women, to step outside the government agenda and create a  reality for ourselves that responds to our  needs built on our vision and values. We  believe women can have some independence from the system, can go beyond its  limitations.  Our strategy over the next two years  is to build a community, an economic resource base for women. It would start out  of the women's centre but would become a  stand-alone entity where women can work  with each other to create these community  venues, whatever they are, and build an  ethic, whatever that looks like.  We've tried to connect with other  groups about this vision. WomenFutures,  [the Vancouver-based women's community  economic development organization] was  one of the first groups we went to, but they  were hampered by their own funding  needs. So we pulled together other agencies in our community and we're starting  with a Community Kitchens Network, as  one vehicle to bring women together to  work towards addressing an immediate  need: food. (Last year, we were told the first  thing women need is access to food when  they don't have money.)  We're also trying to educate ourselves  about popular education, and about how  to bring us back to community values and  into new ways of working as women. The  next step for us may be to hold a kind of  alternative economic trade fair, which  could encourage the formation of networks  and groups.  Ultimately, it's about going back to the  ground and starting from the very local  level. It's a struggle for us because we really bought into that other picture [of responding to the government agenda and  working within its framework and institutions.] The risks and fears of separating  ourselves from that agenda is a struggle in  itself. We're seeing within our own organization the same kind of conflicts that we  see when we look outside our organization  at how women are struggling and trying  to network in new ways. But we're learning from other women globally that this can  be a powerful strategy. We're listening and  we're learning.  Fatima Jaffer is a regular contributor to Kinesis. She will be among women covering November's anti-APEC activities for Kinesis.  continued from previous page  We need space to develop our think  tanks, freedom to disagree with one another  without penalty and character assassinations, freedom to make mistakes, while  finding solutions. None of us have it all  contained in our heads. The solutions must  include the work of women most impacted.  Migrant workers' associations, home-  workers' associations, farm women's associations, frontline women's equality workers, community health and social services  workers, and women's lived experiences,  must collectively inform any analysis and  any strategy.  We must demand that no trade agreement or economic policy be enacted and  enforced without a "gender mapping" of  its effects on women, and that women be  equal architects in the process. We must  demand that social accounting be included  in the budget lines—the cost to women, the  environment, whole communities, et cetera,  must be included in all economic indicators. Many women are developing other  economic indicators, replacing the Gross  National Product (GNP) with the Genuine  Progress Indicator (GPI), which measures  benefits and not just money flow.  Money markets determine whether or  not women have work by affecting  factory closings, downsizing in the  public and private sectors, and  determining what we grow and eat.  Women's groups in Europe engaging  the European Union [the trade bloc among  European countries] around trade agreements were successful in getting their governments to give multi-year funding to  feminist organizations to do ongoing gender impact studies of the trade and economic policies, and lobby their governments for change. They have just completed  a gender mapping of the EU's policies,  which will make them more transparent  and women's lobbying more effective. They  have also created a campaign called Women's Eyes On the World Trade Organization  (WEWTO), and are currently pushing the  WTO to deal with gender issues and democracy.  How do we do this work and push forward our agenda, and not just react to  "their" agenda? What kind of grassroots  public education strategy and organizing  are we going to put in place so that we all  "get it," and not just the few "converted  ones"? How do we use popular formats to  build resistance and transform? We are told  every day that we are "consumers" and  "shareholders." How effectively can we use  this power to create our own globalized  markets based on people-centred, fair  trade?  These are some of the discussions we  need to have at the Second International  Women's Conference Against APEC [in  Vancouver, November 17-18.]  We have examples from women in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean  of how women can and do create "markets"  that bring benefits to our communities. Our  support for social services, public education, credit unions, small businesses, local  farmers, public pensions, Medicare, workers' rights, public daycare and food cooperatives, are all examples of ways in which  we are resisting the global corporate  agenda.  Corporate control is not inevitable;  governments still have power. It is who they  listen to and agree to be controlled by that  has to change.  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women is in the process of developing popular education information on the MAI,  WTO, GATT and other elements of the world's  trading systems that we need to know how to  resist. To find out more, contact NAC, 203-234  Eglinton Ave East, Toronto, Ontario, M4P  1K5; tel: (416) 932-1718 or toll free: 1-800-  665-5124.  Joan Grant-Cummings is the president of the  NAC, the largest national feminist lobbying  group in Canada.  NOVEMBER 1997 Second International Women's Conference Against APEC:  J}mj?temmiin§ @$& mm vwim  by Cenen Bagon as told to Lisa  Valencia-Svensson   More than 400 women from British Columbia, other provinces and territories in  Canada, and countries around the world are  expected to gather in Vancouver this month for  the Second International Women's Conference  Against APEC (the Asia-Pacific Economic  Cooperation). The Women's Conference, which  will take place November 17 to 18, aims to "increase awareness about the many issues surrounding APEC which will affect the lives of  women in Asia and the Pacific Rim and to develop effective strategies to oppose APEC's regressive trade policies." The program includes  a number of plenary speeches on the four main  themes of the conference: Labour, Human  Rights, Environment, and Economic and Social Development. As well, there will be workshops and strategizing sessions for more in-  depth discussions of the theme areas [see page  15 for an outline of the program and registration information.]  Lisa Valencia-Svensson had the opportunity to speak to Cenen Bagon about the history  leading up to the Second International Women's Conference, the goals and desired outcomes  of the Women's Conference, and some of the  political debates that arose during the organizing of the conference.  Bagon is a key member on the steering  committee of the Women's Conference, and a  member-at-large of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women's Executive  Committee. Lisa Valencia-Svensson recently  completed a research project with the Vancouver Status of Women for which she wrote a  lengthy document analyzing corporate globalization and its impacts on women.  Lisa Valencia-Svensson: Could you tell  us when the idea for the conference was  generated?  Cenen Bagon: At the First International  Women's Conference on APEC last November in Manila, [the Philippines], NAC was  asked to organize the Second International  Women's Conference. Because earlier this  year NAC was in a very difficult situation  financially and staff-wise and because it  was an international women's conference,  we felt we should involve other women's  organizations and individuals in the organizing. So myself and other women from  NAC called for the first meeting to see if  there were women interested in organizing  this Women's Conference. Quite a few  women attended.  We also asked women from the People's Summit to attend because we wanted  the Women's Conference to be part of the  People's Summit. [The People's Summit on  APEC bills itself "an open, public gathering  of people from around the AsiaF'acific who are  concerned about the trade liberalization being  promoted by members of APEC." Convened by  non-governmental, labour and people's  organizations, it is a parallel conference to official 1997 APEC Summit. The People's Summit includes forums, on issues such as  Sustainability, Labour, Arms Trade, Poverty,  and Youth.]  Valencia-Svensson: Could you give us  a brief background on the First International Women's Conference on APEC? Who  organized it and what were the outcomes?  Bagon: It was organized by a coalition  of women's organizations in the Philippines. It was part of the Manila People's  Summit, which was part of the official  APEC conference. At the Women's Conference, they discussed women's experiences  and had several demands on issues such  as democratic government, human rights,  environment and labour rights.  Valencia-Svensson: There were demands made to the 18 APEC member  countries?  Bagon: There were demands as well as  plans for action. The Second International  Women's Conference coalition agreed that  we were going to organize this conference  as an offshoot from where the first conference left off. What we're doing is looking  at the main issues discussed at the First  Women's Conference.  Valencia-Svensson: Why is the Second  Women's Conference explicitly "against"  APEC, when the first one was simply a  Women's Conference "on" APEC?  Bagon: The women's conference in the  Philippines was also against APEC. I think  the use of the word "on" as opposed to  "against" was more tactical, so they can get  funding from people and institutions who  were open to discussions around APEC or  even open to strategizing for an alternative  to APEC.  Valencia-Svensson: So it's related to  funding.  Bagon: I think so. I spoke to one of the  organizers in Manila who visited here recently and asked her that question. She said  it was specifically because of funding. I took  a "beating" on that one [in the coalition]  because I suggested that if we changed the  conference title to "on," women and some  funders might be more open to giving us  money. I said it wouldn't mean we change  our direction or our discussions; it was just  for funding purposes.  Valencia-Svensson: Were there certain  funders you had in mind in suggesting the  title be "on APEC"?  Bagon: The government. Not just Canadian governments but also other governments internationally.  Valencia-Svensson: Was there any funding denied because of the explicit "against  APEC" stance of the Women's Conference?  Bagon: Some funders explicitly said it  would be difficult for them to fund the  conference. Even when we tried to organize community forums, some groups had  difficulty getting their boards, which were  not as progressive, to allow us into their  meetings or into their buildings. They said  they could not be a sponsor because of the  name.  And of course, Status of Women  Canada, which up till now has been stalling on giving the Women's Conference any  money, said that it would be hard for the  government to fund something that is explicitly, in its name, opposing the government. NAC responded that NAC always  opposes the government and its policies as  long as its policies are working against  women and children. [For an update on  SWC's decision regarding funding to the Women's Conference, see As Kinesis goes to press,  page 2.]  Valencia-Svensson: Were there similar  discussions among the organizers of the  Women's Conference about remaining attached to the People's Summit, such as  whether there should be a completely independent women's conference?  Bagon: We discussed that when we first  started organizing the Women's Conference. We agreed then that we were going  to attach ourselves to the People's Summit.  Some women now, but I don't think it's all  of the women in the organizing committee, feel the Women's Conference should be  independent because they say some of the  organizers of the People's Summit have a  different position on what the conference  is about. [The People's Summit does not take  an official stance of being "against APEC;"  rather, the Summit is allowing the participants  to discuss and determine the position it should  take. Some groups participating in the organizing of the People's Summit are less progressive than others.]  Valencia-Svensson: Were there other key  debates among the organizers of the Women's Conference?  Bagon: The debates were mainly  around politics because women working in  a coalition bring their own politics. For me,  I always worked around the bottom line,  which is that all of us in the coalition are  againstAPEC  One key political debate was the issue  of "to engage or not to engage" in the APEC  process. I think on that issue, in particular,  women had different definitions of what it  means. For me, I define "engagement" as  progressive movements engaging in the  process of change, and that includes organizing and educating in communities, locally, nationally and internationally. Part of  that work also includes lobbying governments so that governments policies aren't  detrimental to our needs. That's what I  mean by engagement. Other people see it  differently.  Valencia-Svensson: What kind of  outreach has been going on in terms of getting women aware about the conference  and also perhaps even mobilized and organized before the conference?  Bagon: We've had several educational  and organizing events happen. One here in  Vancouver; another in Surrey; another in  Richmond; and there's one with Aboriginal women on Saturday [see page 8.] There  was also a cabaret event.  In [the August issue of] its newsletter  Action Now, NAC published its position on  APEC, and there was a very good discussion on APEC at NAC's annual general  meeting, as well as at the NAC-BC regional  conference in Kamloops.  Valencia-Svensson: Aside from discussions and putting NAC's position into Action Now, has NAC had an ongoing campaign? For example, there seems to have  been more mobilizing done leading up to  the National Women's March Against Poverty [coordinated by NAC and the Canadian Labour Congress] last year. I haven't  noticed as big a build up. Has there been a  similar campaign of building the issues up  that leads us into the conference?  Bagon: Because of our limited resources, we really made sure it was at the  NAC AGM where the big educational  work was done.  Valencia-Svensson: So NAC didn't have  the resources to do a bigger national campaign?  Bagon: No. It was really about making  use of the AGM and Action Now, and also  the participation in the Women's Conference organizing. And of course when Joan  [Grant-Cummings, president of NAC] and  other executive members go do outreach  work in different regions, they bring the  current position of NAC on APEC.  Valencia-Svensson: I want to move now  to the content of the conference. What do  you feel are the key questions the women's  movement needs to be addressing?  Bagon: In my opinion what needs to be  addressed is what strategies should be  acted on internationally and how to oppose  not only APEC's direction but also the capitalistic and economical restructuring most  governments are leading into in response  to countries' economic crises. I think it  would be really good for women to come  up with strategies for the short term, to  Jt *x>u£d6e teattif food jot  women to come up with  Cenen Bagon  come up with, say, international campaigns  which are do-able for women in all countries, and which would be effective.  I'd also like to see women start a discussion around alternatives to the economic  restructuring of this government. I know  that governments always say the economic  restructuring is in response to economic  crisis, but I say, it is really capitalism that is  in crisis.  Governments say their plan is good for  everyone, but we know that people who  are marginalized and just getting by economically are being impacted more negatively than ever. Because of that, we should  come up with a common international vision and a common international strategy  or alternative to this economic restructuring. I think women should also start looking to a process whereby we can actually  discuss, research and work towards our  own economic restructuring, from which  all of us, and especially women and children, would benefit.  Valencia-Svensson: I presume there  were also strategies and actions that came  out of the First Women's Conference. Can  you tell us what some of those were and  how they've actually been carried out in  the year since that conference?  Bagon: I don't have the list of the strategies or what has come out since then. I  think basically the strategy was to make  governments accountable to the policies  they were implementing in their countries  that affect women and children. The strategy was also to demand that governments  abide by the United Nations' conventions  they signed, which are meant to benefit  women.  Valencia-Svensson: Are you aware of  any concrete follow-up work that has been  done, and any successes that have been  achieved since last year's conference?  Bagon: I really don't know. We do our  part here in Canada. We did a lot of work  in terms of demanding government accountability at all levels. We also participated in different international conferences,  and are part of the continuing organizing  and networking of women. I haven't attended any international conferences, but  I'm sure they are coming up with some vision that could work internationally for  women.  Valencia-Svensson: There have been a  lot of international conferences on various  themes taking place in the last few years:  Copenhagen [UN Summit on Social Development,] Beijing [Fourth World Conference  on Women,] Cairo [International Conference on Population and Development,] and  so on. NAC participated at a lot of these,  and certainly that work is important. However, I also know there are criticisms, not  just in Canada but in other countries, that  the women's movement is putting too  much effort into international conferences  and not into the follow-up work. There are  a lot of women on the ground who don't  really hear much after each conference.  Does NAC have any plans to move beyond  the official international conference mechanism?  Bagon: That's precisely why NAC is  pushing for the Second Women's Conference to come up with implementation plans  rather than just action plans.  With regards to past international conferences, NAC makes a contribution by  participating in those international conferences. And when we come back here, we  incorporate some of the strategies into our  own campaigns. For example, the Toy  coant ties, and' w/ilcA woutdte  effective.  Awareness Campaign [focusing on the exploitation of women working in toy factories]  came from Beijing, and we took that up and  continue to do so.  Part of NAC's priority campaign is to  eradicate poverty and move closer to women's equality. This year, we are focusing on  funding for women's groups because the  only way women can democratically work  towards equality is through doing organizing and educational work in their communities. Without funding, this is very difficult to achieve.  Another priority is to demand that the  government implement all the UN conventions they've signed, and to look into what  the government has and has not done in  terms of those conventions. Another part  of our priority campaign is to work more  with Aboriginal women. We are putting a  lot of effort and resources into supporting  Aboriginal women and their organizing.  For NAC, I think that when we attend  international conferences, we do bring the  work back into the organization, and we  try as much as we can, given our resources,  to do work we've agreed to do, and not  only nationally but internationally.  Valencia-Svensson: What are some of  the plans NAC has for ongoing grassroots  organizing in Canada around issues of economic globalization?  Bagon: NAC has been working with  coalitions fighting against poverty, fighting  for social policies. We do have our own  campaigns, but we also put importance in  coalition building because we know that  women who are in a poverty situation also  work with anti-poverty organizations, not  just women-only organizations. I think  that's also grassroots organizing.  Valencia-Svensson: In terms of what will  come out of the Second International Women's Conference, you've already mentioned  that you're interested in seeing concrete  strategies as well as implementation plans.  What do the organizers of this year's conference hope will happen as a follow-up?  Are they thinking that there will be another  women's conference next year or maybe  that we should unhook ourselves from [the  APEC leaders'] agenda and set our own  schedule?  Bagon: We are going to encourage the  Malaysian women to organize the Third  International Women's Conference and  New Zealand the Fourth. [The next two  APEC Leaders'Summits are scheduled to happen in Malaysia in 1998 and New Zealand in  1999.]  Valencia-Svensson: Has there been any  discussion within the women's movement  internationally of unhooking itself from the  APEC timetable specifically and maybe  coming up with other international meetings and report back mechanisms?  Bagon: I can see some exciting outcomes from the [Women's Global Alliance  on Social and Economic Rights] meeting in  Brussels that Joan [Grant-Cummings] recently attended [see page 5.] One aspect I  remember from what I read was that  women are really interested in passing on  strategies among themselves on how we  can achieve equality internationally. I agree  that women could organize themselves  outside of other international conferences,  but I still think we can make use of the international conferences that are happening.  Valencia-Svensson: The reason I was  referring to the APEC timetable specifically  is that, even as we speak, the Multilateral  Agreement on Investments (MAI) and the  extension of NAFTA to incorporate more  countries in the Americas are being negotiated. It would seem that it might be more  useful for women to meet regularly to discuss the whole picture of corporate globalization.  Bagon: I agree with that, and thaf s why  I said hopefully it will be agreed upon at  the Women's Conference that women  should really work towards designing our  own alternatives to the present economic  system.  Like in NAC, we do have a resolution  passed around APEC, and included in that  is a reference to building alternatives. We're  hoping that in next year's priority campaign, the issue of developing our own  women's economic and political vision can  be discussed. Feature  Women, labour and APEC:  Linking the issues  by Marion Pollack as told to Lisa  Valencia-Svensson:   Kinesis' Lisa Valencia-Svensson had an  opportunity to interview Marion Pollack about  the key issues and challenges APEC (the Asia  Pacific Economic Cooperation) raises for the  labour movement, and the involvement of labour women in the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC and the People's Summit on APEC.  Pollack is a postal worker and an activist  with the Canadian Union of Postal Workers  (CUPW). She is also a member of the steering  committee of the Women's Conference.  Lisa Valencia-Svensson: Are there a lot  of women active in the labour movement  involved in organizing the Women's Conference?  Marion Pollack: Unfortunately not.  There is myself, a woman from the Canadian Auto Workers and a woman from the  BC Federation of Labour who regularly attend planning committee meetings.  Valencia-Svensson: Why have you, as  labour women, chosen to work specifically  with the Women's Conference, rather than  the People's Summit or its Labour Issues  Forum?  Pollack: I think women's and labour  issues are really intertwined, so I don't  think there is a big difference. I'm a trade  unionist because I'm a woman, and I'm a  feminist because I'm a trade unionist. I  think it's really important that workers' issues are at women's conferences because,  the effects of globalization hits women  workers the hardest.  Valencia-Svensson: Do you feel there  has been a sufficient connection between  women's issues and labour issues in the  planning and in the actual content of the  Women's Conference?  Pollack: Yes, one of the four theme areas is "Labour and Migrant Workers." But  I also think issues like human rights are  very important to labour women. Issues  like the environment are becoming increasingly important. And the whole issue of  development is going to become increasingly important.  Valencia-Svensson: Are these links being made by a lot of other people in the  labour movement?  Pollack: It's a struggle. I think increasingly more and more women are seeing the  links, and I think that more and more the  leadership of the union movement is. It's  certainly not there yet; we've got a long way  to go, but I see a real big change even in  terms of my participation [in broader social justice issues] from ten years ago to  now.  Valencia-Svensson: Do you have concerns with the fact that the Women's Conference is outright "against" APEC,  whereas the People's Summit has not taken  a specific position, but has left its position  open to discussion?  Pollack: I think we're actually getting  lost in this whole discussion of "on" or  "against" APEC, and we're not talking  about the really important issues. The issue which I, as a trade unionist and as a  feminist, feel is most crucial is creating tactics and strategies so I and other women I  know can build solidarity links with  women and workers throughout the South  and the North.  Valencia-Svensson: Certainly one of the  big debates that seems to follow along with  the signing of trade agreements is whether  social movements and progressive movements should be fighting for the inclusion  of "social charters" or "social clauses" into  the agreements in order to safeguard certain rights [such as labour, human rights  and environment.] Do you think that this  is a strategy which should be taking up a  lot of our attention?  Pollack: No, because if s not a strategy  which we as individuals or organizations  can actually [be successful at.] The federal  government has not listened to me, to my  organization [CUPW] in the past, and I really doubt they're going to listen in the future. I don't have a lot of input into whether  there is a social clause or not. Where I do  have input is in developing and implementing solidarity strategies, and that's where  the focus needs to be.  Valencia-Svensson: What are some of  the specific strategies in your mind?  Pollack: One of the reasons I'm participating in the Women's Conference is that  I'm actually not too sure about what strategies would work, and I need to learn more.  I think we have to talk about boycotts, and  about when they're appropriate and when  they're not. They're not always appropriate, so they have to be clearly called for by  the people in the countries affected. We  should also talk about consumer strategies.  Another area for discussion is how  those of us working in the same industry  or for the same transnational corporation  can work together. As a postal worker, I  know that similar technologies are being  used in postal systems all across the world,  and it would be really important for postal  workers, not only in Canada but in all the  other Asia Pacific countries, to talk about  how we should respond to the changing  technology.  What's also really important is that we  figure out how we can defend public services. It's clear to me that one of the effects  of globalization is the gutting of public services.  To me those are the things I can do, and  in which I can actually have some input.  Valencia-Svensson: I've been wondering  why there hasn't been a stronger "anti-"  APEC voice, the same way there was a  strong anti-NAFTA (North American Free  Trade Agreement) voice. This is true, not  just of the labour movement, but of other  progressive movements. What are your  thoughts on this?  Pollack: I don't know for sure, but I  think people are tired. In terms of unions,  we're fighting so hard just to keep our  heads above water that it's difficult to look  outside our own little struggle to see what's  going on in the world. The right-wing attacks [the backlash against progressive peoples and movements] of the past ten years  and the effects of NAFTA have made it a  lot harder for us to look outside ourselves.  We're fighting every day just to maintain  what we've got.  Valencia-Svensson: And yet APEC will  only continue to intensify all of these harsh  realities.  Pollack: Oh, there's no question about  that, but I just think people are so caught  up in their own struggles.  Valencia-Svensson: The Canadian Labour Congress (CLC) has adopted different strategies for each of the particular free  trade agreements being negotiated: APEC,  MAI (the Multilateral Agreement on Investments), FTAA (Free Trade Area of the  Americas). I know they've adopted one  particular strategical position towards  FTAA, which would extend NAFTA to  cover North, Central and South America.  Then, they have different positions on the  MAI, and onAPEC Do you feel the labour  movement should be tackling these issues  piece-meal, or should they tackle overall  the agenda of increasing corporate control  and profits driving these agreements?  Pollack: I'm not too sure; it's a hard  question. One thing I like about the labour  movement is that there is room enough for  discussion and debate. I don't know this  stuff well enough to know whether the CLC  should take one position or different positions based on the specific situation.  Do I think there has to be some overall  fights for certain things? Yes, I think that,  overall, we have to fight for strong public  services; we have to fight as a trade union  movement for access to reproductive freedom because that really impacts on working women. I think there's a whole series  of things the trade union movement has to  fight for, and what I see as one of my roles  is making sure that they carry out these  fights.  I would like the CLC to join in with  workers and women in the North and the  South to talk about the right to organize,  both in terms of unions and political  groups; to talk about freedom from harassment, which includes sexual harassment;  to talk about reproductive rights; and to talk  about a strong public sector.  Valencia-Svensson: In terms of the People's Summit, which sectors of the labour  movement has it been targeted to, mainly?  Pollack: I think because of the cost of  attending the People's Summit and because  it's happening in the middle of the week,  it's not primarily for the rank-and-file trade  unions. It's not for people like me; it's much  more for people in leadership positions in  their union. I think we would need a lot  more funding to be able to bring in a whole  bunch of rank-and-file trade unionists.  Valencia-Svensson: Has there been an  effort on the part of the organizers of the  People's Summit to ensure a lot of women  trade unionists will be able to attend?  Pollack: As far as I know, it's supposed  to be 50-50 [men/women] in terms of all  the summits, including the Labour Summit. Except of course the Women's conference which will be 100 percent women. At  the Vancouver and District Labour Council (VDLC), of which I'm on the executive,  there's encouragement for women to attend.  Valencia-Svensson: In your union, as  well as in the VDLC, has there been much  discussion of how to make use of what  comes out the People's Summit and the  Women's Conference?  Pollack: The way the VDLC works is  we carry out campaigns of the CLC, and  we've had some discussions about carrying on this work after the APEC Summit is  over?  One of reasons we need to have these  conferences is to talk about these issues, and  hopefully bring some clarity to them.  Valencia-Svensson: Do you feel there  will be enough room for really concrete discussions?  Pollack: I hope so. I have faith that a lot  that the people coming to the People's Summit from both the North and the South want  to talk, not only about the general issues,  but also about concrete ideas.  The night before the official opening  of the People's Summit, the Labour Issues  Forum is having a "speak out" of rank-and-  file trade unionists from a number of countries: Thailand, Malaysia, and others. We're  going to have people who actually working in factories talking about their work  conditions, and about how pressure and activism from the North affects them. Hopefully, this will lead and help concretize a  lot of the discussions.  14  NOVEMBER 1997 Feature  Anti-APEC activities in Vancouver:  Resistance is nor futile!  Women and social justice activists in Vancouver are gearing up to take on the  "suits" when the APEC (Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation) Summit hits town,  November 19 to 25. The activists are planning numerous protests around the city to  educate people about the evils of APEC and clearly show their opposition to more so-  called free [for whom?] trade agreements.  APEC is a group of 18 countries of the Asia Pacific, working to promote free trade  and investment in the region. The member countries in APEC are: Australia, Brunei,  Canada, Chile, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, New  Zealand, Papua New Guinea, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and the  United States. The heads of state of all these nations will all be in Vancouver to further push the entrenchment of capitalism.  APEC started in 1989 as a forum for the exchange of ideas and an informal, non-  binding consultative body. Today, APEC looks more like a formal "free trade zone,"  along the lines of NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement).  APEC is about increasing the profit-making opportunities of transnational corporations, and is part of the larger trade liberalization, deregulation and privatization  trend that is supported by almost all governments in the world. APEC is extremely  dangerous to women and other marginalized groups of people.  What follows is a brief outline of some of the anti-APEC organizing that has and  will be going in Vancouver to challenge the corporate globalization agenda which  spewed out APEC.  November 24: Wear a Red  Armband  Lounge singer Jimmy Sushil (aka Sheila James) sings and  speaks out against APEC at a women's fund-raising cabaret for  the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC.  by Agnes Huang  The Feminist Networking Group  (FNG) is calling on women across Canada  to wear red armbands on November 24, the  National Women's Day of Protest Against  APEC, in solidarity with all women who  oppose APEC and corporate globalization.  At the last annual general meeting of  the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) in September, the  membership passed a resolution which,  among other things, declared the National  Women's Day of Protest, which will coincide with the first day of the APEC Leaders' Summit.  Taking the lead, the Vancouver Status  of Women (VSW) quickly called together  the FNG to plan an anti-APEC campaign  for November 24th and strategies for mobilizing women in every community. The  FNG, which has since been meeting weekly,  is a coalition of feminist organizations and  individual feminists in British Columbia's  Lower Mainland.  The idea of red armbands came after  discussion about picking a campaign that  was do-able, and that was accessible to the  broadest range of women. "We're trying to  get as many women as possible all over the  country involved in this campaign," says  VSW's Ema Oropeza.  The FNG has also produced a brochure  explaining the danger APEC (and other free  trade agreements) poses to women, and  calling on all women to join in on the National Women's Day of Protest. Already,  many women's, labour, students' and other  social justice groups are helping to spread  the campaign around.  The FNG is asking individual women  and women's groups to hand out red armbands at their organizations or places  where they hang out, and to other women  they know or to women on the street (or in  laundromats, schools, malls, and so on).  Other actions the FNG is proposing women  can do, include: contacting your local Member of Parliament and telling him or her that  you oppose APEC and the federal government's secrecy around free trade processes;  writing letters to the editor; calling in during radio programs discussing APEC; holding an informational workshop for women  in your community; or organizing a protest activity on November 24.  The FNG is also encouraging women  to carry out their own "Random Act of Protest" against APEC. Here are what some  Vancouver feminists say they're planning  to do...  Says Downtown Eastside community  activist Ellen Woodsworth: "I'm going to  paint an anti-APEC image on my bright orange rain poncho and wander around the  city;" and  Says a volunteer at Kinesis, who wishes  to remain anonymous: "I'm going to walk  into the Vancouver Stock Exchange and  throw up on some guy's shiny new Gucci  shoes."  (Other ideas could include: putting an  anti-APEC sign on your lawn or your car  window; flying a kite with an anti-APEC  message on its tail; or staging a protest in a  store that sells Nike products [see page 3.])  For a copy of the Feminist Networking Group's brochure or to find more about  the National Women's Day of Protest  Against APEC, contact the FNG, c/o Vancouver Status of Women, tel: (604) 255-5499;  fax: (604) 255-5511; e-mail: vsw@web.net.  Or call NAC at (416) 932-1718 or toll free:  1-800-665-5124.  VSW has also prepared a 52-page document outlining the history and context of corporate globalization, its impact on women,  strategies of resistance, and a glossary and resource guide. To get a copy, contact VSW.  Second International Women's Conference  Against APEC  Organized by a coalition of women's and labour groups and individual feminists, the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC will take place  in Vancouver, November 17-18, at the Plaza of Nations. The conference is expected  to bring together more than 400 women for discussions and strategizing [see page  12.]  To register for the Women's Conference, call: (604) 291-4023; fax: (604) 291-  5518; or e-mail: rjiwa@arts.sfu.ca. The cost of attending the conference is sliding  scale $0 to $250. There will also be a free reception open to all women on November 16.  Below are some of the highlights from the agenda of the Women's Conference:  Sunday, November 16:  6:00-8:00pm        Open reception at Simon Fraser University, Harbour Centre, 515  W. Hastings St. (Please RSVP at 291-4023)  Monday, November 17:  9:00-10:00am      Keynote Speech will be given by Jeanette Armstrong (Okanagan  Nation, Penticton, BC)  10:00-11:00am    Opening Plenary with speakers on four main themes:  Choung Lai Har (Hong Kong) speaking on Labour  Yayori Matsui (Japan) on Human Rights  Katie Rich* (Davis Inlet, Labrador) on Environment  Sunera Thobani (Canada) on Economic & Social Development.  [* not confirmed]  1:00-4:30pm       Various workshops will be held on the four theme areas and others determined by participants.  November 18:  10:15am-noon    Strategizing around theme areas with facilitators:  Leni Marin (US) on Labour  Bella Galhos (East Timor) on Human Rights  Sarojini Rengan (Malaysia) on the Environment  Tanya Suarez (Mexico) on Economic & Social Development  (Among the issues to be discussed are Popular Education; Researchers' Forum; Community Economic Development; Popular  Theatre/Dance; International Campaigns; Strategies for Migrant  Women)  Noon-l:30pm     Demonstration in Downtown Vancouver  1:30-3:00pm        More workshops on Strategies and Actions  3:30-5:00pm        Closing Plenary and "Call to Action"  NOVEMBER 1997 Feature  Saying NO! to APEC  by Joan Bridget  A grassroots coalition in Vancouver,  called the Network Opposed to Anti-People Economic Control (NO! to APEC), has  been organizing for more than a year to  challenge the imperialist globalization  agenda behind APEC.  The coalition, made up of women,  youths, students, and environmental, social  justice and community groups, has conducted a campaign to educate people about  the negative impacts of free trade. Through  monthly workshops, newsletters, conferences, forums and demonstrations, NO! to  APEC has built a strong resistance leading  up to the APEC Summit.  NO! to APEC activities  On November 21-24, NO! to APEC will  host the "People's Conference Against Imperialist Globalization: Continuing the Resistance!"  The conference will present the coalition's position on APEC and imperialist  globalization; further the gains of the 1996  People's Conference in the Philippines [the  site of the previous APEC leaders' summit];  consolidate the coalition, its members and  supporters; and help build the anti-imperialist movement inside and outside of  Canada. Registration for local delegates is  $100, and for out-of-town delegates is $400  (includes local travel, food, accommodation, and conference costs). [The conference  has been organized by volunteer labour, with  no funding support from government or any  other institutions.]  NO! to APEC will hold a Solidarity  March and Demonstration on November  24, starting at 11:45 am. The march will begin at the Kalayaan Centre, 451 Powell  Street (across from Oppenheimer Park),  and move towards the Trade and Convention Centre/Canada Place. Following the  demonstration, there will be a discussion  at the Kalayaan Centre.  And from November 27-28, the youths  and students of NO! to APEC will be holding the 2nd International Youth and Student  APEC Alert at UBC  by Kelly Haydon  The authorities' reaction to APEC  Alert's anti-Apec activities at the University of British Columbia have become increasingly confrontational. For several  months, the group has been holding actions  to protest the unilateral decision by former  UBC President David Strangway to host the  APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting (AELM)  on campus [see Kinesis, October 1997.]  One of APEC Alert's activities which  has garnered more attention is its weekly  road hockey game in the driveway of current president Martha Piper's house on  campus. Initially, only security guards were  present watching the game, but at their last  game, four RCMP and three security guards  showed up. They informed the activists that  they couldn't play there and, in fact, even  brought in a large truck and parked it in  the driveway to block the game.  Piper's reaction to APEC Alert has also  been interesting. APEC Alert initially wrote  to her about their concerns last February  when Piper was still living inAlberta. They  received no reply. They wrote again at the  end of August when she officially took over  the presidency position. Again, no reply.  Then, in mid-September, they received  a letter from Piper stating her support for  the AELM on campus. In her letter, she  wrote: "what better place than a university  campus to illustrate the immense value of  these democratic principles to the APEC  leaders, the world press, and the international community."  After initially refusing to meet with  APEC Alert members, the president's office contacted the group to set up a closed  door meeting with Piper and four to six  members of APEC Alert. The group refused  these conditions, and invited Piper to speak  at one of their open organizing meetings.  Piper declined the invitation.  APEC Alert activities  APEC Alert has been holding various  workshops and educationals on campus  and elsewhere in the city to help students  and activists confront the APEC agenda.  One workshop, entitled "Colour Connected," focused on the impact of globalization on indigenous peoples and people  of colour, particularly women. On November 8, APEC Alert will be holding an all-  day workshop on civil disobedience.  A tent city called, "Democracy Village," will be erected in front of the Goddess of Democracy statue starting November 17. At the end of the week, students  from other universities will be join in on  the tent city.  Also on November 17, APECAlert will  hold "Voices of East Timor", a mock trial  of Indonesian president Suharto for crimes  against humanity in the killing of hundreds  of thousands of East Timorese people.  APEC Alert will mark the first day of  the AELM, November 24, with "Free University," a campus-wide Teach-in and  Speak-out throughout the day. The event  will feature a panel of local and international activists and music. APEC Alert is  also calling for a "Student Walkout" on both  days that the leaders of the 18 APEC countries will be on campus.  On the morning on November 25,  APECAlert will host a "Lunch with Dictators" as part of is Day of Action Against  APEC. Later, students will join up with the  NO! to APEC march and rally.  For more information about APEC Alert's  activities, contact them at (604) 251-9914; e-  mail: alert@netinfo.ubc.ca; or check out their  website: www.cs.ubc.ca/spider/fuller/  apec_alert  Caucus. Convened by the Asian Students  Association and the Radical Society of New  Zealand, the conference will help to name  what APEC and other free trade agreements  have meant for the majority of people in  the Asia Pacific, and young people in par  ticular. Registration fee is $50 for local delegates and $100 for out-of-town delegates.  For more information about NO! to  APEC's activities, call (604) 215-9190 or 215-  1103; fax: (604) 214-11103; or e-mail:  notoapec@vcn.bc.ca  Artists unite against APEC  by Leanne Johnson  In a continuing attempt to broaden  their community-based support, the NO!  to APEC Coalition put out a call to Vancouver artists to get involved in helping to  get their anti-APEC message out loud and  clear.  Vancouver artists answered the call  and held their first meeting in October. The  meeting was a success, bringing together  more than 30 artists and arts organizations  to form an "Art Against APEC" action plan.  As a result of ongoing planning meetings, several events have been organized  in and around Vancouver to help educate  both the artistic community and the general public on issues surrounding APEC.  Organizer Liz Hardwick says that governments and cultural organizations like  the Vancouver Cultural Alliance have tried  to sway artists into supporting the APEC  agenda [through offers of grant money, as  part of its "Canada Year of the Asia Pacific".]  Government promises of lucrative new  "markets" for artists are being countered  by members of Art Against APEC. How,  they ask, can art and culture survive and  flourish when, in the language of APEC,  countries become "economies" and people  become "human resources"?  The artists involved in anti-APEC  work say they fear a trend towards  trinketization of art and culture. Art that  no longer reflects a culture, but becomes  commodifiable and marketable object in a  supply and demand economy, empty and  meaningless. In such a climate, art that  makes consumers of art "uncomfortable"—  such as feminist, lesbian and gay, and anti-  establishment art—will no longer be encouraged, supported or accepted.  Like APEC, NAFTA (the North American Free Trade Agreement) promised to  open up markets to artists; but in place of  new markets, artists have seen unprecedented cuts to arts funding in this country. The voices of many new and emerging  artists have been lost with recent cuts to the  Canada Council. Cuts to funding slowly  erodes the Canadian cultural identity by  creating a monopoly for art that has strong  financial backing. Entertainment factories,  like Hollywood and Disney, then become  the main deciders of what "art" is produced.  Art Against APEC activities  Art Against APEC is meeting every  Saturday to work on making puppets, murals, banners and other props for various  APEC protest activities.  Art Against APEC will also be holding a Music Festival on November 14, 15  and 20, each day at a different location.  And on November 25, Art Against  APEC will be participating in the NO! to  APEC march and rally starting at  Oppenheimer Park. For that, the artists are  building a big (possibly 40 feet) figure.  Anyone interested in getting involved and  supporting the freedom of Canadian cultural  and artistic expression, should call Art Against  APEC in Vancouver at (604) 253-6316.  Leanne is a local cranky Vancouver-based  writer and arts activist.  (right) No! to APEC protest outside  $400 a plate federal Liberal Party  fundraising dinner. Prime Minister  Jean Chretien stayed inside.  16  KINESIS  NOVEMBER 1997 Review of ExWe Shanghai at the Vancouver international Film Festival:  Nostalgia for a divided city  by Laiwan  EXILE SHANGHAI  Directed by Ulrike Ottinger  Ulrike Ottinger Filmproduktion/Transfax  Film Productions  Germany / Israel, 1997  Exile Shanghai is a test of endurance.  The four and a half hours you need to watch  this film should at least have been some  kind of radical experiment of cinematic  time and space. Unfortunately, Ottinger's  vision is limited. She falls short in translating the f ullness of what is an amazing story  of Jewish exiles living in Shanghai between  1860 and 1949, and also fails to manifest  any cinematic experimentation to which  her past films allude. (Ottinger's previous  films, such as The Image of Dorian Gray in  the Yellow Press (1984), are rooted in experimental filmmaking and narrative.)  Structurally, Exile Shanghai is made up  of interviews with six former members of  the Jewish expatriate community in Shanghai, now all residents of Northern California. Mixed in among long, slow pans of  contemporary land and cityscapes of  Shanghai, these interviews primarily tell of  various memories of arriving there — either having escaped the pogroms in Russia or the Nazis in Europe — and trying to  find a home in what was one of the most  highly colonized cities of China.  The history of modern Shanghai is  unique and must be contextualized by the  history of the Opium War if one is to understand the weak points of this film.  Towards the end of the 1700s, China  had a self-sufficient, pre-capitalist economy  that created many goods like tea, silk and  ceramic china. Europe had little that China  needed, so most of these goods had to be  paid for in silver, which few countries could  do. Meanwhile, Britain had succeeded in  colonizing India and began to grow opium  poppies there as a cash crop. This opium  was exported to China, and although in  1800, opium was banned by Emperor Jia  Qing — he was unsettled by the destructive social effects of the trade — smuggling  and bribery became widespread among  British and Chinese traders.  The rapid escalation of opium addiction and the drain on the Chinese economy  in 1838 caused the Chinese government to  clamp down on and destroy many illegal  British and American opium storehouses.  As this was supposedly an act against freedom of trade, Britain declared war on  China.  In the course of the Opium War, Britain's modern military strength resulted in  China's defeat and humiliating treaties like  the Treaty of Nanjing (1842). This required  China, among many things, to pay Britain  an indemnity of 21 million silver dollars,  grant them most-favoured nation status,  allow them access to five other ports for  trade, and hand over the port of Hong Kong  to Britain. The treaty of Wangxia (1844)  granted similar trade privileges to America  after American troops were sent in to support the British.  Trading made Shanghai a busy port  city where most European ships docked.  The opening of China for trade was considered to be beneficial for the West; however, it was enacted in a way that impoverished China economically and humiliated  the country culturally. Shanghai's urban  geography in the mid-1800s embodied this.  The city was divided among the major European powers so each nation had its own  bordered area (or concession) with its own  laws and languages.  For example, in the French concession,  everyone would be governed by French  law; children would be schooled in the  French language and culture; and social  clubs would exist for French citizens and  allies — primarily the British, Dutch, German, Russian and American. The Chinese  worked as domestics within these concessions but were not permitted to socialize  in the homes or clubs. When Anna Mae  Wong, then a famous American actress, visited Shanghai to promote her film, she  wasn't allowed to go bowling nor enter the  American Club. This made the Chinese  exiles in their own city.  Ottinger's film only touches the tip of  the iceberg in relation to the larger philosophical and historical meaning of the  word 'exile'. (The story of Anna Mae Wong  is one of the few inclusions of the Chinese  experience of exile mentioned in Exile  Shanghai.) She fails to examine the impacting socio-political forces that have created  situations of exile among particular cultures of people, and she also fails to explore  subversive relationships that can exist  within these situations.  Ottinger's first problem is that the six  interviewees she chose tell similar stories.  She films the six speaking with minimal intervention or editing cuts on her part, and  many times details are repeated by interviewees. This may be an 'interesting' exploration in the construction of storytelling or narrative in supposedly 'real' filmic  time, but it becomes absurd in light of the  length of the film and the realization that  something else is being left out. What is not  being told? What has been silenced? What  is wanting to be forgotten?  In 1942, the Japanese who had invaded  China and now governed Shanghai, confined Jewish people to the area of Hongkew,  instead of exterminating them as the Nazis  had directed. Hongkew, full of crumbling,  unhygienic, undeveloped hovels, became  the ghetto for Jewish people of all class  backgrounds in Shanghai. This was the  poverty-stricken centre where Jews lived  among Chinese and both had a common  enemy: the Japanese. For these six interviewees, Hongkew is an unforgettable site.  In light of the type of life many of those  interviewed had in Shanghai before they  were moved to Hongkew, it is clear that  Ottinger's subjects lived among a particular middle and upper class. The fact that  all six now live in Northern California  makes me wonder how Ottinger conducted  her research or how she selected her interviewees. Since there were some 20,000 Jews  who were confined in Hongkew between  1942-45, and not all were of the upper or  middle classes, I wish Ottinger had included stories from other classes.  Ottinger's second problem is her use  of imagery of contemporary Shanghai.  Scattered among sections of interviews,  Ottinger throws in scenes that can be interpreted as "everyChina"—bicyclists  manoeuvering through the crowds and  rain; fish, meat and vegetable markets;  dhows along the docks; modern wedding  preparations; shops and streetscenes. Although she shows us a few historic buildings like the Chinese Conservatory of Music which used to be the Jewish Club, she  also lands up with footage like that of the  Peace Hotel where her camera slowly caresses every wall as she pans an unpeopled  lobby.  I understand that these scenes are  meant to convey the spirit of the era  through architecture. However, the number  and repetition of scenes of "public" spaces  makes me wonder what kind of filming  permits, if any, she had obtained to make  this film. I don't believe in the necessity of  permits, but in a country like China, permits govern what kind of buildings can be  filmed, who can be interviewed and what  kind of contemporary Chinese research can  be included. With or without permits,  Ottinger should have constructed a film  that more accurately portrays China.  In her credits, Ottinger lists the Centre  for Jewish Studies in Shanghai, but we are  never taken there nor told what they study.  It seems a lot of Ottinger's footage of China  are atmospheric or even gratuitous. China  becomes an exotic backdrop for a very particular story, one that could have been  broader in imagination and deeper in spirit.  An example of Ottinger's tokenism of  the Chinese can be seen in her only interview with a Chinese person in this film —  a woman who lived near the Jewish Club.  This woman, beginning to recount her  memories of Jewish exiles and speaking in  Mandarin with subtitles, has hardly said  five sentences when she is drowned out by  music. I'm told this music is usually played  at Yom Kippur. The camera slowly pans  away from her while she's talking. She  thinks she's being heard but her voice is  without sound and the camera has moved  on to caress walls and furnishings.  What is this scene about? Yom Kippur?  Is the cost of translating from Mandarin so  expensive that this is how Ottinger solves  the problem? Is this woman speaking rubbish that she need not be heard? Why include her? Ottinger's intervention in this  interview, while never doing so during the  others, is obnoxious and exemplifies her  bias and conservatism. It also reveals her  wish to control the film's trajectory, and for  a four and a half hour film, her control becomes obvious.  The six interviews barely touch on the  subject of the larger narrative in which their  victimization was implicated. The Holocaust that was happening in Europe and  Germany was minimally referred to  through personal stories of escape, but the  many memories of Shanghai painted a nostalgia for the European tastes and culture  they had brought with them. There are few  stories of interaction with the Chinese people or culture. One interviewee told of a  good Chinese domestic cook who could  make European culinary dishes but personally ate none of it. Images accompanying  this story were of a cook in a public restaurant who is pounding dough with incredible juggling skill and I automatically  thought he was making challa, a braided  Jewish bread, but instead it was Shanghai  noodles.  China of the pre-Opium War and post-  second World War is known to be a country of closed, self-imposed exile. Much of  this came from a fear of invasion and a wish  to be a self-sufficient society. Modern Communist China especially imposed this exile partly to heal the devastation and alienation experienced since the Opium War and  in response to the massive hostility towards  communism in western politics particularly  in the 1950s.  A story of Jewish exiles in China could  be rich with enlightening and empowering  stories of subversion, rebellion against oppression, interracial relationships and a  bridging of cultures. Instead, with Exile  Shanghai, we participate in Ottinger's reminiscing of a lost colonial world that once  existed among a hierarchy of divided exiles.  For information on Hongkew by survivors  and families, see: http://www.bnaibrithwest  .org/rickshaw  Laiwan is an interdisciplinary artist and writer  based in Vancouver, BC. She was born in  Harare, Zimbabwe, of Chinese parents.  NOVEMBER 1997 Arts  Plundering indigenous knowledge:  Biopiracy  by Amy Johnson  BIOPIRACY:  Plunder of Nature and Knowledge  by Vandana Shiva  between the lines  Toronto, Ontario, 1997  Renowned Indian physicist, ecologist  and activist Vandana Shiva has authored a  new book which continues her critique of  western society's violation of nature. In  Biopiracy: Plunder of Nature and Knowledge,  Shiva tackles the new biotechnologies  which are being developed at a rapid rate:  genetic engineering of crops and animals,  using animals as bioreactors, and hormonal experimentation, among others. She  takes aim at the way life is being  commodified, indigenous knowledge is  being stolen, and what's left of communal  biodiversity is being made into private  property.  Biopiracy builds on her previous book,  Monocultures of the Mind, which focuses on  the way European imperialism destroys  diverse indigenous economic, social and  agricultural systems in the South. The forcible imposition of western standards and  methodology brought poverty and instability to the regions of the world most abundant in natural resources.  In her other works, Shiva shows how  the European notion of ownership makes  sustainability impossible to achieve. The  traditional concept of "the commons"—resources which belong to everyone—once  ensured both human and planetary survival. Now that that value has disappeared,  we no longer remember or recognize the  importance of our interconnectedness.  In her introduction, "Piracy through  Patents: The Second Coming of Columbus,"  Shiva characterizes intellectual property  rights and patents (a hot topic at the international trade agreement tables lately) as  mechanisms which perpetuate Eurocentric  notions of knowledge and wealth. The  plundering of the Earth and indigenous  cultures, which began 500 years ago with  colonization, is now proceeding to the level  of the cell, thanks to the availability of new  tools of genetic manipulation.  When the colonizers came to the  Americas, they saw land which they  thought was unowned; they proclaimed it  OUR 6TH ANNUAL  HOME SHOW AND SALE  at the  BIG PEACH GANG STUDIO  Ceramics, artwork and jewelry  Jdv kao and Cynthia Low])^  FRIDAY NOV. 21 7-12  SATURDAY NOV. 22   NOON - 8  SUNDAY NOV. 24        NOON - 8  2814 Trinity Street  one block north of mcglll and renfrew In Vancouver  For more info call 254 9487  We would like to invite you to join in our Friday night  opening party. Great food and good company  exciting door prizes dei/y  ^  &>  cooi cheep stuff.  "vacant." When the indigenous peoples  wanted to use their land as they always  had, the colonizers called them trespassers  and used violence to take it for themselves.  Today, a parallel situation is revealing  itself through "corporate colonization."  Pharmaceutical companies are patenting  traditional healing knowledge of plants and  agri-business giants are buying the rights  to the genetic makeup of seeds—seeds  which have been painstakingly developed  and cultivated over centuries by indigenous farmers. Again, the true "owners" are  being treated as if they are the thieves, and  farmers are now being forced to pay multinationals for the "right" to grow plants  which were part of the commons.  Shiva refers often to the neem tree,  which has been used as medicine and  biopesticides in India for centuries. Its value  was ignored by corporate interests until  recently, when they were pressured to find  alternatives to chemical products. Now,  several American and Japanese companies  are trying to get patents on certain ways of  using the neem, even though Indian companies have long been making the same  products.  These firms justify their claims by arguing that although traditional knowledge  inspired the development of these products, they are sufficiently novel and different from the "source" to warrant a patent.  Shiva uses this example to highlight how  the source—biological resources and indigenous knowledge—is treated as cheap raw  material and as something that accumulates value only after it has been tinkered  with.  In taking apart western views of nature, Shiva illuminates the disasters created  by thinking about living beings as machines. When we shift from seeing animals,  for instance, as having worth just because  they are living beings and only value them  as instruments of production, we remove  all ethical boundaries about how they are  treated. This is done with the goal of maximizing production (and therefore profit).  It is documented that "Stress Syndrome" is common in animals in the livestock factories, ".pigs have to have their  tails, teeth, and testicles cut off because they  fight with each other and resort to what the  industry calls 'cannibalism.' Eighteen percent of the piglets in factory farms are  choked to death by their mother," writes  Shiva. With the development of more biological tools, the stresses and diseases these  animals experience will increase. "Already  the pig with the human growth hormone  has a body weight that is more than its legs  can carry."  In a chapter called "Can Life Be Made?  Can Life Be Owned?" Shiva makes a case  for the importance of ensuring that different life forms can direct themselves in the  search for ecological sustainability. Self-  regulation is intimately connected to a being's healing and regeneration.  "When organisms are treated as machines, and manipulated without recognition of their ability to self-organize, their  capacity to heal and repair breaks down,  Vandana Shiva includes this Palestinian  poem, "The Seed Keeper," in Biopiracy,  saying that in her struggle, she often draws  inspiration from it:  Burn our land  burn our dreams  pour acid onto our songs  cover with sawdust  the blood of our massacred people  muffle with your technology  the screams of all that is free,  wild and indigenous.  Destroy  Destroy  our grass and soil  raze to the ground  every farm and every village  our ancestors have built  every tree, every home  every book, every law  and all the equity and harmony.  Flatten with your bombs  every valley: erase with your edits  our past  our literature; our metaphor  Denude the forests  and the earth  till no insect,  no bird  no word  can find a place to hide.  Do that and more.  I do not fear your tyranny  I do not despair ever  for I guard one seed  a little live seed  that I shall safeguard  and plant again.  and they need increasing inputs and controls to be maintained."  This leads us to examine the issues of  control and power underlying the way we  treat our biological resources. The new biotechnologies reproduce all the old patriarchal dichotomies: male/female, material/  spiritual, active /passive and culture/nature. Nature is still treated as passive and  empty, ready for exploitation and manipulation. Now that the land, oceans and air  have been colonized and polluted, these  biotech tools make it possible to invade and  control those few things which have retained some autonomy. "It is in this sense  that the seed and women's bodies as sites  of regenerative power are, in the eyes of  capitalist patriarchy, among the last colonies."  The scope of Shiva's work has always  been impressive. Once again, in Biopiracy,  she manages to sew together information  from many fields and traditions, turning  out a strong political and cultural analysis  of biotechnology. Some people may find her  writing style a bit academic and perhaps  difficult to get through at times. Although  Biopiracy is technical, I feel Shiva expresses  her deep analysis as clearly as she can.  Her writing can be poetic, and in comparison to some other texts on biotechnology, is relatively accessible to a laywoman.  The strong feminist and indigenous perspective is always apparent in her writing,  as is her activist passion. Vandana Shiva is  not only an accomplished scientist and  writer, she is also one of the most compelling defenders of diversity, biological and  otherwise.  This is Amy Johnson's first time writing for  Kinesis. She has a great interest in issues of  colonialism and neo-colonialism.  NOVEMBER 1997 Arts   Reviews from the Vancouver International Film Festival:  Tragedy, sex, triumph  by Marusya Bociurkiw  For 16 years, the Vancouver International  Film Festival has brought to the city a broad  array of films from around the globe. Marusya  Bociurkiw had a chance to take in a few films  and videos this year, and provides Kinesis readers her reviews. Bociurkiw is a writer, and film  and video maker.  Calling the Ghosts  Directed by Mandy Jacobsen and Karmen  Jelincic  Produced by Bowery Productions  Distributed by Women Make Movies,  New York, New York, 1996  One of the more horrifying revelations  to emerge from the war in Bosnia-  Herzegovina was the fact of Serbian-run  concentration camps. A media community  inured to images of war finally stood up  and took notice when rumours of the  camps began to leak out. This powerful  video documents the experiences of two  Muslim women, Jadranka Cigelj and  Nusreta Sivac, who were interned in  Omarska, the notorious Serb camp, and, in  unflinching detail, illustrates the traumatic  effects of war, rape and displacement on  these and other women's lives.  Structured almost entirely through interviews with Cigelj and Sivac, the video  manages to avoid the pitfalls one might  otherwise expect from an American production company doing a piece on a faraway war. Raw and low-budget, Calling the  Ghosts employs the aesthetics and form of  an activist documentary; there is no soothing movie star narration and no slick production values to distance us from the facts  of this tale.  The privileged backgrounds of the two  primary interviewees opens up some interesting contradictions. Cigelj and Sivac—an  attorney and judge, respectively—describe  themselves as middle-class professionals  oblivious to anything but their own well-  being before the war. "I was an ordinary  woman," says Cigelj, not without a trace  of irony, "worried about my son and my  household appliances." Growing up in the  Bosnian town of Pryedor, she recalls never  thinking twice about anyone's ethnicity,  and only now, as she examines old photo  graphs, does she realize they grew up in  an integrated community composed of  equal numbers of Serbs and Muslims. The  comfort and peace of their idyllic  schooldays, their beautiful summers where  everyone co-existed happily, had, as it turns  out, a thin veneer.  The invading soldiers, their captors,  and even their rapists, were the very Serbs  they had once socialized and worked with.  Racism, at once so personal and so impersonal, had always existed beneath a surface  of tolerance and goodwill.  Calling the Ghosts aptly conveys the  unreal nature of this war, where a small,  sleepy city could become a war zone in a  matter of days. On April 29,1992, the Serbs  seized power in Pryedor. Muslim and Serb  intellectuals were the first targets. Within  weeks, Cigelj, Sivac, 34 other women and  hundreds of men, found themselves in a  concentration camp, where torture, rape  and genocide were the order of the day.  Sivac describes the rooms the women slept  in, stained with the blood of the men who  had been interrogated. At night, the women  were taken out of their rooms, one by one,  to be raped. In the daytime, they witnessed  the killings of their friends and acquaintances: "You see rows of corpses, people you  knew...I called that mental rape, and it was  going on 24 hours a day."  It was a visit by international journalists that saved the lives of these women.  When reporters demanded to see the  Omarska camp, Serbian authorities acted  swiftly to remove the women they had said  weren't even there. Cigelj and Sivac returned to their families, but their lives were  unalterably changed. Like thousands of  other Bosnian Muslims, they left their  homes forever and 'crossed over' into  Croatia. Says Sivac: "It was a way to assist  the ethnic cleansing without the actual  murders."  From here, the video broadens its scope  to look at a community of women refugees  now living in Zagreb, recovering from the  after-effects of rape and torture, yet refusing to stay silent. "They didn't think we'd  talk," says one unnamed refugee. "If they  knew how much we knew, they wouldn't  have let us go." The women are organized,  articulate, and conscious of the continuum  Jadranka Cigelj taking the testimony of a Bosnian refugee in August, 1993  From Calling the Ghosts  of atrocities towards women that happens  in every war.  Sivac is unequivocal in her observations. "What the Serbs had was a planned  strategy to systematically humiliate  women. Simply, to destroy their spirit, to  make women realize that they can't live in  Serb-occupied territory. It was all  planned...All along the goal was ethnic  cleansing.  Better said, "genocide."  To deal with her anger, Cigelj began  working with the Association of Women of  Bosnia/Herzegovina and the Croatian Information Centre, gathering the testimonies  of war victims, "to help those who stayed  behind." Calling the Ghosts concludes with  footage of Cigelj and Sivac attending the  United Nations International War Crimes  Tribunal to testify on behalf of all the witnesses, and to demand the inclusion of rape  in the lexicon of war crimes. As a result of  their efforts, Zejko Mjakic, the commander  of the Omarska camp, was indicted in February 1995, and charged with genocide,  crimes against humanity and war crimes.  However, at the time of the video's release,  he, along with hundreds of others like him  had yet to be apprehended.  Calling the Ghosts recounts, with compassion and acuity, the heroic story of two  women who transformed tragedy into activism. But it also makes a valuable statement about the ways in which women are  affected by war. As Sivac says in the video,  "When they were killing and raping older  women, they were killing and raping living history; when they were raping younger  women they were destroying future generations."  Erotica: a journey into  female sexuality  Directed by Maya Gallus  Swept Away Productions Inc, Ontario,  Canada, 1997  In the current multi-channel universe,  where even golf now has a discourse all its  own, images of female erotica are still as  scarce as hen's teeth. Erotica: a journey into  female sexuality is, in this context, extraordinary, if only because it was made for television—TV Ontario, to be exact.  Featuring a kinky 60-something  dominatrix from Belgium, a Black woman  rapper, a 90-year old sex writer, a butch  drag queen-slash-sex educator, Annie  Sprinkle, and others, this video is kinky,  explicit, and about half an hour too long.  Ten women artists talk about the exploration and depiction of female sexuality in their work. Some are wonderfully  articulate; others aren't. Putting a self-de-  continued on next page  ClamriNeJ rates: $8* for the first  50 words or portion thereof. $4* for  each additional 25 words or portion  thereof. Maximum 200 words.  Deadlines are the 16th of the preceding month. Classifieds must be  prepaid and will not be accepted  over the phone: please mail or drop  off. (Mon-Thurs., 9:30 am - 5 pm).  Deadline to reserve all advertising is always the 16th of the month.  To book your space or for more info call Sur at 436-3825  It'  On, the tnings they know, the very wise,  they will tell you,   Advertise!  No matter what it is you like to uo,  tell other people so they...knew...  mnuch cheaper than the sidle of a dus,  this nnuch-reaa. paper, Kinesis!  Display ada: From a business card size to a full  page, verticals or horizontals. Rates start at  $19*. Full pages at $489*. Discounts begin at 3-  5 consecutive insertions. Don't know how to  design your ad? No problem. Kinesis can do it  for just $25* (25% for one-quarter to full page  ads).  Just need minor changes? One to three lines of  print? Kinesis can do it for a miniscule $10*.  And i  I  »er:  Vou only pay   IA> lax.  Mo r!Sl   for you and m  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, Telephone:(604)255-5499, fax: (604)255-5511  NOVEMBER 1997 Arts  Two or Three Things but Nothing for Sure  Reviews from the Vancouver International Film Festival:  continued from previous page  scribed "amateur writer of erotica"  (Ronnilyn Pustill) next to the deeply  tongue-in-cheek, bawdy, and well-spoken  Annie Sprinkle just doesn't work. Where  Pustill is tentative and vague, Sprinkle is  flawlessly poised, a kind of spin-doctor of  sex.  Then there's Jeanne de Berg, the  smooth-talking dominatrix from Belgium,  juxtaposed against Candida Royalle, a New  York porn producer with nothing to say. It's  hit-and-miss with this piece, and oddly so,  when there are so many great artists out  there. It is also strange that the director  would settle for sophomoric musings  when, even in their own hometown (Toronto), she could have interviewed the likes  of photographer Jennifer Gillmor, female  ejaculation specialist (and theorist) Shannon Bell, poet Carol Camper...the list of vibrant women who make art about sex goes  on and on.  Indeed, a decade's worth of theorizing  and activism around sex and censorship is  given no mention in this film, so that the  cultural work depicted exists with almost  no political context. There's a lot of white  bread on this journey with only one woman  of colour, Lique, an African American rapper, included in the mix. False assumptions  about the 70's—when, supposedly, the entire women's community was anti-sex—  abound, [pioneer lesbian erotica filmmaker] Barbara Hammer and [writer] Jill  Johnston, notwithstanding.  But there's one scene in this video that  has stayed with me. In it, Annie Sprinkle,  performing for a live audience in New York,  muses about her aging body and wonders  if she's too old to do sex work. She describes  (and points out) her wrinkles, sagging  breasts, cellulite and large belly, and it looks  like the performance will end on a sad, resigned note.  But then she takes a second look at her  body, and says, "I think that in a lot of ways,  older women are much sexier than younger  women. There's a kind of ripeness, a juiciness, fire and awesome sensitivity...I think  that older women are now the new sex symbols." It's extremely rare to see sexualized  images of older, or even middle-aged  women, and that alone makes this journey  worth taking. Hopefully, Erotica will appear  on TV screens outside of Ontario sometime  Two or Three Things but  Nothing for Sure  Directed by Tina DiFeliciantonio and Jane  C.Wagner  Women Make Movies, New York, New  York, 1996  There are some works that enter  through your eyes and go straight to your  heart, and you want to pass on its images  and words to everyone that you know. Two  Or Three Things But Nothing For Sure is such  a video.  Produced for Britain's progressive  Channel 4 by American directors Tina  DeFeliciantonio and Jane C. Wagner, this is  a stunning portrait of working class lesbian  writer Dorothy Allison. It's only twelve  minutes long, but it stays with you for days.  Based on writings from three of her  books (Trash, Skin, and Two or Three Things  I know For Sure), the video opens in an uncompromising fashion, withAllison's voice  playing over a landscape shot of her South  Carolina home, saying, "I write stories. I  write fiction. I put on the page a third look  at what I've seen in life: the condensed and  reinvented experience of a cross-eyed  working class lesbian addicted to language,  violence, hope..."  Combining performance footage of  Allison reading her work, interview excerpts, archival footage, dramatic re-enactment and gorgeous special effects, this  work makes the best of the video format,  transforming simple, minimal footage into  a fast-moving montage of dream-like im  agery that slides lyrically back and forth  between memory and history. Old photographs from Dorothy Allison's childhood  are superimposed onto laundry swaying  from a line. Home movie footage flickers  between shots of Allison reading, passionately and shamelessly.  In under fifteen minutes, we learn the  most intimate details of Allison's life: that  she was born into a poor South Carolina  family, and had a stepfather who beat and  raped her throughout her childhood. Her  mother left him but then moved back—they  couldn't afford the hotel that was their refuge—and stayed with him until her death.  Gathering together fragments of language, education and feminist politics,  Allison managed to leave South Carolina  but not the trauma of her childhood. In such  ground-breaking books as Bastard Out of  South Carolina (since made into a Hollywood film) and Two Or Three Things I Know  For Sure, she describes how childhood  sexual abuse "breaks your sense of what's  possible, of what love can do."  But a surprising sense of possibility  and hope radiates from the conclusion of  this video. In an interview sequence  intercut with images of Allison with her  lover and young son, Allison describes her  sexual and spiritual coming home. "At the  point at which I had done enough of the  work, I fell in love with somebody who  could make me believe they loved me. And  she convinced me that she would not let  us go wrong....There are few places in me I  didn't know were broken."  In the past decade, a plethora of accounts and analyses of incest and abuse  have appeared in print and film. This is the  first I have seen to address the issue with  such complexity, precision, and poetic fluency. As much social-issue document as literary portrait, Two or Three Things is an  important contribution to the canon of  feminist video.  Two or Three Things but Nothing for  Sure was screened as part of "Brief Encounters: Lesbian Stories."  11th ANNUAL INTERNATIONAL LESBIAN WEEK  NOVEMBER 16-22, 1997  A week of events by and for lesbians  will be held to celebrate this year's International Lesbian Week in Vancouver. Most  events are sliding scale, wheelchair accessible at some locations, and although there  will not be onsite childcare, subsidies are  available.  KIDS DAY  Sunday, November 16, lpm  Harry's 1716 Charles St.  $0-7  For kids of all ages and their lesbian  caretakers/friends/morns/aunts/etc...  Meet at Harry's at lpm for carpooling to  Bonkers indoor playground in Richmond. The price at Bonkers is $7 for kids  4+, $5 for 2-3 year olds, $2 for younger  kids. Adults are free. ILW's sliding scale  applies, so contribute what you can, and  ILW will pick up the rest! To register and  for carpool information call Laura at  873-5181.  SEXPHILES  Sunday November 16,7pm  Celebrities, 1022 Davie St.  $10/13 at the door  A Benefit for ILW. Sexphiles 1997 is the  third annual paranormal sex show for  women who love women. This year's  variety of the erotic, the exciting explicit  promises to be even better than the real  thing. Dance party follows. Tickets at  Little Sister's, Women In Print and  Harry's. For childcare subsidies or more  info call 669-9110.  DELIGHTFUL YEARLY  KREATIVE EXHIBITION  Monday November 17, l-9pm  Dynamo Art Gallery, 2nd Fl-142 Hastings St  Come view artwork by local dykes. One  day only. This venue is not wheelchair  accessible. For more info call Linda at  645-6412  LESBO BINGO  Tuesday November 18,7pm  Doll & Penny's Cafe, 1167 Davie St.  Entry $0-5 sliding scale, additional cards  50 cents  ILW's third year of "L" for Lesbo Bingo.  Come down with your sweetie and play  a few cards. Exciting guest callers and  lots of prizes and a fun time guaranteed.  Bring the kids.  POOLTOURNEY  Wednesday, November 19  The Lotus, 455 Abbott St.  Admission is free  Come down to the Lotus and shoot some  stick. Lots of great prizes.  LICK ME, SUCK ME, FUCK ME  RAW  Thursday November 20,8pm doors  open at 7:30pm  The Havana, 1212 Commercial Dr.  $0-15  Voices, images and alternative ideas to  tame girl-girl sex. An evening with  slides, video and plenty of discussion.  For childcare subsidies call Kimcha at  254-9054  'D' IS FOR DYKE  Friday November 21,8:30pm  Emily Carr, 1400 Johnston St, Rm 328  $4-10  As part of ILW celebrations, Vancouver's  annual Out On Screen Queer Film &  Video Festival is presenting a retrospective of the National Film Board's Studio  D films and videos. Studio D was the  first publicly-funded feminist production unit of its kind in the world. With a  mandate to provide opportunities for  Canadian women and to provide a  forum for women's perspectives, it  spawned a rich legacy of award winning  social documentaries and talented  filmmakers. Noted lesbian films from  Studio D include Lynne Fernie and  Aerlynn Weissman's Forbidden Love and  Dionne Brand's Long Time Comin . Studio  D was shut down in 1996. For more info  call 688-WEST, ext 2014. For childcare  subsidies call 669-9110.  DRAG KING SHOW AND ILW  WRAPUP PARTY  When: Saturday, November 22,8pm  Where: The Lotus, 455 Abbott St.  Cost: $0-10  An all-star line up hosted by K.C. Dance.  Party and nibbles after the show. For  more info or childcare subsidies call 669-  9110.  NOVEMBER 1997 Bulletin Board  read   this  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or  arts—are invited to one of our next Story  Meetings: Tues Nov 4 and Tues Jan 6 at 7  pm at our office, 309-877 E. Hastings St.  For more information or if you can't make  the meeting, but still want to find out about  contributing to Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. New and experienced  writers welcome. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  December/January 1998 double issue is  from Nov 18-26. No experience is necessary. Training and support will be provided.  If this notice intrigues you, call us at (604)  255-5499. Childcare and travel subsidies  available.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Thurs  Nov 13 at 7pm at VSW, 309-877 E.  Hastings St. For more info, call (604) 255-  6554. Please call before the orientation to  confirm attendance. Childcare subsidies  available.  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  WEAR A RED ARMBAND  On Mon Nov 24, women across Canada  are being asked to wear a Red Armband  as a symbol of their opposition to APEC  (the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation)  and other forms of corporate globalization.  The action was called by the Lower  Mainland Feminist Networking Group in BC  as part of the National Women's Day of  Protest Against APEC [see page 15] The  FNG has also produced an informational  brochure explaining the evils of APEC and  is asking women's groups to endorse the  National Women's Day. For more info call  the Vancouver Status of Women at (604)  255-6554, or e-mail vsw@web.net.  PARTY PARTY PARTY  Martini Mania, Cigar Mistress, Exquisite  Munchies. The Grasshopper Restaurant,  1262 Davie St. Wed Nov 19, 9pm-2am. $5.  DJ Ebony in the house with her unique  mixin' stylze. Music: Hip Hop, House, R&B,  Soul and Disco. Be there or be square!  SHEILA NORGATE  Artist Sheila Norgate and Little Sister's  Bookstore announce a launch of Norgate's  new book, Storm Clouds over Party Shoes:  Etiquette Problems for the lll-Bred Woman  (Press Gang). Mon Nov 17, 7pm at the  Community Arts Council, 837 Davie St,  Vancouver. For more info call 689-4099.  HYSTER-Y OF HIPPOCRATES  Cheryl Hamilton and Kate Barry present  The Hyster-y of Hippocrates and Hypocrisy  at the Helen Pitt Gallery, 882 Homer St,  Vancouver, Nov 7- Dec 13. This exhibit is  an installation of mixed media paintings  that look at the medicalization of women's  bodies in the context of HIV, AIDS and  chronic illness. Opening Fri Nov 7 at 8pm.  For gallery hours and more info call 681-  6740.   SEXUAL HARASSMENT  The Lower Mainland WITT (Women in  Trades, Technologies, Operations and Blue  Collar Work) Association is hosting a talk  on sexual harassment by carpenter, writer  and poet Kate Braid Mon Dec 8 at 6:30pm.  Braid will address sexual harassment in  the workplace, as it specifically relates to  workers' compensation issues. Her talk will  be at Rix's Club, SE2 Building, BC Institute  of Technology 3700 Willingdon Ave,  Burnaby. The event is free. For more info  call the WITT phoneline at (604) 688-9499.  AMAZING GREYS V  Amazing Greys and Amazing Greys in  Training are holding a weekend gathering,  in White Rock, BC, Nov 7-9 to celebrate  women in all our diversities, the energy,  creativity and wisdom of mature women,  and the adventure of aging. This fifth  annual Amazing Greys Gathering will  feature various workshops. The highlight of  the weekend is a "Croning Ceremony"  following a banquet. Registration is limited.  The cost is $95. For more info write  Amazing Greys c/o Wyneja K. Godwin, #7-  15474 Victoria Ave, White Rock, BC, V4B  1H5 or call (604) 541 -1778 or fax (604)  599-4362.   FREE WORKSHOPS  Douglas College in BC's Lower Mainland is  holding free workshops for women attending or interested in attending the college.  The next workshops will be held on Mon  Nov 17, 2-4pm "Relaxation Techniques for  Women" at David Lam Campus, Rm. 1430,  1250 Pinetree Way, Coquitlam. And on  Wed Nov 26, 7-1 Opm the topic will be  "Investing Tips for Women" also at David  Lam Campus. Seating is limited but pre-  registration is not necessary.  BREASTFEEDING CONFERENCE  A conference on becoming breastfeeding  friendly by the year 2000, Breastfeeding:  Nature's Way, will be held in Saskatoon, SK  Nov 13-14. The conference will focus on  the impact and issues of breastfeeding on  the health of women, children and communities and the ways to strengthen and  protect breastfeeding practices in hospitals  and communities. For more info contact  Marg Norum, Continuing Nursing and  Medical Education, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK; tel: (306) 966-7792  or 966-8360; fax: (306) 966-7673.   DYKEWORDS  Dykewords will be hosting literary cabarets  on Thurs Nov 13 and Thurs Nov 27 at  9pm at The Lotus, 455 Abbott St, Vancouver. Readings of works-in-progress by  recent graduates from a fiction workshop at  the Kootenay School of Writing will be  featured. Admission is $1-4. Everyone  welcome. For more info call 685-7777.  WOMEN PAINTING WOMEN  Women Painting Women, a figurative art  exhibit will be held Nov 20 until January  1998 at the Whip Gallery, 209 E. 6th Ave,  Vancouver. The show features works by  Women's Figurative Art Group members  Kate Barry, Isobel Carter, Elizabeth Godley,  Kelly Haydon, marilyn lemon, Shelly  Saville, Lyla Smith and Liz Wilcox. Opening  reception Thurs Nov 20 at 8pm.  RENEE RODIN  Renee Rodin will be reading on Mon Nov  10 at 7:30pm at the VanDusen Room of the  Vancouver Public Library (Central Branch),  350 West Georgia St. She will read from  her book of prose poems Bread and Salt,  as well as some new work. For more info  call 731-8299.   RADICAL WOMEN PUBLIC MEETING  Radical Women are holding an Eyewitness  report in Seattle from the International  Feminist Brigade to Cuba on Thurs Nov 20  at 7:30pm. Seattle Brigadistas will discuss  their recent two-week trip to the island  nation and the resolutions for upcoming  actions passed at the International Solidarity Conference in Havana. Dinner with  vegetarian option at 6:30pm optional, $6.  At New Freeway Hall, 5018 Rainier Ave. S.  Wheelchair accessible. For rides or  childcare call (206) 722-6057 or 722-2453.  FAG-HAG:THE LOVE STORIES  Fag-Hag: The Love Stories, a play by new  Canadian playwright Anne Farquhar,  featured at this year's Vancouver Fringe  Festival, will run from Nov 6-9 and Thurs  Nov 13 to Sat Nov 15 at 11pm at the  Firehall Arts Centre, 280 E. Cordova,  Vancouver. Fag-Hag is the tale of three  women's love relationships with men who  love men. For tickets and info call 689-  0926. All proceeds for the Nov 6 show will  go to A Loving Spoonful.  ANDREA NEEDHAM  Andrea Needham will be speaking at the  Vancouver People's Summit, Thurs Nov  20, 1-4pm as part of her Canadian tour to  educate people about the plight of the East  Timorese people. Needham is one of four  British peace activists who were found  innocent in an English court of charges  arising from $3 million worth of damage  they did to a British Aerospace military jet  (which was going to be sold to the Indonesian government). She will also be speaking in Victoria on Mon Nov 17, 7:30pm,  Rm. 159, Begbie Building, University of  Victoria; in Nanaimo Tues Nov 11 on the  Nanoose Conversion Campaign Walk; in  Comox Wed Nov 12; and on Hornby Island  Fri Nov 14. For more info call (250) 595-  '7955.  JJ LEE - DISSECTION  JJ Lee will be exhibiting her work, Dissection until Sat Dec 6 at the Artspeak Gallery,  233 Carrall St, Vancouver. The work  represented in Dissection continues to  address Chinese-Canadian identity  through aspects of Western painting  techniques. Lee's new work considers the  physical presence of the Asian body,  dissected, analyzed and categorized in  terms of both gender and race. For more  info call 688-0051. .  VANCOUVER NEW PLAY FESTIVAL  The 24th Annual Vancouver New Play  Festival will be held Nov 7-23 at the Arts  Club Revue Theatre, Granville Island. The  festival opens with the world premiere  Criminal by Elizabeth Dancoes, a powerful  and poignant story about women's stoicism. For more info call 685-6228.  JAN PEACOCK INSTALLATION  Jan Peacock is presenting a new video  installation called The Book of Chairs until  Fri Dec 12 at the Western Front, 303 E. 8th  Ave. Peacock's videos re-work imagery in  subtle and poetic ways that decenter both the  narrator and the viewer. Gallery hours Tues-  Sat, 12-5pm. For more info call 876-9343.  NOVEMBER MOTHER'S DAY  The Surrey Art Gallery invites all mothers  and their friends to a non-traditional  celebration with performances by Mom's  the Word, music by the June Katz Trio and  poetry by Diane Laloge on Sun Nov 9, 2-  4pm. Admission is free and child care  available by reserving at (604) 501-5566.  The Gallery is located at 13750-88th Ave,  Surrey, BC; tel: (604) 501-5580.   SHEILA NICKERSON  Sheila Nickerson, former poet laureate of  Alaska, will read from her memoir of  Alaska, Disappearance: A Map on Thurs  Nov 13 7:30pm at Women In Print, 3566 W.  4th Ave, Vancouver. Disappearance is a  potent map of love and loss and how we  find our way back home through the  landscape of the heart. Free admission. For  more info call 732-4128.   PRESS GANG LAUNCH  Press Gang Publishers will launch and  celebrate its fall release of feminist and  lesbian books on Fri Nov 14 at 8pm at The  Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St, Vancouver.  Sheila Norgate will present a slide show of  images from her new book Storm Clouds  Over Party Shoes: Etiquette Problems For  The lll-Bred Woman. Persimmon  Blackbridge will read from her new novel  Prozac Highway and Sheila Baxter from  her new book Still Raising Hell: Poverty,  Activism & Other True Stories. Admission is  free. Complimentary refreshments. Everyone welcome and the site is wheelchair  accessible. For more info call 876-7787.  HIV/AIDS CONFERENCE  The 1998 Women, Children & Youth HIV/  AIDS Conference will be held in Vancouver  Mar 6-Mar 7,1998. This conference will  address the unique needs of women,  children and youth infected with and  affected by HIV disease. The conference  will be held at the Coast Plaza at Stanley  Park, 1733 Comox St. For more info call  (604) 822-2626 or toll free within BC 1-  800-663-0348.   VIDEOWORKSHOP  Video In Studios in Vancouver is offering a  intensive production training workshop,  'The Week-end Shoot," Dec 6-7 from noon-  6pm. Participants will cover technical  aspects of both the new digital camera and  the Hi8 camera. Other topics addressed  include sound recording and microphones,  and basic lighting principles. Cost is $250.  The workshop will be held at 1965 Main St.  For more info call 872-8337.  NOVEMBER 1997  21 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  1  GROUPS  1  SUBMISSIONS  WRITE OUTWEST CONFERENCE  Write Out West, the first Canadian lesbian,  gay, bisexual and transgender writers'  conference will be held Nov 7-9 at Simon  Fraser University Harbour Centre, 515 W.  Hastings St. in Vancouver. The event will  feature readings and panels by Luanne  Armstrong, Persimmon Blackbridge,  Marusya Bociurkiw, Rebecca Brown,  Rosamund Elwin, Janine Fuller, Lizard  Jones, Barbara Kuhne, Lydia Kwa, Larissa  Lai, C. Allyson Lee, Daphne Marlatt, Shani  Mootoo, Kathleen Oliver, Karen X.  Tulchinsky, Betsy Warland and Barbara  Wilson, among others. The fee to attend is  $100. For more info call (604) 254-9222.  WOW FREE READING  Write Out West will host an opening  reception Fri Nov 7 at 7:30pm in the Alice  McKay Room of the Vancouver Public  Library, 350 W. Georgia St. Readings by a  number of individuals including Persimmon  Blackbridge, author of Sunnybrook: A True  Story With Lies and Prozac Highway and  Rosamund Elwin who wrote Asha's Mums.  Attendance is free.  KISS &TELL PERFORMANCE  Kiss & Tell with experimental musician  Emily Faryna will perform That Long  Distance Feeling: Perverts, Politics and  Prozac on Sat Nov 8 at 8pm at the Roundhouse Community Centre, 181 Roundhouse Mews, Vancouver. The performance  piece is a humourous and provocative  collage of sound, image and spoken word.  From Bill Gates, to phone sex to salvation  through psychiatry the work charts a vivid  course through the raptures of urban  lesbian life. Tickets $5-15 sliding scale,  available from Little Sister's, 1238 Davie St,  Women In Print, 3566 W 4th, and Womyns'  Ware, 896 Commercial Dr. Part of the Write  Out West conference.  MATERNAL ART EXHIBIT  Field Notes from Maternal Territories: An  Exhibition About Mothering with artists jil p.  weaving and Margaret Naylor will be held  until Sun Jan 4 at the Surrey Art Gallery,  13750-88th Ave, Surrey. In her paintings,  weaving proposes a science fiction future  where "mothering" becomes the work of a  robot. Paired with these works is a sculptural installation by Margaret Naylor  challenging the stereotypes of mothering  through architectural metaphors for the  mother's body. For more info call 501-5580.  SUSAN MCCASLIN & KATE BRAID  Susan McCaslin and Kate Braid will read  from their beautiful chapbooks of fine  poetry on Tues Nov 25 at 7:30pm at  Women In Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. McCaslin will read from her Letters to  William Blake and Braid from her collection  entitled A Woman's Fingerprint: Georgia  O'Keefe Meets Emily Can. Both books are  published by {mJOther Tongue Press. Free  admission. For more info call 732-4128.  WOMEN AGAINST APEC  The Lower Mainland Feminist Networking  Group is meeting weekly to plan actions  before and during the APEC Summit to be  held in Vancouver November 19-25. In  particular, the FNG is trying to mobilize  women across Canada to participate in the  National Women's Day of Protest Against  APEC on Mon Nov 24 by wearing a Red  Armband and carrying out their own  "Random Acts of Protest." The FNG will  meet every Thursday until the APEC  Summit at 7pm at the Vancouver Status of  Women, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For more  info call (604) 255-6554.   IWD ORGANIZING  The next meetings of the International  Women's Day Committee in Vancouver will  be Mon Nov 10 and Thurs Dec 11 at  7:00pm at the Britannia Public Library  (upstairs), 1661 Napier St. Women are  welcome to join in the planning for the  March 1998 events. For further info call  Claire at 708-0447.   POSITIVE WOMEN'S FUNDRAISING  The Positive Women's Network (PWN) is  trying to raise funds by selling the 1998  Vancouver Entertainment Book. The books  are $46, with the proceeds going to fund  PWN's Wellness Program. To order call  Nancy Pang at 681-2122 ext. 200, or visit  PWN at 1107 Seymour St. in Vancouver.  WOMEN'S LEGAL CLINIC  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver and University of British  Columbia Law Students Legal Advice  Program are co-sponsoring free legal  clinics for women on alternate Tuesdays  from 6:30-8:30pm. Next clinic day Nov 10.  To make an appointment or for more info  call 822-5791.   REDEYE ON COOP RADIO  The Redeye program on Co-op Radio,  102.7FM is looking for new volunteers. The  program covers current events, ideas and  culture, from a progressive perspective.  The show is looking for people to write  scripts, suggest stories, organize interviews, operate the controls and host. No  experience necessary. For more info call  Karen at 254-0007.  Support Canada's  sole remaining  national feminist  monthly  FIREMOON  Firemoon: Asia-Pacific Wimmin's Alliance  welcomes all women of mixed, partial or  full Asian and/or Pacific Islander heritage in  the Lower Mainland to discussion groups,  potlucks, rallies and more. For more info or  to suggest discussion topics call Naomi at  473-9575 or e-mail boun@sfu.ca.  LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS  The Breast Implant Centre of BC is holding  info and support sessions on Living with  Chronic Illness. The next sessions will be  held on Nov 18, Nov 25 & Dec 2 in the  evening. Topics of discussion will include:  loss and grief, sexuality, and strategies that  seem to help. Call (604) 875-2013 for more  info, time and venue.  HEALING FROM WITHIN  Healing from Within is a support group in  Vancouver for people who have lost their  children to foster care. The group meets  every second Friday at 6pm at 638 Alexander St. The group allows people a space to  learn how to successfully deal with social  workers, financial aid workers, lawyers and  children and partners, among other things.  Transportation, meals and children's gifts  are provided. For more info call Alison at  (604) 254-1389. Space is limited, so please  call to confirm.  RAPE RELIEF  Vancouver Rape Relief and Woman's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Training sessions are on Tuesday  evenings. For more info and for a training  interview call (604) 872-8212.  APVEHTBSE  M XOUEGBS  call: (604) 255-5499  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS a OTHER MEDIA  Discounts for  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 732-1128  welcome  lax       604 732-1129  10-6 Daily  ♦   12-5 Sunday  Help  Social Work student needs your help  I'm a pro-choice feminist seeking input on the need for post-abortion support.  If you experienced emotions (grief, guilt, confusion, etc.) after having an abortion, and you feel  that you could have benefited from a post-abortion support group, or from counselling, I'm  interested in your story.  Our conversation will be anonymous, confidential, and sympathetic, since I have come to this  research project through personal experience.  Please contact Beth: Monday through Wednesday, or Friday, from 9 a.m to 9 p.m.  687-0859 or e-mail me at skypilot@dowco.com  VIOLENCE AGAINSTWOMEN  FREDA (the Feminist Research Education  Development and Action Centre) in  Vancouver is analyzing policies in British  Columbia affecting women in or leaving  abusive relationships. The project will  include an annotated bibliography of all  research dealing with violence against  women in BC, and a critical analysis of BC-  based policies. FREDA is seeking input,  particularly unpublished research reports,  needs assessments and curriculum  materials. Contact FREDA at SFU Harbour  Centre, 515 W. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC,  V6B 5K3; tel: (604) 291-5197; fax: (604)  291-5189; e-mail: mhmorrow@sfu.ca.  SPIRITUALITY ANTHOLOGY  Calling all writers, story-tellers & oracles,  sherece taffe & Sister Vision Black Women  and Women of Colour Press been waitin' to  hear your views, opinions, stories, anecdotes, critiques and whatever else ya got  about all Religions/spiritual/ritualistic and  ceremonial denominations. All Black and  Brown ("of colour") dykes, lesbians, bi/  sexual, gay wimmin and queer gals, send  yo stuff now to sherece taffe at Recovering  c/o Sister Vision Black Women and Women  of Colour Press, PO Box 217 Stn E,  Toronto, ON, M6H 4E2. Deadline is Feb 15,  1998.   CHILDREN OF EXILE  Children of Exile is an anthology of men  and women of colour who were raised in  white families or institutions: Native people  who as children were in residential  schools; Asian children adopted out of  Bangladesh, Korea, Vietnam, etc; Black  and racially mixed children who were  Dahl findlay Connors & Evans  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS   ^  • A full range of services to meet your business and  personal legal needs  • Free initial consultation  • Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW  NOVEMBER 1997 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  adopted or fostered in White homes;  children of colour who went through a  White system of group homes or other  juvenile facilities. What was your experience like? Send essays, articles, letters,  journalings, artwork, photography, interviews, etc. to Carol Camper, c/o Sister  Vision Press, PO Box 217, Stn E, Toronto,  ON, M6H 4E2. Include a self-addressed  stamped envelope if you want your work  returned. Deadline is Feb 15,1998.  BLACK LESBIAN ARTISTS AND  POETS  Kuumba, a Black lesbian and gay journal  based in the US, is accepting ongoing  submissions of poetry and artwork.  Kuumba is dedicated to the celebration of  the lives and experiences of Black people  "in the life." For more info contact Mark  Haile at BLK Publishing Company, Box  83912, Los Angeles, CA, 90083-0912; or  call (310) 410-0808, fax (310) 410-9250, e-  mail newsroom@blk.com.  WOMEN ANDTHE MILLENNIUM  Papers are invited for submission to be  included in Women and the Millennium,  edited by Somer Brodribb. This collection of  essays will explore, within the frameworks  of women's lives, some of the questions  feminists are considering at the turn of the  millennium. Deadline for proposal Nov 28.  For more info contact Somer Brodribb,  Department of Women's Studies, University  of Victoria, Victoria, BC, V8W 3P4. Call  (250) 472-4277, fax (250) 721-7210, or e-  mail brodribb@uvvm.uvic.ca for more info.  LIVING UNDER FUNDAMENTALISM  Submissions from women are wanted for  an anthology on the experience of living  under religious fundamentalism. Short  stories, poetry and first person experiences  to a maximum of 3,000 words are requested. For more info contact Deb Ellis,  PO Box 204, Dunnville, ON, N1A 2X5 or  call (905) 774-8091. Deadline is May 31.  STRANGE FRUIT  Dark visions and distant gardens bear  Strange Fruit, a new literary magazine  giving voices to writers of colour. Now  looking for submissions of poetry, short  fiction, book reviews, graphics, critical  essays, interviews, short plays, experimental works. Send writing to Strange Fruit, 1A  Vermont Ave, Suite 37, Toronto, ON, M6G  1X6. Enclose SASE to receive reply. For  more info call (416) 533-4761.  CLASSIFIEDS  LAURA JAMIESON CO-OP  Laura Jamieson Housing Co-op is accepting applications for 1,2 and 3 bedroom  units. Monthly housing charges from $559-  821. No subsidy available. Active participation is enjoyable and necessary. Share  purchase ($1500) required. Great eastside  location and wonderful people. For an  application, send SASE to: Membership  Committee, 100-1349 E. 2nd Ave, Vancou-  ver, BC, V5N 1C4.   COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.   WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.   FRASER RIVER PLACE CO-OP  Fraser River Place Co-op is accepting  applications for 1-3 bedroom units. No  subsidies, shares are $1600. Housing  costs are $667-977. Participation required.  S.A.S.E. 530 Ginger Dr, New Westminster  BC, V3L 5K8.   ENERGY BALANCING  Empowerment through realignment of  body, heart, mind and soul. Artemis Fire,  B.S.W, B.A.T. 215-9400. Sliding scale.  DESERT ARTISTS RETREAT  Desert Writing and Painting experience for  women. Tuscon, Arizona. Feb 23-Mar 2,  1998. Creative nonfiction, poetry, fiction,  painting. Cost is US$730, and includes  room and meals. Phone (250)598-6034; or  e-mail: jlightwater@pacificcoast.net.  LYDIA KWA  Lydia Kwa, Ph.D., clinical psychologist in  private practice, works with clients dealing  with a wide range of issues. Central  downtown Vancouver location. For appointments, call (604) 682-5818.  A Beautiful Place  5 acres of forested foot paths with  ponds, ocean and mountain views.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  1207 Beddis Road, Salt Spring Island, BC V8K 2C8  A woman-owned and operated business specializing in defensive driver training.  Driver Improvement and Retraining  Become a confident and safe driver with an experienced instructor.  WHYWEHAVEABODY  Why We Have a Body is a comedy  written by Claire Chafee which will  be produced by Random Acts at  the Havana Cafe, 1212 Commerc  Dr. in Vancouver Nov 7-15.The play  is directed by Jackie Crossland,  and will be performed by Erin  Graham, Rosanne Johnson, Nora  D. Randall andTaylor Stutchbury.  In the play, the four women are all  searching for something—the  mother is an explorer, one daughter is a private investigator, and the  other holds up 7-11 stores. Along  comes a heterosexually married  paleontologist and everybody has  questions.  This hit play has b  San Francisco where it received  ,and in New York  . _ . 'roject where it  received Newsday's George  Oppenheimer Award.  Why We Have A Body will be performed Fri Nov 7 and Sat Nov 8 at  8pm, Sun Nov 9 at 2pm, Fri Nov 14  and Sat Nov 15 at 8pm, and Sun  Nov 16 at 2pm. Tickets are $8-12  sliding scale. Call 874-3482 for  advance tickets, or pick them up at  Little Sisters, 1238 Davie St. or  Urban Empire, 1108 Commercial Dr.  Tickets also available at the door.  Photo by Jehn Starr.  Join V.S far a  CeCe6ration r  of 'Books  I SHULfl liUfl  Press Gang Publishers  Fall 1997 Launch  November 14th 1997, 8:OOpm  HERITAGE HALL, Vancouver  3102 Main Street (at 15th Ave.)  Storm Clouds Over Party Shoes:  Etiquette Problems for the lll-Bred Woman by  Sheila Norgate puts a hilarious and artful  twist on the rules of "good breeding."  Includes 30 colour prints.  Prozac Highway, a new novel by  Persimmon Blackbridge, delves into  Internet romance, pharmaceutical remedies  for life, and aging rebelliously.  Still Raising Hell-. Poverty, Activism and  Other True Stories by Sheila Baxter is an  inspiring account of community activism  in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside.  Readings • Book Signings • Door Prizes  Refreshments • Much Fun!  Free Admission • Wheelchair Accessible  For more info:  604/876-7787 • www.pressgang.bc.ca  "^ Co-sponsored by Women In Print  NOVEMBER 1997  i let KINESIS  CONNECT YOU WITH .  AROIJP) THE WORLD.  LIB1Z8 4/98  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC V6T 1ZB  SUBSCRIBE TO-DAY!  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name_  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to women prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Address—  Country   Telephone.  Postal code.  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1