 I  WWJ/BM*  1 Rape is not debatable.  That's the response of women's groups to local CKVU  and the reason why they've  called a boycott of the station.  3 Six individuals from  Morgentaler's Winnipeg free  standing abortion clinic  were arrested on charges of  conspiracy to perform an  abortion. Jan DeGrass reports.  6 Just what did go on in  the courtroom during Victoria's Red Hot Video trial?  Women Against Pornography monitored the proceedings and present an  analysis of 'the circus' they  witnessed.  13 This month Kinesis includes a supplement on lesbian women and some of  the issues raised during the  recent B.C. Regional Lesbian Conference.  July/Aug. '83  17 Sara Diamond traces  the history of the lesbian  movement and the emergence of a distinct lesbian  politic.  22 Women in England are  at the forefront of anti-  nuclear actions. Emma Kivisild reviews 'Over Our Dead  Bodies: Women Against the  Bomb', an anthology of writings by Britain's feminist  activists.  23 Women artists have  become a solid part of Vancouver's Folk Festival weekend. Janie Newton-Moss  talked with staffer Susan  Knutson about this year's  line-up.  24 Barrier birth-control  requires some knowledge  and skill to use effectively.  Two collectives are working  with women in Vancouver,  fitting both diaphragms and  cervical caps.  COVER: graphic & design by Claudia MacDonald.  SUBSCRIBE TO KiMMJiS  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  .□ VSW membership - includes Kinesis subscription -  $20 (or what you can afford)  D  Kinesis subscription only - $13  D  Institutions - $40  □ Sustainers - $75  Name   .Amount Enclosed_  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding — we need member support!  news about women that's not in the dailies  Lesbian Issues Supplement  Lesbian Conference Report  Nurturing Long Term Relationships  Provincial Connection  A History of the  Lesbian Movement  Nicaragua's Healthcare Campaign  A Life of Art:  Asian Women Artists in Canada mwm  Victoria Women Report on Red Hot Video Trial KMESiJ  Women call boycott  Despite the rain, more than 200 demonstrators turned up on the steps of CKVU television on the evening of June 16th to protest the station's refusal to retract a  statement made by CKVU editorialist, Doug  Collins, endorsing violence against women.  During the May 12th "Vancouver Show", Collins unleashed a barrage of sexist and  vicious criticisms against the existen<  a newly funded feminist group called Media  Watch. These comments included the now  notorious statement: "If there is ever  another conventional war, it is my hope  that Media Watch and its army of snoops  will be found in the front lines where  they can be raped by the Russians."  Collins, well known locally for his rabid  anti-feminism, enjoys considerable freedom in the media to voice his views. In  f addition to_CKVU editorials, he broadcasts a talk show for CJOR radio station,  writes for The Columbian  (a newspaper) and  The Vancouver five:  Supporter faces trial  Toronto - A Toronto woman has been charged  with procuring an abortion, and with theft  and possession of stolen goods relating to  the charge. Her supporters say the charges  constitute police harrassment.  Colleen Crosbie, a Toronto nurse, was charged several days after approximately 15  police officers raided the east-end home of  five Toronto political activists.  The police were armed with search warrants  for evidence leading to possible charges  relating to procurring an abortion, seditious libel, sabotage of Litton Industries  in Rexdale, Ontario, and a firebombing in  Montreal'. Of these, only the Charges dealing with procuring an abortion were laid.  Among items listed on the warrants were  copies of Bulldozer,   a prison reform magazine; correspondance between one household  member and three Vancouver activists; and,  "Trial by Media", a video tape on media  coverage of the arrests of the Vancouver  Five.  Although some household members have been  active in the local Free the Five Campaign,  a member of the Colleen Crosbie Defense  Committee said, "Collen's involvement with  the Free the Five campaign and Bulldozer  was non-existent. She was the weak link."  On her arrest, police reportedly drove  Crosbie around Toronto asking her only  about last October's bombing of Litton,  which manufactures guidance systems for the  cruise missile. She was then taken to an  interrogation room. "It appears the charges  against Crosbie are being used as harrass  ment", said the spokesperson, "to try to  gain information on the other people in  the house." Police have yet to make a  Toronto connection in the Litton bombings.  There has been speculation that police  would like to have a test case to advance  the cause for the proposed new civilian  police force. That the police have had to  dig deep would seem apparent by the seditious libel charge (advocating without  proper authority the overthrow of the  government by force), a charge that has not  been laid in Canada for 30 years.  The Colleen Crosbie defense committee will  be working to get support from local feminists and pro-choice activists who have  also been busy supporting the Morgentaler  clinic which opened here in June.  In a statement the defense committee said:  "in regards to the charge itself, (Crosbie)  has admitted to nothing. However, we believe that the state has no right to even  raise such a charge in the first place.  Abortion should be out of the criminal  code altogether...It is currently illegal  to even attempt to end a pregnancy with the  use of simple herbs which have been used  for this purpose for centuries."  A defense fund is currently being established. Meanwhile Colleen Crosbie has been  released on her own recognizance with orders to report once a month. The preliminary hearing has been set for Sept. 16.  Crosbie is being represented by well-known  civil rights lawyer Clayton Ruby.  continued on p. 4  writes for many smaller  pepers.  Media Watch and women's organizations chose  to focus their demand for a retraction on  the management of CKVU who can be held  responsible by law for statements broadcast over their station.  Upon hearing that CKVU refused to apologize  to Media Watch, a strategy meeting was  called by various women's groups out of  which emerged the decision to organize a  boycott of CKVU. Community groups and individuals were encouraged to endorse the boycott which meant the refusal of any services,  assistance with background research or any  interviews, in or out of the studio.  The June 16th demonstration was planned to  formally announce the boycott and to show  CKVU the broad range of community protest  against Collin's remarks.  Speakers at the demonstration demanded that  CKVU apologize for Collins remarks. Lorri  Rudland of the Vancouver Status of Women  said, "Collins called his remarks a 'fun'  piece and dismissed the women's groups who  protested as "humourless wretches". We  don't think that advocating hatred and violence against women is funny. We call it  hate propoganda."  Frances Wasserlein of Women Against Violence  Against Women/Rape Crisis Centre stated  that there is nothing frivolous about rape,  nothing light or entertaining.  "Rape is a terrifying experience for women  and for children. There is a war. We are  in the front lines. We know that girl babies  as young as three months old are raped, we  know that women in their nineties are raped.  We know that each and every woman among us  is vulnerable to rape.  For anyone to say he hopes we will be raped,  that he wants us to be raped shows us, yet  again how much we are hated and feared,  and how much ignorance there is in our  world."  Also included amongst the speakers was a  Native Indian woman from Courtenay, Donna  Tindall. Tindall asked, "What is the use of  dealing with moral issues, with people who  have no moral standards and do not even  abide by their own laws." She noted that  Collins had also made racist remarks against  Native Indians, calling them "snivelling  losers".  Boycott co-ordinators Megan Ellis of Women  Against Violence Against Women/Rape Crisis  Centre, and Lorri Rudland of the Vancouver  Status of Women have received 58 endorsements  from a wide variety of community groups and  government officials. In addition to women's  groups such as those noted above, the BC.  Federation of Women, Port Coquitlam Women's  Centre, Battered Women's Support Services,  the Feminist Counselling Association of BC  and the S.F.U. and U.B.C. Women's Centres  endorse the boycott.  Also included are the BC Teacher's Federation Status of Women Committee, the Canadian Federation of Students, Pacific Region,  the BC Civil Liberties Association, Downtown  Eastside Residents Association, the U.B.C.  Center for Continuing Education, and the  International Committee Against Racism. The  Association of University and College Employees, Local 2 and Local 6 from S.F.U.  have pledged their support as have SORWUC,  CUPE 2396, and the BC Federation of Labour  Unemployment Coalition.  Four City Councillors, Davies, Ybrke,  Erickson, and Rankin, support the boycott  continued on p. 8 2   Kinesis   July/Aug '83  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Women confront  male attackers  Two women walking arm and arm down a Vancouver residential street one night in early  June received a barrage of crude and obscene  remarks from a man sitting on a curb. When  one of the women went over to confront him  with a kick his three friends came out of  the house , grabbed the woman, and repeatedly punched her in the face. They threatened  to rape her, but finally the women broke  away.  The result of this street attack was a well-  organized confrontation the following night  at midnight. Women at Rape Relief spent the  earlier part of the day calling individuals  and groups to let them know of the incident  and the plan to confront the men involved.  About 100 women gathered in a nearby park  and then walked silently to the house in  the 3000 block of Dumfries street, leaf-  letting cars and residences along the way.  The women were met by the men and two women  who were all waiting for them outside. They  gathered on the opposite side of the street  and let out a howl, banging pots and blowing whistles. A woman with a megaphone told  the neighbourhood what kind of men lived  in the Dumfrie street household. Neighbours  were mostly appreciative of the action and  several phoned in the following day, some  of whom left their names and phone numbers  to be contacted in case of further action.  The action was put together by women from  Press Gang and Rape Relief.  Support appeal  for battered women  by Rae Gabriel  Battered Women's Support Services(BWSS)  needs your support. On July 18, 1983 we  will officially begin our first Fund  Raising Campaign. At present, BWSS is funded by Secretary of State and Family Services of Greater Vancouver, however, both  of these funding sources have reduced their  grants for 1983 and Family Services will  be unable to provide any monetary support  in 1984.  It is therefore necessary to seek alternate forms of funding. The purpose of this  campaign is two fold. First, we need to  raise approximately $20,000 to fund the  Support Group Programme for the coming year,  next we wish to increase our visibility in  the community so that when we approach  foundations, unions and corporations for  grants they are familiar with our organization and the types of services we provide .  BWSS was founded in the fall of 1979 in  order to promote services to battered  women and to act as an educational resource  on the issue. The organization focuses on  three main areas: support groups for battered women, educational work, and liaison  work between battered women and those who  work with them. BWSS provides leadership  training for women interested in becoming  support group leaders, and sponsors support groups for women who have been or are  in battering situations. These groups run  from 8 to 12 weeks. They consist of a leader and about ten women who together provide the members of the group with emotional support and practical assistance in  dealing with their situation. This service  is provided free of charge to battered  women and child care and transportation  expenses are supplied where necessary.  BWSS is also involved in research projects.  At present research is being done in the  area of battering of teenage women in non-  cohabiting relationships. In the fall of  1983 BWSS is planning a training programme  for Legal Advocates who will accompany  battered women to Family Court. These advocates will provide practical information  concerning court structure and procedure  as well as emotional support.  There are a number of ways in which you  can give your support. You can dig down  deep into your pockets and see if you can  come up with a donation. As we are a nonprofit, charitable organization your donation is tax deductible. If you are unable  to make a monetary contribution but are  interested in the issue and would like to  work on the campaign, please call and volunteer your services. Or watch for our  calendar of events that will be posted in  women's centres, women's bookstores, VSW,  etc. and support one of these events. Your  presence increases our visibility. For  those of you who have already made donations  in response to our fund raising letter, we  would like to take this opportunity to thank  you. We have had a few very generous donations and a good number of small ones. As  of June 15, we had reached $1,500.00. It's  a start but we have a long way to go before  we ^ach our goal.  Prostitute denied  visiting rights  The Alliance for the Safety of Prostitutes  (ASP) is calling for a letter writing campaign to support Roberta McQuaid's attempt  to re-instate her right to have visitors  while in prison. McQuaid is a Vancouver,  prostitute convicted of the self-defense  murder of a male customer in October,  1982. She is currently serving her three  and a half year term at Kingston Penitentiary.  Last month, McQuaid and two other prisoners  went on a rampage over their frustration  with the attitude of the administration at  the prison. For this, she was placed in  punitive segregation - isolation from  other prisoners - and all visiting privileges were terminated.  McQuaid wants to appeal the part of the  decision which revokes her visiting rights.  The fact that she was pla.ced irt a prison  2,000 miles from her friends and family,  leaving her with very few visits anyway,  makes this decision seem unnecessarily  harsh. The few visits she could receive  are now cancelled.  Letters of support to McQuaid and appeal  letters to Warden Caron can be sent to:  P.O. Box 515, Kingston, Ontario, K7L 4W7.  Save Langara's  women's studies  Women"s Studies has been cut at Langara,  Vancouver Community College. We appeal to  all to support us in a letter writing campaign, urging the refunding of this essential program. If you have been a Women's  Studies student, or would like to be one,  if you have the backing of any agency or  group or if you operate in isolation,  please stand with us, now.  We believe that if enough support and outrage is expressed to the college, there  is a chance of success in the reinstatement of this programme. Following are  some facts you may find useful in a letter  of support:  •Because of budget cuts, more than 80  courses have been cut at Langara. However,  Women's Studies is the only programme to be  cut, through eliminating its one remaining  course'.  •Women's Studies instructors receive 3/32  (sic) of a term instructor's salary. The  monthly cost in salaries for mounting a  Women's Studies Course, thus maintaining  the program, is less than $1000 per month;  $4000 per term.  •By not offering Women's Studies in 1983,  the college will disrupt the instructional  continuity of a 10 year old programme. It  will also disrupt students who would take  both W.S. 116, and W.S. 216 in preparation  for entry to an upper levels programme in  Women's Studies, such as the minor programme at Simon Fraser University.  The Women's Studies program at Langara is  10 years old. It is an interdisciplinary  program where three or four instructors  from a range of academic backgrounds team-  teach the course. Every instructor has been  actively involved in the women's movement  for some time prior to her employment at  Langara.  More than 500 students have taken Women's  Studies courses at Langara. In 1983, the  program was evaluated by internal examiner  Cindy Nagel, and external examiner Dr.  Margaret Benston of SFU. Langara's Academic  Council has accepted their recommendations  that women's studies continue at the college  as presently constituted; a separate discipline, with interdisciplinary methodology,  and with a feminist approach.  We encourage you to write a letter supporting the program. Letters should be sent to:  Mr. A.S. Manera, President, Vancouver  Community College c/o King Edward Campas,  1154 E. Broadway, with a copy to:  Frances Wasserlein, Langara Women's Studies  Advisory Committee, c/o 301-2515 Burrard  Richmond legal  clinic now open  The Richmond Community Legal Information  Office will be reopening foru direct  client services on June 20, 1983. This -  has been made possible by grants from the  Law Foundation and the Legal Services  Society of B.C., under the sponsorship  of the Richmond Women's Resource Centre  with support from the municipality of  Richmond which has provided a temporary  office location at the Municipal Hall,  6911 No. 3 Road until the end of August.  The office will be open to the public  Monday-Wednesday, 9:30 to 4:30 and Thursdays, 6-9p.m.  The Legal Information Office is staffed by  a legal information counsellor and volunteers, with the backup resource of a consulting lawyer. Legal information will include: landlord, tenant and co-op law,  family law, consumer law, as well as unemployment and welfare benefits and appeals. Workshops are scheduled to take  place throughout the year.  The service is free and confidential and  is open to people on low or fixed incomes.  We also have free legal pamphlets available. For further information, contact  Penny Goldsmith at 270-7710.  Women's Bookstore  marks anniversary  July '83 marks the 10th anniversary of the  founding of the Vancouver Women's Bookstore. The present collective is planning  two events to celebrate this milestone.  On July 14, they will host a party to be  held at Women in Focus (456 W. Broadway)  starting at 8p.m. There will be food,  taped music for listening and dancing and  a no host bar. All women are cordially  invited to attend. The bookstore is  attempting to contact women who have been  collective members over the years through  a careful reading of their old log books.  However, most names are just first names,  and even though one of the original collective members is still active, she isn't  able to call to mind everyone who has been  involved over the years.  If you are one of those women and are still  living in the area, you are urged to make  this a reunion as well.  The second event planned is a "Tea-Sale"  that will be held at the store (322 W.  Hastings St.) on Saturday, July 23 from  1-5:30p.m. As usual, there will be 10% off  on all purchases and refreshments. July/Aug '83   Kinesis   3  ACROSS B.C.  Correctional centre  Transitional  service threatened  British Columbia's only community correctional facility  for women is in danger of  being shut down because of  Socred budget cuts. The Lynda  Williams Correctional Centre  is a minimum security correctional facility that provides  those women who have very-  short' sentences, or long-term  sentences that are almost  over, with a chance for integration into the community. It  is a house in a residential  neighbourhood from which inmates can come and go with  varying degrees of freedom,  and so are able to hold down  jobs, do volunteer work, or go  to school, as well as meet  people outside the correctional system. There are three of  these Community Correctional  Centres(CCC's) for men in the  province.  It proved difficult to confirm  rumours about the slated closure. Corrections commissioner  Bernard Robinson partially confirmed them in an interview  with the Sun  where he said  closure was under active con  sideration. The corrections  branch has been forewarned of  cutbacks, but says it will not  know how severe until the  attorney-general's department  budget is presented in the  legislature. Prisoners believe  they may be sent back to Oakalla or Twin Maples as early as  the beginning of August.  In the case of this institution, financial restraint  makes very little sense as a  rationale for closure. For one  thing, with so many (relatively) men's CCC's in B.C., the  elimination of the only community facility for women is blatantly discriminatory. Furthermore, as the inmates point out  it costs a great deal($40,000)  to keep a prisoner at Oakalla,  where the women well go if  Lynda Williams closes. The  centre has the capacity of 16  residents with as.many as 35  passing through on short sentences every two months. They  postulate that the salaries  saved by closing the centre  could in no way justify losing  it.  However, in some ways the  move comes as no surprise.  Lynda Williams opened six years  ago only after a very long  struggle, and was threatened  three years ago on the grounds  that it didn't service enough  women. A community -petition  and extensive lobbying kept it  open. The community has accepted the centre only on the  agreement that it is for women.  The question arises what use  the government, will have for a  recently renovated correctional facility once it ceases to  function as a transition point  between Oakalla and Twin Maples  and the outside world.  The residents feel very strongly about the value of the Centre: "This way you're not free  with nothing. How could I find  an apartment from Oakalla? Here  I can make money and save money.  I don't have to get-out and go  right downtown and turn a  trick."  "And you're meeting straight  people who can turn you around.  You don't just go right back  where you started."  "Some women have families in  Vancouver. Here they can keep  in touch with their families.  Their kids can come visit, and  a lot of them wouldn't be able  to find transportation out  there."  Some women are better suited  to the program than others:  "It's still jail. It's difficult being only six inches  by Miljenka Zadravec  One in three women will be  sexually assaulted by age  eighteen.  Every 17 minutes a  woman is raped.   One in ten women will be battered by the  man she lives with.  A child is  abused every day.   Violence  and abuse are a continuous  reality for women and children.  Every woman knows the fear,  the threat of violence even if  she believes she's never been  violated. We've all felt it,  we're all affected by it, and  we all need to find ways to  empower ourselves and stop the  violence.  This summer three women are  researching a relatively unexplored area within that continuum of violence. The focus  of the research is younger  women who are being abused by  male friends that they don't  live with. We are trying to  understand what the situation  is for these women,-what the  factors are that keep them  within these relationships and  what support systems they need,  The focus is on women who are  not living with men who batter  them, to find out how these  relationships are different  from those where a woman lives  with her batterer.  We know from research on wife  battering that abuse happens  on many levels: physical,  psychological and sexual, and  that there are many reasons  why women remain trapped within  these relationships. One rea-.  son is economic dependence  and another major reason is  the obstacles set up by a  society that "loves its central lie - that marriage means  happiness - and hates the woman that stops telling it,  even to save her own life."  (Andrea Dworkin)  But what keeps younger women  who are not trapped by marriage in these relationships?  This question was posed to two  different high school women's  studies classes. The responses  were varied, with a lot of women focusing on why they  thought the men were being  abusive.  "I used to let him hurt me.   I  thought I deserved it. "  "I think he felt I was getting  the better of him in an argument and he always had to be  right. "  "Emotional insecurity,   lost  his job,   lost his family."  "He couldn't control his temper. "  Some of the women in the classrooms felt that alcohol and  jealousy were contributing  factors to the violence. Many  saw battering take place at  parties. Some felt the women  were afraid to lose their boy-'  friends. Others believed abusive past histories were important. One thing that was  clear - battering was taking  place among them and they did  see it as a problem. The women  were open to talking and were  pleased and excited that this  issue was being acknowledged  and explored.  We are conducting workshops,  handing out questionaires, and  making posters in our effort  to make contact with younger  women in battering relationships. We will talk to them  in a safe atmosphere, ask the  women how they perceive their  situation and what kind of  support they need. In addition,  we will talk with people who  are in contact with young women who may be in this situation, such as teachers, counsellors and childcare workers,  to find out how they perceive  the situation and what support  services they offer these women.  We want to do as much outreach  as possible to make younger  women aware of this project  and to urge them to talk to  us. As an outcome of this  project we plan to organize  support services and support  groups. We urge every woman  who has been hit in any way,  verbally abused or humiliated,  or has been forced into.sexual contact with a boyfriend/  male lover that she doesn't  live with to please contact  us. Anyone who would like to  do a workshop on battering  can phone us at Battered Women's Support Services, 734-  1574 and ask for Jeny, Jean  or Miljenka.  away from freedom. Some women  can't handle it, mentally, at  all."  "Lots of women are here for a  week or ten days for impaired  driving or something like that.  If they shut this place down  they will have to go to Oakalla,  and they don't belong there.  It would be hard psychologically  on them, and on the women there  who have long sentences."  There have been almost no incidences of conflict with members  of the community in the six  years since Lynda Williams  opened. Though no figures are  available, inmates are sure  that the rate of return to the  correctional system must be  lower for women who had the  chance to go through the centre  before getting out.  Residents of the Centre have  begun to pressure the government to keep it open by contacting members of the press,  and Gary Lauk, the NDP MLA for  the area. A petition is circulating, and women are urged to  sign or write letters to  Attorney-General Brian Smith,  Premier Bill Bennet, and Lauk.  All can be reached at the Provincial Parliament Buildings,  Victoria, B.C. V8V 1X4. Copies  of letters to B. Beck, Lynda  Williams Correctional Centre,  #5 - 7 West 15th Ave., Van.,  B.C.  Abuse of younger women  KINESIS is published ten times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position  of women in society and work actively  towards achieving social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are  those of the writer and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 400 A West  5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of  Women is $20/year (or what you can  afford). This includes a subscription  to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $13/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right to edit, and submission  does not guarantee publication.  Workers This Issue: Libby Barlow,  Jan Berry, Frances Bula, Lyn Cadence,  Jan De Grass, Cole Dudley, Patty Gibson, Mich Hill, Nicky Hood, Emma  Kivisild, Barbara Kuhne, Cat L'Hiron-  delle, Claudia Macdonald, Anne Ray-  vals, Rosemarie Rupps, Michele Woll-  stonecroft, Ruth Meechan.  KINESIS is a member of the Canadian  Periodical Publishers' Association. 4   Kinesis   July/Aug '83  ACROSS CANADA  Civilian security agency  What price 'security'?  by Patty Gibson  Bill C-157, the legislation to  create a new civilian security  agency in Canada, separate from  the RCMP, has been perceived  in a wide range of circles as  an Orwellian attack on civil  liberties. Solicitor General  Robert Kaplan's assurances that  the legislation contains sufficient checks and balances to  prevent abuse regarding legitimate political dissent, has  so far failed to convince a  number of the Bill's most ardent critics, not the least of  which is Alan Borovoy, general  counsel for the Canadian Civil  Liberties Association.  Borovoy's chief concern is the  language of the Bill-which he  says "appears broad enough to  subject innocent Canadians to  all this snooping simply because they may happen to have  some knowledge or expertise  about foreign countries."  Under the new security bill  citizens may have their conversations bugged, mailed opened, homes searched and tax  files invaded. "The core of the  threat," says Borovoy, "lies in  the fact that citizens can be  targeted for intrusive surveillance without evidence that  the law is being violated."  Defined in the Bill are four  "threats to the security of  Canada" upon which the proposed security service can act.  They include, "Espionage or  sabotage against Canada or any  state allied or associated with  Canada or activities directed  toward or in support of such  espionage or sabotage" and  "Foreign influenced activities  within or relating to Canada  continued from p. 1  Meanwhile in Vancouver the five  themselves face trial in September. At a bail hearing on  July 8th, Ann Hansen and Brent  Taylor will be conducting their  own defense.  The decision to go without a  lawyer will allow them to bring  in their own witnesses and raise  interesting points of law.  Defense lawyers have the sixty  hours of tapes collected by  police surveillance before the  arrests, but are finding it  difficult to work with the five  people, all of whom are in jail.  Within the prison, the five have  been moved, splitting up the  three men, and completely isolating Doug Stewart. The two  women have been kept together.  The defense group has been directing its efforts towards fund-  raising, raising $3000 to date  from benefits alone. This summer  they will be doing two workshops on issues connected to the  trial: one on electronic surveillance (July 21), and one on  political trials.  Those wanting to attend the July  8th hearing are reminded the  trial is being conducted at  the New Westminster Courthouse.  that are detrimental to the  interests of Canada or any  state allied or associated with  Canada and are clandestine or  deceptive or involve a threat  to any person."  Where does this leave a Chilean  support group, for example, or  any Central American group  raising money for medical supplies and general civilian  support? As has been pointed  out, Chile is a good business  customer of Canada's and is  easily considered an associate.  Is El Salvador an ally given  its obsessive anti-communist  stance? What would be the legal position of any group,  whether it be an ad hoc independent group, a political  party, or a community, women's  or church organization supporting liberation movements fighting inhumane and oppressive  regimes governing several countries now "allied or associated with Canada"?  The Canadian Security Intelligence Service (CSIS), as it  now stands would be able to  plant wiretaps without even  meeting the conditions currently required by police officers  under the Criminal Code. Presently, a judge must agree to  a wiretap if it appears to be  "in the best interests of the  administration of justice".  The new legislation simply  requires a judge to satisfy  him or herself that a warrant  is necessary "to enable the  service to perform its duties  and functions". More, CSIS  agents would be allowed to  commit "incidental breaches"  of the law including trespass  and the damage of private property.  In its second editorial on  Bill C-157., The Globe and Mail  had this to say: "Suppose the  service exceeded its mandate,  and started spying on people  engaged in lawful protest or  dissent. Who would know? Bill  C-157 would let the civilian  agents trespass, destroy private property, open mail, read  confidential tax returns and  plant listening devices. A  Federal Court judge would have  to approve any interception of  communications or searching of  premises, but...he would be  prevented, as would everyone  else, from disclosing any information from which the iden-  Lesbians get Pink Ink  by Emma Kivisild  The Pink Ink, a new lesbian/gay  publication from Toronto,  launches its first issue this  month. Committed to covering  feminist issues from a feminist  perspective, and looking at  gay participation throughout  movements for social change,  Pink Ink also has pledged 50%  lesbian participation in every  aspect of the magazine, all  of which comes as good news to  women working on women's issues.  Pink Ink hits the newstands in  editorial collective of TBP  published a note - 'Ad News' -  saying that they had "debated s  accepting the advertisement for  several months." The decision to finally run it was made  when they dismissed the anti-'  pornography movement as 'bad  politics' and said it plays  into the hands of the right.  Referring to Red Hot Video's  material as 'erotic' the disclaimer reiterates TBP's intension to publish erotic material.  The Pink Ink has written to TBP  oppossing the inclusion of the  ad, in a letter signed by all  eight members of the Editorial  Board. However, they do not see  TBP as rivals. "Competition is  a bad word to use," says editor Dean Haynes. "We are working  in addition to the other resources that are available.  There are a lot of communities  out there with a lot of voices,  work, but apparently took a stand and many of those voices are  stand against the concerns of    just not getting heard. We're  feminists working on the issue   providing a forum." The Pink  early this year. Some TBP writers Ink is different from the Body  seemed to feel that feminists    Politic in many ways: it has a  are not aware of the censor-     more national focus; it is more  ship question, the best example  visibly committed to lesbian  the wake of controversy about  another Toronto magazine of  gay liberation: The Body Politic  (TBP). TBP culminated a series  of editorial comments condemming  anti-pornography work by  publishing an ad for Red Hot  Video, complete with editorial-  rationale, in their June issue.  The magazine has long conducted  a debate on anti-pornography  tity of anyone assisting or  working for the service in  covert operations could  'reasonably be inferred'".  Since one section of the Bill  makes it a crime, punishable  for five years, for anyone to  disclose information that could  identify a covert security  operative, how can misconduct  be reported? Nowhere in the  Bill is a line drawn between  "legitimate" and "illegitimate"  dissent. Who will decide this  line and on what basis will it  be decided?  The federal NDP have taken a  strong stand against the Bill  and a meeting of the province's  attorney generals also issued  a statement against the legislation as it now stands. However, Kaplan has made it clear  he wants the legislation passed as soon as possible, in the  interests of national security.  The Trudeau government has a  long history of rushing controversial legislation through  the House and it appears the  CSIS may well be created despite outcry from concerned  and informed critics.  Coming in the August paper is an  article by a man, Gary Kinsman,  in which he asks gay men to rethink their attitudes to straight  porn, and to look at gay pornography in that light.  The magazine intends to provide  a forum for dialogue on the  women's movement. For example,  the first paper carried an article by Diana Meredith on  abortion and why it is a lesbian issue.  Other articles looked at gays  in the peace movement, profiled the gay community in  Fredericton, N.B., and discussed the need for gay shame-  lessness.  The magazine also runs fiction  and poetry, and regular columns  will cover health, law, arts,  and a listing of events around  the country, as well as "dyke  and faggot humour."  being Tim McCaskell's April  column in which he draws an analogy between anti-porn work and  prohibition. Letters to the  Editor from anti- pornography  readers clearly had no effect.  The ad from Red Hot tells lies  in openly addressing feminist  work, stating: "Red Hot Video  does not distribute film containing scenes of excessive  violence, bestiality or sexual  acts involving minors no matter  what a small, vocal minority  would have you beleive." The  content; and more concerned with  the questions facing lesbians  and gays working for political  change outside the gay liberation  movement.  What is their position on pornography? They're working on it,  says Haynes. The women on the  board have undertaken a series  of "round table" discussions with  other members of Toronto's women's  women's community in order to  come to grips with the issue  from a lesbian perspective.  Correction  Last month's Kinesis carried an  article on the prostitution debate at City Council on May 17,  1973.  Due to an editing error, City  Councillors were listed as 22  for and 19 against the Justice  Committee recommendations. This  figure actually referred to the  41 community delegations which  appeared before City Council.  The City Councillors split 7 to  4 over the major issue of supporting the creation of a new  crime of offering or accepting  an offer to engage in prostitution, and unanimously supported  the other four recommendations. July/Aug '83   Kinesis   5  ACROSS CANADA  nding abortion clinics:  Winnipeg raided, Toronto in jeopardy  by Jan DeGrass  Six individuals from Winnipeg's  month old abortion clinic were  arrested on Fri., June 24 and  held overnight pending a bail  hearing. A doctor, Robert Scott,  three nurses, one counsellor  and one coaltion volunteer were  charged with conspiracy to perform an abortion. Dr. Scott and  one nurse were also charged  with helping a woman procure an  abortion. This is the second  time in a month that the clinic,  opened by Dr. Henry Morgentaler,  has been raided.  On this occasion bail conditions stipulated that none of  the arrested persons could go  "within one city block of the  clinic" if released on bail.  Five refused this condition and  remained in jail for the weekend. Local pro-choice groups  planned an evening rally Mon.,  June 27.  At this time there has been no  statement from Manitoba's reportedly pro-choice NDP government regarding the arrests.  The Winnipeg clinic, as well as  Morgentaler's clinic in Toronto, have managed to continue  operating for the last few  weeks despite local opposition  and fears of just such a police  raid. Earlier this month Dr.  Scott, Dr. Morgentaler and six  of his employees appeared in  Winnipeg court charged with conspiracy to perform an abortion.  The following week Morgentaler  flew to Toronto to mark the mid-  June opening of that clinic. He  was greeted with a support demonstration and an attack on  his person by a man brandishing garden shears.  Ontario anti-abortionists said  they did not choose to demonstrate at the Toronto opening  as they were confident the Ontario provincial government  would act on their behalf. Ontario Solicitor-General George  Taylor says that police are  keeping close tabs on the clinic in order to collect evidence  for a charge more specific than  the Manitoba one of conspiracy.  At press time staff at the Toronto clinic expect a raid any  day. The clinic is currently  being investigated.  A spokeswoman for the B.C. Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion, Marva Blackmore, says  that Morgentaler would probably  prefer a charge of performing  an illegal abortion because a  major tactic in setting up the  clinics in the first place was  to challenge Canada's current  abortion law. A charge of performing an illegal abortion  would allow him to plead the  defence of necessity, she said  - a plea which argues that making a woman go before a committee to obtain an abortion could  be physically injurious to her  health and cause a delay taking  her past the first trimester of  pregnancy, the generally considered safe period for abor-  Blackmore is dismayed that pro-  choice support groups are unable to extract a promise from  Manitoba Attorney-General Roland Penner and the NDP government in that province to drop  the charges and stand by its  position on abortion. In response to the second raid  Blackmore said, "It seems like  they're just trying to find  some way to close down the  clinic. We're flooding the  Manitoba NDP with letters and  telegrams directed at Penner  and Premier Howard Pawley."  Meanwhile Canadian Association  for Repeal of the Abortion Laws  (CARAL) President Norma Scarborough, acting as an individual, has launched her own assault on Canada's abortion laws  by challenging sections of the  Criminal Code that refer to a-  bortion and charging that withholding an abortion is a violation of the Charter of Rights  guaranteeing a woman's right to  life, liberty and security of  A similar suit is under way in  Winnipeg where the Coalition  for Reproductive Rights has had  $15-20,000 worth of legal time  donated by sympathetic lawyers.  "Granting Joe Borowski's legal  Prostitution proposals  under consideration  standing as an individual speaking for the rights of the foetus has opened the way for his  opposition to launch a similar  series of individual suits,"  said Blackmore.  "I hope we can  get the saime kind of commitment  from lawyers in B.C.", she said.  "The more places the suit comes  from, the stronger we will be."  Women are urged to voice their  opinion on the abortion clinics  to: Howard Pawley, Premier of  Manitoba; Roland Penner, Manitoba Attorney-General; and in  Ontario to: Health Minister  Larry Grossman and Premier Bill  Davis.  It's not a victory. But, the protests of women's groups and  other community groups across  Canada against toughening up  the criminal law against prostitution seem to have been considered by Ottawa legislators.  Justice Minister Mark McGuigan tabled a discusssion paper  in the House of Commons on  Thursday. June 23, 1983, in  which relatively minor adjustments were proposed for the  present federal law on  prostitution.  MacGuigan proposed that customers of prostitutes also be  charged with soliciting, whereas in current Canadian law the  practice of charging customers  is left to the interpretation  of the courts. Consequently,  the practice of charging customers varies from province to  province. In B.C., for example,  no customers are charged. Secondly, MacGuigan proposed to  include an automobile in the  present definition of "public  place" so that soliciting in  an automobile could be punishable.  Despite an intensive lobbying  action by Vancouver's Mayor  Harcourt, Gordon Price and the  Concerned Residents of the West  End (CROWE), and Police Chiefs .  and Mayors across the country,  MacGuigan noted there was no  national consensus on the issue  and cited the protests of women's groups who have steadfastly opposed tougher penalties for prostitutes as the  answer to "cleaning up the  streets".  MacGuigan's proposals have  not been presented in the  form of a legislative Bill but  rather only as a discussion  paper. However, it is expected that the proposed changes  to the prostitution laws will  be passed in the fall.  New Brunswick  native women  fight for status  An Ad Hoc Committee for Advocacy for Reinstatement has  been formed by three New Brunswick Native women to fight the  sexism in Canada's Indian Act.  These women are Shirley Bear,  Caroline Ennis and Karen Pear-  iy-  Although Native Canadian representatives and the provincial  and federal governments reached agreement last March that  aboriginal and treaty rights  apply equally to men and women,  the battle is still raging over  the complexities of restoring  sexual equality.  The Indian Act, which removes  Indian status from Indian women if they marry non-status  Indians, is the source of the  problem. Their children also  lose status as Indians. Between  1955 and 1981, 15,700 women and  57,000 children lost their  status in this manner. According to a 1982 report by the  Department of Indian and Northern Affairs.  On the other hand, Indian men  who marry white women confer  status on their wives and the  children of that marriage.  Indian status rights include  being able to live on a reserve,  receiving special health and  education subsidies and exemption from taxes on income derived from reserve sources.  In a Toronto interview, Bear  says the committee not only  wants the sexist clauses repealed, but they want the Indian  Act to guarantee that women who  lost their status through marriage will have their status restored. They also do not want  non-native women who marry  Indian men to be granted Indian  status.  She says she's tired of waiting  for things to change. In 1980,  she says, the United Nation's  Human Rights Tribunal ruled in  favour of Sandra Lovelace, a  New Brunswick Native woman, who  went to the UN to protest the  Indian Act. The tribunal recommended that the sexist clauses  be abolished; in response,  Canada said the clauses would  be repealed by 1981. "It's now  May, 1983, and the law is still  in effect," says Bear.  (From the Toronto Clarion, May,  1983).. 6   Kinesis   July/Aug '83  PORNOGRAPHY  by Women Against Pornography  On May 30th, in Victoria Provincial Court,  Judge Darrell Collins convicted Red Hot  Video Ltd. on three counts of obscenity  under Section 159 of the Criminal Code. His  decision has been hailed by some anti-porn  activists as a victory for women, if only  a symbolic one. Several Women Against Porn-  orgraphy (WAP) members were present throughout most of the proceedings, and we saw no  victory for women in what took place in  that court room. It is understandable that  news of the verdict could be superficially  interpreted as a victory. One had to be  present at this three-ring circus to fully  comprehend the inadequacy of the criminal  justice system to address feminist concerns  about porn.  We believe this decision could represent  a potentially serious blow for women's  and gay rights, given the prevailing politically right-wing climate in Canada. .  Feminist concerns about pornography were  not addressed in this trial; in fact, it  became quickly apparent that women ourselves are considered irrelevant in terms  of input into "community standards" (upon  which the definition of "obscenity" was  predicated). The primary consideration  throughout the trial, and illustrated in  the decision itself, was the imperative  that the "moral welfare of the state" must  be protected. What Judge Collins ultimately  found offensive about the three films in  question was not the fact that they demean,  exploit, and violate women, but their sexually explicit nature.. At one point in his  decision, he recited a litany of the unacceptable sex acts he observed in each of  the films. Itemized together with intercourse, fellatio, ejaculation, group sex,  etc. were nakedness, masturbation, and lesbian sex. Rape and brutality received only  passing mention. The very wording of the  obscenity law makes it near impossible to  deviate far from this perspective.  The Issues Before the Court..  The trial started with the defense (Red Hot  Video Ltd.) applying, under the Charter of  Rights, to have Section 159 declared to have  "no force and effect" and the charges dismissed. They were arguing - using Sections  2 ("freedom of expression") and 7 ("right  to life, liberty, and security of the person") - that the obscenity law was an infringement of their client's basic rights  and liberties as guaranteed by the Constitution. !  The prosecution relied on  case law and  technicalities but there  were a number of flaws  in their overall approach  and the Crown was  astonishingly Unprepared  in other ways  Collins was not impressed by this tactic,  and he eventually decided that Sect. 159  was indeed constitutional, allowing the  trial to proceed. This meant, however, that  the Crown now had the additional burden of  mensrea, or proving criminal intent (ie.  that the accused had knowledge of the nature of the material).  With the constitutional issue resolved, argument turned to the three issues in question. Red Hot Video was charged under Sub.  1 of Sect. 159, with possession of obscene  materials for the purposes of distribution.  The Crown had to prove: a) Red Hot Video  possessed the three films; b) they were  "obscene", and c) they knew they were obscene.  Red Hot's trial:  3 Ring Circus  First came the matter of establishing the  corporate entities involved, their relationship, and whether possession could be proven against Red Hot Video. The defense argued that it was the Victoria store, incorporated under the name "Douglas Video Ltd.",  which possessed the films, and that no  clear connection between the two companies  could be proved beyond a doubt; meaning no  clear proof that the films originated with  Red Hot Video. The Crown countered that  all the evidence pointed to, at the very  least, a "partnership", amd more realistically a franchise operation.  On the second point, "obscenity" was measured against "contemporary community standards", with the defense producing so-called  experts to testify that Canadians will and  do tolerate pornography. Their basic thrust  was to produce, as evidence of tolerance,  the "social acceptability" and widespread  pervasiveness of porn, (citing mainstream  media interest in the subject as proof of  its "legitimacy").  Finally, the matter of mensrea, with the  defense and the Crown attempting to prove,  respectively, Red Hot's "moral innocence"  and their moral culpability. The summaries  of both sides followed, after which the  Judge adjourned to May 30th for his now  famous decision.  The Crown: For this we waited a year?  This decision was not attributable to a  brilliant job by the Crown. The prosecution,  for the most part, relied on case law and  adequately argued legal technicalities. j  While their expertise in this area cannot  be faulted, there were a number of serious  flaws in their overall approach. While having  obviously done extensive research of legal  precedents, the Crown was astonishingly  ill-'prepared in other ways.  For example, the confusion over the actual  corporate entities involved could have been  lessened had the Crown done their homework  more carefully. In seizing the tapes from  "Douglas Video" and subsequently charging  Red Hot Video, they opened the way for a  complicated and effective defense. A charge  against "Douglas Video" of selling obscene  materials, under Sub. 2 of Section 159  would have been easier and less convoluted  to support.  Also, during the proceedings, the Crown  attempted twice, unsuccessfully, to subpoena Douglas Video Manager Don Watt. Had  they served the subpoena earlier, they  could have prevented his last-minute disappearing act. Instead, they put (absentee)  owner Wayne Roberts on the stand, gaining  very little useful information. Any of the  women who regularly picket the store could  have told crown counsel (and did) that Watt,  not Roberts, was responsible for the day-today operation of the store, and thus they  could have had the information they needed.  More, the Crown's first "expert" witness  lacked credibility and had obviously not  At one point, Walsh  insisted there was no  such thing as a Snuff  movie. This was news to  those who watched WAP  publicly destroy a Snuff  film last fall July/Aug '83   Kinesis   7  PORNOGRAPHY  been well-briefed. There to share his expertise as a psychiatrist with "some experience  in treating sex offenders", he had surprisingly little knowledge of the available  research on pornography. This witness was  vulnerable to defense attempts to undermine  his credibility and expose him to ridicule.  When questioned about the available research, he could not cite one study by name,  and knew of only "about eight" in existence.  This happened in spite of the fact that we  had providdd crown counsel with a bibliography or over sixty studies. We spoke with  him after, and discovered that he was unaware of our bibliography. His briefing had  been negligent, not just in terms of information, but also preparation for the aggressive style of cross-examination he should  have expected. This choice of witness seemed even more questionable when we later  learned that Crown Counsel had obtained  from Judy Erola's office a list of suggested witnesses, all of whom were highly qualified and credible, including prominent researchers like Malamuth and Donnerstein.  Perhaps the most serious criticism, from  our point of view, was the prominent lack  of feminists input in that court room.  prosecution (which was due to the government's longstanding refusal to prosecute)  demonstrated a community standard of tolerance as well as their client's "honourable"  intentions (mensrea). Of course, defense  counsel intimated, what were they to think  when the tapes were seized and later returned to them with apologies?! What indeed!  Another critical disadvantage was evident  in the "style"of the person (who happened  to be a woman) representing the Crown. Due  to Antifaev's (Crown Prosecutor) generally  accommodating and unaggressive manner, the  defense was allowed to get away, unchallenged, with some amazing theatrics, distortions, and outright lies.  Defense witnesses Walsh and Boyanowsky were  both allowed to monopolize court time. During their speeches both, but Walsh in particular, made numerous absurd but damaging  statements, which should have been challeng-  There is a great deal of knowledge and expertise in the women's community of which  the crown could have availed itself. Many  women have researched this issue, developed  a comprehensive feminist analysis of porn,  and could even have testified as to community standards, because of involvement at a  grass-roots level in the community. (For  instance, WAP has conducted about 20 workshops in the last year, reaching hundreds  of women and some men, most of whom are not  feminists.)  The glaring lack of feminist input was exacerbated by having to hear defense witnesses  speculate about "what the feminists want".  We were not asked to speak for ourselves.  Moreover, if the defense can be allowed to  produce witnesses as subjective as Vancouver film critic Michael Walsh, to give opinion evidence on "community standards", then  we can well ask why the Crown did not produce a feminist, for balance.  Women made a great deal of valuable information available to the Crown, almost none of  which was utilized. Crown counsel were aloof  and unreceptive to input, ensuring - you  may well speculate - that they be perceived  as independent of influence from "fanatical  pressure groups".  Not only was significant input from feminists lacking, however. The Crown - in the  "community standards" debate - failed to  stress the groundswell of anti-porn sentiment taking place all over Canada; or to  point out that many mainstream organizations - such as churches, service organizations, municipal governments, community  groups, human rights and minority groups,  and unions - have joined feminists in deploring porn. There was no reference, for  instance, to the nation-wide Pay-TV protests and the Eaton's boycott, or the  phenomenal impact of "Not A Love Story" on  Canadians.  The Crown's case contained inconsistencies,  both in court room strategy and the previous track record of the Attorney-General's  Ministry which, of course, Crown Counsel  were representing. Their two "star" witnesses, Ontario film censor Mary Brown  ("conservative") and B.C. film censor Mary  Louise McCausland ("liberal") had radically .  different views on community standards,  and thus on criteria for censorship. The  defense was able to exploit this inconsistency, resulting in McCausland - the Crown's  witness - being used against them.  We observed successful use of this tactic  several times, but none more galling than  watching the defense use the government's  own previous policy against them. The defense argued there had been no previous  prosecutions - despite the seizure of tapes  on two occasions - and that this lack of  ed.  Boyanowsky referred at length to outdated  social effects research supporting porn  (Denmark), and had to be reminded by the  judge that this was irrelevant here. But  not before twenty minutes had elapsed and  this information, lent credibility by the  endorsement of an "expert", was-entrenched  in the court record.  Walsh, at one point, insisted there was no  such thing as a "Snuff" movie, which existed only in the realm of "myth". This was  news indeed to the women (and one reporter)  in the gallery who had attended WAP's screening and destruction of "Snuff" last fall.  The Crown should have known about this well-  publicized event, and they should have challenged this monstrous lie.  They should have leapt to challenge Boyanowsky, too, when he casually maligned Ontario film censor Mary Brown. His remark that  Brown had told him her criteria for censorship were based on "what she thought her  mother in Sarnia would tolerate" was, of  course, sensationalized by the media. This  followed Brown's thorough testimony wherein  she described the way in which the Ontario  Board attempts to ensure accurate representation of community values, and in which  she had stated that the Board had conducted  over 10,000 interviews.  Members of Victoria's Women Against Pornography  perform street theatre in front of Red Hot Video after the  trial. This 'mock trial' centred on a porn pimp being tried  by a jury of battered women.  Defense witness Don Sikorsky, who was invited to share his expertise as a photographer of strippers, and a denizen of Vancouver strip joints, was a clever defense  ploy to introduce in evidence a dozen or so  porn magazines and the three tapes on  trial, which had been easily obtained at a  variety of locations in Vancouver and Victoria. Time and again throughout the trial,  the very pervasiveness of sexual exploitation was used to justify it.  The primary  consideration throughout  the trial was the  imperative that the  'moral welfare of the  state' must be protected  Both Sikorsky and Walsh were entirely lacking in qualifications and credibility; were  clearly alienated from real community standards; and gave evidence that was mere conjecture and highly subjective personal opinion. Neither man should have been allowed to  take the stand, and the Crown should have  done everything possible to block them.  There are other questions that remain to  be answered. Why did the Crown only pursue  summary conviction, as opposed to indictment? What rationale was used for the selection of the three tapes? They don't represent a continuum in degree of violence,  being similar in content. We have, in fact,  seen far worse tapes from Red Hot Video  and have laid complaints with police on  two of them. Why were these extremely violent films not included in the charge? Why  did the Crown concur with the defense in  seeking leniency in the penalty? And, why  did the Judge, after finding Red HOt guilty  on all three counts, settle on an absurdly  lenient fine, far below the maximum he was  empowered to impose?  The answer to these questions is patently  obvious. They demonstrate the degree to  which those in power fail to take seriously the problem of pornography. They also  confirm Andrea Dworkin's hypothesis that  censorship laws comprise a battle between  different groups of men to determine how  much of their warped sexuality should be  revealed. Women have no meaningful input  into this, process. We were reminded of this  fact constantly throughout the trial.  The Obscenity Law: A Victorian relic  Roget's defines obscenity as "immorality,  dirt, filth, lubricity, salacity, smut...  indelicacy, indecency, ribaldry, vulgarity"  etc. While pornography certainly is immoral  (because it exploits, degrades, and hurts  women) and vulgar (because it reduces human beings to one-dimensional genital caricatures), it is hardly its "smuttiness"  or "indecency" which concerns feminists.  This, however, remains the focus of not  only popular idiom, but also Canada's present obscenity law. Given our concern with  the violent, degrading, and exploitive nature of pornography, Sect. 159 has proven  an ineffective weapon with which to fight  back. We are convinced that, not until the  link with sexuality is broken, not until  porn is recognized and treated as a form of  hate propaganda, will the justice system  contain real justice for women.  The obscenity law - included under "Offenses Tending to Corrupt Morals" - could  represent a potential threat as much to  women and homosexuals as to porn pimps. It  could be used to erode our right of access  to information, given the anti-feminist  political climate today.  The legal emphasis on morality was clearly  articulated by Judge Collins in his decision. As stated earlier, what he found  offensive was the sexual explicitness of  the three tapes, not the dehumanizing way  they portray women. Near the top of his  list of "no-no's" were female nakedness,  masturbation, and lesbian sex. Granted,  pornography does not portray these subjects 8   Kinesis   July/Aug '83  in the way we would wish to see, but erotica certainly could and does.  This trial demonstrated clearly that women  have yet to achieve real input into the  values which shape our communities. These  appear to be the exclusive preserve of  educated white men, who presume to speak  for all Canadians; but who, in fact, were  appallingly uninformed beyond their immediate milieu. (Walsh spoke authoritatively  for the patrons of porn theatres - they  have no complaints - and Boyanowsky was  edified primarily by the views of his students.) The "well-intentioned citizen" referred to throughout the trial is-obviously  possessed of a penis. The organized protests of feminists were repeatedly dismissed, trivialized, or ignored. We are, we  learned, "not representative" and "not  significant". Defense counsel, in fact,  stated repeatedly that there has been no  public reaction to pornography, and that  this lack of reaction equals tolerance.  When feminists were referred to (grudgingly), it was usually in the same breath as  "the Moral Majority".  Even the word "violence" is open to interpretation: throughout the trial, defense  witnesses bickered about whether rape was  necessarily violent, and they used the words  like "spoof", "satire", "mockery" and  "parody" to characterize the rape and torture scenes in the tapes. Rape? A little  "harmless fantasy". Vaginal penetration  with a human fist? A "circus stunt".  The real problem with the vagueness of the  obscenity law is that it allows so-called  experts to explain, interpret, and pontificate, investing their sexist views with  credibility and legitimacy in the process;  it permits blind speculation and subjective opinions to run rampant, allowing  dangerous statements like those.above to  be made, and mocking the very meaning of  justice.  If, on the other hand, the present obscenity law were repealed, replaced by the inclusion of porn with other forms of hate  continued from p. 1  as do Parks Commissioner Pat Wilson, NDP  MLA Rosemary Brown, and MP Margaret Mitchell,  and many more groups and individuals.  Support is still expanding and recently the  Vancouver and District Labour Council voted  to send a strong letter of protest to CKVU  President Peter Viner and to CRTC President  John Meisel.  CKVU President Peter Viner has refused to  apologize and instead defends Collins'  statement under the banner of freedom of  speech.  "CKVU is a member of the Canadian Association  of Broadcasters and has therefore committed  itself to ridding its airwaves of abusive  or discriminatory material or comment which  is based on matters of race, sex, ethnic  origin, religion, colour, age, marital status,  or physical or mental handicap," said Sylvia  Spring of Media Watch. "Collins is paid by  CKVU to say the kinds of things he says. The  fact that they continue to employ him and  that they refuse to apologize or refute  Collins' statement attests to editorial approval of his comments," Spring said.  Rudland of the Vancouver Status of Women  stated that protests have been made to the  Canadian Radio and Television Commission and  to the Canadian Association of Broadcasters  which is supposedly pledged to voluntary  self regulation and of which CKVU is a member.  "The CRTC can intervene in a matter of this  kind and community protest has been so  strong and so continuous that we expect the  CRTC to act. We have been informed that  all the CRTC Commissioners viewed the Collins  editorial on videotape on June 27th."  Women, men and community groups are urged to  write protests to Peter Viner, President,  CKVU, 180 W. 2nd Avenue, Vancouver, and to  John Meisel, Chair, CRTC, Ottawa, Ontario  with a copy to VSW.  Not all offensive  statements came from  the defense. During a  break in the screening of  the tapes the Sheriffs  Deputy paraded through  the corridors with a  hand-lettered sign that  read '$6 a seat', joking  and bantering with coco-workers  propaganda, we believe the emphasis on  sexual explicitness, and thus morality,  would be removed. Erotica would be less  threatened because, unlike the present law,  a distinction could be made, based on violence, coercion, and degradation.  More, current social effects research  would probably be considered relevant.  Freedom of speech rhetoric would not apply,  since it is more generally believed that  rights are not. limitless; they are curtailed when they infringe upon the rights of  others. Those elusive "community standards"  would also become irrelevant, for what  community generally wants to admit to its  standard of tolerance for racism. The law  would be far better equipped to recognize  and deal with the combination of racism  ~:nd sexism that is often pornography. The  present law does not even begin to address  the racism of porn.  This is the only ultimate solution to the  semantic problem in Canadian criminal law,  around pornography. The mere addition to  159(8) of the word "degradation" - as  Justice Minister Mark MacGuigan has just  proposed - is simplistic and unworkable. If  men can argue about whether a porn rape  scene constitutes violence, they will debate endlessly about degradation. (In fact,  defense witnesses maintained that, since  both men and women (in their opinion) were  being degraded, it was perfectly acceptable)  The present wording, in addition to its  emphasis on sexual explicitness, results  in polarization. It becomes a showdown between "liberalism" and "conservatism" with,  again, no room for a feminist analysis.  It presents a disturbing dilemma for feminists since most of us wish to be identified  with neither of these male ideologies.  Another serious flaw with the present law  is its lack of "teeth". Women want Red Hot  Video closed down. Section 159 does not  have the capacity to effect any immediate,  meaningful change in and of itslef. The  penalties set out are ridiculously lenient,  demonstrating superficial understanding of  the seriousness of the problem. As well,  if effective enforcement does not exist,  any law is meaningless. Improved enforcement should be as much the focus of lobbying efforts as law reform.  The Courts: A microcosm of  patriarchial power relationships  There is a well-known slogan in the abortion  rights crusade: "If men could get pregnant,  abortion would be a sacrament". Variations  of such supposition can be applied to the  battle against misogynist violence: If men  got raped, rape would become a capital  offense; or if.men experienced pornography  the way women do; hate propaganda laws  would be enacted faster than you can say  "misandry"; "freedom of speech" rhetoric  would be dismissed, as the ravings of  "fanatics"; and men would receive prompt,  adequate compensation through the courts.  As it was, the masculinist values of the  court room created a forum whereby outrageously fallacious and/or sexist arguments could be advanced - legitimized and  lent credibility by association with the  power and dignity of the surroundings. The  defense used every conceivable tactic to  argue the "legitimacy" of porn and the  social acceptability of sex exploitation.  This resulted in a quasi-circus atmosphere,  of which all but WAP members seemed unaware.  Here are some of the more phenomenal leaps  of logic, sexist assumptions, distortions,  and untruths we had to silently stomach:  •The defense cited mainstream media interviews with porn star Marilyn Chambers as  proof of the legitimacy of porn (seemingly  unmindful of the media inclination to dwell  on controversy andsensationalism to sell  papers).  •Defense witnesses described the rape and  torture scenes in the tapes as "parody"  and "satire", "done for humourous effect",  with "no apparent ill-will". Walsh described the tapes as having a "sweet innocence",  and labelled porn a legitimate "genre".  •Both witnesses described a scene of vaginal penetration with a fist (Candystripers)  as a "circus stunt" or "sexual gymnastics",  with the woman's "obvious consent". (The  lyrics of the background song are: "It  hurts. Feel the Pain. Going deeper inside,  of me. Can't escape the feeling of misery.")  It is our own visceral, gut reaction to  scenes such as this which tells us, as women, that we are witnessing abuse and degradation, not simple "gymnastics". That  these men were so detached from female  reality horrifies and sickens.  •Walsh - referring to the rape scene in  "The Filthy Rich" - stated that, since  men performed oral sex on the woman prior  to raping her, this showed an attempt to  "satisfy her"; thus she really had control,  and this "softened" the rape. This statement betrayed the most amazing ignorance  of female sexuality most of us had ever -  seen.  •Not all the offensive statements, however,  came from the defense. During a break in  the screening of the tapes, the Sheriff's  Deputy got into the spirit of things, by  parading through the corridors with a hand-  lettered sign that read, "$6.00 A SEAT",  joking and bantering with co-workers.  In conclusion, we have for some time harboured serious reservations about the  recommendation some feminists have advanced to simply add the word "degradation" to  Sect. 159. After experiencing the trial,  we are firmly convinced this is no solution, and that the energies of the anti-  porn movement should be directed toward  hate propaganda legislation. We should not  further encumber an already antiquated law.  We fear that - as with rape laws previously - powerful feminist lobbying groups  and high-profile individuals are not receiving enough grass-roots input before  acting.  WAP, more than any anti-porn group we are  aware of, has had first-hand experience  with the legal route, both through Victoria's short-lived by-law and, more recently, the Red Hot trial. We have gained  many insights from the expereince of monitoring the trial, many of which we have  shared here. We think our observations are  important and we want to share them, and  receive feedback.  We realize feminists can, and will, differ  on strategy, but it is essential we begin  to get together to explore these differences in more depth. July/ Aug TO   Kinesis   9  WOMEN AND PEACE  Survivors speak  Hiroshima: f|  Never Again  by Lisa Jenkinson  During the Festival of Peace, (which ran at  the Vancouver East Cultural Centre in early  June) I attended an afternoon workshop  which dealt with the theme of the Hiroshima  survivors. That afternoon I learned a lot  about the personal hell these survivors  have had to live with for the past 38 years,  but also, I was made aware of their strength  and determination in working towards educating the public into realizing that nuclear war, no matter how limited, must not  be allowed to happen again.  Kuniko Laskey is a resident of Vancouver  and a Hiroshima survivor. That afternoon  at the Cultural Centre, she presented two  films, related her own personal account  of the day Hiroshima was bombed, and spoke  of the work being done by the Canadian  Society of Atomic Bomb Survivors, a group  which she organized last year.  The two documentary films, Prophesy and  The Lost Generation, were recently made  by a group of Japanese citizens concerned  with the future of this planet in the face  of the nuclear arms race. Prophesy deals  with specific information about the bombing and destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Much of this information was kept in  confidential files by the American government for the 35 years following the bombings and was only released in 1980. The  Lost Generation presents interviews with  several Hibakusha,(the Japanese term for  Atomic Bomb Survivor) in which they relate  what they were doing the day of the bombing,  the kinds of injuries they incurred and how  their lives have been affected over the  past 38 years, since that horrifying day  in August 1945. Watching these films, I  got a sense of the anger and injustice the  Hibakusha  must feel and have been feeling  for so long. Some of the facts presented  in the films included:  •The U.S. Army leafleted Hiroshima before  the bombing, warning the citizens of what  was to happen, but the secret service and  Japanese police confiscated-the leaflets  before anyone saw them.  •The American Government, unaware of the  full effects of an atomic explosion on a -  human being, sent .camera crews to Hiroshima  o Laskey, 'Hibakusha1  and Nagaisaki shortly after the bombings, to  film the survivors and their injuries.  There is a lot of footage of this type,  presenting the victims as "specimens" to be  examined and filmed by the very government  that caused them this immense pain and disfiguration. The victims were angered and  humiliated by having to expose their wounds  to the American cameras. Their counteraction was to show these atrocities in  order to help spare someone else the same  tragedy.  •This footage was kept in U.S. government  archives under confidential status for 35  years. In 1980 it was finally released and  a campaign was set up by the public in  Japan whereby any citizen could buy back  10 feet of this footage. This is how the  two films were made.  •Survivors rights are still being ignored.  There is no government financed program of  health and medical care for Hibakusha  in  Japan and survivors living in North America  are afraid to disclose their identity for  fear of losing their health and life insurance, since most insurance policies contain  a clause which states that expenses for  illness or death caused by the effects of  an atomic explosion will not be covered.  The primary message of the Hibakusha  in  these films is that this tragedy must never  be allowed to happen again. They are committed to doing all they can for peace; nuclear  war, they say, is something you don't do  twice.  The Canadian Society of Atomic Bomb Survivors is a group which was organized last  year by Kuniko Laskey. Laskey said she had  kept quiet about her experience as a survivor of Hiroshima for 37 years, but last  year decided it was time to speak out, tell  her story, educate the public about the  effects of nuclear destruction, and make  them aware of what they can do to act  against the arms race. What she has to say  is compelling, powerful and important.  Laskey is available to speak and show the  films Prophesy and The Lost Generation to  any size group. She can be contacted  through The Canadian Society of Atomic  Bomb Survivors, 1517 East 34th Avei, Van.,  B.C. V5P 1A2.  WOMEN GATHERING TO STOP THE CRUISE  WE ARE A GROUP OF WOMEN ORGANIZING A TWO-DAY  WOMEN'S PEACE CAMP ACTION AT COLD LAKE, ALTA.  (SEE PAGE 29 THIS ISSUE). BUSES WILL BE CHARTERED  AT A COST OF $87 PER PERSON, ROUND TRIP. WILL  YOU JOIN US?  □ YES. I'M INTERESTED IN GOING TO COLD LAKE  □ I'D LIKE MORE INFORMATION  □ HOW CAN I HELP ORGANIZE THE EVENT?  □ I CAN EVEN AFFORD A DONATION  NAME:.  _ PHONE:  §<  Send coupon to Box 5,400A West Sth, Vancouver, B.C.  Weekly meetings are held Thursdays, 7:30 pm, from July 7th at CRS Workers Co-op, 1239 Odium Dr. (at Charles). All interested women ai  _ encouraged to attend.  Peace camp  at Puget Sound  by Marrianne van Loon  '■■ Women from Washington and Oregon have organized the Puget Sound Women's Peace  Camp, at Kent, Washington. Kent is significant as the site of the Boeing cruise  missile plant. The camp is intended to  peacefully halt cruise production, and  encourage conversion to peaceful production.  The cruise missile, along with the Pershing  II, is expected to be deployed in Europe  by the U.S. government starting the end of  this year. These first-strike weapons are  virtually undetectable, so verification  in case of arms limitation treaties will  be impossible.  The deployment of these missiles will further destabilize East-West relations, and  accelerate the escalation of the arms race,  say the women who have decided to form  the peace camp. "We are ordinary women:  mothers, daughters, sisters, workers. And  we feel that time is running out for all  life on earth."  The Puget Sound Women's Peace Camp makes  connections between the nuclear arms  race and violence against women, racism,  victimization and oppression. "We want  violence at home and abroad to stop", they  say. This women's peace camp has connections with other women's initiatives  around the world - at Seneca Falls, N.Y.  where first-strike weapons are stored for  airlift to Europe;-Greenham Common, one  of the air bases in Britain where the  cruise missile is to be deployed; Europe  and Japan.  This summer a women's peace group is travelling from Vancouver to Cold Lake, Alberta, the proposed cruise missile testing  site. The testing is an important link in  the cruise missile development, production  and deployment chain.  The Puget Sound Women's Peace Camp needs  .women for fundraising, organizing, outreach, legal research, publicity, and  support. This is an all-women's action,  but men are invited to take part in practical support groups. For more information  contact the Puget Sound Women's Peace Camp  Seattle  523-2101  | Tacoma day 272-3724  eve 627-8612  or write:  P.O. Box 22756  Seattle, WA. 98122  U.S.A.  Blockade at  Greenham Common  From July 4 to 8 an International Women's  Blockade of the Greenham Common air force  base is being held to protest against the  deployment of American Cruise Missiles,  scheduled for early next year. The women  sent out a call to women all over Britian  Europe and other parts of the world to join  the Greenham blockade in order to disrupt  tine preparations of these war weapons,  which they believe represent a dangerous  escalation of the arms race and will increase the probability of a nuclear war in  Europe.  The week's blockade was expected to involve  thousands of women so the days were divided  by regions: July 4 - International and  Scotland; July 5 - Cymru (Wales), Ireland  and South West England; July 6 - London;  July 7 - South East England; July 8 - North  England and the Midlands. Each region is  expected to commit themselves to covering  the blockade for 24 hours and over and above  that the women asked that women come whenever they could, especially for the first  day, and for as long as they could stay. 10   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  LABOUR  DWU  takes  action  by Frances Allen  The Domestic Workers Union(DWU) has presented the B.C. Government with a legal  challenge on behalf of domestic workers.  The action was launched in mid-June under  Section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights  and Freedoms which states: "Everyone has  the right to life, liberty and security of  the person, and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with  the principles of fundamental justice."  "We believe that the purpose of this section is to prevent discrimination against  any class of people," said the DWU on June  11, 1983 at an open press conference,  "hence showing that domestic workers should  have the same rights as any other employees  in the province of British Columbia."  B.C.'s Employment Standards Act regulations  currently exclude live-in domestics from  Section 3 of the act which covers hours of  work and overtime. This means, unlike  other workers in the province, domestic  workers can be legally required to work  any time over a 40 hour week without compensation in time or money.  Although the regulations provide for a  minimum wage of $29.20 per day(8hrs x  $3.65), this acts as a maximum wage since  they contain no limit on the number of  hours a domestic must work to receive  the $29.20. As a result, many domestics  work 12 to 16 hours a day bringing their  hourly wage down to $2.45 or even as low  as $2.00. The situation is compounded by  the fact that domestics are required to  pay their employer as much as $200.00 a  month for room and board. This deduction  leaves between $1.20 and $1.60 as their  gross hourly wage.  Between 85% and 90% of domestic workers  are women, and more than 80% come from  third world countries. The union believes  domestic work is seen as an extension of  women's "natural functions" rather than 'Ģ  "real work". Thus domestic workers wages  and working conditions have been highly  influenced by the fact that women have  traditionally performed domestic work for  subsistence only.  The union also points out that domestic  servants have historically been a privilege  of the wealthy and charges governments  with setting up legal mechanisms, like  work permits, which are annually renewable  and can be cancelled at any time. This  effectively enables high-income earners  to exploit a third world labour force.  The DWU was first formed in Vancouver,  B.C. on December 20, 1981 and currently  has seventy-five signed members. The union  is not yet certified under the Labour Code.  Its primary activities have been advising  members of their statutory and contractual  legal rights and representing them before  various tribunals and with various government authorities.  Sexual  harassment  sparks debate  by Marion Pollack  The May, 1983 national convention of the  Canadian Union of Postal Workers(CUPW) will  be remembered for the emotionally charged  debate on the sexual harassment resolution.  While some media reports implied that the  defeat of this resolution signified a retrogressive step for women in unions, in  reality the impressive debate it sparked  served notice to all unionists that working women will not be silenced.  As it was originally worded, the resolution  dealt with member to member sexual harassment in any context. This was-altered by  the Resolutions Committee to^deal specifically with harassment of one member by  another in the course of union activities.  The resolution, which was to be adopted  as part of the constitution, outlined the  steps to be followed in the event of harassment. The initial step would be an informal meeting with the offender; the final  resort would be laying formal charges.  Affirming the dignity of the woman who was  harassed was central to the process.  The resolution was presented midway through  the marathon 36-hour session. Most delegates  accepted that sexual harassment exists,  although a number questioned how it could  possibly occur in our union. Noticeably  absent from the debate was the undercurrent  of comments and jokes that often accompanies  discussion of sexual harassment.  All those who spoke to the resolution - both  women and men - dealt with it seriously.  Many women who had never spoken into a  microphone before got up to address this  issue. Some spoke of personal experience;  others addressed the larger question of  how sexual harassment weakens the labour  movement. A dramatic note was added when a  courageous woman demanded - and got - a  public apology from a co-delegate who was  making sexist comments.  For me, the debate sparked a roller-coaster  of emotions ranging from elation to anger.  I was truly proud that my union had the guts  not to stifle this debate, and proud of the  way my co-delegates respected the issue.  Proud, too, that the women's movement had  laid the groundwork for dealing with sexual  harassment.  When the debate was over one male delegate  who had previously been quite unsupportive  told me that he had never seen the issue  as important, but that this debate had  changed his mind. CUPW President Jean-Claude  Parrot called the debate 'the best educational' he had attended. CUPW already has  prepared a course on sexual harassment, and  this debate insured continuation and follow-  up.  Bank  of B.C. sues  SORWUC  by Patty Gibson  The Bank of B.C. is suing The Bank and  Finance Workers Union Local 4 of SORWUC  and the union's president Mary Jean Rands  in the B.C. Supreme Court. The bank is  claiming damages for alleged libel contained in an article in the Feb/March  1983 issue of the union's newsletter, The  Monthly Statement. The union is confident  the article entitled "Supervisor and Bank  of B.C. Reach Agreement" is not libelous  but is concerned that the suit could cause  the union considerable financial damage,  leaving little time or resources for actual  -organizing.  The article in question summarized a  series of events describing where Rands,  then supervisor of the steno pool at the  bank's Hastings and Burrard branch, had  received a demotion, transfer and cut in  pay following a steno rating where bank  management had disagreed with her review  of a stenographer's performance. The union  filed an unfair labour practice complaint  charging the bank with interference aimed  at preventing union organizing among its  employees. The complaint was withdrawn  when Mary Jean accepted a monetary settlement after her new job had been re-classified and her wage increased so she was  earning more than her original supervisor  salary. She also received a week's leave  of absence upon request.  SORWUC Local 4 is now awaiting a decision  of the Labour Relations Board regarding  whether or not the libel suit constituted  a threat to Mary Jean's employment. The  union had filed a complaint with the Labour  Relations Board charging the bank with  interference and intimidation in respect  to the union's lawful right to publish and  distribute a newsletter. The June 23 hearing, however, refused to deal with the  interference charges and said it would only  consider the question of whether the suit  had actually threatened her employment.  The Board's decision will include the reasons for dismissing the other complaints.  Because the statement in question was not  critical of the bank, but rather a positive  statement about the union, SORWUC is concerned that they could have a libel suit  on their hands everytime theyymention a  bank in their newsletter. Women wanting  more information on the court case, or who  wish to contribute to a defense fund, can  contact the union at 681-2811. July/Aug '83   Kinesis   11  LABOUR  B.C. teachers:  Hit by hard times  my Employment and Immigration, 1421 women      women allows  by Kim Lyster  Drastic and punitive cutbacks levelled  against education (among other ministries)  by the Soeial Credit government has made  B.C. teachers the recipients of harsh  restrictions imposed by school boards  scrambling to balance dwindling financial  resources. The full implications of the  present economic crisis for women teachers  becomes clear when one looks at the statistics on cutbacks in education.  According to the 1982 unemployment rate  statistics compiled by the Department of  ?  H '"R" ,  i~iggi  were out of work compared to 483 male  teachers, a ratio of 3 to 1. When one  considers that women occupy 54% of the  full-time teaching positions, this ratio  identifies an alarming tendency to discriminate against women in the teaching  profession.  In 1971-72, the most recent period of high  teacher unemployment in B.C., the number  of employed women teachers decreased by  553, while the number of employed men  ' teachers actually increased. Statistics  from Ontario show that in 1976 women teachers were released at a ratio of nine women  to one man.  If the statistics are clear, so are the  reasons for this discrimination. Since  the Industrial Revolution, women have been  seen as a secondary source of workers, a  reserve labour pool. They have been moved  in and out of the wage labour force as the  economy dictated. The two world wars provide sharp evidence of this.  During World War I, women were employed  to fill the labour shortage created by the  conscription of men. They proved themselves  able, committed workers. Largely because  of their increased participation in the  economy and the political work of the  suffragettes, women were granted the vote  in 1917. With the outbreak of World War  II, women were again challenged to work  outside the home (as well as inside) as  their part in supporting the war effort.  They performed their double duty selflessly  and competently. When the war was over,  "the federal government mounted a full-  scale propaganda campaign to convince women  that they should now demonstrate their  love of country by leaving the labour  force and remaining at home. Family allowances were made payable directly to women  as a way of offsetting their need for  income," says Peggi Hall in a recent article from The B.C.   Teacher.  Prior to the establishment of public  schooling in B.C., teaching was considered  primarily a male responsibility. Only  with the economic prosperity of the gold  rush and the subsequent demand for more  teachers as the population increased were  Daycare strikes win and lose  After eight months of picketing, a settlement has been reached between members of  the Ontario Public Service Employee's  Union"(OPSEU) and Mini-Skools in Mississau-  ga and Scarborough. These strikers are now  being called back to work.  On Oct. 8, 1982, 60 women from Mississauga,  Scarborough and Hamilton, employed by the  American based Mini-Skools(a chain of  day-care centres owned by Kinder Care,  with head offices in Alabama) proceeded  to plan strike action over meager wages  (between $3.68 and $4.21/hr.) with an insufficient offering of increment, and  practically no benefits.  Eighteen of the teachers who were employed  at the Cawthra Road Mini-Skool, with help  from Action Day Care, made plans for  alternate day care. The found a good location in a community hall in Port Credit.  Some teachers also opened their homes to  students, with the result that 65 students  were entrolled out of a possible 140.  This school remained open during the strike  although Mini-Skool Management attempted  to entice parents to enroll their children  in their schools by offering half-price  tuition as well as free pick-up from their  homes. Several parents did enroll but many  refused to cross the picket line.  The settlement was not a victory for the  strikers. The wage increase finally agreed  upon in April(15% in the first year and  10% in the second) is the same wage  increase the workers rejected in October,  1982.  in addition, the important issue of seniority for work call-back and the question of  continuing employment of scabs was shunted  aside. On May 24 it was determined by the  Ontario Labour Board that they would rule  in these areas. The only recourse left by  the workers is to file "unfair labour  practices" .against Mini-Skools on specific  issues.  Meanwhile, the striking teachers in Hamilton determined their own success story.  Mini-Skool management closed the Hamilton  school after the strike began there, claiming that the franchise was not making  enough profit. The strikers began a search  for an alternate site. They found one in  a semi-rural setting, and after much hard  work refurbishing it, the Paradise Corner  Children's Centre opened March 10. The  workers are job-sharers, the parents pay  low fees and the wages are higher than  those paid by Mini-Skools.  (Action Daycare Newsletter/Toronto Clarion)  lowed into the profession. Consistently they faced lower salaries, unfair  hiring practises, discriminatory termination practises and ghettoization in the  primary grades. Even now 94% of primary  teachers are women, 98% of kindergarten  teachers are women and only a small percentage (21%) of women occupy any administrative position.  Many school districts still consider women teachers secondary wage earners. This  misconception is part of the rationale  behind the termination practices of school  districts in this period of restraint. In  1982, in districts where termination  notices were sent out, a disturbing patterr  appeared: in all districts but one, women  received a disproportionate amount of the  notices.  Statistics show that women are not secondary wage earners or working for luxuries:  they need their jobs. Thirty percent of  women in the labour force are single; ten  B.C.T.F. Unemployment Action Centre  percent are widowed, divorced or separated;  twenty-seven percent have husbands with  incomes of less than $12,000. As of 1976,  one family in every ten was headed by a  lone parent; eighty-three percent were  headed by women. Recent figures indicate  an increase in this pattern.  School board hiring practises reflect the  heightened vulnerability of women workers.  Approximately 71% of teachers on temporary  contract are women, 93% of part-time  teachers are women and the majority (79%)  of substitute teachers are wc-nen. Last  hired, first fired...again and again.  Statistics frighten, stagger or appall us  but they don't protray the personal consequences of discrimination and unemployment.  Tracy (name changed) is a 29 year old teach  er with four degrees. Since her graduation  in 1982 she has only worked one-half year  in a temporary position in a northern district. Due to cutbacks, her contract was  not extended after being told initially  that it probably would be. Trying to maintain a long term personal relationship  long distance proved exhausting for Tracy.  When she lost her job, moving to the Lower  Mainland became possible and financially  necessary. She had this to say about being  unemployed.  "I blamed myself a lot for getting my  Masters,  for not staying in Ontario,  for  not getting into teaching sooner...now I  recognize that it has nothing to do with  my choices,  it 's just a game of luck.  This  society identifies you according to your  job so when you say you're unemployed,  you're devalued.  Money is power and I've  been feeling rather powerless in many ways.  continued on p. 12 12   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  SPORTS  |K The Manitoba  **&£& Marathon drew  |||lgt:| competitors from  K across the country,  ^ajjftli and was won by  t^SlI Cindy Hamilton.  Where are the women?  by Emma Kivisild  A joint study conducted by Media Watch and  the Canadian Association for the Advancement of Women and Sport (CAAW&S) puts  numbers behind what sportswomen, athletes  and fans alike, probably knew all along:  not only is the coverage of women's sports  appalling, it is practically nonexistent.  The survey looked at local television,  newspapers, and radio. Whereas 39% of the  television viewing audience for sports is  female, an average of about 5% of the TV  sports news coverage is about women (6.4%  on BCTV, and 4.5% on CKVU). Six percent of  the sports section" in commercial newspapers  deals with women's news. That figure is  brought well into perspective, points out  CAAW&S' Jean Willow, if you consider that  horses get double that amount of coverage  - twelve percent.  Women athletes fare worse on radio than in  any of the other media: they are in only  1.4% of all the sports programming on Lower Mainland radio stations.  The CAAW&S/Media Watch survey makes it more  obvious than ever than one of the primary  issues for women in sport is still invisibility. Taking into consideration the nature of much of the women's sports coverage  that is there, the extent of that invisibility becomes even clearer.  How can we believe in physically strong  role models if we never get to see them?  Unemployed Teachers  continued from p. 11  Tracy has been supplementing her inadequate  unemployment cheques with a variety of  part-time jobs, endeavoring to maintain  some degree of financial independence in  her relationship. She is finding it extremely stressful to be juggling several jobs  at once. She describes it as a no-win  situation: the expenditure of energy to  keep working to maintain self-esteem has as  its catch the exhaustion it produces.  Lorrie is 28, a five-year degree student  with a major in special education. Since  her graduation in 1981 she has been actively  job seeking in her field, but she has not  had a chance to work. Substituting has  dwindled for 4-5 days a week last year to  4-5 days a month this year.  "One of the biggest things I 've encountered  is feeling like I just don't have a goal,  a purpose in life.  I've worked five years  in university and I don't know if I'll ever  get a job. My biggest problem is losing  motivation...after a while you're just  getting up and keeping busy for the sake  of keeping busy.  I'm somebody who I think  adjusts really easily but you just don't  know when it 's going to end - there just  seems no end in sight.  It's easy to feel,  and I know I shouldn't take it personally,  your self-concept slowly being depleted."  Lorrie also has concerns about the attitudes  of her colleagues towards her as a substitute teacher fighting increasing unemployment.  Maxine Boag, President of the Provincial  Association of Substitute Teachers, is all  too aware of the discrimination substitutes  face. Boag said school boards have wiped  out or drastically reduced budget allotments  for substitutes, whose numbers she estimates  at 5,000 to 7,000. About 80% of them are  women. Boag said many who have relied for  their living on replacing regular classroom  teachers during absences are, or will be,  destitute.  In response to the ever worsening employment  situation among teachers the B.C. Teacher's  Federation approved funds to establish an  Unemployed Teacher's Action Centre in the  B.C.T.F. building. Since its opening in  March the centre, staffed by one paid coordinator and a host of volunteers, has  provided counselling; advice on UIC, GAIN,  grievances; workshops; a social environment;  political advocacy; contacts and support  for teachers.  It has also sought to make the plight of  unemployed teachers a priority among their  employed colleagues across the province.  The obvious need for the centre, as indicated by the numbers of people using it either  by telephone or in person, has led the BCTF  Executive to approve funding for another  year. Those women who have availed themselves of the resources in the centre have  found it a valuable source of information.,  support and advocacy. The centre's phone  numbers are 736-9267 or outside the Lower  Mainland, toll free 112-800-663-9163.  (Kim Lyster is a teacher in the Lower Mainland and is currently the Status of Women  representative for the BCTF task force on  teachers.)  National  leaders meet  The Canadian Association for the Advancement of Women and Sport (CAAW&S) had their  annual general meeting in Winnipeg in June,  and their B.C. Regional meeting later that  month.  The annual general meeting was marked by  the increased involvement of grassroots  participants - as opposed to international  athletes and top-level coaches - at all  levels of the organization. As well, the  results of several studies were presented,  and some strategies for action tentatively  developed for the coming year.  Some of the strongest evidence that women's  opportunities in sport are bleak, especially  when it comes to our chances for employment  in a sports environment, came from a study  conducted in the CIAU (the national university athletic body). Figures revealed that  between 1978 and 1982, while employment  opportunities for men in various areas of  | sport have steadily increased, those for  women have decreased in some areas, and at  best remained the same._ For example, men  gained 24 full-time coaching positions in  women's  programs in that period, while  women lost  five in the same area. In men's  programs, male coaches have garnered 149  jobs, women only six. An update to the report shows that from 1982 to 1983, men's  programs, overall, increased to the tune  of 15% whereas women's grew by only 3%.  CAAW&S has struck an ad hoc committee to  specifically address the problem of the  decreasing numbers of paid positions for  women in the sports world.  Another issue at the CAAW&S meeting was a  Canada Fitness Survey showing that the  peak of fitness for Canadian girls comes  at the age of 10, after which the drop in  physical well-being is dramatic(for boys  the peak is at age 13, and the decline is  not as sharp). It is a fact, also, that the  highest level of sports participation for  Canadian girls is at twelve years.  "Girls participate until puberty, and then  that's when all the messages that sport is  not ladylike, or feminine, or the right  things for girls, start coming in," notes  Susan Lee, a CAAW&S Board member. "We're  trying to work at getting women to participate throughout their lives."  The question of integrated ('co-ed') versus  sex-segregated sports programs was also  addressed. Women in the Maritime provinces  are facing the negative consequences of  integration as schools integrate sports  programs to save money, and female phys-ed  teachers are let go, regardless of seniority, since they are not deemed appropriate  role models for boys. Action on behalf of  these women was slated as an immediate  priority.  B.C. representatives have decided to conduct a consciousness raising program about  women and sport this summer. "We'll be trying to demolish the myths about what types  of activities women can get involved in,  make it clear that women don't have to go  to Ron Zalko to get fit." The program will  involve a slide-tape presentation, and the  participation of community sports leaders  from around the province.  CAAW&S would like to hear about any upcoming events for women in sport so that they  can be an effective referral service for  athletes and spectators. The organization  also needs articles on softball and soccer,  and layout people for upcoming newsletters.  They can be reached at 687-3333,  at the Sport B.C. building, 1200 Hornby,  Vancouver. July/ Aug '83   Kinesis   13  LESBIAN  Conference  of British Columbia met May 20 to 23 in  extravaganza of cultural events, workshops  rs counted more than 500 women in atten-  by Carolyn Jones  Lesbians from every part  Vancouver for a weekend  and networking. Organize  dance.  "Our goal was to make this conference useful to many different  women and we think we succeeded", said one of the members of the  thirty-woman organizing committee. "Isolation is one of the biggest  problems we face as gay women and conferences like this are crucial  for our identity and survival."  Johanna, one of the women who worked on the workshop and agenda  committee, told Kinesis  the organizers have received a variety of  feedback and criticism since the conference. They were told by  some women that it was too personal, by others that it was too  political.  The committee tried to have something for everyone, Johanna said,  but couldn't find facilitators for some workshops which they  thought important. Organizers started with a list of two hundred  workshops which women wanted. The list was compiled at an open  meeting about the conference last October and from suggestions  from groups, ihdividuals, and organizing committee members themselves.  More than forty workshops focussed on issues like surviving outside the cities, coming out on the job, nurturing relationships,  unemployment, spirituality and strategies for effective political  organizing.  Some workshops which did not happen, for various reasons, would  have dealt with death, body image, tolerance in the lesbian community, raising sons, and sadism and masochism. The last was difficult  to organize, Johanna said, because the committee felt they could  not have a workshop for S&M lesbians without also having a debate  workshop on S&M.  Johanna felt the availability of space for affinity/support/  interest groups was a way of compensating for the areas that were  not covered. Several workshops led to ongoing groups, among them  an S&M support group and two groups out of the workshop on violence  in lesbian relationships.  Johanna attended the workshop on violence in relationships, in  which about thirty women participated. "It was really emotional  and really hard and all the women who came were really brave,"  she said. Some women had been and some are in violent relationships, and a few were in crisis situations. "It was a hard thing  to talk about," Johanna said, so it was a powerful experience to  break the silence. The organizers got good feedback from women who  attended that workshop. "We had a lot of feedback that the facilitators needed more skills, which we think is true in some cases,"  Johanna said.  Peggy, a member of the core organizing committee, told Kinesis  about the organizing process and fundraising efforts for the  conference. The 1981 National Lesbian Conference, held in Vancouver,  recommended that each province have a conference before the next  national conference. British Columbian is the first province to  hold one. Organizers began meeting last August with five women,  who obtained a grant and loan from the national lesbian conference.  An open forum at the beginning of October drew about fifty women,  Peggy said, and twenty-five of them joined the organizing committee.  The core committee had one of the best working moods she has felt  in any group, Peggy said. She felt they really tried to respect  each other's viewpoint and listen tQ each other. The core committee  met fortnightly until two months before the conference, when it  began meeting every week.  Fundraising was a major undertaking. The organizers held two bazaars and three dances. Each dance cleared $1000.00, Peggy said,  but they are still left with a deficit. There will be more fund-  raising events later this year; including dances the last Fridays  of August, September, and October at Capri Hall.  The conference received media coverage from The Sun,  The  Courier,  CKWX,   and Kinesis,  Peggy said. No media at all came to the pride  parade Saturday May 21st, although they were Invited. "I would  have liked the coverage and I think they stayed away because they  didn't want to cover us too much, " Peggy said. The week before  the conference, she added, six of the organizers went on The  Vancouver Show to advertise, the conference and field some questions  about lesbianism.  .(The organizers would like suggestions for fundraising events.  What kinds of events would you like to go to?  Please contact the organizers at P.O.  Box 65563,  Station F,   Van,  B.C.,   V5N 5K5.) 14   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  Connecting  province-wide  by Nym Hughs  The Provincial Connection is a new B.C.-  wide lesbian association formed at the  recent Regional Lesbian Conference. One of  the things we really wanted to see resulting from the Conference was some kind of  formalized way for lesbians to keep in  touch and work together. We thought that  there were enough lesbian groups and networks existing in BC that it was time to  start talking about a provincial organization.  A small sub-group of the conference organizing committee met a few times to write  up some tentative proposals. We had no  idea what other women would want or need  or even if other women would think a provincial organization was a good idea, so  we went to the meetings at the conference  very open to what might happen.  I found the meetings very powerful and  moving. There were iesbians from up north,  from the Interior, from the Kootenays,  from the Island. There were lesbians that  have been active in political work for  years and years and lesbians who were at  their first lesbian gathering. We ended  up with a commitment to creating a provincial network that would strengthen us as  individual lesbians, that would help  create accessible lesbian networks and  groups where none existed, and that would  facilitate communication and resource-  sharing across the province.  Nobody wanted a lot of structure. Nobody  knew the best way or the right way to organize provincially. So we started from  what we as individuals needed and what  work we were prepared to commit ourselves  to doing over the next year. Women took  on specific projects like compiling and  publicizing a list of regional contacts,  fundraising, producing educational pamphlets, publishing regular provincial updates in feminist and gay publications,  organizing another meeting in six months.  There were a couple of commitments that  particularly excited me. One was the  creation of a group to look for, think  about, find ways to make available to lesbians living outside of large cities the  kind of access to lesbian resources and  support that city women take for granted.  The other was a commitment by Vancouver  women to do fundraising for lesbian projects .in other parts of the province. It  Childcare: a conference priority  by Rachel Langf ord  The planning committee of the 1983 Regional Lesbian Conference chose childcare as  one of its priority concerns last October.  With information from Lesbian and Feminist  Mothers Political Action Group(LFMPAG),  we created a list of needs and issues to  be dealt with concerning lesbian mothers  and their children. On site childcare was  possibly the most important issue to be  addressed.  The location committee worked hard to find  a site with enough suitable space for the  needs of the children; including a nursery,  a quiet room, a noisy room, and a workshop  room. We also recognized the importance of  making lesbian mothers and their children  visible to those normally unexposed to  their needs. We encouraged non-mothering  lesbians to get involved by signing up  for volunteer childcare workshifts.  Another one of our goals was to provide  a Saturday overnight childcare giving some  of the mothers a rare evening space to  themselves. Thanks to the wimmin who shared  their house with us, the children enjoyed  a night of video movies.  Integrating the children in with the conference was our underlying objective,  making the weekend as memorable for them  as it was for us. For example, during the  introductory speech, a special welcome  was made to all those children in attendance. Here we announced that girls were  welcome to any workshops not specified  adult only, and that boys could go too,  if they had to be near their caregiver,  but were not to participate. Over the weekend a suggestion was made to provide a  workshop for boys run by men(perhaps gay  men) off site, dealing with issues such  as sexism.  Last November, a small non-mothering committee started to plan scheduled activities  such as a field trip, outdoor games, costume making and workshops. At this point  we decided on equipment and materials  needed and located sources from where we  could borrow or rent such goods. It wasn't  until the weekend, we realized, that we  desperately needed more childcare organizers. Unfortunately, none of us were able  to attend any of the conference.  It was December when advertising first  went out for paid childcare workers. Meetings with prospective workers were held  as early as March, where general policies  were discussed, schedule time slots filled  and ideas shared. As time grew closer the  odd worker dropped out with changes in  plans, leaving us with gaps to be filled.  Eventually, we finalized with eleven wimmin  which gave us an excellent worker/child  ratio. Fortunately, these wimmin were a  hard working and responsible team which  proved essential over the weekend.  Imperative though, is the realization of  just how important pre-registration of  children is to the judgement of numbers of  workers, food amounts, materials bought and  a general budget allotment. Thanks to those  mothers who did pre-register, everything  ran smoothly With the thirty children who  attended. It became clear by the appreciation that the'childcare was much needed in  our community, and it also spoke for a  large chunk of the overall conference budget.  We would like to thank those many wimmin  whose help and dedication was so greatly  appreciated in contributing to a successful weekend. The many who lent equipment,  shared knowledge, space, facilitated workshops, and gave of their time on the weekend. It was an incredible learning experience for all those involved, with new  knowledge shared, leaving us extremely  pleased with the results.  (Childcare Committee,   1983 Regional Lesbian  Conference) 'ñ†  seemed as though we were really acknowledging the difference between living as  a lesbian in Prince Rupert and living as  a lesbian in Victoria. There was also a  strong sense that all of us had jobs and  children and lovers and friends and political commitments and couldn't take on any  work that didn't directly make sense. We  seemed to be a lot more realistic, a lot  more tolerant of differences and a lot  more willing to make mistakes than we were  five years ago.  We"talked about the fear that creating a  provincial lesbian organization would be  duplicating the work of existing groups  such as the BCFW Lesbian Action Committee.  Women who worked on the Lesbian Action  Committee said that they felt the existence  of a provincial lesbian network would  create more visible lesbian communities,  more lesbian groups, would put more lesbians in touch with BCFW, would mean more  women coming to feminism and would, in  short, be both personally supportive to  them as individuals and strengthen the  political work they were already doing.  Any woman in BC can join the Provincial  Connection, by getting her name and address  on the mailing list. She can stop right  there if she wants to. The mailing list  will be totally confidential. Or she could  join one of the already existing work  committees like communications, or fundraising, or she could get together with several  other women to create a work committee to  take on a specific project. She could become a contact for her community or region.  Being a contact woman for the Provincial  Connection would mean either being in a  safe position to have your first name and  phone number publicized, or being willing  to have the Communications Committee pass  along to you inquiries from your region. It  would probably be sort of like being a one-  woman lesbian information line. You would  end up giving information to women new to  town about what was happening for lesbians,  and probably talking with women who were  coming out. So if a woman moves to Kamloops  and doesn't know any lesbians there she contacts the Provincial Connection mailing  address who sends her name and phone number  to the Kamloops contact lesbian who phones  her up and tells her whatever there is to  tell. It's a bit cumbersome but it's a big  step forward to even have a contact lesbian  in Kamloops.  Lesbians in Kamloops can get in touch with  lesbians in Vernon and have parties or  baseball games or shared childcare or  meetings.  The Provincial Connection is going to  connect lesbians across the province with  each other. Anything could happen from  there. Ending our isolation as lesbians is  step one in building a movement.  Contact the Provincial Connection at:.  #404 - 1545 W. 15th Ave.  Van., B.C., V6J 2K5 -ia~Ph: 734-3153 Kinesis   July/Aug'83  15  Nurturing  long-term  relationships  Long-term relationships are not ideal for every  lesbian. But for some, a committed relationship  working towards a vision of permanancy is the  goal. Within the confines of a long-term  relationship the women involved may or may not  choose to live together or make the committment  monogamous.  by Michaela Johnson  There are factors inherent in being a  woman and a lesbian that affect us within  our relationships; most obviously, misogyny  and homophobia. Growing up in a woman-hating culture with its inequities and violence  may manifest in women as self-hatred,  shame and guilt, and other ramifications  too numerous to mention. Belonging to an  unpopular minority group, the lesbian must  cope with even more exaggerated forms of  this in addition to little or no support  from family, straight friends, the law,  etc. Even more painfully, she must face  her own internalized homophobia - doubts  that her form of loving is really alright.  Additionally, most women experience what  have been termed "boundary problems" -  because our society does not permit women  to develop a strong sense of autonomy (self-  direction, independence), many of us have  trouble defining ourselves. We don't know  our limits, aren't aware of our needs and  wants and how to take care of these assertively. It is then all too easy for us to  submerge ourselves 'in a relationship, losing sight of who we are and where we are  going.  Having done lesbian relationship counselling for several years, I've noted that  many of the presenting problems women  bring into counselling are actually issues  regarding autonomy and fusion (two individuals submerging themselves in their relationship so much that sense of self or  individuality is felt by one or both part  ners as threatened, lessened or even lost  within the relationship). The presenting  issue may be concerns about lifestyle  choice, city vs. country life; sexual difficulties, monogamy vs. non-monogamy; or  power imbalance, one partner making most  of the decisions. All of these interface  with autonomy and fusion. For example,  some women may seek out a second relationship as a way of maintaining autonomy in  their primary relationship. It's important  to realize that all relationship problems  are not a function of this paradigm, but  it does occur so often and in so many guises  that it bears close scrutiny.  In the heterosexual model, fusion occurs,  but usually only one-sidedly;- the woman  takes on much of her self-identification  from her husband. But in the lesbian relationship, both partners have been conditioned by the romantic ideal of "losing  oneself" and the belief system that the  relationship and/or the other person must  always supercede one's own needs. This,  coupled with the boundary problems mentioned above and many other factors, sets up  a situation favoring fusion.  Almost all relationships shift in and out  of fusion depending on stages and conflicts  within the relationship. Because of this,  it's best to conceptualize the following  as a continuum of evaluation. However, the  truly fused relationship will not shift  easily or often and the individuals involved  will experience the right hand column of  the continuum more frequently than the  left. Because intimacy in a lover relationship is a result of equality, the left hand  Intimate bonding: sufficient autonomy and boundaries:  1. Partners experience trust & openness, frequent self-disclosure of  thoughts, feelings, needs and wants.  2. A peer relationship exists; there is shared or shifting power balance.  Partners feel interdependent but powerful within the relationship.  3. Partners take responsibility for themselves and a problem-solving  approach toward difficulty.  4. Partners accept and honor their differences; both realize compromise  and accomodation are necessary.  5. Both partners have individual friends, interests and activities  as well as those that are shared.  6. There is acceptance and working through of change.  7. Partners feel they choose and want to be in the relationship; if it ends  8. There is a gradual resolving of issues; an agreement to disagree about  those that can't be resolved.  Credit and thanks to: Connie Wolfe, Ellen Tollman, Jane Rule, Ingrid Pacey, Sandra Lorenzen and,  Addictive or fused bonding: insufficient autonomy and  boundaries:  1. Partners experience secret-keeping, a "no-talk" rule about certain  2. Continual power imbalance exists; partners feel enmeshed.  3. Partners blame the other or the relationship for difficulty.  4. Partners attempt to change or invalidate each other.  5. Everything is always shared.  6. There is" fear and resistance to change; the relationship feels stagnant.  7. One or both partners feel they 'have to' be in the relationship and feel  as if they won't survive its ending.  8. Conflict and issues feel circular- nothing ever feels resolved.  column is headed - "Intimate bonding:  sufficient autonomy and boundaries", and  the right can be called - "Fused or addic-.  tive binding: insufficient autonomy and  boundaries" because the fused relationship  is also an addictive relationship since  one or both partners do not feel empowered  or self-sufficient within it.  It is important to reiterate that women  are carefully taught to function on the  "fusion" side of this continuum. We are not  taught openness, directness, assertion,  negotiating skills, etc. From the time they  are children, men are taught to "function as  autonomous beings in the world; we are not.  Additionally, most of us would agree that  the goal is not to function as men do, but  to strike a balance between inner and other  directedness, between our own path and the  needs of those around us.  In the lesbian relationship, both partners  bring their experience of and reaction to  all of the factors I have discussed. Given  this and the ordinary problems individuals  face in relationship, it's no wonder we  sometimes feel a bit overwhelmed! Although  there are no formulas that work in every  situation, there are some superficial guidelines that can be helpful through the  morass:  1. Be sure you and your partner have time  and space alone.  2. Have individual friends, interests, and  activities as well as shared ones.  3. Learn to share feelings, negotiate  issues, compromise and fight fairly.  4. Set up specific times to handle business.  5. Give and receive frequent appreciations,  strokes, and assurances.  6. Be honest; check intent when giving  feedback; check out assumptions, fears  and fantasies.  7. Contract as much as possible - eopeciallj  finances, responsibilities, goals and  commitments.  8. Be willing to modify behavior and ask  for what you want and need.  9. Work independently on your own issues  - everything can't and shouldn't be worked out within the context of your relationship, jsr^iss  10. Don't indulge in self-blame and negativity; you and your partner are not  responsible for your conditioning and  oppression, you are responsible for  your healing.!  (Credit and thanks to:    Connie Wolfs,  Ellen  Tollman,  Jane Rule,  Ingrid Pacey,  Sandra  Lorenzen and many more. ) July/Aug '83  July/Aug *83   Kinesis   17  From our past        A Lesbian Politic Emerges  by Sara Diamond  DYKE/dZ uck/n: warm,  caring,  affectionate,  woman loving women.  Oppression does not produce an automatic  response, but it does provide the conditions within which the oppressed can begin to develop their own consciousness  and identity. (Jeffrey Weeks, Coming Out,  London,  Quartet Books,   1977, pg.   4-5)  It has only been in the last century that  lesbians have emerged as a distinct and  conscious group in society. This is despite  the reality that lesbian sexual behavior  and emotional bonding between women have  existed in various forms throughout history.  The isolation of all forms of sexuality  which differed from the heterosexual  norm of the family ultimately forced lesbians to create alternate structures to  fulfill their needs. To self-define one  must perceive oneself as divided off from  others.  A mass movement and community of open lesbians, one that cuts across class and to  some extent, cultural lines, has only  emerged in the last fifteen years, with the  growth of the recent feminist radicaliza-  tion.  There are some descriptions of early 17th  century lesbian activity in the USA, revealed during the witchhunts. Lesbian  options for early American women were very  limited because of the small numbers of women, nonetheless lesbian activity was documented and repressed; a threat to the  Puritan family.  As early as the 18th century* a homosexual  community existed, primarily for upper  class men. Women did not participate in  the sexually segregated institutions in  which male homosexuality could be acted out:  prisons, schools, universities, the army  and navy and politics. Women were active in  their communities and in a variety of helping professions, midwifery for example.  Much of this work is unrecorded - it would  be valuable to look for lesbian activities  in these all-women groups and amongst domestic and agricultural workers.  "The Ladies of Llangolen", photo repro: Donna McBride from Lesbian  Lives by Barbara Grier and Coletta Reid - Diana Press  There are some descriptions of 18th century  lesbian activity in France. Here Diderot  described it as "the domain of widows and  maids', less of an affront than these women's activities would be with men."  One of the difficulties in studying early  lesbian activity is that the majority of  evidence is of women cross-dressed. It was  these women who most fascinated male social  scientists. This eliminated the women who  lived and loved with these women, or other  women who did not obviously differentiate  from the norms of female appearance.  The turn of the century brought a heightened  awareness of lesbianism in the U.S., France,  England and Germany. Some writers have  suggested that women's friendships with  women contained both overt and suppressed  lesbian sentiment in this period.  Women certainly' related along the sexual  division, not across it, for emotional  support. The record of women's emotional  relationships comes from a small privileged group of women, those with leisure and  enough education to enable them to write.  Women were isolated in the home after  marriage. Many women did not go to girl's  schools. The culture degraded women and  made it difficult for them to respect themselves, let alone each other.  Women had no economic margin and little  privacy to act out lesbian relationships.  The repression of female sexuality in  general would take a harsh toll on women -  not only heterosexuality but masturbation  was suppressed.  For many women, sexuality appears to have  been subordinated to economic survival and  the widely propagated concepts of love and  romance generally held within marriage.  While there was a long-term form of lesbian oppression through the institution of  compulsory heterosexuality, there have also  been other varying forms of sexual oppression. These have been expressed through  changing state policy and its reflection  in the media and school systems, both of  which are regulators of the family and  sexual relations for the state and economic  system.  The law was an active agent in forming  homosexual male activities; in shaping and  containing the visible ghetto. Gay men, and  later lesbians, have been consistently  scapegoated in times of economic recession.  For example, in England in the 1890's  there was a severe depression. Homosexuality was identified with foreignness, the  undermining of the family and the radicali-  zation of the working class. Homosexual  charges were laid against rebels, who  fought for home rule in Ireland as a way  of polarizing public opinion against them.  In the late 19th century, as the law evolved  to incorporate gay male activity, medical  science also began to investigate and categorize forms of "deviant" sexuality. Three  treatments of homosexuality emerged. One  built on the concept of sexual sin, translated this concept into law, and dealt with  homosexuality as a form of corruption. A  second defined it as a disease, one which  could be contracted after birth; society  needed protection from the illness, thus  the sick required isolation. If it could be  contracted, then conversely it could be  cured. The last analysis posed homosexuality  as congenital in nature; it could not be  cured, only tolerated, and was possibly  the result of new chromosome patterns.  Psychoanalysis also emerged in this period.  Along with other social sciences, it attempted to apply rational scientific concepts to  the previously unexplored area of sexuality.  While psychoanalysis allowed for the possibility that men and women experienced homosexual and lesbian as well as heterosexual  desire, it adopted a prescriptive notion  of sexuality based on 19th century concepts  of masculinity and femininity.  The early feminist movement created the  context in which the first gay male movement appeared. The strongest movement developed in Germany, aligning itself with  the massive socialist and feminist currents.  As early as the 1890's a debate emerged  where Marxist and often feminist forces  aligned on one side and more conservative  voices on the other. The former argued that  sexual identity was a continuum, with homosexuality in all forms being a socially  learned behavior, like heterosexuality.  The more conservative voices argued that  homosexuality was congenitally determined.  Feminism divided into two currents internationally. One, represented by socialist-  feminists such as Stella Brown in England,  argued for sexual expression and control of  women over their bodies as well as legal  equality and workers' power. The other,  articulated by bourgeois British and American women tended towards an anti-sexual  position, seeing women as primarily exploited for their bodies. As an extension of her  position, Brown defended gay and lesbian  rights, however she believed that women  opted for lesbian relationships primarily  because heterosexuality involved such extreme oppression.  Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas from  'Charmed Circle' by James R. Mellow,  Preger Publishers,photo: Carl Van Vechten  Marxists of this period developed a program which demanded the liberation of women,  opposed moralism, and advocated liberalizing abortion, divorce and homosexual and  lesbian legislation. When the Russian Revolution took place the Bolsheviks abolished  laws against homosexuality and did away  with the category of "a crime against nature". This did not mean that an understanding of lesbian and gay issues was by  any means widespread, but it does suggest  a nascent willingness to build a new social  understanding of sexuality. The Russian  Revolution inspired international organization for sexual reform. The World League  for Sex Reform encompassed feminists and  homosexual rights activists, including  official representation from international  Communist groups.  In this early feminist period, a visible  lesbian subculture emerged for the first  time. The Black jazz scene revealed a lesbian milieu in its midst. Bessie Smith's  lyrics describe her sexual encounters with  women as well as men. Columbia Records produced these songs for commercial sale in  the Black community, indicating the material was not considered shocking by the milieu. Bessie Smith describes other lesbians  and a network of apartments and clubs where  women could party together.  A significant lesbian literary community  began to emerge. Rather than study law or  attempt research, many women, a significant  proportion of whom were lesbians, have re-  corded their experiences and struggle for  personal and political change within a vehicle that deals with the emotional and  subjective realms(the area of women's  jurisdiction) - the novel.  In the 1920's, a milieu of petit-bourgeois  and bourgeois lesbians, most of whom were  financially independent, congregated in  Paris. The self-image of these women was  very bohemian. Many dressed as men, either  because they were to some extent male-  identified (which was certainly how the  dominant ideology defined lesbians) or  because they were constantly trying to  challenge the oppressive and gender-restrictive mores of their age.  Radclyffe Hall, in The. Well of Loneliness,  provides the classic stereotype of the  lesbian: father-identified, unable to love  her mother, congenitally masculine in  physique and style.  A variety of lesbian lifestyles are evident,  although much of the lesbian literature of  this period is heavily invested in both  romanticism and self-hatred. Another literary current reflected a life which, far  from being centered on salons, focused on'  marriage, with brief interludes of lesbian  contact. Yet another represents two women  living together; without sexual contact,  but with deep affection.  A last current is exemplified by Helen R.  Hull, who wrote The Labyrinth  in the USA  in 1923. The book is about independent  feminist career women who live together in  a stable relationship, competently taking  on relatives, employers and anyone else  who tried to get in their way.  Despite any critiques of these books, the  significant factor is their impact on a  society which had refused the existence of  lesbians. Radclyffe Hall's trial for The  Well of Loneliness  was the lesbian equivalent to Oscar Wilde's. It led to the suppression o.f lesbian literature triggered  by an attack by the Sunday Express(London),  which published a picture of Hall in suit  and bow tie. The book was censored because  Hall failed to condemn the woman about  whom she wrote.  As well as the English attack on Hall,  there was increased repression against  lesbian literature in the US. The play,  The Captive,  was banned from Broadway. New  York City passed a law banning all lesbian  and gay content from public view.  The legal situation for lesbians was becoming increasingly tense. In 1921 the  British Parliament debated the inclusion of  lesbianism into the legal definition of  homosexual activity. Queen Victoria earlier  stated she could not believe women would  do such a thing and the politicians finally  chose not to pass the amendment for fear  that it would act as a kind of advertisement, alerting innocent women to the possibilities of such activities.  Two political processes occurred in the  1930's which, outside of economic constraints, were to"have ongoing effects on  the ability of lesbians to come out. These  were the growth in international fascism  as a response to the severe economic  crisis and the right turn of the Soviet  leadership under Stalin, which led to the  left's disassociation with sexual reform  and feminism.  The German fascists decimated the powerful  gay male movement in Germany, focusing on  it as the target of its first political  offensive. The gay movement failed to defend itself and in the growing conservative climate the left would not defend it.  German feminism .was also crushed with the  defeat of the left both before and after  the Nazis came to power. Movements fragmented and turned against each other. Over  10,000 homosexuals and lesbians died in  Nazi concentration camps.  Meanwhile, in the Soviet Union and the  international Communist movement, the  family, long criticized, was reinstituted  as an ideal. All non-procreative sexuality  was suppressed. The war consolidated capitalism and its aftermath led to the  strengthening of the family.  The first evidence of a re-emerging lesbian subculture existed in the USA during  the 1950's. This was a period of reaction  in the US and violent anti-communist hysteria. The traditional identification of  sexual difference with political heresy  was rekindled as McCarthy jumped to defend  the American family.  There were twice as many prosecutions of  lesbians and gay men in the post-war period  as before. Lesbians and gay men were described by the police as a security threat  because theoretically they could be blackmailed, and were forced out of the civil  service. Accusations of lesbianism and  homosexuality were used to fire large  numbers of civil servants, regardless of  their sexual orientation.  During these hard times a new type of  organization formed for gay men and women,  one that lobbied for limited reform and disassociated itself from all political radicalism. The Mattachine Society emerged for  homosexuals and several years later Del  Martin and Phyllis Lyon began the Daughters  of Bilitis for women.  The initial meetings reflect the confusion  and fear of the period. "Experts", including homophobic experts, were asked to  speak; women were often apologetic for  their sexual orientation; few knew each  other's names; and attempts were made to  "feminize" masculine women.  Nonetheless, within the DOB there were the  first stirrings of a revitalized feminism.  The economic boom of the 1960's set the  stage for the rise of the modern lesbian  movement. The development of large-scale  birth control led to more liberal attitudes  towards heterosexual activity outside of  the family and a lessening of sexual repression in general. Given the relative  stability of the family and the weight of  heterosexual conditioning, governments in  North America, England .and Europe responded to pressures from the reform gay movement and permitted consensual homosexual  acts between adults.  A new women's movement also erupted, from  the radicalization of the late Sixties,  based on long-term changes in the position  " of women and the specific frustration of  women within other radical movements.  Sexist attitudes seemed in contradiction  with the increasingly liberal atmosphere  and women's goals.  The material means for women to have more  autonomy and pleasure within heterosexual  relationships existed, yet women did not  control birth control and abortion and  mysogyny blocked the realization of pleasure. Women wanted to redefine the nature  of sexual pleasure, to wrest control of  their bodies from a male-dominated culture.  This framework provided the basis for a  largescale lesbian current to emerge.  •• £•■-': .--v;  A lesbian movement emerged both within  the predominantly gay male movement and  the women's movement. The new gay movement addressed four forms of oppression:  persecution, discrimination, liberal tolerance and self-oppression. Its perspectives were far more militant than its  1950's predecessor. One of its primary  tactics was to call for gays and lesbians  to "come out" and be open about their sexual orientation. The early gay liberation  movement identified, at least theoretically, with a feminist critique of gender  roles and called for a total restructuring  of sexual rights and freedoms.  As the movement developed, women within it  began to organize specifically around  lesbian oppression. Real differences emerged between men trying to improve their  social status and women who identified  primarily as women and criticized male  privilege. Gay men were often insensitive  to women's needs. By 1972 the gay liberation movement had divided, split along  sex lines, socialism versus countercultural  strategies, and the reality of the gay  ghetto versus the goals of the liberation  movement.  While a strong, diverse and public gay  community, including both men and women  emerged from this process, the movement  disintegrated, concentrating on demands  for equal treatment. Many lesbians left  gay organizations, preferring to work  exclusively with women, or to ally with  gay men only around specific issues, and  growing right-wing attacks.  At the same time lesbians had entered the  women's movement. Some women left reform  groups and became radical and socialist  feminists; others fought it out inside  groups like the National Organization of  Women(NOW). When women were successful in  winning the implementation of lesbian  rights, they tended to stay in the larger  women's movement and often became central  activists. In some situations this meant  that actual organization around lesbian  continued on p. 18 18   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  Facts about lesbian health  by Lorna Zaback  Getting good healthcare is not easy for  most women. We are encouraged, from an early  age, to mistrust our own judgement about  our health and place ourselves unquestion-  ingly in the hands of doctors and the medi- ,  cal system.  However, the medical industry in North  America exists primarily to realize profit  for those who control it(drug companies  and doctors) and we do not, for the most  part, receive healthcare that is in our  interests, that will help us attain and  maintain health.  Within this system, lesbians face particular problems. Most healthcare practitioners  assume that every woman is heterosexual,  that sex means intercourse and that all  women need birth control. If lesbianism is  considered at all it is as a deviation from  the norm. Faced with this knowledge, it is  no wonder that many lesbians are reluctant  to expose themselves to potential harassment or to jeopardize themselves by being  open about their sexuality, even when  assessment of the state of their health  might depend on it.  Many health practitioners look upon lesbianism as a treatable "disease" and recommend lesbians seek psychiatric help in  order to be "cured". Even doctors who are  supportive of lesbians make assumptions or  generalizations about our sexual practices  based on one or two conversations.  Embarassment about sexuality, or not  wanting to appear ignorant, can prevent  even supportive practitioners from asking  questions necessary to give accurate information. There is little enough good  health information available to women in  general; there is even less about what  health issues are of concern to lesbians  and about how we can approach those issues.  For example, it is a myth that lesbians  do not need to be concerned about the  health of our reproductive organs. Although  it is_ true that we don't have to live with  the stress(and risk to our health) of  choosing and using the elusive "safe and  effective" birth control method, it is  important that we consider our gynecological health as part of the entire picture.  Lesbians can, and do, develop abnormal"  cervical cells and sometimes cervical cancer. It is not true that only women who  have had several male partners or women  who started to have sex with men at a  young age get cervical cancer(although  some studies show evidence to this effect).  It is still important for us to have regular  pap tests to detect changes that might  occur in cervical cells (See A Feminist  Approach to Pap Tests, Kinesis,  Feb. '83  for more information about this. This article is also available at the Women's Health  Collective).  Although it is rare, lesbians can get  venereal disease. Theoretically, even though  the bacteria that cause gonorrhea thrive in  mucous membrance and can live only a few  seconds in air, a woman who has gonorrhea  with exceptionally heavy discharge can  infect a partner.  Vulva to vulva contact with a woman who  has gonorrhea can conceivably infect another woman. It is also possible that  gonorrhea of the throat can be passed by  kissing someone who has it. If you think  you have, or have been in contact with,  gonorrhea, you should have a vaginal culture done and suggest that your lover(s)  do so too.  Syphilis seems to be extremely rare amoung  lesbians, but not 'completely unheard of.  It is possible for a woman to have a syphilis "chancre"(on her vulva, for example)  and not be aware of it. Syphilis is passed  by sexual contact and can be passed between women. It is important for any lesbian who has reason to believe she has  syphilis to get a blood test and tell her  partner(s) to do the same.  Herpes can be passed between women, usually only when there are open sores. Because herpes sores can erupt inside a A-SfsliS  woman's vagina or on her cervix, she may  not be aware they are there(although they  are frequently quite painful) If you have  herpes or think you may have been exposed  to them, learning to do cervical self-  exam can be useful in checking for sores.  There is a lot of scary information around  about herpes these days which often makes  it difficult to discuss the situation with  a lover(particularly with someone new).  There are some good pamphlets at the Health  Collective that deal with both the physiological and the emotional issues surrounding herpes.  Lesbians can and do get vaginal infections  (yeast, haemophilus or gardnerella, tri-  chomanas, etc). The organisms that cause  "vaginitis" can live ordinarily in the  vagina as part of the normal "flora". Any  number of factors (eg. diet, stress, antibiotics) can play a part in causing abnor  mally heavy growth of one or more of those  organisms and resulting symptoms (unusual)  odour or discharge, itching, burning, etc.  Although vaginal infections do not necessarily develop as a result of sexual contact, the organisms can be passed between  women during sex. Vulva to vulva, vulva  (or vagina) to finger to vulva, thigh to  thigh, thigh to vulva contact can all contribute to the spread of infection between  "Part of being a considerate lover is informing your partner(s) immediately when  you have, or suspect you may have, any  sort of vaginitis or other contagious  gynecological problem," states an article  in Lesbian Health Matters!  We can help protect our own health, as  well as the health of our lover(s) by  learning to recognize the signs and symptoms of infection(perhaps by reading or  talking to other women about their experiences). We can learn to do cervical self-  exam and do it regularly to check for  lumps, sores, discharge, redness or anything that might suggess a problem.  One last word(from Lesbian Health Matters!)  about "fingernail hygiene". "If you put  your fingers in your lover's vagina, your  fingernails should be kept clean and very  short. Bacteria can be harbored under  fingernails and possibly lead to a vaginal  infection. More often, fingernails can irritate the cervix(even without your lover  feeling it, since there are few pain nerve-  endings in the cervix) causing a cervical  erosion which can be very susceptible to  infection".  This article is only a beginning. There is  more specific information about all the  topics touched on(including treatment information) at the Health Collective or in  the reference publications.  As lesbians it is important for us to remember that we are the authorities when  it comes to our healthcare. We have a  wealth of information based on our own  experience that we need to share with one  another, about how to prevent and treat  illnesses and about how to keep ourselves  healthy.  photo  by Claudia MacDonald  p**fcflk.  giftg  yiiL  ftdfcfci:  i*M  I'M     M  ■us  is  Hi  m^m':^  t:%   km  P^B£  \F ^2  m%mw^' 1--  .V»   ..£  i  H^dif^*^  continued from p. 17  issues took second-place relative to other  feminist campaigns. In places where lesbians were defeated, seperate communities  were formed.  Within the women's movement lesbian separatism and radical feminism began to emerge  as a coherent current, one which defined  men as the principle enemy, patriarchy as  a global system, with capitalism being its  most recent phase. Lesbianism was often  seen as the only correct direction for  women to take politically, not as a sexual  choice or identity.  At times there were conflicts between women  who saw themselves as political lesbians  and women who first identified sexually  and emotionally with women and whose politics were more diverse; Other lesbians became feminists but rejected separatism  strategies, seeking allies outside of the  women's community. The lesbian political  community tended to concentrate on alternative organizations and cultural events.  There have been tensions between women  whose social life has concentrated on the  bars and the political feminist and lesbian subculture.  Despite these differences, an increasingly  self-aware lesbian identity and movement  has emerged, with goals that distinguish  it from both the gay male movement and the  general feminist community. Lesbians have  fought for the general rights of women,  for. economic and personal autonomy from  men, for a sense of pride and power, for  the right to bear and raise children outside of the traditional family, for civil  rights for lesbians, against violence  against women in all forms, etc. We have  often been the cutting edge of the women's  movement and the recipients of male and  right-wing aggression.  This community is different from the lesbian milieu of the past in its numbers,  its variety and in its belief and pride  in its right to exist both in its own  right and as a positive alternative to  the oppression that many women experience  in heterosexual relationships. July/Aug'83   Kinesis   19  Lesbians and Sport:  The  dilemma  coming out  by Betty Baxter  On an old yellow bus, with fifty kids jostling for space to the regional track meet,  she came up the steps, clipboard commanding  order, curls framing her face, freckled  and confident. There, at age eleven, my  first moment of total adoration for my  junior high gym teacher.  Later, as my own athletic skills and confidence strengthened, the blinding adoration  faded, but with each new city or each new  sport or team, I would seek out the athlete or coach with that same power of surety in what they do; confidence or independence. It took me several years to figure  out that many of these women were lesbians.  All of them had an ability to love themselves, but many were lovers of other wo-  To be a lesbian in sport is not all confidence and power and self-celebration. An  equal part of life is self-denial, secrecy  and coded messages. As for many women, the  denial of an emotional life is central to  survival for lesbians in sport. By far the  most common experience for lesbians with  jobs in sport is to retreat from open  social gatherings, choose a circle of  trusted friends and live a very private  life. I spoke to some of these women about  their choices.  Their primary concern is their work. Most  jobs in sport are within very conservative  institutions; the school system, the universities, or administrating sport within  the municipal, provincial or federal governments. All share contact with the public,  parents, volunteers and the use of public  funds. Lesbians vary in the degree they  feel they must hide their lives. Some  choose to fit in socially with their work  colleagues, to dress and communicate in a  non-threatening way. They wear "feminine"  clothes, make-up and occasionally date men.  Others avoid conversations about personal  or social life but remain constant in  appearance and behavior at home and at  work. They do their job, but give little  information about their lives to others.  Both groups are certain they are suspected  as lesbians, but trust the value of their  work to keep them from being dismissed.  Due to the influences of a professional  (coach , teacher, administrator) has on young  people, some feel it is irresponsible to  be open about lesbianism. Sometimes these  women have friends who socialize with them  for years and still have no idea about  their sexuality. That is the way they want  to keep it. "If you were indiscreet enough  to open up to friends, how could you convince an employer that you wouldn't tell  other employees or young people that you  might, influence."  These women are well-respected, well-liked  members of their community. They quite  simply do not discuss lesbianism. Many  lesbians in sport want to live "normally"  like everybody else, and keep their sexuality secret. Aside from employment,  sportswomen, like most lesbians, fear  hurting family and others through telling  about their lesbianism. As a consequence,  many years of reinforcing the "comfortable  lie" have now become habit. The social  awareness never becomes a pattern. In the  words of one woman "there are constantly  situations where you use good judgement".  Coming out as a lesbian into a group of  lesbians in sport for me was like being  admitted to a secret club. The club was  based on a taboo that was never named. On  the outside, I'd known the club existed  and had watched groups laugh together or  be extremely vague about their activities  after the game or on free weekends. On the  inside, women dove into closets or down  stairways, not to be seen until it was  clear that I knew where I was and was  there by choice.  Membership was an elitism - secure social  inclusion. To be sexually with women was  not the point of admission, but to be in  on the secret was; a member by knowledge.  There was little pressure to be sexual or  go out to the basement gay clubs. The  pressure was to never expose the secret.  Being a woman in sport often means Strug- 'Ģ  gles to feel legitimate, whether in  strength-training or aggressive skill development. The bonding in that struggle  allows for security, success and a kind of  self-celebration. Such is what teams are  made of. To be a lesbian in sport means  different and contradictory things.  On some teams there were so many lesbians  that joining the team meant accepting open  lesbian relationships within the team. On  other teams the percentage of lesbians  was small and women would hide their sexuality by mentioning men or dating gay  men to keep the other team members uncertain. At the same time those lesbians  could go to parties where their straight  teammates were excluded, and cruise women,  be affectionate with lovers and celebrate  the behaviors taboo in the external sport  world.  For some, membership in that secret club  lasts a lifetime. Others, myself included,  break away from the club and join other  lesbians in naming each other and saying  the word lesbian in our daily life. Rarely  do lesbians stay in sport and allow open  communication about their sexuality. By  way of example, I know of only three teams  in Canada that call themselves lesbian  teams. Yet I know of scores of lesbian women who play on teams and are not out to  their teammates.  Many of these women do not want lesbianism  to be an issue, yet it is the factor that  shapes much of their life. There is no  gain visible to them by coming out. They  can, however, see tremendous loss, for  them and for others. Although they closet  their lesbianism, they are visible as  strong, physically-skilled women who survive and achieve without men attached to  them. In many ways they are valuable role  models.  Sport can be fun. It can be a place to  learn to be confident in the capabilities  of our bodies. It can be a place to meet  many lesbians. In surveying friends and  teams I'd known in past years, I estimate  30-50% of women in recreational and competitive sport are lesbians. To a large  degree the myth is true. Many women who  make sport an important part of their life  are lesbian. They support each other and  form a social community. They avoid naming  the taboo of women loving women. They  don't want attention and they don't want  revolution. They are healthy, strong -  sometimes physically fit. Their teams are  often a lot of fun. If you think of signing up, I encourage you, but be forewarned; it could get quite complicated!  To be a lesbian in sport is not all confidence and  power and self-celebration. An equal part of life is  self-denial, secrecy and coded messages. As for  many women, the denial of an emotional life is  central to survival for lesbians in sport. 20   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  Bisexuality  and women  by Rosalie Hawryiko, Joyce Penner,  and Joan Woodward  Bisexuality - a loaded issue within the  feminist movement, but definitely a feminist issue. We believe there is a need for  a better understanding of bisexuality on  the part of women in the women's movement.  At stake are choice  in sexual orientation  and the right to define ourselves on the  basis of our own experience. We take pride  in and enjoy bisexuality - it's a natural  as well as chosen  sexual orientation; but  we're often faced with reactions ranging  from puzzlement and polite shunning to  hostility, rejection and castigation. Even  the fact that one is bisexual is often disbelieved. It can't really be possible.  In reality a large percentage of women and  men may be bisexual. According to Pepper  Schwarz' examination of Kinsey's studies  into human sexuality in her paper Bisexuality: Some Social Psychological Issues,  "The inescapable - but often escaped -  conclusions from Kinsey et al.'s findings  are that a mix of homosexual and heterosexual behaviours in a person's erotic  biography is a common occurrence..."  What is a bisexual? A person who may love  both women and men, one who has a mixed  affectional preference for both genders,,  though not necessarily with equal weight  at any given point in time.  In practice is there such an item as true,  open, equal bisexuality in an individual?  The answer to this is not clear cut. Life  is more complex and subtle than that, sexuality more fluid. A bisexual woman may go  through periods of focusing more on women,  for instance, but her sexual or emotional  desires for women and men remain. There's  a wide variety of experiences among bisexual women and there's no single  specific  pattern that emerges. However, through  the process of existence and, hence,  struggle for integration of a sexual identity, many of us succeed in being genuinely  bisexual.  In a political context, we're often confronted with the attitude from lesbians,  gays and heterosexuals, that bisexuality is  just a cop-out, a phase for those who  haven't the guts to come out. In our experience, it takes a lot of sheer nerve  to be out as a bisexual. Here are some  responses to the Vancouver Bi Women's  Group questionnaire:  For us to maintain our identity,  often  requires courage,  long-range vision,  acceptance of our own experience, and  political integrity - a battle familiar  to many lesbians.   Usually alone and  without much validation, we arrive at  our self-definition.  A phase - This is just as silly as  accusing a straight or lesbian of being  'just in a phase'.  For any person at  any time,  being straight or gay or bi  may be a temporary,  exploratory phase,  and we should respect the right of  individuals to explore various options  and not put them down if they change.  But for many, perhaps most bisexuals,  this is a stable,   lifelong sexual orientation.  Nobody has the right to tell me  I'm going through a phase when I know  perfectly well I've been bisexual all  my life!  A cop-out - How unrealistic! Woman-loving  women are an oppressed minority whether  or not they also relate to men.  Many  bisexual women are very open and active  in the lesbian community.  I suspect that  there are also many who are. fearful and  closeted.   The fact is that loving someone of the same gender is risky in this  society and the degree to which women  choose to deal with that risk publicly  and politically probably has nothing at  all to do with their relationships with  men.  We posit that it's entirely consistent  with a feminist value structure for our  self-determination as bisexual women to be  recognized and respected. We want our  chosen identification, our self-image and  our particular vision to be accepted and  understood. We are weary of hearing "you're  not a real lesbian". Many of us have spent  years fighting for lesbian and gay rights  but we are basically invisible within the  feminist/lesbian movement. We would like  to urge all women to support the right of  choice in sexual orientation regardless  of their own preferences.  In the most comprehensive study of bisexuals to date, Charlotte Wolff found that  bisexual women's primary loyalty is to  women and she coins the term "homo-emotionality" to describe this. In addition, bisexual women enjoy a degree of independence  "Bisexual and lesbian  women are on the cutting  edge of the struggle  against patriarchy. The  rage, fear and hurt we  experience with each  other is to be expected/'  from men; we're politically involved with  and personally attached to the women in  our lives.  Along these lines, we often hear the argument that a bisexual woman will probably  leave a woman lover for a man. In our experience, this appears to be another stereotypic myth that cannot claim to be based  on empirical evidence. The roots of the  fear underlying this accusation have validity, that is, men objectively do have more  power than women in our society. However,  it is inaccurate to conclude that this is  the deciding factor for all bisexual women.  We hope that all women attempt to relate to  their lovers in an ethical manner.  Conversely we would like to point out the  rage felt by many bisexual women towards  some lesbians who have rejected us solely  on the grounds of our bisexuality, no  matter how strong our commitments to women  are. We also have a serious problem with  the number of lesbians and heterosexual  women who are closet bisexuals, who deny  and keep hidden their bisexuality. This  leaves us out in the cold, taking the flak  we risk when we are out as bisexual women.  Bisexual and lesbian women are frequently  on the cutting edge of the struggle against  patriarchy. The rage, "fear and hurt we experience with each other is to be expected;  in fact, the angry or disparaging divisive-  ness among all women is to be expected  under patriarchy.  Politically, bisexual women take a stand  on the issue of whether men can be our  allies in the feminist struggle, or are,  by definition, enemies. We view the sexual  revolution as a major component in a fundamental transformation of life on this  planet; it is as essential to our future  as class revolution. And we are conscious  of the links and connections between the  two. If women cannot find allies among  the class raised to oppress us, as, historically, oppressed peoples have done  over issues of class and race, then truly  doomsday awaits us. Without the possibility  of allies, no solution would be possible  while two sexes exist. Politically, we  expect men to respect the autonomy of the  women's movement, and to support feminist  issues in their own work and personal environments. Additionally, we experience  and choose to accept the support that particular men have given us as individual  women.  Sometimes bisexual women are accused of  enjoying heterosexual privilege, and sharing, somehow, also in male privilege. Certainly there are times or circumstances  in which such privilege may exist. However,  particularly for 'out' bisexual feminists,  many of the benefits of privilege - social  acceptance, validation in images around us,  being able to talk about our experiences  and express our affection openly - are  not available to us in much of the lesbian  or heterosexual world. When privilege does  operate, we try to be aware of it; but the  facts and dynamics of privilege in this  issue are not clear. We must examine the  whole issue of class, race, colour and  childless privilege(that many of us enjoy  or are unconscious recipients of) and  place it in the context of class society.  Historically, the refusal of the suffragette movement to take on the issues of  race, class and poverty played a part in  destroying it. The present feminist movement must not commit the same mistake  again or it will not survive.  So what are women to do who may share in  heterosexual or male privilege? It seems  reasonable to ask these women, and their  male friends/lovers to do at least two  things: 1)refuse to allow homo or bi-phobic  harassment to pass unchallenged in their  presence and 2)more fundamentally, work  to eliminate the root of male and heterosexual privilege, i.e., work to eliminate  sexual exploitation in all aspects of our  lives. Our focus must be to gain power  and acceptance for all women.  To return to specifics of personal life  and the political stance represented by  bisexuality, the important fact that often  gets lost in debate is that bisexual women  love women. Our experiences here are as  varied as those of women in other kinds of  sexual relationships. What is impressive  is the diversity of our experience which  has led preliminary researchers to conclude that, to date, the facts on sexuality  and sexual orientation defy generalizations  and simplistic analysis. We have found  that bisexual women have been mythified.  It's female bonding, rather than sexual  specifics between women, that poses a  threat to the patriarchy. As women gain  more economic independence, the threat of  female bonding becomes more and more real.  We simply can't accept the hostility and  denial of bisexuality coming from a movement fighting for freedom of choice in  sexual orientation. We need to open up  discussion of these questions throughout  the women's movement to increase our  understanding of our sexuality per se, and  of each other.  Bisexual women are active in many other  concerns; we can be found throughout the  women's movement, the left, the anarchist  movement, labour struggles, the anti-  nuclear movement, and the arts. We, as  bisexual women, want to increase solidarity  in the women's movement through acceptance  of our diversity and celebration of who  we are. Bi-dykes unite!!'.  Active support for bisexual and interested  women is available: The Bisexual Women's  Group/Vancouver formed as a result of a  workshop on Bisexuality at the National  Lesbian Conference, May '81, Vancouver.  Call Georgia 874-1756, Joyce 255-6997 or  Storm 872-3143. July/Aug'83   Kinesis   21  ARTS  by Cy-Thea Sand  In a recent issue of Off Our Backs^. the  author ot'Folly  says: Although my mother  tells me I had a high school teacher who  used to send notes saying I was a good  writer and should be encouraged,  I don 't  remember it at all.  I suspect that Maureen Brady's creative  amnesia is common to many working class  women and that it is related to the limited vision of opportunity imposed by cramped circumstance. I entered the third decade of my life before the self-descriptions of 'intellectual' and 'writer' felt  at all comfortable. The world of words,  books and ideas is inextricably bound to  a middle class sensibility in our culture,  an often devastating equation for creative  working class people.  To be lesbian, working class and looking  for a literature of one's own demands  patience. The dominant culture ignores  the working class literary tradition and  it is often difficult and painful to  connect one's experience to class inferiority. Despite this, there is a demand in  feminist and lesbian circles for a clear  definition of what it means to be poor or  working class.  FOLLY,   by Maureen Brady. The Crossing  Press, 1982. 196pp. $9.95.  The historically silenced who are just  beginning to speak are expected to be  articulate. I love the genius of Virginia  Woolf, Gertrude Stein and Carson McCullers  but I also need to know about the lives  of the poor and disenfranchized. I need  images of intellectual women who were not  born into cultural and economic privilege;  I want biographies of creative women whose  cultural and economic insecurities speak  to my own experience.  Maureen Brady was twenty-six before she  began to write. She helped found a publishing house called Spinsters Ink in  the late seventies, self-publishing her  first novel, Give Me Your Good Ear.   This  work concerns the mother/daughter relationship. With Folly,  Brady has produced a  second novel of substance and dignity.  This work combines her lesbian and anti-  racist sensibilities with an exploration  of her own class background:  I came out of a family with a lot of  class conflict.  My father was very  strongly identified with the working  class.  If he Was interested in moving  out of it,  that desire was thwarted  by a sense of immobility.  My mother,  on the other hand, wanted to present  us as if we had already made that mobility.  Her view was,  you just shut up  and pretend toward your better advantages. My father's view was, you might  as well see who you are.  It took me  longer to examine some of that than it  had to examine other aspects of my  background.  Conjuring up memories of her spinster  aunt who was a factory worker for years,  Brady sets Folly  in a North Carolina mill  town in the seventies. Folly and Martha  are next door neighbours and work side  by side in a pant factory. Folly's daughter is hanging out with the local lesbian;  Martha's mother is old and sick. Both  women fume about the injustices suffered  by themselves and the other women workers  Style limits lesbian novel  at their plant. When a sister worker is  arrested for negligence - her sick baby  dies while Cora is forced to be on shift  - the women walk out. The novel focuses  on the ensuing strike and we are quickly  drawn into Brady's world of female characters.  An important aspect of this story is  Brady's black women characters. Concerned  that as a white woman she was being pre-  sumptious by writing from a black woman's  perspective - Mabel becomes one of the  leaders of the strike - Brady consulted  the black lesbian poet Audre Lorde. Lorde  told Brady that as a white woman writer  she can never be presumptuous, only wrong.  The black women in Folly  are minor characters compared to the white women and  Brady admits that in future work there  will be more of a balance. But it is  significant that Brady's fiction explores  how racism affects one's vision and understanding and she should be applauded for  her courage. When Lenore becomes friends  with Sabfina, we catch a glimpst of the  imperceptible nuances of racism - what  Brady calls an imaginative void:  She stretched again,  closed her eyes,  and tried to picture Sabrina's face.  It didn't come easy.  In fact,  it didn't  come at all.  She consciously tried to  construct it. A rounded face She  tried to get a sense of the exact color  of Sabrina's skin,  how black it was?  How brown? How did the black and brown  merge? She could picture Betsy 's  cheeks,  high red after lovemaking,  even when she had a tan.  She could  call up those colors and see them vividly in her mind, whereas, it was as if  her brain cells had never been notified  of the existence of the dark tones.  Folly  is an overall good read but I was  disappointed'with the dullness of Brady's  language. A distinct lack of variety,  ingenuity and sharpness of language define  the novel as documentary realism rather  than imaginative fiction. Experience is  transformed into art by a writer confident  with images, subtleties in pitch and tone  and.a comfort with description that impresses with its strength and accuracy.  These qualities are lacking in Folly  and  I am concerned that the work was not  closely edited. The love scene between  Martha and Folly, while slightly richer in  texture than the rest of the work, disappoints. I was annoyed that lesbian sexuality was short changed - it was given such  skimpy treatment and scarcity of detail  and was marred by romanticism. There is  too much constraint and control in Brady's  work - a restrictive ambiance of political  correctness, perhaps - which is most evident in scenes demanding pulsation not  demarcation. To be fair, lesbian writers  in general are limited by our language  which denigrates and reduces the female  body. But Brady's language - sexual,  descriptive and factual - needs new direction and boldness overall.  When asked to give advice to other working  class writers Brady's answer was simply,  "do it". If asked to outline a working  class critical perspective I would answer  that it is one that takes the work of  working class writers seriously enough  to be demanding, exacting and comparative.  In her interview in Off Our Backs,  Brady  refers to our tradition of writers such as  Meridel Le Sueur, Tillie Olsen and Anzia  Yezierska. As we add to that tradition  with a particular interest in the lives of  lesbians and people of colour, we must  bring to the celebration a love of language  and character as well as political aware-  Suggested readings:  Tillie Olsen's book Silences  is a basic  reference work about literary silences.  The lesbian/feminist culture is addressing  the problem by creating journals such as  Common Lives, Lesbian Lives  which encourage working class lesbians to write, and  by inspiring women to self-publish.  Audre Lorde's Zami,  a new spelling of my  name,  Persephone Press 1982.  Paul Lauter's essay in The Radical Teacher  #15 entitled "Working-Class Women's  Literature - an Introduction to Study." 22   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  ARTS  The Colour Purple  Exploring black women's souls  by Marie Arlington  The Color Purple  by Alice Walker is about  black women; enduring women, women in  pain, joyful women, women surviving and  growing, against all odds. Here is a black  woman writing with no apologies, with no  holds barred, to, about, and for other  black women, using black women's experience  words and phrases in a way that I haven't  read before. Her writing is straight forward and the main concern is with the exploration of black women's souls.  The Color Purple,   by Alice Walker. Washington Square Press, 1983, $5.95(softcover  edition)  Celie and Nettie are sisters. Celie, the  leading voice in the book, was raped by  the man she believed to be her father.  The two children she bore as a result of  the rapes were given away by him and, unbeknownst to Celie, are alive. He told her  not to tell anyone but 'god', "else it will  kill your momma". For thirty years Celie  talks to god about her marriage, her husband,, his children, her whole life is  talked to god.  Celie is only a child when the rapes begin.  Not being able to ask why or allowed to  say no, she asks god:  "Dear God: I am fourteen years old.  I  have always been a good girl.  Maybe you  can'give me a sign letting me know what  is happening to me. "  He wanted her sister but had to settle for  Celie and a cow. She was abused by the  man she called Mr.   and raised his  four children when she was no more than a  child herself. Her sister Nettie escapes  the same fate and is befriended by a  missionary couple who have unwittingly *  adopted Celie[s  children.  Alice Walker has managed to communicate  the idea that black women were and are in  the same dangerous situation throughout  the world. The use of the phraseology so  prevalent in the black community in the  Celie ■  married off to a man she hated.  U.S., the special way of using language,  the shortening of phrases that say more  than long sentences, this book preserves  a part of 'blackness' written by a black  Shug Avery enters Celie's life and the  changes begin from that moment. Shug (short  for sugar) is brought home by Mr.  ;  she is sick and has nowhere else to go.  Mr.   and Shug had been lovers and she  has had three children. With the coming  of Shug, Celie comes into her own power  and you can see her unfold, take root and  grow. Her relationship with Mr.   changes  "Did I ever ast you for money? I say I  never ast you for nothing. Not even your  sorry hand in marriage." When Celie leaves  Mr.   and.has her own life, it again  changes and they become friends and work  together in her business. \  The reuniting of Celie, Nettie and their  children is the final coming home, and  Celie's long awaited dream.  "By now the car stop under the trees  in the yard and all these peoples dress  like old folks git out.  By now my heart  ' is in my mouth and I can't move.   Then  us both start to moan and cry."  Alice Walker, "womanist" born in Eatonton,  Georgia and now living in San Francisco,  has written novels, short stories, poetry,  a biography and edited a Zor Neale Hurston  reader. This novel is her best to date.  There is a need to take time out to appreciate black women's past and so prepare  the way forward. Alice Walker has made a  major contribution to this beginning.  Say'no'  to the bomb  by Emma Kivisild  The introduction to Over Our Dead Bodies:  Women Against the Bomb  is an appeal to  women to speak out, to have the courage to  make up their own minds on the question of  nuclear weapons. A great strength of the  book is that it facilitates responding to  such an appeal. It provides a wide range  of opinions and possible solutions to the  nuclear planetary death warrant, a wealth  of political and technical information,  and a strong emotional base. Though each  chapter can stand on its own, reading the  book from start to finish leaves you with  a sense of having begun to confront the  issue; having gone well beyond just saying  'no'. As Ann Pettitt puts it in her chapter  "Letter to My Neighbour", you "begin to  get at the truth behind the rhetoric about  holocausts and Armageddons".  Over Our Dead Bodies:  Women Against the  Bomb.   ed. by Dorothy Thompson. Virago  Press Ltd., 1983. 253pp. $8.05.  Over Our Dead Bodies  is an anthology of  essays and poetry about militarism and  the bomb. The contributors(each of whom  wrote her chapter especially for the book)  are all English, all women, and all  "agreed on the central question of the  dangers we face, and of the need for protest and for action". Clearly, however,  the root of the dangers, the nature of the  protests and the scope of the action, are  open to debate. It is impossible to agree  with each of the writers. For instance,  one of them proposes alternative defence,  (i.e. with conventional weapons), while in  the following chapter another writer ex  presses the opinion that any armed defence  proposal is "not only moving too cautiously, but in the wrong direction". The debates make you think, form your own opinion, and test your analysis, over and  over again.  The nuclear question demands that we arm  ourselves both factually and emotionally,  and the range of style in Over Our Dead  Bodies  accomplishes this end. The poetry  interspersed throughout the book is a  powerful emotional outlet, and a contrast  to such things as Marian Sugden's "Interesting Times: A Chronology of the Nuclear  Age," which catalogues the development  of nuclear weaponry since 1945. We need  both.  I was especially pleased to see things like  analysis of the treaties leading up to  this "Balance of Terror" accompanied by an  analysis of the development of personal  rage. An uneven balance of these aspects  ».  would leave us vulnerable, either to com- 1  promise in the name of 'rationality', or  ,  to the abject terror that is consciousness £  of the nuclear threat with no practical   I  release. ; j  While it is not possible to summarize some--  thing like an anthology, there are parts   £  of this one that I found particularly  worthwhile. Suzanne Wood's chapter on  Civil Defence does more than prove the  absurdity of defending any populace  against nuclear attack. The scenarios she  depicts on the basis of the English handbook 'Protect and Survive' present a  clear picture of the inhuman military  mind that dreamed up the idea of winning  a nuclear war and dealing with the burned,  maimed, grief stricken survivors.  Angela Carter's "Anger in a Black Landscape" reminds us yet again that anger is  appropriate here. The extensive bibliography and glossary are a valuable resource.  And the conclusion of almost every chapter  is that action is necessary, and the time  for it is NOW.  Which is not to say that Over Our Dead  ,  Bodies  is without faults. The lack of  economic analysis of the war industry is  a bit disappointing: "The Women Who Wire  up the Weapons" did not go far enough  for me. The two chapters focussing on the  humanity of the Americans and the Russians  and the strength of their peace movements  veer towards the sentimental. Dorothy  Thompson extolls the virtues of American  reform politics. I wonder. At times, too,  the feminism of the book tends towards  the woman-as-nurturer-of-the-race argument .  Something that is no fault of the authors  is the fact that the book is English, and  written about the English situation. A  Canadian reader might be encouraged by the  fleeting references to Canada's middle of  the road stance on nuclear war, and forget  our economic bolstering of the US war  industry, our CANDU reactors, our uranium  mining, our wavering on cruise missile  testing.  On the whole, however, the book succeeds.  It is moving, intelligent, and persistently  eloquent. And it accurately conveys the  urgency of action against nuclear arms. July/Aug'83   Kinesis   23  by Janie Newton-Moss  The sixth annual Vancouver Folk Music  Festival comes to town on July 15-17th  and with it a bevy of international musicians. This year almost half of the entertainers will be women; in groups, in duos,  and performing singly. Behind the scenes  will be a large number of staff ensuring  that everything goes 'right on the night'.  I spoke to one of them, Susan Knutson,  about different aspects of the Festival.  Susan told me that 1980 was the year in  which the potential for bringing together  women's music and folk music was realised.  That year the stage was shared by a good  representation of the women's recording  industry: Nancy Vogel, Holly Near, Barbara  Higby, Robin Flower, Laurie Lewis, Betsy  Rose, Cathy Winter, Adrienne Torf, Sweet  Honey in the Rock and Ferron. The presence of lesbian musicians in the folk  world did not go unnoticed and Susan felt  that it had been a positive consciousness  raising event for everyone. I asked her  whether the issues those women performers  were addressing in 1980 were the same in  subsequent years.  "In the first year the performers tended to  bring everyone up to date in terms of 'yes  we are lesbians, yes this is women's music  and this is our material and this is our  audience'. I think now they're assuming  that they're known and that it's o.k.  that they're there and that they can go on  to talk about other things."  She also pointed out that there has always  been a significant number of women and  lesbian women amongst the Festival's volunteers.  "Women in Vancouver have supported the  Festival and the Festival has responded to  us as an audience."  As a worker on the Festival since 1978  Susan has supported the notion of bringing  in women and lesbian performers and highlighted their unique contribution in the  Festival's 1980 programme.  This year there will probably be more women  performing, proportionately, than at any  other folk music festival in North America.  Heather Bishop, Connie Kaldour, Nancy White  and Anita Best will be coming from different parts of Canada to participate.  Nancy White is one of that breed of entertainers who successfully mixes satire with  political commentary. She was for a couple  of years the "Songs to Order" person for  CBC's Sunday Morning, having the ability  to write a song about anything. With Gay  Clifman she has produced two radio cabarets, "Lies My Mother Told Me" and "Gee  that's a cute little dress, Marjane". She  also writes revoluntiary songs in support  of the struggles in Latin America.  Past Festival goers will welcome the return of Sweet Honey in the Rock, Anne Ro-  maine, Frankie Armstrong, Rosalie Sorrells,  Teri Garthwaite, Bobbie Louise Hawkins and  Jane Sapp. Some of the less well known acts  are amongst the most interesting.  The Blue Flames Stringband, a mixed band,  includes Susie Rothfield and Kate Brislin  who were part of the Any Old Time String-  band, the first all women's bluegrass/  stringband to enjoy success in North America. From further south comes Jo Carson who  is a storyteller and Jean Ritchie, a white  mountain dulcimer player who wrote "Black  Waters" which Robin Flower popularized.  Susan described her as "one of the great -  mothers of the Apalatian revival".  Barbara Dane, a survivor from the 60's  blacklisting of political entertainers  has been touring the continent with her son  Pablo Menendez who from age fourteen  studied music in Cuba. "She was one of the  first and strongest anti-Vietnam performers,  one of the first to suggest organizing  entertainment for the G.I.'s and using  cultural strength as a way of fighting the  Vietnam War. Jane Fonda.actually credited  Barbara Dane with being one of the founders  of that movement", said Susan.  Susan believes that aside from the increasing exposure women were enjoying at festivals, another exciting development was how  the folk distribution network was becoming  connected with the feminist distribution  network at various points.  We have an alliance of folk and feminist  small independent labels being distributed  together which is efficient and politically  a nice thing."  For women interested in attending the  festival:  Weekend Tickets(at the gate)  $50.00  Friday Evening Concert        $15.00  Saturday, Sunday $22.00  Children under 12 and persons over 65  admitted free.  Special rate for the unemployed.  People needing to be accompanied by an  attendant can bring their attendant in  free of charge.  Two American women groups playing very  different music are Zenksa Pensa who look  to the Balkans for inspiration and Sabia  who play Latin American new and traditional  songs. The latter use a variety of instruments including the charango(mandolin),  zamponias(pan pipes) and the guenas(reed  flutes).  "Women are carriers of a very large cultural repetoire", said Susan. "It's women who  pass on hundreds of tunes from generation  to generation. Many musicians learned large  portions of their repetoire from their  mothers."  One of those carriers of a tradition how  all but lost to us, handed down from her  mother and grand mother, is Lydia Mendoza  who is an authentic singer from the border  region of the Rio Grande where there was  one culture, largely Mexican, which was  divided by an international border. It was  from this area that the serenade emerged  and although this type of singing is a male  domaine, Lydia Mendoza has enjoyed a reputation for fifty years as the "Lark of the  Border".  I asked Susan what the future held as far  as women maintaining their folk heritage  and Creating new cultures within the folk  music curcuit. She pointed out that over  the last ten years the growth of folk  music and women's music had been similar.  Both had difficulties of access to the  mainstream music industry and both wanted  artistic control over the music they produced. Inevitably small independent music  labels have to play an important role for  "Sometimes I feel like I have  Each time I get a phone call or someone  stops me on the street(it happens regu-  larly)and says,   "You need to come by  and talk with my neighbor',  or  'I got a  story you ought to hear',  the feeling  is reinforced.  These days, I have the  privilege to speak for someone else.  It  Wasn't planned or even dreamed when I  began writing the People Pieces.  It has  just grown up that way."  Jo Carson will be one of several storytellers appearing at the Vancouver Folk  Music Festival.  i 24   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  From June 14th to June- 24th Women in Focus  presented A Life of Art: Asian Women Artists in Canada. It included a mixed media  gallery show,  four workshops,  calligraphy,  dance,  flower arranging and film, and a  dance and music finale on the last evening.  Vietnamese food was served on the opening  and closing nights.  Karen Henry reviewed the event for Kinesis.  by Karen Henry  It is significant that the Chinese character for a woman artist is the same as that  for life - life is generated by the female  creative principle - life and the creative  process are one in the same. A woman artist in Asian society remains rooted in the  practical roles prescribed by tradition and  nature and from this synthesis discovers  and channels her creativity, expressive  of the whole fabric of her life. The women  whose work formed the recent show of  Asian art at Women in Focus all recognize  this cultural source from which they  spring while at the same time they have  each moved beyond tradition into other  continents and cultures and more personal  forms of expression.  It was the inspiration of Katherine Pfaff  at Women in Focus to give these women an  audience that extends beyond their own  community and to challenge western exclusive categories of "fine art" and ethnic  "traditional art". It is the tradition of  Euro-American art to break with the past  and compete for the vanguard, the new form,  the new statement which challenges and  denigrates the past without recognizing  its debt - the dialectic necessitates opposition. The Eastern perspective is to  value change as a part of a whole, recognizing its roots in the ongoing process.  It is a different set of priorities defined  by culture but in both the artist is moved  to creativity by her own experience and  love of the medium as a form of expression.  To criticize art from other cultures as  simply traditional is to show our own ignorance of the subtleties of change in  other milieus and not to recognize our own  value traditions.  In western culture existential and immediate forms which express some integrity of  feeling, accent and explore the social climate and present ourselves to ourselves in  a visual and expressive way, are valued  beyond the craft of painting, pottery,  sculpture, etc. The Eastern way is through  a highly disciplined, structured mastery  A Life of Art:  :/T\?1  'T   /J  p  Jfjlipp! :  Painting by Letty Shea: A Life of Art  Mitsui Yamamoto, weaver/designer: A Life of Art July/Aug '83   Kinesis   25  of the form. Karen Nishi describes the  way to art in her biographical statement,.  The potter is apprenticed to a master and  schooled in the craft by repetitive practice. It is not until the body and mind  are disciplined in the practice to such a  degree that it becomes unconscious that  spontaneous creativity emerges. Thus "art"  is always informed by a value for mastery  of the medium in its basic traditional,  form.  The women-in this show are schooled in  this tradition to varying degrees; those  trained in Asia more so than the third  generation sensei who must explore their  roots from a more objective perspective.  Talking with the artists I found them to  be diverse and individualistic but each  one expressed a strong inspirational tie-  to nature. Perhaps this is a cultural  influence arising from an ancient holistic,  non-industrial perspective which revered  nature as the source of life throughout  centuries until recently where it has been  distracted by technology and competitive  world markets.  The works in this show represent examples  of both art and craft, traditional and  personal forms and mixtures of these in  various proportions. It is broadly based,  touching on many areas in which Asian women  work and encouraging a concept of art as  an expression of life influenced by culture.  Are the bold and self-assured strokes of  a calligrapher embued with a love of the  soft brush and flowing forms and unique  style of the person any more or less art  because they follow a traditional path?  Is the controlled balance of a floral  arrangement any more or less indicative of  culture than the studied design of a Mon-  drian painting? The show attempts to  broaden the definition of art.  Mitsue Yamamoto spins, dyes and weaves fabric and designs clothes. She works with  natural fibres and takes her inspiration  for colour from nature. Though her forms  are>North American and she was nurtured  in the craft movement of the last decade,  she feels she owes much of her sense of  design and colour to her Asian roots.  Calligraphy and poetry added to the objectively Asian character of the show by expressing the pictoral form of the language .  and the subtle nuances of poetic expression.  Peggy Gunn offered a caligraphy workshop on  Thursday afternoon and provided a display  of the tools and some of her work. The  poetry of Yan Yao Wan is well known in her  native land but in North American her reputation does not reach beyond the Asian  community.  Mid-summer in Banff is not hot.  Wearing a fur coat, I still feared it's  too light./The glacier is very thick.  Only friendliness is thin.  The water in Mirror Lake  not the only thing that's cold.  It is not that we cannot appreciated its  traditional oriental form and the subtlety  of tangential feeling but simply that we  remain predominantly locked in the Western  ambience, as much a prisoner of our own  narrow concerns as Yan Yao Wan is of her  ethnicity.  Leila Trinidad is a painter-decorator whose  two main influences are European impressionism and her Phillipino roots in light  and colour. She paints colourful still-  lifes predominantly of floral arrangements  and often uses a favourite carved wooden  statuette.  Letty Shea is newly landed in Vancouver  bringing her paintings with her from China.  ft  It is not until the  body and mind are  vSSl disciplined in the  practice to such a  degree that it becomes  unconscious that  spontaneous creativity  emerges, karen nishi  Donna Nabata, potter: A Life of Art  The two potters in the show provide the  clearest examples of diverse cultural influence. Donna Nabata is a sensei educated  in Vancouver and her work defies the Asian  emphasis on controlled, refined form. Her  pottery is expansive and solid, confidently  claiming space and staring back at you  through the painted, glazed face that is  her motif. Her nature is uninhibited by  cultural roles and she allies herself with  western expressive values while at the same  time finding commonalities with Japanese  peasant potters using earthenware clay and  natural glazes. Karen Nishi went to Japan  to apprentice in the traditional way and  her pottery has the refinement and grace  of a skilled and tasteful hand which values  beauty and discipline.  1  Her teacher was a part of a movement called  the Lingnan Art World School which broke  with tradition and -began to incorporate  some western techniques. This loosening of  the bonds allowed for more personal expression particularly in the use of colour and  in the choice of subject matter. Letty Shea  uses a mixture of black ink and water colour to paint subjects from nature. Her use  of space is recongnizably Asian. Her brush  strokes range from'bold, dark and energetic to the most delicate of details as in  the sensitive depiction of a dragonfly.  Pang Yi is perhaps most familiar to Van--  couver audiences. She chooses to live in  Vancouver because of its natural beauty  which she uses to remind her of the basic  Pang Yi, photographer/painter: A Life of Art  elements of earth, sky and water which inspire her paintings. Her beautiful photographs are a bridge to understanding her  paintings. The white mist shrouding the  mountains hides unknown depths, nurturing  the form. Her paintings attempt to express  her experience of communion with primordial energy - cracking earth, swirling  gases and emerging form. Pang Yi would  like to get together with other women artists to form an ongoing group to share  concerns and articulate stances within the  general community.  Throughout the show fresh flower arrangements appeared, compliments of the Vancouver Ikebana Society who, also gave a workshop. The arrangements were lovely examples  of Asian artistry and grace. There were  two other workshops, one by filmmaker  Christine Wong whose work represents her  own ethnic and personal concerns, and another in traditional dance by Lorita Leung.  The festival was culminated with an evening of performing arts highlighted by the  dance of Lorita Leung, an entrancing Koto  duet, folk dancing, and the local Taiko  drummers who brought the house down with  their demonic and powerful capers.  The event was not entirely successful in  reaching a broad Caucasian audience. More  than half of those who attended were from j  the Asian community. But it was a valid  effort at remedying our sins of ommission  within the women's community and raising  our consciousness to move beyond our ethnic and conceptual narrowness; to appreciate art forms and traditions other than our  own. These Asian women have shared with us  a bit of their souls.  Paintings by Leila Trinidad: A Life of Art  Asian Women Artists 26   Kinesis   July/Aug'83  HEALTH  t;  Conquita (right), a health  educator, and Lila (left), a  member of a health brigade or  'brigadista', are both part of a  major campaign to improve  Nicaraguan health conditions.  Nicaraguans: working for quality healthcare  by Adrienne Ross (photos also by A. Ross)  When the Sandinistas overthrew the Somosa  regime in 1979,  they were faced with  appalling living conditions,  extreme shortage of human and material resources and  a desperate national health situation.  The majority of people had no access to any  form of health care,  life expectancy for  women was 40 years- and the infant mortality rate was ten times that of Canada.  From the beginning, women have been extensively involved in setting priorities  and making decisions around health care.   The  women's organization, Arnnlae,  initiated  the first health brigades, where small  groups of women participated in extensive  courses in first aid, nutrition,  health  education,  sanitation and hygiene.  Arnnlae,  along with other mass organizations;  Anden(teachers),  Fetsalud(health workers  union),  Sandinista Youth, and Sandinista  Defense,  formed the National Popular Health  Council in 1981.  In February 1983,  a group  of Canadian health workers visited Nicaragua and met with the Health Council and  other Nicaraguan health workers.  The words  of these articulate,  dedicated women personify the struggle of the Nicaraguan  people to improve the living conditions and  consciousness of all Nicaraguans, making  quality health care available to all.  Rosanna - Representative for Arnnlae on the  National Health Council.  Participation of mass organizations has  been essential to achieving our goals of  improved health for all. By strengthening  popular health consciousness at local  levels from neighbourhoods to municipalities, towns, departments, and regions  we've ensured that health care is not  just oriented from top to bottom, but  from the base, making its needs felt to  the structure at the top, and then making  its own policies.  We've had to change the old tradition of  being passive recipients of health care.  Now people are forcefully active: defining needs, making demands and using their  creativity to make the most of local  resources.  We used the multiplier effect for developing the health campaigns. We trained 120  educators, they trained 1200 more regionally and those people went out' into the  communities to train 24,000 health bri-  gadistas.  In health education we're not just interested in changing attitudes, people must  understand meaning and context and make  links between the economic and political  system and their perceptions. For example,  it's no good talking about the importance  of diet and protein if there's no protein  available. Seventy percent of health bri-  gadistas are women and we're presently organizing further technical training to  ensure ongoing broad participation of  women in health and community affairs.  "We had the worst health  situation in the country.  We were a forgotten  people. We had the  typical diseases of an  underdeveloped country;  all preventable with  health education and  better living conditions."  Brigadistas are becoming specialized now:  we in Arnnlae concentrate on maternal  infant care, for example promoting breast  feeding (to counteract Nestle's propaganda) and starting oral rehydration units  to treat diarrhea. The Sandinista youth  encourage youth participation in health  care and fetsalud provides technical  training.  You must remember - people who participate  in health campaigns are from mass organizations and have many goals - defense,  production, education - health care is  just one of them.  Marta - 24 year old Regional Director for  the Ministry of Health in Blue-  fields,  on the Atlantic Coast.  We had the worst health situation in the  country, we were a forgotten people. We  had the typical diseases of an underdeveloped country: malaria, diarrhea,  parasites, malnutrition - all preventable  with health -education and better living  conditions.  Participation in the revolution was very  small, partly because of the isolation.  Involvement in health care through the  national health campaigns has politicised  people, its the only tangible effect of  the revolution to them.  We go out in teams to visit the health  posts, supervise work, look for problems,  review organization and statistics. Organization is the main problem, people need  training. The health posts and clinics  now have prenatal and baby clinics. We  have breast and cervical cancer programmes  It's hard to promote breast self-examination because people are too embarassed  to be touched. We don't have speculums  and slides for cancer screening. We need  s,o many things: books, plastic rainwear,  radio transmitters, educational materials,  medical supplies.  Our priorities this year are opening the  new hospital, consolidating the brigadista programme, starting a health programme for workers in fishing, construction and the sugar mill and a training  programme for midwives. We'll choose women who are already their village mid-  wives so people will feel more trust. And  of course we have to keep ready to give  health services in an emergency - military  intervention by the contras could happen  any time.  The deaication of health workers here is  impressive. They have no feedback or  moral support like people in Managua  (the capital). We don't have the mass  organizations here, such as Arnnlae.  continued next page July/Aug'83   Kinesis   27  HEALTH  Conquita - a health educator in Blue fields.  "My responsibility is giving workshops and  technical assistance and explaining the  problems of a particular area. We need a  different strategy here on the Atlantic  Coast because of the different races and  dispersed communities in the rain forests.  We have to divide into three groups -  misquito, Creole(black) and mestico(span-  ish) in every workshop. We keep things as  dynamic and practical as possible so people  begin to define and analyse their own problems and develop their own solutions. They  learn by social drama, role playing, story  telling, poetry, songs, puppet shows and  art work. We get them to form study groups  and have them teach each other. Then they  can use the same methods with the population.  They learn how to carry out blood tests,  vaccinations, first aid, build latrines,  improve water supplies, drain swamps, teach  hygiene and use eight different medicines.  They learn when to refer to a nurse or  doctor. Above all, health education is not  given in a vacuum but with political,  social and economic context.  We've trained 200 health brigadistas this  year. They are volunteers chosen by their  village and trusted. At first people said  the vaccines were poison so we had to hold  meetings and explain. Some people believed  diarrhea was due to spirits blowing on  food. We take microscopes into the schools  and show them microbes and worms. Then they  understand.  The brigadistas have a health bulletin  every few months with information on activities and songs, poems and letters written  Imperialist forces and  counter-revolutionaries  are blocking the aid we  need. Our greatest  achievement is the clear  sense of purpose and  readiness expressed by  whole population.  by them. They are active in the community  and frequently are seen as representatives  of the revolution. So they continually  face threats from the contras. Two brigadistas have been murdered recently and  others have had their children kidnapped  and papers burned.  Lila - a brigadista from Cukra Hill,  two  hours by boat from Blue fields.  I was chosen by my village to be brigadista.  I know a lot an' all the time I'm learnin'  more. Every day I work, I don't have no  set hours, I here for any hours they need  me. I don't have no job an' I don't win  no salary, I workin' for my people to feel  healthy. For Nicaragua to have healthy  children an' no cripples.  We have plenty little communities in the  bush an' no transportation. I walk the  whole day an' come back in the evenin'. We  need a vehicle to go out bring people in an'  we could visit more often an' get supplies.  We wait in' for milk from Bluefields for  whole month.  Now we have a clinic here - somewhere good  where everybody get attention, get treated  an' go home. We tryin¬a to ^educate people  - they don't know to do away with bush an'  keep pigs out of the house. But can't make  changes all at once - time by time people  know.  Plenty people use old medicines and herbs.  Mow we'get them to study because sometimes  good but lots time really bad.  I been pregnant six times but only got one  child - he twelve. I was on a pill for a  long time then went off it an' lost the  baby at five months. Then the next time I  lost baby at six months. Maybe it was pill  that did it. One time I almost died an'  now can't have no more children. My husband  young an' he says one child not enough.  One day maybe he leave for a younger woman.  So I work hard an' train an' I'm learnin'  enough. Maybe one of these days well I'll  win a salary.  Maria Lilian Torres - Director Children's  Hospital,  Velez Pais.  Before the revolution, less than 40% of  births were in hospital. Now our policy  is to institutionalize births because the  home delivery situations are so inadequate,  newborns dying from infectious diarrhea  and tetanus.  We have 30 - 50 births here per day and  the majority of women come already in  labour. We have a programme "birth without pain" in which men participate but we  just don't have the facilities for husbands  to come to the birth, and it's not the  custom.  We do about seven Caesare;  day - less than before bei  forceps. But remember the large proportion  of women still deliver at home.  After the birth we try to keep the children  with mother as much as possible but our  post partum space is so inadequate. We  have to have three women sharing a bed  with a crib at the end. Even then they can  only stay eight hours before walking home.  After that they go to the local health  centres.  The major causes of maternal death are  toxemia, abortions and hemorrhage. We see  one or two self induced abortions a day.  We have a desperate shortage of medicines.  For example today we have no syntocin (a  hormone that can stop fatal bleeding after  delivery) or rhogam (treatment for infant  blood disorder).  We i  's hospital desperately.  Victoria - Ministry of Health, Popular  Health Council.  We've achieved a tremendous expansion of  delivery of health care nation wide. Imperialist forces from outside are blocking us from receiving the kinds of aid  we need and counter-revolutionaries from .  within are destroying, stealing and sabotaging. Our greatest achievement is the  clear sense of purpose and readiness expressed by brigadistas, educators and the  population in general.  We're clear about our limitations and we're  prepared to defend ourselves to accomplish  our objectives. We want to petition you  (Canadians) to count on your active solidarity in telling the world what we are  trying to achieve and what our obstacles  are.       Last fall more than $11(0,000.00 of medical  supplies, fishing equipment", tools, school  supplies, toys etc. were sent by boat from  Vancouver to Nicaragua. We saw many of  these things in use and all were much  appreciated. Another boat is leaving this  fall. If you would like to help with  the project or have goods or money available  please contact Catherine Pearson at OXFAM,  736-7678, or Bobby at IDERA. Donations  could be made payable to OXFAM, the Coalition for Aid to Nicaragua, 2524 Cypress St.  For information regarding solidarity  action, call myself, Adrienne Ross at 873-  0687.  Marta (far left) is pictured here receiving speculums from  Vancouver; women (middle) working in a hospital  laundry; one Nicaraguan woman (right) takes advantage  of a new milk bank so she can continue breastfeeding while  working. 8 Kinesis July/Aug '83  HEALTH  Making sure the cap fits  Two groups of women associated with the  Vancouver Women's Health Collective fit  women with diaphragms and cervical caps.  The diaphragm fitters collective has existed for more than four years and now numbers  ten woman. The cap fitters emerged from  this collective a year and a half ago and  currently is made up of four women.  The concern of both collectives is that  safe and effective means of birth control  be available to women at low cost. As  women's experiences are continually proving, those methods most readily promoted  by the medical profession (the pill and the  IUD) can have numerous side effects and  complications, often with serious effects  on a woman's wellbeing. Concern that bar-  riermethods of birth control be offered as  alternatives to these methods by well  trained and sympathetic women has motivated  the continued existence of both collectives.  According to two recent studies, statistics  show that when women are properly fitted  and shown how to use the diaphragm, its  effectiveness rates are equivalent to or  slightly higher than the IUD's. As the  cervical cap has not been as widely used  in North America, effectiveness rates are  less available. Studies to date show them  to be 91-96% effective.  A fitting for a diaphragm includes sharing  experiences about birth control, explaining how the diaphragm works, learning  cervical self-exam and practising insertion  of the diaphragm. By structuring fittings  in this way, we want to ensure that women  feel confident in their ability to.effectively use the diaphragm and, also, to promote a woman's greater understanding of  her body.  The cap fitters collective provides  another contraceptive option for women who  can not wear a diaphragm or who prefer a  cervical cap.  Skills in both collectives are learned  through apprenticeship. It takes approximately one year before someone has the  skills to be considered an experienced  fitter. At this time an evaluation takes  place. Women in the cap collective spent  one year training through workshops with  Aradia Women's Clinic in Seattle, various  local practitioners, and practising on  each other and on friends. We believe  the knowledge and skill we have developed  in our work is impressive.  If anyone is interested in fitting caps or  diaphragms, both collectives are currently  looking for new members. Both groups re  quire a one year committment, a minxmum of  two fittings per month (initially more frequently) , experience with use of a cap or  diaphragm and the regular attendance at  meetings. The diaphragm collective hold  monthly meetings and the cap collective  meets once every two months.  Information about joing a collective or  arranging for a fitting can be obtained by  . contacting the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective at 736-6696 or at 1501 W. Bdway.  In addition to fitting cervical caps and  diaphragms, the Health Collective will  soon be teaching the ovulation method of  fertility awareness. Using this method,  a woman charts the changes in her cervical  mucus in order to determine times of fertility to either avoid or achieve conception.  Marsha McKay of the Ovulation Method Teachers' Association will be in Vancouver,  from Los Angeles, to train teachers. We  invite other women who would be interested  in teaching the ovulation method to take  the course with us. It will take place on  August 3-8, both days and evenings.  Women taking the training need to have  charted their mucus for at least three  months. If interested, please call the  Health Collective for further details.  .  .  r      i  mm   \  PP  ''  inserting cap                           f  a) squatting  Depo-Provera  and sex offenders  Depo-Provera, the controversial contraceptive for women, is being tested now as a  sexual appetite suppressant - for men.  The Biosexual Psychohormonal Clinic at  John Hopkins Hospital "in Baltimore is conducting tests of the drug on male sex  offenders, attempting to reduce their sexual urges and perhaps prevent future crimes.  By blocking production of the male hormone  testosterone, Depo-Provera reportedly  suppresses or eliminates the male sexual  drive. However, consent must be given  before treatment with the drug can begin.  The drug causes gross abnormalities in  sperm and has caused cancer in laboratory  animals, as well as other side effects  including weight gains, high blood pressure, and symptoms similiar to female  menopause.  (Her Say)  Estimates of  VDT harm too low  The low-level radiation emitting from  video display terminals may pose 10 times  the health hazard previously estimated,  so says Dr. Edward Radford, a leading  authority on the subject and the chair  of a National Academy of Sciences Committee  on the Biological Effects of Radiation.  In a recent press conference, Radford re  vealed that the advisory committee's  1980 report was released only after the  committee reduced the original estimates  of how much cancer is caused by low-level  radiation. Radford himself objected to  those changes, saying the higher projections were correct.  New sponge  contraceptive  A new $1 sponge contraceptive approved by  the U.S. government has a failure rate of  18 per cent during the first year of use  and 10 percent after that, Planned Parenthood has said.  The new contraceptive, approved recently  by the Food and Drug Administration, was  proved during field tests since 1977 in 11  countries. The trials were funded partly  by more than $600,000 from the National  Institutes of Health and the Agency for  International Development.  The FDA has told the manufacturer, VLI  Corporation of Costa Mesa, California, to  inform purchasers of the "Today Vaginal  Contraceptive Sponge" that its clinical  trials "were not large enough to assess  the risk of developing toxic shock syndrome'.'  The sponge is made of a special polyurethane  which is a material used in making artificial hearts, blood vessels and heart valves.  The new product will be available nationwide by September.  Unlike the diaphragm, the sponge fits all  women in one size and thus does not require  fitting by a doctor or a prescription. It  can be used for 24 hours and then must be  removed, by tugging a loop and disposing of  it.  Dr. Louise Tryer, Director of the Planned  Parenthood Federation of America does say  that the spermicide employed with the devicel  may protect against gonorrhea and other  sexually transmitted diseases. It is the  most commonly used spermicide in use in the I  United States and over a 20 year period it  has not been shown to cause significant  harm to men or women. (Images, May '83)  Pregnancy drug  leads to lawsuits  Bendectin, a drug used to combat morning  sickness, has been linked to a variety of  birth defects ranging from missing arms  and legs to a potentially fatal intestinal  problem.  The manufacturer, Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, a subsidiary of the Dow Chemical Co.,  has now boosted the retail price of Bendectin by 300 percent to cover the costs of  their rising insurance premiums and the  nearly 200 pending legal suits.  Dr. Sidney Wolfe, director of the Ralph  Nader affiliated Health Research group in  Washington, charged that Merrell Dow is  trying to price bendecting off the market  so it can be drawn on the basis of diminished sales. The retail price is more  than $90 for 100 pills. (New Directions  for Women, May/June 1983). July/Aug'83   Kinesis   29  LETTERS  Food banks:  telling it like it is  Kinesis:  Have you heard about the food bank?  Have you had the opportunity to contribute?  Have you seen the long lines of the poor?  Have you had the opportunity to feel good  lately?  Well, if not,  You can.  You too can help the poor  You can drop cans of food into a box  at the back of churches  at your local grocery store  You can help the poor without being there  You can help the poor without seeing them  And then  You can tune in every Wednesday  on your favorite T.V. station  and see what your can, can do  Take advantage of this guilt free opportunity .  And maintain the status quo!!!  Linda Erwin  Women Gathering  to stop the cruise  Open letter to Kinesis readers:  We are an alliance of Vancouver women  brought together by our common concern  over, the effects of nuclear/war/technology on our lives and on the earth. Our  specific focus is the proposed testing of  the Cruise missile -at Cold Lake, Alberta.  Inspired by the women of England who have  so successfully demonstrated their collective power at Greenham Common USAF base  and by our desire to actively oppose the  Cruise missile within the context of our  feminist politics, we are organizing an  all-women's peace camp/ritual/action at  the Cold Lake Base for the' August 20-21  weekend. We would like our presence at  Cold Lake to be strongly felt, and are  encouraging women in other cities and  towns across Canada to organize towards  joining us there.  We realize, however, that due to the geographical size of our country, there are  women, especially in the eastern provinces,  who will be unable to journey to Cold Lake.  We are asking these women to join hands  with us in symbolic solidarity during the  August 20-21 weekend by organizing actions  near their own communities. We suggest  the focus of such actions be either Armed  Forces Bases or any institutions or corporations which are directly involved in  or supportive of nuclear/war technology  (for example, picketing Litton Industries).  For those who can come to Cold Lake, and  we hope as many women as possible will  be able to do so, we urge you to contact  us at Box 5, 400A W. 5th, Vancouver or  come to one of our organizing meetings.  (See Bulletin Board, pp. 30-31.)  We had originally intended to have a 2-3  week all-women's peace caravan from Van-  'Ģ couver to Cold Lake. However, since we  do not wish to be confused with or to  compete with the Peace Caravan being organized by other anti-nuclear groups to go  to Ottawa via Cold Lake this summer, we  have revised our plans to focus on our stay  at Cold Lake. Our transportation committee  will be concentrating primarily on getting  women up to Cold Lake in chartered Greyhound buses (at a cost of $87.00 return  per woman). The buses will leave Vancouver  on the evening of August 18, to arrive at  Cold Lake, Alberta on the evening of August 19. The trip takes approximately 19  hours. There will probably be a number of  women who will take their own vehicles and  more travelling time. Once we arrive at  Cold Lake, we will set up a temporary  women's camp at the English Bay Campground  in conjunction with the permanent(mixed)  peace camp which will open there on June  25 of this year. Donations are welcome and  can be sent to the above address.  As to immediate organizing, we participated  in the 24-hour Peace Camp for Survival in  front of the U.S. Consulate in Vancouver  April 22-23. A number of our members were  involved in organizing that event. We  joined the Walk for Peace on April 23 and  handed out information leaflets, inviting  women to a general fundraising, outreach,  publicity, and events at the Peace Camp.  It is our hope that our activities this  summer will be a step towards forming a  broad-based women's anti-nuclear movement.  Our aim is to inspire in all women a sense  of our creative power and to encourage all  women to take an active role in opposing  nuclear insanity. We want to stop the Cruise  and all nuclear/war technology. Together  we have the power to do it.  In Sisterhood, Vancouver Outreach Committee,  Women Gathering to Stop the Cruise  Male prostitutes  need alternatives too  Kinesis:  In the June issue of Kinesis, the story  "Prostitution recommendations spark heated  debate" by Lorri Rudland and Cole Dudley  fails to mention one group that spoke  against the motion proposed by Alderwoman  Marguerite Ford and May Brown. The Gay  Rights Union, represented by Donald Lar-  ventz and Rob Joyce, also presented briefs  along with the more than 11 groups and  individuals mentioned in the article. The  GRU representatives pointed out, like many  of the other speakers against the motion,  that young gay males end up on the streets  because of previous sexual abuse in the  home. As well, they pointed out that all  prostitutes, both male and female, must  have alternatives to this way of earning  a living. Real alternatives must be provided - not just sanctimonious moral condemnation.  Was the decision to exclude any mention of  the speakers from the Gay Rights Union an  editorial decision or merely an oversight  on the part of the reporters?  Kevin C. Griffin  (Ed. note: We appreciate your letter on  this point. Several groups were not mentioned in the article due to space constraints but we agree it is important to  point out that both male and female prostitutes need alternatives that the soliciting recommendations do not provide.  Thank you for your letter.)  And more on  feminist f atism  In response to Helene Wistozki's letter,  Kinesis June '83, criticizing my letters  on fat issues.  First I deny that I am upset about fat  oppression. I am angry11 an appropriate  response to oppression.  I do not deny that your othodontic braces  and the resultant speech impediment are a  handicap and that you receive prejudicial  treatment because of them. As a feminist,  I actively work against that sort of  prejudice everyday of my life as I do with  fatism, sexism, racism, ageism, anti-semi-  tism, and a host of other injustices. 1  ask that my sisters do the same, expecially  in feminist media.  As to the question of how fat women are  oppressed with regard to employment, medical care, and housing...Employment; a fat  woman can have better qualifications than  a thin woman and still not get the job,  because she is fat. We all know that the  patriarchy wants "attractive baubles"  around the work place and we know what  the patriarchy thinks of as attractive.  If a fat woman is successful at securing  a job, she is stuck at the back of the  work place and has little or no chance of  promotion. As well, the commonly held  myths that we are lazy and stupid work  against us.  Medical care; The myth that to be fat is  to be unhealthy is not true. It is made  true by the medical profession and society.  Doctors routinely treat every ailment of  fat women with weight-loss diets, never  treating the ailment. When the fat woman  is crippled or dies of the untreated ailment, it is blamed on fat. Catch 22. Reason enough to be angry.  Weight-loss diets have a five year 99%  failure rate. The one percent who are  successful are people who have suddenly  gained and just as suddenly loss weight,  people who are not normally fat. These  are Canadian and U.S. health department  stats.  Society contributes to our poor health  by taunting, jeering and generally making  a public spectacle of us when we have the  audacity to walk down the street, let  alone use public facilities for any kind  of physical activity. Sports clothing as  well as any other clothing is not manufactured, in our sizes so that our improvisations are further the butt of ridicule  Would you get any kind of exercise under  these circumstances?  Even dancing at a feminist function can  be an ordeal. There is always at least  one woman who is so impressed because she  didn't think you could put one foot in  front of the other, let alone dance and  dance well.  Housing; No landlord wants to rent to someone who is a lazy slob, a filthy pig.  These are the myths that society believes  about fat women. This coupled with the  lack of adequate employment, clothing  and medical care, means fewer choices for  housing.  Ms. Wisotzki accuses me of "overcompensa-  ting...by including minorities and under-  priviledged people...", I did not include  them in my criticism of the lack of fat  women in the Feminist Fashion article.  Rather as a feminist I noted that "in  addition...women of colour, disabled  women, children and older women were conspicuous by their absense". As a feminist,  were I not primarily concerned with fat  issues, I would have written my letter  about the other omissions.  As feminists we each have our own area of  prime importance to us. In our prime areas,  we work to educate and eradicate the-injustices that exist. At the same time I  hope that we seek to learn about and help  to eradicate the injustices experienced  by our sisters, and help form the kind of  society in which we want to live.  The feminist media exists to promote and  report feminist ideals in all their facets.  Fat issues are one area that Canadian feminists are lagging 10 years behind U.S.  feminists and I hazard a guess that there  are still other areas of oppression that  we feminists have not yet seen or exposed  continued on p. 30 30   Kinesis   July/Aug '83  BULLETIN BOARD  Events  THE PORT COQUITLAM AREA WOMEN'S CENTRE  will be holding its next General Meeting  on Thurs.. July 7, 1983 at 8:00p.m. at  the Women's Centre, corner of Chester  and Coquitlam Avenues in Port Coquitlam.  All interested women are invited to  attend.  SFU SUMMER WORKSHOP SERIES presented by  the SFU Women's Centre...  Women and The Peace Movement with Marianne Van Loon, Wed., July 6, 12:30p.m.  (at Women's Centre AQ 2003).  Anorexia Nervosa with People Concerned  with Anorexia Nervosa and Associated  Disorders(ANAD), Wed., July 13, 12:30p.i  . (at Women's Centre AQ 2003)  Film:'Pornography: Not A Love Story,  Discussion groups afterward, Tues.'Äû  July 19, 12:30p.m. and 8:00p.m.  (at Images Theatre, SFU)  Women and Unemployment, Wed., July 20,  12:30p.m. (at Women's Centre, AQ 2003).  All Women Welcome...  FREE LAW CLASSES by the Peoples Law School.  Registration and information: 734-1126.  July 12, 7:30p.m. - Common-law marriage  at Fraserview Library.  July 13, 7:30p.m. - Marriage Agreements  at Fraserview Library.  July 18, 7:30p.m. - How To Get Legal  Help at Frog Hollow Neighbourhood House.  July 20, 7:30p.m. - Sexual Assault: The  New Law at Little Mountain Neighbourhood House.  ALLIANCE FOR THE SAFETY OF PROSTITUTES is  having an educational evening with Margo  St. James from COYOTE as the main  speaker. It will take place Sun., July  10 at the United Church, 320 E. Hastings  from 7-9p.m. Childcare available.  LA QUENA COFFEE HOUSE presents Sabia,  four women who play a wide variety of  music from Latin America with a particular emphasis on contemporary songwriters and traditional and contemporary music dealing with women in Latin  American society. Thurs., July 14, 8p.i  PARTY AT WOMEN IN FOCUS, July 14 at 8p.m.  Hosted by Vancouver Women's Bookstore in  celebration of their 10th anniversary.  "Tea Sale" at the Vancouver Women's Bookstore July 23 from 1-5:30p.m.  Refreshments, 10% off all purchases.  : contribute to the  continued from p. 29  and because of.this i  oppression.  Ms. Wistozki, and anyone else who fits her  self description - No, your thoughts and  feelings are not less important because  you are white, middleclass, educated and  thin. You are however more privileged.  Giving up or denying your privilege will not  and never has, aided those of us who are  less privileged. Instead use your privilege  and power to the benefit of us all. When  your braces come off and your speech returns to "normal" remember the lessons you  have learned and the oppression you have  felt. The rest of us will live with our  oppression every day, the rest of our lives.  The September issue of Kinesis, I hope,  will carry a reprinted article on "How  You Can Help End Oppression Of Fat Dykes"/  women, and a definition of who is fat by  Minneapolis Lesbian Fat Liberation and  Life in the Fat Lane respectively. I hope  that Kinesis will continue to seek out and  publish fat issues as well as the many  other areas of Feminist concern.  Bonnie Ramsay, anti-fatism,- sexism, racism,  nuclear, anti-semitism, nonaccess, homophobia, ageism, facism, pornography.  Groups  HEATHER BISHOP, FRANKIE ARMSTRONG, Sweet  Honey in the Rock, Terry Garthwaite,  Bobby Louise Hawkins, Rosalie Sorrels  are among the many performers who will  be at the 6th Annual Vancouver Folk Music  Festival, July 15, 16, 17 at Jericho  Beach Park. Advance weekend tickets:  $40; at the gate $50; Fri. evening $15;  Sat./Sun. $22.  THE CALGARY WOMEN'S SUMMER FESTIVAL: "Ain't  I A Woman" will be held July 29, 30 and  31. For more info., phone 403-283-7939  or write to Calgary Women's Summer Festival, 1221 Bowness Rd. N.W., Calgary,  Alberta T2N 3J6.  THE FOURTH ANNUAL NORTHWEST WOMEN'S FESTIVAL will take place July 22, 23, 24,  1983 at Alicen's place, located halfway  | between Hazelton and Smithers. Several  workshops; topics include - aging, non-  sexist child-rearing, childbirth in the  North, Lesbians in the North, self-help  health, stress, women and nuclear disarmament. Cost $15 per woman. For more  info, contact the Deh Quo Women's Group  P.O. Box 3881, Smithers, B.C. V0J 2N0  or call Debra 847-4846 or Alicen at 847-  4119.  FACES OF THE MOON, Dawn Obokata's one-  woman show presented by Powell Street"  Festival, July 30 at 6:30p.m., Firehall Theatre, 280 E. Cordova St. Admission: pay what you can. For further info,  call 684-7814.  POWELL STREET FESTIVAL CELEBRATIONS, July  30 and 31 (11:00a.m.-7:30p.m.) at  Oppenheimer Park (400 block Powell St.)  Numerous events include: Japanese  Classical and Folk dances, Okinawan  dance, music, drumming, demonstrations  of martial arts, cooking, flower arranging, tea ceremony, crafts, food..  For more info, contact Lucy Komori at  684-7814 or 255-2651.  THE DOWNTOWN EASTSIDE COMMUNITY, through  the sponsorship of the Downtown Eastside  Residents' Association(DERA), is holding  a one day celebration in Oppenheimer  Park on Sund., August 28 from 12:00 noon  until 8:00p.m. Among the events being  planned are a variety of ethnic and  musical entertainment, history and information displays, a bar-b-que, along with  a lot of fun and games.  The first fund  raising event, to help offset the costs  of the festival, will feature a delicious  ten course Chinese banquet, organized by  the DERA Senior Citizens Club. The dinner  will be held at the Park Lock-Restaurant,  544 Main Street On Sat., July 23 at 6:30  p.m. Tickets, $22.00, can be purchased  at DERA, 9 East Hastings. Ph: 682-0931.  SPECIAL GENERAL VSW MEMBERSHIP MEETING  Proposed constitutional changes. Sept.  15, 1983, Thurs. at 7:30p.m. in the  NDP Hall at 517 E. Broadway.  WEEKLY SOFTBALL DIAMOND AVAILABLE for any  women to play. Weds., 7-9p.m., northwest diamond - Britannia field off  Williams St. Bring equipment if possible.  THINKING OF STARTING WOMEN'S GROUPS? (ie.  support groups, health, self defense),  and need a place to meet or are already  established and would like to do outreacl  in the Little Mountain area, contact  Sage at 879-7104.  BATTERED WOMEN'S SUPPORT SERVICES will be  conducting a training program for women  who are interested in becoming support  group facilitatiors. The training is  composed of one weekend session, six  weekly evening follow-up sessions and a  final day-long wrap-up. For more info,  contact Robyn at the BWSS office (734-  1574) before August 15.  THE RADICAL REVIEWER needs critical work  done on books about women and technology,  on science fiction and lesbian novels,  feminist theory and Canadian literature.  We'd like to see regular short review  columns on periodicals, small press publications, poetry and self-published  work. Features on women in theatre, art  and film are needed as well as more critiques on women in music. If you want to  be on our mailing list to receive books  and/or records for review, send us your  name, address and area(s) of interest.  THE RADICAL REVIEWER is in process of  changing and forming the various committees needed to keep our publication alive  If you are skilled in any of the following we'd like to hear from you: lay-out,  design and production; management of  budgets and grants, promotion and advertising; subscription drive, soliciting  manuscripts, editorial and office work  and fund-raising.  Contact us c/o P.O. Box 24953, Station C,  Vancouver, B.C. V5T 4G3  FAT ISSUES GROUP starting up, for info,  call Bonnie at 251-3803.  BATTERED WOMEN'S SUPPORT SERVICES is  currently planning their provincial  educational program for the coming year.  If" you are interested in sponsoring a  workshop or training program, contact  the BWSS at 734-1574, #301-2515 Burrard  St., Van., B.C. V6J 3J6.  BATTERED WOMEN'S SUPPORT SERVICES has  initiated a project to determine the  needs of teenage women who are battered  in their relationships. If you know of  any young women who might be interested  in participating in this project have  them contact Jean, Jeny, or Miljenka at  734-1574. Confidentiality is ensured  for all participants.  PALINDROMES: ON WOMEN AGING, an exhibition  of work by 7 Canadian women artists at  the Burnaby Art Gallery (6344 Gilpin)  runs from Aug 18-Sept 11. Events surrounding the show include: Performance-  Aug 18/8.30pm; Radio Series-CFRO  102.7FM  Mondays/7pm-; Artists Meet the Public-  Aug 21,27/2pm/B.A.G.; Video Series-Aug  22,23/7pm/B.A.G. & Aug 25,26/7pm at  Video Inn; Women Growing Old:Testimo-  nials  Aug 28/10-5pm? B.A.G./sponsored  by VSW. Call 291-9441 for more information on September events.  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN'S 1982/83 annual  report is now available. To obtain a  copy write or call our offices. There  will be a postage charge for all mailed  copies. July/Aug'83   Kinesis   31  BULLETIN BOARD  Workshops  A RESIDENTIAL WEEKEND WORKSHOP FOR LESBIAN  COUPLES - Description: This workshop is  particularily designed for lesbian  couples in committed relationships. The  emphasis of the work will be on improving communication skills and-dealing  with common issues such as autonomy,  intimacy, sexuality, goal-setting, etc.  Role playing and psychodrama, gestalt,  encounter, fantasy work, and art will  be used to process material.  Location: The workshop will be held at  'Treetops Retreat', a dome ten minutes  from Sechelt on the Sunshine Coast. Located in a beautiful, natural setting,  the site is easily accessible to beaches  and a marina. Date: July 29-31, 1983.  Cost: $275.00 per couple includes room  and board. Facilitator: Michaela Johnson,  M.A. Ph: 876-6166 for further info.  PORT COQUITLAM AREA Women's Centre (corner  of Chester and Coquitlam Avenue in Port  Coquitlam) is holding two law workshops  and drop-in clinics in July. I Family  Law Workshop - July 6, 7:00p.m. The  workshop will be followed by a Family  Law Problems Drop-in Clinic at 8:00p.m.  II Wills And Change Of Name Workshop -  July 20, 7:00p.m. This workshop will  also be followed by a Wills And Change  Of Name Drop-In Clinic at 8:00p.m.  The workshops and drop-ins are free,  and free childcare will be provided.  For info, call 941-6311.  HEALING AND EMPOWERING WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN  at 1165 Fairfield, Victoria. Sliding  scale fees. Sara Joy David at 385-2954.  Classified  RUMMAGE SALE: Due to a large number of  donations, Women against Nuclear Technology is having a second rummage sale  July 10th, 11a.m. - 3p.m. at 1774 Grant  St. to coincide with Italian Day. See  you there.  HAVE A CHILD? NEED ACCOMMODATION? Sharing  is a positive solution - share expenses  and evening and weekend child-care time.  I am a single mother with an 8 year old  son. I want to share accommodation with  a single mother, one child. I have 2 bedrooms available in an older 4 bedroom  lower duplex, 4 blocks from VGH - backyard included. One Bedroom has a fireplace. I also have a washer and dryer.  Your share $365.50 plus h  utilities.  Available July 15 or Aug. 1. Call 876-  4670.  THE WOMYN'S BRAILLE PRESS, INC. offers  over seventy-five feminist and lesbian  books on tape, to womyn who are blind  or physically disabled. WBP also circulates several feminist periodicals  on tape. Subscribers receive a quarterly  newsletter in Braille, print, or on tape.  For more info, or to make a contribution  contact: WBP, P.O. Box 8475, Minneapolis,  MN 55408.  THREE WOMEN LOOKING FOR ANOTHER WOMAN to  share co-op house. Garden/garage/storage  and workshop space. Near Charles and  Nanaimo. Two-thirds bilingual household.  $175/mth. plus utilities. Call 253-3350.  Available Aug. 1st.  AGORA FOOD CO-OP is allowing non-members  to shop during the summer months - June,  July and August. 3307 Dunbar. Ph: 228-  9115.  FOR SALE:  JVC personal stereo, with one  year warranty still to go. Great condition, rarely used. Plus rechargable  batteries and charger. Phone Bonnie at  251-3803.  MA/PATRON WANTED: Poor dyke desperately  needs financial help for three years.  Acupuncture School starting Sept. '83.  If you can help sponsor me, write: Naja  Sorella, Box 11, 2124 Kittredge St.,  Berkeley, Ca. 94707. Any amount of donations gratefully accepted.  BRITISH COLUMBIA'S WOMEN'S ACCESS ASSOCIATION has put together a resource manual,  aimed at teachers, counsellors, and  community helpers who work with women.  Cost of $10.00 includes binder and mailing. To order send cheque to: Women's  Access Resource Manual, c/o Douglas  College Women's Centre, Box 2503, New  Westminster, B.C. V3J 5B2.  FEMALE DOCTOR WANTED...Women, in beautiful  Lake Windermere Valley in the East Kootenays, who are wholistically health oriented are interested in locating a  sensitive, cooperative, female M.D. who  would be interested in relocating. We  invite you to come for a visit this  summer to meet and talk with some of us  about the possibility. Carol Gordon,  P.O. Box 2611, Invermere, B.C. V0A 1K0,  Ph: 604-342-3685.  WANTED TO RENT - Single woman seeks East  End apartment for August 1st. Must have  electric stove and electric/steam heat.  Max. $225/mth. Call Penny 872-5901 or  254-9963.  WORKSHOP SPACE FOR RENT, available immediately. "Ph. Press Gang at 253-1224.  WEST WIND CIRCLE T-SHIRTS: A Women's Business. We specialize in silk-screening  and custom designs/logos. We have special rates for political groups. Call  Carol, 327-5778(message); Susan 873-5804.  BOOKS FOR SALE - The Vancouver Women's  Health Collective offers some books for  sale at cost. These are well-written,  informative, and clearly illustrated.  They are: Our Bodies,  Our Selves:  $3.00;  A New View of a Woman's Body:  $8.00;  How to Stay out of the Gynecologist's  Office:   $6.00.  SEARCH FOR JOURNEYWOMEN IN B.C. - Alice  MacPherson, Journeywoman Motorcycle  Mechanic, is collecting info, about  journeywomen in B.C. If you are a  journeywoman who would be interested in  .participating in a survey about your  experiences as a woman in the trades,  please write to Alice at: Women in  Trades Association, 400A W. 5th Ave.,  Van., B.C. V5Y 1J8, Ph. 876-0922.  INFO ON BERLIN NEEDED: Canadian lesbian  feminist wishes to make contact with  womyn(preferably feminist), who are  travelling to Germany, or who have just  arrived from there. I am planning on  leaving for West Berlin in September,  and need to make contact with strong,  politically progressive womyn, who  could billet me(am willing to do an  exchange for the billeting) and who  could give me some reliable contacts  from the womyn's movement, as well as  the lesbian movement. Contact Angy Zenk  at: 875-1328, 875-1329. (I work Mon.  thru Wed. from 10a.m.-5p.m. Leave your  name and anumber if you can't contact  me on those days, and I'll get back to  you.)  'OR SALE: three slightly used tapes of  women's music - Turning It Over, Strong  Singers and Margie Adams, Songwriter.  Phone Bonnie at 251-3803.  FEMINIST THERAPY, INCEST SURVIVORS COUNSELLING, LESBIAN COUNSELLING - Marsha  Ablowitz, M.S.W. Ph: 261-8953. Sliding  fee scale.  ROOM AVAILABLE FOR ONE WOMAN in co-op  owned East End character house. We are  presently two women and three men. We  have a planted garden and one cat. Rent  is approx. $200 and food and utilities  $100 - total costs are $300/mth. Non-  smoker preferred. Ph: 255-7287.  LESBIAN FEMINIST CO-OP HOUSE looking for  fourth roommate. The house is near 33rd  and Fraser, has pets, and is non-smoking.  For more information, call 876-4541  FEMINIST ARTISTS: As part of their fund  raising campaign Battered Women's Support  Services is organizing a Feminist Art  Exhibit which will be held in late Sept.  If you are a feminist artist who is interested in submitting your portfolio for  consideration, please contact Rae Gabriel  at BWSS - 734-1574 or 685-8740 before  July 29, 1983. Traditional female "craft"  work such as quilting, embroidery, weaving etc. will definitely be considered  for this show.  NEW AT ARIEL:  Pegeen Brennan-ZARKEEN  $6.95  the EVENT Feminist issue  $3.00  GAY/LESBIAN Almanac  $22.95  "Sylvia" cards   $1.35  Angela Davis—  WOMEN, RACE & CLASS  $7.95  OPEN: Mon-Sat10-6  Friday till 9 p.m.  ARIEL  BOOKS  2766 W. 4th Ave.  733-3511