 ,^  2 British Columbia's nurses win a  well-deserved increase while John  Fryer sulks  10 It's home  unsweet home for  women in  Vancouver's downtown eastside  3 CARAL marches  in Victoria to defend  our access to  abortion  1 1   MOTHERS  TAKE BACK THEIR  DAY: a special  KINESIS supplement to celebrate  province-wide  4 Vancouver feminists will have an  opportunity to hear  the Quebecoises  16 We chart the  rise and fall (and  rise?) of midwifery  6 .What is life like  for the women of  Zimbabwe, Namibia  and South Africa?  1 8 There's no  better year than  1980 to read Vida  8 Why women have  found themselves a  home in the anti-  nuclear movement  ■ 9 Scream from  Silence evokes a  mixed response  Cover graphic by Susanne  Gartlan  SUBSCRIBE TO KMEJ/S  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $10  $12  $20  $50  Name  Address  Payment Enclosed   Bill Me   Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate funding  —we need member support!  MAY'80  0:3 c  :gf SU  KiMMJiJ  news about women that's not in the dailies  EVERY MOTHE)?  Vb K FORKING >mm  •'11'     <[&m* 2 Kinesis May 80  B.C. NEWS  Nurses win well-deserved increase; Fryer sulks  By Kinesis staff writers  One of the highest and most-deserved wage  increases ever awarded unionized workers  in B.C. has received severe and unwarranted criticism from union leader John Fryer.  Fryer, who is paid about $-46,000 a year to  run his 4-6,000-member B.C. Government  Employees Union, quickly denounced a 44$  increase for 12,500 nurses who are earning  slave wages. Fryer, who earns about three  times the salary of a registered nurse,  does not have to dump bed pans or wash  sick bodies.  Yet he yelled and screamed to the press  that the increase offered nurses by the  Health Labour Relations Association will  bring out "industrial choas" and "wage  and price controls." What is happening  to the labour movement in this province  when so-called leaders blame workers for  wage and price controls and economic upheaval?  Fryer also conveniently failed to mention  that the BCGEU workers were given 56$  catch-up increases when they won bargaining rights in the mid '70s.  More importantly, he ignored the comments  of medical people, including hospital  administrators, who admitted that nurses  have been subsidizing the health system  with their low take home pay.  The starting wage for a registered nurse  with several years education is about  $1,300 a month or $8 an hour. Kinesis  doubts nurses would be earning such low <  wages if the 12,000-strong professional  group were male.  This year nurses and the negotiators stuck  to their "no more nurse nice guy" threat  and it paid off. By 1982 nurses will be  earning about $2,000 a month, similar to  the paycheque of a firefighter or police  officer.  Fortunately, many responsible labour leaders did not share Fryer's temper tantrum  which some say was ignited when BCGEU  members complained that they are locked  A union for dental assistants? Dentists are quietly  freaking out  By Joey Thompson/Province  A union which wants to represent B.C. dental assistants says many dentists enjoy  healthy pay cheques and pleasant working  conditions while their employees are  denied sick days off, medical coverage,  paid vacations and annual salary increases.  The Health Sciences Association (HSA) wants  to give the dentists' helpers union clout  to get those benefits.  The dental assistants — with the blessing  of the 33-year-old B.C. Dental Assistants  Association — are seeking improved wages  and working conditions under the bargaining  power of the HSA, a trade union which bargains for hospital dieticians, medical  librarians, lab and x-ray technicians.  Applications for certification of six Lower  Mainland dentists' offices with two or more  employees are currently being reviewed by  the Labour Relations Board.  If they win there, more applications will  follow. Each office will form an individual bargaining unit. Dentists, who will  have to negotiate individually with the  union, could be forced to pay thousands  of dollars more in wage and benefit packages to an estimated 4,000 certified and  non-certified assistants, receptionists,  hygienists and lab technicians who are  working for the province's 1,600 licensed  dentists.  Union officials say demands for first contracts will probably include substantial  upgrading.  "Dentists are quietly freaking out. They  are afraid their business will be taken  over by the assistants," said an association spokeswoman who owns an employment  service agency for dental auxiliaries.  The College of Dental Surgeons of B.C.  issues an annual wage and compensation  guide — much like the voluntary fee  schedule which was recently hiked 12 per  cent.  . But the assistants association says that  very few dentists pay the recommended  rates.  It says assistants are paid at the whim of  the employer who can fire an employee on  the spot without explanation or advance  warning. Salaries and working conditions  vary drastically from one dentist's office  to another, the average assistant earning  between $800 and $1,000 a month.  "But there are gross differences. Many  earn less than $800. Many women are single  parents with no job security and few days  off. Certified dental hygienists and  dental assistants are not even afforded vthe  minimum protection under the B.C. Labour  Code because they are covered under the  Dentistry Act of B.C.," says HSA executive  director, Jack Campbell.  "They are in the  same category as farmworkers and domestics.'  College president Dr. Ted Ramage said when  it comes down to union organizing, the  dentists are on their own. "Good heavens  no, the college won't have anything to do  with that. We don't know the first thing  about it."  Refusing to release the wages suggested by  the association, Ramage did not know  whether or not dentists used the wage  guide.  "...I can only relate to my own  office. And I know the gals (sic) there  have nothing to complain about."  He did not want to speculate on whether  dentists would boost fees again to offset  the increased costs of providing better  wages and working conditions. Q  Margaret Marsh wins  Margaret Marsh was exonerated March 6 of  all responsibility in the death of a stillborn child during a home birth she attended' in Saanich July 12, 1978.  Judge Peter Millward ruled that it was  "highly unlikely ...that the child could  have been saved by anything Margaret  Marsh could have done."  Marsh is not a midwife, but a spiritual  healer and an ex-doctor. But her next  trial, now postponed until Septermber,  will be an important one for the home birth  movement. The B.C. College of Physicians  and Surgeons has charged her with practic-  ising midwifery without a licence, a summary offence under the B.C. Medical Act. 0.  into a three-year eight-per-cent contract  which does not even protect them against  cost of living increases.  Fryer's childish antics sent shivers up and  down the trade union movement in the province. Jack Munro, regional president of  the International Woodworkers' of America  went so far as to suggest that Fryer needs  to see a psychiatric nurse.  The BCGEU provincial executive has suggested that Fryer take a sabbatical.  The women's movement suggests that Fryer  study herstory and seek a better understanding of women's hard fought battles for the  right to decent working wages and conditions, something most men have taken for  granted for a long time.  Workers, women as well as men, need encouragement and support for their struggle  against the bosses. But then, we don't  have to tell this to a man who negotiates  for thousands of government workers. Do we?  AUCE deciding which way to go  By Ann C. Schaeffer  Members of the Association of University  and College Employees (AUCE) will determine the future of their union in a referendum.  The CLC's refusal last fall of AUCE's  application to affiliate prompted the  union to investigate all options available  to strengthen its position. True to its  democratic character, AUCE will let its  members decided whether the union will remain intact or merge with CUPE, BCGEU or  0TEU.  Delegates from each of AUCE's five locals  attended an affiliation convention last  month. By a vote of 31-8-1, they overturned motion to recommend merger with CUPE in  favour of a provincial executive proposal  recommending "that AUCE remain constitutionally intact with the present decisionmaking structure intact." The convention  also decided to put the question to AUCE's  2800 members in what could turn out to be  a four-step balloting procedure.  First, members will be asked whether they  wish AUCE to remain an independent or to  affiliate with a labour federation.  A majority voting to remain independent  would end the nearly year-long controversy.  But an affirmation of the union's original  decision to seek affiliation with other  labour unions would require the members to  vote on a second question; namely, "with  which labour organization do you wish to  affiliate: the CLC, the CCU, or any other,  such as SORWUC?" If either the CCU or  "any other" is chosen, AUCE is virtually  guaranteed admission constitutionally  intact.  If members decide the CLC is for them, however, they will have to choose, on a third  ballot, between extensive lobbying of the  CLC to reverse its original decison or  merging with a CLC union.  A decision to merge with a CLC union would  lead to final AUCE referendum in which  members would choose to join, en masse,  BCGEU, CUPE or 0TEU.  The results of each ballot will be tallied  and published by each local.  This, said  Hester Vair, Vice President of AUCE Provincial, was a contentious issue at the  convention.  "Any local can secede if two-  thirds of its members want to," said Vair.  "We have a clause in our constitution  allowing them to. That's quite unlike any  other union."  That unique clause could be AUCE's undoing.  Members could use a democratic clause to  vote themselves out of a democratic union.  In other AUCE news, Local 1 at UBC has  voted overwhelmingly in favour of strike  to back contract demands for a 15%  increase over one year. 0. Kinesis May 80 3  B.C. NEWS  CARAL marches in Victoria to defend access to abortion  By Marine Boag  When the Canadian Abortion Rights Action League (CARAL) marched for freedom  of choice on abortion March 29 in Victoria, more than 150 people joined in.  They carried banners ("Freedom of Choice",  "No Compulsory Pregnancy") and an assorted  collection of placards ("I'm A Christian,  I'm For Choice", "Financial Reasons Are  Damn Good Reasons", "Repeal All Abortion  Laws", to "Hope You Come Back As A Woman,  Rafe", which like many was addressed to  Rafe Mair, B.C.'s anti-choice Minister of  Health.  They chanted, "With Rafe We Lose  The Right To Choose", and "Woman must control her fate, not the church and not the  state" the protesters marched down Douglas  Street, crowded with Saturday shoppers, to  the Legislature building.  Standing on the steps were twenty pro-  lifers, holding aloft their signs ("Thank  You, Rafe Mair", and ''Legalised Abortion  Is Legalised Murder"), waiting for the  protesters to stop. It was a reminder to  many of the ugly confrontation between the  two groups when over 100 pro-choice demonstrators had disrupted the pro-life  Mothers Day rally last May. Waiting too  were the t.v. cameras to film the confrontation. The marchers slowed down for a  minute. Then the decision was made to continue in their circular route to the Old  Age Pensioners' Hall for speeches, without the planned stop at the Legislature.  Positive declaration not busted  Many felt that the march was a positive  declaration of belief and should not be  deflected by arguments with the anti-  abortion fanatics.  Besides, it was  chilly and the protesters were tired from  carrying their banners in the wind, and  wanted to get inside and sit down.  Inside the O.A.P. Hall, a succession of  speakers addressed the crowd on different  aspects of the abortion issue.  Jennifer Lowen, speaking on behalf of the  Canadian Abortion Rights Action League,  the organizers of the march, began by  explaining that CARAL's main goal is to  see that no woman in Canada is denied  access to safe, legal abortion.  "Our aim  is the repeal of all sections of the Criminal Code dealing with abortion, and the  establishment of comprehensive birth control counselling and abortion services  across the country. We regard the right  to safe, legal abortion as a fundamental  human right, and we are protesting today  because women are being denied abortion  services throughout the country."  "We are protesting first because the abortion committee at Victoria General has  stopped all abortions at that hospital,  causing a tremendous overload at the  Jubilee Hospital, and making many women  travel to the United States, seeking  illegal abortions, or bear an unwanted  child. We are angry that an essential  medical service has been denied to the  women of Victoria by three men."  Lowen continued: "We are protesting  Health Minister Rafe Mair's stated intention to cut B.C.'s abortion rate by 90 per  cent. We do not believe that this would  stop unwanted pregnancies, only force  women to seek dangerous or expensive abortions elsewhere. And thirdly, we are protesting an ambiguous, unworkable federal  abortion law, which allows hospital committees and politicians to keep women  pregnant against their will."  Statements from NDP MLAs Rosemary Brown,  Stuart Leggatt, Charles Barber, and Gordon  Hanson were read. Federal MP Jim Manly,  who had come from Ladysmith to join the  march, spoke to the audience, reaffirmed  the NDP's pro choice stand, saying that it  was ironic that the opponents of legalised  abortions were usually in favour of capi  tal punishment, which is "the same as postnatal abortion".  Carol Pickup, chairman of the Greater Victoria School Board, and an ex-VGH board  member, spoke of the importance of individual political involvement, and urged  the audience to buy Hospital Society memberships and participate in hospital  board elections, where anti-abortion groups  find it easy to swing elections and elect  one-issue anti-abortion board members.  Astrid Davidson, representing the B.C.  Federation of Labour, spoke of the importance which choice on childbearing holds  for working women.  "Contraceptives fail,  maternity leave is often difficult to get,  so abortion must be available as a backup."  Women's Studies lecturer at U Vic, Josephine Payne, talked about the history of  abortion rights, explaining that abortion  before 16 weeks was not a crime, even in  the Catholic Church, up until the 19th  century.  Ann Thompson, representing the Vancouver  CCCA (Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion), talked about the importance of  getting organised to draw supporters into  active participation in the fight to make  abortions totally legal and accessible to  all women."  The final speaker was outspoken poet Alice  Ages, who believes that doctors have no  right to decide if a woman should have an  abortion. She said that nationwide polls  show that a majority of Canadians think  that abortion decisions should be made by  a woman and her doctor: but Ages believes  that the final decision should be left to  the woman, without having to ask for a  doctor's approval.  R. Krieger  When the rally was over, the organisers  agreed that it had been a great success.  "It takes a crisis, such as the one we  have in Victoria at present, to mobilize  supporters," said Jennifer Lowen.  "Many  people think that abortion is legal and  available to all women in Canada, when it  isn't.  The situation in Victoria, where  the committee at one hospital approves no  abortions, and the committee at the other  hospital approves all of them, is a striking example of the inequities caused by  the federal abortion law."  "We are planning to participate in a  nation-wide Day of Declaration for Abortion  Rights, to be held in the fall across  Canada. We will continue to protest until  the law is changed, and abortion is removed  from the Criminal Code." 0  A WARD SYSTEM FOR VANCOUVER  Accessibility and Accountability  Vancouver citizens voted 51.7% in  favour of a ward system in the last  civic election. In the November 1980  elections, ward representation will  continue to be a major civic issue.  The current city council has refused  to implement the will of the majority.  VSW supports a ward system,  because we believe it is in the interests not only of women, but also the  majority of Vancouver residents.  COME TO AN INFORMATION  MEETING AT KITS HOUSE  (7th & Vine)  Wed. May 14, 7:30 p.m.  Panel: Aid. Oarlene Marzari  Aid. Harry Rankin  Jean Swanson, Committee of  Progressive Electors  Susan Hoeppner, VSW executive (former member of Kitsilano Community Resources Board)  Moderator: Debra Lewis, VSW 4 Kinesis May 80  ACROSS CANADA  Hear the Quebecoises: Vancouver conference June 6, 7  Danyele Leroux and Susan Croll are two members of the recently formed ad hoc Vancouver Committee to Hear the Quebecoises.  The committee is bringing three feminist  Que'be'coises to speak at a public meeting  and conference to be held in early June.  Danyele and Susan talked to Kinesis about  the Committee, and about what its like to  DANYELE: I've been here for two years now.  One of the reasons I first came here was because I felt really suffocated in Quebec  because of the political, social and authoritarian structures such as the church and  family. So I came to B.C. and started to  do some work in the Fishermen's Union and  the Lesbian Drop-In.  In lots of areas I  felt I was not understood in a lot of ways;  that my background was never taken into  consideration.  It was really important for me to be in a  group that could understand where I was coming from and what my experiences were -  being a minority, working within a minority  (the women's movement and the left).  So I talked to a friend of mine about how I  was feeling being a francophone, not being  supported. I very seldom talked about how  I felt because then I would get into a political discussion, or not even a political  discussion, where the person I would be  talking to would be really defensive. I was  trying to make them understand how I was  feeling, and they felt like it was their  fault. So it would always turn into a stupid  discussion where I would fight with people.  So I decided I wasn't going to talk to anybody except people who were aware of what  was going on in Quebec, who knew about exploitation and oppression. I thought that  one of the ways women here could see the  condition of living in Quebec would be to  organize some kind of rally or conference.  How the conference was conceived  I started thinking about that in October of  last year.  In December I went to Quebec  and met three women there, and asked them  if they would be interested in coming and  speaking in Vancouver about the living conditions of women, and about the whole question of Quebec, and explain it in ways in  which people here could understand and give  their support. It would be education for  people here as much as information about  Nicaragua, Chile and Cuba is.  So I went to see these women. And they said  they would be really interested in coming  here, but they didn't feel the people here  could understand anything that they were  going through because they weren't living  it. And these women were saying that you  can only support a cause, and understand  something, when you have a really strong  gut feeling about it.  I decided that I would overcome that here.  I was going to organize this conference.  So when I came back I wrote a letter and  sent it to about 40 women's groups in Vancouver and the lower mainland and asked foi  a meeting.  That was in January. At that meeting, only  two people came. I got quite bummed out  and decided I was going to give it up; but  those people thought that if there were only  two or three people, it meant there was a  lot of work to do. Our awareness had to be  increased because this (i.e. the issue of  women in Quebec - ed.) is going on; this is  real; this is not something that is quite  far.  I wrote a speech for International Women's  Day and printed some leaflets asking for  another meeting.  This time eight women came - women from  SORWUC, the Revolutionary Workers* League,  the Women's Bookstore, Rape Relief, from  the Fisherman's Union - from a lot of dif  ferent backgrounds. We agreed at the  first meeting that what we wanted to do  as a group was to pull together our best  knowledge in areas like publicity, public  education, fund-raising - all we knew, in  how to build a conference, although we  didn't know that much, and we put our  efforts together.  Our main goal is to have women from Quebec  come here and express themselves. We want  people to hear women from Quebec talk  about themselves.  We thought the media propaganda here was  terrible. Some of the women I talked to  said that it was really fine to support  a< cause, but that they had to feel that  this thing was affecting them in their  everyday lives. That's where the referendum question comes in.  I had to find a common ground. What happens is that the people who are against  the referendum, and the people who have  the power, and the people who have the  money - the corporations, the government -  these are the same people who deny women's rights, who deny union's rights, who  deny lesbian rights, who deny all these  things.  So that was the link that I made with the  opppression of women in Quebec. It was important for people here because overall  those who stop women from being free in  Quebec are the same people who stop women  from being free here.  If the people in the anglophone community  don't support the people in Quebec, they  are standing beside the coporations, the  government - beside all those people who  deny our rights.  KINESIS: So it's not really a coincidence  that this group is forming around the same  time as the referendum?  DANYELE: No it's not, although we really  want to, focus on building links regardless  Also in Quebec, the women grow up under the  dictatorship of the church. Because of the  church, the family life is a lot stronger;  the men have more power; the women, of  course, have no contraception. It's very  common for Quebecois families to have 10  kids and poor living conditions. It was im-  possibe for women ever to get good paying  jobs. People in Quebec, women and men, who  are francophones make a lot less money than  people in English Canada.  It was very rare for women, especially in  the fifties, to ever finish high school and  then to ever go beyond that. So the kinds  of jobs women would be getting in Quebec  would be in sweatshops, especially in the  textile industries, or in restaurants.  I think all this led to the formation of a  different type of women's movement, and,  of course, it's tied up with the struggle  for independence from English Canada.  The fact that women in Quebec only received  the right to vote in 1949 is a perfect example of the low status women had in Quebec,  KINESIS: What do you see as the difference  between being a working-class francophone  woman and. a working-class anglophone woman?  DANYELE: You can make an analysis of women's  oppression in, Canada and you can say that  women's oppression comes from such things  as the family, from the government, from  the media, from sexual politics. And you  can put anglophone women here, and francophone women there: and what you'll get  are three more areas of oppression for  francophone women. Those are: exploitation by anglophone corporations at work -  being used for cheap, uneducated labour;  the exploitation of the church (which women here don't have to the same extent);  and being a minority.  The outcome of the referendum, or the outcome of independence, would sure create a  different- social atmosphere in Quebec.  Danyele Leroux Danyele Leroux at two years of age, with  of the referendum and regardless of the outcome. We want to build links between the  trade union movement in B.C. and the trade  union movement in Quebec, between the women's movement in B.C. and Quebec.  SUSAN: Everybody in our group supports  Quebec's right to self-determination, but  we didn't come together on the referendum  question or the national question per se.  There are other groups in Vancouver, other  committees in English Canada doing that  kind of work. Our purpose, as Danyele says,  is to build links between the women's and  trade union movements in B.C. and Quebec.  The women's movement in Quebec is very different from the women's movement in B.C.  For example, International Women's Day in  Quebec was built a lot through the unions  - in fact it's a joint effort.  her grandmother, her mother and cousin.  You can't talk about the exploitation of  women in Quebec without talking about the  national question, because it's one more  area in which women in Quebec are oppressed. They are all the time fearing assimilation. They are defending their culture  every day.  It's the same for me here. I hardly have  any energy to convince people about the  necessity for Quebec to be independent.  SUSAN: We talk, in English Canada, about  the double oppression of women in the sense  that a woman goes out to work for eight  hours, quite often she'll have a job that  is not unionized, pays poor wages and has  lousy working conditions. Then she comes  home and has the kids to look after, the  house to clean, dinner to cook...well, with ACROSS CANADA  Bell workers win  After spending all winter on the picket  line, operators and cafeteria workers at  Bell Canada have won a badly-needed wage  increase.  The operators and cafeteria workers, almost  all women, won an increase of 15.9% in the  first year of a three year contract, with  a 12.2% increase in the second year and a  9% increase in the third. That brings the  workers from $194 a week to $255 a week,  effectively immediately.  Not one striker crossed the picket line in  Quebec and Ontario. A Toronto operator,  with 14 years service, described the strike,  this way: "Backbone, that's what the strike  has given us. We may have been a submissive  bunch in the past, but after this strike,  we'll be a force to be reckoned with." 0_  Upstream info  Manitoba Action Committee  opposes transfer of jurisdiction  The Manitoba Action Committee on the Status  of Women is attempting to voice opposition  to a possible transfer of jurisdiction over  divorce from the federal government to the  provincial governments. This transfer was  agreed to by most of the government representatives at a constitutional conference  of premiers one year ago.  The Manitoba Action Committee says that  reasons for opposing this transfer include:  * fear that such a transfer is a bargaining  tool in the attempt by the federal government to achieve constitutional reform;  * concern that this might be a precedent  for the federal government in surrendering  other responsibilities such as jurisdic-  HEAR THE QUE'BE'COISES    a Quebecoise, there's another element: it's  quite likely that she has gone to work,  and had to speak in English. That's an  example of national oppression.  KINESIS: Can you describe what it was like  growing up as a francophone in Quebec?  DANYELE: I grew up in an anglophone community. From the age of five to the age of  14> I grew up in a suburban town outside  Montreal, and it was an extremely poor district - East Greenfield in St.Hubert. In  that area there were maybe 300 families  and about a third of those were francophone.  There was one park and when we were young  we weren't allowed to go to the park because it belonged to the English people.  I remember one day sitting on the swing and  some English kids came along and pushed me  off. I didn't belong there. None of the  French kids belonged in the park. And there  was only one park. Everything that was organized there - baseball or broomball or  any of those things - were only for the  anglophones.  When I was 15 I moved to a place that was  only francophone. It was in the Laurentians.  It was very clear that you had to know  English to do anything, to have a job.  When I was 19 I left St. Jerome. Because  kids in St. Jerome - they wouldn't finish  high school first of all - would get a car  and go to work in the factories. St. Jerome  has a lot of tire factories and textile industries. They'd go to work and buy a car  and that's all they'd do - plus get married.  So I moved to Montreal and I started working for an anglophone company. Francophone people have to be bilingual to get a  job but anglophone people don't.  I found  out that if I didn't know English, or if  I didn't try to know English, I wouldn't  get anywhere. For almost two years I denied  I was French. I'd go to a store, I go anywhere, and I'd always talk in English -  and find out two months later that the  woman who was serving me was also French.  Now it's easier to live in Montreal because  tion over rape, wife battering, etc.;  * awareness that multiple jurisdictions  compound the problems for women in maintenance and custody order enforcement.  They ask people to write the appropriate  government officials in opposition to the  proposed transfer of jurisdiction. 0_  Radio Shack signs first contract  Workers at Radio Shack in Barrie, Ontario,  have won a first contract after a year-long  strike against the company.  The contract, the first collective agreement ever negotiated anywhere in the world  with Radio Shack, a subsidiary of the Texas-  based Tandy Corporation, gives the workers  a 1%  pay increase immediately and a 5%  increase in August of this year.  One of the main issues in the strike, the  union demand for compulsory dues check off  to provide union security, was also successfully negotiated." Q  Upstream info.  Ottawa fires its EOW director  The National Action Committee on the Status  of Women has asked its Ottawa members to  boycott filling the job of director of  equal opportunities for that city, following the firing of former EOW director Helen  Slater.  Slater was fired March 3, after she refused to resign. Ottawa mayor Marion Dewar  who has in the past championed the right  of women to join the police force and the  fire department, was out of town when the  firing took place. But on her return she  said she supported the decision.  Slater "was very competent"-Dewar said,  "but I saw her approach things differently  than I thought the director of equal opportunities would."  Says Slater of the decision made by Ottawa  city hall: "they were looking for a few  token items ... either they wanted a few  women being promoted or some individual problem being solved ... which I said was just  window dressing. I think that's what they  were looking for because that gives them  some good publicity without really affecting very much or costing very much."  Slater's firing in Ottawa comes almost one  year after Sheila Day was dismissed from  her comparable job with Vancouver city hall  _—__—____^^^__    Upstream  So safe you could eat it  A new contraceptive has been released for  distribution and sale in the Toronto area.  The product, called Contracep 1, is a vaginal suppository which will be available  without prescription in Toronto drugstores.  It is similar to a product which has been  available for several years in the US and  has now been approved by Canadian authorities.  The manufacturer, Fem-tech Pharmaceuticals,  claims that a test group of several hundred American women have been using it for  four years without a single unwanted pregnancy.  An official of the company, George Scholes,  appeared on a CITY-TV news broadcast. He  explained that the product was entirely  safe, nontoxic, odourless and tasteless.  To emphasize his point he proceeded to unwrap one of the suppositories, placed it  on a cracker and then, with a somewhat  forced smile, chewed it down. Q  Toronto Clarion  Quebec has turned quite political. Bui before, like five years ago, teenagers who  did not have a political analysis, who did  not know a lot about politics, and who  were not interested - they couldn't see  the link between working politically and  getting out of their misery. All they  wanted to do was work; they wanted to get  some money because money was the only way  to get out.  I left Quebec to remove myself from the  suffocation and be more free. I find myself here denying again and slowly being  assimilated. I can't live here if nobody  can relate to me. So If I want to make  this place my home, I have to have some  support from the people I work with.  If you have nowhere to go and you feel  really stuck, you'd rather in some ways  be part of the oppressor - and that's how  I felt when I was younger: I'll speak English and I'll do everything they want. I  want to get out; I want to have a career.  I wasn't thinking then that I'd go out and  put on blue jeans and work for politics -  because that would have meant continuing  to live the suffocation.  I wanted to get out and getting out meant  for me not becoming stronger as a Quebecoise. It meant for me denying all these  things.  SUSAN: What we're seeing in Quebec now is  people throwing a whole ideology out the  window, making a stand and ending self-  denial of their culture, their heritage,  their traditions, their language. Saying:  "we're going to decide our own future, our  own way of life. We've had enough." (j)  Quebec women to speak at  Fisherman's Hall  The Vancouver Committee to Hear the Quebec-  oises is holding a public meeting, Friday,  June 6 at the Fisherman's Hall, 138 E. Cordova, Vancouver at 7.30 p.m. On Saturday,  June 7, there will be a day of workshops  and seminars, for women only, at the same  location.  The committee is bringing three feminist  Quebecoises: Andre Cote, Executive of the  Nation Co-ordination of Free Abortion on  Demand; Diana Lamoureox, teaching assistant at the University of Quebec (Montreal),  and responsible for the woman's rights  committee of the university union; and  Helene David, responsible for the women's  rights committee of the Confederation of  National Trade Unions (CSN).  The three women will be available as resource people in Vancouver for the whole  week of June 2-8.  Committee to hear the  Quebecoises needs your support  The cost of bringing the three women to  Vancouver and of holding the conference is  estimated at $2000. The committee comments:  We are requesting endorsement and funding  from various organizations in B.C.    We are  concentrating our energies for this purpose in areas such as the labour movement,  the NDP, women's groups, francophone  groups, and university and college departments .  The committee needs financial support for  the project. As their leaflet states:  Helping us defray the costs of their trip  publicizing the event and building it,  can be your way of establishing concrete  .solidarity between unions and the women's  movement in B.C.  and Quebec.  The committee is working on providing  creative and politically educational daycare at both events through LAFMPAG (Lesbian and Feminist Mothers Political Action  Group).  For more information phone: Danyele: 879  0373; Therea Stowe: 733 8231; Diana Des  Roches: 879 0373.  Donations can be mailed to The Vancouver  Committee to Hear the Quebecoises, Box  4237, Vancouver B.C. 9 6 Kinesis May 80  INTERNATIONAL  What life's like for women of Zimbabwe,Namibia, South Africa  By Morgan McGuigan  Kinesis takes a look at the historical context of women 's experiences in Southern  Africa, reports on life in a refugee camp  and interviews two women from Zimbabwe.  Of the 10 million refugees in the world today, approximately four million are in  Africa. This is double the 1969 number.  The refugees have left their homes because  they find their lives intolerable, due to  war or natural disasters. They land in  other countries with nothing, and must be  fed, clothed and sheltered.  Children - nearly half the refugees are under 18 - must be educated, and adults given  meaningful employment. The host countries  are usually themselves underdeveloped, and  find it hard to look after the refugees.  Often camps are set up so that international agencies such as the UN, and liberation  groups can aid the refugees directly.  A conference in Vancouver this spring attempted to explore the situation of these  refugees: why they exist, what their needs  are, and what people in Canada can do.  The conference, held March 21 to 23, was  sponsored by a number of disparate groups,  including Oxfam, Cuso, the South Africa  Action Coalition, the B.C. Teachers' Federation and the British Columbia Federation of Women.  The focus was particularly on Southern Africa: South Africa, Namibia and Zimbabwe  (formerly Rhodesia). These three countries  are the last bastions of white civil rule  on the African continent. (Economic rule  is another question.)  South Africa is a nation run by a minority  (16$) of white settlers who have lived  there for three centuries. It is a racist  regime, advocating white supremacy and  apartheid, and built on white prosperity.  The whites have the highest standard of  living; the blacks, the worst. Apartheid  makes investment profitable because of  cheap black labour, and many foreign companies make a lot of money in South Africa.  7152 of the population (the blacks) is being  relegated to 135? of the land. Blacks are  not allowed to own land outside of the reserves, known as Bantustans. The Bantu-  stans are on the most impoverished land in  South Africa, and any black African without employment in the cities can be deported to the Bantustans. The South African  government calls it 'returning to their  homeland', but many of the people deported  in such a manner have never lived in that  area - it's where their ancestors came from.  Namibia is an illegal colony of South Africa. South Africa has been denounced by  the United Nations; but it still holds on  to the country as a colony. Namibia has the  most wealthy diamond mines in the world.  Racist conditions are the same as in South  Africa.  Zimbabwe is the new name for Rhodesia. That  country has also been run by white settlers  for years. It has recently undergone a  seven-year war between the whites and the  Patriotic Front, a national liberation movement composed of two parts: ZAPU and ZANU.  In March 1980, the United Nations supervised an election in which the Patriotic Front  became the new government.  These three countries have generated thousands of refugees, who are living in poverty  - often in camps, sometimes in the cities  of strange towns - until the day they can  take control of their own countries and  change conditions there.  Conditions in Southern Africa are a feminist  issue. Half of the people are women, and we  need to fight for the rights of women all  over the world.  This conference presented some of the issues  about Southern Africa that are well worth  knowing.  Joshua Berson  Regina Mkwanazi speaking at conference, "To Live in Freedom"  Southern Africa: its refugees are no accident  Susan White, an anthropologist from the Manitoba Anti-Apartheid Coalition and co-author  of a book called African Abstract, gave an  excellent talk on the Saturday morning of  the conference about the refugees.  The existence of refugees in Africa, White  stated, is no accident.  It is the result of a long-term historical  process. In 1500 A.D., the majority of Africans lived in agricultural communities.  They were economically self-sufficient, engaging in farming, and crafts such as pottery and iron tool making. Everyone had  the right to the basic resources, and wage  labour was unknown.  Some African communities were feudal states.  Their ruling class held power by military  might, and controlled the trade routes.  Trade flowed north to Europe and the Middle  East , to Arabia, South East Asia, India,  and China. Africa for 600 years had been  a huge wing of the Islamic empire, and was  in the mainstream of world civilization.  At that time (1500 A.D.) Europe was a backwater. Europeans couldn't compete economically with the mainstream of trade, so they  seized what they wanted by force. A wealth  of trade flowed into Europe from their  plunder.  This wealth strengthened the merchants,  and the growing industries of Europe. It  financed the building of factories, com-  mericial agriculture, shipping, and the international trading houses. A new working  class developed in Europe, which resulted in  a huge demand for raw materials. This led  to plantations in the new world (cotton,  sugar, coffee etc. ). The planatations needed cheap labour, and this resulted in the  African slave trade.  Millions of Africans were transported to  the new world. Many were killed, or displaced. Societies in Africa were warped.  .Some were militarized to fight against the  new slave trade. A whole new body of  social relations was created within  African societies. Some African ruling  classes grew to great wealth. Society  was profoundly changed by the slave trade.  A couple of centuries later, Europe, having undergone the Industrial Revolution,  needed greater access to the resources and  markets of Africa. The slave trade blocked acess to Africa. So the new, rising  "legitimate" traders won the abolition of  slavery in the period from 1830 to 1880.  Europe started direct military conquest of  Africa in the 1880s to ensure control of  their supply of raw material. They made  deals where they could, but resorted to  military force if they couldn't. They encountered great resistance from many African people. African empires were smashed,  and rulers either co-opted or replaced.  Societies were again changed, and people  displaced. The power of governing was  taken from the African people, and a small  foreign elite, with certain "cooperating"  local leaders, ruled.  Monopoly capitalism grew in Africa at this  time. Small indigenous middle classes were  put out of business, and great European  trading classes companies such as the Royal  Niger Co., and the British South Africa Co.  coalesced and penetrated the continent.  At first these companies controlled the  civic government as well as the economic  systems. Later, European governments took  control of the political rule in the African countries. The companies stayed in con  trol of the economies. Palm oil, and later,  mining, gave immense wealth to them.  The life of Africans again changed abruptly. For the firt time, wage labour entered  into their lives. The Europeans forced the  African men to work by military force. Or  they forced them to pay taxes in cash, so  that the Africans had to work for Europeans  in order to get cash.  The women were left behind  As the men became wage labourers, often required to leave home for months at a time  to work in mines, as house servants, or as  secretaries, the women were left behind.  Women became solely responsible for running  the farm, and feeding the children and the  elderly.  In South Africa, for instance, this had the  effect (and still has today in the Bantustans), of actually making the women subsidize the mining companies. The mine owners don't have to pay to make sure that a  new generation of workers will be reproduced. 'ñ∫ Kinesis May 807  INTERNATIONAL  When women and children did accompany the  men into the cities, the women were actually forced out of their labouring roles.  There were no jobs for African women; they  were excluded from training. This was due  to the large rate of unemployment for  Africans in general, and also to inherent  sexism of Europeans. Women lost their more  traditional roles in farming and became  dependent on men.  After the second world war, a second kind  of colonialism arose - neocolonialism.  The rise of organized labour movements,  and popular based movements demanding an  end to colonial rule, to racial discrimination, and to economic exploitation, led  to Britain and France handing over control  of civic government to moderate African  leaders (who would, of course, encourage  European investment).  Less wealthy European nations such as Portugal, Spain and Belgium, tried to hold on  to their colonies, but were eventually  pushed out.  A rough map of Southern Africa  The transition to political independence  was more difficult in countries with large  European settler populations. The settlers  had their own interests, often not the same  as those of the large European corporations.  Often they were only forced out after bitter wars, such as in Algeria and Kenya.  Now that Rhodesia has finally achieved its  political independence and become Zimbabwe,  South Africa is left as the last outpost of  white minority rule in Africa.  White concluded her talk with a summary of  her argument:  "The refugee problem in Africa and Southern Africa is the almost inevitable outcome of European colonialism. It's the  outcome of foreign political domination,  and domination by a minority which refuses  to allow democratic participation, which  represses political dissent and protest  with violence. It's the outcome of economic exploitation which produces urban and  rural poverty and unemployment, and vulnerability to natural disaster...This economic  exploitation is for the benefit of a small  local elite and even more, for foreign corporations, particularly the transnationals.  "The refugee problem is also an outcome of  resistance, which is the natural response  of oppressed and exploited people, people  who are forced to fight for their political,  economic and human rights. The refugees  of course need our immediate humanitarian  aid, but the solution to the refugee problem is to remove the causes."  The first step in the removing of causes  is to put political control in the hands  of the African people themselves.  The next  step seems to be their regaining of economic control of their countries, which may  be a much more difficult operation. Q  Conference participant with Debrah Maganya  Zimbabewan describes her Victory Camp in Zambia  During the war in Zimbabwe (formerly Rhodesia), thousands of people fled the country.  The white army regularly did "sweeps"  in small villages, where they swept into  town, shooting and shouting. They would  take all the men in the village for an interrogation of three to four hours in an  attempt to find guerilla fighters. This  type of brutal terrorizing took place regularly. If a woman's husband had joined  the fighters, she was harassed and questioned. So people naturally were fleeing.  Once some structures for receiving refugees  were set up, such as camps, even more people fled.  At one workshop during the conference,  Debrah Mafanya, a Zimbabwean woman from a  refugee camp in Zambia, talked about the  camp she lives in. She is a daycare worker,  in Canada on exchange in a program organized by Cuso. This was the second time she  had spoken to a group - she is not a professional speaker.  Victory Camp, where Debrah Mafanya comes  from, is a refugee camp located in Zambia  and run by ZAPU - PF and the United Nations.  The camp is different from the rest, however, in the fact that only women and children live there. There are around 8,000 women and children in this one camp.  Boys stay in the camp until they are 11  years old, when they are moved to a camp  for boys only. Their camps only have tents,  while Victory Camp has buildings and electricity.  Men come into the camp and do specific work  such as teaching or cooking. Mafanya said  the men do the cooking because the pots are  so large. But all the men leave the camp  at night.  Food consists of maize, porridge, milks,  beans and dried fish. It is very monotonous. Adults don't get breakfast. Approximately 50/? of the people are malnourished.  Each person has two blankets. People live in  dormitories; and work or go to school in  the camps.  There is a sewing factory where the women  make clothes for the camp and for the guerrilla fighters, using sewing and knitting  machines.  The schools are very crowded, due to a  shortage of teachers. Often there are 45  to 50 children in a class. Mothers are in  classes with the children, learning to  read and write.  The preschool is for children two to six  years, and is set up so that mothers can  do other work. Debra was sent by ZAPU for  a nine month course in child care. They do  much the same there as in our daycares,  except they also teach English.  There are  two main languages in Zimbabwe, but the  school system teaches in English.  There are no separate women's organizations  in Zimbabwe, Debra said, but the party  (ZAPU) has a women's organization in the  headquarter's office. Its responsibility  is to look out for the needs of women.in  the future government on the principle that  women should have equal rights with men.  Women are involved in camp administration.  Some women used to go to other camps to  train as fighters in the war, but that has  not been happening since the October 1978  bombings of the camps.  The Patriotic Front is in power now, but  plans are to remain at the camp for the  next year or so, and not disrupt the children's lives again. When they get some  paper to draw on (which is not often), the  children have a tendency to draw planes,  showing that they still remember being in  the midst of the war. Q  What changes do women  want in a free Zimbabwe?  By Prabha Khosla, Anne MacDonald and Morgan McGuigan  A few days after the conference one refugees in Southern Africa, three women got  together with Debrah Mafanya, who is 26  years old, and with Regina Mkwanazi, who is  40, to share our experiences as women in  struggle in Zimbabwe and in Canada. In  our conversation with Debrah and Regina,  we learned about the problems facing women in Rhodesia and their hopes for a  free Zimbabwe.  Could you tell us about the situation of  women with regards to marriage?  There is no steadfast rule regarding marriageable age. Usually women marry  after they turn 18. The parents select  the man for you. If there is a man that  you would like to marry, you have to go  tell your aunt: usually the sister of your  father. Or you tell the mother of your  father. The women in the family, but not  your parents. The aunts then tell the parents.  Another thing in Zimbabwe is that a man  can have more than one wife. None of the  women like this. The men, of course, like  it. This is the first thing we want to  change in Zimbabwe.  Also, when you have your periods you do  not tell your parents. You tell your  aunts and they tell your parents.  Do you have traditional or western marriages ?  We marry in church.  If you are a Lutheran  (turn to p. 20) 8 Kinesis May 80  ANTI-NUCLEAR  Why women have found a home in anti- nuclear movement  By Jane Carew  The following article, which has been  edited for length, was presented at a  Feminism and Uranium Conference in Australia and is reprinted from the Australian  Womens' News Service  (Special Edition:  Number 20)  Women have played a large and prominent  role in anti-nuclear movements and have  been particularly visible in community  struggles against nuclear power plants.  In Seabrook (U.S.) local women were the  backbone of the resistance, being among  the first to alert the township of the  dangers.  In Whyl (Germany), women from  the farms and small towns were extremely  active; and in Japan, the peasant women  have usually been the ones to organize the  villages and lead the fight against nuclear plants.  What is particularly interesting about  these cases is not simply the prominence  of women in a protest movement, but the  fact that many of these women, who are  willing to break the law and stand up to  government officials, are thought to be  especially backward politically.  These anti-nuclear activists are farm  women, peasant women, women from small  towns; women who have never been involved  in anything political before; women in  traditional roles centering on family and  community; women who have been largely untouched by the feminist movement (though  participation in anti-nuclear struggles  rapidly switches them onto feminist ideals);  women who have usually been dismissed by  radical organizations as incorrigibly  conservative.  I think it is important for us to understand why women all over the world —  particularly women in family- and community-centered roles, whom politicians have  long regarded as the backbone of the social  order — have become so prominently involved in a radical movement.  We can start with the obvious answer:  that women are the ones who traditionally  play a nurturing role and have a life  which focuses on the family and (particularly for country women) on the community.  They are thus likely to be particularly  concerned about anthing which threatens  their family and immediate environment.  A woman of Whyl (interviewed in the film  "Better Active Today Than Radioactive  Tomorrow") explains how her absorption  in farm, family and children led to  involvement in the anti-nuclear struggle  when she realized that the things she had  worked and suffered for were threatened  by a nuclear power plant.  For most women, the technology of the  motor, the electrical circuit, the transistor, the computer, the jet, the nuclear  power station belong to an alien world, e  world out of control.  As workers, women are generally the lowliest of the machine-feeders; as house-  workers, they are the consumers and  users of products which they have  no part in designing and the workings  of which they generally don't understand.  Technology: toys for the boys  Men are in a different position. As  boys, they are early initiated into mysteries of the mechanical realm. They  play with mechanical toys, take things  apart, tinker with bicycles, then with  motor cycles and cars. Some boys follow  up these early activities in their education by becoming mechanics, electricians  etc, or go to university and become engineers and scientists. Girls do not  usually go through this initation process  and they do not usually go into these  occupations.  Women's present relation to technology  should be seen as the result of a historical development. What has happened  is that the technology of household production, which before the industrial  revolution was largely under the control  of women (making candles, soap, dyes,  tanning skins, etc. ), has gradually been  taken out of the home, made into an object  of scientific and technological research,  incorporated into factory production, and  returned to women in the form of consumer  Household producers have suffered the  same fate as other craftspeople: their  skills have been mechanized or have disappeared into the factory (where women  are now employed as process workers).  The practical knowledge and skills once  under their control are now developed by  scientific and technological experts  working under the direction of industrial  capitalists. Women are seldom found in  the ranks of these experts. The institutionalization of knowledge and skills  almost always works to the disadvantage  of women.  Technology is a matter for males. Women  are supposed to have a separate, non-  technological area of expertise — an  aptitude for servicing people (at home  and at work), for relating to and bringing up children, for managing personal  relationships, for understanding and empathy.  Women are supposed to be the upholders of  morality (because men can't afford too  Erica Weihs WIN/LNS  much morality in the workplace); the ones  who apply moral values and teach them to  the next generation.  Traditional abilities: separate but not equal  But these are rather nebulous abilities.  They have not been incorporated into the  scientific-technological corpus. Indeed,  moral judgements are not regarded as  having any place in science and technology; they are not usually thought of as  knowledge at all. Making these judgements and exercising these skills is  regarded as something women do by intuition.  The grand label "human knowledge"  doesn't apply. The traditional abilities  of women and men are separate but not  equally valued.  Further, having these abilities, and the  attitudes and values that go with them,  are commonly thought to make women unfit  for the "important" social roles.  A former Australian Prime Minister Bill  McMahon was recently reported as saying  that women wouldn't make good political  leaders because they are too likely to  be sympathetic to underdogs: the unemployed, the poor, the pensioners, etc.  That is, the important institutions of  capitalist societies — the state, the  large industries — must be run by those  who see people as objects to be managed  and manipulated in order to achieve economic health and large profits.  Concentrating on people themselves, trying to understand their problems and>  STOP NUCLEAR POWER ANTI-NUCLEAR  points of view, believing that they  should be able to live satisfactory lives,  is being sentimental — i.e. "womanish".  It is, of course, easy to find women who  are not at all sympathetic to the plight  of the poor and unemployed and plenty of  men who are. But the point is that traditional ideas about sexual division of  work not only assign household work to  women and work -outside the home to men,  but also assign to women and. men different aptitudes, abilities, and values.  The responsibility for technological  progress has come to belong more and  more to men (and more and more to just  a few men); and as the methods of science and technology have come to be  applied not only to machines and materials but also to the organization  of work and to social control, a woman's  traditional sphere becomes more and  more peripheral and her supposed aptitude for human relationships more and  more inappropriate in a society which  stresses the efficient management and  control of human and other resources and  tries to keep moral judgements from  clogging up the machinery.  Women's work is still being colonized  Women's traditional work is still being  colonized by the capitalist technology.  The position of the houseworker in relation to technology is something like  that of the peasant of a pre-industrial  society.  In the name of progress, products of modern industry are thrust upon  her, sometimes by well-meaning experts,  more often by people in search of a  profit.  The benefits of this new technology are  lauded; the costs are seldom recognized. There is an arrogant assumption  that in the end modern science and technology will take over these remaining  outposts of traditional knowledge.  Kouseworkers and peasants will be incorporated more completely into the industrial-technological machinery of  modern society.  The behavioural psychologist B.F. Skinner,  for example, looks forward to the day  when children can be scientifically conditioned, using the latest behavioural  technology, rather than the "unscientific," "inefficient" methods of rearing  now employed by parents. His idea of  progress is to take away from parents —  which of course, means primarily the  mothers — the decision-making, judgement, and skill now associated with  child rearing. Control passes into the  hands of the expert, who regards the  child as an object to be manipulated  for what those who make the decisions  regard as the social good. The woman  once again becomes incorporated into the  new form of production as a process  worker.  There are strong philosophical objections to Skinner's ideas about learning.  But his views are important as an extreme example of a prevalent attitude:  that the methods of science, the type of  manipulation and control associated with  presently-existing forms of science and  technology, can be applied to manipulation and controlling human beings;  that another form of traditional knowledge, practiced in particular by women,  ©an be taken over by a technological  elite and used (directly or indirectly)  for the pursuit of profit.  Women whose lives centre on fostering a  different sort of human interaction are  fighting a war of resistance against this  form of colonialization. The struggle  to preserve traditional ways of doing  things can take the form of a knee, jerk  reaction against anything that seems to  threaten the family as it exists in  Western society.  Encouraging women to work, child care  centres, women's liberation, are seen  by many women as attempts to subvert  human values and deliver the family into the hands of industry or the state.  But the reactionary form which this  struggle can take should not blind us  to the radical core of the protests of  these women.  The family: haven in a heartless  world; or bastion of patriarchy?  The family is usually seen by feminists  as the womb of patriarchal society,  as an adjunct of capitalism, as a bulwark of the social order. It is all of  these things. But it is a contradictory  institution, for inherent in it are ideas,  values, and priorities which are contrary to the logic of capitalist development and sometimes oppose it. The  . -w   — Erica Weihs WIN/LNS  ifmfmi or-  NUCLEAR RICE   way many women (and men) see the family  is as an island of humanity in a cold,  rapacious world: the family is a haven  where people can relate to each other  in a non-instrumental way, where people  can express themselves and communicate  without fear. It is, of course, women  who are held responsible for upholding  and achieving this ideal. Necessarily,  they fail.  The patriarchal nature of the family,  the narrow-minded conformism of the  community, makes this ideal impossible  to achieve. Nevertheless, many women  strongly resist seeing the contradictory nature of the family and the  inevitability of its failure and, in  struggling to preserve what they know  is valuable, end up supporting the most  reactionary causes.  But this shouldn't prevent us from  recognizing the validity of the values  which many women have dedicated their  lives to, the role that people with  these values can play in a struggle  against authoritarianism. The attitudes, values, and abilities which  have brought so many "conservative"  women into the anti-nuclear movements  are just^those attitudes, values, and  abilities which men see as making women  unfit for higher office.  Nuclear power is the most outstanding  example of technological irrationality  of our times: an example which illuminates the basically anti-human nature  of much of modern technology. Here is  a product of science and technology  which is justified as a way to save  money on energy (which in fact it  doesn't do), and in exchange gives us  an apparently insurmountable nuclear  waste problem, a health risk, the  possibility of serious accident (but  these don't count, because they don't  figure on the balance sheet of costs  and profits).  In addition, it involves the further  centralization of power supplies, increasing their vulnerability and in--  creasing the feeling of helplessness of  ordinary people who are faced with something large, dangerous, and out of  control. It is the climax of the  technological nightmare.  The farm woman of Whyl, the townswomen  of Seabrook saw the proposed nuclear  power plants as, first, a threat to  their families and communities in the  most basic possible way — as a source  of disease and death. They also saw it  as an intolerable case of interference  and authoritarian decision-making  threatening their ability to create a  satisfactory environment for the people  they cared for. But they saw it as an  example of immorality — something that  would cause harm to other people as well  as themselves.  It is often the women who act first, are  often the more determined and persevering.  This is not simply for the sake  of their children. Men also care about  their children. But men's lives are  more likely to centre on work outside  their home, and by necessity they must  succumb to the logic of industrial  capitalist development; they begin to  see it as inevitable, even desirable.  Women, particularly women who take traditional roles seriously, don't accept  it; can't accept it, for the way they  identify themselves as women leads to  rebellion against it.  But it should be possible for women with  traditional values to find their values  and concerns recognized as important by  the anti-nuclear movement.  They should  be given a chance to see that their misgivings about uranium mining and nuclear  power are similar to the objections of  others (which at first may seem alien  and radical to them); that their values  and priorities, properly understood, are  human values and priorities which may be  realized and fought for in ways they  haven't anticipated. 0.  Developing the anti-nuke,  feminist connection  When more than three thousand Lower  Mainland residents marched in Vancouver  April 26 for the International Day of  anti-nuclear protest, the women's movement was out in force.  Movement groups, including Rape Relief,  the Health Collective and Vancouver  Status of Women marched behind our  banners, from Kitsilano Beach, across  Burrard Bridge, to rally at Sunset  Beach.  We joined with native peoples, with  trade unionists, with ecology and environmental activists, with pacifists,  with religious groups and with the anti-  nuclear movement itself. It was an impressive illustration of the fact that  the nuclear menance touches the lives  of everyone, and reaches across all  lines of sex, race and national boundaries.  At the rally, we listened to speeches  and live music, and saw a theatre presentation put on by six Vancouver feminists. The theme of each event was the  same: the destruction of our planet by  the nuclear industry.  The recent seven-year ban on uranium  mining in B.C. is a victory. But just  across the border there are nuclear  plants and a nuclear base, plus nuclear weapons at Comox. Q_ HOUSING  It's home unsweet home on the downtown eastside  By Joey Thompson  The only problem I've got right now is  finding a place with a fridge and a stove  and that 's hard.... What I'm looking for  now is a housekeeping room, a place that  I can cook in.    But they only have hotplates.    Some have half fridges.    You have  to get your food every day.    That 's no  good.    I want a big fridge so I can freeze  the meat.    If I have a half fridge then  I've got to shop day by day and you can't  save money that way.    And I need a stove  with an oven because I like to make my  own bread and a roast that will last for  days and (I) can get up and have a snack  whenever (I) want, and...  These are simple requests for thousands of  people who take fridges and stoves, stocked  cupboards, a separate bedroom and the privacy of a locked bathroom for granted.  For the women who live in the downtown  eastside of Vancouver, tnese items are a  luxury...beyond their reach financially.  They don't even have the bus fare which  would enable them to find a better space  to live.  They have to share toilets and  tubs with other people in the apartment  building. They put up with sexual haras-  ment from drunks and landlords because the  alternative is a night on the street.  The fears and frustrations of single women  in the downtown eastside — a minority  among a community dominated by men — surfaced during a recent study by Jo-anne Lee  and Corinne Angell for the Society for  Women's Residences. The study, released  a few months ago, is an indictment of the  deplorable living conditions in the downtown eastside. And it reveals why women  choose — or are forced — to stay within  the area. The report also takes a close  look at single women with "problem" backgrounds whose opportunities for finding  decent housing is even less than that of  other groups.  The study found that most of the downtown  eastside housing has been built for temporary, transient use. A lack of bylaw  enforcement over the years has contributed  to deterioration of the buildings.  One  study revealed that almost 10,000 bylaw  violations were found during city hall  inspections. Low profits dissuade landlords from spending money on maintenance.  There is little voluntary upkeep or maintenance .  Sleeping rooms, which constitute 85%  of  the rooms, are cramped, inadequate and have  no food storage facilities, no refrigeration, no private bath and inadequate  wiring for a hot plate and other electrical  appliances.  Cockroach row  The roominghouses are in very poor repair.  There are cockroaches and all the places  have community kitchens which mean you have  to share with everybody in the hotel so  you can just forget about keeping anything  clean cause it's dirty the minute you turn  around.     I tried cooking,  but if there 's  a fridge the food gets stolen.     You can't  stand guard on that fridge for 24 hours to  ensure that nobody takes your food.  Over half the women, about 260 women, in  the downtown eastside are over 35, live  alone, live in poverty and live in fear —  fear that landlords, passers-by or drunks  from the hotel bar will bang on their  door or interrupt them while they are in  the shower.  I don't feel safe.     When I lived down here  I used to have an iron support and bar  across my door because it was nothing for  a drunk to come in or even a sober man to  come in. And you'd be by yourself and  they 'd be kicking down your door.     Sharing  bathrooms is bad.    Men and women do share  bathrooms and to top it all off there 's  no locks on the doors...when I was up  visiting recently I went to see their  washroom and a man walked in on me...I  got a little upset because I don't want to  go to the washroom and run into that.  Agency workers and residents said single  women are living in conditions that make  them vulnerable to harassment or assault  from male residents or managers and almost  all described personal experiences or  cases of violence against women ranging  from brushing up against their breasts in  the hallway to extreme cases of sexual  abuse and battering, some of which have  resulted in death.  The men are terrible.     They are a pain in  the ass.     They get drinking.    A woman  alone, you have to watch yourself every  minute.     The woman alone has  lots of problems.    As soon as you get your welfare  cheques the  landlord tries to put the rent  up.     They did it last year when they found  out welfare went up $15.  Those interviewed felt that repairing doors  and locks, providing keys with each room,  having or being close to protection, having segregated washrooms or having self-  contained suites would remove the. fear of  being in physical danger to a large extent.  I've heard of one woman who was  living in  a hotel and was being constantly harassed,  beaten up and in danger all the time cause  this guy was always trying to get in her  room and very often he was successful in  breaking the  lock.    Like every time she  would buy a lock he would get a hacksaw  and break it off... that kind of on-going  stress that goes on and on and never lets  up is incredibly hard to live with.  I've also heard of landlords causing  problems.    Asking for favours...the landlord is in a situation of power — he holds  the keys to her room.     That's pretty  frightening.     The fact that you could be  asleep in your room one night and if this  fellow is angry or feels like he wants to,  he can just open your door and walk in.  On the other hand,   "you don't want to be  out on the street.     It's really difficult.  The unemployment rate among women living  in the downtown eastside is at least 50%:  62% have no higher than elementary school  education. The average death of women in  the area is 54 years compared to 72 years  for Vancouver females. They die at an  earlier age than men in the same area and  the main cause of death is cirrhosis of  the liver.  Waiting lists and problems of eligibility  were repeatedly mentioned as reasons for  not being able to qualify for hotel or  city-managed buildings. Managers asked  for non-refundable deposits although it is  illegal.  Sub-zero vacancy conditions  Firstly, the women can't afford to move.  Vacancy rates in Vancouver are below zero.  Families, single parents with children,  pets and preferences which don't suit the  powerful landlords can't find a place to  live. But there's another reason why the  average length of stay there is 13 years  and why lonely souls gravitate to the  downtown eastside.  This area of town has a special atmosphere.  One you don't find in any other area of  Vancouver.    First of all there 's a lot of  community services down there but what I've  found is that it's almost small town atmosphere. . .you'll see people standing there  talking on the street corner for hours.  You don't see that in downtown Vancouver  or in Kits.     It's a slower pace.    A lot of  people are not working and they have a lot  of time on their hands.    There are a lot  of drop-in centres around.    There 's a  community spirit down here and everyone  knows and likes each other.    I can't walk  down the street without bumping into three  or four people I know...A  lot of people  want to stay here because they enjoy the  atmosphere and the community spirit.  The other thing which is part of this is  that there 's a lot more acceptance of the  handicapped in this area than other parts  of town.  The study, in suggesting seven recommendations, found that the housing problems  of single women — compared with single  men — are no different.  But their social problems by virtue of  their vulnerability, their smaller numbers  and the exploitive and discriminatory  nature of men, are vastly different.  The First of weMokth . - •  The Society for Women's Residences approved  recommendations which include:  * Charges of discrimination in rental policy against" women should be confronted  and halted.  * Consideration should be given to allocating a greater proportion of the available  government-managed housing stock to women.  Because of their invisible presence in the  community, women's needs have been overlooked.  * Information regarding women's difficulties with the quality and inadequacy of  the housing stock in the downtown eastside  should be made avaiable to appropriate  bodies  The rental situation in the Lower Mainland  is deplorable. Single parent women and  those on social assistance are always the  losers in a housing monopoly that is controlled by large landlords and the politicians who need their votes. The Rent  Review Commission recently pounced on  several big-time landlords who officials  suspect have been cashing in on the problems by charging exhorbitant rates to tenants.  Changes are in order.  Adequate and appropriate housing is not a  privilege — it's our right.  0_ Mother's Day Supplement  Mother's Day was the first Labour Day  Last year,   1979, Mother's Day was such  a disaster for me.     I really wanted to  go to the park with my daughters but  somehow a lot of things got in the way.  Why did I have to buy THINGS for my  mother,  my granny,   and his mother and  granny?    Why did I have to cook all day  with the grannies and mothers doing the  dishes — some holiday!    If I added  up'the value of all the work we women  did as well as  the cost of all the things  we have to by,  I'm sure it would add  up to much more than the minimum wages  I get for a whole week's work.  . This year a group of women  living in  East Vancouver decided to make Mother's  Day something different.   ■ Instead of a  money-making double work-load for mothers,  we've planned a celebration of women's  skills and an opportunity to speak out  about our lives.     We began by  talking  about all our invisible work.     You know!  The shopping,   ironing,   cooking,   cleaning,  childrearing,  educational and healing  things we do for free to keep the rest  of our community in good health so they  can work.    A  lot of us work outside the  home as well and when we do we soon  suffer exhaustion and anger which is  usually diagnosed as a mental or physical  disorder — as though there 's something  wrong with us instead of the system.  The Federal Advisory Committee on the  Status of Women in 1978 printed statistics  showing our housework was worth $26  billion or 27% of all the production in  this country.    So why is this work unpaid  and without any of the vacations and other  benefits  that all other workers get?    Why  do we usually get minimum wages when we  work outside the home,  and often even less  if we are new to this country?    The added  costs of childcare, work expenses and  income tax often make it uneconomical to  take a second job.  In Canada, we women make up 60% of the poor.  We pay the same exorbitant rents as everyone else.     Our groceries cost as much.  Our medical bills are higher because our  workload is so heavy.     When we first move  here, we have the added costs of sending  money back to our relatives.     Our work in  and outside the home helped build this  country and we seldom see any benefits  for ourselves.  %-:!©  HHife  ^  1 ^P^  ISIS  ^RS  mb '■''  fPI  ■ ^Jffti  fiSHl  ^W  Our mothers and grandmothers are usually  poorer than we are.     Whole departments  of the government are needed to decide  whether or not an older woman qualifies  for a tiny pension.     Whole health  industries have been created to attend  the results of the economic violence  women have suffered.     Give our older  women enough money to live graciously,  without question or qualification and  we need not spend money curing the results  of poor nutrition and exhaustion.  If we or our mothers are immigrant our  situation is even more difficult.     We  are often not eligible or not aware of  many social services.     We usually end  up doing the worst jobs at the  lowest  rates of pay in unorganized situations.  We all experience the economic violence  done to mothers whether as children,  as  mothers,  grandmothers or great grandmothers.     This year we didn't want  Mother's Day  to go by without us all  speaking out against the economic,  physical and verbal abuse dumped on us  that keeps us  too sick and tired to  stand together to improve our situation.  This year we're  taking stock and joining  together to organize.  We have made some advancements,  since  our great grandmother's day.     More  women have been able to leave intolerable situations or choose to  live on  their own by receiving welfare.     But now  let's call welfare what it is - a wage for  work well done.     Let's increase that wage  to an amount closer to its real worth  instead of below the poverty  line.  More single mothers are able  to keep  their children,   and are raising them  in both  traditional and non-traditional  ways.     Now  let's have no mother lose  custody because of her sexual orientation,   her income or her lifestyle.  Some can now obtain limited day care.  Now let's make good universal childcare available for every child at any  time and not only for a small number,  at a high cost in crowded understaffed  institutional facilities.  It's now possible for every woman to  receive half the family assets if the  family dissolves.    Now let's make it  possible for every woman to be economically independent by paying her for her  work so that she doesn't have to think  twice about leaving an abusive man or  choosing to live on her own.  Mother's Day  1980 is our day  to  recognize the importance of mother's  contribution in every sphere of our  society.    Mother's Day is The First  Labour Day.    Or as women in Iceland  said on the occasion of the first r  general strike,When Women Stop,  Stops.  East Vancouver Mother's Day Group  B.C.F.W.  East End Artists Association  Wages for Housework, Vancouver  We Are Family Too  ^  Mothers take back the day fy  Vancouver  In East Vancouver, a number of groups including B.C. Federation of Women, East End Artists' Association, Wages for Housework, We  Are Family Too and several individual women  are holding Mother's Day from 10-4 pm, in  Grandview Park, next to Brittania Community  Centre (Commercial/William). Events include  films, music, theatre, a puppet show, tables  of food, arts and crafts and books. There  will be booths from: East Side Family Place,  We Are Family Too, Downtown Eastside Women's  Place, Wages for Housework, an East Indian  food table, a Pensioner's table, Matsuri,  the Japanese Women's group, The Women's  Book Store, Press Gang, a Japanese pottery  demonstration and one of bread sculpture.  There will also be a Speak-out of mothers  of all ages and cultural backgrounds including: Vancouver Welfare Coalition, Wages  for Housework, B.C. Domestic's Association,  an East Indian immigrant mother, a lesbian  mother, a daycare organizer, a grandmother  and local M.P. Margaret Mitchell.  There will be booths from: East Side Family  Place, We Are Family Too, Downtown Eastside  Women's Place, Wages for Housework, an East  Indian food table, a Pensioner's table, Matsuri, the Japanese women's group, the Women's  Book Store, Press Gang, a Japanese pottery  demonstration and one of bread sculpture.  Mother's Art  The week leading up to Mother's Day, there |  will be an art exhibit dedicated to mothers X  and grandmothers. It runs from May 1 - May I  10 (except Sunday and Monday) at 1204 Com- -  mercial Drive from 4 - 8pm and during regular hours at Brittania Public Library.  Kootenays  Prince Rupert  PrinceRupert Options for Women is planning  to have a fundraising benefit in the hopes  of one day having a Transition House to  serve the area.  Donations for the House  can be sent to PROW, 116 A Hays Cove  Circle, Prince Rupert, B. C.  Nanaimo  The Women's Resource Centre at Malaspina  College, together with local women are  planning a festival of women for Mother's  Day, May 11.  Poetry, arts and crafts by  local women will be featured.  A highlight  of the festival will be the 8 p.m. performance at Malaspina College of "The Many  Women of Margaret Laurence", performed by  Norma Edwards.  Admission is $2.00.  Nelson Women's Centre will attempt to  increase community awareness of violence  against women through distribution of  information about rape and wife beating.  We will also sell posters and buttons  and will hand out leaflets about sexual  harassment, child abuse and wife batterinc  Women from Trail and Castlegar will get  together May 10 for a demonstration  around the issue of rape.  If you would  like to get involved or for further  information contact Nelson Women's  Centre at 309 Vernon St., Nelson, B. C.  352-991fi.  Cranbrook  On Mother's Day the Cranbrook r >men's  Centre is planning to do fundraising by  having its members go door to door to  raise money for the Women's Centre, for  an emergency shelter for women and their  children.  They also hope to get support  for women with small children and  explain to their community the situation  of women.  For information and support  contact:  Cranbrook Women's Centre,  233 10th Avenue South, Cranbrook, B.C.,  426-2912. EVERY  Artwork by Wendy L. Davis M Kinesis May 80       Mother s Day Supplement  Older women  In many cultures, older women are  respected for their wisdom and experience.  In our society, too often their contribution is forgotten. Older women are the  poorest and often loneliest people in our  society as they are past being saleable,  attractive workers for the job and marriage market. But as the number of older  women grows, so too are active pensioners'  groups and pensioners.  Many older women have spoken out  against the new B.C. Family Relations Act  in B.C. and similar ones across Canada,  which effects couples upon separation or  divorce. Although the Act is supposed to  guarantee women an equal right to family  assets for their economic contribution to  the marriage, it could be used to push  them into the paid labour market for minimum wage or unemployment.  Several women's groups have also been  demanding Canada Pension Plan credits,  indexed to the cost of living for housewives, or for minimum wage.  They've also  demanded that it could be portable for  those who change jobs, and that widows  should be entitled to survivor benefits  from CPP and Veteran's Affairs, even if  they remarry.  RESOURCES FOR OLDER WOMEN  NDP Women's Rights Task Force on Older  Women  c/o 517 E. Broadway, Vancouver, B.C.  879-4601 (Margaret Birrell) 943-5080  (Mercia Stickney)  Prime Time  304-620 View St.  Victoria, B.C. V8W 1J6. 388-6101  L.I.F.E. (Living Is For Everyone)  101-395 W. Broadway  Vancouver, B.C. V5Y IPS. 873-5013  Welfare women  While the Federal Government allots  billions of dollars to fighter planes,  welfare payments are still way below the  poverty line.  In B.C. they are now $130  for a single person and up to $250 for  some family's below. Welfare mothers a-  cross the country are fighting for more  money and benefits for themselves and  their children, or as a prominent placard  in a Toronto demonstration put it, "Raise  Our Money, Or We Raise Hell".  RESOURCES  Some facts for mothers  Vancouver Welfare Coalition  c/o Vancouver Status of Women  See Address This Page  National Council of Welfare  Brooke Claxton Building  Ottawa, Ont. KLA 0K9  Houston welfare resolution  What follows-is part of the historic  resolution on welfare passed unanimously  at the National Women's Conference in  November 1977 in Houston, USA.  The  conference was funded by the US government and attended by 20,000 women,  including international observers from  Canada.  "Just as other workers, homemakers  receiving (welfare) payments should be  afforded the dignity of having that  payment called a wace, not welfare."'  What is a Wife Worth 1970:  Chase Manhattan Bank Survey.  Job  Hr/WK  $/WK  Nursemaid  18.13  71.97  Housekeeper  17.5  56.88  Cook  13.1  42.58  Dishwasher  6.2  12.4  Food Buyer  3.3  11.55  Laundress  5.9  14.75  Gardener  2.3  6.9 0  Chauffer  2.0  6.50  Maintenance  1.7  5.10  Seamtress  1.3  4.22  Dietician  1.2  5.40  Practical Nurse  0.6  2.25  Total  99.6    $257.53 A Week  When the Chase Manhattan study was  first published in 1970, housewives were  not considered to be workers, making an  essential contribution to our society.  Since then governments all over the world  have been forced to recognize the value of  this work, in plans for welfare, family law,  family allowances, UIC and pensions. One  of the groups most active in this international movement of women for economic in-  depence has been the Wages for Housework  Campaign, which has been fighting for women to be paid for all the work they do,  inside and outside the home.  RESOURCES  Women Workers in the Home  c/o Vancouver Status of Women  1090 W. 7th Ave.  Vancouver V6H 1B3  Wages for Housework Vancouver  c/o 1426 Napier St. Vancouver V5L 2M5  ICELAND, OCT 24,1975—GENERAL STRIKE OF WOMEN. Full-time housewives, factory workers,  teachers, typists, actresses, childminders, telephonists, prostitutes, bank clerks, school girls, mothers, grandmothers. Some businessmen took their children to work. 90% of industry ground to a halt. Meals not cooked.  Shopping not done. Floors not swept. Of 60,000 women in all Iceland, 25,000 at mass meeting in the capital,  Reykjavik. Women struck to show their power—and did!  Immigrant women  "Lucy worked in Vancouver for two  years as a live-in housekeeper before  returning home for a year in 1977. A  mother of three children who remained in  Jamaica, she came back at the beginning of  the year.  Although.the minimum wage requirement  of $350 has been in effect for four years,  she was paid only $200 a month during her  first two years here.  Maude who also has three children in  Jamaica, started at $200 a month three  years ago and now is making $325 also as a  live-in housekeeper.  Your employer would say to you, 'I  cannot pay you more than $200', "should I  take it or not?— and you take it rather  than leave the country."  Province, March 9,'78.  Women like Maude and Lucy have been  coming to this country to work as domestics since the beginnings of our history.  The hours are usually long, their wages  very low, working conditions hard and with  little legal job protection.  These conditions are very similar for many immigrant  women who take jobs others who've been here|  here longer often won't take:-as farm  workers, building cleaners, chambermaids,  restaurant workers and textile workers, as  well as working full time in their own  homes.  These conditions have been hard to  change when women are so overworked and  underpaid, and scared to organize for fear  of losing their jobs or deportation. The  new Immigration Act has only added to these  fears with new undefined sections threatening immigrants with deportation for subversive activity. In their homes in the  community, immigrant women often have to  fight for social services Canadian citizens take for granted, including welfare,  child care subsidy, housing and pensions.  Even with all these barriers, immigrant women in Canada have always organized  against discrimination and for payment for  all their work. In recent years, Chinese  and Japanese women have fought hard to  keep control of their community as have  East Indian women active in organizing  farm workers. Domestic workers, many of  whom are West Indian have begun to organize  in B.C., Ontario and Quebec for the basic  labour legislation granted to all other  paid workers, and for higher wages and  better working conditions.  RESOURCES  MOSAIC  926 Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C.  254-9626  B.C. Domestic's Association  e/o Mary Brooks, 1530 Matthews Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. 733-1048  Canadian Farm Workers Union  7705 6th St.'  Burnaby, B.C. 521-5719  VANCOUVER  SCHEDULE OF EVENTS 10 A.M. to 4:00 P.M.  ,., "       (All Day - Booths)  11:00 FILMS:  "In the Best Interests of The Children"  "Should The Government Pay Parents of  Pre-school age Children"  "Slides From Asia"  1:00  "Song Spinsters"  "Theatre Group"  1:30 SPEAK-OUT (See Front Page for Speakers)  3:00 PUPPET SHOW  3:15 FILMS:  "SIT Work and No Pay"  "Great Grandmothers"  "By The Skin of Our Teeth"  FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL:   253-3395; 253-4391. Ext. 57 OUR BODIES, OURSELVES  Ruth Hubbard, guest speaker for SFU Women's Studies  How medical technology operates on women's biology  By Kinesis staff writers  "Women's biology has been described from  the outside by people with no experiential knowledge of what that biology feels  like; defined by those who have an ideological, social and economic stake in  believing that women are designed by  nature to breed, nurture, care for and  accomodate them.  "The medical definition of women's biology was constructed not by the goddess,  but by her human sons. By her 19th  century, upper class sons, for whom it  was important to believe that their wives  and daughters could not rightfully aspire  to the same status as themselves."  This is Ruth Hubbard, speaking recently  in Vancouver about medical technology  and women's biology. Dr. Hubbard, a professor of biology at Harvard University,  was here as a guest of the women's studies  department at Simon Fraser University.  With an extensive academic background in  realms of research remote to most —  biochemistry and photochemistry of vision  in vertebrates and invertebrates (!) —  Hubbard is now working on the development  of a sociology of science from a feminist  perspective.  It was during the latter part of the last  century, said Hubbard, that the medical  specialities of obstetrics and gynaecology  were invented. A parallel attempt to  create a speciality for men — andrology  — was born and quickly died in less than  a decade.  This was due to the sense that men's  physiology was not problematic but normal.  It was women who were diseased.  As professionalization took place, midwifery was gradually eliminated in the  U.S. (and in Canada).  The replacement of  midwives by medical men was in fact, harmful to birthing women.  For one thing, doctors were responsible  for epidemics of childbed fever. In the  days before the bacterial origin of disease had been accepted, doctors would  come directly from diseased people and  cadavers to birthing women without so  much as washing their hands. Midwives,  who do not work with the sick and the  dying, could not carry infections in this  way.  For another, the elimination of midwives  in rural areas drove up maternal and infant mortality due to the difficulty of  getting to a hospital.  And midwives did not take nearly as active a stance in the "management" of  childbirth.  Doctors, on the other hand,  intervened constantly.  Objective evidence that medical intervention in childbirth was not healthful  was dismissed, even though the documentation-was available as early as 1840.  Women's entire reproductive biology,  Hubbard pointed out, is still considered  as being in some sense pathological.  Menstruation, pregnancy, childbirth,  lactation and menopause are all looked  upon as being in need of medical intervention.  The notion persists: something  vaguely sickly is going on.  There is an abysmal ignorance surrounding  women's normal physical functioning.  It's amazing, said Hubbard, how little is  known by women and by the medical profession about menstruation, for example.  Is something wrong if my periods are  irregular, or painful? These are questions which every woman has asked herself.  And these questions have no answers. We  simply don't know what the norms are.  This is a particularly dark and secret  area of women's lives, Hubbard emphasized.  In our culture, we speak more easily  about sex than about menstruation.  But now women are becoming increasingly  aware of how little information we have  about each other's experience, and our  own.  Women who go into intense training as  athletes, for example, have noticed that  their periods stop. Researcher Rose  Frisch has recently come up with the  theory that the determining factor for  menstruation has to do with body fat.  For women to have their periods, this  theory goes,- there is a critical level  of body fat.  If your body fat falls  below this level, due to dieting or to  the conversion of fat to muscle in  athletic activity, your periods stop.  Frisch has also shown that the onset of  menstruation — menarche — correlates  with diet and activity. As does menopause .  Amniocentesis, used today on pregnant  women over the age of 38, is another device in the ever-increasing repetory of  pre-natal testing. And it raises large,  ethical questions.  Once technology is available, Hubbard  points out, women must have access to it.  We have the right to be able to use it.  But what now is seen as an advance — to  be able to decide on whether or not to  carry the fetus to term — could quickly  turn into an obligation.  What about, for example, the woman who  wants to carry a fetus with Down's syndrom to term? Very soon, such a woman  could be looked upon as being totally  crazy and irresponsible.  What now looks like a widening of choice,  Hubbard suggests, could become in fact a  Have tribal, non-industrial cultures had some kind of  contraception they've been hiding from the anthropologists?  We've known for some time that the age  of menarche in our culture has been going  down, the age of menopause up. Frisch  also connects this to diet.  Perhaps this theory provides some explanation for puzzling questions. Have tribal, non-industrial cultures (where children are spaced out over three to five  years) had some method of contraception  which they've been hiding from the anthropologists?  In many societies, with that natural  spacing, a woman might expect four to  five pregnancies rather than the annual  ones we have associated with our state  of living and nutrition in this century  or the last.  Then there are the anthropologists who  have brought back tales of cultures  where women never menstruate.  "Is the regular cycle merely an artefact of sedentary life?" Hubbard .queried.  But getting back to the athletes. Dire  warnings are starting to circulate. What  are  these women doing to themselves by  taking part in all these sports and  missing their periods?  Now that's an interesting comment, said  Hubbard, from a medical profession which  has no hesitation in supressing menstruation completely by means of the pill.  And then pretending that menstruation is  taking place by artificially inducing a  spurt of break-through bleeding by telling  women to stop taking the pill after 25  days.  The pill, she suggests, is far.more hazardous than any natural cessation of pregnancy.  It was women ourselves who had to  raise the objections to the pill. Objections, Hubbard adds, which many members of  the medical profession still frown upon as  female foolishness.  Having posed these questions about menstruation, Hubbard moved into an evaluation  of the major medical interventions in  childbirth and pregnancy.  A great many women, at some point in their  pregnancies, are now monitored with ultrasound, a device hailed as a liberating  advance. We know that there are no obvious short-term effects from ultrasound.  But about the long term effects  we know nothing, although we act as  though we do. Hubbard compared the acceptance of ultra-sound today with the  cavalier attitude towards x-rays in their  early days.  narrowing of choice. As our repetory of  fetus-testing devices increases, so too,  could the list of fetuses we would be  not  expected to bring to term: "you can't  have a child like that I"  Difficult questions.  The last section of Hubbard's address took  a critical look at the U.S. caesarian  epidemic.  One birth in every four has a chance of  being a caesarian. A potentially empowering experience for women — birthing  — is being more and more frequently  turned into gross pathology.  Infant mortality is not decreasing due to  increased caesarians. Maternal morbidity  is not decreasing either.  Caesarians are set up for the doctor's  convenience.  If the labour goes on for  more than six or seven hours, and if it  looks like taking quite a bit more time,  the doctor will perform a caesarian to  get the birth over with. And caesarians  are three times more profitable than normal births.  The medical profession has set up a whole  bunch of self-fulfilling prophesies.  If interns are trained in settings where  they don't experience normal childbirths,  then they won't be able to cope with a  normal situation. They'll never learn.  The more physicians are told that intervention in pregnancy is needed, the more  they will intervene. Given the "active  management" of labour, it may in fact be  true that more women need a caesarian —  because the natural progress of the labour  has already been disturbed.  Whether she needs it or not, Hubbard commented, a woman is at the time usually in  no position to refuse.  In closing Hubbard pointed out that there  is a major economic investment in women  being taught to dislike and distrust our  biological selves.  Our active dissatisfaction with our bodies is necessary to maintain not only  certain branches of the medical establishment but also a number of major industries.  It's important, Hubbard concluded, that we arm ourselves against the  mediealization of our normal reproductive  lives, and know who will be our friends  and who will be our enemies. V.e must  seek out midwives and medical practitioners we can trust, and we must develop  our networks to take care of our medical  lives. Q 16 Kinesis May 80  OUR BODIES, OURSELVES  Charting the rise and fall of European midwifery  By Joan Woodward  Midwifery is...a labour of love, read the  posters for a recent two-day conference  on midwifery, held in Vancouver. The conference was sponsored by the Maternal Health  Society (MHS) and the Campaign Association  for the Legalization of Midwifery (CALM).  The activities and projects of bbth the  MHS and CALM are based on the philosophy  that each individual has the responsibility and the right to participate actively  in her own health care. Both groups therefore support a flexible, responsive system  of health-care for the birthing family  which optimizes physical and emotional  well-being through a wide range of options  in childbirth.  These views overlap in an important respect  with feminist beliefs. Feminists agree  that each woman should have control over  her own body and accordingly, large numbers of feminists are united in a desire  to reclaim the birthing process.  A World Health Organization definition  makes it clear that a midwife is not an  untrained person. She is well-trained in  the normal processes of pregnancy and  birth and is therefore capable of recognizing potentially abnormal conditions which  necessitate referral to a doctor. Her  focus is on birth as a normal, healthy,  and joyful Experience. She is in a position to make or mar what can be a uniquely  fulfilling experience.  Dr. Jean Donnison, anthropologist and  author of "Midwives and Medical Men, A  History of Interprofessional Rivalries &  Women's Rights", spoke at a public session of the conference on Friday evening.  What follows is a condensed version of her  talk.  Primarily, she gave a comparative account  of the rise and fall of midwifery in England, the USA and Europe.  Medical history, reports Dr. Donnison, has  not been accurately recorded for us. She  begins by giving a warning against the  dangers of the approach to history which  presents civilization as on a perhaps  stumbling, but nevertheless inevitable  march towards progress. Nowhere has the  fallibility of this approach been more evident than in the history of medicine.  Medical history: a hobby for medical men  Medical history has long been the hobby of  medical men who have given us a sexist and  professional interpretation dedicated to  the glory of the male medical profession.  This mentality dates from the sixteenth  century, when members of the inquisition  declared that the worst witches of all  were the midwives because these witches  dedicated the newborn to the devil.  By the same bias, until the second half of  the nineteenth century, women were seen as  having no part in medical history, save  as the lady caring for her family and servants, or charitably attending her poorer  neighbours, or as the local village wise  woman.  Midwives have been thought of as illiterate women with no regular training. And  for the bulk of midwives, particularly in  rural areas, this was probably true. But  since the beginning of the seventeenth  century,, we have a history of trained mid-  wives in attendance at births.  Before this time, those who could afford  to do so would hire a physician to prescribe any special diet or medicine for '  the lying-in woman. The physician would  not attend the actual delivery. During  the delivery, if possible, a surgeon would  be hired to stand in wait in case a cesa-  rian was necessary (on the dead body of  the mother) to save the life of her unborn  child. In some cases, it was the life of  the mother that had to be saved by the  piecemeal extraction of the dead child in  In either of these cases, it was the midwife who would request that the surgeon  come in if she thought it necessary.  Many midwives were held in high esteem  both by the medical profession and by the  community they served. In some places a  regular town midwife was appointed much as  there would be a town doctor or surgeon.  In New Amsterdam (New York), one of the  first acts of the Dutch settlers was to  build a house for the town midwife.  By the late middle ages, most surgeons and  apothecaries were included in guilds, which  in attempting to restrict practice to duly  qualified practitioners, enhanced the status of their members. But mid-wives,presumably for the same domestic reasons that  hamper the organization of women workers  today, nowhere appear to have had their'  own guilds.  During the middle ages the Roman Catholic  church, inspired by its interest in the  prevention of witchcraft, the salvation of  souls, and the enforcement of extramarital  were called in as surgeons and referred to  as such before; but by the second decade  of the seventeenth century they were already supplanting midwives at ordinary  labours among the French nobility.  This trend was gradually to spread to the  middle and lower classes leaving only the  less well-paid work to midwives. By the  1620's the word "man-midwife" had been  officially added to the English language.  Custom required that women practising midwifery be married, of mature age and to  have borne children. No such requirement  was posited for men. Increased competition  from men discouraged many women from entering the field. For the young physician  or surgeon, midwifery opened the door to  providing medical service to the children  he delivered as well as to their parents.  The general practitioner, although this  term was not to be coined until about 1813,  had arrived.  Needless to say these charges did not take  place without arousing sustained opposition. Pamphlets condemning man-midwifery  kept on appearing right up to the middle  One woman swaddles quintuplets*!) while another attends  Bavarian Woodcut 1565  chastity, began to exercise some control  over the practice of midwifery through its  ecclesiastical courts.  From the mid-fifteenth century onward however, more formal systems of midwife regulation began to appear.  This model was copied in Scotland and New  York in the following century. Control  over midwives was not maintained by three  separate authorities: the church, the  municipal administration, and the physicians and surgeons. The official medical  authority might be the city physician or  surgeon, as was the case in many German  cities, or the local surgeons' corporation, such as was the case in Paris. These  authorities enforced laws restricting the  practice of midwifery. Midwives were required to send for a doctor in difficult  cases. This, in spite of the fact that  most physicians and surgeons had no experience in midwifery and most had never even  attended a birth. Although similar laws  existed in England, actual regulations of  the midwives was left to the church since  this was the only institution with an  official in every parish.  By the second half of the sixteenth century  male midwives began to appear. The new  spirit of inquiry, later to result in the  Renaissance, led to a scientific study of  anatomy, making possible a more informed  understanding of the 'mechanism of labour,  and consequent advances in operative obstetrics .  Since the prestige of these new advances  belonged to men, this was to encourage  more men to take an interest in attendance  on abnormal midwifery. At first these men  of the nineteen century. Of course, much  of the objection came from midwives fear-  . ful of losing their livelihoods, but they  also had their male supporters. Physicians and surgeons deprecated the work as  beneath the dignity of the respectable  physician or peer surgeon. Laymen denounced it as indecent and impractical.  Midwives themselves further claimed that  the man-midwife increased his practice by  slandering midwives, by exaggerating the  dangers of childbirth. And to make matters, worse, they argued, the man-midwife  was for "dispatch", that is to say he was  always ready to use his instruments to  save his time, and for the use of which  of course, he charged a higher fee.  The result of all this, it was alleged,  was a much higher rate of infant and  maternal injuries and deaths than before.  Thus birth, a natural process, was being  turned by men, for status and for profit,  into a surgical operation.  The more aggressive men-midwives replied  in the same vein. Midwives were nothing  but ignorant, cruel, old battleaxes who  did more harm without instruments than  men did with them. The management of  childbirth was a mechanical operation, and  so far more suited to men than to women.  Midwives might be adequate for the poor or  for primitive peoples; but rich women were  known to be far more delicate, and therefore more in need of the more expensive  male attention.  By the early nineteenth century, this argument had become universilized. As  civilization progressed, it was thought,  so childbirth would necessarily become 'ñ∫ OUR BODIES, OURSELVES  more difficult and require more active  male management. The midwife, a relic of  a less scientific past, could then be  allowed to disappear.  Significantly, it was contended repeatedly  for three hundred years that the rich did  consistently less well in childbirth than  the poor in spite of the more expensive  male attention. Official confirmation of  this came in the 1930's for England and  Wales. Two reports on maternal and infant  mortality and morbidity cited meddlesome  midwifery (active male management) as a  major cause of these deaths.  Midwives demand public recognition  During the second half of the eighteenth  century the fight intensified. Midwives  saw more and more the need for a publicly  recognized system of midwife training.  The only training open to female midwives  in England was to be obtained privately,  from another midwife, or in some cases as  the helper of a male physician who certainly would have no intention of educating midwives to the highest level.  In  France, formal training had been available  on a small scale in the lying-in wards of  1'Hotel Dieu since 1630.  The British equivalent of this institution  had been swept away a hundred years earlier with the reformation. It was not until the middle of the eighteenth century  that lying-in wards in hospitals and outpatient lying-in charities were again  established. Midwives could be trained in  these institutions and some admitted men  as well as women. Some, such as the  Middlesex hospital in London made a special  point of training only men.  However, this training, while it did provide some public respectability for mid-  wives, also served to reinforce the  subordination of the midwife to the male  practitioner and was clearly inferior to  the training enjoyed by midwives at the  Hotel Dieu in Paris. Nor, since there had  been a breakdown in the old system of  epispocal licensing, was there any statutory means of distinguishing the trained  from the untrained.  By the end of the eighteenth century the  municipal system of licensing which had  been in effect in Scotland and in some New  England towns had disappeared as well,  possibly due to a reluctance to interfere  with the free workings of market forces.  This was in sharp contrast to the situation  in the rest of Europe. For these countries  the strength of the state clearly lay in  the numbers of its able-bodied subjects.  Unprotected by geographical factors as  Britain was, such countries saw the need  for large armies manned by conscription  to defend the borders. In consequence,  these countries actively pursued pro-  natalist policies. England saw no need to  increase its population until the early  1900's after the humiliations of the Boer  war.  One example of the strength of these concerns was the Prussian law of 1794 requiring all healthy mothers" to suckle  their own infants. And in France, financial inducements were given by Queen Marie  Antoinette to all mothers who breast-fed  their infants. Continental countries  were also taking steps to improve the standard of midwife practice, and to provide  free and subsidized midwifery to the poor.  In Russia in 1754, under the influence of  the Empress Elizabeth, a system of training and examination of midwives came about.  In Austria, in 1748, the empress, Maria  Theresa, brought about a similar program.  In Germany, many cities had appointed  "Heidenmeister",men to train midwives. In  France, in 1728 an official inquiry was  conducted on midwife training throughout  the kingdom. This resulted in a general  decree in 1730 which appointed the local  surgeons' guild to oversee and regulate  midwifery practice. After the French revolution an official program of one years  duration was set up at the Paris Maternite  for the training of midwives, although  here again an effort wao made to keep  midwives subjected to make practitioners.  Then universities stepped in and set up a  number of Chairs across Europe in midwifery. Universities, you will recall,  were still closed to women until the latter half of the nineteenth century. The  midwife was henceforth everywhere under  the tutelage of the medical practitioner  in his capacity as teacher, examiner and  inspector.  It is significant also that the leading  pioneers of women's re-entry into the  medical profession, Elizabeth Blackball  and Elizabeth Garrett, put forth as one  of their main arguments the need to give  find favour. Nor was there as large an  established upper class to take up the  midwives' cause for philanthropic purposes;  hence the power of the generally antagonistic medical professional was proportionately greater. In spite of the fact that  in studies of anti-natal supervision it  was discovered that maternal deaths were  much less frequent in women attended by  midwives than in women who were not, those  striving for midwife regulation and hoping  to phase out midwives completely with the  upcoming obstetrician won the day.  In English midwifery, a paradoxical situation developed. Proponents of socialized  medicine introduced there in 1948, had  hoped that more freedom of consumer choice  By the second half of the sixteenth  century, male midwives began to  appear... by the second decade of  the seventeenth century they were  supplanting midwives at ordinary  labours among the French nobility  Sciopio Mercurio 1721/Ms  women the choice of skilled female attendance in childbirth. This, in fact did  nothing to further the midwives' cause.  Elizabeth Garrett was to develop a tough  anti-midwife line, in chorus with the  British Medical Association. To give lower  class women a knowledge of the reproductive organs, they said, would invariably  lead to an increase in the number of criminal abortions.  In spite of this, the English midwife was  finally granted official recognition  through state regulation in 1902. This  regulation was the result of a private member's bill, the fruit of persistent lobbying and campaigning by three distinct  groups.  The first of these were women who by reclaiming a field which was previously  theirs sought to increase employment opportunities for women which had so seriously  declined in the previous century.  The second of these were comfortably-off  physicians who were happy to press for  training midwives to attend the poor since  such women presented no threat to them. At  the same time the type of legislation they  favoured would ensure that midwives would  be subordinate to the general practitioner  or physician and so would not have the  status of an independent profession desired by the midwives themselves.  The third group were women from the upper  and middle classes who were inspired by  the philanthropic object of providing  some kind of attendance to poor child  bearing women.  This measure, without which the English  midwife would probably have disappeared,  was unfortunately only an act for the  regulation of midwife practice, and contained no provision for the organization  and subsidization of training (such as  was the case in Europe).  In the USA, the flood of immigration and  the absence of threat to their dominance  on the North American continent, meant  that pro-natalist policies were not to  would result. In fact the opposite has  occurred. The medically inspired and government backed move toward 100$ hospital  delivery has resulted in a deliberate dismantling of the home birth midwifery service.  Many claim that mothers and infants do less  well even today under active male management in hospital than they would at home  under the care of a midwife. Unfortunately  midwifery is still illegal in Canada, and  in other countries such as England, the  midwife's responsibilities are being cut  back, and her training is being held back.  Some old questions posed again  In a period of falling births, and with  increasing numbers of male obstetricians  being graduated every year, one is led to  pose some very old questions:  1. Is the increasing mechanization of lab-  . our merely "meddlesome midwifery" modern  style?  2. Is much of the increased use of induction merely another example of the man-  midwife being too much for dispatch,  for his own and not the patient's convenience?  3. Is active management the latest manifestation of the male medical imperialism  which midwives and their protagonists  have attacked for nearly three centuries?  4. Is the increasing mystification of  childbirth, which gives the generally  male doctor control over a basic female  function the pains and joys of which he  can never fully understand but with  which he so often feels compelled to  interfere, merely the result of male  jealousy of women's generative powers??  In this time of rising hospital costs, Donnison concluded, maternity services would  indeed benefits from the introduction of  different methods of care.  0_  Read Dr.Jean Donnison's Midwives and Medical Men: A History of Inter-Professional  Rivalries and Women's Rights  (New York:  Shocken, 1977) 18 Kinesis May 80  BOOKS  There's no better year than 1980 to read Vida  By Mary Schendlinger  VTDA, by Marge Piercy. New York: Summit  Books, 1979. 412pp.  Like Marge Piercy's other works of fiction,  Vida  is an historical novel. Set alternately in the late 1960s and the present,  the book is the story of Vida Asch, a 35-  ish fugitive from the antiwar activist  movement. She has lived on the run for almost ten years, keeping occasional contact  only with her sister Natalie, her sort-of  husband Leigh, and The Little Red Wagon  Collective, with whom she has worked since  her early days in the Students Against War.  The specifics are dated: this is a novel  about a particular time, a particular set  of goals, and a particular M.O. Vida's  reference group is a typical late sixties  action-oriented radical political group of  young American women and men, fighting  corporate complicity in the Vietnam war.  In fact, anyone who was anywhere near political students in 1969 will get a sense  of deja vu reading some of Piercy's dialogue - it could have been taken straight  from any SDS pamphlet published during that  time.  But as usual, Piercy's use of specifics is  just a vehicle for her observations about  people and social movements in general.  Some of the events in Vida's story are  painfully familiar: the woman's role in the  radical "communal" house was - guess what?  Subtle treatment of sexism  The novel is worth reading just for Piercy's  skilful, subtle treatment of sexism in the  left, and the price paid by women for "free  love." She also deals with the old "nuclear power is a bourgeois issue" argument.  And remember the initial confrontation between the left and the resurgence of feminism in the early seventies?  Vida is one of those women who has always  lived, worked, and slept with men; and  there are some really satisfying scenes  between her and Natalie (who has gradually  grown to embrace the women's movement)  about this issue. Vida is suspicious of  feminism, doesn't trust it, thinks it might  be at worst at capitalist plot to divide  people, or at best a diversionary 'quality  of life' issue that takes attention away  from the real culprits.  At one point Natalie has been raped, and  Vida says, among other things, that it  isn't really rape if it's someone you know.  And that if Natalie goes public about it,  she shouldn't let it be known that the rapist is black.  I always appreciate a novel that destroys  myths, and de-romanticizes people's lives  and relationships. As Vida  opens, our  heroine has taken refuge in an underground  station and is startled to find a fellow  fugitive there, a deserter several years  her junior, whom she actually met years  earlier. Fortunately, Piercy does not  allow the reader to spend too much energy  dreading a happy-ever-after ending: yes,  the two embark on an intense relationship,  but we are taken right through the day-today stuff that many love stories leave out.  We hear about Joel's persistent jealousy  of Vida's husband, sisters, friends, political commitment - everything he cannot  own; about Vida's husband Leigh's left liberal press position that makes it possible  for him to be involved in the action without being committed (to Vida or anything  else); and about the realities of living  as a hunted person that prevent Vida from  taking even the small things in a relationship for granted - that keep her constantly  on her guard.  Indeed, her whole existence as a fugitive  is described with superb skill. The reader  lives with Vida's paranoia, her constant  physical and mental vigil, the never being  sure whether that man is watching her, the  bag of disguises, the hair dye, the never  having any money, the elaborate system of  codes and frustrating delays in contacting  her friends and relatives; to say nothing  of the personal comforts she must constantly forego. "I was locked in the trunk of  a car for fourteen hours once ," she tells  Joel matter-of-factly.  There are chinny-chin-chin close calls: a  friend reacts the wrong way; Joel and Vida  are nearly busted for speeding, etc. Hardest of all is Vida's continual work at having to detach herself from the people she  meets, to fend off closeness with anyone  but people she is absolutely sure of, and  even then being watchful and careful. At  one point, one of the people in the collective turns out to be another of those classic,  timeless political animals - an informer.  and on her politics, never assuming anything, constantly second-guessing herself,  noticing her reactions and trying to make  everything right with her conscience,  while not totally ignoring her other  human needs.  It's tough going.  I cheered  her on for 412 pages.  Political work doesn't stop  Vida (and Vida)  is about courage, determination, love, anger, commitment, and passionate caring about what's wrong on the planet,  Piercy takes the work begun in the 60s seriously. The times change, and there are  rest periods, in the cycle; but the work  doesn't stop - political commitment and  and action are not one-shot affairs.  There is a tempting possibility for Vida  to sink quietly into domestic oblivion somewhere with friends and/or lover. And when  it comes right down to it, she would have  By far the most striking, well-executed  part of the novel is Piercy's awareness  that politics is about people - their passion, their beliefs, their rage, and how  they will work together for changes they  want. Personal, human strengths and weaknesses give the fire to revolution and political work, and they can also make trouble  for and within a movement.  We meet the members of Vida's collective,  the mixture of motivations and personalities that the group works to accommodate.  There are the hotheads, the conciliators,  the intellectuals, the power-trippers, the  groupies, and so on. All are committed to  the work they are doing, and equally comit-  ted to the struggle to work and live together and keep their aims and strategies cohesive. From our third-person, omniscient,  20-20 hindsight position, we can easily  point out all the weaknesses and smell  trouble before the characters can, but  Piercy's portrayal of the (however naive)  passion and energy that fuel a young, burgeoning political movement, is dead-on.  Repression in the name of the Cause  And there is no use pretending that  people's emotional and sexual attachments  don't affect how their work group functions.  For Vida, as for many of us, the lesson  that a price is paid for not acknowledging  that people have feelings, came years later  than the intellectual part of her political  education. Great personal repression went  on in the name of the Cause, and people  coped with each other's strong feelings by  telling them to can it, it was off the wall.  In fact, Vida's personal struggle is a metaphor for that shift from the angry sixties  to the feely seventies. We need both kinds  of awareness in order to work together, but  achieving an effective balance is the trick.  Vida works hard on her personal circumstances.  Claudia MacDonald, Peg Campbell  enough work on her hands just surviving.  But for Vida, that's not good enough. Right  through to the novel's hair-raising conclusion, her political work continues. And  that is the overriding message: that survival as a lifetime occupation could expand to fill the space available, but it  cannot be the sole or even prime activity  in our lives.  For me, there was no better year than 1980  to read Vida.    In this novel more than any  other, Piercy moves away from dogma and  rhetoric and concentrates more on the questions than on the answers. And that is an inspiring way to face our uncertain political  future. £  Tasteless sexism sold at  Spaghetti Factory  The Vancouver Status of Women sent a letter  to the Spaghetti Factory protesting against  a recent advertisement. The advertisement  shows a woman lying on her back on a table  (presumably at the Spaghetti Factory),  while one man lies on top of her, and another (a waiter?) looks on.  Here's some of the reply we received:  "It's unfortunate that you find the photograph sexist and degrading because the  model is obviously in the control position,  literally being served hand and foot. She  is not tied to the table or in any way  being physically threatened. She actually  appears to be taking advantage of the two  males, so maybe on that level it could be  viewed as sexist advertising.  "I do agree that the fact that she's in  a partial state of undress might have upset those with conservative tastes; however we have not intention of promoting  the exploitation of women on any level,  and we do believe in freedom of creative  expression." 0. Kinesis May 8019  FILMS  Scream from Silence evokes a mixed response  By Diana Smith  Scream From Silence is a mixed bag, both  cinematically and in terms of content,  being a multi-faceted look at rape. Likewise, my response was also mixed.  Before the movie even started, I was puzzled. Here was a feature film playing at  a commercial cinema (The Bay, on Denman)  with the typical sensational advertising  - 'What follows can be just as traumatic as  the crime itself and '...on the subject  everyone is talking about' - made by, wait  for it, the National Film Board of Canada,  which I know for its often interesting,  least obnoxious, short, documentary-style  films. Well, anything can change. Look at  China, for instance.  It started out fine. Shots of various 'normal' looking men with women's voices accusing them of rape. The men were the women's  boss, psychiatrist, ashram guru, and husband. What quickly followed was a long,  brutal scene of a woman attacked, at knifepoint, by a stubble-chin, mean-looking labourer.  The woman was dragged into a van,  beaten, raped, tormented and pissed upon.  Since more women are raped by men they  know than by strangers, it would have challenged the stranger-in-the-bushes image of  a rapist to show one of the men known to  the woman as the rapist, instead of the  stranger.  At this point in the movie, when I'm thinking that the rape scene is going into overkill, and I'm not identifying with the woman (or feeling terrified out of my wits  - which I figure is the desired effect),  since I have yet hardly seen her (the camera  viewpoint being that of the woman), the  scenario is interrupted by a cut to an  editing room where two women, presumably  the director and producer, are discussing  the scene. One of them is also having  trouble identifying with the woman.  The movie continues, following the woman's  life after the rape, interjecting all kinds  of techniques: for effect, and to show the  many aspects of rape. There are old film  clips depicting various wars in which the  indigenous women are raped routinely by  the invading armies. An interesting contrast is made between a long sequence of  Suzanne, the rape victim, having her hair  carefully untangled by her boyfriend and a  woman friend, and old film clips of women  having their heads shaved publicly in Europe after the second world war.  Horrifying clitoridectomy  The most powerful part of the movie for me  - where my guts were literally wrenched -  was an original clip of women in Africa performing a clitoridectomy on a young girl.  Another form of socially sanctioned violence against women.  All this has been shown within the first  third of the movie. And the bombardment  continues, sometimes successfully, sometimes not. The rest of the movie is about  the aftermath of rape - we see the second  raping of Suzanne done in the guise of a  police interrogation, followed by her gradual psychological breakdown. And, although  the preferred term for rape victims these  days, among rape relief centres, is 'survivor', Suzanne is not one of them.  Usually I can come away from a movie able  to recommend it, forget it, or lambast it.  This one left me with mixed feelings.  It appears to be a feminist movie on rape.  Great. It's getting commercial exposure at  the Bay. Fine; except I wonder who is  going to see it. It's not family entertainment. There's a bit of sex and violence at  the beginning, but basically it's a heavy,  serious film with some difficult messages.  Difficult to take, and, at times, difficult  to understand.  I think the movie is worth seeing — by any  one. Compared to other movies on the enter  tainment pages, this one is presenting information closer to the reality I know.  As a movie, it is clever and interesting  even though a bit overdone in places. It  was directed, co-produced and partly scripted by Anne-Claire Poirier, a French Canadian  film-maker who already has to her credit  a 'full-length documentary on pregnancy, a  feature on Quebec from a woman's point of  view, and a feature film on abortion.  Stranger rapist stereotype misleads  My main criticism of the film is Poirier's  use of the stranger as the rapist in the  realistic rape scene, rather than depicting a man known to the woman. Later in  the movie the same men introduced briefly  in the beginning — the boss, husband,  psychiatrist and guru — are confronted  by the women they raped; but in a surreal,  theatrical setting.  The impression left  is that in reality strangers rape, whereas  the< more common but more complex and mis--  understood situation of sexual assault  between people who know each other is as  confusing and mysterious as ever.  It is this latter situation that needs to  be shown realistically, with all the intricacies and contraditictions of female/male  interactions.  It's certainly more treacherous and complex territory to enter into  but it is this area where we need some  feminist-type of light shed. In contrast,  the stranger-rape is clear, if not simplistic. The guy hates women, he picked  up the first one that came along, he  needs to dominate,degrade, and abuse her:  "When you can piss standing up, then we  can talk?"  I think I might be too encased with a feminist perspective of rape to view this  film fairly. Actually it has some pretty  solid information about rape that could  have quite an impact on an unindoctrinated  audience. However, it doesn't develop the  analysis of rape much beyond presenting  a woman's viewpoint.  Still, this is a lot more than the prevailing ideology where rapists are still part  of the old boys' school, passionate devils  who can't control themselves. And rape  victims are women who ask for it by accepting a cup of coffee or a lift, or who wear  blouses with the top couple of buttons undone.  For a more complex analysis, rape needs to  be dealt with in a much broader social context which links violence against women  with capitalism, imperialism and the patriarchal system. All this done in a clear,  relevant way, of course.  Poirier begins to tackle why women feel  guilt and shame after being raped. The  question is presented with impact — why,  after such an obviously brutal act was  committed upon Suzanne, where she clearly  was not responsible for any of the violence  done to her, did she feel ashamed? But  the answer is not forthcoming. Sure, we  have no cause to feel shame. But we do.  Why? We need to go to a broader social  context for the answer to that — which the  movie doesn't do.  The movie also included a look at rape by  fathers on their daughters, but continually used the word 'incest' to describe  that act. This is misleading. The word  'incest' refers to social taboos and describes the relationship of the people involved rather than the act itself. Any  coercive and/or violent sexual behaviour  done by a father to a daughter is rape and/  or sexual assault, and needs to be called  exactly that.  The closing scene of the movie says that  the best solution, so far, to rape is for  women and children to wear whistles round  their necks and 'shrill out their distress.  Consistent with my response throughout the  film I was left confused. Is the message  sarcastic? Is it saying that it is a  pretty feeble solution? Feeble as well  as dangerous since rapists can also  strangle women as well as rape them, and  whether the string carries a whistle or a  crucifix, the end result can be equally  fatal.  But if it's sarcastic it loses its edge  because you then hear a cacophony of  whistle blasts with the emotional message  that this, in fact, will be a solution:  collective distress signals. And if that  is the case I hope it's understood symbolically, and that the message which comes  across is that organized collective action  by women, strong, more effective and enduring than any symphony of whistle blasts  is what we need to put a nail in the  coffin of violence against women. Q  Highlights of BCFW Quiz Bonanza  BCFW STRUCTURE  What do you think is the purpose of  BCFW?  Are we accomplishing that purpose?  Explain.  What are your suggestions for accomplishing this purpose better?  How does being a member of BCFW  benefit your group?  What drawbacks does BCFW  membership have for your group?  STANDING COMMITTEE  What do you see as the main function of  the standing committee?  Does the work of the standing committee  benefit your group? Yes? No? Explain.  SUBCOMMITTEES  What do you see as the main function of  the subcommittees?  Is the work of the subcommittees  relevant to your group? Yes? No? Please  explain. Any suggestions for  improvement?  REGIONS  How does working regionally benefit  your group?  What drawbacks does working regionally  have for your group?  CONVENTION  Is the annual convention worthwhile to  your group? Yes? No? Explain.  Do you have criticisms of the convention  structure? Agenda, where, when, how,  number of days, rules of order... ?  MONEY  If BCFW had to function with little or no  money, what areas do you see as  priorities? List in order: subcommittees,  regions, newsletter, standing committee,  convention, other (specify).  GENERAL  Are responsibilities of member groups  clear?  It is clear how action can happen?  Is it clear how policy is decided?  How has the existence of BCFW over the  past five years helped, hindered,  influenced or changed your group? What  has the effect of BCFW been on the  women's movement in British Columbia?  What is your idea/vision of BCFW five  years from now?  Send all this to:  BCFW Structure Committee  Box 24687 Station G  Vancouver, B.C.  V5T4E2 LOCAL MOVEMENT NEWS  Kinesis is going  through a  rough patch  KINESIS ended the fiscal year $2500 in  debt.  This, despite strong community  support, despite generous sustainer  donations.  If that debt remains consistent, in  twelve months we'll be caught in a hole  that's just too big to dig out of.  Costs (I know, you know) are racing  like a speeded-up horror movie. Silver,  which is used in all our photographic  processes, has doubled since January '80  Kinesis bills over the last six months  have been depressing affairs. $893 for  March, $992 for February, $1260 for December-January. Where's it going to end?  Compare those with the average monthly  cost of Kinesis for 1977-78 : $542.  Subscriptions have not gone up in two  years. But now we're forced to raise them  from $8 to $10. (if you cannot afford to  pay, we'll still send you Kinesis free. )  And we've introduced austerity measures  in production. We've set 24 pages as our  outside limit (no more 32-page binges);  we think twice about every photograph we  put in. We've quit fantasizing about how  spiffy Kinesis would look if we could  typeset   SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Do you know anyone who would be interested in a subscription to Kinesis? Do  you know of people who read Kinesis but  who don't subscribe (shame)?  We need new subscriptions; we need them  desperately.  We need more sustainers, who contribute  $50 a year to keeping Kinesis alive.  Can you help out?  1  Marsh, Coffeehouse benefit  Four great acts marred by sloppy production  By Margo Dunn  Four great acts played to a restless audience April 18 to benefit Margaret Marsh  and the Women's Coffeehouse Collective.  M0NA ARENS derives her material from jazz,  folk and rock. She has a powerful voice  and phrases skillfully. Guitar and piano  accompaniments run second to the vocals.  Arens' version of Ferron's "Who Loses"  shows the folk process already beginning  with Ferron's work, and shows "the songwriter singer gives only one, albeit very  special approach, to a song.  Arens' sing-along numbers are fun, although  she tends to overestimate the crowd's ability to grasp how many times to "boo-ah"  with just run one-through.  Perhaps we wouldn't have been so sluggish  if the show had started less than an hour  late. The late start, the long breaks between sets and a lengthly intermission  added up to 80 minutes of entertainment  during three-and-a-half hours.  Next the a capella  group BRASS TACKS provided vocal and visual razz-ma-tazz. The  group's musical and choreographic interpretation of each number flashes with  ultra-sharp control. At times, the moves  seem contrived, not rising spontaneously  from the mood of a number. Since this was  a preview of new choreography, further rehearsal should help the flow. Brass Tacks'  choice of songs for a feminist even might  have been made more carefully. .There's  lots of women's music available and it's  easy to change lyrics in songs (e.g. "we  sang brother to brother...").  Brass Tacks' least professional member is  their manager, who talked loudly to another  man throughout Mona Arens' set. Doesn't  look good, Brass Tacks; put the lid on him.  But these are cavils — the energy, talent  and commitment of Brass Tacks make them  sensational.  JUDY GUMB00TS satirises a parody of Mae  West cum logger who writes songs, sings  them with the help of some raunchy piano-  playing and laughs at herself laughing at  herself. Some would say "multi-faceted".  She's warm, witty and her songs (bush or  slush) talk about life the way it is, juxtaposed to the way we would like it to be  ("I'm never going to love you much until  I don't need you at all"). Her voice sometimes escapes her control but her piano  would lie down and roll over if she asked.  More. More.  CAROL STREET wound up the show with her  life-oriented songs of  relationships, visions of the future and political statements  Her feminist and ecological message runs  consistently throughout her material:  "You've Got Control", "Running Out Of  Time", "Coming into What is Mine". Street';  guitar is like a second voice — a counterpoint, as in "Down Under", or an obligato.  Some of Carol Street's songs about relationships, like those of many women singers,  except those defined publicly as lesbian  feminists, are confusing. She tends to  substitute the plural 'they' so as not  to disclose the gender 'he' or 'she' in  a love/pain-of-love song.  What closet is this? Heterosexuality is  not always a perversion, and if we're  baring our souls about relationships,  why not go all the way? It's the undisputed use of heterosexist cliches,  as in some of Brass Tacks' songs,  that's disturbing.  Carol Street's musicianship commands  absolute respect. Unfortunately she  played her set through a rumble of male  voices — a reggae dance was to follow the  show.  The Marsh/Coffeehouse was not a well-  organized event. Sponsoring benefits may  be tedious, but it's a job that needs to  be done in such a way that the community's  entertainment dollars stay in the community, not only because we support a cause,  but because we're likely to have a good  time.  As an evening, the benefit dragged. But  Mona Arens, Brass Tacks, Judy Gumboots  and Carol Street were terrific.  WOMEN IN ZIMBABWE (com. from P. 7)    then you marry in a Lutheran church. If you  are a Methodist, then a Methodist church.  Do women have children out of wedlock?  Yes, many women have children and they are  not married. When this happens you stay  with your parents and the child stays with  you. But when you get married you have to  leave the child with your parents.  Why?  This is because if you have other children,  then they say that there might be problems  between the husband and you, because he  could accuse you of treating the child different from his. Favouritism.  Can you elaborate on the situation of children with regards to marriage?  During a separation the men want the children. The parents of the couple usually decide the fate of the children. The couple  go to the parents and present their case.  Men have been able to keep the children due  to the fact that they have jobs and money.  If they do not get the child they sometimes  go to the parents and offer them money for  the child.  Are there women loving women and men loving  men in Zimbabwe?  No.  How is rape dealt with in Zimbabwe?  Now you have to report rape to the police.  Before they used to kill the man.  What do the police do?  The police ask the man to demonstrate what  he did, to embarass him. And he usually  goes to jail.  Is it possible to get an abortion?    How do  people feel about abortion?  Abortion is not allowed. Many children are  abandoned.  What about birth control?  Men do not want women to use birth control.  Information about birth control is accessible via the radios.  The radios make  announcements about birth control and  where it is available.  There are family  planning clinics also.  Is education accessible to most people?  Debrah: There is only one primary school  in Seluke, which is where I come from. Almost everyone goes to school.  Those who  have big families because of many wives  and so many children cannot afford to send  their children to school, because you have  to pay for the uniforms and books. So education is restricted somewhat.  Debrah also pointed out a section in the  Patriotic Front Manifesto: "Education is  the most important factor in developing  the people so that they can solve their  problems. A Patriotic Front government  will ensure that every child in Zimbabwe  has education."  What do women do in the Patriotic Front?  Many women address rallies.  Jane Nywenya  has been part of the negotiations at Lancaster House.  There are many women fighters. At first the men did not like the  idea of women going to fight. But they  learned to get used to the idea. There was  a training camp of women guerillas close  to us that was bombed. We could see the  flames from our camp.  What kinds of changes would you like to see  in a free Zimbabwe?  The first thing we want to get rid of is  the system that allows a man to have more  than one wife. We are really opposed to  that.  Another thing we want is equal pay for work  of equal value.  The jobs that have been  open to women are domestic work, factory  work and work in small restaurants. The domestic workers get about $10.00 a month.  The women who work in factories with food  and textiles get about $5.00 a week. There  is high unemployment and very few jobs for  women. Even if women have education they  get jobs with little money.  We want men to share in the things that  only women do right now. Like sweeping and  cleaning and looking after the children.  Here in Canada the women drive buses and  trucks and do many other things that only  men do in Zimbabwe. We want the women to be  able to do the same in Zimbabwe. We saw  men daycare workers here, in Vancouver and  Regina.  There are no male daycare workers  in Zimbabwe. We would like Zimbabewn men  to look after children, too.  We want education to be more accessible to  women. We want more training programs for  women and more jobs open to women. We are  positive that the new government will now.  create more jobs.  Pemberi ne Chimerenga!  (Forward with the Struggled) LETTERS   Ad hoc * Fassbinder * the draft * erotic art—you're responsive  Dear Kinesis:  The band AD HOC has played at dances celebrating International Women's Day in 1978,  1979 and 1980. We initially came together,  in fact, just to play at the 1978 dance.  In addition, we've played for a variety  of other feminist groups, including CCCA,  Makara, Rape Relief, Vancouver Status of  Women and SORWUC, in all cases either for  free or for a nominal charge to cover our  equipment costs.  We have been particularly pleased to have  been asked to play for IWD. .We believe  the IWD is a time to celebrate the strength  and accomplishments of the women's movement, and an occasion to build unity between women and supportive men. Uniting  in this celebration, we get energized and  better able to overcome our divisions.  From this, we emerge stronger for the  struggle ahead.  We believe, however, that the policy adopted by this year's IWD committee of charging $3 admission for women and $5 for  men was a mistake. The rationale for this,  printed on the poster advertising the  dance, was to dramatize the fact that women  on average, earn only 60!? as much as men.  This inequity desperately demands action.  We think, however, that relating this to  admission price to the IWD dance did not  further the end of uniting men and women  to fight for equal pay for equal work, and  was actually counter-productive. Rather  than helping people focus their anger  against a sexist system, we think that this  policy made many men feel guilty and not  wanted at the dance. (Our own collective  members, when first hearing of the differential admission prices, felt angry, hurt,  ambivalent and slightly rejected).  AD HOC supports the principle of women-  only events, recognizing that these events  are important in building feelings of solidarity among women. At the same time —  as a mixed collective — we believe that  women and men can work together, and that  for effective political and social change,  women and men must learn to work together.  AD HOC Musical Collective  Dear Kinesis:  I read with interest Pat Feindel's review  of The Marriage of Maria Braun, (Kinesis,  March '80). Having just seen the film I  would like to offer a different interpretation of Fassbinder's work.  In films and in novels; including Prochain  Episode  by the late Quebecois writer, Herbert Aquin, female characters are often  used to symbolize countries. Rarely are  these analogies flattering. (Why are we  not surprised?) The portrait of Maria  Braun is no exception. Fassbinder's protagonist, as the frame photographs of  Hitler and Germany's Chancellors demonstrate, is a symbol of Germany.  Maria is a prostitute, a murderer, a master  of manipulation, ruthless, ambitious,  opportunistic, grasping, loyal to one ideal  only — her elusive husband — the Fatherland. Bill, an American soldier in the  occupying army, is Maria's first "John";  she profits by her association with him  and murders him, without remorse, when her  ideal man returns. Bill, a black man,  represents Germany's six million slaughtered Jews, useful for a time and easily  disposed of. The American industrialist,  who Maria also sleeps with to clinch a  deal, represents the countries who poured  billions of dollars into Germany's reconstruction.  Although Maria/Germany get richer, Fassbinder allows neither the woman nor the  country to grasp their ultimate ideal.  Maria is blown up at the end of the film  — Fassbinder's indictment of the industrial aspirations of present day Germany,  and his explicit warning to aspirants who  include the Chancellors pictured after  the explosion.  That the film can be interpreted on levels  other than the symbolic is not to be  denied. However, the attempt to portray  Maria's human aspect clashes with Maria as  symbol. At first I interpreted the exploitation of her pin-up sexuality as a means  of survival, but her abundant wealth and  cruel use of Oswald clearly exceed necessity. This excess could be explained as  a reaction against the scarcity of the  war years, as could Maria's cold-blooded  treatment of Oswald, Bill and the unions  be interpreted as the behaviour of a  person whose emotions have been paralysed  by the trauma of the war.  But, even on a human level Maria is presented as excessively inhuman, as a personification of the ruthless, manipulating  cock-teasing Bitch we see all too often in  female stereotypes in the media and the  fine arts. Fassbinder, aware of this  effect, perfunctorily apologizes for his  own creation by having Maria admit that  her consciousness (romantically obsessed  with "her man") "lags behind" the contemporary reality of women's emancipation.  These apologies, however, fail to counterbalance the overwhelmingly sexist depiction  of Maria Braun.  The film is  interesting and challenging.  But, as feminists and feminist film critics  I believe we should avoid knee-jerk celebrations of women characters who are not  victims and cultivate a discerning attitude towards images of women with power.  To say that The Marriage of Maria Braun is  "not a feminist film" is a staggering  unders tatement.  In sisterhood,  Leslie Timmins  Tom Tuthill/LNS  Dear sisters,  As a feminist my aim is to bring about a  strong collective women's consciousness  that will enable women here and all over  the world to fight their oppression on all  levels.  One of the biggest obstacles to bringing  about a strong collective women's consciousness is the male media. They constantly distort, misquote, and define what  women are saying. They not only distort  what we say, they also distort our bodies  and minds. The inherent assumption of the  collective male media is that males are  superior and women are inferior.  Yet in the last issues of Kinesis in the  article Picture Yourself in the Persian  Gulf For Exxon Right or Wrong by Ann C.  Schaefer we have Ann quoting a story in  'Newsweek' about the National Organization  of Women. The quote itself is irrelevant.  What is relevant is that Ann not only  quotes a male magazine's interpretation of  what a women's group said, she proceeded  to say, "In spite of such inanities and  the singular unimaginativeness of NOW's  remarks..."  So not only did Ann quote the male media's  interpretation of a women's group but she  then went on to accept it as fact — and  Kinesis printed it.  What we have here is a women's group saying something. The male media quotes it  or misquotes it — who knows — and a  women's press prints it as fact!  I want to make it clear that what I am upset about is not a question of whether the  quote was right or wrong. (That we won't  know until we check with the women's group  involved). I'm upset about the method of  taking the word of the male media when  we know from experience that they have  misquoted and distorted practically everything we have ever said or done.  One of the first steps in stopping the  oppressor is to refuse to accept them as  people with the privilege to define us or  speak for us and one of the best ways to  strengthen and build a strong women's  movement is to let women speak for themselves .  We all make mistakes and the more we do the  more mistakes we make — therefore the aim  of this letter is not to hit Ann or Kinesis  over the head but to point out why the  article was in some way destructive and  why Kinesis should not have published it as  it was written.  Yours sincerely,  Dorrie Brannock  Dear Kinesis:  The March 1980 issue of Kinesis contains  an article by Diana Smith entitled "Erotic  art show prompts show and tell meeting;  chaos ensues." While the article was an  admirable attempt to review the progress  of a very difficult project, the title of  the article frivolously summarizes the  proceedings. We take particular exception  to the words "show and tell" and "chaos  ensues".  Both the making and the understanding of  art are work. Oftentimes the work is  pleasurable, more often it is frustrating,  demanding and difficult. Both processes  usually occur in isolation. For the purpose of this planned show we are trying to  carry out these processes in a group.  Our  intent is to try to develop a better understanding of our erotic selves, as women  and as feminists,by reviewing and analyzing  our own and other women's work. We hope  that the women involved and their work will  change through this process.  The term  "show and tell" undermines the value and  intensity of this process.  The "chaos ensues" reminds us of the typical stereotype that women are not capable  of discussing sexuality reasonably and  rationally. Feminists have purposefully  looked at their own and all women's sexuality. . As a result we have gained a  stronger sense of our sexual and sensual  selves. We are still learning about what  turns us on (eroticism) as opposed to  what turns us off (pornography). This is  a positive process. Our meetings have a  high level of energy and spirit. We feel  that they maintain the purpose and direction toward which they are geared.  We hope that future reviews (and headlines)  show more sensitivity to the group's objectives and process.  . Sincerely,  Robin Barnett and Paula Levine BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  MAY DAY celebrations take place Friday  May 2 at the Swedish Hall, 1320 East  Hastings, beginning at 8 p.m.  Program consists of folk and labour  songs, dance music by AD HOC and feature  speakers from the labour movement.  WALKATHON for Rape Relief House, Sunday  May 4, 11am around Stanley Park Seawall. Rape Relief invites you to walk  or sponsor a walker. Contact Diane or  Chris, 872-8212 for info and pledge  sheets. Childcare available.  RAISES NOT ROSES. Starting May 1 1980  and running Thursdays at 12.00 - 1.00  for 6 weeks, SORWUC in conjunction  with the YWCA will be presenting a  brown bag series on the following topics :  May 1 — The girls in the office:  sexism and the workplace.  May 8 — The concern we can never forget : childcare.  May 15 — Everything you always wanted  to know about your legal rights.  May 22 — Women's liberation and unions.  May 29 — A union contract - what's the  point?  June 5 — Do it yourself: organizing  your office.  These workshops are free. For more info  call SORWUC at 684-2834 or 681-2811.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S NETWORK. Thursday, May  22,6.00 - 10.00 p.m. panel of speakers  discuss "Who's for health and happiness?  Holiday Inn Ballroom, 711 West Broadway. Costs $14 for network members, $18  for guests. Mail registrations by May  16 to Women's Network, UBC Centre for  Continuing Education, UBC, Vancouver  V6T 2A4.  WOMEN'S ART GALLERY — Corinne Kingma,  "Begotten and Born of Woman" ceramics  May 2-30. Gallery is open Mon-Fri  10 a.m. - 4 p.m., to 10.00 p.m. Thurs.  at #6 - 45 Kingsway, Vancouver. Phone  872 2250.  THE WORLD OF MARGARET LAURENCE - Morag,  Hagar, Rachel, Stacey and Vanesse are  brought to life by actress Norma Edwards in a one-woman show. Performances  are at North Vancouver's Presentation  House Studies Theatre May 8 - 10 at  8.30 p.m., with two matinees May 8  and 9 at 2.00 p.m. Bookings available  by calling Presentation House at 986-  1351, 333 Chesterfield Ave, North Vancouver V7M 3G9.  SURVIVAL BENEFIT FOR ATLIN, B.C. To help  the Atlin Community Association in its  opposition to the proposed Placer Development Adanac molybdenum mine in a highly radioactive area 15 miles from the  town. Two films will be shown: South  Africa — The Nuclear File, and War Games  Tuesday, May 6 at Robson Square Cinema,  8 p.m.  On Monday, May 26, the Women's Building Committee  is sponsoring a performance of LILITH, a feminist  theatre troupe from San Francisco. They will peform  PIZZA and TRESPASSO at 8 p.m. at the Robson  Media Centre. Call Gillian at VSW-736-1313 for ticket  On Sunday, May 25, LILITH will facilitate an  intensive three hour workshop at the Western Front, 7-  10 p.m. Cost for workshop is $10.00  WORKSHOPS  THE COMMON WOMAN'S DANCE COLLECTIVE  is holding a day-long workshop Saturday May 17 from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.  Day will include stretching, improv-  isational movement, contact improvisation and other surprises.  Women only, no experience necessary.  Wear loose clothing, bring food, to  share for lunch. Pre-registration  is required and fee is arranged on  a sliding scale: 1%  of your monthly  income divided by the number of people living on it. For example: monthly, income $800 divided by two people = $400; 1%  = $4.00. The collective will also be asking you to make  a donation to a political cause TEA.  This is voluntary.  Workshop will be held at Tamanhous  House, 1885 Venables St, Vancouver.  Childcare available: register for  this by May 10 by calling Linda at  253-2120. For workshop registration,  send cheque payable to Linda Ruedrich  with your name and phone number to  her at 1740 E.Georgia, Vancouver.  MASSAGE WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN - teaching  basic massage. Sunday, May 11 from  10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Fee $18 (negotiable).  Facilitators: Annette Clough - 732  7088, and Krin Zook - 732 5696. Registration $5 in advance.  RAP GROUP FOR GAY WOMEN - talk about relationships, jobs, families, whatever  is of concern to you as a gay woman. With  Marsha Ablowitz. Friday, May 9, 7-10  p.m.; Saturday, May 10, 9-4; Tues, May  13 and 20, 7 - 9 pm. $30 (subsidies are  available). Call Robbie 731 4951.  =VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN.  Hours: Monday-Wednesday, 9-6 pm  Thursday 9-9 pm  WARD SYSTEM MEETING - VSW's public meeting  on a ward system for Vancouver takes place  May 14 at 7.30 p.m. at Kits House (Vine  and 7th). Speakers include alderpersons  Darlene Marzari and Rankin, plus Jean  Swanson and Susan Hoeppner.  VSW has been working with the Legal Services Commission and Co-op Radio to  produce a monthly show on women for  the 'Talking Law' show. We are looking for a few people who might be inter-  •  ested in working on the show.  VSW's ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING: Thursday  June 26, 7.30 p.m. 517 East Broadway.  WANT TO RUN FOR THE VSW EXECUTIVE this  year? The nominations committee has  been struck and is accepting nominations now.  Call Nadine, 736 1313.  THE CONSTITUTION COMMITTEE has submitted a revised constitution to the membership, which will be voted upon at  the annual general meeting. Members  receive their copy with this Kinesis.  GROUPS  ATTENTION WOMEN'S GROUPS: an in-movement  day on accountability, to discuss how  we can more effectively be accountable  to each other. June 14, 10-4.30.  Place and agenda TBA and announced next  issue.  WEN-DO, Women's Self Defense:  Classes can be arranged for groups  of 10 or more women. For information  contact Wen-Do West, 2349 St. Catherines, Vancouver (876-6390).  OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WOMEN has the following  meeting and -events planned  May 13 — Bicycle workshop and B.B.Q  dinner  May 11 — Rafting expedition on the  Thompson River  May 24-25 — Bicycle trip through  Gulf Islands (overnight)  June 7 — Day of canoeing and kayaking  on Pitt Lake.  Membership fee is $45/yr, which covers  instruction, equipment use, and special  trip rates and discounts. Call Clasina  at 683-2531 for more information.  FAT IS A FEMINIST ISSUE ~ women's group  meeting in East End of Vancouver on  Friday mornings — 11.30 a.m. to 1 p.m.  To" join, call Ruth - 225 7182 or Betty  255 7272 (evenings) .  THE B.C. WOMEN IN TRADES ASSOCIATION has  recently been formed. Goals include  greater representation of women in .the  trades, wider access to training, and  a support network for women who are  working in or are interested in the  trades. Anyone who wants to know more  about the organization or who needs  help from the group can contact: Judy  Doll, 7387 Capistrano Drive, Burnaby  B.C. V5A 1P7; or Peggy Bleeker at 254  3312.  SORWUC needs new volunteers. Evening work  is fine; training provided. Call 684-2834  or 681-2811. SORWUC's address: 814-402 W  Pender St, Vancouver.  SINGLE PARENTS GROUP FOR VANCOUVER EAST is  being organized by Single Parents Group,  c/o Britannia Community Centre, 1661  Napier St, Vancouver V51 4X4. Phone  253 4391 local 57.  If you're a SINGLE PARENT having hassles  with welfare, a self-help group is  .  forming. Call 931-8154 (7pm-6am) for  information.  WOMEN'S GROUP forming to discuss mutual  concerns about infertility. Call Beth  at 738-6397 or Harriet at 438-3397.  LESBIANS OVER 40 meet Monday night at  7:30 at the Women's Bookstore, 804  Richards St, Vancouver. Come join us.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE (LIL) is open to  calls two nights a week, Thursday and  Sunday, from 7-10 pm. Call 734-1016. x  LESBIAN MOTHERS DROP-IN meets Sunday at  2pm at the Women's Bookstore, 804  Richards St, Vancouver. For info, call  Laurel, 525-1336 or Lynn, 734-9784.  DROP-IN FOR YOUNGER LESBIANS meets  every Thursday night, 7:30-10pm.  Lesbians under 21 welcome. 1501 W.  Broadway. Contact the drop-in by  calling LIL, 734-1016.  CENTREFOLD by Wendy Davis is now being  made into a fund-raising poster on  heavy paper. Watch Kinesis for details.  MANY THANKS to the women who worked o  the four-page Mother's Day insert.' Kinesis May 80 23  BULLETIN BOARD  ON THE AIR  7 DAYS IN MAY - IT'S A PLOT to keep Coop radio on your dial. May 4-11  keep your dial tuned to 102.7 FM and  call in your support to 684-8494.  Pledge lines open 1.00 p.m. Sunday May  4, to start off a week of radio extraordinaire leading up to the Annual  Marathon Weekend - 24 hours of programming .  THE LESBIAN SHOW'S May program:  May 1 — No theme theme show  May 8 — Special one hour show, as  the Lesbian Show's contribution to the  Co-op fund-raising marathon.  A good  time to phone in a membership pledge!  May 15 — Lesbian mothers. May 11 is  Mother's Day. When's pay day?  May 22 — Lesbian humour  May 29 — Lesbians and music  The Lesbian Show on Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, Thursdays from 7:30 - 8:00 p.m.  W0MANVTSI0N programs for May:  May 5 — Marathon Special. Good time  to phone in your pledge to co-op.'  May 12 — tapes from Equal Pay for  Work of Equal Value meeting.  May 19 — News show. Woman's news  from around town, around the country  and around the world.  May 26 — Woman in the Arts: music  and reviews.  CONFERENCES  SEXUAL HARASSMENT ON THE JOB conference  will be held May 30-June 1 at Sheraton  Landmark Hotel, Robson St, Vancouver.  Contact your local union or labour  council; all unions have been notified  of this event.  PRAIRIE SOCIALIST FEMINIST conference May  24 at old campus of University of Regina, Fine Arts building arena theatre.  For details, write the Regina Women's  Centre, 219 - 1810 Smith St., Regina.  MEN AND MASCULINITY conference at North  Seattle Community College includes such  topics as 'Men Against Rape', 'Men's  Sexuality from a Woman's Perspective',  'What Men Should Know about Women's Liberation'. Information from Metrocentre  YMCA, 909 Fourth Ave, Seattle WA 98104.  RESOURCES  Recent titles at the women's bookstores;  ARIEL BOOKS, 2677 West 4th Ave. 733 3511  Crystal Cave, Mary Steward, $2.70  Dream Snake, Vonda Mclntyre, $2.70  Hillbilly Woman; Cathy Kahn, $3-30  Sinister Wisdom, journal, $3.00  Anne Sexton: A Self-Portrait, ed.  Linda Grey Sexton, $8.95  Towards an Anthropology of Women,  Rayna Reiter, $7.45  WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE, 804 Richards Street,  Vancouver, 684-0523  Lesbian Path ed. by Margaret Cruikshank,  $8700  Capitalist Patriarchy and the Case for  Socialist Feminism, by Zillah Eisenstein,  $Oo  Victorian Murderesses, by Mary Hartman,  18773  Let Me Speak (testimony of Domitla,,  woman of the Bolivian mines) by Domitla  Barrios de Chungara with Moema Viezz  . $7.45  Alexandra Kollontai, Selected Writing,  17793   Love, Therapy and Politics, ed. by Hogie  Wyckoff, $6.25  CLASSIFIED  UNFURNISHED ROOM for non-smoking feminist available for $150 a month including utilities. In Surrey, 20 minutes  from SFU. Call Vicky: 574-5396  WORK EXCHANGE, a member-run community  exchange with about 80 members, where  people exchange work for work rather  than money. No fee, people of all  ages welcome. For information, call  689-4787 or 879-9946.  HEALING WITH THE TAR0T. If you would like  a reading, please call Pat at 873-6886  between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. Monday to  Thursday.  COURSES  WOMEN'S STUDIES AT S.F.U., summer 1980:  Women in Canada, 1600-1920—day course,  July/August, instructor B. Todd, no  prerequisite  Special Topics: Women and Religion—  day course, July/August, instructor  B. Blakely, lecture/tutorial, pre-  requesite 60 credit hours or permission of instructor  Special Topics: Women and the Law—  evening course, May/August, instruc-  tor L. Baker, lecture/tutorial, pre-  requesite 60 credit hours or permission of instructor  As well as courses of directed reading  and research. Contact the general office  at 291-3593 for complete information.  Women's programs at Capilano College:  Assertiveness Training—Saturdays 10-5pm  starting May 3, 1 session, fee $20, instructor Jessica Easton, Information  Centre, 1357 Wharf St, Gibsons  Going to Work: How to Land a Job—Sat-  urday 9-4pm May 10, 1 session, fee $20,  Lynnmour Campus ND101, instructor  Suzanna Bolton  For information, call the Women's Resources  Centre, 986-1911, local 350. To pre-  register for courses, send fee and info  to: Community Education, Capilano College,  2055 Purcell Way, North Vancouver, B.C.  PROJECT CHILD CARE. A study of child day  care policy in B.C. is currently being  undertaken by the Social Planning and  Research Committee of the United Way  of the Lower Mainland.  All interested persons, associations  and organizations are invited to make  submissions for consideration by the  S.P.A.R. Committee concerning all aspects of the provision of child care.  Briefs,.recommendations, policy statements or letters should be addressed  to:  The Director, Project Day Care  Social Planning and Research  United Way of the Lower Mainland  1625 West 8th Avenue  Vancouver B.C. V6J 1T9.  To arrive not later than May 20, 1980.  33 3 3 3:  'MEW ZEALAND'S  ►FEMINIST JIACAZIlf  >•••***•'  k READ IT FOR MEWS &. VIEWS FROM  "FEMINISTS IN THE ANTIPODES c&  JO PAGES OF EXCELLENT PROVOCATIVE,  EABING - OUR HEALTH ISSUES A SPECIALTY'  HELP KINESIS GROW  OLD AND WISE  Thank you, sustainers. Your contributions  are needed now more than ever to make the  continued existence of Kinesis possible.  Sustainers contribute $50 a year, in  a lump sum or in installments of $5 or  more. In return, you receive your own  subscription, along with any number of  complimentary copies for your friends.  Why not fill out this sustainer form  and help Kinesis continue?  Postal Code  I enclose my monthly installment of    I enclose a lump sum of $50    Clip and mail to:  Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  KINESIS is published ten times a year by  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing positien of women in society and  work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly  to all members. Individual subs to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year. We ask members to base  their donations on this, and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication. Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe,  Janet Berry, Cole Dudley, Penny Goldsmith, Morgan McGuigan, Helen Mintz,  Gayla Reid, Janice Pentland-Smith,  Diana Smith, Joey Thompson, Lezlie Wag-  man, Cat Wickstrom, Joan Woodward. MOVEMENT DEBATE  Women's Building benefit sparks cultural debate  The Women's Building benefit show on March  9 has raised a debate in the women's movement around several important issues.  What is women's culture? How do we establish our own standards in art? What about  freedom of personal expression and censorship? Why is some material considered offensive by some feminists and liberating  by others? Looking at the specifics of  some of the performances that night, and  why they could be seen as putting down women, brings some of these issues into focus.  The performances which showed women as passive and fluffy might have been acceptable  if they had been placed in some sort of context which made it clear that these values  were not being extolled. As period pieces  they might,have had some effect, but only  if counterpointed with other pieces (and  not necessarily by the same performer)  which showed women in stronger and less traditional ways. Unfortunately the other  theatre pieces in the show did not provide  the kind of material that is positive for  women; they were not only sexist in that  they perpetrated grotesque stereotypes of  women as sex objects, they could also be  seen as racist and classist.  A piece which depicts a Latin American woman as grossly sexual in a very male-defined way, while happily carrying her burden  on her head, is perpetrating a North American stereotype of a Third World woman which  is insulting and inauthentic.  No Latin American woman has ever dressed or  acted like that except on stages in tourist  centres for the titillation of foreign,  male-dominated audiences.  The other piece which depicted (at extraordinary length) a woman in tight pants and  padded bra, again in a "sexy" way, was perhaps even more disrespectful to women.  Whereas no Latin American woman ever went  around dressed as Carmen Miranda (except  Carmen Miranda who performed for North Am-,  erican audiences), there are women, usually working class women, who still dress in  what might be called 'fifties' style. To  parody them, to mock them, is to put them  down.  There are many women who still think male  approval of their sexuality is necessary  for their sense of identity. To portray  this kind of behaviour on stage as appropriate for women, even if it is supposed to  be "in fun" is not furthering the awareness  that women have choice and that we have to  redefine ourselves outside of the cultural  male-created stereotypes.  Culture is not apolitical. Art that does  not challenge the status quo is in tacit  agreement with the status quo.   Culture is  an important tool for challenging the system, raising consciousness, providing a vision of other possibilities for ourselves.  It does not have to be didactic and unrelentingly serious to achieve this; wit,  style and levity can be used to educate as  well as entertain.  We have all at some time bought into the  stereotypes of women the popular culture  provides and allowed them to divide us.  We must guard against being agents of a  system in which we do not have equal status or power with men and which insults and  limits us.  Reinforcing the system's stereotypes of us  in our art and culture does nothing to take  away the power it has over us. Mainstream  culture cannot be a model for us; women's  culture has to be an alternative culture  with different standards, different values,  different aesthetics.  The last word on women's culture is not in,  but debate is in process. To open the chan^  nels of- communication between artist and  audience and facilitate the debate, we  might consider having informal meetings the  day after performances at which artists and  members of the audience can talk; we also  might consider having a sheet for comments  handed out at performances and providing  a suggestion/comment box. Public forums,  sponsored by arts groups, at which more  structured debates can happen, could also  be possible.  There are many questions to be raised, many  points of view to be heard, many visions to  be shared. A new women's culture can be a  learning place and a testing ground for  new forms of creative expression and new  ways of being..  IMAGINE  A WOMEN'S BUILDING  IN VANCOUVER  The Women's Building  Committee responds  When we started planning a concert/variety  show, our idea was to provide an evening  of varied entertainment by local performers - women known to have a feminist consciousness, although not all performing  specifically feminist content. We didn't  feel we could dictate content; we trusted  the women to select material that would  not. offend feminist sensibilities.  We ventured into this program with little  or no production experience. The program  we mapped out seemed simple enough to execute without auditions, rehearsals, etc.  We did decide on a sound and light check  run through on the Sunday afternoon of the  performance, right at the theatre. There  were incredible hassles with the sound equipment so most of our energies went into  getting that set, and there just wasn't  time for an actual run through. Even  though Marg Verrall had made up a schedule  and worked out the mike setups, timing  placement, etc. required for each act, it  certainly didn't flow as intended.  Naturally, we're concerned about some of  the negative feedback we've gotten as regards content. Perhaps this will act as  a catalyst in commencing the process of  defining women's culture.  Personally, we opt for a broad base that  would encompass feminist performers  whose work is political in nature, as well  as feminist performers whose talents need  support from the women's community, but  whose content is not specifically feminist  - but always with the understanding that  their material could in no way be construed as sexist, racist, classist or oppres -  sive to women. Of course, this in itself  would be open to different perceptions,  and our concert/variety show is a case in  point. But we have also had considerable  positive feedback, with most of the criticism aimed at the production problems previously mentioned.  The physical reality of the Women's Building is down the road a ways, but we hope to  produce and co-produce other women's cultural events to keep the concept of the Women's Building alive, and to continue increasing support from the women's commun-  ity.  Gloria Greenfield for the Women's Building.  Another response... and  future plans  The Women's Building Planning Committee met  with several women the week following the  Variety Show to discuss the reactions of  some women to the concert.  The discussion followed a constructive criticism format. There were three criticisms  presented concerning the content of the  show; the responsibility of the Women's  Building Committee for not screening the  acts; and the lack of an evaluation process.  (See Annette Clough's comments. )  The Women's Building Commitee had already  discussed the show and our reactions to it  at some length. As Gloria Greenfield has  pointed out in her statement, time was of  the essence, and we learned a lot from our  first production.  We appreciate the energy and concern  voiced by those women who came directly  to us with their criticisms.  We would like to thank all of the women  entertainers who generously gave of their  time to the Women's Building. The evening  was a financial success - we raised $450.  The whole question of what is the nature,  content and politics of women's culture  will be an ongoing topic of discussion.  Through this process, precipitated by the  variety concert, we as feminists must define what is women's culture.  The Women's Building's next production  will be Wallflower Order, a feminist  dance troupe from Eugene, Oregon.  They  will perform at the Britannia High School  auditorium, 1661 Napier on May 3 at 8 p.m.  On Monday, May 26, the Women's Building  Committee is sponsoring a performance of  Lilith, a feminist theatre troupe from San  i  Francisco, who made a big impression on  the women's community - as well as the  theatre community - when they toured here  in 1977.  This time, Lilith will be performing two  one-act plays — PIZZA and TRESPASSO.  Showtime is 8 p.m. at the Robson Square  Media Centre. Daycare is available. Lilith  will also facilitate an intensive three-  hour workshop on Sunday, May 25 at the  Western Front from 7-10 p.m.  For registration contact Ros Sherrard at  873 4588 (work) or 327 5392 (home), or  Jane Kalmakoff at 873 8864. For more information contact Gillian Marie at 736 1313  Gillian Marie and Roz Sherrard.