 4 SpeGtelCaiections-SsiAal  * September 1993 Review of Women in Canada..p. 11  cmpa $2.25 Itmstdf  .  er, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work c  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Sept 7 for the  October issue at 7 pm at Kinesis. All  women welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by  the Vancouver Status of Women. Its  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work   I  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism .classism,   '  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial  EDITORIAL BOARD  Shannon e. Ash, Lissa Geller,  Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew, Faith Jones  Sur Mehat, Kathleen Oliver, Gladys We  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Winnifred Tovey, Faith Jones, Shannon  e. Ash, Kathleen Oliver, Fatima Jaffer,  Gladys We, Wendy Frost, Carolyn  Delheij-Joyce, Juline Macdonnell, Asha  Bhat, Lorraine Suomi, Robyn Hall, Juliet  O'Keefe  Advertising: Cynthia Low  Circulation:Cat L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  Johnstone, Tory Johnstone  Distribution: Yee Jim  Production Co-ordinator: Anne Jew  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Photo ofArdythe Wilson  by Fatima Jaffer  PRESS DATE  August 26, 1993  SUBSCRIPTIONS  lndividual:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to make  submissions. We reserve the right to  edit and submission does not guarantee  publication. If possible, submissions  should be typed, double spaced and  must be signed and include an address,  telephone number and SASE. Kinesis  does not accept poetry or fiction.  Editorial guidelines are available upon  request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in the  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1,  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC laser  printer. Camera work by The Peak and  Midtown Graphics. Printing by Web  Press Graphics.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  PublishersAssociation.  ISSN 0317-9095  Second class mail #6426  News  The never ending horrors of NAFTA 3  by Jackie Bown  Women's monument 4  by Mariam Bouchoutrouch  Panel on violence 5  by Johannah Pilot and Jackie Brown  Features  The deficit and social spending 10  by Ellen Woodsworth  NAC's Review of the Situation of Women in Canada 11  by Punam Khosla, Faith Jones and Winnifred Tovey  Domestic workers and the Employment Standards Act 14  by Lorina Serafico  Centrespread  Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en landmark ruling   by Miche Hill and Fatima Jaffer  NAFTA—we don't hafta 3  Commentary  The blockade at Clayoquot Sound 15  by Shannon E. Ash  Women and computers: Can email be femail? 16  by Juliet O'Keefe and Gladys We  Fighting back: child sexual abuse 17  by Marie Thompson  Arts  Review of The Doctor's Wife 20  by Amy Wong  Review of the National Women's Music Festival 20  by Pat Hogan  Review of Sheepish Beauty, Civilian Love 18  by Erin Marie Soros  Review of Memoir of Women's Prisons in the Islamic Republic of  Iran 19  by Shahla Sarabi  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6  What's News 8  by Manisha Singh  Bulletin Board 20  compiled by Wendy Frost  CO..  <S|5a^s^Ts^|s^B^p  The right of the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en 12  Writers-  -we  need  you!  Even  if  you  have  no  experience  call  255*5499.  Shannon e. Ash on Clayoquot..  Workshop with Winnifred  Add paste-up, general layout  and design to your roster of  skills this fall in the production  room with a view at Kinesisl  Call 254-8691  Femail email 16  SEPTEMBER 1993 It's been a long summer. Much has happened, is happening, will happen...as we go to  press. It's been almost a year since we came up with the idea of this column (for some of you  that missed the intro to "As Kinesis Goes To Press" in the oct/92 issue of Kinesis, the typos  and confusing grammar is 'cos we go write it a mere hour or so before we go to press...yeah,  frazzled minds and ticking clocks)...for tha t last-minute stuff and we're still glad we have this  chance to get the latest, the juiciest, the funniest into the paper at the last moment...'cos not  much has changed: Stories break, there's no time and, yeah, we never did find out who to  lobby for that 72-hour day...  It's hard to think of that witty, August thing to say when we've just read N AC's Review  of the Situation of Women in Canada (page 11), and then, the government's Panel on  Violence Against Women report (page 5)...gasp, how could we mention them in the same  sentence! NAC's probably going to call us and chew us out.oh, maybe not. With federal cuts  to their budget, they can't afford the phone call! Anyway, we don't think they belong in the  same sentence. The Review is a well-researched and written, much-needed resource for  women activists and frontline workers and researchers in Canada...actually, while the  analysis is excellent and really puts it all together, it's the stats that we find we'll be using a  lot...like a woman called and wanted a stat on something. We didn't know but we do now  so hope she calls back. Meanwhile the panel's report is...well, we're real glad the panel  members seemed to have learned something about what's happening out here..far, faraway  from Kimmie-Kampbell-land.  Wait a minute, we are pretty close to Kimmie land in a way...some of us live in her riding  and get junk mail from her... speaking of which...we never know what she's really talking  about, if anything.but we can't underestimate her either. We think she's pretty, well,  smart...and quite dangerous...She's certainly managing to convince a few people she had  nothing to do with most of those disastrous Tory policies we've had to deal with,...especially  in the last few years.  Women in Vancouver aren't really talking about the battle up ahead, you know, the  federal election...but then again, they are...in that kind of serious, tell-me-it-ain't-so way:  "Kimmie's going to win, you know," or that, groan-I-don't-believe-it way: "I think it's going  to be the Liberals...I mean, you never know." Then again, there's that happy, confident  voice: "It's amazing, but I think (NDP) Betty Baxter's actually going to defeat Campbell. You  should see what it's like out there...people love her. And the NDP will do well, they're the  only party that can defeat NAFTA, and who cares what the polls say." Then again, we get  realists saying (in a cheery voice, no less): "Hey, no matter who I vote for, the government  gets in." Actually, I don't think we can afford another government right now...especially  after reading The Review. Well, we'll be running analysis on the federal parties in our next  issue...we've got Judy Rebick on the line-up of writers and..., well, read us in October.  We'11 also have moreon both Ontarioand BC's employment equity laws, both of which  are causing storms...backlash...etc  Our Histories of Vancouver Organizations feature is missing once again from our  pages...there's a couple in the works, but it's taking a long time to translate an organization  and women's 20 or 15 or 10 years of activism, hard work, politics and change, into a 3,000-  word piece that everyone will follow...  Remember the Legal Services Society story we ran in March/93? There's been an  update, details of which will be in next month. For now, we can tell you Theresa Tait, a  Wet'suwet'en woman who was fired as head of Aboriginal Services at LSS and filed a case  with the Human Rights Commission, lost that case. But she's got a civil suit against LSS in  theworks and we'll know morenext month. She's also written a chapbook called InsideOut:  First Nations on the Front Line published by Vancouver's own Lazara Press that's now  available call 604-872-1134.  Oh, and remember that Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies that  was set up back when we were all much younger? Well, we got something in writing from  them promising their final report will be released on November 15...and wouldn't it be too  bad if that happened to be federal election day and they won't get enough press time so,  well, we've waited this long and, not that we're expecting it to be any great shakes, so...  Well, hey, lots of last minute stuff to squeeze in...Little Sisters' Bookstore slipped us a  note (can't read the scribble, Lisa) to let us know they're in total fund-raising mode for  October 4th, which is when the gay and lesbian bookstore's court case against Canada  Customs for numerous seizures of stuff that the Customs guys jus' couldn't take any  more...so they held on to them and Little Sisters is not going to let it go! Little Sisters' says  it's in dire need of funds 'cos help from LEAF is still outstanding and BC Civil Liberties is  broke (like, really broke?) so the store is paying their own costs and they're planning major  fundraisers...and getting proceeds from when Timothy Findlay comes to October's Writers'  Fest and when Pat Calif ia comes to town and Beckie Ross performs and they're also tai king  to Jo Anne Loulan-'and Carol Vance and have a September benefit screening of,  yeah...Forbidden Love (again???) and, hey, they probably have an ad or two in this issue  anyway so...! Bottomline is, they need $$$$.  Oh, and here's a good one...Dionne Brand's latest film "Long time Comin"' is coming  to town on September 18th.. .better still, Dionne Brand's coming to town with her film.. .(aaah,  the temptation to pun!) Anyway, rumour has it the Black lesbian feminist activist doesn't like  to travel...so this is a rare occasion.catch the film and Dionne at UBC on September 18th.  Call the 'Out on Campus" line at 822-5358 for more details...oh, and the film's being put on  by UBC's President's Lecture Series in Lesbian and Gay Studies and they've got other great  plans for the fall so keep calling them or look up their ad (guess they'll have to get it in to us  now) in the next issue of Kinesis.  The Racy Sexy project at the Chinese Cultural Centre is hiring for two full-time  positions but you have to be on UI to apply (is anyone still on UI? Didn't they scrap that?  What about welfare?) One of the positions is administrative, the other requires database  desktop experience...they're encouraging people of "diverse cultural and sexual backgrounds" to apply. Call Karin Lee at 682-5760 for more. By the way, what's Racy Sexy? (a  November 93 exhibition on race, culture and sexuality, we think).  The International Lesbian Week organizing committee has a call out for their first  meeting...they're inviting "womanists, dykes, lesbians and womyn-loving women"...and  offering on and near-site childcare and transportation subsidies if needed...to show up at  Entre Nous Femmes at 1656 Adanac Street, which is wheelchair accessible. It's on September  12 at 7-10 pm. Call Carol at 255-1620.  So we're going to press and this woman walks in and says "mention it's Faith's  birthday" and we don't usually do that but she was a nice woman and Faith did a great job  on this issue and she's new on the ed board and we like her so happy birthday Faith Jones  and how about those Blue Jays eh?  We're back! Yes, after a month off and  lots of sunshine (well, we did have a couple  of days of sun in July, don't you remember?), we're at it again...intrepid reporters  on the cutting edge of feminist  journalism...production crews returning to  the scene of the never-ending wonders of the  production room...oh joy, such bliss... Well,  here's the update...  As we glide effortlessly into fall, we get  closer to the weekend for our annual Kinesis  retreat. We'll be sailing away to ...location  not yet decided, but it'll be on an island and  cheap, we hope...to hashout long-term plans  for the paper, ideas on format, content and  policy changes, how to be better and brasher  yet...and what we're going to do to make  sure everyone knows Kinesis is 20 years old in  1994 (start saving up for those special t-shirts  that are already in the works) plus more  more more. The retreat takes place September 11 and 12, and is open to all Kinesis  volunteers (women and children). We're  asking for subisdies of $25 per person or  maybe less (children go free) to help us pay  for the getaway. For more information and  to register for on-site childcare, call Anne,  Fatima or Faith at 255-5499.  Speaking of Faith...We are thrilled to  officially welcome Faith Jones (long-time  contributor and volunteer extraordinaire) to  the Ed Board. Guess all those subliminal  messages worked: "Faith, don't you think  joining the ed board will be exciting?"; "Oh,  Faith, do join the ed board"; "Hey, Faith..."  Well, we're happy it worked. Faith has some  great ideas, tons of energy and enthusiasm,  great organizational skills, and doesn't nod  off in front of the computer at 3 am!  We'd also like to welcome our new  writers this issue: Karenza Wall, Mariam  Bouchoutrouch, Amy Wong and Lorena  Sarafico. Some of our new writers didn't  make it in to the paper this issue, but we'd  like to welcome them on board anyway:  Astrid Dier, Brenda Wong, Christine  Pritchard.  And our new production volunteers are  Asha Bhat, Lorraine Suomi, and Juliet  O'Keefe.  Here's the don't-be-shy-come-on-down  (or if-you-have-some-free-time) part: If  you've ever wondered about paste up, what  a PMT is, what proofreading can do to your  life,orhowtousePagemakerorWordperfect  5.1, call 255-5499 for info about attending  one of our free workshops or volunteering  on the next issue of Kinesis.  For all you aspiring reporters out there,  the next writers' meeting is September 7.  Need we repeat our motto? Why not..."No  experience necessary."  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in July:  Marg Cooke • Cathie Cookson • Barbara Curran • Nancy Duff • Gloria Filax • Mary Frey  • F.E. Johnson • Cynthia Johnston • B. Karmazyn • Barbara Lebrasseur • Leanne  MacDonnell • Deborah Nilsen • Angela Page • Neil Power • Janet Riehm • Sheilah  Thompson • Shelagh Wilson • Women's Work Screen Print & Design Studio  We would also like to say a special thank you to those who have responded to our recent  appeal and whose support is so vital in this time of government cutbacks:  Cathy Aikenhead • Joanne Drake • Julie Elizabeth • Lynn Giraud • Jo Hinchcliffe • Eve  Johnson • Anne Kloppenborg • Diane Malley • Vera Mclntyre • Denise Nereida • Laura  Parkinson • Mary Schendlinger • Nora Sterling • Susan Stout • Ron Yamauchi • Gail  Zuccolini  It isalso time to thank some dedicated volunteers! To all those who have worked so hard  in the VSW Resourceand Referral Centre this summer answering phones, reorganizing files,  stampingbooks, shelving periodicals, helping women use the Resource Centre and a million  other tasks, thank you from all of us at VSW: Burcu • Carol • Christine • Janet • Jennifer  • Lon-aine • Manisha • Nahid • Roisin • Ruin • Shamsah • Shere  SEPTEMBER 1993 News  North American Free Trade Agreement:  Not a done deal  by Jackie Brown  Despite widespread opposition from  women's, labour, and environmental  groups, politicians in Canada, the United  States and Mexico are moving to finalize  details of the proposed North AmericanFree  Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in time for its  scheduled ratification in January, 1994.  As feminist organizations have pointed  out, women—and particularly women in  Mexico—stand to lose the most if NAFTA  becomes a reality. Corporations waving the  free enterprise flag will shift their operations  to cheap labour sites, drive wages down and  damage the environment. They will also  pressure governments to help them "stay  competitive in the global marketplace" by  reducing employer contributions to health  care, unemployment insurance and other  social safety nets.  With the completion in August of side  deals designed to protect workers and the  environment from "bad" corporations [see  box], it doesn't look good for NAFTA's opponents, who have repeatedly warned that  the deal will mean the loss of thousands of  jobs in Canada and erode the country's social programs.  "There is a lot of  optimism that  Congress won't  go for it."  -Michele Swarnachuk  ir% r ''!*{« i  But all is not necessarily lost. The federal political process in terms of NAFTA in  Canada may be over, but the deal has yet to  be ratified. There also remains the matter of  a soon-to-be called federal election: depending on how much of an election issue NAFTA  becomes, it could be in for trouble.  And in the US, NAFTA has not been  approved by the Senate or the House of  Representatives (Congress)—both of which  must say "yes" before it can become law.  While N AFTA is expected to get through the  Senate, there is considerable opposition  within Congress, which even President  Clinton has admitted will be a tough sell.  A further complication comes in the  form of a recent ruling by a US District Court  judge who said the National Environmental  Policy Act requires that an environmental  impact study be conducted before NAFTA  is passed. The judge was ruling on a lawsuit  launched by a number of environmental  organizations. If the judge's decision stands  (the Clinton administration is appealing), an  impact study could take months or even  years and, according to some Washington  ana lysts, could have a serious impact on the  "momentum" Clinton needs to sell NAFTA  to Congress.  For Michele Swarnachuk of the Canadian Environmental Law Association—one  of numerous environmental organizations  in Canada opposed to NAFTA—there is still  room for optimism. She believes there is a  "verygood chance" that Congress will reject  In August, following some pre-election "stand-up-to-the-US"-type sword waving,  Prime Minister Kim Campbell joined with US President Bill Clinton and Mexico's President  Carlos Salinas de Gortari in agreeing to labour and environmental side deals. All three  countries have now approved NAFTA's basic text.  The side deals are designed to protect workers and the environment by ensuring that  each country enforces its environmental and labour laws. The process was initiated by  President Bill Clinton as a means of selling NAFTA to the US Congress. Congressional  representatives were concerned that US companies would be drawn to Mexico because of its  low wages and lax environmental standards and thus affect employment at home.  The side agreements do not require the countries to make improvements in terms of  worker rights and environmental protection but will establish two commissions and tri-  national arbitration panels to hear and rule on disputes.  The commissions will try to settle disputes informally; if that doesn't work, they will go  to an arbitration panel. While this panel has the power to fine violators up to $20 million, the  accuser must prove that the country in question has a "persistent pattern of failure" in  enforcing its laws. And the panels are limited as to what they can deal with: they can hear  occupational health and safety, minimum wage, and child labour complaints only; they  cannot address collective bargaining or strike issues that may arise because of NAFTA.  Not surprisingly, the side agreements are under attack from various quarters as virtually  useless. Besides not requiring countries to improve on labour and environmental standards—thus limiting worker and environmental protection-critics say the side deals do  nothing to prevent corporations from moving to jurisdictions with poor labour and  environmental standards, thus further exploiting workers and contributing to environmental damage.  And, while the panels can levy fines against a country, it is not the offending corporation  but the government—that is, the taxpayers—who will foot the bill.  In a press release issued shortly after the side deals were announced, the Canadian  Environmental Law Association levelled these additional criticisms:  •the enforcement procedure is long and complicated and will likely provide many  opportunities for political strategies to ensure the federal government is not ordered to pay  fines;  • the deals apply only to federal environmental laws although much environmental law  is provincial.;  •the deals do not protect Canada from US use of sanctions against Canadian environmental policy. As with lumber tariff problems, the US countervail laws remain in tact and  can be used against Canadian environmental policy.  the side agreements and thus threaten  NAFTA's future.  "This is just the beginning of the process  in the US Congress, where there is already  considerable opposition to NAFTA, including from House Majority Leader Dick  Gephart, which I understand is very significant. There isa lotof optimism thatCongress  won't go for it," Swarnachuk said.  She adds that "very strong" opposition  to NAFTA throughout the US is expected to  have a significant impact on the House.  Much will depend on the anti-NAFTA  lobby in Washington, which, like its pro-  N AFTA counterpart, is turning up the heat  on Congress. Swarnachuk says the strategy  includes "a lot of knocking on doors" to  remind politicians that their political futures  depend on NAFTA.  WhileCanada has its political lobbyists,  the system here does not compare to Wash  ington's, where lobbying and deal-making  on behalf of well-financed interest groups  play an integral role in the political process  and wield tremendous clout over decision  makers. With the general public already concerned over rising unemployment, health  care, and other issues, Congressional representatives are expected to weigh carefully  the political consequences of approving an  agreement that many say will hurt American workers and the environment.  In the meantime, organizations like the  National Action Committee on the Status of  Women (NAC) and Women to Women Global Strategies plan to make NAFTA a key  election issue.  NAC President Sunera Thobani is optimistic that NAC and other organizations  opposed to NAFTA can make a difference.  "It looks depressing right now but we're  not giving up," says Thobani. "We're going  to make NAFTA an election issue and tie it to  women's unemployment and increasing  poverty, the erosion of social programs and  other issues that affect women's lives.  NAFTA affects all of these issues." And, she  says, NAC will also emphasize the crisis in  democracy NAFTA represents.  "The majority of people oppose free  trade and NAFTA, but it has been rammed  through by a handful of politicians anyway," says Thobani. "NAC's fight will include drawing attention to the lack of accountability of politicians and the undermining of the democractic process in Canada.  There is a need to make long-term structural  changes or Canada will continue to run headlong into destruction."  mm  NAFTA opponents must  be prepared  for a long-term fight.  MW^^MWf  Thobani says as Canadians continue to  feel the negative effects of the Free Trade  Agreement—and NAFTA if it comes into  being—they will fight backand demand that  government make immediateand long-term  changes. That could begin with the election  campaign if NAFTA captures attention and  more Canadians voice their concerns to pro-  N AFTA Conservative and Liberal party candidates.  Miriam Palacias, a member of Woman  to Woman Global Strategies and Oxfam,  says she is still hopeful that NAFTA can be  stopped or delayed by such strategies as the  lawsuit launched by US environmental  groups.  But, she says, even if NAFTA is ratified,  it is still possible to erect obstacles to prevent  corporations from taking advantage of the  deal and further exploiting women and the  environment.  Noting that NAFTA is but one component of a global strategy that involves multinationals doing what they want, where they  want, until someone tries to stop them,  Palacias says NAFTA opponents must be  prepared for a long-term fight.  "From my perspectiveas someone from  a third world country where we are always  fighting undemocratic policies, I know the  power of the corporate agenda is incredible.  We have to be very clear about this. It represents a great enemy and NAFTA is only one  small component of a global economic fight."  Palacias says Woman to Woman Global  Strategies also plans to make NAFTA an  election issue and will be working with NAC  to plan a strategy to oust the Conservatives.  While she says a NDP victory would certainly be good since the party is the only one  on record as being opposed to NAFTA, the  election outcome won't change the reality of  the corporate agenda and the need to continue fighting.  Jackie Bro  s a freelan  titer liv\  <\' >■  SEPTEMBER 1993 News  Women's Monument Project:  Facing the  backlash  by Mariam Bouchoutrouch  When women in Vancouver came up  with the idea of building a monument to  women, "for all the women murdered by  men; for women of all countries, all classes,  all ages, all colours," they found themselves  confronted by a massive backlash.  Mainstream media's male columnists  and men from all over the province screamed  "reverse sexism." They pounced on the  words "for all the women murdered by  men" and complained that the phrase implies that all men murder women.  But the only group the inscription refers  to is male murderers, say Kelly Phillips and  Cate Jones of the Women's Monument Pro ject  (WMP).  Members of WMP voted in August to  keep the wording of the planned inscription  as is, and not to let the backlash undermine  the project.  "We decided that by stating who the  perpetrators are (men), we're dealing with  the issue," says Jones. She points out that  changing the words to read, "for all the  victims of violent crime," as some columnists have demanded, would fail to address  reality. For example, Jones says, reality is  that, between 1974 and 1990, the 98 percent  of the women murdered in Ontario were  killed by men.  WMP initially came up with the idea to  build a permanent monument after 14  women were murdered by a man on December 6,1989 in a Universite de Montreal engineering class. Since the Montreal Massacre,  December 6th has been declared a National  Day of Remembrance and women across  Canada have built monuments to women  murdered by men. Most were built, in part,  to address the fact that the identities of the  women killed by men are often erased from  history, while those of their murderers are  often recorded.  When the project was first announced,  some women opposed the idea of building a  monument focusing only on the 14 women.  Women Against Violence Against  Women RapeCrisisCentre (WAV AW) wrote  a letter to WMP expressing concern that  focusing only on the women killed in the  Montreal Massacre would "glorify" those  women, and ignore other women who have  been killed by men.  However, says WAVAW's Andrea Yim,  who wrote the letter, the inscription now  clearly recognizes all women murdered by  men.  The full text of the proposed inscription  reads: "In memory and in grief/ for all the  women murdered by men/for womenof all  countries, all classes, all ages, all colours/  We, their sisters and brothers/ remember,  and work for a better world."  "This [inscription] is holding the men  who murder to account," says Ta mara Gorin  of Vancouver Ra pe Relief and Women's Shelter. "And what we're dealing with out there  isa media backlash against women demanding a public acknowledgment of violence  against women."  Gorin says she hopes the monument  will help to educate the public on the realities of male violence but is concerned that,  like the National Day of Remembrance, it  may become just another "memorial that  people attend, but don't necessarily remember the women that are out there surviving  every day, and working to end male violence."  "It's like when feminists demanded a  National Day of Action, and the Federal  Government gave us a Day of Remembrance," she says.  She says that the Women's Monument  could have focused on the women acting  against male violence, the survivors and not  the victims.  There have been other concerns expressed in the women's community about  how useful a monument is, given that, over  the last ten years, funding for direct services  and for women's groups that advocate social change have been severely cut by the  Tory government and women are fighting  for their lives against the daily assaults of a  violent patriarchal society.  Building a monument "is not what we  identify as a priority ourselves, right now,"  says Chris Rahim of the Vancouver Status of  Women (VSW). "Frontline workers against  male violence are working with less money  than ever," says Rahim. "And the tremendous racist backlash right now against  women of colour and Aboriginal women  particularly demands our immediate attention."  But, she adds, "like most women's organizations, we support women who choose  to make any contribution they see fit to end  male violence against women. The monument project aims to show people that these  things occur. It's going to be visible and that  is good. It will be a reminder."  Jones agrees. WMP has "taken one aspect of what is wrong in our society and tried  to make a contribution," she says.  The project has also been criticized in  the mainstream media for taking funding  away from women's groups. WMP estimates  it will cost about $300,000 to build the monument.  Rape Relief's Gorin, however, points  out that, since "there's little or no funding for  women any way...if these women build a  Pride Day in Vancouver  This year's Pride Day march in Vancouver was the biggest ever. Not bad,  considering the march almost didn't happen.  Eight weeks before Pride Day, an ad-hoc group ot volunteers stepped in to form  the Pride Day Committee. It usually takes months to plan and produce the event.  But by Pride Day, the Committee had raised money, recruited volunteers, and  planned a new, longer route for the parade.  About 10,000 people showed up for the parade and post-parade concert on  August 2. Organizers say that tops the attendance of the parade during Celebration  90, when thousands descended on the city for the Gay Games.  There were a number of firsts this year: there were more floats than ever before;  the route of the parade was extended to include Denman Street, a major  commercial street in the West End; and, hey, all the politicians running for the  major federal parties in the riding of Vancouver Centre were out in force. (The  Progressive Conservatives' Kim Campbell sent a troupe of pink-capped men in  her stead. The prime minister was tied up, and couldn't attend).  The New Democratic Party's Betty Baxter and the Liberals' Hedy Fry both spoke  briefly at the post-parade celebrations on Sunset Beach. A pink-capped Tory  read a letter from Campbell to boos (and an occasional cheer) from the crowd.  Another first was the Two-Spirited First Nations and Lesbians and Gays of colour  float [see picture]. The truck was one of the biggest in the parade, and the music  among the loudest. Taiko drummers—Vancouver's River Sui and Toronto's  Tamai Kobayashi—entertained the crowd, while about 30 mostly lesbian marchers  danced alongside.  monument, and people are willing to give  them money, then we have nothing against  them."  She adds that men and the media should  stop attacking women's groups about funding the project and start asking the government why there isn't more core funding for  direct service organizations.  WMP's Jones explains that fund-raising  for the project will come mostly in the form  of artistic grants from Canada Council, for  example, which are not normally given to  direct services, and from architectural, engineering and other such companies.  The Canada Council gives monies to  artistic and cultural organizations towards  project costs and acquisitions of works of  art.  "Because of the cultural aspect," and  because WMP is stressing that the monument will be a work of art, "many of our  donors are giving [funds] to the issue of  violence against women for the first time,"  says Jones.  "The issue of violence against women  will be talked about in places it wouldn't  normally be discussed," and the donors may  be likely to give again to the issue. Jones says  that a list of donors will also be made available to other women's groups.  Mariam Bouchoutrouch is a first-time  writer for Kinesis.  PARAGRAPH  EastsIcIe DataGraphics.  1460 Commercial Drjve  teI: 255-9559 Fax: 255^075  OfficE SuppliEs  ..Unjon Shop  CaU or fAX ancI we'U sencJ you our MONTkly flyER of qREAT  officE supply spEciAls. Free NEXT'dAy dslivERy.  TOPICAL  VATIC  MUSCULAR  REFRESHING  NYMPHOLEPTIC  COAST TO COAST  $14 one year  S26 two years  (GST included)  PARAGRAPH  137 Birmingham Street  Stratford, Ontario  N5A 2T1  SEPTEMBER 1993 News  Canadian Panet on Violence Against Women:  What else is new?  by Johannah Pilot and  Jackie Brown  After $10 million and over two years  work, the federal panel on violence against  women has released a final report called  Changing the Landscape: Ending the Violence—  Achieving Equality.  But many women's groups say the report is a far cry from ending male violence  against women or achieving equality for  women.  While the report is exhaustive both in  terms of content and recommendations—  there are 494 in all—women's organizations  say it contains nothing new and recommendations fall short of what is necessary to end  male violence. And in light of the federal  government's history of inaction and regressive policies around male violence and other  issues of importance to women, it also seems  unlikely that anything will come of the recommendations.  Sunera Thobani of the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC)  has little good to say about most of the  report.  "It is a step backward for women and  women's groups in Canada because many  of the recommendations are weak and are  not prioritized, there is no specific time frame  for their implementation, and there is no  indication of where the money (to carry out  the recommendations) is going to come  from."  Mary Collins, the minister responsible  for the status of women, responded to the  panel's report by claiming her government  does not have a "magic wand to cure all of  society's problems" and cannot be expected  to implement all of the nearly 500 recommendations. Collins also says there will be  no new monies for social programs.  Describing Collins' response as "absolutely trite," Thobani says NAC's objective  is to "defeat the neo-conservative agenda"  and raise concerns about women's equality  with all candidates in the upcoming federal  election.  She adds that this is a "critical election to  stop federal government attacks on women  and immigrant communities and to fight for  the universality of social programs."  Calling Collins' response "dumb," Lee  Lakeman of Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter says Collins is attempting  to absolve the federal government of its  responsibility and to dump the responsibility for violence against women on individuals and communities.  "Of course, the federal government is  supposed to address social problems and  deal with the equality of its citizens. We need  to know what they are going to act on and  what they are going to give women's groups  to further our work."  The Panel's report and  recommendations  The report provides a lengthy description of violence against women. Some recommendations from the report are:  •Set national standards for service delivery; for example, a crisis line in every  community;  •Establish compulsory sex education,  life skills education and media literacy programs;  •Provide financial and other resources  for the full participation of Aboriginal and  Inuit women's organizations at all stages of  negotiation, development and implementation of self-government;  •Change, through legislation, the  grounds for granting refugee status to ex  plicitly recognize persecution on the basis of  gender;  •Add sexual orientation as one of the  prohibited grounds for discrimination in the  Canadian Human Rights Act, without limitation with respect to the definition of family  or marital status;  •Reinstate and expand the court challenges program;  •Implement mandatory gender and  race sensitivity training for legal personnel;  •Implement a national childcare program;  •Provide on-going funding to all services for short-term, medium and long-term  planning. Core funding is recommended for  community based services such as women's  shelters, sexual assault centres, rape crisis  centres and women's centres.  ...one long example of  non-accountability"  -Zara Suleman  **—***»********  mmm  In addition to the 494 recommendations, the report asks every individual, community, government and institution in  Canada to commit to the equality and safety  of women. And it calls for every person and  organization in Canada to adopt a "zero  tolerance" policy which "affirms that no  amount of violence is acceptable and commits to the provision of adequate resources  to eliminate violence and achieve equality."  Thobani rejects the notion of "zero tolerance" as insulting: "If there is tolerance for  violence against women, it is from the federal government, not the women's movement [which] has been working very hard to  end violence against women."  "Commitment from government is not  enough," says Cenen Bagon from the Vancouver Committee for Domestic Workers  and Caregivers Rights. "What we need are  changes to legislation and policy."  And Thobani calls the report fundamentally flawed.  "It lacks any real perspective and understanding of the power relations in our  society" that give men the power to abuse  and control women.  Shirley Masuda of the DisAbled Women's Network Canada (DAWN) is also critical of the report, and especially its approach  to women with disabilities. The report portrays women with disabilities as helpless  and dependent, rather than as women who  are more vulnerable to male attacks because  of their disabilities and the lack of accessible  resources and services, she says.  The report also calls upon governments  and institutions to consult with front-line  anti-violence groups who have been doing  the work and devising strategies for change.  But Lakeman says the manner in which  the panel is calling for consultation is meaningless.  "Consultation without the intention of  real change or the provision of resources to  enable consultation is deceit, and only diverts from the work that grassroots groups  need to be doing."  Lakeman and others also dismiss the  panel's call to enact a Status of Women Act.  According to the report, the Act should "iden-  Shrouded in secrecy reminiscent of the release of a federal budget, the Canadian Panel  on Violence Aganist Women released its report in Ottawa at the end of July without notifying  or providing copies to women's organizations.  Only a few of the representatives of women's organizations, who happened to be in  Ottawa or were able to get there on very short notice, attended the press conference and  received a copy of the report.  Lee Lakeman, a representative of Canadian Association of Sexual Assault Centres  (CASAC) was at the press conference. She questions the secrecy surrounding the report's  release.  "The government's decision to release it just prior to a long weekend can be seen as a way  of manipulating the debate," says Lakeman.  "It served to give the panel complete control over commentary and opinion about the  report." She adds that, if women's groups had not been able to get themselves to Ottawa and  respond immediately, there wouldn't have been any substantive comment on the report  from feminists.  Shirley Masuda from DisAbled Women's Network Canada (DAWN) says DAWN  representatives in Ottawa were not invited to the briefing, though "it is our right and business  to be there."  And Zara Suleman of Women Against Violence Against Women Rape Crisis Centre in  Vancouver (WAVAW) says this is typical of the way the Panel has operated since its  inception in 1991.  The Panel has been severely criticized in the past for its lack of accountability to the  women's movement and accessibility to women in Canadian society. A year ago, four  national women's groups pulled out of the Panel's 23-member advisory committee after the  minister responsible for the status of women refused to hold consultations with national  women's groups or appoint women with disabilities and more women of colour to the panel.  The four organizations are NAC, DAWN, the Congress of Black Women, and CASAC.  The Panel followed up the controversy by releasing a 28-page progress report that  contained little new information and, in fact, was regressive, leaving out much of the political  context contained in a 1991 sub-parliamentary report, War Against Women [see Kinesis, Jul/  Aug and Sep/92.]  Says Suleman: "The panel members have not corrected their ways. It seems the panel has  been one long example of non-accountability, leaving front-line workers out and alienating  specific women's groups from their process."  Many women's groups are also suspicious of the government's motives, drawing a  direct link between the panel, the release of its report (originally expected in December last  year) and the upcoming federal election.  Raminder Dosanjh of the India Mahila Association (IMA) says what Canadian women  need is action to combat violence against women. Instead, says Dosanjh, we hear about "how  shocked the panel members were and how much they learned [during the process]. It seems  our [taxpayers'] money has been used to educate the panel members. Yet, anybody working  at the community level knows the issues, but rather than putting the money into direct  services, the government chose to once again 'research' the issues."  Dosanjh adds that if the IMA is not "at least issued a copy of the report for free, we won't  be getting one." The IMA, a 20-year-old organization working on issues of violence against  women in Vancouver's South Asian community, is entirely volunteer run, and receives no  government funding.  The Panel's report costs approximately $45, the Community Kit, designed to help local  communities develop and implement actionplans, costs approximately $18, and a half-hour  video, entitled Without Fear, which tells the stories of six Canadian women who have  survived abuse, costs approximately $18.  Dosanjh says, "the $10 million to study violence against women was an unnecessary and  useless effort," and seems to be more "a political stunt for pre-election."  WAVAW's Suleman suggests that, with the release of the report at this time and in this  way, "it seem like the government is just trying to create a public image that they are actually  doing something to stop violence against women, and that the panel has only assisted them  in doing so."  tify the specific obligations and responsibilities of the federal government to ensure that  the rights to equality and safety of all Canadian women are supported and advanced."  The Act would also include designating the  Minister Responsible for the Status of Women  as a senior minister and creating a permanent Advisory board.  Such recommendations, says Masuda,  will only serve to further entrench power  and control in the hands of government  bureaucrats rather than women and women's groups.  Women  m**\i\*m**tmw*vm**i\  lso highly critical of what  they say the report does not recommend.  For instance, says Lakeman, "they do  not recommend that the federal government  co-operate with women's groups." She says  the report also fails to acknowledge that  many of their recommendations contravene  and contradict Tory policy and practice over  the past 10 years. Instead, it suggests that  women's services have been hit hard because of the'  But says Lakeman, "women's groups  are not suffering from the recession, we are  suffering from regressive Tory policies.  "They never once say that the conservative agenda is wrong-headed and should be  reversed if it is going to serve the interests of  women in this country."  While Lakeman is skeptical that the federal governmentwill take any actionaround  the report, she fears that if they do "they'll  act only on the recommendations that won't  interfere with their conservative agenda or  cost them money.  "This government, in the last 10 years,  has spent an enormous amount of money in  the name of [ending] violence against  women—sometimes in the guise of research  and increased government bureaucracy—  but very little of the money has gone to  women's groups. Ultimately, they haven't  transformed anything."  Johannah Pilot is a volunteer writer for  Kinesis. Jackie Brown is a freelance writer  living in Vancouver.  SEPTEMBER 1993 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  by Manisha Singh  being invited to India to tell the Indians how  to do it, but rather to share information, to  learn from one another and to seek some  solutions which we can all work on together."  Conference organizers have been able  to raise funds to cover the expenses of Canadian participants while they are inlndia, but  have asked Canadians to pay for their own  airfare. Anyone interested in attending the  conference, or fund-raising for travel expenses, should contact Chris at the Vancouver Status of Women at 255-5511 or Fawzia  at Women Aga inst Violence Against Women  Rape Crisis Centre at 255-6228.  Break in at  Sister Vision Press  Sister Vision Press, an independent Black  women and women of colour press, which  has been publishing and supporting writers  of colour since its inception eight years ago,  was broken into in August. Computer equipment, containing information vital to the  running of the publishing house, manuscripts, other equipment, back-up disks, and  money were stolen.  The break-in is a setback for Sister Vision Press and its publishing schedule and  the loss of the organization's vital records is  expected to result in further lost revenue for  the Press.  However, Sister Vision says it will continue its publishing mandate in an attempt  to regain the ground lost.  Sister Vision is asking for support from  community groups, individuals and organizations in the following areas: financial contributions, volunteer time, groups to organize benefits, cultural workers to donate their  talents, and donations of space to hold ben-  etits.  To show support, please call Sister Vision at (416) 533-2184 or write to: Sister  Vision Press, PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto,  Ontario, M6H 4E2.  Philippine lesbians  organize  LINK is a new lesbian organization in  the Philippines, and possibly the first.  Based in Davao City, LINK says their  objective is "to help lesbians build their capabilities and communications for a better  quality of life" through workshops, seminars, training and AIDS prevention work.  Part of their action plan also includes building a lesbian cooperative. LINK operates  with limited funds, so any help would be  appreciated. For more information write:  LINK Davao, PO Box 81532, Davao City,  Philippines.  India/Canada  grassroots conference  SNDT Women's University in India is  organizing a conference called India/Canada  Grassroots Conference/Consultation on Violence  Against Women/Women Against Violence.  The conference is scheduled to take place  from December 13-17,1993.  According to the organizers, the conference will bring together 20 grassroots community activists from each country to share  information and build coalitions.  Domestic violence, sexual assault,  femicide, sexual exploitation of children,  pornography and traffickingaresomeof the  issues on the agenda.  The organizers intend the discussion to  centre not only on the violence being perpetrated but also on the causes and on the  means being adopted to combat violence.  Organizers stress that "Canadians are not  NDP health  conference  The Making It Work: New Directions In  Health Conference is being held on October  20-23 at The Coast Plaza in Vancouver. The  conference will look at some of the initiatives being proposed by the BC government's Neiv Directions in Health program  and at restructuring the province's health  care system.  For information on the conference, call  261-3478. The Coast Plaza at Stanley Park is  at 1733 Comox, Vancouver.  500/500 Lesbian  Space Project  The 500/500 Lesbian Space Project (LSP)  aims to raise 250,000 pounds by December  10 to buy a building so they can set up the  world's first lesbian-owned lesbian cultural  and community centre inSydney, Australia.  They aim to network world-wide and  provide facilities for local, national and international lesbiansand lesbian groups. LSP  would like the centre to be a venue for  international lesbian conferences and all expressions of lesbian entertainment.  For more information or to send donations, write to: Lesbian Space Project, Box  503, Glebe NSW, 2037 Australia.  African Women's  Human Rights  A new African Women's Human Rights  Networkhasbeen launched in Bamako, Mali.  The network, called Reseau Femmes  Africanise et Droit Humans (REFAD), will  stress the importance of law as an instrument for positive social change.  The network aims to facilitate links between women in the region and to integrate  West African women's human rights into  efforts to increase South-South cooperation.  For more information write: International Centre for Human Rights and Democratic Development, 63 rue de Bresoles,  Montreal, Quebec, H2Y 1V7.  IDEP is also asking individuals and  groups to sign the "Call to the Peoples of the  United Nations" which will be presented to  the Secretary General of the United Nations  by a delegation of poor families from all over  the world on October 17,1994, on the occasion of the International Year of the Family.  For additional information write: The  International Day Committee for the Eradication of Poverty, 6747 Drolet, Montreal,  Quebec, H2S 2T1, or contact the National  Anti-Poverty Organization, 316-256 King  Edward Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario KIN 7M1.  Israeli Women  oppose "bad law"  The Israel Women's Network reports  that Israel's major women's organizations  havejoined forces to oppose Section21 of the  first written constitution proposed for the  state of Israel.  Section 21 leaves matters of marriage  and divorce in the hands of religious courts.  Women's groups say that the proposed  constitutional protection from discrimination ba sed on sex, among other things, would  not apply to the most severe discrimination  experienced by women in Israel—inequities  in marriage and divorce.  Despite other new constitutional benefits, women's groups in Israel are taking the  position that "it is better to have no law than  to have a bad law."  International  Day for poor  Jamaica rules  for women  Jamaica has amended its constitution to  eliminate sex discrimination in citizenship.  The amended constitution now qualifies either parent to bestow citizenship on a child  born outside of Jamaica, whether the child  was born in or out of wedlock.  The amendment also gives both male  and female spouses of Jamaican citizens the  right to acquire Jamaican citizenship.  1994 Year of the  (Institutional) Family  The 1994 United Nations Year of The  Family should not be used as a pretext for  oppressive action in the name of the family,  says a resolution adopted by a regional workshop of the Asia Pacific Forum on Women,  Law and Development in Bangladesh in  October 1992.  The resolution expresses concern "that  reinforcement of The Family as a social institution will result in the state abdicating its  social and economic obligations."  October 17 marks the International Day  for the Eradication of Poverty.  The International Day Committee for  the Eradication of Poverty (IDEP) says October 17 is a day "for those who have survived,  or are still living in poverty [and] a day when  poor people from all over the world will  speak. In their own words, and with their  own ideas, they will invite everyone to act,  on all levels, to show nations that poverty is  not inevitable."  IDEP is asking people to participate by  testifying on the effects of poverty; by suggesting ideas on what needs to be done to  escape poverty and to build solidarity with  the very poor; and by proposing activities  for October 17.  inFebfuay-92.  vA^vsubscrtwi Send  a R3C2G1.  It also says it will "negate the efforts of  the women's movement globally to expose  the historically oppressive aspects of this  institution" and that "the very specific notion of the family that is being promoted  excludes and isolates all those other supportive relationships that exist outside the  institutionalized family arrangement."  For more information contact: Regional  Coordinator, APWALD, Asian and Pacific  Development Centre Building, Pesiaran  Duta, PO Box 12224, Kuala Lumpur, Malay-  Research money for  women's education  The Research Priorities for Female Education in Africa Program was established  recently by the African Academy of Science  to promote the long-term improvement of  female education in Africa. The programme  gives grants to individuals, researchers, governments or NGOs.  For more information contact: African  Academy of Sciences, PO Box 14798, Nairobi, Kenya.  New booklet on  lesbian battering  The London Battered Women's Advocacy Centre has just written and produced a  new booklet on violence in lesbian relationships called Confronting Lesbian Battering.  For a copy, write: The London Battered  Women's Advocacy Centre, 69 Wellington  Street, London, Ontario N6B 2K4.  Bed & Breakfast  A  Memorable  Escape  Centre Yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of Canada's beautiful, natural  Gulf Islands  5 acres of forested foot paths  trails with ponds  ocean and mountain views  Decadent Breakfasts  Hot Tub  A private retreat  (604) 537-9344  Mail: R.R.#2, S-23, B-0, Ganges, B.C. VOS 1E0  6  SEPTEMBER 1993 Movement Matters  /M'  For children  survivors  Good Things Can Still Happen, an animated film for therapists and other professionals to use with children who have been  sexually abused is now available from the  National Film Board of Canada.  Good Things is an innovative tool to help  break the cycle of abuse and to help prevent  the emotional turmoil that survivors suffers.  For more information, contact Jan  Clemson at 666-3838 in Vancouver.  Indian constitutional  amendment  In a move to increase women's participation in public life, the Indian Constitution  was recently amended to reserve for women  one-third of the seats in the elected governing bodies of villages and municipalities  across the country.  The National Commission for Women  in New Delhi reports that this new measure  will empower 80,000 women countrywide  to head village and district-level governing  bodies.  New Japanese  women s newsletter  Yokohama Women's Forum is anew bian-  nual English newsletter produced in  Yokohama, Japan.  A primary aim of the newsletter is to  change international stereotypes of Japan  and Japanese women, and to provide space  for the voices of Japanese women.  For more information or a subscription  write: Yokohama Women's Association for  Communication and Networking, 435-1  Kamikurata-Cho, Totsuka, Yokohama, 244  Japan.  New journal for  survivors launched  Courage, a new Montreal-based journal  of poetry, personal testimony and artwork  by female survivors of incest, has just  launched its first issue.  If you are interested in a copy, have  submissions, or have time to work on the  next edition, please write: Courage c/o YWCA  Social Services, 1355 Rene-Levesque Blvd,  Montreal, Quebec, H3G 1T3.  by Lorraine Suomi  New books on  Welfare B.C.  The People's Law School is offering free  booklets on welfare in BC.  Welfare for Employable People and Welfarefor Unemployable Peop/e describe the types  of income assistance that are available, how  to defend your rights, and where to get help  if you need it.  Welfare Appeals explains what to do if  welfare has turned you down or refused to  give you a benefit you need.  Multiple copies of these booklets are  available at The People's Law School, 150-  900 Howe Street, Vancouver, BC, V6Z 2M4.  Telephone: 688-2565.  To order single copies, contact Legal  Services Society of BC, Box 3, Suite 300,1140  W. Pender Street, Vancouver, BC, V6E 4G1,  or drop by VSW at 301-1720 Grant St.  Friends of  Cuban lesbians  A solidarity group called Friends of  Lesbian & Gay Cuba (FOLGC) has been  formed in London by two British lesbians  who visited Cuba recently.  The group's main aim is to send newspapers, articles, and books to contacts in  Cuba. FOLGC has identified, in particular,  communities of lesbians and gays in Havana  and Santiago for the information.  There is presently a lack of lesbian and  gay organizations in Cuba and lesbians have  little access to information on lesbian and  gay issues.  To help establish the lesbian and gay  network in Cuba, FOLGC is requesting any  help, information (particularly written in  Spanish), or donations (cheques payable to  LSE Students' Union) to help offset mailing  costs. Please write: to FOLGC, c/o London  School of Economics Students' Union,  Houghton St., London, England EC2 A 2AE.  Technology, Work and  Ecology  A conference on Feminist Perspectives  on Technology, Work and Ecology will be  held in June 1994 in Graz, Austria.  The conference will focus on: feminist  approaches to ecology; technology, ecology  and work as challenges for women's education; information technology; and organisation.  For more information, write: Inter University Research Centre for Technology,  Work and Culture, Schlogelgasse 2, A-8010  Graz, Austria.  UN World Conference  on Women, Part 2  Several new publications have been set  up to provide information about the Fourth  United Nations World Conference on  Women. The conference will be held in Beijing, China, September 4 to 15,1995. The last  UN conference on women was held in 1985  in Nairobi, Kenya.  Conference '95 is a semi-annual newsletter published by the UN Conference Secretariat. It is available in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish, and may  be ordered from the Division for the Advancement of Women, PO Box 500, A-1400  Vienna, Austria  A special issue of The Tribune (No 50,  May 1993) contains a 16-page section entitled "95 Preview," with background information and news about the World Conference. To order, send $4 (US) to the International Women's Tribune Centre, 777 UN  Plaza, New York, New York 10017, USA.  Women's Envision will provide the latest  information for the preparation for the Conference. Women's groups interested in sending representatives to the conference or participating in other ways are invited to write  about developments in their countries and  regions to: ISIS International, PO Box 1837,  Quezon City Main, Quezon City 1100, Philippines. Twelve issues cost $25 (US).  The purpose of the Beijing conference is  to define a platform of action for the United  NationsCommission on theStatusof Women  for dismantling obstacles to the advancement of the majority of women in the world.  This time, specific discrimination against  lesbians is being included in the conference's agenda. The conference's main organizer is Secretary General of the conference, Gertrude Mongella, the minister for  women's affairs in Tanzania. Mongella also  played a key role in the organization of the  Nairobi conference.  International Women  and Health  The Seventh International Women and  Health Meeting takes place in Kampala,  Uganda in September.  The conference will focus on global concerns for women's health; reproductive  rights; social, political and economic factors  influencing women's health; and community support for women's health.  The conference also aims to identify  local, regional and international strategies  for action.  For more information, write: The Coordinator, 7th IWHM, PO Box 1191, Kampala,  Uganda.  Women Empowering  Communication  A conference called Women Em powering Communication is slated to take place in  Nonthaburi,Thailand on February 12-19next  year.  Theobjectivesofthisconferenceinclude:  reassessing media-related strategies adopted  during the end of the Women's Decade in  1985 and planning new strategies for the  next decade;and stimulating ideasand resolutions related to women in communication  to feed into the next UN Women's Conference in Beijing.  For more information, write: Teresita  Hermano, WACC Director forCommunica-  tion Education, 3547 Kennington Lane, London, SEII 5QY England.  Back to school survival guide  by Jenny Mitchell  BACK-TO-SCHOOL SURVIVAL GUIDE FOR WOMEN  By Nora D. Randall  Vancouver, BC: BC Network of the Canadian Congress for Learning Opportunities for  Women, 1992  A new handbook draws on women's experiences with education and training to help  women in British Columbia cope with the job losses and education cutbacks of the 90s.  Shauna Butterwick, project director of the 160-page Back-to-School Survival Guide For  Women, says the cost of economic restructuring in Canada has been largely borne by women.  "Women are losing their jobs at a faster rate than men. At the same time, government-  funded job training has become more difficult for women to access because of changes in  eligibility criteria, and information and counselling for women have been greatly reduced."  Butterwick represents the Women's Employment and Training Coalition of the Women's Reference Group. The figures in the Survival Guide handbook show an actual decline in  training assistance for women at this critical time.  "In spite of the Conservative government's boast that they're spending more money on  training," says Butterwick, "the reality is that funding for women's training programs has  been cut by over 20 percent during the past two years."  Political change is critical to improving the situation. But in the meantime, the Back-to-  School Guide is intended to help BC women make the most of what's left, and it covers a full  range of education and training opportunities.  Written by Nora D. Randall, the Guide's format—diary-sized and spiral-bound—  matches the practicality of the content. Randall wrote the guide with volunteer assistance  from individuals and the book's publishers, the BC Network of the Canadian Congress for  Learning Opportunities for Women (CCLOW). CCLOW is a nationwide volunteer group  promoting equal education and training opportunities for women.  Due to the fast pace of change, especially given the way social programs are being cut  back these days, Randall has focused on helping readers learn to do their own research. She  also provides examples of existing programs, contact names at key organizations, a  descriptive bibliography, and a complete list of post-secondary educational/training institutions in BC.  Topics covered by the Back-To-School Survival Guide For Women include: researching  career options and the job market; time and family management; government-funded  training; services for immigrant women; completing high school; distance education; private  education; colleges and universities; and opportunities in sciences, trades and technologies.  Randall includes a look at the experiences of 29 women who went back to school—and  survived. The result is a readable, upbeat and empowering guidebook, where women share  anecdotes of the often-ingenious ways they handle family and financial problems, sort out  their needs, or convince bureaucracies to "bend the rules" a little.  "I wanted the book to be useful," says Randall. "One thing I tried to get across was that  it wasn't going to be easy, but that it would be worth it."  In fact, after "anyone can do it,"—the most forthright point in the book—comes "never  take no for an answer." The book relates how women eventually got what had initially been  refused them. Learning they did it is one of the things that makes the book truly useful. The  project, which took more than two years to complete, was inspired by a back-to-school guide  that was published by CCLOW's New Brunswick network.  Butterwick and Randall say they hope the Back-To-School Guide will eventually be  distributed province-wide through women's centres and Employment and Immigration  Canada.  Croup or individual orders for the book can be sent to CCLOW—BC Network c/o  Bonjour Books, #230-8711 Backwith Road, Richmond, BC, V6X 1V4 or call 278-5529, or toll-  free 1-800-665-8002. While supplies last, the guide is free for women who cannot afford the  S10-plus-S3.75 shipping cost.  Je,  i/ Mitchell is a first-time writer for Kir  SEPTEMBER 1993 What's News  by Lissa Geller  Sexism in the  justice system  Yet another report that slams the Canadian judicial system for its sexist treatment  of women was released in July. And it was  met with yet another lukewarm endorsement from the federal government, which  "accepts the spirit of the report."  But, while the report acknowledges the  deep-rooted sexism of thelegal system, women's groups are skeptical that it will lead to  any real changes, particularly given the lack  of commitment shown so far by the governments in Canada to implementing the report's recommendations.  "It's absolutely meaningless to say they  [thegovernmentjacceptitinspirit. We want  to see concrete changes made to the justice  system," says Sunera Thobani of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women.  Thobani also questions the Tory government's commitment to change. She points  out that the report, produced by the Working Group of Attorney General Officials,  was completed over a year ago but not released until July this year.  The report, which is titled Gender Equality in the Canadian Justice System, highlights  the profound discrimination facing women  in every area of the justice system, from tax  to pension laws, to legal aid and prosecution  of sexual assault cases.  The report notes that the justice system  in Canada "has been developed and maintained primarily by men.." and that women's traditional role in the system has been  that of "victim or witness." Since the system  was designed by and for men, it "fails to  ensure equal protection" for women.  The report specifically identifies pervasive sexism on television and advertising as  contributing to violence against women.  "Aggression against women occurs on a  spectrum of activity which moves from nonspecific to specific; from a simple advertisement for automobiles or beer in association  with barely-clad women, to murder. The  state of mind of the aggressor is only a  question of degree," conclude the writers.  The more than 125 recommendations  range from appointing more women judges  (currently only about 10 percent of judges  are women) to recognizing the role pornography plays in violence against women, to  increasing services for women who are victims of violence.  Suki Beavers of the National Association of Women and the Law says "It's great  that we've got all these problems on the  table, but now we'd like some concrete solutions."  So far, only the Attorney General of  Ontario, Marion Boyd, has said that her  government will attempt to implement  changes recommended in the report.  Quebec women  demand rape shield  The demand foi lows a Montrea 1 j udge's  refusal to let a woman who was raped by  five men testify in a closed court. As a result,  one of her alleged rapists was set free after  the case against him was then dismissed for  lack of evidence.  Women survivors of rape "have already  lived through enough trauma," says Jacynthe  Lambert, head of Regroupemen t Quebecois des  Centres d'Aides et Luttes Contreles Agressions  a Caractere Sexuel, a provincial association of  organizations fighting sexual assault. "Why  force them to act like Joan of Arc."  Lambert adds that making a woman  who has been sexual assaulted testify in  open court is a violation of her privacy.  The woman was raped when she was  16. She has already testified against four of  the men in camera in juvenile court. At a  preliminary hearing for the Crown's case  against the fifth man, who is over 19 and  therefore must be tried in adult court, she  requested her testimony be given in a closed  court because she feels ashamed about what  had happened to her.  Neither the defence nor the prosecution  objected to her request.  The judge, however, ruled that the fact  that she would be "uncomfortable" testifying in open court was not reason enough to  allow her a closed court hearing. He blamed  the woman's "stubbornness" for refusing to  "have at least tried" and said she has no legal  basis for requesting a closed court.  The Crown prosecutor is considering  an appealing of the ruling or possibly laying  another charge against the 22 year-old rapist. An appeal may not necessarily succeed  because, at present, the Quebec Court of  Appeal only allows in camera testimony if  the witness is not capable of testifying in an  open court.  The chief justice of the Quebec Court  has since told reporters that he does not  Quebec women's groups are demanding a new rape shield law for women who  have been sexually assaulted that will give  them the option of testifying in a court closed  to reporters and the public.  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183  believeclosed court hearings should be made  automatically available forall sexual assault  victims.  Women's groups say they will continue  to demand the law be changed to allow all  sexual assault victims the right to testify  behind closed doors if they wish.  Pro-choice uses anti-  stalking legislation  Pro-choice groups may fight back  against the constant harassment and threats  they have to deal with from "loose-cannon"  anti-choicers by using the federal government's new anti-stalking law.  The BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics  (BCCAC) met with BC Attorney General  Colin Gablemann to demand that the legislation be used to protect nurses, doctors and  otheremployeesandvolunteersatBC'sabor-  tion clinics and referral agencies.  BCCAC's Joy Thompsoncited threatening letters and phone calls she and others  had received, as well as being followed in  her car and harassed on the street. "If that's  not stalking and harassment, what is?" she  asks.  Theanti-sta Iking legislation was brought  into effect to deal primarily with women  who were being stalked by ex-partners. It  has been criticized by women's groups as  "gravely flawed" for its failure to recognize  thegender-basednatureofthecrime of stalking.  A number of women's groups oppose  the legislation, saying it could easily be used  by men to prevent women from calling them  to ask for late child support payments.  Women's organizations are cal ling for a  repeal of or amendments to the law, saying  it does more harm to women than good.  Moms lose child support tax case  by Agnes Huang  A North Vancouver woman has lost her  court challenge of a taxation law that discriminates against single moms.  Brenda Schaff took Revenue Canada to  the Tax Court of Canada earlier this year.  She argued that the tax law, which requires  her to include the child support payments  she receives as taxable income while giving  her ex-spouse a tax benefit, constitutes sex  and economic status discrimination. She said  that, as a "poor, female, single custodial  parent," the tax law violates her Charter  guarantees to equality (section 15) and "security of the person" (section 7).  In early August, Judge Gerald Rip ruled  that Schaff did not suffer discrimination on  either basis. Rip dismissed Schaff's sex equality arguments, using similar reasoning as in  an earlier case in Quebec filed by Suzanne  Thibaudeau.  Thibaudeau had also argued that taxing  child support she receives is discriminatory  on the basis of sex. The judge in that case  ruled that, while the application of the tax  law may result in unfairness for one party,  that does not mean the law is discriminatory.  He said the remedy for such a situation  lies in appealing to the Family Court system  for a variance in the child support amount.  Thibaudeau's case is currently under  appeal at the Federal Court of Appeal.  Schaff's other argument—that the tax  law impinged on her and her children's right  to the "security of the person" by imposing  an economic disadvantage on them—was  also rejected. Judge Rip ruled that the Tax  Act does not impair her ability to provide for  herself and her children the necessities of  life, nor does the Charter guarantee a minimum income or standard of living.  In his decision, Rip wrote that Schaff's  complaint was "misdirected" to the Tax  Court, and is a matter to be dealt with in the  Family Law Court system.  But Susan Milliken, a children's rights  advocate and a witness for Schaff at her  hearing, disagrees that this is not a tax law  issue. She says the tax law is discriminatory  in that it shifts the tax burden to the mother  and children.  "The tax law requires the mother to pay  the father's share of taxes on income he's  sharing with their children," says Milliken.  "The father is only paying part of the cost of  raising the children and receiving a tax break,  but the mother doesn't get a tax break."  In Schaff's case, tax implications were  not considered when child support was set  because she was living on social assistance.  Social assistance in not taxable. "To have  [tax implications] considered, you have to  have an income," says Schaff.  In 1990, when Schaff became employed  full-time, Schaff was required to pay taxes  on the child support she received. The onus  was on her to apply to the Family Law Court  for an increase in the child support to account for the tax consequences of earning an  income.  "There is an assumption that the family  law system is just, and that it will compensate for the mother's tax consequences, but it  will not, because of the complexity of the tax  system," says Milliken. As well, tax laws  change frequently.  Whiledenying discrimination occurred,  the judge conceded that poor, female, single  custodial parents constitute a "discrete and  insular minority" worthy of Charter protection.  Jeanne Watchuk, the lawyer who represented Schaff, says it is important the Tax  Court recognized the disadvantage of poor,  single mothers. "That the court accepted  poverty as a personal characteristic for Charter purposes is significant, and has future  implications in laws other than income tax,"  says Watchuk.  Schaff and her lawyer are still considering whether or not to appeal the Tax Court's  decision.  While acknowledging the criticisms of  the legislation raised by other women's  groups, Thompson says BCCAC will continue to press for its demands. "We will  continue to work in collaboration with women's organizations and shelters to call for  amendments to the legislation, but we need  protection too and we need it now," says  Thompson.  The Attorney General's office has not  decided whether or not to allow charges of  stalking and harassment to be laid against  anti-choice individuals who repeatedly  phone, harass, and threaten the lives of pro-  choice advocates, workers and women who  enter abortion clinics.  New birth  control pill  The federal government has approved  the sale in Canada of a new oral contraceptive for women called Marvelon. This pill  has been used in Europe for the past ten  years. Little is known of possible long-term  side-effects.  The manufacturersofthedrugalso claim  it reduces a woman's risk of heart disease by  adjusting cholesterol levels in the blood. No  studies have been done to indicate whether  this is true.  Bishop O'Connor  case intervention  The Aboriginal Women's Council, the  Canadian Association of Sexual Assault  Centres, the Disabled Women's Network  and the Women's Legal Education and Action Fund will be making a joint submission  Affordable therapy for           f\  women working on issues          \~-J  of self esteem, abuse,       /^^*\  depression and personal     / ) /=\ ( \  growth in a supportive      ( ( O ) )  environment.              ^0^/  Parlene Gage • Counsellor  254-375S  PATRICIA DUBBERLEY  BA, M.A.  Counsellor  • Healing Issues  ol Dysfunctional  Families and Abuse  Telephone: (604) 733-4523  • Enhancing  Relationships and  Sell-Esteem  #201 -2515 Burrard Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 3J6  • Individual, Couples.  Family and Group  Canada's largest feminist organization calls the  1993 federal election "critical for women".  Concerned voters will want to consult this easy-to-  read tour of issues vital to women's equality. The  NAC Voters Guide also includes questions to ask  candidates, summaries  of what the parties have  said—and how they've  voted on many of these  issues, PLUS a handy  rating sheet for your  candidates!  Special discount price is  available for orders of 50  guides. To place  bulk orders phone (800)  SEPTEMBER 1993 What's News  intervening in the case of a Roman Catholic  priest accused of sexually assaulting children and teenagers in his parish over the  past decade.  Bishop Hubert O'Connor was to stand  trial last fall, but the charges were stayed  after the Crown failed to disclose evidence to  the defence. The evidence consisted of notes  and tapes of interviews with the four victims, as well as the files of therapists and  other medical personnel who treated them.  The Crown is appealing the ruling, saying that disclosing the medical files would  amount to a breach of privacy. It is on that  basis that the four groups have been allowed  to intervene.  The groups are being restricted in what  they will be allowed to discuss during their  written and oral submissions. They are  allowed to make arguments regarding a victim's right to privacy in sexual assault cases  but cannot discuss the merits of the case  against O'Connor.  The Canadian Mental Health Association has also been given intervenor status  but will be making a separate submission.  Lesbians in former  Yugoslavia  Lesbians, among other womenin former  Yugoslavia, are under increasingattack from  the war-time governments in the region.  In Croatia, thegovernment has declared  that lesbian relationships threaten relations  between men and women, call into question  traditional roles of the sexes and, because  lesbians do not produce children, destroy  the hopes of a strong and united country.  "From the government's point of view,  a woman should only bea tool in the service  of perpetuating the nation.    Lesbians are  ©  Utility Assistant  (MALE/FEMALE)  GAS OPERATIONS  BC Gas is the supplier of natural gas to the  majority of households and businesses in  British Columbia. Ic is a dynamic and forward chinking company which provides  employees with a myriad of opportunities  for growth and advancement within the  system.  The operations group is seeking qualified  candidates with trades related background  to apply for the position of Utility  Assistant.  These entry level jobs located in the Lower  Mainland require a familiarity with work  on a construction job site or in a maintenance shop. The work environment may be  oucdoors or in a mechanical shop and  involves physical labor as well as the ability  to competently utilize tools and equipment.  Successful candidates must have:  •completed graduation from Grade 12  •demonstrated mechanical apcicude and  ability  •related work experience and/or pre-  apprentice trades training at a recognized  institution  •good communication and comprehension  sldlls  If you possess all of these qualifications, you  are invited to submit your resume quoting  file EL-080/93C to:  BC Gas Utility Ltd.  Human Resources Department  12th floor, 1111 West Georgia  Vancouver, B.C. V6E 4M4  Closing date: August 31, 1993.  No telephone calls please.  BC Gas is committed to a diverse workforce and we encourage qualified  women, aboriginal people and visible  ties to apply.    ^^  BCGasCfi) Naturally.  accused of not lovingCroatia and, therefore,  should be re-educated," says an article in the  Paris-based Lesbia Magazine.  The Croatian government is currently  developing a constitution that would deny  women without children housing and employment, and restrict a woman's right to  work if she has younger children. It also  restricts "a woman's workplace" to "appropriate" places, which excludes anything too  "rough or heavy."  Article 38 of the proposed constitution  allows that "the Republic should, with the  help of certain laws, and political intervention, struggle against everything that goes  against the family and marriage."  Although these laws have not yet been  enacted, there is considerable evidence that  repression of lesbians and other women,  particularly feminists, has become more and  more common and accepted in the region.  Reports from the Paris-based Collectifde  Feministes et de Lesbiennes en lutte avec les  Femmes et Lesbiennes d'ex-Yougoslavie indicate that women who counter the traditional  roles of women in Croatian society are "presented by the media propaganda as prostitutes, or crazy. If it is not written as such, it  is written as though lesbians do not even  exist, or worse, that they act as both destroyers of the state, and destroyers of the morals  of the state."  The Montreal-based collective, Actions  politique lesbiennes (APL) has organized  around this issue, not only to get the word  out about lesbian repression in Croatia, but  also to help women inside the former Yugoslavia fight this repression.  APL is encouraging women to send  money to a lesbian support group in Zagreb  to purchase office supplies, fax machines  and pay long distance bills. As well, the  support group could use books, magazines  or articles on lesbian/feminist issues, particularly to combat the isolation felt by the  women. APL forwards all money and goods  to Paris where they are convoyed to the  former Yugoslavia every three months.  For more information or to donate,  please contact the APL at C.P. 1721,  Succursale Place de Pare, Montreal, PQ H2W  2R7.  Diagnosing  women with HIV  Because men's symptoms are considered the standard in AIDS identification,  many women with HIV and AIDS are going  undiagnosed for months, perhaps years,  according to AIDS Nova Scotia spokesperson Rosanne LeBlanc.  LeBlanc notes that 65 percent of women  who die from AIDS are not diagnosed until  after death. This has meant that many women  are not receiving treatments that could prolong their lives. "Because the symptoms in  women are not linked to a definition of  AIDS, physicians may not encourage v<  to be tested. Women are often told they're  not at risk, so a lot of women who may be  infected are not tested," says LeBlanc.  In response to the lack of awareness of  physicians, AIDS Nova Scotia has developed a pamphlet to be distributed to doctors  and women identifying the common signs  of AIDS in women. The signs they identify  include: persistent, recurring yeast infections; pelvic inflammatory disease (PID) and  bacterial pneumonia whichdoesnot respond  to regular treatment.  Since many of these illnesses are common and related to other causes, the pamphlet warns that doctors may not think to  test for HIV when they see the symptoms.  As well, according to the Atlanta Centre  for Disease Control (CDC) in the US, women  die faster from AIDS than men. LeBlanc  believes this may in part be due to the fact  that women do not get diagnosed as early.  Urban Native  housing cutbacks  The federal government announced  sweeping cutbacks to programs aimed at  creating affordable housing and upgrading  existing homes under the Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation (CMHC) in  its 1993 budget. On the chopping block are  also the Rural and Native Housing Program,  the Residential Rehabilitation Assistance  Program, the Emergency Repairs Program  and the Urban Native Non-Profit Program.  In response, the BC Native Housing  Corporation has started a letter-writing ca m -  paign to restore funding to these programs  and to the CMHC existing housing budget,  which will be cut 10-20 percent in the coming year.  Spokespeople at the Housing Corporation are encouraging people to write to stop  the cutbacks.  "The future of our country will continue to be one of instability and there will be  more and more households forced into  homelessness," unless this decision is reversed, says last month's communique from  the Corporation. For more information, contact the Corporation at (604) 459-2234.  MSS security  deposit policy  The Ministry of Social Services' currently proposed policy on rental security  deposits would force welfare recipients to  disclose to their landlords that they are on  welfare. This opens them up to further discrimination and harassment from landlords,  and fewer housing choices.  The policy would allow MSS to claim  returnable security deposits directly from  landlords, circumventing the tenant alto-  Introducing Amplesize Park's  own line of clothing  New hours:  Mon, Tues, Thurs 11 -6  Fri 11-7  Sat 10:30-4:30  Closed Wed & Sun  Quality consignment  clothing  Size 14... plus  Amplesize Park  5766 Fraser Street  Vancouver, BC  V5W 2Z5  Sarah-Jane (604)322-0107  gether. This means that tenants would not  be able to maintain the privacy of their income source. MSS claims this is a way to  keep landlords from stealing security deposits but, instead, it targets the tenant, who  is more vulnerable, without holding landlords accountable for non-refunded deposits.  EndLegislatedPoverty(ELP)saysithas  long lobbied for a policy that would abolish  security deposits, because they force those  least able to pay to give substantial amounts  of money to landlords.  "Abolishing security deposits is in the  direction of balancing power among those  with financial privileges and those with fi-  nancia 1 challenges," says ELP's Joanne Shaw.  Frontline Advocacy and Action Workers says it proposes that, instead of the MSS  going after security deposits, it adopt a policy  like that in New Brunswick, where all security depositsare paid to a governmentagency,  run by the interest on the pool of deposits,  and requires that landlords apply to this  agency for declared damages.  Childcare spaces  announced  by Karenza Wall  The BC government announced in July  that there will be 7,500 new childcare spaces  available in British Columbia.  The new spaces will cost S32.3 million,  which has been allocated for childcare in BC  from the NDP's BC-21, an investment program set up in the last provincial budget.  BC-21 was allocated SI.42 billion, with a  mandate to stimulate economic and social  benefits in BC.  The childcare spaces will be available in  provincially owned or funded buildings,  suchas schools, post-secondary institutions,  hospitals and government workplaces that  are currently planning, constructingor renovating childcare facilities.  The disbursement of the S32.3 million  childcare portion of the fund is to be carried  out by the various communities receiving  these monies, who are expected to determine their own needs.  In real childcare terms, this means that  7,500 children or more will have access to  licensed group facilities across the province.  Each "space" is occupied by one full-time,or  two or more part-time users. The criteria is  tha 195 percent of the spaces will be available  to the community at large and not reserved  for children of workers at the locations, except in the case of school-based centres.  Pat Chauncey, former chair of theChild  Poverty Action Committee and currently  with End Legislated Poverty, says that, while  having 7,500 new childcare spaces in BC is  good news, "we have a long way to go  before [childcare] needs in BC are met.  "There is not enough affordable child  care, especially for low wage earners, and it  has to be recognized that women who are  looking after children at home also need  respite care."  Showing We Care, the 1991 task force  report on childcare, identified a need for a  total of about 120,403 spaces for children up  to six years of age. The report found that  only about 20,582 of these children actually  received care in licensed centres. The rest, it  concluded, are given care in informal facilities or not at all.  7th Annual  British Columbia  AIDS Conference  Hotel Vancouver  October 24 to 26  (604)822-2626/822-4965  SEPTEMBER 1993 Feature  The deficit and social spending:  Who's lying  now?  by Ellen Woodsworth  The mass media, and the federal and  provincial governments are hysterically deluging us with statements about how high  the Canadian federal and provincial deficits  are. In the same breath, they then tell us that  they need to cut public spending and slash  social programs, and that they are unable to  institute programs they have long promised  us, such as a national childcare program.  What is the truth behind the propaganda? Is Canada really in trouble? Are  women's programs just a frill to be cut in  times of economic crises?  Yes, we do have a deficit problem. No,  you and I didn't create it. And yes, it is  solvable.  But it will require a different political  agenda than that of big business to change  things. It requires the organizational work of  the women's movement, and of other movements of peoples (the poor, seniors, Eirst  Nations people, gays and lesbians, environmentalists and people of colour) to turn it  around.  Causing the deficit  There are six major reasons for the deficit.  The biggest cause is high interest rates,  which are set by the governor of the Bank of  Canada who is appointed by the federal  government.  If you have ever borrowed money, you  know that a loan of $100 at 5 percent over a  ten-year period costs a lot more than a loan  of $100 at 2 percent.  Our tax dollars are being used to pay  off, a t high interest rates, a debt that was first  incurred in 1974 by the Liberal government.  One dollar out of every three goes toward  paying off the debt.  The following is from the Canadian  Centre for Policy Alternatives paper "Bleeding the Patient: The Debt/Deficit Hoax Exposed:"  "When the Tories took power in 1984,  the accumulated federal debt was $207 billion. Now it is roughly $453 billion, which is  an increase of $246 billion—not bad for a  government whose purported goal was to  control the debt.  "Interest charges on the public debt  during that same period were $279 billion,  which means—if you take $279 billion minus $246 billion—thatgovernment programs  (aside from the public debt) have operated at  what we call a profit of $33 billion!"  A second reason is that the Tory government has reduced the amount of taxes  paid by corporations from 18 to 9 percent—  and many corporations pay no taxes at all  due to tax write-offs, tax loopholes, or direct  handouts.  Third, the Canadian economy loses a lot  of money because a large part of our debt is  owed to foreign companies, meaning that  the money paid for the debt is not reinvested  in Canada. The government could borrow  from the Bank of Canada, or have it print  more money—this is what we used to do so  that they wouldn't have to get the chartered  banks to print money, which the government then borrows from them at high interest rates.  Another reason we have a deficit is  beca use of the US-Canada Free Trade Agreement (FTA). Two thousand plants have  moved out of Canada, taking with them  hundreds of thousands of dollars in tax revenue.  The Free Trade Agreement has cost us  over 500,000 jobs, which means both lost tax  revenueandlostconsumerdollarsthatwould  have stimulated the economy. If the federal  government that we elect in the upcoming  federal election this fall signs the North  American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA),  we stand to lose thousands more jobs and  governmental control over the economy, as  NAFTA overrides all levels of Canadian  (and Mexican) government—federal, provincial and municipal.  Finally, the government is mismanaging the money we do have, with terrible  spending policies such as the purchase of  helicopters that won't do the job for $5.4  billion.  Wait a minute...who created this  problem?  We aren't at this stage by accident. The  causes of the deficit I outline above are all  strategies of the right-wing corporate elite.  What they are doing in Canada, they are     This publication is regularly indexed in the Canadian Women's  Periodicals Index.  The index is a reference guide to articles about women printed in  more than 80 English and French periodicals, for use by researchers,  lecturers, students and anyone else interested in women's studies.  This alphabetized hardcopy of a comprehensive computerized index  is produced three times a year by the Canadian Research Institute for  the Advancement of Women, and is available on a subscription basis.  For more information, please write:  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index  University of Alberta  11019-90 Avenue  Edmonton, Alberta  CANADA, T6G2E1  IS To  (W^^  doing world wide. It is called "restructuring," and is often backed by the World Bank,  which often eventually forces countries to  collapse in the effort to pay off their debts to  the transnational corporations.  In industrialized countries, the deficit  is used as a justification for cutting social  spend ing. For exam pie, "In the United States,  David Stockwell and other officials with the  Reagan administration now openly admit  that, at the behest of their corporate friends,  they deliberately increased the deficit so  that they would justify later cuts in social  program fundings!" (from The Deficit Made  Me Do It: Myths about Government Debt by  Chomey, Hotson, and Seccareccia of the  Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives.)  Large corporations directly benefit from  high deficits here, as they have done in other  countries.  The banks and other money lenders  make money on debt payments; with increasing interest rates, even more money is  made by the banks on the debt.  As social programs and spending in  the public sector are slashed, lots of unemployed people—especially women, who are  at the bottom rung—are forced to take low  paying, part-time, no-benefits contract jobs.  As governments cut administration,  they are less able to monitor corporate tax  evasions, labour violations, pollution, and  so on, all of which cost us more money.  As it is the corporations who own the  mass media, they use them to convince us  that, because of "the deficit," our governments cannot afford social programs and  public services, such as medicare.  So, who pays for the deficit?  The major targets of the deficit attacks  are the public sector and social programs.  The public sector—such as Canada Post,  Via Rail, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, government employees—is targeted  because those who work in it are organized  union employees who have set high wages,  benefits, and human rights and health and  safety standards for all workers.  Social programs, such as the Family  Allowance ("baby bonus"), unemployment  insurance, and federal-provincial transfer  payments for education, health and welfare, have been drastically cut or eliminated  by this Tory government. As well, there  have been severe cuts to non-profit groups,  such as women's and aboriginal groups.  They have also used "the deficit" as an  excuse for their failure to implement a national childcare program, a national anti-  violence campaign, or pensions for housewives, and have used it to threaten the  rJUfti^ ^^m  National Welfare Council and the National  Advisory Council on Aging, to mention just  a few.  In addition, this government has imposed the GST, a tax which preys most heavily on those with low incomes.  Are there solutions?  Yes:  •Replace the governor of the Bank of  Canada with someone committed to an eco-  • lomic policy of full employment.  •Significantly lower interest rates.  •Nationalize the Bank of Canada.  •Have the Bank of Canada produce  more money.  •Tax corporations, block tax loopholes,  stop corporate handouts and patronage.  •Stimulate the economy through more  social spending (social spending in Canada  is lower than in most European countries);  job creation; a high minimum wage and  welfare rates; investmentineducation, health  and housing; payment for housework; investment in the environment, child care and  pension plans. All of this creates jobs and  puts taxable dollars into the Canadian  economy.  •Abolish the Free Trade Agreement,  which puts us all in a worse state each year  the more it is implemented. And cancel  NAFTA.  •Continue to educate ourselves and  mobilize the women's movement to elect  governments committed to the above solutions and the weUbeing of all Canadians.  As the power of government to act on  behalf of ordinary women, children and men  is attacked and eroded by the transnationals  and NAFTA, we will be faced directly with  inhuman, insatiable transnational corporate  greed.  The gains of our grandmothers, mothers  and ourselves are being cut away beneath  our feet. We must mobilize the entire women's movement to fight. Our lives are at  stake.  Ellen Woodsworth is a member of Woman to  Woman Global Strategies and co-chair of  the BC Action Canada Netzvork (a coalition  of progressive groups opposing NAFTA.)  Sources for this piece include "The Fraying  of our Social Safety Net," a series of articles  by Linda McQuaig, the Toronto Star, 1993;  "Debt: a Campaign Comic," in the New  Internationalist May/93; "The Deficit:  Facts," speech by Larry Brown of the  National Union of Public and General  Employees; speech by Marjorie Cohen at  End Legislated Poverty, July/93; The  Wealthy Banker's Wife by Linda  McQuaig.  SEPTEMBER  1993 Feature  NAC's Review of the Situation of Women;  Back to the future  by Punam Khosla  The following is from the introduction to  The Review of the Situation of Women in  Canada. It provides the context and analysis for  the information contained in the The Review.  The women's movement in 1993 is politically stronger than ever before. In the face  of a resurgence of anti-feminism, women's  groups have not only held their ground, but  together constitute the clearest voice for  social, political and economic justice in the  country. This was visible in the front-line  role of women's groups~both national and  grassroots~in the referendum debate on the  Charlottetown Constitutional Accord. The  women's movement today is an impressive  coalition of Aboriginal women, women of  colour, labour feminists, lesbians, professional women, women with disabilities, poor  women and other activists.  However, the situation of Canadian  women is marked this year by a series of  both blatantly obvious and cleverly camouflaged economic, social and ideological attacks which, piece by piece, undermine the  everyday living conditions of the vast majority of women.  In spite of significant feminist victories,  the goal of equality for all women is, in real  terms, facing the most concrete and profound backlash of the post-World War Two  period.  Social and economic policies are forcing  women to do more work for less pay. Women's full-time work is shrinking in favour of  low-paying part-time jobs. Those women  still working full time are working harder to  simply stay in their jobs, and the majority  earn less than $20,000 a year. Poverty rates  a mong single mothers are at record levels. In  all, an increasing amount of unpaid and  underpaid labour is expected of women,  leading to longer workdays and growing  health problems due to high stress levels.  Under these circumstances, it is hardly  surprising that, according to the 1993 United  Nations Human Development Index, Canada's interna tiona 1 ra n king rega rd ing its trea t-  ment of women fell even further to 11th  place, from eighth the year before.  This year's Review of the Situation of  Women in Canada shows that women are not  uniformly affected. Rather, the increasing  class divisions in society as a whole are also  evident between women. The privileges  available to a Kim Campbell, for example,  are far removed from the daily reality of  food banks, welfare lines and unemployment rolls of growing numbers of women.  The hidden truth of economic restructuring, Free Trade, and the recession is the  inherent assumption that already disadvantaged women will quietly absorb the social  costs of creating more profits for an increasingly powerful international corporate elite.  In the "brave new world" of the 90s, where  "survival of the fittest" is openly espoused,  the dismantling of social services for women  contributes to this polarization of wealth  and power.  Minister of Health and Welfare Benoit  Bouchard said last year that it gave him great  pleasure to be the one to kill the national  childcare program, announcing that childcare was now considered a last priority by  his government.  Not only has a promise of a national  childcare system been abandoned, but there  is no longer any pretence of universality in  the government's agenda for social services.  Unemployment Insurance is no longer available to all previously eligible Canadians.  Medicare is being cut back, and the entire  system of healthcare is undergoing a restructuring that will shift the burden of  healthcare responsibilities to women in the  home. Family allowances have been eliminated. There is no more money for cooperative housing. Women, poorer than other  Canadians, bear the brunt of these policies.  The campaign for a return to "family  values" isa thinly veiled drive to send women  back into the white, heterosexist, male-centred, nuclear family home. Right-wing commentators, media and politicians alike are  co-opting the language of women's liberation to promote what amounts to an assault  on both women's and lesbianand gay rights.  The most recent funding cuts to the Secretary of State's Women's Programs are a clear  attempt to silence groups advocating for  The goal of equality for  all women is facing the  most concrete and  profound backlash of  the post-World War Two  period.  women and to prevent them from criticizing  social policies that hurt women.  The insidious message of public anti-  violence debates is that the streets are not  safe, and women should stay home. Home,  however, continues to be the site where  women are most frequently shot, beaten,  murdered and sexually abused. In spite of  feminist campaigns to expose the reality that  very few violent crimes against women are  committed by strangers, media reportage  continues to sensationalize cases that perpetuate this myth.  Victorian notions of women's need to  be protected by chivalrous men have seeped  into the public discourse. Women's fight  againstsexistviolencehasalwaysbeenaimed  at empowering women to live, work and  walk in the world as independent beings,  not at frightening women into returning to  dangerous,illusionaryorarchaic protections.  Economic and social pressures are bringing out the worst in our society. Women are  increasingly confronted with racist violence,  lesbianbashing,andviolenceagainstwomen  with disabilities. The creation of racist immigration laws, racist and misogynist attacks  by elected officials against the leadership of  women's organizations, cuts in funding for  d isabled women's groups, all contribute to a  hostile atmosphere in which already oppressed groups are further scapegoated. In  this poisoned environment, active groups of  ultra-right elitists find support for their violent ideas and actions.  The fact that the women's movement is  res ponding to this environment by engaging  in the fight for social, economic and political  equity for women of colour, lesbians, Aboriginal women, disabled women, poor  women and working women, and by pro-  actively strengthening the voices of these  constituencies of women within the ranks of  our own organizations, is yet further testament to the capacity of feminism to be the  pivotal force for fundamental social change  our foremothers dreamed of.  Punam Khosla is the Toronto-based writer  and researcher of Review of the Situation  of Women in Canada.  by Faith Jones and Winnifred Tovey  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women's (NAC) Review of the Situation of Women in Canada shows some major  disparities between government rhetoric and  the realities of life for Canadian women.  While official statistics collected by Statistics Canada show advances for women in  the workplace, this is only because the data  collected have excluded the most marginalized women, says Punam Khosla, the  report's author. For example:  •official statistics show that fewer  women than men are unemployed in  Canada. The report recalculates this figure  by including women who are working part-  time but wanted full-time; women whose  hours have been cut back; and women who  have become demoralized at the lack of jobs  and stopped looking for work. When calculated this way, the real unemployment rate  for women is 20.8 percent. The real unemployment rate for men is 20.9 percent.  •according to the government's figures, women earn 69.6 percent of what men  earn; however, this figure is arrived at by  comparing full-time, full-year workers.  When all wages are com pared, the real wage  gap is 61.5 percent. Khosla points out that  female part-time and seasonal workers have  actually lost ground compared to male workers.  •over the past ten years, women's work  has shifted from full-time to part-time and  short-term work. Underemployed women  account for almost half the female workforce.  Not only are the wages lower in these jobs,  but they usually provide no job security,  benefits, overtime or vacation pay.  • the federal government's Federal Employment Equity Program is not helping. A  study of the plan's effectiveness shows that,  Underemployed women  account for almost half  the female workforce.  at current rates of change, it would take 60  years for women to represent half the  workforce at Air Canada, and 50 years at the  Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.  The study also shows:  •over 60 percent of wage-earning  women earn less than $20,000 per year;  •women make up 72 percent of workers in Canada's ten lowest-paying jobs, and  the lowest-paid group in the country (childcare workers) is 98 percent female;  •domestic workers (the third lowest-  paid group) continue to be exploited by  government policy [see article p. 14];  •women are joining unions eight times  faster than men, but are still less likely to be  in union jobs than men. Thirty percent of the  unionized workforce is female; 6 percent is  Aboriginal or of colour—there is no breakdown for how many of these are women;  •in 1991, over 3 million women with  child ren under 13 were in the pa id workforce,  but there were only 333,000 childcare spaces  available;  •subsidies available for childcare can  fall up to $400 a month short of the cost;  •17 percent of Canadian women have  less than a grade 9 education-; among Native  women, the figure is 21.3 percent;  •when sorted by family type, the three  highest poverty rates are: 61 percent for  single mothers and their children; 47 percent  There are major  disparities between  government rhetoric  and the realities of life  for Canadian women.  for women over 65 who are unattached to  men; and 37 percent for women under 65  who are unattached to men.  •federal funding to women's groups is  $10 million this year, less than $1 per woman;  • the effort of the Conservative government to re-criminalize abortion in 1991, although unsuccessful, resulted in many doctors refusing to perform abortions; abortion  access has yet to return to pre-1990 levels;  •by the year 2004, the federal government contribution to the health care budget  will be zero;  • an estimated 90 percent of all Canadian women have been harassed on the job;  •prostitutes are raped an average of  five times a year;  •53 percent of women with disabilities  have been raped, abused, or assaulted;  •92.5 percent of sexual assault victims  are women; 99 percent of accused assailants  are men;  •at least 40 percent of all sexual assaults are on children aged 11 or younger;  another 40 percent on young people aged 12-  19. In 48 percent of cases, assaults on children were by family members; 8 percent  were assaults by strangers;  •although three quarters of the world's  refugees are women, the majority of refugees admitted into Canada are men.  There's much more in the report, not  only statistical information but analysis of  the social realities that form the context for  women in Canada.  Khosla notes that there are still a lot of  gaps; much more research is needed. In  particular, since most of what is available  tends to lump women into one homogenous  group, it is difficult to assess with any accuracy what the situations of disadvantaged  groups of women, such as women of colour,  Aboriginal women, lesbians and older  women, are.  Review of the Situation ofWomen in Canada  testifies to the continuing erosion of women's independence. It examines the ways  women are pushed to the margins both economically and politically, impoverished,  assaulted in our homes and terrorized outside of them.  To obtain copies of the Revieiv of the  Situation of the Women in Canada, contact the  National Action Committee on the Status of  Women at 57 Mobile Drive, Toronto, M4A  1H5, or phone (416) 759-5252 or fax (416)  759-5370. The cost is $10 plus postage.  Faith Jones and Winnifred Tovey are  underemployed.  SEPTEMBER 1993 NO GOING BACK  It's "a major victory in the eyes, not only of the Gitksan  and Wet'suwet'en people, but the First Nations in BC and  across the country." — Afclythe Wilson  as told to Miche Hill and Fatima Jaffer  It took almost nine years, but the wait paid off—in part. Hereditary chiefs of the Gitksan and  the Wet'suwet'en were in Vancouver in June when a long-awaited decision on their court case came  dozen. In a unanimous decsion, the BC Appeal Court ruled tlxat Aboriginal rights in BC exist andhad  never been extinguished by colonial governments. ^  -  The victory ivas partial because the court also ruled 3-2 against recognizing Gitksan-Wet'  suwet'en ownership, jurisdiction and self-government of their traditional territories, rejecting the  Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en's claim to clear title over 58,000 square kilometres of territory in northwest  BC. ifl  Del-gam Uukw, a hereditary Gitksan chief, along with 34 other Gitksan and 13 Wet' suwet'en  hereditary chiefs, first filed a claim against the provincial government in 1984, with the BC Supreme  Court. They sought a declaration that they have a  right to ownership and  jurisdiction over their  House territories. The  Social Credit government, like others before  it, claimed that the  Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en  had no rights, title, and  interest to the territory  and its resources.  Unlike most First  Nations in Canada, Aboriginal peoples in BC  never negotiated treaties  with colonial governments.  In the Supreme  court decision in May  1991, BC Supreme Court  Chief Justice Allan  McEachern dismissed  most of the Gitksan-  Wet'suwet'en's claim.  Discounting their testimony, which was largely  based on oral histories,  he described the Gitksan-  Wet'suivet'en as "a primitive people," and ruled that their rights  purposes," such as hunting and fishing.  McEachern ruled that BC's colonial governments had extinguished any Aboriginal rights in the  last century. Further,he said those rights of ovonership over the land had never existed and their only  rights were to use of the land, which could be extinguished by provincial regulation (such as building  a fence to keep people off the land.)  In appealing the case, the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en continued to defy existing European legal  standards, and based their case on Aboriginal conceptions and understanding of their own rights,  which they Imd never ceded to any government.  Three of the BC Appeal Court judges upheld McEachern's decision, narrowly limiting the  unextinguished rights of the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en to traditional uses of the land. Of the two  dissenters, Justice Lambert's rulingwas a strong,100-page judgement that the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en  have the right to occupy, possess, use and enjoy the land and right to self-government and self-  regulation. ^B/^F   ^^^^ ^^^^^^% I  And all five appeal court judges agreed tlwt the specific boundaries of the appeal and the extent  of native rights would be best settled at the negotiating table. This opens the door for Aboriginal  peoples to negotiatations with federal and provincial governments.  There were also seven related decisions on Aboriginal rights lianded down the same day: two-  involved hunting rights; two were on the right to sell fish; and three argued that traditional laws  supercede provincial laws. The Appeal Court ruled against the First Nations in five ofthe cases, while  two were acquitted. ^ ^^^^^^B  If the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en decide to appeal the land claim decision, the case might go to the  Supreme Court of Canada.       .-- ;r.;,  Following the decisions, Miche Hill and Fatima Jaffer spoke with Ardythe Wilson. Wilson has  been spokeperson for the Office of the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en Hereditary Chiefs in Hazleton for five  years, and coordinator for the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en litigation team since 1991.  Miche Hill: What do you think of the decision by the BC Appeal Court? It seems a little  complicated. Is it, in fact, a victory?  Ardythe Wilson: It's a fairly significant decision, in the sense that the five-judge bench  ruled totally in our favour with regard to extinguishment of Aboriginal Rights. They  completely over-turned the McEachern decision of two years ago, that our rights were  Ardythe Wilson of the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en  \ited to '  ■Anal  extinguished prior to Confederation by various colonial settlements. So that was a major  victory in the eyes, not only of the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en people, but the First Nations  in BC and across the country.  But they've also taken a very narrow view in what the nature of our rights are, and  continue to view us in the same manner as McEachern viewed us, which was that the rights  are very narrow and they're basically sustenance or subsistence rights, for example, you  could fish—but only to feed yourself. We had no commerce, no economy, and no system of  government, so that was a disappointment.  But then we also have a strong dissenting view from Justice Lambert, where he basically  accepted our view of what our system of government is. That was really encouraging and  shows that the courts, at least that particular man, have been educated about who and what  we say we are, and what our rights are.  Hill: Because of this decision favouring Aboriginal rights, at least the  subsistence rights, do you think it puts us back at*S^,uare one as far as  relying on negotiations?  WilsonJ/ruon't see that it puts us back at square one. WeS^ always  pushed fjp?negotiations. Before the decision was even made to bring this  whole^tion to the level of the BC Supreme Court for trial, all our activities  ndjmr energies were geared towards negotiations with the federal  gcMrnment.  Unfortunately, their comprehensive claims policy was such that theyV  'uldn't come to the table with us without the provincial governments  io sitting at the table. As we all know, the position of the Socred \  (overnmentat the time, and others since Confederation, was that they did/  lot recognize the existence of Aboriginal rights, that our rights had been  ■xtinguished, and given that, they didn't see any reason that they shqftld  tome to the negotiating table.  Hill: Do you think this decision is going to make a big difference as  s the relationship between the provincial negotiators and the Cjlksan  [et'suwet'en?  Wilson: We're always optimistic that any victory, no matter how  is going to make a difference. Up to this point, there was never  ing to compell the government to negotiate with us with any sense  of^^Kss, honour, or dignity. 1 think this now has made them si t u p and  o take notice. ^r    '"'"•  -g_ Hill: Do you feel the province has been dragging their feet on it, or  was it a question of waiting for the court case to be decided?  Wilson: They were dragging their feet. For example, what came out  of the 1991 decision, even though it was based on extinguishment of  Aboriginal title, was a fiduciary obligation by the province to deal with  aboriginal people. We asked the provincial government many times what  their "fiduciary obligation" was, what their obligation was to us, and they couldn't answer.  Instead of lookingat fiduciary obligations, they arranged with someFirst Nations to sign  interim protection measures, and said, we'll consult with you. Our experience of "consultations" is that, for example, the Ministry of Forests will come and drop their five-year  development plans [that] has no input from our communities, and say, "This is our plan,  what do you think of it?" That's their type of consultation.  And that is all it was. But the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en said, (and we challenged them in  court very soon after the McEachern decision came down), "This is what your fiduciary  obligation to us means." Our rights were never extinguished, before Confederation and after  Confederation, and the provincial government does not have the power to extinguish [our  rights] without our consent. And the courts agreed with us on that  Fatima Jaffer: So now the question is: What does "our rights have not been extinguished"  mean? ^^k H  Wilson: Exactly. What are the nature of those rights? We've heard the very narrow  definition of those rights from the courts. Now, the challenge is, how do we take the victory  we've gained and expand it so that the proper definition of our rights is understood? That's  the basis of our negotiations.  We're hoping that, out of [this latest court] decision, a voice of reason will be heard in  the province, to eliminate the hullabaloo and hysteria-generating that we see with some of  the groups that are using the media to send a very false message to the public.  The First Nations in BC have always taken the position that, when we're talking about  self-government, we're not looking at governing you; we're looking at taking control of and  managing our lives.  It seems to me that the white citizens of this province, and especially those living in our  territories, believe that, because of their treatment of us and impositions against our lives as  Aboriginal peoples—like shutting us away on reserves and not allowing us to do this or  that—that we would turn around and do the same to them.  So we tell them: Look, we're not on a mission of vengeance, we're not seeking revenge  against you for the actions of the governments. What this is about is the federal government  did not make a treaty with us and we did not give up interests and our rights to our lands  to anybody. We did not lose our lands and rights in battle nor did we sign them away through  agreements. That was the position we took in court.  Jaffer: It was good to see so many people attend the rally that was held in Vancouver as  the decision came down, the elders and chiefs, and lots of people from Vancouver. The mood  seemed very optimistic in some ways, very powerful.  Wilson: We always have to be optimistic, otherwise the struggle would be meaningless.  The reason why we spend so much time and energy and what little resources we have is  because we're optimistic that, sooner or later, change will take effect.  And when we look back ten years ago and see the progress that we've made today—in  the general public and in the courts, and sometimes with governments—we have to remain  optimistic.  Also, I think we're happy about the victory in the court. But, we also know that a victory  means nothing unless you're willing to push it further. That's the real challenge. There's  major work ahead of us. We should be moving further and setting very firm directions in our  lives based on that victory in the courts.  Hill: What kind of things do you see as part of setting firm directions?  Wilson: We've already initiated a number of activities. For example, the major concern  the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en faced was the destruction of the land by the forest industry. We  had to bring public attention to the the callous disregard for the laws and regulations that  govern, for example, how they should be harvesting trees. The public really didn't know that  much about it.  We've also gained smaller victories in court. For example, we put injunctions against  people like Westar Mining. We stopped a bridge from being built to [enable loggers] to start  cutting the whole northern part of the Git'ksan territories, which is still a beautiful,  untouched area. Tfeey were taking the first steps to begin to clear cut and we stopped that.  That's a victory.       '"^f  The Eagle Clan in the western part of our terri tories have been successful in, for example,  meeting with the province's small business licencee and getting them to agree to one year's  moratorium from cutting, while a plan of research, surveys and inventories are being done  on the land. This takes into consideration not just harvestable wood, but looking at the  environment, the eco-systems, the ancient activities that took place there, and at how all that  can be incorporated [into the plans for land development].  Then you see discussions with provincial line ministries, and federal departments,  where we've taken over other activities, like health. Not just health in the sense of medical  services, but the holistic view of health that our people have.  We're also looking at taking over our education, and that includes everything from  n school,  ] includes  ies that our  ught stealing  tally doesn't  the child—  a to teachers. In one of our communities, we have a Gitksan i  where you're not just taught to speak the language, but to be Gitksan i  having a close connection to the land, and [learning] the different s  people were involved in. ■]£&  We're also interceding into the court system. Let's say, a yoUi:  or breaking and entering. Rather than going through the court sys  do much for our people, we intercede. The House group takes responsib  they set the goals and the discipline for the child. The whole family, the father's clan and the  victim's family is involved in setting the ground rules for this person's rehabilitation. This  is an attempt to put more balance and harmony back into the community.  I'm not trying to paint a pretty picture, because it isn't a totally pretty one. But there are  a number of very talented, skilled people in our communities and we are initiating change  ourselves. We're training ourselves and our people, we're interceding in court, and we're  making our families responsible again. Whereas before, through the Indian Act and the Band  Council System that the act created, it set up a dependency system [which] literally tore our  communities apart.        ^■■■^■■■■■^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  One of the things we hope will change here is, not just the public's perception of who  we are, but the government's perception. When we try to negotiate, they treat us as if we were  all the same Nation. That has to stop. We are a very distinct Nation of people. If there are to  be fair and honourable negotiations, the perception [that all Aboriginal people are the same]  is the first thing that must change.  Hill: I encountered that all the time when I was a notetaker for the Aboriginal circle for  the Constitution. Everywhere we went, the communities stated over and over again they  wanted negotiations as individual Nations of people, not blanket negotiations on self-  government.  Wilson: Yes. It's also why, when [the federal government] talks about self-government,  they talk about a government based on their system, only with brown faces.  Hill: I guess, it comes down to: "If you do it our way, we'll let you do it. If you don't do  it our way, then forget it." ^^^___^^^_^^^_g^fl  Wilson: That's what we're talking about when we're talking about the government's  perception. But that is not what we are talking about Each nation, and we all must respect  this, not just the government but also Nation to Nation, has to choose what's best for them.  I hear a lot of criticism sometimes about what another Nation is doing, but I guess it works  for that Nation, otherwise they wouldn't have agreed to it. We have to respect that just as  other Nations have to respect how the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en chose to pursue Aboriginal  rights and title.  And what we hope to see come out of all these years in court is that there will be a shift  in policy at all levels of government. People have to get out of the mentality of the Indian Act.  The Indian Act generalizes us—you're either status or non-status, you're either a band or not.  But when we talk about our Nations, we're talking about our people—not about r  not about bands and band councils, but about people being Gitksan and people being  Wet'suwet'en. It would be really encouraging for us if we saw some move to eliminate the  Indian Act—not arbitrarily, but with distinct safety networks in place.  We've been moving for the past three years to try to replace the Indian Act with the  Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en Act. That's just a fairly small piece of legislation of delegated  authority, but it's taken three years of negotiations just to deal with the restrictions and  limitations of reserve boundaries.  In these negotiations, we've been trying to get them to understand that we have our own  system of government already in place, which is based on our matrilineal system. That's not  good for them. We don't vote in our society, it's a matter of consensus, consensual agreement.  They can't accept that. They can only agree on voting. Our people never voted.  Hill: That's also how they keep us split apart—by negotiating things on their terms. And  then they set up the Tribal Councils as elected bodies and we have splits within communities  about who are the real leaders of the community: the elected members or the traditional  hereditary chiefs.  Wilson: Yes. And the people who function under the traditional system are not  recognized legally as our leaders, like our chiefs who brought this action to the courts.  Jaffer: How were they recognized in court?  Wilson: As people who have interest, but not power.  Jaffer: What's the relationship now between the elected band leaders and the hereditary  chiefs?  Wilson: Outside of the structure of the Indian Act and the Band Council system, the  people who hold those elected positions are house members. They belong to houses within  clans.  Hill: Are they responsible to those Houses?  Wilson: Yes, if they choose to be. On the other hand, if you want to be a person outside  of your own traditional system, the Indian Act gives you that power.  But elected or not, we are the same people. My father sat on the band council for about  30 years. He's a hereditary chief of his house. There's a balance there. It's not like this core  is separated from that core.  Jaffer: Why do you think that balance [between traditional and elected leaders] has been  possible for the Gitksan and the Wet'suwet'en peoples?  Wilson: Because our system is still very strong. We were one of the last peoples to  experience European contact. Also, I believe the reason why we've managed to keep our  Nations fairly intact is because of the strength of our system. In spite of the legislations that  were passed against us, we continued to function. For example, when what is known as the  Potlatch Law, the anti-potlatch law, was passed, we didn't stop having our feasts.  And the matrilineal system, the passing on of maternal names has continued. Our  activity and the presence on the land continued.  In the last 20 years, with the passing on of the old ones, there has been some loss of  language and teachings. Because we are oral societies, taught from a very early age on the  rights and wrongs of life and how we should conduct ourselves, this broke the chain of  teaching. But the impact wasn't as great on us as on other peoples.  Jaffer: How do you think the Gitksan-Wet'suwet'en decision will affect your relations  with other First Nations?  Wilson:[ When the decision came down,] for the first time since we started this court case,  we saw a very co-ordinated approach withother tribal groups. That was interesting, because  during the trial, we basically stood alone. But this time, I believe people saw the benefit of  working together. Sitting through the trial and the appeal, you saw how the governments coordinated and worked together to fight us. It's a lot easier for us to fight the enemy when we  work together.  That's the greatest hope I have coming out of this whole process. It's given birth to the  idea that we can work together, even when we come from different points of view or  geographical points in the province.  It's also the message we have to give out to the non-Aboriginal people in BC. If we can  do that with one another, certainly we can do that with the general public. It's already proven  true in a number of our cases. Outside of government policy and outside of the courts, we've  managed to [make links], and we've done that with a lot of dignity and honesty. When they  can actually see those things at work—showing the people we're not out for vengeance—  that's what will sway the public.  Even non-Aboriginal people know we have to work together. I've listened to their  politics, to what they say in the news—there's no local control, and people wish for more local  control. Here are the opportunities for them to work together and institute changes in policy.  Our intention is to see the lives of our children be better than ours have been; it's not to  get rich off the land and leave it in destruction and go someplace else. We've always lived  in our homelands and we have no intention of leaving. We intend to live there for generations  to come, so we know we have to takecareof the land. And if people areall of the same mind—  tha t we're no t here to get wealthy over some of the resources—then we should be able to work  together.  Miche Hill is Mi'kmak from out east somewhere. Fatima Jaffer is South Asian from further  east somewhere (Kenya). Thanks for hours of transcribing to Cecelia Wyss of the Squamish  Nation, and to Faith Jones, a Jewish ally.  A\ Feature  Domestic workers and Employment Standard Act:  Pushing  for rights  by Lorina Serafico  The following is based on a presentation by  Lorina Serafico of the Caregivers Association at  a Sectoral Bargaining Workshop organized by  the Vancouver group, Women for Better Wages,  that was held last April 29th.  Sectoral bargaining would mean tlxat under  contract negotiations workers employed by different employers zvithin the same industry could  bargain collectively by sector rather than by  single workplace. Labour activists, who were  disappointed last year ivhen changes in BC's  labour legislation failed to include provisions for  sectoral bargaining, continue to lobby for  changes. Serafico writes about how sectoral bargaining can work for domestic workers.  Who are domestic workers? Why do  they endure the working and living conditions they find themselves in? Why aren't  they protected under the current collective  bargaining provision in the BC labour code?  And how can sectoral bargaining improve  their lot?  Domestic workers are mostly women of  colour from Third World countries. They are  forced to leave their countries to earn their  living in a foreign land because of severe  economic conditions that are not of their  own making. They are forced to leave their  countries because their governments are  unable to challenge and therefore blindly  follow the dictates of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank. This is the  push factor in the migration of domestic  workers.  They come to Canada to fill a labour  need. They are allowed into Canada to perform domestic work—work that few are  unwilling to do because of its low status, low  pay and lack of benefits. This is the pull  factor in the migration of domestic workers.  Looking at the push/pull factor of the  migration of domestic workers by itself will  readily give us an idea as to why domestic  workers are among the least protected and  most exploited workers in Canada.  It is because they are mostly immigrant  women of colour, and because they are performing work that has traditionally been  done by women for free—work that supposedly does not create wealth and therefore is  non-productive work.  It is crystal clear that there is both an  element of racism and sexism for the lack of  recognition and respect for domestic work.  Under very restrictive conditions, domestic workers are brought into Canada  through the Foreign Domestic Movement  Program, now called the Live-In Caregiver  Program. Domestic workers are to work  solely for the employer that is specified in  their work authorization, and they must live  in their employers' homes. We believe these  restrictions form the material basis for their  vulnerability to abuse.  After two years of domestic work, domestic workers must apply for landed immigrant status. The processing of this application can take up to four years.  Domestic workers normally work 10-12  hours a day (and, at times, 16) doing the  usual routine—preparing meals, takingcare  of children, doing the laundry, shopping,  cleaning, et cetera. Some domestic workers  also garden, wash cars and clean swimming  pools, although these duties are not stipulated in the Foreign Workers/Employer  Agreement they have to sign.  BC Employment Standards Act  So how are domestic workers protected  under the Employment Standards Act of  BC? For starters, domestic workers are excluded from the overtime and sick pay provision of the act.  At present and in theory, the Employment Standards Act of BC entitles domestic  workers to holiday pay, vacation pay, two  days off per week and the minimum daily  wage, based on an eight-working-hour day.  In reality, it does not provide these things.  Take the minimum daily wage, for example. Since domestic workers get paid for  eight hours but work over eight hours, their  hourly rate goes down relative to the number  of hours they work over eight hours. When  they work on a holiday, which they are often  asked to do, they are not paid time and a half  like other workers. Instead, they are told to  take another day off, or they are paid for  regular hours.  Only a few of these violations ever get  reported to the Employment Standards  Branch, if any, and most of these are reported after the domestic worker has left the  COOP  Co-op Radio  CFRO  102.7  RIVI  Listener Powered!  Co m m u n i ty- Based!  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8-9pm: Womenvisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, law, spirituality, arts,  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Thursday, 8:30-9:30pm: The Lesbian Show  Thurday, 9:30-10:30pm: OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community news and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Friday, 8-10pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women—old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday-Friday, 10am-6pm  employer. For most domestic workers, these  violations are simply a fact of life. Many are  not even aware of the Employment Standards Act, since they work in isolation, and  may have no way of knowing their rights as  workers.  The fact that enforcement of the Employment Standards Act is complaint driven  in itself acts as a hindrance for domestic  workers to file a complaint.  It requires considerable courage on the  part of the domestic worker to file a complaint against an employer upon whom she  depends for income, shelter and the right to  her stay in Canada.  What domestic workers are asking for is  anEmploymentStandards Act that addresses  the specific needs of domestic workers. Our  situation is created by federal legislation—it  becomes important, then, that ESA regulations build upon the fact that the home of our  employer is our workplace.  The two most important features of our  proposal for the sectoral bargaining to become effective for domestic workers are the  formation of the Tri-Partite Committee and  the Central Registry. The Tri-Partite Committee should be set up to enact and enforce  minimums employment standards for domestic workers. This committee should have  representation from domestic workers, employers and government.  We also propose that the government  establish a Central Registry for domestic  workers as a specific component of the ESA.  We envision this registry as the enforcement  branch of the ESA for domestic workers.  Employers of domestic workers would be  under a legal obligation to register.  The registry should have a mandate to  act on behalf of a domestic worker, if the  latter chooses it, in the case of a dispute with  the employer. This way, domestic workers  do not have to deal with their employers  themselves; rather the employers will have  to deal with the registry.  To ensure compliance, there should be  stiff penalties imposed on employers. Also,  the provincial government should work out  an agreement with Immigration Canada  whereby the registry be provided, on a regu  lar basis, with a list of names of employers of  domestic workers, so employers do not simply ignore the requirement to register.  We see the Central Registry as crucial if  domestic workers are to benefit from collective bargaining, because the Central Registry is the mechanism whereby we can locate  who the domestic workers and stay a ware of  their working conditions.  Collective Bargaining Law in BC  In BC, recent labour legislation has allowed domestic workers to unionize and  them to form a single employee/employer  bargaining unit. Again, in paper, this may  sound equitable, but in reality, will not help  organize domestic workers to bargain effectively for what they require.  It will be prohibitively expensive to organize domestic workers into multiple single employee/employer bargaining unit.  And we must not overlook the extreme inequality of bargaining power between a  domestic worker and her employer.  The premise of current collective bargaining law is the assumption that it is best  to let the parties work a dispute out. In the  case of a dead lock—after every avenue to  resolve the conflict has been exhausted—  both parties can resort to economic sanction  in which the employer can lock-out the domestic worker or the domestic worker can  withhold her services.  And what is wrong with this picture?  For a domestic worker, in the case of a lockout or strike, she loses access not only to her  place of employment, but to her place of  residence.  The degree of inconvenience, for many  more reasons, is more severe for a domestic  worker than for the employer.  The above is the scenario we have in our  minds when we explain the importance of  sectoral bargaining for domestic workers.  We see sectoral bargaining as theonly mechanism to equalize the collective bargaining  field for domestic workers.  We hope the women's movement and  the labour movement does not forget this  scenario, as we continue to push for sectoral  bargaining rights in this province.  14  SEPTEMBER 1993 Commentary  On the blockade at Clayoquot Sound:  Turning the tide  by Shannon e. Ash  Voices echo in the hills, singing and  calling in the early morning darkness. The  sound is haunting and beautiful as I lie in my  tent. Closer by, two people are walking up  the gravel road, strumming a guitar and  singing Bob Marley's "Redemption Song."  It's 3:30 am. Time to wake up.  It's Monday, August 9. This morning,  300 people will be arrested for blocking a  logging road into the old growth forest of  Clayoquot Sound. Most of you reading this  probably know about the clearcut logging in  Clayoquot Sound, the decision taken by the  BC government, and its repercussions Jsee  Kinesis, Jun/93]. You probably know about  the mass arrests that have taken place.  I came to Clayoquot Sound to support  the blockade, to learn and write about the  process of the blockade, the peace camp, and  the roles women are taking.  1 arrived in the camp on a Saturday,  with a busload of others. "Welcome to the  Black Hole," says the driver. The Black Hole  is an area that was clearcut and burned in the  1980s. The site is rocky, and charred stumps  and logs abound. There are small trees, most  no more than shoulder high; the most noticeable are deciduous, not evergreen; and  there are the purple flowers of fireweed.  We are warmly greeted at the gate. The  woman leading us in says, "We ask you to  read the Code of Nonviolence and agree to it  before you enter the camp." Nonviolence  workshops are offered daily and all blockaders are expected to take one.  We trudge down the old logging road,  past thecommunal fire circleand the kitchen,  dubbed "Clearcut Cafe." Following the  gravel road uphill, past a line of tents on both  sides, I'm amazed at the number of people-  it's like a small village.  The trail divides at the top of one hill. 1  take the west road, and set up my tent between a small tree and a charred log. To  protect the regenerating land, we must camp  on the road; it's very rocky and I'm glad I've  brought sleeping pads.  Some people have been here for weeks.  Taut expedition tents sit next to faded and  tattered ones, pressed into perhaps one last  use for the cause.  As I am setting up my tent, a man  passing by remarks, "depressing, isn't it?"  referring to the clearcut that surrounds us. I  reply that it's hard to fully appreciate what  has happened since I hadn't seen what was  there before.  But you can imagine from the size of  some of the blackened stumps. I saw some  old-growth forest the following day, which  helped me to recognize the extent of the  alteration. Of course, there's so much more  than what can be seen by someone unfamiliar with the area.  There's a noticeboard by the communal  circle, posted with newspaper clippings,  hemp information, an article by Starhawk,  and a copy of the full-page ad the Nuu-  Chah-Nulth Tribal Council ran in the Victoria Times-Colonist on July 24.  The Nuu-Chah-Nulth of Clayoquot  Sound are comprised of the Hesquiaht,  Ahousat, Tla-o-qui-aht, Ucluelet, and  Toquaht nations. These First Nations are the  original peoples of the land and are 43 percent of the population in Clayoquot Sound.  The land has never been ceded. But they  have not been consulted, before or during  the government decision-making process  They oppose the Clayoquot Land Use Decision (CLUD). Treaty negotiations have yet to  start and, though the BC government has  saidtheCLUDwon'tprejudicenegotiations,  theCLUDaffects the very land and resources  to be negotiated.  The Nuu-Chah-Nulth say in their ad  they are not opposed to all logging, but are  concerned with how and where. They oppose logging in certain area-the Hesquiaht  territory, Clayoquot Valley, and Flores Islan-  and in other areas want logging methods  which "ensure the protection of our environmentally sensitive salmon streams, cultural and spiritual sites."  The Friends of Clayoquot Sound have  been consulting with the Nuu-Chah-Nulth  since before this year's blockade started.  totally safe space, is to be completely naive,  because our own socialization is incredibly  pervasive, and we have homophobia and  sexism and racism in us."  By Sunday evening there are almost 500  people in camp. The mood is festive as a long  dinner line snakes around the communal  circle. Several people play music: there are  drummers, and one manplaysa horn-I think  it's a bombard, an oboe from Brittany. They  play a traditional Celtic tune-there is dancing and clapping-followed by a jazzy  number. Rainis falling on thecircle's canopy  as the strategy meeting starts.  Clayoquot Sound  Julie Draper is the Friends' First Nations  liaison; she says the Friends only began consultations with the First Nations this year.  "We wanted to make sure it happened  this year because the environment and native rights are all connected."  Meetings were held after the provincial  government's decision in April, and chiefs  were consulted for permission to set up  camp and to be on the road. The Nuu-Chah-  Nulth do not actually support the blockade  at this time. They are currently using a  number of other strategies to oppose the  CLUD.  On my first night, I meet Tzeporah  Berman, anorganizer with FOCS. She agrees  to an interview, when she has some free  time; as it turns out, that's not till my last  day.  We talked about the prominence of  women on the blockade.  "The women are the ones who are making the decisions here, doing the organizing,  mostly."  Berman talked about being a woman in  the environmental movement. She's been  working in the environmental movement  for six years, in many different groups. FOCS  has been a different experience for her, she  said, because while there were more women  than men in most other groups, "Most of  those women had caretaking and 'nurturing' roles. The people who did the administrative and organizing roles...and who made  the political decisions, were mostly men. I  can see that it's changing."  Much planning was done before the  Peace Camp was set up. "We wanted to  make it as accessible as possible. There's a  tight rein on the actions through the nonviolence code. The way that peacekeeping has  worked in this camp;..is a direct result of the  women who are working here."  Almost all the nonviolence trainers are  women. "There's been a lot of problems at  the camp but, at the same time, it's a wonderful place to be. I feel like we've created a safe  space for women and for people of all backgrounds to come here and protest."  She qualifies this, though: "I think, that  to Sciv that there isn't sexism, or that this is a  The day before I arrived, MacMillan-  Bloedel (MacBlo), the forestry corporation,  did not go in to log, citing "fire season."  Berman, who's facilitating the meeting, comments, "It's the wettest fire season I've ever  seen."  There's a strong feeling that, with so  many people here, MacBlo will not come in  tomorrow, either. There's discussion about  how people who don't want to risk arrest  can safely participate in holding the road.  Logistics are worked out, the buddy system  explained, and legal advice given. The nonviolence code is reviewed"no shouting or  running." We're reminded that the loggers  and police are not our enemies, we must  treat them with respect.  Monday, 4:00 am: I've walked down to  the highway, where a long line of vehicles  wait, including two busloads of people from  Victoria.  By about 5:15 am we've reached the  Kennedy Road bridge, the site of the blockade. About 800 people have gathered. The  morning dawns grey, damp and chilly. By 6  am, there's about 500 people sitting on the  road, the rest standing on the sides. We sing  and chant, and wonder: Will they come?  Will they stay away?  Just before 6:30, word comes: Mac Bio is  coming up the road, with the RCMP and  police vans. They are really going to try to go  through, then. I'm a "buddy" for a woman,  Leora, who is risking arrest. This means I  keep a n eye on her, bring her food and water,  and relay messages.  A truck has driven up, containing  MacBlo reps and several loggers and family  members. One of the MacBlo reps reads the  injunction-court order-against the blockade.  As the arrests begin, we are singing "we  won't wait any longer/we are stronger than  before," a quiet and sombre song. The realization that they intend to arrest all these  people is hitting home. I look at Leora and  see she is crying. I start crying too, overcome  by the intense feeling and dedication, then  stop myself.  There are so many people that there are  three waves of arrests; the vans have to take  people to Uclueletand comeback. A MacBlo  rep videotapes every person arrested. Kids,  old people, lots of young people. A blind  woman, garbed in a forest green cloak, sits  on a stump in the middle of the road and  sings wordlessly, a keening sound. I want to  think of these people as individuals rather  than numbers or—as the Globe and Mail  recently put it—"human capital."  Leora is in the first wave of arrests. The  next day I ask her, Why did she decide to get  arrested? "I'm sick of writing letters, signing  petitions, not having people answer or getting back form letters from politicians saying 'We think this is the best decision possible' and giving me all these facts and figures  which are...quite wrong when you look at  the other side of the issue."  We hold the road for six hours. Eventually everyone is arrested and the trucks go  through. Two people read out a list of  MacMillan Bloedel's convictions for pollution and destroying salmon streams. Several  people are crying, women and men.  When I get back to camp, the mood is  subdued; almost half the camp has been  arrested. Others have to leave for home. I  feel exhausted and drained. But the daily,  vital work to support the camp must continue: meals must be cooked, the gates  staffed, latrines dug and maintained. And  the blockade continues tomorrow; people  are arrested almost every day.  I go to bed early. The next day, I find that  a discussion about sexism in the camp, starting in last night's circle, went on until 2 am.  I'm chagrined at having missed it but, in my  interview with Berman, the issue comes up.  Berman comments that some men have  promoted "unsafe and machismo actions"  such as "jump[ing] in front of the trucks  right as they go by", and "needing to enlarge  their egos through that"-or through constant drumming.  "The feminist focus of this camp means  we try to work that out in as open a way as  possible, within the camp. We've had women's caucuses. At one, a woman came forward and said she had been sexually harassed on the way up to camp by someone  who was in camp. We supported her and  talked to her and tried to decide what we  wanted to do."  They contacted male allies and named  the perpetrator, calling on the men to deal  with it.  "That wouldn't have happened if there  weren't so many strong women here willing  to support, and if the organization hadn't  been feminist-based."  Berman relates the story of another  woman "Amy, a woman who's 16, [at first]  she was very quiet, just settling in, obviously  nervous around men. She's been here five  weeks now, and last week she took over as  head of security for the front gate. Walking  around...and telling everybody what they  should be doing, and organizing, and doing  a fabulous job. The process and the people in  the camp have really empowered a lot of  young women."  I found one of the most powerful aspects of the camp is that many of the people  involved are committed to fundamental  changes in society, beyond the blockade.  The struggle against the malaise of cynicism  and powerlessness that sees the current economic/social system as inevitableand mocks  our deep feelings and dreams is revitalized  by this commitment and energy.  Clayoquot Sound is just one struggle  among many to "turn the tide."  Shannon e. Ash didn't get arrested because  she had a deadline to meet. (She missed the  deadline anyway).  SEPTEMBER  1993 Women and electronic communication:  Can email  be femail?  by Juliet O'Keefe and Gladys We  Imagine an endless wall. Notes and  posters are put up on the wall every few  seconds, forming a collage of information,  discussions, jokes, and arguments. Most of  the notes follow each other; there is a certain  thread. Some fall off the wall for lack of  interest, and new topics crop up to replace  them.  As you watch, some of the people  putting up the messages break away in pairs  to talk to each other. Other message lines  converge, gathering those interested into  groups. You can't see their faces—in fact,  nothing distinguishes them physically. But  it doesn't seem to matter.  All you get are the voices: what they  know, choose to share, and how they express themselves. It's a world where people  can't be readily judged on appearance, only  on ideas.  When we turn on our computers at  work, we use them to format letters, design  a brochure, or print out labels. But we can  also access that endless wall of messages.  By checking our electronic mail (or  email), we can read about a band coming to  Vancouver in six weeks, what songs they  will be playing, reviews from people who  have already seen the band perform (one  person comments that the order of songs has  changed), or read someone's lament tha t the  tour schedule doesn't yet include Brisbane,  Australia, where she lives.  Or we can read letters from friends—  one is in England, sitting in the computer lab  at Coventry Polytechnic, who jokes that she's  avoiding writing an essay.  Or, more importantly, we can receive  immediate, eyewitness and uncensored information: There's been a coup in Guatemala. The bulletin has been sent, not just to  my computer but to thousands of activists,  political groups and news services around  the world, while the coup is taking place. We  received this note almost 24 hours before the  mainstream media announced it in the West.  So what's email? It's a message that you  receive electronically through a modem on  your computer. You can only receive e-mail  from someone who is hooked up to the same  network. All you need is a software program, a computer and a modem (used computers can be found for about $200, modems  for about $50.)  Thereare other networks, such as Usenet,  that originally began as email but have developed into public forums. These are not as  private; anyone can read anyone else's posts.  The beauty of email is that you can target the  mail to specific groups or individuals. For  example, Sappho, a lesbian and bisexual  email list, is woman-only. (It is, unfortunately, possible though quite rare, that men  posing as women could join the list and read  the messages.)  InUsenet, wecanchooseto read postings  from over 2,000 different discussion groups.  By selecting "soc.culture.latin.america," we  spend a few minutes reading reports about  the coup in Guatemala. A woman is posting  a message from Mexico City, reporting that  arrests are under way. Others are sharing  feelings of frustration, anger, concern for  friends and relatives.  All this takes place on the Internet, the  largestinternationalnetworklinkingthemost  sophisticated (expensive) computers globally. Connected through special data lines,  they allow people to communicate with each  other at the speed of electrons. An estimated  15 million people are connected to the  Internet, including governments, universities and corporations.  The word "cyberspace" (coined by Vancouver science fiction writer William Gibson)  has been adopted as a general term for the  social world you find on the Internet. It's a  "democratic" world, in some senses, because everyone who has an account can  speak their piece on an equal footing with  everyone else. It allow someone who types a  word a minute to have as much of a voice as  someone who types 60 words a minute,  because the message gets posted whenever  it's completed. But it is not a true democracy  because you have to have money and access  to the technology, and not many women or  poor people know about it. But it could be.  Censorship or interception of information flowing through the Internet is virtually  impossible, as millions of messages are sent  daily. This allowed Guatemalan activists to  post information about the coup as it happened, before their government could intercept it. It also alerted activists everywhere to  raise their voices against the coup, and send  help.  Cyberspace is a world where strange  and wonderful communities are being created. With an Internet account, you can join  mailing lists where people talk about feminism (Femail), being lesbians and bisexuals  (Sappho), or receive regular news articles  and updates on issues that are under represented, or completely erased in the mainstream media (NLNS-the New Liberation  Newsservice).  Messages on a mailing list vary in content and tone. In Sappho, a few months ago,  a raging discussion about transsexuals who  have come out as lesbians took place beside  another about the rumoured pairing of kd  lang and Martina Navratilova.  We're lucky to have an active feminist  community in Vancouver. For women in  rural areas, electronic meeting places are  frequently the only place to find like minds,  and email has the potential to bring women  together from all over the world.  For women working in the home, the  groups online specifically for parents  ("misc.kids," for example) can be a great  resource. Information is shared freely, as are  the joys and frustrations of parenting.  It's also a world where men can't intimidate women as easily. In reality, some of us  have problems confronting men when they  say something sexist or demeaning. In  cyberspace, however, we can do it and not  be afraid of his physical presence. It also  gives us time to think about a response,  which is difficult sometimes in a live, physical confrontation. We can say what we usually think of the next day, and look up any  information we might need to back up our  arguments (like the exact statistics on women's incomes as compared to men's). If we're  shaking with anger as we type, no one knows.  For the moment, because it's so new,  there a re very few rules in cyberspace. Those  When you get online, you're going to want to explore. The two main ways to talk to other  people are through reading UseNet (Users' network) and joining electronic mailing lists.  Here are a few definitions for the jargon you'll see.  Email: refers to notes and letters delivered to your electronic address, accessed through  your electronic mailbox.  List: Short form for an electronic mailing list. When you get online, you'll be able to  subscribe to a zillion lists, about any topic you might want to talk about.  UseNet: The Users' Network, where people chat and give advice in over 2,000  newsgroups, about any topic you might imagine.  Moderated/unmoderated groups: Some newsgroups and mailing lists are moderated,  which means that someone approves the messages before they're posted to thegroup. (Some  say this is a form of censorship; others find moderators are great for sifting out the "noise."  Most lists and groups are unmoderated.)  Flaming: People often react blindly to notes they read, and dash off a heated post. A  "flame" (comes from flamethrower) is one of these notes, which often calls into question the  receiver's parentage, race, taste, or intelligence.  FTP: File Transfer Protocol. Using FTP, you can dial into one archive for updates of all  Statistics Canada press releases, or go to another and find all the Indigo Girls' lyrics.  FreeNet: A social movement which works to allow people to get equal access to  computer networks for everyone. Plans are afoot to create a FreeNet in Vancouver, where  you'll be able to set up local discussion groups, join international mailing lists, read UseNet  newsgroups and more, for free. Plans arealso in the works for terminals to be placed in local  libraries, so that people won't even need to have a computer to get access. If interested, call  the FreeNet at 665-3944.  that exist are about the proper conduct in  social situations (netiquette), and prohibit  advertising unless it's requested.  Some people describe cyberspace as a  working anarchy, a place where volunteers  do much of the work of collating information and there is no "government." This,  however, paints a rather Utopian picture of  the Internet.  At its best, the Net has the potential to be  a truly positive force for social change. In  June, we received a notice from the New  Liberation News Service that free access has  been offered to anyone online for the World  Conference on Human Rights in Vienna. If  we had subscribed, we could have read the  proceedings of the conference as it happened.  Despite the Net's potential, it is still  oftenadifficult,and sometimes hostile, place  for women. There are many feminist issues  that need to be addressed about cyberspace.  For instance, the open nature of the postings  means that a message from woman recommending alternatives to commercial menstrual pads is a few keystrokes away from a  man's violent sexual fantasy. You are sharing the space with born-again Christians,  fascists and racists, as well as anti-apartheid  activists in South Africa, eco-feminists in  Alabama, and us.  As well, there are issues of access. Less  than 10 percent of the people on the Internet  are women. Most are male, white and academically educated. It is still largely a resource based in universities and large research-oriented technological companies. It's  an exclusive medium. The cost is frequently  prohibitive. Also, most Internet sites are in  North America, which means that English is  the dominant language in use.  There arealso socia I barriers for women  on the Internet. Many women complain they  receive harassing messages, especially from  young college men. The culture of the computer room remains predominantly male.  Where men are encouraged to explore technology, we've been socially conditioned into  technophobia. As feminists, we believe we  have to continue to break the barriers keeping us from using information technology.  To join the world of cyberspace, you  must have the money to buy a computer and  a modem, and the luxury of uninterrupted  time. This alone puts online communication  out of reach for many women. But it can be  a tool for empowerment that we should not  ignore. We could choose to try to shape the  technology to our needs. Other progressive  global movements have adopted these technologies, such as PeaceNet and EcoNet.  Many women are already connected online  and are finding ways to make the online  world more accessible.  As it stands, while Internet replicates  the problems of our society as a whole, it also  offers the chance to create a global feminist  network, one where women in China can  communicate with women in Palestine. It  has the potential to be a tool for progressive  social movements, instead of yet another by  which to concentrate the power and information of the elite.  It's a world that's being shaped as we  speak, and we believe more women should  get involved to make sure it doesn't become  yet another patriarchal weapon against us.  Juliet O'Keefe has a child, a job, and no  spare time, but when she finds more that 24  hours in a day, she accesses her email. Her  email address is: "okeefe@sfu.ca". Gladys  We is going on leave from the Kinesis  Editorial Board to do volunteer work  setting up the Vancouver FreeNet (a free  access computer system). Her email address  is: "-we@sfu.ca".  SEPTEMBER 1993 Commentary  Sexual abuse and the system:  Fighting back  by Marie Thompson  A year ago I wrote a story on my use of  anti-depressant drugs and my experiences  in the mental health system.  My subsequent choice against anti-depressants has led me into a different arena—  the criminal justice system.  Last February, I made several police  statements, implicating two uncles (one for  allegedly molesting me when I was four  years old, and another for allegedly doing  the same to my brothers); my mother and  stepfather (for alleged extensive abuse); and  two other men (for allegedly raping me  when I was 17). When I mailed the letters to  the out-of-province jurisdictions in which  the incidents occurred, I expected a simple  "I'm sorry..." in response. Instead, I find  myself at the root of a massive investigation.  Each day, I grasp better its effects on my life.  What prompted such action? It began  with my choice to be drug-free. But it really  began when I started to write. I took a writing class, and though I risked being dubbed  "morbid," I let my main characters reflect  what I know best: feeling small and ineffectual, not believing I had rights (while others  around me seemed to know what they were  entitled to), and coping with thedespairofa  seemingly bleak life.  One of the scenes I described in a story—  of being locked in a dark attic—began to  haunt me over the weeks: "Our captivity  time I gauged by my need for a bathroom  When acute abdominal pain was replaced  by a leaden ache, 1 knew they meant business." As this echoed in my mind, it slowly  began to make sense. This was about me.  Then, something else happened which  heightened this focus.  After a three-day drinking binge, my  brother Tim suddenly just died.  My reactions were varied. On the one  hand, I couldn't believe it. So soon after Dad  died. Hadn't I already paid my dues for a  while? On the other hand, I felt angry and  guilty. I rarely sent him letters and never told  him I loved him. Then again, I was jealous  that, by dying, he had found an "out" from  the suffering that had gone on for generations in our family. Yet, I was happy that it  was over for him.  Meanwhile, my other brother vowed he  would kill the uncle he held responsible for  Tim's death. Bulimia ravaged the health of  my sister. I was feeling fairly strong, but still  not immune to moments of despair. No  matter how strong we are, everyone has a  limit. Now, seeing those remaining in my  family "dying" in front of my eyes, I slowly  reached mine.  I took the first step of many to save usall  from the same fate as Tim.  In February, in my letter to the police, I  told them about what my parents had allegedly done to us. The response, a month later,  said my allegations were serious.  In May, I wrote again about being allegedly raped at 17.  I had reported this before, in 1987, while  I was still on medication. At the time, my  account was too vague for the Crown to  proceed with a case. Now that I was drug-  free, I came up with an additional nine pages  of clearer detail about what had happened.  Early this summer, I had my first face-  to-face interview with a detective from the  Sex Offence Squad about the alleged sexual  assault at age four.  I was nervous because I thought I  wouldn't be believed. I expected to be  "charged" with having "false memory syndrome" (a new so-called syndrome alleging  that a woman's memories of child sexual  abuse are false. The syndrome is used to  discredit testimony based on recovered early  childhood memories).  The paperwork was endless. I refused  to sign a release allowing the police access to  my medical records: I was afraid they would  label me "unbalanced." 1 had to fill in a  "Criminal Injuries" form, which is essentially the equivalent of a victim impact statement. The final step was naming my siblings  as having knowledgeof thealleged assaults.  My brother went through a hard time in  the interview he had with the Ontario police.  Two strangers, hiding behind badges,  plunked down a tape recorder and a stack of  spare batteries, demanded he tell them "all  about it." How could they be allowed to be  so insensitive? My brother, who has never  spoken in intimate detail about allegedly  being abused before, was now expected to  trust these two men because they were cops.  It is difficult, if not impossible, for anyone to  give the kind of detail needed for such a  statement. Even with the language to describe what has happened, you still have to  break through the feeling of intense shame.  Because of their approach, that short  meeting was a flop.  My sister, however, didn't regret her  experience with the police. Even though she  had told me this wasn't exactly the "right  time" for her to do this, she agreed to do an  interview just to help me. Later, I heard she  had "corroborated" every detail of my account, in an interview that lasted almost four  hours.  Then theofficers made a mistake. While  asking my sister if she knew about me being  raped, they mentioned it would be a shame  if the case went to court. When, they said my  first attacker would "slit his wrists" if he  was publicly charged, they showed their  bias in favour the accused. I couldn't believe  it! I berated myself for being so gullible—no  cop in a sma 11 town, where everybody knows  everybody, is really going to care about the  truth. I realized from their mistake I'd had to  work harder to get a fair chance.  I then spent weeks mailing letters to the  Ministry of the Attorney General, the Ontario Human Rights Commission, the Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  (LEAF), the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women, the Action Committee  on Public Violence Against Womenand Children, ex-therapists, old friends, and rape  crisis centres. To date, this has worked. Peo  ple have pressured the police department,  asked questions, written character references  and supported my efforts..and even taught  me more about my rights.  My next step was to write a letter of  complaint to the sergeant of the officers who  had interviewed my sister, and send a carbon-copy to his superior as well.  This brought results! After being told  for months that the police had no personnel  or time for the case, suddenly the final interviews with witnesses were done. My case  proceeded to the Crown Attorney.  After this, I collapsed for a week. Then  I found out about the library at the Law  Courts, where I was referred to Martin's  Criminal Code, 1977.1 still had some trouble  labelling the abuse I had survived as a  "crime." But I was shocked at what I found.  Inconceivably, Section 43 justifies force to  "correct" a child ".. if... [it]...does not exceed  what is reasonable under the circumstances."  When Section 43 was still the law, an  officer had been sent to visit my home. We  were not removed from the house, and  charges were not laid against my parents.  (The alleged charges they now face are: failure to provide the necessities of life; unlawful confinement; indecent exposure; assault  and assault causing bodily harm; cruelty;  and abandonment).  The memory of how the officer had not  done anything leaves me assuming either  one or both of two things: that they considered it "reasonable" to bea t girls with bats; or  that they didn't want to jeopardize their  friendship with my parents. Swift action at  the time could have altered so much!  Apart from the emotional and psychological costs, the financial tally is staggering.  I had to juggle my finances to pay for 11  hospitalizations, three surgeries, regular  periods of uninsured time off work, 14 years  of paying for therapy and for innumerable  remedies for a stubborn back injury. It left  me bankrupt and bereft.  With my "non-payment" of debts including a old student loan, the government  considers mea "typical" defaultand refuses  ever to give me one again. I am launching an  appeal because I am determined to go to  school again.  This process, from day one, has been  fraught with so much. I'd never truly known  my pain until I began—nor the sadness,  fear,orthecrippleofdoubt Nordidl realize  the potency of a fine mind and inner grit.  Yet when forced to acknowledge my  power, I often felt upset. The steps I have  taken have challenged my brother and sister, who are just beginning their own healing process, to move faster and further than  they would haveontheirown. Occasionally,  I wished I could turn back theclock. Still, my  gut told me I'd done what I had to do.  We're all weathering the legalities better now. My sister seems relieved she's having the opportunity to talk about it. She's  learning how to be a survivor, getting help in  dealing with her feelings, and even makes  jokes—"You're pretty gutsy, Thompson. Do  you suppose, the next time, you might try  bungee jumping?"  Even my brother is beginning to sound  more relaxed. When we spoke last, he alluded to the exhilaration of not bottling up  his pain—"I'm going to start charging anyone who twitches!"  I hope these positive responses will continue a long time, but will offer them my  help if things get bad again.  Me? On the bad days,! claw for my life.  I worry about everything, like being perceived as bitter and cold, or as some sort of  gold-digger. Am I prone to the mother-blaming that society teaches? Or is my anger as  balanced as the scales of justice should be?  Once, the words "arrested" and "handcuffs" made me feel sick. 1 imagined the  reaction of my parents if the police tried to  pick them up, and felt guilty and afraid for  them. This would lead to me trying to excuse  what they had allegedly done to me, to  seeing them as victims themselves--for example, they had simply acted out on me "the  result of the accumulated feelings, rules,  interactions, and beliefs...[that had been]  handed down [to them]"(from ToxicParents  by Dr. Susan Forward.)  And, with a warped package like that,  how could they possibly prepare "...an independent young adult to leave home, develop  a network of supportive friends, feel autonomy yet commitment in intimate relationships, develop a career and earn a living,  possess interest in community and feel value  in the world, be responsible to self and others, parent emotionally healthy children,  face traumas, grieve losses, experience joy,  face death?" (from Children of Trauma by  Jane Middelton-Moz.)  Yet, in allegedly choosing brute force to  express their unresolved conflict, they made  me easy prey in the world. Held captive by  fear and incessant self-trashing, I was vulnerable to everyone in a position of authority, includingtheproverbial"boynextdoor."  No more. I won't let another negative  Crown decision translate into making me  think that I am expendable. What these people have done to my life has had many  consequences. I know a trial costs money  and the Crown may decide it isn't worth it to  proceed. I choose not to let the value of my  life hinge on something so subjective. Nobody will wield that kind of clout in my life  ever again—not the Police, the Crown Attorney, or those who question my decision  to use the criminal justice system.  When things are going well, I allow  myself to savour the tiniest of triumphs.  Taking this risk is about love, empathy, and  the very best of intentions. I've inspired  people around me by my choice to fight and  stay alive. 1 accept, the responsibilities that  are mine to own. I'm not responsible, however, for the behaviour of others, nor the  decree (still pending) from a bureaucratic  hiccup.   All names have been changed to protect the  identities of the people in this article.  SEPTEMBER 1993 Arts  Review:  Let some  air in!  by Erin Marie Soros  SHEEPISH BEAUTY, CIVILIAN  LOVE  By Erin Moure  "The poem is not the place for 'E' mail."  from "Executive Suite"  You are reading my reading of Erin  Moure's Sheepish Beauty, Civilian Love. A  review. Literally, to review is to re-see, look  again, do a double take. We are off to a good  start then, because Moure's work plays and  replays with doubles and duplicity.  Moure parodies theorists and reviewers: "This is a complex poem whose sociopolitical implications deserve deciphering."  And: "What business is it of hers to adopt  this superior tone, appropriate for a seasoned politician, not for a respected artist?"  Her work anticipates or echoes the comments of readers frustrated by the experiments and "in" jokes (or "out" jokes) of a  lesbian poet: "On top of this, she manages to  insert her usual gratuitous references to the  vagina. Clearly her views are not balanced,  and are conformist, influenced at least indirectly by arm's length funding to the Canada  Council. Is this the 'culture' we are promoting?" Or:  Whose thigh, she as>s me, scowling  I hope it isn't her thigh  you are touching in the public place of the  It's worse than at a bus stop...  ...Look at all the executives staring at you  you idiot.  from "Nice Poetry"  Or even: "In some schools, jokes are not  allowed in poems. And the poet must be  very polite, politer than this one...."  Here, the review is doubled and folded  into the poem. The boundary between the  two is never as clear as it seems. "'Grow  up,'" the reviewer said./"The period is perfectly acceptable/punctuation."  Poem/review, writer/reader, book/  world, truth / fiction, inside /outside, dream /  reality, word7act, noun/verb, subject/object, self/other—Moure's poetry plays on  the boundary of binaries, revealing and  reveiling "what seems isnot what is."Women  fall through the cracks of patriarchal definitions. "We are (not) 'he' or 'his'; we are (not)  'mankind' or 'humanity.' We are knots in  man's history."  But Moure's poems go beyond critiquing  sexist language: her work explores the relationships between words and acts, between  silence and violence.  CREEN       PRINT  Making a Postive impression  for Our Community Since /984/|  (604) 980-4235  • Women  Owned & Operated*  Who  the state says you are. Why the state says you  are invisible when  the man found & hunted you in the corridor  because these rifles  exist they say for security of citizens...  "The secret of the state is the identity of the  citizen in each of us & we W  must identify first as M to be citizen,  from "Pain"  Sheepish faeauia  fi-t     J>  K..Ai'(itan c^Love  ERIN MOURE  .'■■:■■■■.■:..   ■■  Women survive and struggle "hunted  by the letter H." We are subjects objectified.  We fight ina world where we are victimized;  we write in a language that writes us: "Our  tongueheld down and theback/ with scraps  of muscle, core, blood."  And, paradoxically, when women fight  against violence and when we write against  abuse, the state acts as if we were the aggressors. The thought police. "As if freedom  itself comes from government &/opposi-  tion to government opposes/freedom."  Women's revolutionary ways of being  in the world —and being with each other—  are presented in patriarchal terms: feminists  ■^ PRESS W  ^^m   603 Powell St.,     ^^JwflfflWMH  Fe women's printshop • worker-owned  • since 7970^H  • union shop * ~<3g%i - CWA Local 226 ^^  253-1224            Zj  ^^^^         1 Let our experience help you make  1      TM^  | the most of your printing budget.   |       ^fg  ^^^ "COOPERATIVES AND UNIONS WORKING TOGETHER" M  are labelled "militants"andlesbiansarestere-  otyped "masculine."  "L does not exist. Elle does not exist,  nor W for women we are instead Double You,  we are the double, our secrets  have tunnels built under them...."  from "Pain"  W.omen. W. "A double You being/  marked male multiplied." Double negative.  Women are written over. And over.  Within patriarchy, women's pain, memories, desires, stories, bodies—a re crossed out.  Double crossed. Twice told "the wound on  the surface of the body lies." On the margin:  simultaneously inside and outside patriarchal systems. "Between M & W where W  does not exist." Enveloped, yet excluded.  Enscribed, yet erased. Enslaved. Enraged.  Walking in His language, we are always on  edge.  So we must write and rewrite ourselves,  shaping words to fit. "We have to invent  ourselves continually/ some of us use poems." To read or write woman; to write or  read lesbian. But how the hell do you get out  of the old clothes? Out of those old cliches?  Or can you? Write on the border, the margin,  the seams.  "We have to invent  ourselves  continually..."  My t-shirt & beige shorts, their clothes  & lifted knees, the floor full of women & I see  there...The seam folded &  sewn shut between us, she smiles over the  border...  ...The seam I break with  my eyes breaking the seam the space between  the  real & imagined meetings not to be broken I  with my eyes,  from "Meeting"  Her & her. Fabricating. Material on  women's bodies. Writing, living. On the  seam. The edge of your shirt, the fold between you and the air, the border between  you and another woman. The seam. The  binding of her book. The seam. The fold in  the copy of Kinesis you hold in the fold of  your hands. The seam. The border between  what is and what...  1988 W 4th & Maple  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J1M5 .     ^  733-3511        _   ^jiQS  WOMEN  IN   PRINT  BOOKS&OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC V6R 1N8  Canada  Voice 604 752-4128  Fax      604 752-4129  ♦  Opening August 28 1995  Hours    10 to 6 Monday through Saturday  12 to 5  Sundav  Author Erin Moure  ... Seams. "[Ljike that vaginal space in us  that is continuous & contiguous with the  air/ & has never been counted as Real but as  empty space, unreadable." The vulva is neither inside nor outside. Neither verb, nor  noun. Not active, not passive. It touches  itself. We do. Within ourselves. Doubled. A  mouth mirrored. Hers or hers. W. Not one,  but two. But both. Two and one. Two in one.  Not the singular phallus, unified, meaning  one thing. But more—multiple within unity,  indefinable. Excessive, orgasmic. The seam—  clitoris, vulva, hymen and vagina. Remains  unreadable withina patriarchal framework.  W. Written—not "marked male" but a "double you." Not a solitary cell, a solipsistic self,  but words, but women. Meeting. Meaning.  In relation, in relationships.  With Moure's poetry, you make sense:  "which makes my face exist, too, grinning,/  one letter different from my name." In her  words, you are. "Women/ sitting leaning  listening the voices sonorous. Their/ seams  meet & touch, are folded, by the reader  (you)/ visible in their absence. The sounds  of voices sonorous." The writer, the reader.  Two mouths together shaping words. Shape  of lives. "Their lives touch....The woman &  the woman she told you of. You reader. As  it seems, the fold turns over the women  raising up/ on elbows craning listening not  watching her anyhow./ She is here. & sees  her. Seize no seams."  She & she  Seam, Sewn. Sew. Saw. Seen. Seem.  So, reading & writing her  You won't read Sheepish Beauty, Civilian  Love in a straight line. Moure knits "forbidden sweaters." She pushes you, gives you  room to live, love, move. More room. Her  poems invite play. They make you want to  slip into something comfortable, stretch your  body, open up a book, try a new word, twist  the cap off an old one, and let some air in.  Erin Marie Soros spells her last name the  same way backwards.  SEPTEMBER 1993 Arts   Review: M. Raha's Memoirs of Women's Prisons In The Islamic Republic of Iran;  A journey in simple truths  by Shahla Sarabi  SIMPLE TRUTH: MEMOIRS OF  WOMEN'S PRISONS IN THE  ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN  By M. Raha  Hanover Germany: the Independent  Democratic Organization of Iranian  Women in Hanover, 1992  Quotes from the book were translated by  Shahla Sarabi for the purpose of this review.  On a sunny afternoon in June, I leave  work early to check for mail at the postal  station in Vancouver. Living in Vancouver  as a refugee or in exile for more than ten  years creates odd feelings—the past exists  mainly in the form of letters and written  notes. Going to the postal station over the  years has been like keeping an important  date, never quite knowing what I will receive from my beloved friends. I want anything, any news. But many times I have  "This book was recently  published. It was written  by a woman who spent  nine years in the  prisons of the Islamic  republic of Iran. This  book is a live and  historical document..."  opened the postal box and found only junk  mail.  This time, I have a parcel—a book from  Europe. An old friend, an Iranian living in  exile in Europe, has sent me a book with a  short note: "This book was recently published. It was written by a woman who spent  nine years in the prisons of the Islamic republic of Iran. This book is a live and historical document..." My heart sinks. I feel deeply  sad for a week and do not have the courage  to go into it further. But I want to read about  the many many women that I knew and  loved—women who were killed during the  time that M. Raha writes about. I start reading the book with shaking hands and knees.  I have never started reading a book feeling  so much anxiety.  The book, Simple Truth, is written in  Farsi. It is the first volume of M. Raha's  (which means, M. Free) memoirs of her nine  years in jail, from 1981-1990. Of the thousands of women political prisoners who  have survived the prisons of the Islamic  Republic of Iran, she is the first to have the  opportunity to publish a book.  Over the last 20 years, many thousands  of women have been imprisoned, tortured  and killed in Iranian government prisons.  Yet, this is only the second book to be published on the situation of women political  prisoners in Iran. The Legacy of Resistance by  Ashraf Dehgni was published 20 years ago.  Deghni wrote of survival of torture and rape  in prison during the reign of the late Shah  Reza Pahlavi. A guerrilla fighter in opposition to the tyranny of the Shah's oppressive  regi me, she exposed the atrocities of SAVAK  (the secret police of the Shah.)  Raha dedicates her book to "the memory  of live-thinking people whose salute to freedom was answered with bullets." In the  book, Raha, a leftist activist, describes her  life and those of other women activists imprisoned by the Iranian police.  In the introduction, she writes: "In September 1988, the first International Exhibition [of Tehran] after the end of the Iran-Iraq  war took place. There is not a long distance  between the Exhibition site and Evin Prison.  Through the iron bars, we could see the flags  of different countries. Advertising balloons  were flying [in] the skies of north Tehran.  We could hear the happy noises of the children playing in the nearby playground. But  on this side of the wall, death had forcefully  spread itself all over. We were in line to be  flogged and executed. Every day, tens or  maybe hundreds of prisoners were hanged.  In those days, I wished I could fly in one of  those balloons and cry about what was going on in the prison."  Raha writes about her first few days in  Eshrat Abad prison in Tehran:  "The guard took me and Nargis to another room. The room was dark and damp  with cement walls. Fifteen other women  prisoners were sitting on the cement floor.  The room reminded me of old public baths.  A prisoner, noticing my surprised look, told  me, 'They don't have enough space. They  are using baths as cells.'  "I sat on the cement floor and looked at  the faces. Most were young. Three of the  women were classmates from the same high  school. They were arrested while registering  at school. Akram, a 16-year-old girl, was  arrested with a Molotov cocktail in the famous September 1981 demonstration. Even  though she didn't use the Molotov cocktail,  she was sure that she would be executed.  ...There was a university student who told  me she was arrested because of her activities  in the university. I asked with surprise, 'But  the universities have been closed for a year  anda half!' She said, T have been arrested for  my activities during the time that universities were still open.'  "Akram told me this was a temporary  prison and that, after initial interrogations,  the prisoners would be sent to Evin prison."  Raha relates her experiences with torture in the prison:  "I was called for interrogation. My body  was shivering. I remember seeing a prisoner  who was being flogged in the large basin of  the bath...The interrogator asked me why I  [had been] imprisoned during the reign of  theShah [people with political prison records  during the reign of the Shah were also suspects after the establishment of the Islamic  Republic of Iran] He also asked me about  my education. I replied that I only held a  high school diploma [leftist university students are suspected and imprisoned.]  "In the afternoon, the interroga tor called  me again and, repeatedly calling me a liar,  took me to the interrogation room. He said,  'Liar! Weren't you a student of such and  such university?' I answered, 'I was,' realizing that 1 had been reported by the university. He said, 'The reason for lying?' I said:  'Fear'... He said: 'For this first lie, you will  get 60 hits on your palm'...He also told the  guard to keep me standing up in a small cell  for the whole night with no food."  Raha also tells many stories about resistance and betrayal in the prison. Many  prisoners stood firm on their ideals and were  killed by the government. Some prisoners  recanted, and converted to government views  on an Islamic Republic—they, as a result,  became informants and even torturers. This  became epidemic later on. Consequently,  prisoners who stood [firm] on their ideas  were under extreme pressure by both the  prison authorities and converts, who were  officially called tawabs or repentants—people who ask forgiveness for their sins."  Raha writes about a woman political  prisoner whose daughter, a tawab, turned  her in to the police.  "But we would not surrender to the  situation. We had programs to spend our  times. We spent our days reading newspapers. Usually, we read newspapers in groups  of several people. There were few newspapers and we had to share the reading. One  advantage of reading in a group was that we  could exchange our views on the news and  articles. At night, we talked about films or  books we knew of before jail...We would  analyse the characters and skits." Raha's  memoirs also describe the last days of many  activists in these torture houses or prisons.  "Shohren was a happy and funny young  woman from the city of Abadan. She was  arrested in the winter of 1982. Within two  weeks, her interrogation was finished and  she was sentenced to death. But her execution was delayed for a year. She was spend-  inghertemporarylifewithincredibleenthu-  siasm and love. She was everybody's favourite.  "Once, we embroidered a picture and  gave it to her as a present. All of us had  participated in embroidering the picture.  Shohren was very happy to see it. The picture reminded her of her youth. The background of the picture was the natural scenery of her province Khuzistan with palm  trees. A woman was riding a bicycle in the  foreground and the wind was blowing her  Many prisoners stood  firm on their ideals and  were killed by the  government. Some  prisoners recanted, and  converted to  government views on an  Islamic Republic—they,  as a result, became  informants and even  torturers.  hair. We got the idea for the embroidery  from the stories Shohren had told us about  herself.  "I don't know how her mother handled  the news of Shohren's execution. Shohren  was the only person she had. I was in Ghizil  Hessar prison when I heard the news. The  bullets had silenced her soundful laughter  forever. But her love for a better life for  humanity is always alive in my and other  friends' memories.  "...While walking from the bathroom to  the cell, I tried to look around from beneath  the blindfold covering my eyes...By the wall  stood a woman wearing a yellow jacket and  a beige scarf. She was talking to a young  bearded prison guard. The guard said: 'So  you don't believe that god has created humans?' The woman showed her hand to him  and, in a strong voice, said: 'These hands  have created humans.'  "At dinner time, when I took the blindfold off my eyes, I saw the woman in the  yellow jacket in front of me sharing the  communal dinner plate with me. I smiled at  her and introduced myself. Her name was  Suzaan...She was a 30-year old nurse who  lived alone and had been informed on by a  friend to the police. About the person who  'With great hope to  overcome'...  had informed on her, Suzaan said [she] 'must  have been terribly tortured.'  "...One day I met Suzaan again. We  hugged. She told me that she had gone to the  court and was awaiting execution. My happiness at seeing her was replaced with disbelief and sorrow.  "Her presence in the ward was a relief  for everyone. She was an experienced nurse  [and] offered to teach us first aid...Each  morning, she would hold classes for those  interested. Her emphasis was on preventative medicine in jail. She taught us to massage our feet when they were bruised and  injured from torture. We would start massaging from the tip of our toes...She also  taught us to massage our foreheads to relieve headaches. Later on, whenever I massaged someone's foot or head, the memory  of Suzaan came back to me.  "But Suzaan was with us only for a  week. One day, after lunch, she was called.  We knew that she wouldn't come back. When  leaving the ward, she lifted up her fist and  said goodbye. She refused to say goodbye to  us individually. 'With great hope to overcome,' she said [as] she left the ward. Her  departure was magnificent. There was no  hesitation about her. She left us with a smile  so that we would not cry after her."  There is a brief mention of lesbian love  and its consequences under a government  that sentences loving to prison and death.  "In our common lives in the ward and  especially in the room, we were building  deep affection and friendships among each  other...There were two close friends in our  room. There was a rumour that their friendship had gone beyond the natural relation of  two women. Because of this rumour, other  prisoners did not have a good image of  them." While Raha seems to be sympathetic  for the young lesbians, the fact that she  identifies their relationship as "unnatural"  reveals the prevalence of homophobia in the  mainstream left.  Raha relates that: "One of the women, a  young high school student who had spent a  long time in the prison, suffered from nervous problems. Because of these rumours,  their isolation was increased and the pressures of prison life doubly affected them.  The rumours apparently spread beyond our  room and reached the office. They were  called in for interrogation and both were  flogged. They were then sent back to different rooms."  Simple Truth is a powerful and unique  journey into the lives of women political  prisoner in the Islamic Republic of Iran. It is  an important document written by an eyewitness/survivor of a prison run by a bloody  religious government.  Shahla Sarabi is an Iranian refugee who  follows Middle Eastern news and publications  closely through the mail and interviews eye  witnesses.  SEPTEMBER 1993  19 Arts  Review.Jhe Doctor's Wife:  Two strong-willed women  by Amy Wong   THE DOCTOR'S WIFE  By Sawako Ariyoshi  Translated by Wakako Hironaka and Ann  Siller Kostant  New York: Kodansha International, 1967  Hanaokaseishu- no f-suma,called The Doctor's Wife in translation, was published 26  years ago in Japan. Ariyoshi chose to construct her novel around a major medical  discovery in Japan—the anaesthetic, which  made it possible to perform the first ever  breast removal surgery. This procedure  brought to the fore an important discovery  about women's reality and mortality in patriarchal society of the 1800s—it challenged  traditional folklore that claimed a woman's  breast is a symbol of life, and therefore connected to a woman's life itself. The act of  removing a woman's breast and saving her  life contradicted this notion and therefore,  symbolically, was a small step towards life  for women outside of traditional notions.  In the book, Kae, the woman who marries the doctor who performs the surgery,  initially wants to marry into the Hanaoka  family because she is infatuated with Otsugi,  the doctor's mother. Everywhere in the region, Otsugi's beauty is legendary. Kae is a  child when she first meets Otsugi. She falls  in love with this beautiful womanand wishes  to be close to her. This desire stays with her  through her childhood until she hears with  joy one day that Otsugi wants her as her  daughter-in-law.  At first, Kae's father refuses the marriage offer as Kae comes from a family of  higher social standing than the Hanaokes.  The marriage offer is finally accepted after  Kae indirectly demands her father's approval: she gets sick, refuses to eat, and lets  her maid "leakout" the cause of her malady.  Kae's husband, Seishu, studies medicine in Kyoto for the first few years of their  marriage, during which time Kae tries to  earn Otsugi's approval and affection. All  sparemoniesthefamilyhasare sent to Seishu  for his education. To this end, Seishu's two  sisters and Otsugi weave fabric for sale. Kae  begins to believe Otsugi loves her as if she  were her own daughter, praising her even in  front of strangers. Kae continues to contribute to the family's finances by weaving cloth  for sale.  All this changes when Seishu returns.  Otsugi neglects Kae and intentionally comes  between Kae and Seishu. Kae responds with  disbelief. She now has an antagonistic relationship with Otsugi. The two women are  put in the position of feuding for Seishu's  SAWAKO  ARIYOSHI  A NOVEL  The Doctors Wife  affection. Seishu, of course, seems oblivious  to the feud. He is only concerned with his  work.  This feud for Seishu's affection and loyalty escalates, until both Kae and Otsugi end  up volunteering to be the first human subject  totrySeishu'sanaesthetic.Kaebecomesblind  due to the experiment. Through this sacrifice, she wins Seishu's affection and allegiance. Kae realises that she has gained socially at the cost of her eyesight. This notion  that a woman gains through her blindness,  literally not seeing, is highly disturbing in  that it implies that a woman who sees is in a  state of dis-ease.  The Doctor's Wife lets us into the lives of  two strong-willed Japanese women constrained within a family system that puts  men first. This historic fiction covers 70 years,  from 1760-1835, and ends on a pessimistic  o note: "If you stand directly in frontof Seishu's  "§■ tomb, the two behind him, those of Kae and  f Otsugi, are completely obscured."  | Similarly, Ariyoshi's courageous at-  ° tempt to write about women's realities in  The Doctor's Wife is ultimately obscured by  having to recognise a system that does not  allow women a better, more self-affirming  reality.   Amy Wong is a first tun  r for Kin  Review: National Women's Music Festival  A sense of community  by Pat Hogan  The National Women's Music Festival,  held in the United States in June, took place  on Bloomington, Indiana's university campus. About 4,000 women attended.  It was the first women's festival I had  attended that was indoors. Naturally, it felt  different from the laid-back "summer girl's  camp" atmosphere that the Michigan or  Westcoast women's festivals offer. Nevertheless, it was a great festival, jam-packed  with women's music and culture—workshops, concerts, and a marketplace full of  incredible stuff made by women.  It's only when I get to a festival every  two to three years that I really get a hit of the  extent and diversity of "women's culture"—  age, race, size, lifestyles, skills, talent, experience.  The National Women's Music Fest is, I  believe, the oldest of the women's festivals  in North America, this year celebrating its  19th anniversary (Michigan is one year  younger).  Other forms of women's culture are just  as important as music to a women's festival.  All go towards creating a sense of community—politics and activism, crafts, artistry,  dance, writings, poetry, healing, spirituality, comedy, interpreting—the list is endless.  One of the workshops I attended, led by  Alix Dobkin, was entitled "What the heck is  women's music?" Dobkin, a strong advocate of women's community building and  one of the earliest out lesbians, who sang  about lesbians when it absolutely wasn't  acceptable, redirected the discussion by asking women the questions: "When did you  first hear women's music? What impact did  it have on your life? How would you define  women's music?"  There were as many different stories as  there were women in attendance, and for the  most part, they were coming-out stories—  some funny, others moving. Turns out, there  is no one definition of what women's music  is, but we did manage to agree that songs  written and sung by women, about women,  for other women, and about all the issues  that are close to our hearts, is what we call  "women's music."  We also understood that it was songs  about lesbian lives that had formed the basis  of "women's music," when that term was  coined some 20 years ago.  The women's music that was produced  at that time came out of a predominantly  white middle class feminist culture; to a  lesser degree, this is still true. But just as  issues of racism are being addressed among  political and social women's groups, so too  are they being confronted and worked on by  women active in the women's music festival  circuit.  Many women of colour performed,  spoke and worked at the National Festival  and a specific women of colour space was  available. I appreciated responses by the  Black political activist Angela Davis, and by  Nana Korantemaa, founder of the Akan temple based on African beliefs/customs/rituals, to questions about women of colour only  spaces: separate space is not done to separate or divide. Women have to work towards the freedom of all women and people,  and often need separate spaces for women  /c$Am°\  VANCOUVER  ^      WOMEN'S  31<CAMIMF.SI\  VANCOUVKR, B.C.  V6B 2N4  TKI: (604) 684.0523  1 [OURS:  MONDAY - SATURDAY  in AM -6 I'M  who share common oppressions to get together, to retreat, heal, talk and strategize.  I also attended the annual meeting of  the Association of Women's Music & Culture (AWMAC). Its members are performers, producers, distributors, managers, and  technicians—some of the many parts that  make up "women's culture." Among the  more than 145 members of AWMAC are  performers like Karen Williams, the Washington Sisters, Margie Adams, Jamie  Anderson, Alix Dobson, Sue Fink, and  "Amazon" radio producer Pat Smith.  It was good for me to hear about similar  struggles that other producers face when  putting on concerts and other events—finding affordable venues; negotiating fees, accommodations, and travel; dealing with performers; getting support from the community.  Hearing all this, I didn't feel so isolated  any more.  Another issue producers had in common was that their concerts didn't seem to  appeal to many younger women.  AWMAC is trying to broaden its base of  members to reflect the scope of women's  culture. It is working toward having a strong  representation of women of colour. Although  its membership is mainly in the US, there is  potential for producers and performers in  Canada to network and use the services of  AWMAC. Anyone who would like to know  more about AWMAC and what it has to  offer, please call me.  Pat Hogan is a producer of concerts and  cultural events in Vancouver, and manager of  Sounds and Furies, a production company.  She is also the owner of Josephine's Cafe on  Charles and Commercial.  J7?0A/~SAr  A)'-2o^  ALSO  USBP  Oti  6toa3P*y4Q XS6..    GrAAf$£S &C  1/llLL fa/ 0$V FOR &/H/IES8M*/,  &ej*i/a//st&*fiPEA/id&, tf&urto*^, /htr  frtfftOBS lrr&C/mt/&E      531- 967V  20  2SEPTEMBER  1993 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear  at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST)  forthefirst50wordsorportion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is published  ten times a year. Jul/Aug and Dec/  Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over  the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin  Board, Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  Street, Vancouver, BC.V5L2Y6. For  more information call 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you, too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writers' meeting on Tues, Sept 7 at 7 pm  at our office, 301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If you can't make the meeting, call 255-  5499. No experience is necessary, all women  welcome.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved, but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women. VSW  volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise  funds, answer the phone lines and help to  connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and  other exciting tasks! Come to committee  meetings; Finance/Fundraising, Mon, Sept  20, 5:30 pm; Publicity, Wed, Sept 22, 5:30  pm; Programming, Thurs, Sept 23, 5:30  pm. The next volunteer orientation and potluck will be on Wed, Sept 15, 7 pm at VSW,  301-1720 Grant St. For more info, call  Jennifer at 255-5511.  VSW AGM  Vancouver Status of Women's Annual General Meeting and Volunteer Appreciation  Night will take place Tues, Sept 21, 6-10  pm, at 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver. Bring  a friend and help build VSW membership!  SEXUAL HARASSMENT SUPPORT  Vancouver Status of Women is starting up a  sexual harassment support group for  women. If you are interested, please call  Miche at 255-5511 for more info.  KINESIS RETREAT  Spend a weekend discussing Kinesis\To be  held Sept 11-12, at a location to be announced. Subsidy available, all interested  ARE WE HAVING FUN YET?  To celebrate the Certificate Program in Women's Studies at Simon  Fraser University, the Women's Studies Department and the  Labour Program in Continuing Studies are sponsoring an evening  of fun and diversion on "The Body".  Finding the Body Andrea Lebowitz, Associate Professor,  English  Who dunnit?  Who wrote it? Who reads it? We'll investigate  women and the mystery novel; seek clues for why so many  women write and read them, and deduce what role feminism has  to play in the plot.  Building the Body Marilyn MacDonald, Assistant  Professor, Women's Studies  A once over lightly of women's experience in sport.  Decorating the Body       Mary Lynn Stewart, Professor, History  & Women's Studies  No padding on this illustrated history of women's fashion and  cosmetics through the ages.  WHERE: Harbour Centre Campus  Simon Fraser University  515 West Hastings Street  Room 1400-1410 (Segal Centre)  WHEN: Wednesday, October 20, 1993  7:30-9:30 p.m.  For further information call:  Women's Studies Dept.  291 3333 or  Labour Program, Continuing Studies 291 4177  women welcome. For more info call 255-  5499.  FREE COMPUTER WORKSHOP  Free introductory workshop for women with  little or no computer experience, Mon, Sept  13, 7-9 pm. Address available upon registration. For more infoorto register, call Hope  at 879-3888 or Suzanne at 254-2485.  JOELLE RABU  Benefit concert for the Planned Parenthood  Association, featuring singer Joelle Rabu,  on Sun, Sept 19, 7 pm, at the VECC, 1895  Venables St, Van. Tickets $40 ($30 tax  deductible). For more info call 254-9578.  HEATHER BISHOP  Singer/songwriter Heather Bishop will be  performing on Thurs, Sept 30, 8 pm, at the  VECC, 1895 Venables St, Van. Ticket price  TBA. For more info call 254-9578.  RANDOM ACTS AND TAYLOR  Random Acts present Jackie Crossland and  NoraD. Randall in their newshow, "Who Are  These People." Appearing with performance artist Christine Taylor on Sept 13 & 14,  8 pm, atthe VECC, 1895 Venables St, Van.  For more info call 254-9578.  BEYOND THE FRINGE  Follow the 9th Annual Fringe Festival to the  Vancouver East Cultural Centreforthe picks  of the Fringe, Sept 20-25. For more info call  254-9578.  RELATING TO MONSTERS  Workshops in relating to our "inner troublemakers." Through discussion of tales of  mythical and fabulous creatures such as  witches, vampires, werewolves and other  archetypal representations, we will examine  modes of relationship with our unsavoury  energies. Five Weds in Sept, 1,8,15,22 &  29. Call VLC at 254-8458 or Erin Parker at  731 -2312 for more info or to sign up.  AIDS CONGRESS PRESENTATION  The Positive Women's Network is sponsoring a presentation on the 9th International  AIDS Congress held in Berlin, 1993, and on  the International Community of Women living with HIV and AIDS, andthe International  Women's AIDS Caucus. Thurs, Sept 9, 4-  6 pm, in the Boardroom, Pacific AIDS Resource Centre, 1107 Seymour St, Van. All  welcome.  WALK FOR AIDS  The Vancouver Persons with AIDS Society's annual walk will take place Sun, Sept  26, on the seawall in Stanley Park. Pledge  forms available at all Starbucks, BOY'S CO,  and other locations. For more info, call John  Barnes at 893-2254.  DANCING ON THE EDGE  The Firehall Arts Centre presents the Dancing on the Edge Festival, North America's  largest festival of work by independent choreographers, Sept 3-18. Festival Pass $75,  Weekend Pass $37.50, Advance ticket sales  $2 off per show if bought by Sept 3. For  reservations call 689-0926 or buy advance  tickets or passes at 280 East Cordova St,  Van.  WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  Free workshops offered by the Douglas  College Women's Centre for women interested in attending the College who want to  learn relevant life and study skills. The  Juggling Act: Home, Work, School, Etc.,  Thurs, Sept 16, 2-4 pm. Introduction to  Confidence BuildingforWomen, Wed,Sept  ^September z¥4  ©TAKE BACKiheNiGHT  .. TM«v September zt4MTO MOp* VteiefluvsrArt Gall&ry  WONCMA HAUHandRALUfFOR FXEEDOHFRONHEMV VIOLENCE  VancouverRapeReli&f and Women's Shelter     872*8ZIZ     Hi  toWhiht Canadian Association ofSexual Assault Centres ScfciUfrtgiSjrti- "f«  Stop Censorship Now Meeting  Wednesday, September 8th, 8:00 PM  at  Little Sister's Bookstore, 1221 Thurlow Street, Vancouver  This is an open meeting for all those interested in helping with Little Sister's  Defense Fund. There's alot of work to be done before our case begins in October.  We need all the ideas, input and help available. So please join us on September 8th  to find out how you can help. If you can't make it but would like to participate, just  give us a call at 669-1753.  AGGITATE   EDUCATE   ORGANIZE  SEPTEMBER 1993 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  29, 10 am-noon. No registration required,  drop in to attend at the Women's Centre,  Room 2720, Douglas College, New Westminster. For more info call the Women's  Centre at 527-5148.  SELF DEFENSE FILMS  Pacific Cinematheque isfeaturingan evening  of films on women's self defense, Thurs,  Sept 23. Films include the premiere of A  Hard House, Karate for Women, and The  Women That Got Away. Anita Roberts, Joni  Miller, and Alice McPherson, self defense  instructors featured in the films, will be  giving short talks. $5-$10 at Pacific  Cinematheque, 1131 Howe St, Van. This  event is a benefit for the Women's Monument Project. For more info call 684-3014.  WOMYN'S OPEN STAGE  Sign up now for the womyn's open stage on  Mon, Sept 27, at Josephine's, 1716 Charles  St, Van. This popular monthly event features new and experienced performers. Tix  $2-$5 at the door. Call 253-3142 for info or  to sign up. Door opens at 7:15 pm, show at  8 pm.  PERSON'S DAY BREAKFAST  West Coast LEAF invites you to join us in  celebrating the 64th anniversary of the Person at our 7th Annual Person's Day Breakfast, Fri, Oct 15, 7-9 am, at the Hyatt  Regency Hotel, 655 Burrard St, Van. Guest  speaker Dr. Glenda Simms, President, Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of  Women. Tickets $45, for reservations or  more info call 684-8772.  FAT WOMEN'S GATHERING  Seattle, Washington is hosttothe 1993 Fall  Fat Women's Gathering, Oct 22-25. The  weekend is endorsed by the Fat Feminist  Caucus of the National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance. There will be special  emphasis on fat women's culture and self-  expression, presenting highly positive images of the full-bodied woman through art,  music and theatre. Weekend highlights  include guest speakers Alice Ansf ield, editor  and publisher of Radiance, a Magazine for  Large Women, Dr. Laura Brown, feminist  psychologist and author, and fat-positive  stand-up comedy by Seattle African-American comedy team 4 Big Girls. For more info  call (206) 789-1267.  HONOURING MENOPAUSE  Sandi Chamberlain and Vicki Drader examine this time of great change and transition,  Sept 23-26, at Hollyhock, Box 127, Mansons  Landing, Cortes Island, VOP 1K0. Please  write for a catalogue of events.  SOCIAL WELFARE SYSTEM  The Centre for Research in Women's Studies and Gender Relations will host their  second annual conference, on the topic  Gender and the Social Welfare System, on  Cwl^^^ie^mM^Jb   una Qjt  rHEY.'  Oct 15 -17, in Vancouver. For more info call  822-9173.  POSTER KIDS NO MORE  A Space presents Poster Kids No More, a  multi-disciplinary programmefeaturing visual  art, readings, dramatic and visual performances that push the limits of the ways in  which disabled women are commonly perceived. Oct 19-31, at the Arcadia Art Gallery, 680 Queen's Quay West, Toronto.  Exhibition opening Fri, Oct 22, 6-10 pm.  Performance Evening Sat, Oct 23, 7 pm.  WOMEN DO THIS EVERYDAY  A benefit for the Women's Monument  Project—Women's Self Defense Film &  Video Night at the Pacific Cinematheque,  1131 Howe St, Thurs, Sept 23, 7:30 pm.  Tickets on a sliding scale $5-$10 available at  Ariel Books, 1988 W 4th Ave, 733-3511,  Octopus Books, 1146 Commercial, 253-  0913, and Josephine's, 1716 Charles St,  253-3142. For more infocall Sylvia Jonescu-  Lisitza, Canadian Filmmakers Distribution  West at 684-3014 or Janine Carscadden,  Women's Monument Project at 929-4083.  CAROL LEES & BARBARA LITTLE  Carol Lees who refused to fill in her census  form because it required her to check that  she didn't work as a housewife and Barbara  Little of VOICE of Women BC, who is campaigning to have questions in census on  women's unpaid work, will speak in Vancouver at 7:30 pm at East Side Family Place,  Sept 28. Call 253-3395 for more info.  ANTI-CENSORSHIP ON CO-OP  Voices of Dissent speaking out about censorship, from an anti-censorship perspective—in support of Little Sister's Bookstore  upcoming trial on Oct 4, regarding material  seizure at the Canada Customs border.  Tune in to CO-OP Radio at 102.7. FM on  Tues at noon to 1 pm from Sept 21 to Oct  4. Call Anna Camilleri at 684-8494 for more  info.  LITTLE SISTER'S DEFENSE FUND  Benefit screening of Forbidden Love for  Little Sister's Defense Fund will take place  Sept 7, 7:30 pm at the Cinematheque. For  more infocall Little Sister's at 669-1753.  QUEER CITY  Queer Writes: Benefit Literary Performances  for Little Sister's Defense Fund include  Queeries, Sept 27; Queer Theatre, Oct 4;  Queerla!, Oct 11. Call 689-0926.  TAPESTRY SYMPOSIUM  Making a Place for Tapestry Symposium  1993 will be held from Sept 16-19. Accompanied by tapestry exhibitions it is co-sponsored by the BC Society of Tapestry artists  and the Canadian Craft Museum & Richmond Art Gallery. Call the Richmond Cultural Centre for more info at 231-6423.  GROUPS  BATTERED WOMEN'S SUPPORT  Battered Women's Support Services of  Vancouver offers free support groups for  women who have experienced emotional,  physical or sexual abuse in their adult intimate relationships. Ten week groups start  up each month, and drop-in groups are held  Tues afternoons, 1-3 pm, and Wed evenings, 7-9 pm. Call 687-1867 for more info,  or to speak to a counsellor.  MENOPAUSE GROUP  Let's explore alternate therapies vs. hormones, mid-life issues and ways to celebrate this transition. Starting Sept 20 for 6  weeks. Mon7-9pm. Sliding Scale $30-$50.  Norma Roberts, BSW, Group Facilitator,  874-9590.  REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES  Vancouver Women's Reproductive Technologies Coalition meet on the first Wed of  every month at the Vancouver Women's  Health Centre, 219-1675 W 8th Ave, Van, at  6:30 pm. All welcome to discuss and plan  strategies in response to reproductive technologies.  WAVAW VOLUNTEER TRAINING  Women Against Violence Against Women/  Rape Crisis Centre is looking for female  volunteers to do crisis line work. The next  training begins on Wed, Sept 15 for 12  weeks, Wed7-10pmandSun11-5pm. We  offer extensive training in counselling and  crisis intervention, advocacy and liaison  work, and provide information on medical,  police, and legal procedures for rape crisis  work. WAVAW is striving to be anti-racist,  Jewish women supportive, anti-classist, anti-  homophobic, and anti-ableist. We want  women in the collective to reflect the diversity of women in the community. WAVAW  encourages all women to join our training.  Childcare and transportation subsidies available. Call 255-6228 for more info.  LESBIAN CONNECTION  A woman-based ACOA group is starting  immediately at VLC, 876 Commercial Dr,  Van, Tues evenings at 7 pm. New groups  are starting for the fall season: A support  and networking group for Alternative Insemination, a Women of Colour support  group, and a Women of First Nations Healing Circle. Coming Out groups for women of  colour facilitated by women of colour will  start atthe end of Sept. For infoorto sign up  for any of these groups, call 254-8458.  KARATE FOR WOMEN  Classes available Mon, Tues, and Thurs  evenings, 7 pm, at the YWCA, 580 Burrard  St, Van. Taught by female black belts. Call  734-9816.  WOMEN PRISONERS SOLIDARITY  Joint Effort are a women prisoners solidarity  group, who see prisons as state violence.  GROUPS  We have weekly discussion groups at the  Burnaby Correctional Centre for Women,  organize sports and cultural events, and do  public education, government lobbying, and  liaison with other women's groups. We are  looking for committed women who want to  work with us on the urgent situation of  women who are imprisoned. We see the  perspectives of First Nations women and  women of colour and those with a class and  race analysis as vital to this work. Those  interested please call Chris at 255-5511.  SUBMISSIONS  WOMEN'S LABOUR REP WANTED  The Women's Reference Group (Advisory  Body to the Canadian Labour Force Development Board) is seeking nominations for  the two year volunteer position of the Women's Representative to the Canadian Labour Force Development Board. This woman  will represent women's national employment-related training issues on the CLFDB.  Nominees must be able to effectively represent issues of concern to Aboriginal, visible  minority and immigrant women, and women  with disabilities. For more info, contact:  Selection Committee, Women's Reference  Group, 47 Main St, Toronto, Ontario, M4E  2V6, or call (416) 699-1909, or fax (416)  699-2145.  ASIANS & PACIFIC ISLANDERS  Redefining Our Own Sexuality, an anthology of erotica by Asian and Pacific Islander  women and men, needs poems, prose,  short stories, works of art and photographs  by women and men of Asian and Pacific  Islander descent. Please send your works  along with a bio to: Anthology, c/o Mira  Esmile, 540 31st St, Oakland, California,  94609.  For info call (510) 653-6897.  JOB OPENINGS  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  Starting Oct. 4/93, VSW plans to run a  project employing four women under a  Section 25 Job Creation Grant for four  months. All applicants must be on  unemployment insurance.  The four positions are:  1. Program Assistant - To develop  and pilot a series of workshops for  presentation to single mothers on the  resources and services available in the  Lower Mainland.  2. Marketing and Community  Outreach Coordinator - To develop a  marketing plan for the newspaper  Kinesis and create a more effective  distribution system.  3. Project Coordinator - To establish  and promote the VSW Speaker's  Bureau.  4. Project Coordinator - To assist the  South Asian Women's Action Network  with the establishment of the first  women's centre for South Asian women  in Vancouver.  Call 255-5511 or drop by our  office for job descriptions - Suite  301, 1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6.  Applications must be received by  4 pm on September 15th.  SEPTEMBER 1993 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS  I      SUBMISSIONS  BISEXUAL WOMEN  Final call for all forms of written and visual  workfor an anthology by and about bisexual  women. At least half of this anthology will be  written and produced by women of colour  and the book will be published by Sister  Vision Press, a Black Women and Women  of Colour Press. We especially seek the  voices of bisexual women of colour. Send  work (if possible, on IBM compatible disc  with a printed copy, and with SASE) to:  Bisexual Women's Anthology, c/o Sister  Vision Press, PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto, Ontario, M6H 4E2. Final deadline:  Oct 31.  ASIAN LESBIANS AND BISEXUALS  SisterVision Press iscallingforsubmissions  for an anthology of writing and artwork by  Asian Lesbians and Bisexual Women. About  sexuality, activism, racism, homophobia,  relationships, immigration, identity, erotica,  bi-culturalism, family issues, art —in short,  our lives. Send submissions with an SASE,  or write for more info to: Sister Vision Press,  PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto, Ontario,  M6H4E2. Deadline Sept 1.  IDENTITY AND ASSIMILATION  But Where Are You Really From? An Anthology on Identity and Assimilation in Canada,  seeks submissions from non-white and  mixed-race women of all ages and backgrounds. This anthology will focus on the  experiences of non-white women, born or  brought up in Canada, in search of cultural  identity but caught between two sets of  values, traditions and lifestyles—those which  derive from Canadian society and those  influenced by cultural heritage. Also of  interest are contributions which explore issues around assimilation in Canada. Submissions should be typed, double-spaced  (with diskette copy if possible), in duplicate,  and include a bio with full address and phone  number. Send to: Identity, Sister Vision  Press, PO Box 217, Station E, Toronto,  Ontario, M6H 4E2. Deadline: Jan 15.  BROTHER-SISTER INCEST  Looking for writings and visual art pieces by  women for an anthology talking about  brother-sister incest. Pseudonyms accepted.  Send copies of artwork, poems, or stories  (include SASE) to: Risa Shaw, PO Box  5723, Takoma Park, MD, 20913-0723. Dead-  line:Dec1.  FILM AND VIDEO FESTIVAL  Call for entries for the 4th Annual Women's  Film and Video Festival in St. John's, Newfoundland. Call (709) 772-0359, or Fax  (709) 772-4808.  CANADIAN WOMAN STUDIES  Racism and Gender Issue: Canadian  Woman Studies' Winter 1994 issue will explore the links between racism and gender  at the grass roots, political, and institutional  levels. The issue aims to critique racism  within the feminist movement, analyse how  white privilege contributes to the politics of  exclusion, focus on uncovering the hidden  racism that exists even in progressive movements, and examine misconceptions concerning the representations of marginalized  women. Invited are writings and artwork  which address the links between racism and  gender in women's daily lives. Deadline:  Nov 30. Women and Health Issue: The  Spring 1994 issue will explore health issues  KARATE for WOMEN  YWCA - 580 Burrard  Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm.  BEGINNERS GROUP  September 16  D22] 734-98 I 6  women's health issues and service provision, and the politics of health services for  women. The focus will be on a holistic  approach to health care, including non-medical, traditional healing methods. We are  specifically seeking articles written in a clear  writing style that is accessible to the largest  number of people. Invited are writings and  artwork which address the many facets of  health in women's daily lives. Deadline: Jan  31. Articles should be typed and double-  spaced, 7-12 pages long. A short (50 word)  abstract of the article and a brief bio must  accompany each submission. Canadian  Woman Studies, 212 Founders College,  York University, 4700 Keele St, North York,  Ontario, M3P 1P3. Tel: (416) 736-5356.  Fax: (416) 736-5700 (extension 55356).  CRIAW PAPERS  The publication committee of the Canadian  Research Institute for the Advancement of  Women is soliciting submissions on the  following topics: 1. Women's mental health  and psychology. 2. Visionary/futurist analysis; where is the women's movement going?  What will feminism be in the 21st century? 3.  Ecofeminism. 4. Feminist analysis of government's policies such as those related to  child support, family benefits, income tax,  unemployment, etc. 5. The destiny of feminist proposals when the "system" responds  (e.g. government policies, laws, unions, institutions, Royal Commissions, etc.). 6. Links  between feminism and anti-racism. 7. The  face of women's studies in Canada; what  are the issues? How does it compare to  other countries? 8. Sexualities and sexual  orientation. 9. Afeminist analysis of mothering. The committee will alsoconsider papers  on other subjects of interest for the advancement of women. Write to: CRIAW,  151 Slater St, Suite 408, Ottawa, Ontario,  K1P 5H3. Tel: (613) 563-0681. Fax: (613)  563-0682. TDD: (613) 563-1921.  FIRST NATIONS WOMEN  Kinesis is calling for submissions from first  nations women writers for the Dec/Jan special issue to commemorate the United Nations Year of Indigenous Peoples (1993). If  you're interested in writing for this issue,  please call Fatima at 255-5499, or guest  editor Viola Thomas at 685-7085 by Oct 14,  or write to Viola Thomas, c/o Kinesis, 301-  1720 Grant St, Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6.  MAKING OUT  Making Out: Women on the Verge of Revolution in the Mango Swamp of Enchantment  is calling all lesbian and bisexual women of  colour and two-spirited women of First Nations for a wild time defying high art, low art  and Eurocentric brain patterns. This is a  safe place for our diverse communities to  express ourselves without self-censorship.  It's about process and having fun. For more  info, to make contributions, or to volunteer  call 875-1640 or leave us a message at the  Pitt Gallery. Deadline: Sept 6.  BC WOMAN LISTINGS  Let us know of any events, seminars or  network groups of particular interest to  women happening in your community this  Oct, Nov, or Dec, and we'll tell all our  readers. Fax to Around BC, BC Woman,  (604) 524-0041, or write: Attn: Tia Freeman,  BC Woman Magazine, 704 Clarkson St,  New Westminster, BC, V3M 1E2.  S^v&iieY}  •organic lairfscapijy  ,    ,        'Minor house repairs  F1-1875 Vest tWwe   £cIeU)MP  Y&ocouyer,Dc ybf 7H4  ■painting  Y&»couyer,&G Vhfin  LadI i Bri-rT  Joy Harjo's words and music reflect the beauty and strength of  First Nations women. She is a member of the Muscogee tribe  (USA) and currently resides in Alberquerque, New Mexico. She  has written several books of poetry and her most recent is Mad  in Love and War. Harjo is editing a special anthology of  Indigenous women's writing from North and South America to  be released this fall called Re-Inventing Our Beauty—In Enemies Language. She also plays tenor, alto and soprano saxes.  Harjo will be featured at the Vancouver International Writer's  Festival, Oct 20-24, Granville Island. She will be playing with  her band Poetic Justice.  CLASSIFIEDS CLASSIFIEDS  THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE  Counselling and therapy using an integrative and eclectic approach in order to explore the individual's conflict and distress  within the social context in which this occurs,  such as adoption and fostering; racism and  anti-semitism; heterosexism, etc. For an  appoint, please call Sangam Grant at 253-  5007.  OFFICE SPACE  Approximately 1100 sq ft of office space  available Aug 1. Possibility of shared reception, accounting services, clerical support,  office equipment (i.e. postage, photocopier,  fax, and phones), and rental of office furniture. Parking may be available. Fully accessible facilities. Conveniently located at 6th  Ave and Main. Contact Janet Riehm at BC  Association for Community Living, 875-1119.  DECEMBER 6TH ROSE BUTTONS  Dec 6 is Canada's National Day of Remembrance and Action to End Violence Against  Women. To honour this day, and as part of  the 16 Days of Global Activism Against  Gender Violence (Nov 25-Dec 10), the  YWCA of/du Canada is again producing the  Rose Buttons with an accompanying bookmark. The December 6th button, which bears  a large red rose, reads: "In Commemoration  of the 14 women killed in Montreal, December 6, 1989, and all women who have suffered from violence." Groups working to end  violence against women can sell the buttons  forfund-raising and public education. Available in bags of 100 for $50. English or  French text. To place your order contact:  YWCA of/du Canada, 80 Gerrard St East,  Toronto, Ontario, M5B 1G6, Attention: Rose  Button. Tel: (416) 593-9886. Fax: (416)  971-8084.  1716 Charles St Vancouver BC VSL2T5 & (604)  te fee cappuccino bar    &   light vegetarian mcaJs  art & crafo   d  gifts & music ii   pool table  Open Tuesday ■* Sunday  Womyn's Open Stage       Qy.  September 25        ^  Book your Special Event with Us  WOMAN-TO-WOMAN  A feminist counselling service for all women  who are wanting to make positive changes  in their lives. For relationships, coming out,  substance abuse, sexual abuse and other  forms of violence, I offer a safe, supportive,  professional environment in which to explore your options. Frances Friesen BSc,  BA, MA (candidate), 5-6975 Kingsway,  Burnaby, 540-0634. Sliding scale, free initial  consultation.  VISITING PROFESSOR  Professor with the Centre for Research in  Women's Studies and Gender Relations at  UBC, requires accommodation for the period Jan-Jun 1994. Two bedroom for accompanying child and dog preferred. Please  contact 822-9173 for further details.  NOVEMBER WOMEN'S ART FAIR  Juried show for artists and artisans to sell  their work at a Women's Fair in Vancouver,  Fri evening, Sat and Sun, dates to be  confirmed. 80 booth spaces (8' x 10') available, cost by sliding scale. There will be live  entertainment and artist demonstrations. If  you are interested in having a booth please  call 254-9487.  LOOKING FOR WORK?  I am a disability and women's rights activist  in need of live-in East End attendant services. I want to hire a woman with similar  interests. I need to interview candidates  immediately for positions available end of  Sept, beginning of Oct. Professional development, travel opportunities, as well as free  rent and board. For more info, please call  Shayna at 731-4076 or 737-7302.  AFFORDABLE COUNSELLING  Are you feeling confused, stuck or hurt?  Tired of repeating those old patterns? Exploring your past alone can be difficult.  Counselling creates a safe space to increase your self-esteem and heal from the  past. For more information and a brochure  call Carol Vialogos, 731 -0758. First session  ADS   255*5499  SEPTEMBER 1993 LC0GVU5E  COMNECT/OA<  :  We  spell   it  out!  Read us.  ears  + $2.52 GST QRenewal Orders outside Canada add $8  -tions/Groups QGift Vancouver Status of Women Membership  «  -j-$3.15 GST □ Do nation (includes Kinesis subscription) I  □$30+ $1.40 GST J  □Cheque enclosed      If you can't afford the full amount for S  □Bill me Kinesis subscription, send what you can   ^  □New Free to prisoners  Postal code _  Fax _______  Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6