 Contents  p top  KIN€SJS  srECIAL OOLUCTIONS  50c  JUN€78  Vol 7 no76 ■■/  Vancouver Status of Women  CITY HALL REJECTS VSW'S FUNDING APPEAL, and the anti-  choice element shows up to petition against us  MORE THAN FISH FRYING AT MUCKAMUCK. A worker from the  restaurant tells us what the strike is about  HOLLY DEVOR, from the Vancouver Coalition Against  Anita Bryant discusses the broad nature of the right offensive .  W3MEN AND DECLINING SCHOOL ENROLLMENTS. What happens to  women teachers' jobs when enrollments drop?  !*JDMEN IN A VIOLENT SOCIETY. Jillian Ridington and Gene  Errington report on the recent Calgary conference  BETSY WDOD AND GAY HOON - PRELIMINARY TRAIL is coming up,  DOROTHY HOLME reports on what the Advisory Council on  the Status of Women has been up to in the last nine months  Sundry other goodies, too.  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published by Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support!  Subscriber Only  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED: VANCOUVER CITY DENIES VSW FUNDING  Vancouver City Council turned our  funding application down again.  On Tuesday, May 16,  Vancouver Status of Women returned to City Hall to  ask Council to reconsider its decision to deny our organization funding  for a community worker.  Anti Chokers  The Apti-choicers went, too. Betty  Green, a director of the so-called  'Pro-Life' society in B.C. spoke against funding VSW. She presented a  458 name petition which was opposed  to funding "a controversial political  action group." She quoted Provincial  Secretary McCarthy's comment that  VSW "had failed to demonstrate community support."  Green did not identify the group she  represents. She said not a word about abortion.  It is possible that members of City  Council would not have had any way  of knowing what she was up to, had  not Aid.Harry Rankin provided some  loud asides about 'pro-lifers.'  Council members did not appear to  take the petition very seriously.  "They'll always be someone in the  community who takes a different point  of view", said Aid.May Brown. Aid.  Marzari said that the group was 'hypocritical' for not having identified its real reason for opposing us.  Bloui for BIouj  The first time round, in March, VSW  had lost by only one vote. This time,  too, we were defeated by a single  vote.  A funding application with Vancouver  City Council needs eight affirmative  votes to pass. On the former occasion, we had won the support of the  following Councillors: Marzari, Rankin, Harcourt, Ford, Gerard, Bellamy  and Gibson. Note well that Aid.Bernice Gerard had voted in our favour  last March.  Mayor Volrich and Councillors Kennedy and Puil voted against us - not  that that's a surprise to anyone.  But in March Aid.May Brown also  voted against us. That meant that  we had only seven votes. So we lost.  Two months later, at our May 16 appeal, Aid.May Brown indicated that  she had experienced a change of heart.  She spoke most enthusiastically in  favour of funding.  She hadn't voted for VSW funding  the first time, Aid.Brown explained,  because she thought that we would  be getting all we needed from the  Provincial Government. However, in  view of the fact that this had not  happened, she recommended that City  Council grant funding for two community development workers ($22,000).  Vancouver Status of Women, she said,  provides important legal and ombuds-  services to women in need, including many single parents.  We Lost by  One \bte  Aid.Marguerite Ford agreed that the  services provided by VSW are very  important. Now, however, is not the  time to be expanding, she added. She  moved that we receive $7,000 for  one community worker.  Ald.Darlene Marzari commented: "Vancouver Status of Women has been going for enough time now to have proven itself in the community." She  attacked the petitioners for not  explaining their real reasons for  appearing before Council in opposition to VSW. "When women are being  told to get out of the labour force  it's more important now than ever  before to support a group such as  the Vancouver Status of Women."  Lotta Continua/LNS  Marzari then moved that we be given  $11,000 for one community worker,  (This was the orginial motion before Council, and the one which we  had hoped to have carried.)  Aid.Kennedy spoke briefly against  VSW. He's "vehemently opposed to  funding a political action group."  "We're all motivated by politics  to one extent or another", countered Aid.Harry Rankin. VSW, Rankin  said, "represents a significant  group of people", and for the group  to be effective in the community,  and for it to incorporate volunteers,  it must have funding.  We lost all three motions: Mayor  Volrich, Aid.Kennedy and Aid.Puil  voted against the three motions:  the $22,000 (from the repentant  Aid.May Brown); the $7,000 (from  Aid.Marguerite Ford) and the $11,  000 (from Ald.Darlene Marzari).  Again, we had seven affirmative  votes: Councillors Brown, Ford,  Harcourt, Marzari, Rankin, Bellamy  and Gibson.  Where  Was Gerard?  The crucial factor this time was  that Aid.Bernice Gerard was missing from City Council.  Had Aid.Gerard been present at Council May 16, would she have again  voted yes?  Aid.Bernice Gerard is a well-known  anti-choicer on abortion. How would  the presence of her fellow so-called  "Pro-Lifers" with their petition against VSW have effected her?  June 7:  Bliss Case in Supreme Court  The Stella Bliss Case has been heard  before the Supreme Court of Canada.  Readers of Kinesis will be familiar  with the intricacies of the Bliss  case. Briefly, the case challenges  Section 46 of the Federal Unemployment Insurance Commission benefits.  Under Section 46, a pregnant worker  must go on maternity benefits. She  is not free to choose between those  benefits and regular benefits, even  if she qualifies for regular benefits and would prefer them.  Arguing for Bliss, lawyer John Nell-  igan claimed that the UIC discriminates against all women and accordingly contravenes the Canadian Bill  of Rights.  VSW raised funds for Vancouver Community Legal Assistance Society lawyers Lynn Smith and Al McLean to  take the case to Ottawa. The Supreme Court ruling is expected in the  fall.  Laurie Leifer    LNS  THE ISSUE:  Section 46 of the UIC Act discriminates  against ALL women, not just "pregnant  persons, " All workers, women and men,  should be accorded equal rights under  law. Muckpmucl^ workers on Strike  The workers at the Muckamuck restaurant are on strike. This Vancouver  restaurant serves food traditional  to the Indian peoples of the North  West Coast. It employs native people,  but it is owned by whites.  The greivances include:  * poor pay  * no job security  * no say in scheduling  * short notice of change in working hours  * illegal deductions for uniforms  (the T shirts with Muckamuck printed across them).  * constant criticism from management.  The Muckamuck workers joined SORWUC  to seek an end to these conditions.  The primary union organizer was fired the day that management was notified of the application for certification. Since then, the union  has been certified (with 18 out of  a possible 21 members).  But six  more union members have been fired  or intimidated into quitting.  JOIN TH€ PICK€T LIN€  On Sunday, May 28, a majority of  workers voted to take strike action.  The strikers say: "We are prepared  to negotiate at any time, but we want  a contract because it will give us  control over our jobs and our lives.  "We want all the people who were fired  or forced to quit re-hired - management is opening up an addition upstairs and there are lots of jobs.  "The Vancouver Indian Centre, the  Native Voice, the United Native Nations, the Native Courtworkers,  the Native Brotherhood and Union of  B.C.Indian Chiefs have all assured  us of their support. The trade union  movement and women's groups have also  assured us of their support.  "We gave our contract proposals to  management on April 17 and they have  still not made us one serious offer.  "Please don't eat at Muckamuck until  there is a union contract and workers  are rehired."  More information is available from  SORWUC (Service, Office and Retail  Workers union of Canada) : 684 2834.  Muckamuck worker €TH€L GARDNER on the dispute:  "Would you like to say a few words,  Sam Bob,   about what's going on here?"  I asked, trying to get a coversation  started among us.  "About the restaurant?", he replied.  "Yeah," I said. Before Sam had a  chance to answer, I eyed some people  walking away from the restaurant,  and proceeded to find out what was  happening. I was hoping for some sp-  icey comments from people before the  night was over. It turned out that  they were just looking ;in the window  as they were going by.  "Chris, would you say a few words  about the Muckamuck, about what's  happening here?" I asked. I felt like  a newspaper reporter.  "Bro-ther," she exclaimed, "You mean  why we're doing this?"  "About what management is doing right  now, and about the response we're getting from people," I said. We were  outside the restaurant passing leaflets to customers. The leaflets contained general information and a  list of our greivances. Meanwhile,  management was inside passing them  a counter-leaflet presenting their  side of the story.  "We're getting a pretty good response," Chris said. "We need more response - the way that the management  is bullshitting, by putting that paper up there, by contradicting what  we're saying, and yet they're lying  in there, and then, they're saying  up there that Muckamuck T shirts are  sold to staff on an average of six  dollars, depending on style. That  still doesn't alter the fact they're  going against the law. You know,  they're so dense on this. I can't  see any part of it." She was really  worked up. Her hand was on her hip.  She slowly turned her head away and  somberly looked toward the restaurant and added, "I hope we can keep  up on it. We need more Indians down  here."  One lady stopped on her tracks, mouth dropped, and eyes big, exclaimed,  after reading a few words or sentences of the leaflet, "I don't believe  it.'  Is this true? If it is, we can't  eat here!" I reassured her that it  was true, and let her know that she  would be confronted with another  leaflet inside. She went to another  restaurant. Many people turned away  like this lady.  I caught one couple on their way out  of the restaurant who had plenty to  say.  "How was dinner?" Chris asked.  Leaflet and  Gaunter-Leaflet-  "Oh well, it was o.k., just that  they're down on you guys. They don't  even say why - it's an emotional  trip they're doing on you, you know.  So you should really work your stuff  out and play it on them," replied  the male of the couple. When a couple  was approached, it was usually the  male who spoke. We explained that  we were having a bad time getting  negotiations under way, that we were  with SORWUC.  "You guys seem really sincere and  calm about it. So I figure that some  thing should work out," he said.  "You guys seem pretty centred about  it, where they aren't."  Chris expressed her views of the T  shirt situation. She doesn't believe  that they should deduct money from  our salary for them.  "Why don't they just give them to  you?" asked the girl.  "Exactly," I said.  "You know what you should do," said  the male customer, "You should tell  them to go fuck themselves, and open  up your own restaurant. Well, I mean,  it's an idea, you know. Just slip  away, and do your own trip. Don't  try to hassle with them. They're  just really oppressive, and they  won't do anything."  He gave me the impression that he  thought what we were doing wasn't  worth all the trouble.  "We don't want this happening to  our Native people any more, with  our Native people working in there.  They've been doing it for seven  years. Even if we open up our own  restaurant, they'll still want to  use Native people, and they'll still  give them a hard time," I explained.  "That is true, that's true," he said.  "'You people, you people, I built  a heaven for you people to work in'",  Chris was quoting one of the owners.  "That's Whitey talking there, eh?"  he said. "That's Whitey, for sure."  "Where would they be without you?"  said Cathy, a union representative.  "Right," said Chris, "they tell" us  this is a great opportunity to show  off your jewelry, and all this and  that. And if we don't wear jewelry  we get fired. We have to buy our  own jewelry!"  "Boy, well hang in there," said the  supportive customer. We'll still be accused  of "askjng for it".  The Working Paper on Sexual Offences,  recently released by the Law Reform  Commission of Canada, has been sev-  erly criticised by Vancouver Rape  Relief on the grounds that it does  not address the most problematic  areas of the present rape law, namely that of requiring the victim to  prove that she did not consent.  "This requirement of proof indicates  a bias against victims of sexual  assault," commented Rape Relief  spokesperson, Megan Ellis. "We see  no reason why the burden of proof  should be any different than that  for victims of other assaults."  Megan Ellis made these additional  points concerning the content of  the working paper:  * "The Law Reform Commission of Canada indicated that it was of two minds  with respect to protecting co-habiting  spouses from sexual assault; but for  the purposes of its recommendations  the Commission took the least controversial option - it included only  spouses living apart."  * "The Commission recognized the effect of language, deleting such archaic phrases as 'of previously chaste character', and sought to protect 'the sexual dignity of the  person'."  * "The Commission's recommendations  do eliminate redundant sections. For  example, they do away with the section prohibiting seductions under promise of marriage, or of female passengers on board vessels, acknowledge  ing that 'they assume a general sexual immaturity among women and also  attribute to men the sole responsibility for making sexual decisions',  and thus do not reflect current attitudes ."  Better than Dill C-52  * "We appreciate the Commission's  approach as being much more sensitive and comprehensive than that taken by the Minister of Justice as  evidenced by Bill C-52, which was  more cosmetic in nature, reflecting  its pre-election timing."  * "We think it is quite ridiculous  for the government to pay a body such  as the Law Reform Commission to study  and make recommendations on an area  of law and then, six weeks before  they are due to report, introduce  its own, rather slapdash proposal.  As well as serving to complicate  the issue, it is clearly a waste of  money.  The B.C. COALITION OF RAPE RELIEF CENTRES still haven't had confirmation  from the Provincial Government concerning their funding.  The Centres are living on interim  funding and overdrafts.  wmc3 M§m  Credit: LNS Women's Graphics  AN INTERVIEW WITH HOLLY DEVOR -  a member of the Coalition formed to  oppose Anita Bryant's campaign  by Lorri Rudland  JOIN THE COALITION TO OPPOSE ANITA  BRYANT AND RENAISSANCE CANADA!  Come to: Britannia Centre, Rm.  L2L3,   1661 Napier Street,   Van.  June 13th 7:00 P.M.  KINESIS:  Anita Bryant is seen mainly as an opponent of rights for  lesbians and homosexual men. But  she, and Renaissance Canada, the  Canadian organization that supports her campaign, are attacking  many other civil rights as well.  Just who and what are they  attacking?  HOLLY:   Anita Bryant is leading a  campaign the aim of which is to return our society to fundamentalist  Bible principles.  She wants every  one to live by the letter of the  Bible and she wants the state -  the government - to reflect the  teachings of the Church in its  strictest sense.  Not only does she feel that homosexuals should be treated as  sinners and punished by God, she  feels they should also be punished  harshly by the law.  She condemns  Jews, Hindu's, Moslems, and  liberal Christians to burn in  eternal damnation. Her campaign  favours "right to work" legislation which is a legal attack waged  by Big Business & Management  against the worker's right to the  protection of trade unions,  Anita Bryant would have women be  restricted in choice to the role of  wife and mother and would deny women  the right to safe therapeutic  abortions.  She opposes the equal  rights amendment in the United  States which means that she opposes  the concept of equal pay for work  of equal value, equal opportunity  in education and sports, equal  access to credit and finance, equal  property rights in marriage, and  women's right to child care.  Renaissance Canada, the Canadian  organization that supports her, is  waging a powerful campaign to restrict the educational system to  one narrow fundamentalist Christian  view of life.  They espouse the type  of "spare the rod, spoil the child"  attitude, core curriculum, the  removal of all sex education from the  schools, and the restriction of  elective courses.  This is directly in opposition to  the government's policy of multi-  culturalism which allows minorities  to retain a cultural identity in a  Canadian context.  The Renaissance campaign is strongly  in favour of more repressive censorship laws.  They would use these  laws to repress any statements which  are in opposition to their own beliefs. One of their first targets  has been and will continue to be  gay liberation publications and  media statements and women's movement publications and media statements.  In the name of "saving our  our children from pornographv" they  would in fact be censoring all  opposing views.  KINESIS:    How does Anita Bryant's  campaign against gay rights relate  to her opposition to women's rights?  HOLLY:    The Anita Bryant campaign  against homosexuals is also a campaign against any person heterosexual or homosexual who wishes to step  out of traditional roles. Lesbian  women are not generally highly visible in our society as lesbians.  Being women whose lifestyle requires  a high degree of self-sufficiency  they are most visible as independent and self-defined women. As such,  they deviate from the traditional  role of women and it is as this sort  of deviant that they are most discriminated against.  This discrimination is the same punishment used  against any women, heterosexual or  homosexual, who dares to be  independent and self-defined.  turn to col. 2,p. 21  fiiiiififififi^fiiiiiii  TURKEY OF THE MONTH for June is Vancouver divorce lawyer Neil Fleishman.  One reason why B.C.  has the highest  divorce rate in Canada, he says, is  due to the shaky state of our economy,  A  !tworking man" can no longer afford  to get drunk Saturday night and "beat  the daylights out of his wife, as is  his time-honoured right. "  G€T YOUR VGH M€MB€RSHIPS IN! Canadian Judge:  "they're all Black,  they 're all women and they all lied".  Jamaican  Women  Fight  Deportation  Black, poor and female  by Pauline O'Connor  Nine Jamaican women fighting what  they claim are sexist and racist  motivated deportation orders are  finding the law against them, but  public support for their cause is  growing.  The women, who came to Canada under  a 20 year old agreement between  Jamaica and this country for supply  of Black domestic labour, are getting  deported for failing to declare their  illegitimate children on their  immigration forms.  After their struggle became public,  Immigration Minister Bud Cullen  stayed deportation proceedings pending the outcome of a suit against  the government using new Federal  Human Rights legislation.  But so  far all court appeals against deportation have failed, including a bid  for an injunction against deportation proceedings.  In rejecting the  bid, the courts denied the Federal  •Human Rights Commission any jurisdiction in this matter.  The women claim Immigration officials  advised them not to declare their  children.  In Jamaica common-law  relationships are customary, and most  women are mothers by adulthood.  The  International Committee Against  Racism (INCAR) has taken up the case,  aiming to muster enough public  support to force the government to  back down.  "This move is a deliberate attempt by  the government to build racial tension  in the country and to blame unemployment on these minority ethnic groups",  said INCAR co-ordinator David Jacobs.  These women are all working class.  If they, the government,- can treat  these people as less than human, then  they're saying it's all right for  others to do so too."  An UPSTREAM article.  Jacobs said immigration officials have  turned a blind eye in the past to  failures to declare children, since  few Jamaicans are childless as the  agreement stipulates they should be.  It's only in the past two years failure to declare children has become  gorunds for deportation - "material  misstatements" - under the department's  regulations, he continued.  "In fact  the women didn't even make misstatements," he said.  "These are special  forms for these women asking only if  the children are coming with them now,  coming later, or are adopted.  The  Immigration officers put "not applicable' there".  Jacobs said that with 40 per cent  unemployment in Jamaica, working  in Canada is the only way these  women can get money to care for  their children.  Elaine Pearl, one  of the women to have been deported  more than a week ago, said recently  she faces poverty and permanent  unemployment if she returns to  Jamaica.  She's determined her  three children who joined her here  last summer will stay even if she  is shipped back.  Pearl worked as a maid for two years  after arriving in Vancouver in 1976,  and is now a kitchen helper in a  Toronto hotel.  Jacobs said INCAR is fighting the  deportation on the racism and sexism explicit in the case.  The  judge who rejected INCAR's injunction bid stated in his judgement  "they're all Black, they're all  women and they all lied".  Jacobs said the deportation move  has spread terror through the  Jamaican community since many women  are in the nine women's position.  He said several large union locals  and other organizations have protested the government's action.  (Upstream, April 1978)  Sorwuc: We Must Rely On Our Own Strength  The Service Office and Retail Workers  Union of Canada recently applied to  the Federal Department of Labour for  the appointment of a conciliation  officer to assist in negotiations  for a first contract with the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce,  Bank of Nova Scotia, and the Bank of  Montreal.  Notice to begin collective bargaining for the 20 certified branches  was presented to the banks 8 months  ago, and to date the two parties,  with the exception of the Bank of  Montreal, are still in the process  of clarifying the Unions contract  proposals.  SORWUC's first approach  to commence negotiations with the  banks was to bargain jointly, but  the banks refused to meet on these  terms and insist upon individual  branch negotiations.  "We realize that first agreements  are lengthy and time consuming,  but  it seems the banks' representatives  are prepared to drag negotiations on  forever.     Wages for employees at  certified branches have been frozen,  ^flSKl^^  .fcJLfc^©18  L£TS   PRESS   THE BUTTON-' THIS  PAY CHECK  IS   A   ROBBERY IN PROGRESS.'  therefore bank workers are anxious  to establish their first agreement  with their employers, and hope the  conciliation officer might help to  speed up the negotiating process. "  said Jackie Ainsworth, 1st Vice  President of the United Bank Workers  Section of SORWUC.  Following the completion of conciliation, we will then be in a legal  position to take strike action.  Our  demonstration at the Bank of Commerce  in Gibsons, B. C.  has proven to us  that we must rely on our own strength  and support from the Unions and the  communities in order to establish  decent wages and working conditions  for bank employees.  "We realize that it is in the hanks  interest to stall negotiations,  rather than coming to terms with the  Union and signing a fair collective  agreement with their employees. "  said Ms. Ainsworth.  SORWUC is also presently meeting with  the Royal Bank and the Toronto Dominion Bank. MfSL  POLICC VIOLCNCC  IN FLCCK STRIKC  Police violence has been stepped up  in the Fleck strike (see Kinesis,  May '78 p.9).  On May 24 the pick-  eters, mainly women, were charged by  50 Ontario Provincial Police,  wielding riot sticks.  "I just didn't believe the police  would strike a woman in the breasts",  said one of the Fleck strikers.  "But they came right at us, swinging.  They hit me and another woman in the  breasts.  They got another in the  stomach." Why are the police using  violence on the line?  "It's got to  be political", says strikers.  140 workers, unionized with the  United Auto Workers, have been on  strike for a first"contract at the  Fleck manufacturing plant in Centra-  lia, Ontario, since March 6.  The  plant, which manufacturers automobile  wiring, is 50% owned by the family of  James Fleck, the Ontario Deptuy  Minister of Industry, Trade and Tourism.  The Ontario Provincial Police have  been on the scene since the strike  began, attaching picketers several  times and escorting scabs into the  plant. The May 24 attack was the  most vicious so far.  An UPSTREAM article  By Esther Shannon  BANKNOT€  Credit: Hazel Hankin/LNS  Powell River HomemakprS^  Twenty-one homemakers in Powell River  who are members of Local 1 of the  Service Office and Retail Workers  Union of Canada (SORWUC) have just  signed their first contract.  Their pay will now range from $3.75  to $4.50 per hour, depending on  experience and length of service,  with a raise on September 1, 1978 to  between $4.00 and $5.00.  Top rate  for the clerk is $5.50 per hour.  There are also provisions for overtime pay at time and one-half.  Previous to the signing of the contract, the homemakers were paid  between $3.25 and $3.50 per hour.  Tliey are employed by a non-profit  association which administers the  society.  The contract will run for  one year.  Homemakers in B. C. work in the  homes of ill, elderly and disabled  persons.  Their salaries are mostly  paid by the Department of Health  under the new Long Term Health  Care Programme.  The Department assesses the clients for a certain  number of care hours per month, and  then pays for these hours after  determining the client's income.  There are about 27 such associations  around B. C. and at least two large  private profit making agencies in  Vancouver which supply homemaking  services under this Programme.  "This is the second group of home-  makers in B.   C.   to join a union,  and  we think some significant advances  have been made,"  said Pat Barter,  spokesperson for SORWUC. "Some of  the benefits may not sound significant until you remember that  homemakers are not covered by any  standard labour legislation except  the right to join a union. "  As well as standard union clauses  for grievances, discipline and  discharge procedures, other benefits  include:  * Scheduling based on seniority which will allow employees fuller working hours  * 3 weeks vacation at 6% of  earnings after 2 years service  * Paid sick leave and double  time for worked holidays  for all regular employees  * Maternity and Adoption leave  * Two consecutive days off  after 6 or 10 days worked  (depending on the number  of hours worked)  * 15£ per mile travel allowance after the first four  miles  * Worker's Compensation  The importance of the homemaker's  job was recognized by the government  when it instituted the Long Term  Health Care Programme.  These women  keep families together and people  out of institutions.  With a union  contract, they now have more respect  for themselves - and that's important  for anyone to do a good job.  RULING: no discrimination^  "It's like a nightmare," commented  Shirley Cooligan on the recent  arbitration award favoring the  British American Banknote Company  (BABC).  Cooligan, president of Local 31,  of the Steel Plate Engravers Union  (SPEU), said that morale among the  25% women, is "very low."  They  had been on strike for 9 weeks  from October '77 before the dispute was sent to arbitration.  equal pay issue  The main issue in the strike was  the union's claim that the BABC  was discriminatory against its  women employees.  They earn an  average of 29% less than the men  employed by the company.  In his report, Owen Shime, the  arbitrator, said that the union did  not provide sufficient evidence to  prove its claim of discrimination.  He also noted that comparisons between wage rates in other companies  with workers doing the same or similar work showed little or no difference in salary levels.  The union cautioned Shime that these  comparisons could be invalid since  he could in effect be comparing "one  wage ghetto with another."  Noting that the union's position  could be valid, Shime felt that he  could not consider the "ghetto"  argument since the union didn't  provide any evidence to support its  claim that women or mainly women  did the work at the other companies.  He also said that if BABC was guilty  of discrimination then the union  "must be a party to this discrimination" since Local 588 of SPEU had  signed the same contract with the  Canadian Banknote Company.  Local 31 is considering an appeal  against the arbitrator's decision.  Shime went outside his terms of  reference in comparing wage rates  between other companies, says  Cooligan.  Summing up the frustration and disappointment of the women in Local  31, Cooligan said that as far as  they could see "there is no use  for women to go to arbitration for  women's rights."  Reprinted from UPSTREM,  May   '78 UPDATC ON RIGHT  TO CHOS€ IN US  Since June 1977, when the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that States could  decide whether they would pay for  poor women to have abortions, 36  states have enacted laws restricting state funding.  Only 14 states  and the District of Columbia still  pay for some or all of the cost of  abortions.  On March 17, 1978 in Boston, Mass.  six anti-abortionists attempted to  disrupt one of the city's major  abortion clinics.  Some tried to  break right into the examining  rooms.  Another screamed at patients in the waiting room that they  were "murderers".  The demonstrators staged a sit-in  in front of each examining room  door until police arrived and  arrested them.  Next day, anti-  abortion forces returned and set  up a picket outside the clinic.  Anti-abortionists have also been  trying to disrupt schedules at  another Boston clinic by calling  in false appointments.  VICTORIES IN NEW YORK AND VIRGINIA  In New York, the state legislature  in mid-April rejected a ban on  medicaid funds.  About 4,000 pro  choice people had lobbied against  the anti-abortion amendment introduced by Sen. James Donovan (who had  also lead the fight foi: the death  penalty).  In Virginia on April 21, a federal  judge ordered health officials to  resume paying for abortions considered medically necessary for women  eligible for welfare.  At the same  time the judge dismissed arguments  by anti-abortionists who have been  arrested several times at the Northern Virginia Women's Medical Centre.  The anti-abortionists had sued the  centre, saying it deprived unborn  children of their right to live.  The  judge also rejected their request for  a $1 million judgement for each abortion performed at the clinic.  These arguments were part of a  counter-suit by anti-abortionists  after the clinic sued them with  the help of the ACLU (American  Civil Liberties Union) after the  trespassing charges filed against  the anti-abortionists were thrown  out of the courts twice.  A national US pro-choice coalition,  the Committee for Abortion Rights  and Against Sterilization Abuse  (CARASA) is organizing "flying  squads" of women who can be called  immediately to local clinics in the  event of threatened "right-to-life"  violence.       off Our Backs Info.  reproductive freedom under jire  ANTI CHOIC€ VIOL€NC€  Cleveland's Concerned Women's Clinic  was vandalized on the night of February 15.  Someone broke in and slashed  all upholstery on chairs and sofas,  cut the phones, threw an iodine substance on the walls, floors and  ceilings.  When the Clinic re-opened February  18 a man arrived in a blue delivery  uniform, and when a Clinic worker  opened the door to him, he threw a  gasoline-like fluid in her face.  She  was temporarily blinded.  He then  firebombed the clinic, which was  entirely destroyed.  Damage estimates range in excess of-$100,000.  In early March '77 unknown persons  broke into the Planned Parenthood  administrative offices in St. Paul,  Minnesota, soaked the floor with  inflammable liquid and ignited it.  Damage extended through three floors  of the building and was estimated  at a quarter of a million dollars.  In February '78 an anniversary  attempt was made to bomb the clinic.  A bomb bounced off one of the  plexiglass windows into a snow bank  and failed to detonate.  On August 18, 1977 the Ladies' Clinic  in Omaha, Nebraska was firebombed.  A local newspaper received a pasted-  up letter saying: "You'd bomb a  concentration camp - why not an  abortion clinic?"  November 1977 somebody broke into  the Cincinnati Planned Parenthood  Clinic and set fire to a crib in the  reception area.  February 1978:  The Cincinnati  Women's Centre Clinic had a chemical  bomb and packets of anti-abortion  literature thrown through the  plate glass during the night.  The  Clinic had to be closed for nine  days.  Estimated damages exceeded  $3,000.  January 8, 1978: 10 small fires  were set throughout the Columbus,  Ohio Northwest Women's Centre.  The  Clinic is now operating out of a  doctor's office.  Damage was estimated at $200,000.  March 1, 1978:  Somebody broke into  the Women's Clinic in Akron, Ohio  and set a fire in the bathroom.  The  fire was discovered in time to prevent damage.  A US national pro-choice group, the  Religious Coalition for Abortion  Rights has issued a request to  religious leaders to join in calling  for an end to the violence.  Twenty-  six religious leaders have joined  the call, from the heads of the  Episcopal Church to the United Presbyterians, U.S.A. to the Union of  American Hebrew Congregations.  No  Catholic bishop would participate.  Bomb threats are now phoned into  many clinics regularly in an attempt  to close clinics down, at least temporarily.  In the U.S., the right to  abortion is a constitutional right  but it is under severe attack as a  civil right.  (Info from an article by Christine  Brim, Abortion Clinics Under Seige,  Seven Days, Vol. 2, #7)  I'M AFRAID  ^AT use  OP &OV£&N-  ?%fT "over  UA/c^STiruriomU  the Mo/v/er  Couq> g£  MUCH, MUCH  Besipes-  '3  KlLLlr^Cri  yCArtV ryo  AQdU/^) USlrib  $WT.   MONEY  SCURAT0/LNS i—Anti-Abortionist TQCtiCS    BCFW Health Subcommittee-  There is no doubt about it. The anti-  abortion movement is a threat to our  right to the availability of safe,  legal abortion. Their stand is that  no woman has the right to terminate an  unwanted pregnancy. They are actively  attempting to impose this viewpoint  on others, by using a variety of sensational and emotional tactics that  emphasize and distort the uglier aspects of abortion.  Our stand is that women must be allowed to decide whether and when to have  children, which by necessity means  having abortion available. No one  expounds the virtues of abortion.  It  is an unpleasant, ugly fact of life  that has always been with us, legally  or illegally. And it will continue to  be with us until women and men are  assured 100% safe, effective birth  control.  Anti-abortion people are organized,  numerous, and inspired by a strong  sense of righteousness. They have a  seemingly endless supply of money due  to their affiliation with rich churches. They have a strong appeal to  people who want to do good — but  these people have no understanding of  the implications and complexities of  unwanted pregnancy.  It is important  to understand the underlying intent of  the anti-abortion movement: it is to  actively interfere with our right to  conduct our lives according to our own  standards. We feel the anti-abortionists have a right to practice their  own morality, but they have no right  to impose it on us.  In order to know how to defend our  right to the availability of safe,  legal abortion we should have a knowledge and understanding of the tactics  of the anti-abortion movement.  Some  of their tactics are:  Direct Political Pressure:  -mammoth letter lobbies to politicians, newspapers and journals.  -sending briefs to parliament.  -attempting to change hospital abortion policy by voting anti-abortionists onto hospital boards of directors.  Misleading Advertising:  -placing advertisements in buses,  newspapers, etc. that offer "help" to  women with distressing pregnancies.  No mention of their anti-abortion  sentiments appears in the ad.  -overemphasizing, falsifying, or distorting the negative effects of abortion. For example, telling women they  will no longer be able to have children should they have an abortion.  Harassment:  -harassing doctors who perform  abortions, or support the necessity  for abortion.  -walking into abortion clinics and  obstructing procedures.  Advertisements and Articles Distorting  and Exaggerating Facts on Abortion:  -slide presentations to high schools  and community groups which emphasize  the ugliness of abortion eg. attempting to show the "human" quality of  2-inch fetuses. The focus of these  presentations is sensational and  emotional.  -distribution of grotesque colour  photographs of abortion products,  attempting to give the impression that  most abortions are done in the second  trimester.  LOGIC  -assorted newsletters containing anti-  abortion articles.  -expensive billboard campaigns.  -propaganda which associates lack of  respect for aged and handicapped  people with the issue of abortion.  -pressuring librarians to buy anti-  abortion literature for libraries.  Sensationalist "Theatre" Tactics:  -picketting outside hospitals where  abortions are done — some demonstrators come dressed as doctors (to take  one example) carrying plastic bags  full of broken plastic dolls.  -arriving at public meetings with  bottles of preserved fetuses.  Tactics to Gain Financial Support or  Information:  -priests soliciting support and donations for anti-abortion causes from  their congregations.  -telephoning or visiting women's  groups who offer information on abortion, often pretending to seek an  abortion, in order to obtain information about the group's operations.  SOME COUNTER-TACTICS THAT ARE WORTH  TRYING INCLUDE:  1. Writing pro-choice letters to magazines and newspapers, and letters to  politicians supporting removal of  abortion from the criminal code.  2. Advertising the places in your  community where non-biased pregnancy  testing is available, and information  on all alternatives for problem  pregnancies can be discussed.  3. Sending letters of support to doctors who support the right to choose  abortion.  4. Keeping anti-abortion people off  hospital boards by going to elections  and voting against them. Anyone who  is a member of the hospital society  can vo te.  5. Setting up informational programs  in the community to familiarize people  with the facts on abortion, to combat  anti-abortionist tactics of distorting  and exaggerating facts.  6. Using the media (films, video,  radio) as much as possible to disseminate accurate information about all  aspects of the abortion issue.  See  bibliography.  7. Exposing the tactics of the anti-  abortion movement...making clear their  intent to interfere with our freedom  of choice.  These comments are excerpted from The  ABORTION HANDBOOK FOR B.C., just published by the B.C.F.W. Health Sub-  Committee.  For information about  the handbook, contact the sub-committee c/o Box 24687 Station C Vanr-  couver, B.C. V5T 4E2 8  ANTI GAV  New York (LNS)—In the wake of the  repeal of St. Paul, Minnesota's gay  rights legislation April 25, gay  activist Del Martin told LNS:  "I  think that the country is in a very  conservative swing and the 'New Right'  is very well organized.  They know  how to push all these emotional  buttons.  It's not only gays they're  after, but they are also after  abortion rights, affirmative action  and the ERA."  The St. Paul ordinance prohibiting  discrimination against gay people in  employment, housing and public accomodations had been on the books for  four years.  Its repeal, by a two-  to-one margin, followed the precedent set in Dade County, Florida last  year and marked the first of this  year's assaults on gay rights.  In addition, the repeal movement is  spreading to Seattle, Washington  where two policemen are in the process of filing for a referendum on  the employment section of that city's  gay rights ordinance.  And in California, an effort is underway to  place an initiative permitting dismissal of gay teachers on the ballot.  At least 37 cities in the United  States still have ordinances prohibiting discrimination against lesbians  and gay men.  Last fall Aspen, Colorado adopted a gay rights ordinance.  Gay rights ordinances forbidding  discrimination against gay people in  housing and employment have been  repealed within the last few weeks  in Wichita, Kansas and Eugene, Oregon.  In California, Senator John Briggs  has filed over 60,000 signatures to  have a School-Employees Homosexuality statute on the November state  ballot.  The measure, known as the  Briggs initiative, seeks to  deprive gay and lesbian teachers of  their jobs.  The statute "could very well trigger  other repressive measures that could  eliminate tenure for teachers, limit  their political activity and abolish  collective bargaining," commented  James Ballard, president of the San  Francisco Federation of Teachers, at  a mid-May rally of several thousands  sponsored by the Bay Area Coalition  Against the Briggs Initiative. Plexus  Gay Rights Being Whisked Away in Wichita,  Kansas  defending  our rights  PETERBOROUGH  On April 28, 150 marched through  the streets of Peterborough, Ont.  chanting "Hey, hey, ho, ho, Anita  Bryant's gotta go" while Bryant  spoke to a smaller-than-expected  audience at the Memorial Center.  As bigots lined the streets yelling  homophobic and sexist remarks,  marchers drowned them out with  chants and defended themselves  against threats, rocks, and eggs.  In this morally upright and conservative city, this show of  strength for gay, lesbian, and  women's rights organized by the  Trent Homophile Association was  astounding.  It was aided considerably by a busload of 60 supporters from Toronto.  (Andrea Goth Socialist Voice)  WINNIPEG  Three hundred and fifty marched  in protest against Bryant's concert  appearance in Winnipeg April 30.  The largest mobilization against her  tour greeted concert-goers with  chants of "Anita is a tyrant," "Stop  Anita Bryant," and "Gay rights now."  The demonstration was organized by  the Coalition to Answer Anita Bryant,  which includes 23 lesbian, gay,  women's, and left organizations, as  well as Canadian Union of Public Employees Local 2034 and individuals  from the Manitoban newspaper and the  NDP.  "This is the largest show of solidarity we've seen in a long time," said  an organizer. "It has gone far beyond our wildest expectations.  "We did more in one month to broaden  support for gay rights than five  years of planned lobbying and contact  work not backed.up with public action  has done," said Walter Davis, one of  the organizers and a member of the  After Stonewall journal-  (Socialist Voice)  -^£g^iL©78LN5 CONTINUED FROM p. 8  EDMONTON  Three hundred and fifty people participated in a demonstration organized  by the Coalition to Answer Anita  Bryant, April 29.  Gathering at the  Alberta legislature, they marched  through downtown Edmonton to Winston  Churchill Square.  There, the marchers  heard speakers from organizations and  individuals that had endorsed the  demonstration.  Bill Danyk from the Edmonton and District Labor Council executive outlined to the crowd that the labor  movement had passed many resolutions  in support of women's and gay rights.  Labor must come to the aid of minority groups when they are attacked, he  said.  He was followed by speakers from  the Edmonton Women's Coalition,  the Gay Alliance Towards Equality,  the Unitarian Church, the Edmonton  Gay Youth, the Revolutionary  Workers League, and the Erewhon  Books Collective.  Also addressing the rally as individuals were Julie Annie LeGras  of the Alberta Human Rights  Commission and Ruth Groberman, the  foreign student advisor at the  University of Alberta. (Lynda Little  Socialist Voice)  PROTEST AGAINST VANDER ZALM HOMOPHOBIA  Canada is being ruined by deceitful  bankers, abortionists and homosexuals  says Federal Social Credit leader,  Lome Reznowski.  And he pledges  that his Party will get rid of them.  Provincial Human Resources Minister  Vander Zalm supports Reznowski's  claim.  Referring to Reznowski's  comments on homosexuals, Vander Zalm  remarked, "there are probably a lot  born again bigots  more about renaissance  Canada's own born-again bigotry  Renaissance was "born" four years  ago in the municipality of Halton,  Ontario by Ken Campbell of the  "Campbell-Reese Evangelistic Association, Inc."  He formed Renaissance  to stop the "satanic intrustion" of  a gay liberation presentation in the  high school his daughters were  attending.  He harnessed the anti-  gay support of 1000 parents in a  "Renaissance Regional Rally".  His  group has halted all discussion of  gay sexuality in district schools  dispite student protests.  High  school student, Linda Lundquist of  Burlington, complains, "This entire  incident left me with the question  of how can we be expected to open  up our eyes and minds,  and view  things on a realistic level, when  such restrictions are placed upon  us by society as a whole!"  Renaissance has blazed through 20  Ontario cities and has become a  national movement — organized in  7 out of 10 provinces.  A newly  created Renaissance International  is registered as a non-profit,  charitable organization with  receipting privileges:  committed  to the purpose of "propagating  the values and philosophy of 'our'  Judeo-Christian heritage".  Dr. Robert N. Thompson, joint  organizer of the B. C. Renaissance  chapter with businessman, Jeff Still,  of A. E. LePage, admits, "Gay people  are after boys and they know that's  their weakness and downfall.     Young  lads are their easy targets.    They  even seduce them with ice cream  cones. "  "If homosexuals are going to practise the deviation of homosexuality,  don't expect an open door for it,"  (he says). He "biblically cannot  accept homosexuals as part of the  'normaI' community".  Thompson delivered a hard-hitting  speech in the House of Commons in  1969 against proposed changes in  the Criminal Code concerning the gay  question. "Homosexuality has always  had a debasing effect on morals and  on personality.. .any government worth  the name will want to help forward  a national crusade for purity and  'integrity ...the nation's bedrooms  should cradle righteousness - with  the backing of the state".  "Anita Bryant"  he says "is a high  class Christian artist who  (like  Renaissance)  is not anti-gay or isn't  waging a campaign against homosexuals  except as a private taxpayer/citizen  in Dade County.    It is the Gay Movement and the media who create the  fuss by asking her all those questions and demonstrating wherever she  Renaissance boasts a membership of  3,000 paid members with a strong  representation from the professional  and business communities. "They are  more aware of the current drift in  education and society"  he explains.  Three of Renaissance's executive  members are directly involved in  education:  Dr. Kenneth R. Davis,  Associate Professor of History,  University of Waterloo; Fred Harp,  Elementary School Principal, Ontario  and Dr. Robert N. Thompson, Trinity-  Western College, B.C.  (These excerpts reprinted from  Gay Tide)  of people, particularly now, that  support this type of philosophy and  that favour a strengthening of the  family unit."  The Gay Alliance Towards Equality  comments:  "Vander Zalm's remarks  pose a threat to our very existence.  We have to show that there are a lot  of Gay people out there who are prepared to see what happened in Hitler's  Germany does not happen here."  In an immediate response to these  attacks, the Gay Alliance Towards  Equality organized a picket in front  of the Human Resources Offices,  West 10th Avenue, on May 18th.  They were joined by representatives  from the British Columbia Federation  of Women and Vancouver Status of  Women.  "Women Unite for Lesbian  Rights" and "Lesbian Rights are  Human Rights" were among placards  carried by the two women's organizations.  About sixty feminist and  gay activists demonstrated and  chanted their opposition to this  stepped-up campaign against lesbians  and gays.  / * \  First they came for the communists,  and I didn 't speak up because I  wasn't a communist.  Then they came for the socialists,  and I didn 't speak up because I  wasn't a socialist.  Then they came for the Jews, and  I didn't speak up because I wasn't  a Jew.  Then they came for the trade unionists,  and I didn 't speak up because I wasn 't  a trade unionist.  Then they came for the Catholics, and  I didn 't speak up because I was a  Protestant.  Then they came for me . . , and by  that time there was no one left to  speak up.  - quotation ascribed to Martin  Neimoller, a well-known Lutheran  Theologian. 10  ENROLLMENTS  The following comments on declining enrollments and women come from  a paper prepared for the Status of  Women Program of the British Columbia Teachers' Federation  (BCTF).  The Status of Women Committee of  the BCTF is particularly concerned  about the effect that declining  enrollment could have on the position of women in B.   C.'s teaching  force.     Kinesis is grateful to  Pearl Roberts,   the Coordinator of  the BCTF Status of Women Program,  for access to the position paper.  Women teachers must take their case  to the community, and inform the  public about these issues.  * 1976 - The Federation of Women  Teachers' Associations of Ontario  was involved in a legal battle to  protect the rights of women teachers who had been released at a  ratio of 9 women to 1 man.  * February 1977 - Vancouver Manpower registered 248 unemployed  male teachers and 663 unemployed  female teachers.  * September- 1977 - Statistics Canada reported 5,000 unemployed  male teachers in Canada, and  22,000 unemployed female teachers.  * September 1977 - Prime Minister  Trudeau stated that the rise in  unemployment was due to the unusually large numbers of women  entering the work force.  * January 1978 - A school trustee  in Shuswap expressed concern at  a school board meeting about a  principal hiring his wife as a  substitute teacher, when "the  job could have been used by  someone who does not already  have another source of income".  The pressures are mounting and the  threat is real. Women must become  involved in the declining enrollment program in order to avert this  attack on their jobs and on the  equality of education in B. C.  Women workers are particularly vulnerable in times of economic decline.  This vulnerability must be recognized and addressed in order to  avoid repetition of an historic pattern. Women teachers must assert  their basic right to equality of  opportunity, job security, and  just learning and working conditions.  Declining Support  The most immediate crisis in education is not so much declining enrollment as declining public support.  This decline in support is  directly related to the economic  decline, with schools being blamed  for high unemployment.  It is important to realize that this loss  of support is not provincial, or  even national in scope, but common  to most of the western world.  Great  DOWN  What Will Happen  To Women Teachers?  Britain, Australia, and the U.S.  have seen similar attacks on their  public school systems.  Value Schools,  Back to the Basics, Core Curriculum,  Provincial Learning Assessment, Independent Schools, and now, the  "problem" of declining enrollment  are symptomatic of this loss of  support.  Schools have become scapegoats for crises facing our society,  with governments leading the attack.  Certainly, a decline in student population creates difficulties for the  education system.  But is it really  the "problem" that it is often made  out to be? Why was no attention  paid to the decline until the last  year or so?  In B. C, elementary  (Grade 1-7) enrollments have dropped  by more than 35,000 students since  1970.  No one considered this to be  a problem then.  The fact is that  teachers and the public were so involved in making long-needed improvements in our schools that little  concern was expressed over a drop  in numbers.  Kindergartens were  introduced, class sizes were reduced,  and great strides were made in improving the quality of instruction.  In fact, reduced numbers of students  enhanced our ability to improve the  system.  The same situation exists  today, if teachers organize to take  advantage of it.  Public support and  understanding of the issues is a  crucial factor.  Reduced Birth Rotes  Social demographers talk about "age  specific fertility," "gross reproduction rates," and "baby boomlets"  in attempts to develop precise projections of the school-age population.  Researchers admit that previous calculations have over-estimated population growth.  Somehow  their analysis has failed to take  into account changes in the position  of women in Canadian society.  The  most dramatic change has been the  increased participation of women in  the labor force.  In 1960, 19% of  Canadian married women were employed  outside the home.  By 1976, that  figure had increased to 43%.  Most  women work for the same reason that  men work - to support themselves  and their families.  Accompanying  increased participation in the  labour force has been a reduction  in family size.  Improved contraception and family planning have  LNS Women 's Graphics  enabled women to exercise some  control over their reproductive  function.  Women welcome this control, and are not likely to give it  up.  The BCTF must support this  right of choice for women, and  oppose the use of tactics to pressure women into having children.  These not-so-subtle tactics include the plethora of "declining  enrollment jokes" as expressed  publicly at the Declining Enrollment  Conference and the 1978 Annual  General Meeting.  What is implied  in these jokes is that women are to  be blamed for the decline in student  numbers.  Forces outside the Federation, especially from the media,  are threatening the right of women  to make individual decisions about  family size.  The new television  series:  "Having Babies" is the  most blatant example.  *    #    #    #  Many women do not have children  because the pressures of balancing  family and work responsibilities  are too great.  Affordable, quality  child care is increasingly difficult  to obtain.  The National Day-care  Information Centre reports that the  number of available spaces decreased  in 1977, the first year this has  occurred since they began monitoring  the service in 1970.  This is due to  government spending restraints and  the fact that a number of middle-  income families who could not afford  the increasing cost of child care  removed their children.  Some centres  have been forced to close and others  have re-organized to accommodate  fewer children.  Job Security  Numerous issues in the area of job  security directly affect women in  teaching.  One of the most pressing  needs is to eliminate the misuse of  temporary appointments.  In a recent  survey of temporary appointments, 27  out of 40 school districts indicated  that they had more teachers on temporary appointments than there were  temporary jobs.  One district has  186 temporary appointments, but only  89 of these are justifiable under the  Public Schools Act. Many school  boards are using unjustified temporary appointments as a way of build-  ind a reserve force of easily dismissed staff.  All too often, those  temporary appointees are women.  In  turn to p.11 cont. from p.10  one interior district, 48 out of 62  temporary appointees are female...  Another crucial area is job protection for part-time teachers.  In 1976  93.7% of part-time teachers are female.  Most part-time teachers are  on temporary appointments.  ....women must not be pressured into  taking part-time positions as a way  of cutting staff.  Reports from other  provinces indicate that this is  occurring.  Improved maternity leave is a critical need.  Most districts do not  have adecuate leave provisions.  This  means that women who have children  and wish to remain at home for a  year or two must relinguish all  job security within the district.  Local associations that are concerned about the rights of women make  maternity/parenthood leave a top  priority in 1978 negotiations.  Primary teachers have the worst  learning and working conditions in  the province.  While 17% of secondary classes are in violation of BCTF  class size criteria, 41% of kindergarten, and 32% of primary classes  are in violation.  Almost all of  those primary teachers with oversized classes are female.  Very few  primary teachers have been involved  in the learning conditions program.  Now that class sizes are shrinking  through declining enrollment, primary  classes can approach educationally  sound standards.  Primary teachers  must make this case while the opportunity is at hand.  Elementary prepartion time is another concern that is receiving  considerable attention within the  BCTF.  Again, since women are the  majority of elementary teachers,  this issue especially affects them.  The average percentage of unassigned  time per week for secondary teachers  is 8.7%.  For elementary teachers,  it is o.9%.  Elementary teachers  have waited long enough for preparation time.  A number of good briefs  in support of preparation time for  elementary teachers have been developed by local associations and are  available through the BCTF.  The  most effective ways to increase preparation time are to hire more  teachers or maintain existing staff  in situations of declining enrollment.  Women teachers especially  must involve themselves in this  undertaking.  Declining enrollment has been used  as an excuse to restrict course  offerings in areas such as Women's  Studies.  If school boards have  committed themselves to implementing  Women's Studies, they must ensure  that these programs are offered.  Women's Studies is more than a much  needed curriculum; it is an important way of reducing sex discrimination within the school system.  Similar arguments have been presented as an impediment to integration of classes.  Again, school  boards must clarify their position  on discrimination.  Equality of  opportunity cannot wait for more  "Convenient" times.  With community  support, teachers can bring pressure  upon school boards to ensure that  removal of discrimination becomes  a priority.   •  BCTF cuts Status of Women  CONTACTS CONF€R€NC€  The Executive of the B. C'. Teachers'  Federation (BCTF) has decided to cut  the budget for the BCTF's Status of  Women program.  They have denied the program funding  for the BCTF Status of Women's  annual conference.  This conference is the heart of the  BCTF's Status of Women's program.  It is the opening activity for each  year's program, helping the contacts  develop the knowledge and the skills  that are essential to the development  of a local program.  Linda Shuto and Nora Grove, two  former co-ordinators of the BCTF's  Status of Women program explain what  the Status of Women's Conference  achieves and what the cuts will mean:  "We believe that these are the most  serious cuts that could have been  made to the program.    All of us who  have participated in the contacts '  conference know the excitement and  energy that is generated when a  group of 100 women come together  to share our knowledge,  skills and  sense of sisterhood.    This process  has been the major impetus each  year to launch our local initiatives  and to develop a strong, progressive  force within the federation. "  "We see these cuts as a deliberate  attempt to undermine the effectiveness of our program.    Although we  were not present at the time the  Status of Women program was discussed,   Gale Neuberger of the executive committee said that she was  appalled by the attitude and comments  of some executive members.    For  example,  one member stated that  'hordes of self-interest groups come  (to the presidents ' conference)  to  disrupt the proceedings ',  and  another stated,   'perhaps we should  ban these people from the site'.  These comments were apparently  references to the women who come to  the summer conference   (many at their  own expense)  to assist with the  small groups.     We have always been  particularly proud of the personal  committment that BCTF women have  demonstrated toward the Status of  Women program.     It would appear that  some BCTF members are resentful of  that kind of dedication."  "The Annual General Meeting directed  the British Columbia Teachers' Federation to make Declining Enrollment  a priority consideration in the coming year.     The Status of Women program is an essential program in this  regard because women are traditionally affected most by tight economic  conditions.     The theme of the contacts  conference was to be declining enrollment,  yet this was the major cut  from the program."  These cuts still have to be ratified by the June Representative  Assembly of the BCTF.  If that  happens, comment Shuto and Grove,  "we believe the death knell of the  program will have begun."  Vancouver Status of Women and the  British Columbia Federation of  Women have mobilised to contact  representatives to the BCTF Assembly to reiterate local support for  the Status of Women's Contacts  Conference and to oppose these  reactionary moves by the current  BCTF executive.  We Mm//  Just as we are going to press, we  learn that the June assembly did  NOT ratify the budget cuts.  The Contacts Conference will go  ahead.  Pressure from activists in the  BCTF,  from BCFW and VSW paid off!  This is an important political victory.  Details and analysis next  month.  Good sisterhood! 12  JULIAN  RIDINGTON  WOMEN IN A VIOLENT SOCIETY  GGN€  GRRINGTON  13  After months of preparation, organization, fund-raising and general hard  work by the Calgary Status of Women  Action Committee, the Women in a Violent Society Conference took place  April 21-23.  The conference gave  feminists working on various forms of  woman abuse—pornography, assault,  woman battering, incest, and sexual  harassment among them—an opportunity to come together, exchange information, and perhaps to establish  a better communications network.  It also gave us an opportunity to  present feminist perspectives on  these issues without the structures  felt in the "Family Violence"  symposia organized by traditional  institutions, to refine our feminist  analyses, and to reach a new aud-  Response Gxcellenr  Public response was excellent; about  400 women, and a handful of men,  attended.  And they were representative of a larger community than  that generally attending feminist  events; the women were of all ages,  classes, lifestyles, and from a wide  geographical area.  For all of this  further understanding of the unique  ways in which violence—and the  threat of violence—effects their  lives as women had become important.  Their presence evidenced that a  growing number of women realize that  this issue effects all women.  There  is no area in which women and men  experience the world so differently.  We all live with the same omnipresent fear, and we were'all agreed—  we haven't asked to be violated,we  don't want to be, and we must together demand that all forms of  women's abuse end.  Friday night's keynote speaker was  Diana Russell. Her speech was  derived from testimony at the  Brussels Tribunal on Crimes Against  Women.  It was a powerful beginning  for all of us, but perhaps more so  for those who had had little exposure to the subject before.  Russell  read a detailed description of the  infibulation of a young girl in  Africa.  This painful exorcision of  the cliotris, labia minora and part  of the labia majora, followed by  closing of the two sides of the  vulva over the vagina, is still  practised in many African countries  today; somewhat less severe variations are performed in numerious  countries.  Euphemistically called  "female circumcision" of "clitori-  dectomy",■the operation is done with  jagged instruments and without  anaesthetic.  It is one of the clearest examples of misogyny, of objectification and dehumanization, and of  the consignment of women and their  bodies to a solely reproductive role  (the women are cut when married to  allow intercourse, and cut further  in order to deliver children).  The  outrage, shock, and feelings of incredible and overwhelming vulnerability the description engendered  caused several women to faint, and  others to leave the room to vomit or  excape.  From the podium, bodies  seemed to slump in syncrony to the  pain and violation Russell described;  women turned to each other, hugging  to comfort and share their suffering.  Non Status  Lorenne Clark, Jillian Ridington,  and Maria Campbell followed Russell.  Their presentations brought the problem home td Canada.  Maria Campbell  is a non-status native woman, a  member of the only group specially  denied rights under the Canadian  Human Rights Act.  She spoke from  her own experience of pain, poverty,  and victimization; her testimony  completed the linkage from the  universal to the individual.  On Saturday morning, Bonnie Kreps1  "This Film is About Rape" was  shown.  Again, it focussed on the  effect of women who had been assaulted with inteviews with convicted  rapists, the film showed clearly  the contrast between the horror  experienced by the victims, and the  reaction of the apparently normal  men who had assaulted women almost  as a game.  The women had been  traumatized; the men seemed almost  smug, boastful that they had  "scored".  We recommend that the  film be widely shown and discussed.  Rape  Following the film, Lorenne Clark  discussed her research on rape;  coupled with her feminist perspective, it is powerful, —and enraging.  Existing laws are based on the  proprietory interests of men in  virgin daughters and chaste wives;  sexual autonomy for a woman is not  considered, or is discouraged.  All  of us—non-virgin, non-chaste, known  to take a drink and travel unescorted—realized again that our violation would be considered unimportant.  Only our own integrity would have  been damaged, and that has little  value in our society.  Such realization can terrorize and immobilize  we struggled again to overcome our  feelings of powerlessness.  Joanie  Vance next discussed the deliberations of the Law Reform Commission  on rape law; Lorenne and Joanie had  both been involved in the discussions.  Joanie made her recommendations as the national co-ordinator  or rape crisis centres, and her  statements represented the views of  that coalition.  Recommendations  included taking "rape" out of the  sexual offences category, allowing  a woman to charge her husband with  this kind of assault, whether she  is living with him or not; making  the offenses pertain to both men  and women; and removing the emphasis  on penetration by expanding the  definition to include forced contact  of the genitals with any bodily ori-  face.  As we now know, only the last  two of these were incorporated in  the proposed new legislation.  Once  again, the demands of women have been  watered down and compromised.  Wife Battering  During the Saturday afternoon session  on battered women, Gene Errington  examined the family structure and  our values, and psychologist Maria  Eriksen spoke with compassion on the  damages inflicted on women she had  seen as clients.  Maria could offer  no profile of the "typical" male  batterer; again, they are "normal"  men.  A male lawyer spoke obtusely,  irrelevantly, and interminably on  legal recourses available to battered  women.  The final speaker, Jillian  Ridington, discussed the need for  feminist-based resources and refuges  for vicitims of abuse, and some of  the problems in the current law and  its application.  All the women on  this panel emphasized the "blaming  the victim" perspective so prevalent  in our legal and social-service  institutions.  No time remained for questions after  this panel; the room had been booked  for another group, and we had to prepare to hear Robin Morgan, Saturday  night's featured speaker.  So the  anger had no where to go, and the  questions people needed to ask remained unanswered until the next  afternoon, or became forgotten or repressed.  Jillian Ridington  In an attempt to raise extra funds,  the organizers had opened Morgan's  appearance to the community, and  charged those not registered for the  conference to attend it.  Newcomers  would perhaps have gained more from  her address than those who had heard  the issues delineated in greater  detail for two days.  Morgan is a  good speaker, one of a number of  American feminists who make their  living speaking and writing.  We have  no figures on the number of non-participants she attracted.  However,  there was some question as to the  appropriateness of paying a large  sum to an American feminist, who  did not attend the early sessions,  while Canadian women with perhaps  greater expertise are available.  Lorenne Clark, for example, is an  accomplished, knowledgeable, and  dynamic speaker.  She has academic  qualifications, has co-authored an  excellent and recent book on rape  (using Canadian data) and has done  a great deal of ground work in the  field of pornography.  She is now  seeking funds to enable her to  complete her pornography research.  She is more deeply involved in the  issues than is Morgan; she is an  active feminist, and a hard-working  vice president of N.A.C.  She  contributed to three sessions;  Morgan gave one speech.  Yet Clark  received 1/3 of Morgan's fee; no  other Canadian women were paid at  all.  The question became a large  issue the following day, and is  still being debated in the Calgary  Women's Newpaper.  Pornography  On Sunday morning, the delegates  had to chose to attend either a  workshop on Sexual Harassment, or  one on Pornography.  Both were well  done and relevant.  The Sexual Harassment workshop exposed the cruelty  behind such lies as "If you are able  to handle yourself, it won't happen  to you," and, "If you turn him down  tactfully, he'll get the message".  Such lies force all working women  into a double bind; they are forced  to conform to standards of attractiveness, openness, and friendliness,  and yet given no support to deal  with violations of their dignity and  personhood.  In B. C. the Human Rights  Code states "there shall be no discrimination in terms of conditions of  employment"; this is interpreted to  mean one should be free from harassment based on any group factor including sex.  But the panelists including Hanne Jensen, B. C. Human  Rights Officer, and Tina Schmidt,  her Calgary counterpart, Pat Preston,  the President of Calgary-SWAC and a  vice-president of N.A.C. and Connie  Hunt, a lawyer, agreed that the  issue is a real one.  And poignant  personal testimony from the women  present showed that it is an issue  whose time has come.  The workshop on pornography was led  by Diana Russell and Lorenne Clark.  As background for it, Russell had  brought a display of violent pornography, and had suggested that all  those planning to attend the workshop see it.  For those of us who  had gritted our teeth and gone  through it, the display had said it  all.  Pornography of this type can  not be confused with erotica; it is  not about sex but about the exploitation and degradation of women and  children (usually female children).  No person should take a position on  this issue without being aware of  this particularly vicious kind of  pornography.  If such material  depicted Blacks, Jews, East Indians  —any other visible minority—there  would be great public outcry.  But  since it depicts only violence to  women and since it is "only" for  "titillation", and since it just  might cure some poor fellow of his  impotence, it is acceptable, protected by the "freedom of the press".  There was little time Sunday afternoon for the "Where do we go from  here" session, and it seemed somehow unreal to try to formulate plans  for action at that point.  In the  state of frustration and exhaustion  which seemed almost universal at the  end of the conference, even analysis  seemed useless, if not impossible.  In the face of such overwhelming  evidence of misogyny, it became very  difficult to find a place to begin  either to analyse or to work.  Using  concepts of patriarchy seems to work  best; it affirms our conviction that  we cannot release women from victimization so long as the partriarchal  system continues.  Starting with  local groups, biting off an area to  work on, then liaising with other  groups to put understandings together,  may decrease the awesome insurmountability of the task.  Support  In beginning this article, each of  us wrote separately about our  impressions, of the conference.  All  of us mentioned the powerful emotions  it had engendered in us; the anger,  disgust, and frustration—and how  these had often become directed at  the men present who accused us of  emotionality, while plaintively  querying "what about the women who  ask for it" and "what if a women  cries rape on me?" We all mentioned  feeling love and empathy for the  women who spoke out of their own  pain.  For one of us, it occasioned  her first public statement on the  rapes undergone but unarticulated  during her first marriage.  The  atmosphere allowed such disclosures  and gave immediate response and  support to the women who made them.  Perhaps this support was one of the  most valuable aspects of the  conference.  We have to make it  possible to talk about these things,  to allow women to get away from  shame and self-blame.  One poignant  example occurred during the sexual  harassment workshop, when a 17-year  old women got up in front of 200  women and told a story of sexual  harassment on her first job.  She  broke down several times, but she  told her story.  The most significant thing was that she had been  unable to tell her story before, to  her parents or her counsellor; yet  she told it in the workshop, because  the support was there.  But we are  concerned that the support continue  to be there, for her and all the  others.  All the women who came need  supportive people and structures  around them as they continue to deal  with the anxiety, and the anger, and  the overwhelming sense of vulnerability that the conference realized.  We must speak of these things, but  where can we go from there?  Is violence against women, in any or all  of its forms, an issue deeply understood and felt by enough women that  is can become an issue to bring  women together?  Gene Errington  Last fall, at the B.C.F.W. convention  a provisional sub-committee on  Violence Against Women was formed.  Because one of the committee's co-  chairs became unable to continue, and  the other has been too committed to  go it alone, the committee has not  yet met.  But it seems like a good  vehicle to begin working.  A meeting  is being called for June 15. Perhaps an analysis of the new proposals  for law reform regarding incest and  pornography might be a first task;  workshops or a conference similar  to Calgary's might be goals to work  for.  If any one who is a member of  a BCFW member group would like to  join the committee, please contact  Jillian through VSW or at 738-0395  evenings. Meeting time: 7.30 at VSW.  In discussing the conference, we  have pointed out some of its problems as well as its importance.  We  do not mean to criticise the women  who organized it; we thank them very  much for the efforts they made, and  for the new perspectives they gave  to all of us who attended.  They had  the energy and commitment to do what  we have yet to do; organize a major  conference with a feminist perspective, on a topic that affects us all.  We appreciate it very much.o Vancouver, B.C. Canada - Two feminist prison activists are facing sentences of up to life imprisonment  in the wake of a desparate breakout attempt here in January by five  prisoners at the maximum-security  B. C. Penitentiary, the scene of  more than a dozen mass insurrections,  hostage-takings and escape attempts  in the past decade.  The charges against Betsy Wood, 48,  and Gay Hoon, 32, are the most  serious and the most arbitrary to  confront politically-active people  on Canada's West Coast in more than  a generation.  Wood and Hoon, longtime day-care and women's work-place  organizers, have been key figures in  the campaign to focus attention on  the Pen's solitary confinement unit,  which prison experts have called  one of the most brutal and inhuman  in North America.  Wood and Hoon are charged with  attempted murder and several other  offences related to aiding an escape  attempt.  The attempted murder charge,  which carries a maximum life sentence,  was pinned on them on the grounds  that Wood and Hoon bear equal responsibility because one of the prisoners  stabbed a guard during a scuffle.  KINESIS,  March   '78  Preliminary Hearing of Wood and Hoon  Tuesday, June 13, 1978, 9 a.m., New  Westminster Supreme Court Annex, 615  Clarkson. (Hearing could last two  weeks.)  The two women were present in the  B. C. Pen visiting area on January  28 when a prisoner smashed through  a reinforced glass partition with  a sledgehammer, in an apparently  well-coordinated plan to overpower  the guards there and escape out of  the visitor's entrance.  Five  prisoners, all of whom now face  charges as a result of the incident,  then made their way through the hole  in the glass and into the visitor's  waiting area.  The attempt aborted when the guards  managed to close and lock two doors  and escape, leaving behind 13  visitors - including Wood and Hoon -  as hostages.  In the longest such  seige in Canadian prison history,  the ensuing deadlock held firm for  a week while negotiations were conducted between prisoners and police  officials, until finally the hostages were released unharmed and the  prisoners returned to custody in  solitary confinement.  Wood and Hoon were immediately arrested.  At their first court appearance a few days later, the prosecution alleged that Wood had arranged  for a car to be parked right outside  the visitor's entrance, and that  Hoon had supplied a gun.  The prosecution doesn't have to  reveal its case until the preliminary hearing, scheduled for June 13th  in New Westminster (B.C.) provincial  court.  If the court decides that a  prima facia (credible) case has been  made out, Wood and Hoon will be bound  over for trial, probably this fall.  Indict  THE PRISON  "The hole—it's just this tiny god- -  dam room,  and when they shove you in  there,  it's like they 're putting you  in a closet.     Then that big steel  door clangs shut.   It's like you're  buried alive in a concrete vault. "  -prisoner at the solitary confinement hearings, September 1975.  The solitary confinement unit at the  B. C. Pen is no ordinary prison hole;  penal experts from Canada and the  U.S. agree it is the harshest that'  North America has to offer on a par  with the infamous "Adjustment Centre"  at San Quentin, California.  Conditions in the hold at the B. C. Pen  came to light in 21 days of scorching  testimony in 1975, during a lawsuit  brought by eight prisoners (including  Andy Bruce, one of the five involved  in the current break-out incident)  in the Federal Court of Canada.  The  suit resulted in an unprecedented  judgement that exposure to such conditions constituted "cruel and unusual punishment, in violation of the  Canadian Bill of Rights".  But the  judge neglected to make any order  for change, so aside from a few  cosmetic alterations, conditions  remained the same.  Here's what that  has meant to date:  * confinement in a cell 11 feet by  6 feet, with four bare walls, including a solid steel door; a bed  composed of a concrete slab 4"  from the floor with 2-3" of foam  on it, and one blanket for bedding;  the toilet and sink combined in  one fixture, with cold water only.  * a regimen that consists of 23 1/3  hours a day in this cell, with one  half hour of airless, sunless  "recreation" between four concrete  walls-        turn to col.l, p.17  the Prison System 15  ACSW UPDATE  A.C.S.W. REPORT - OCT. I977-JUNE 1978  One of the Advisory Council's most  important tasks during the past nine  months has been to counteract the  growing backlash against the women  who remain in the labour force during times of economic slowdown.  I'm  sure you've all heard the silly,  unfounded and demeaning remarks by  federal and provincial politicians  that married women are taking away  jobs from men.  These views are also  shared by uninformed members of the  public, including well-off women.  Part of the fault lies with the  media image of women which still  does nothing to dispell the myth  of their 'secondary worker' status.  A.C.S.W. is taking two concrete  steps which should help correct  women's image.  The first is a joint study with the  Canadian Life Insurance Association  to show that women do have a permanent place in the labour force.  It seems that this fact must be  proven again and again before  enforcement of equal-pay legislation and additional protection  for part-time and unorganized  workers will be taken seriously.  The second is to do our own  study of women in advertising  and hopefully convince some of  the insensitive clods in that  field to change their tactics.  Both studies should be completed  this year.  In January, the Advisory Council  issued a progress report on the  recommendations of the Royal  Commission on the Status of Women  entitled "International Decade for  Women 1976-85...What It Means To  Canadian Women".  Of the 120 proposals under federal jurisdiction,  52 (less than half) have been fully  implemented, another 46 partially  adopted and 22 not implemented.  The Council also made 60 proposals  whicn embrace and expand on the  original recommendations not yet  adopted and we hope the government  will implement these before 1980  - the year that all governments must  report their progress (or lack of it)  on women's issues to the United  Nations.  What about this record so  far? Like other women's groups, the  Advisory Council is becoming increasingly impatient that eight  years after the Royal Commission's  Report was tabled, so many of the  major issues have not been fully  resolved.  Some examples are:  ABORTION AND BIRTH PLANNING  The Badgely Report confirmed women's  fears that the abortion law is being  inequitably applied across Canada.  No further action has been taken.  And  now the influence of the so-called  "pro-lifers", who foist their narrow  views on federal and provincial  politicians, is being felt.  Funding  cutbacks to groups who give birth  control information, advocate sex  education in schools, and believe  in freedom of choice, is almost inevitable unless a strong counterattack can be launched.  ECONOMIC VALUE OF HOMEMAKER  A.C.S.W. believes that the economic  value of a homemaker to the family  must be proven and sold to the public  and a paper on this subject will be  ready soon.  Once this is done, the  mechanics of including homemakers in  the Canada Pension Plan will have to  be worked out.  In July of 1977, two  major amendments to the CPP were  made.  The first is equal splitting  of CPP credits earned during marriage  between husband and wife upon divorce  or annulment of their marriage.  The  second would protect contributors  who leave the labour force for a  period of time to raise children  under seven years of age.  Unfortunately the province of Ontario has  vetoed the second amendment and it  cannot become law.  A.C.S.W. feels  that Premier Davis is 'playing politics ' with Ottawa at the expense of  women.  DOROTHY  HOLM€  MULTIPLE JURISDICTIONS-FAMILY BREAKUP  Currently the federal government has  jurisdiction over marriage and divorce while the provinces have jurisdiction over matrimonial property and  civil rights issues.  The answer  lies in unified family courts but  this concept is bogging down at the  provincial level.  Justice Minister  Ron Basford recently said that  unified family courts are the building block for family law reform and  would eliminate many of the jurisdictional problems that now exist  in the field.  But can our federal  and provincial politicians put aside  their intergovernmental jealousies  and legislative chauvinism? Or  like Ontario and the CPP, will they  wrangle on at the expense of women?  MATRIMONIAL PROPERTY  A January 1978 study entitled "Draft  of Statement on Matrimonial Property  in Canada" by A.C.S.W. showed that  no province or territory has yet  attained the minimum objective of  recognizing marriage as a partnership of equals.  None of the Bills  being studied by the provincial  legislatures at that time (P.E.I.,  Ontario, Alberta and B.C.) provided  for an equal sharing of assets acquired through the spouses' joint  efforts during the marriage.  Manitoba had passed a reasonably good  Bill but after a change in government, it was suspended before it  came into force.  B. C. and Ontario  have since introduced revised Bills  and the Advisory Council will study  these and issue a statement.  RAPE - SEXUAL ASSAULT  Although A.C.S.W. welcomes the recent  measures to change the rape laws,  there are three main reasons why we  are not satisfied with the amendments.  One, since rape is a crime of  violence and not one of uncontrolled  sexuality, a separate category of  "sexual assault' should be created.  Two, married women who, because of  economic circumstances are unable  to leave the matrimonial home, have  no protection from rape by their  husbands.  Three, by introducting  amendments only, the government is  attempting a piecemeal solution instead of a total overhaul of this  part of the Criminal Code.  A series of Income Tax recommendations were presented to the federal  government in January.  These involve structural changes in the Act re  child care allowances, women who  work in an unincorporated family  business or farm, alimony and  maintenance payments, and lump sum  settlements in the event of divorce.  Details can be obtained in A.C.S.W.'s  "Background Paper-Women and the  Income Tax System" and "Recommendations on Women and Taxation".  Some  of the changes suggested originated  with V.S.W. representations.  Two major research documents were  released at A.C.S.W.'s April meeting  in Montreal.  One is on "Women and  Aging:  A Report on the Rest of Our  Lives."  It is a depressing paper  that confirms statistically what  most of us have long suspected - old  women are our poorest citizens.  They not only face financial discrimination - in pension plans, government assistance programs, employment  and housing -- but also psychological  discrimination.  Our youth-oriented  society still doesn't know what to  do with women who reach 40 and refuse  to become senile.  We are anxious  to get feedback on this paper before  making our final recommendations to  the federal government.  The other one is a book called  "Indian Women and the Law in Canada  -Citizens Minus."  It was researched  and written by Kathleen Jamieson  (Indian Rights for Indian Women)  with the support of the Advisory  Council.  This powerful study, which  documents the historical and sociological background to the present  discrimination against Indian women  embodied in the Indian Act, is well  worth reading.  SHARING  TH€  POW€R  A.C.S.W.'s long-awaited political  kit was also released at this meeting.  It's called "Sharing the Power" and is  intended for use by women's groups to  help women learn how to influence the  decision-makers and become directly  involved themselves in the political  process.  cont.   on p.16 16  cont. from p.   15  It includes information on how to  lobby, write a brief, organize a  workshop, and work with the media.  It details how to run an election  campaign and how to be a candidate.  It includes a discussion on power  and involvement, questions revealing  attitudes, and projects for group  work.  It lists federal Boards,  Commissions, Councils and Agencies  to which recommendations for appointment should be made.  It doesn't, however, tell women how  to deal with the dirty tricks and  questionable maneuverings of the  "backroom boys".  We hope that women  will join the political party of  their choice and fight for changes  re nominating meetings, access to  party power, etc. from within.  A CBC reporter recently asked me if  the Advisory Council was a "powder  puff" organization.  I explained to  her that any advisory body - even  the Economic Council of Canada - is  ineffective if the public is not  supportive of their proposals to  government.  I know one thing for  sure - nothing happens without  public pressure.  It is the only  thing that governments respond to.  A good example is the federal Human  Rights Bill, which is law today  only because of several well-organized write-in campaigns by many  diverse organizations across this  country including the Vancouver  Status of Women.  write for  ACSW  materials  I urge women to write for the various documents that I have mentioned.  Pick your area of interest and support us with letters and more letters  to the appropriate officials.  The  documents are free and can be obtained from the Advisory Council, 63  Sparks Street, Ottawa, Ontario.  KIP 5R5 (Box 1541, Station B).  One of my priority areas for the Fall  will be to urge the establishment of  a provincial advisory council on the  status of women.  British Columbia,  Alberta and Manitoba are the only  provinces without councils and as a  result, women in these provinces are  denied a voice on women's issues at  the federal level.  I will have more  to say on this in a future Kinesis.  In the meantime, please read Page 7  of April Kinesis - editorial on  "Representation without Notification"  which expresses my views exactly.  I have enjoyed my first year on the  federal Advisory Council on the  Status of Women.  There is a tremendous amount of material to digest  and it takes time to establish media  contacts.  Therefore I have not  had as much personal contact with  women's groups as I would have liked,  but hopefully I can rectify this in  the next two years.  Please call me  at 936-1662 if you have any questions  or wish information on A.C.S.W.'s  many activities.  Dorothy Holme  LETTER  LOBBY  media  This month's Letter Lobby is by  former L.L. Coordinator, Dorothy  Holme. She believes letter lobbying  to be a most important tool which  individual women and women's groups  can utilize to affect change.  V.S.W. would like to organize another L.L. group but since inadequate funding has reduced our staff  to the bare minimum, we must rely  on volunteers. Dorothy has agreed  to give her initial assistance to  get a group going - four or five  people is all it takes. It you are  able to help in this vital area,  please phone Sue Moore at 736-1313.  LETTER LOBBY  Imagine that you are reading the TV  Guide - a family magazine - and the  first paragraph of an article called,  "Television Discovers Sex!" goes  like this:  A guy runs along the beach  at ABC,  his balls bouncing  like white balloons in the  twilight.     On NBC,  a different guy bends down so  the camera can linger on  his buttocks.    Neither guy  was an actor a year ago.  Both are beneficiaries of  the fact that television  this year is buying  'butts  and balls' and  'guys that  jiggle'.  Impossible, you say, it would never  happen.  No one would dream of degrading men and the male anatomy  in this manner.  But what if the  subject (or object) was female?  Well, that's different, isn't  it? Just substitute the word  'boobs' for 'balls* and 'girl'  for 'guy' and you have the picture.  This repulsive article goes on to  tell us what we can expect in the  way of television 'entertainment'  this Fall.  Inane shows such as  Roller Girls, Beach Girls, California Girls, ad nauseam* will  feature "plastic faces, large  breasts, F. F-Majors hair, and  semi-scanty, form-fitting uniforms".  Television executives (male) readily  admit that the women portrayed in  the shows are "sexual fantasies" but  they also point out that "titillating" programs are perpetually near  the top of the Nielson ratings.  And  the U.S. Federal Communications Commission says it has had very few complaints from viewers - other than a  few religious groups.  But I think the FCC is in for a surprise.  A recent Vancouver Sun story  told of a national protest by concerned citizens against Sears, Roebuck & Co., sponsors of Charlie's  Angels and Three's Company.  "We are  disgusted with the low level of television programming and are going to  make our voices heard where it counts  - in the advertisers' pocketbook,"  one spokesperson said.  Feminists should also make their  voices heard.  Although we don't  have the same clout as U.S. residents  we can add considerable weight to  their lobby.  Write the offending  stations (Canadian and American) and  also to:  U.S. Federal Communications  Commission  Broadcast Bureau  Washington, D.C, 20554  Send copies of your letter to  Communications Minister  Hon. Jeanne Sauve  House of Commons, Ottawa  and the Canadian Radio and Telecommunications Commission  1050 West Pender Street  Vancouver, B. C.  Here is a sample letter;  I am deeply concerned about the dene-  gration of women in (name of show)  and I understand that this type of  'entertainment' will be even more  prevalent in the Fall.  It is ironic that television producers have picked the United Nations'  International Decade of Women (1975-  1985) to revert to the dark ages in  their portrayal of women.  Surely they can come up with interesting and intelligent programs  which would reflect today's woman  and still be high on the Nielsen  ratings.  Granted there are some  viewers who cannot yet visualize  women as human beings, but must  you cater to this minority?  I intend to boycott the sponsors  and television stations concerned  and will urge my friends in  (name of organization or political  party) to do the same.  I look forward to hearing from you  on this important matter.  Yours truly. CONTINUED from p.14.  Wood and Hoon  * a complement of guards who routinely subject the prisoners to  every form of humiliation. There  has been a history of beatings,  strip searches, threatening them  with guns, gassing them and  hosing them down in their cells,  contaminating their food with  everything from human waste to  ground glass. Verbal abuse is  constant, including suggestions  to commit suicide.  * such complete sensory deprivation  that prisoners lose the ability  to talk with other people, even  to read books. They become prey  to their own hallucinations, often  losing contact with reality completely.  * thorough-going despair, leading to  frequent suicide attempts and  suicides. The long-term solitary  confinement unit is meant to segregate, for months on end, prisoners who are perceived by the  administration as a threat to the  "peace and good order" of the  institution. This can mean anything from prisoners who have assaulted guards to those involved  in political organizing. All the  experts who testified in the suit  stressed how capricious this process is.  In this past decade prisoners at the  Pen have tried every sort of tactic  to break down solitary, from law  suits to hostage-taking to mass  strikes and insurrections. Yet the  Pen's hole persists - a monument to  the entrenched power of the senior  Security Staff.  Richard Wright, Ralph Saumer and Dave  Bennet, all of whom have experienced  Solitary, are charged in connection  with an excape attempt last January  (Steve Hall has already been sentenced  to life, and Andy Bruce faces trial  in the Fall); Betsy Wood and Gay Hoon,  who have been key figures in the  battle against Solitary, are accused  of helping them.  Put the real criminals on trial.  Take part in turning these court  proceedings into an indictment  of Solitary and the entire Canadian prison system.  BCPEN  ON TRIAL  More information from Solitary Confinement Abolition Project, Box 758,  Station A, Vancouver, B. C.  Money  urgently needed by Wood-Hoon Defence  Fund, c/o CCEC Credit Union, #10 -  246 East Broadway, Vancouver, B.C.  BC PEN  CONTRAVENES  17  WOMEN'S WORLD!    A weekend extravaganza to promote cosmetics, facials,  hairdo's, fashions, sewing machines,  multi-purpose garbage bags, vegetable choppers, no-stick frying pans,  nailpolish, nylons, sexuality, passivity, plasticity, and stupidity  was held this June 10-11 at the Show  Mart Building of our own P.N.E.  Admission was only $3.50 - a bargain  at the price!  (Just who is raking  in the dough, we ask?)  Women's groups were invited to  attend in order to present an alternative viewpoint (or to avoid picket-  ting of the premises). Attend, we  did. up to col.3  Women's World  We were provided with a corner of the  room to set up displays.  Our corner  of the room was called WOMEN'S WORLD  IS CHANGING!  Press Gang, Makara,  Ariel Books, Vancouver Women's Health  Collective. Vancouver Status of Women,  Rape Relief, SORWUC, Priorities (NDP  Women's Ctte. Magazine), Vancouver  People's Law School, and Concerned  Citizens for Choice on Abortion provided pamphlets and information.  For  many women we also provided a welcome  relief from the surrounding propoganda  and sales pitches. And, women also  expressed anger at losing $3.50 for a  tacky advertiser's gimmick that promised more than they delivered.  But  then, don't they all ....  WAVAW  Women Against Violence Against  Women (WAVAW) of Toronto have  protested a recent advertisement for  men's clothing sponsored by Harry  Rosen Men's Wear of Toronto.  The advertisement features a woman  on the floor of a washroom.  She is  half-undressed.  Above her, stand  three men.  One is licking a knife  and pointing a carrot at the woman.  "The message is clear that the  woman is the victim of a premeditated and brutal attack", commented  a WAVAW spokesperson.  (Globe and Mail info.)  RAPIST M€NTALITY  Victoria - Saanich Mayor Mel Couvelier  voted against a grant for rape prevention education on May 9.  He didn't  want "some woman in a low-slung  blouse" giving talks about rape in  schools.  "Did you 9ee her blouse?    It was down  to here,  for God's sake",  he told  reporters.  Victoria Rape Relief worker Trisha  Mary Moon had worn a blazer-type with  a scarf around her neck.  The Greater Victoria intermuncipal  committee turned down Rape Relief's  appeal of the earlier refusal to  grant the Centre $16,000.  The Centre now operates with 2  workers who work up to 100 hours a  week.  ANTI CHOIC€  "There's nothing wrong with fighting  abortionists."  Hon. W. Vander Zalm,  MLA. Hansard, May 10, 1978.  ANTI ABORTIONISTS LOSE POLITICAL  BATTLE IN PRINCE GEORGE  Anti-abortionists failed to elect  their candidate in the recent  federal Liberal nominations in Prince  George, B. C.  While the balloting  was going on, members of the Prince  George Women's Equal Rights Association demonstrated for choice outside.  Lee Nunn, 31 year old Prince George  apartment manager, had the backing  of the Coalition for Life in B. C.,  an anti-abortion group. Liberal  Party" spokespersons have confirmed  that the anti-abortionists had been  buying up party memberships.  Nunn's opponent, Spike Enemark, won  by 92 votes on the first ballot to  Nunn's 61. (info from Prince George  Citizen)  ANTI-CHOICE factions are signing up  members for the annual general meetings of hospital boards in POWELL  RIVER and FORT ST.JOHN.  Meanwhile, an anti-choice person has  won a seat on the SURREY HOSPITAL  board. Art Goyer, a chartered accountant was elected, while two other anti-  choicers were defeated.  In VANCOUVER, the Coliseum has been  booked for the VGH Annual General  Meeting. 18  A RESPONSE TO CITY COUNCIL  What the cutbacks uuill mean  The Mayor and Council  City of Vancouver  453 West 12th Ave  Vancouver B.C.  V5Y W4  Dear Sirs and Madams:  I believe the Vancouver City Council made a grave error in refusing  the request of Vancouver Status of  Women for funding. The service this  group performs for women and the community as a whole is invaluable.  Let me detail my own experience with  this wonderful group, bearing in mind  that the help they gave me they give  to countless other women every day.  In February, 1977, because of the  alcoholism and brutality of my husband, I took my three children and  left our family home, finding accommodation in a store top apartment.  The following three months were very  trying for me. I was forced to go on  welfare while awaiting my hearing; I  had a prowler; I lived in fear that  my husband would discover our whereabouts; my oldest son had an emergen--  cy appendectomy; my youngest son was  hit by a car; I was constantly worried about the outcome of my hearing  and whether the Court would grant me  the orders I requested, particularly  that of occupancy of the family home.  I must have phoned the Status of Women office ten or fifteen times over  this difficult period. At times I  felt I couldn't make it - that I  would have to return to my husband  and his abuse.  Every time I phoned,  People often ask us,   "What will  the cutbacks at VSW mean?"  One service which we have been  forced to cut is personal counselling.   What does this mean?  Read this woman 's letter.  Her comments are more eloquent than any  we could offer.  I received support, sympathy and  good advice. After each call, my  courage was renewed as was my determination to build a new life for me  and my children. Finally, the date  of my Hearing arrived - I was granted  all my orders and we made plans to  move back into our home. On moving  day, I discovered my husband was not  going to comply with the court order  and my three children and I with  all our belongings were forced to  move in with friends. This was the  most difficult time of all. No one  could help me: not the police, not  the courts, not my lawyer. I phoned  Carol Pfeiffer at the Status of Women. She gave me the courage, after  four days at my friends, to contact  a locksmith while my husband was  out, have the locks changed, and  move kit and kaboodle into the home.  When my husband came home and tried  to enter forcibily, the police arrived and finally enforced my restraining order. If I hadn't done  this, I would probably have moved  back to sink further into depression.  COMBAT IN THE MEDIA ZONE  A recent issue of Seven Days carried  an excellent article under the above  title by socialist-feminist Barbara  Ehrenreich about the seventies media  version of a feminist.  "Unlike her militant predecessor", Ehrenreich writes,  "the media's New Woman is  never aggressive (only 'assertive '), but that doesn't  stop her from getting her  way....In pop psych language, the New Woman has  'kicked the fear habit',  'learned to say no' (to the  tiresome demands of other  people), and decided to be  a 'winner', not a 'loser'.."  New magazines, like New Woman and  Working Woman, have sprung up to  promote the image and service those  who aspire to it.  MS., the only  explicitly feminist mass magazine,  always assumed that its readers  were into making it - or 'getting  yours' to borrow the unfelicitous  title of MS editor Letty Pogrebin's  recent book - but Working Woman  aims straight for the upwardly mobile  career woman with articles like  "Selling Insurance Offers Lucrative  Careers Nationwide", "How to Become  an Entrepreneur", and "Selling Big  on Commission."  N€W SUP€RWOMAN  Meanwhile, the traditional women's  magazines have been hastily updating  their image to suit the ear of the upwardly mobile New Woman.' The Ladies  Home Journal, for example, purveyors  of hard-core domesticity to* at least  three generations of American women,  has thrown out the apron image for a  business-like blazer.  Its average  reader, LHJ claims, is no longer a  satisfied mommy, but a frenetic achiever, "who never stands still...One  moment, she's off to the mountains  for some skiing, the next moment,  she's off to the islands for some  tennis.  And in between, she's a  growing family (sic), an exciting  career and a creative way of life  that's hers and hers alone".  After I was in my home, I felt as  if I could get on with my life. I  returned to work in August and have  been working ever since. I feel  stronger than I have ever been. My  children and I are getting along  just fine. And I really believe that  without the help and encouragement  of the Status of Women, I never would  have made it. They were always there  when I needed them, just as they are  for any person in distress who asks  for help. If I didn't return to my  husband, I would probably still be on  welfare at a cost to the taxpayers of  several thousand dollars a year. If  I had returned to my husband, I would  probably have either committed suicide  or have been institutionalized, again  at a cost to the taxpayers. I am not  being overly dramatic. I was in a very  bad state when we moved out.  So you see, in my case the Vancouver  Status of Women has saved the taxpayers thousands of dollars. And that  is just one case. They help hundreds  of other women the same way each year.  Now the group will have to cut back  services. I wonder which service will  be the first to go? Now perhaps there  won't be time to listen to all the  distressed people who call. Now perhaps they will have to turn people  away.  What is more important than helping  people rebuild their lives? What are  your priorities and those of our  Provincial Government? You should  be ashamed of yourselves for denying  aid to this most worthwhile and  deserving group.  Name withheld  RACISM   &  D€CLINING  €NROLLM€NT  FAIR IS WHITE.'  Robert Jackson, the head of the  Ontario Royal Commission on  Declining School Enrolment is  worried about the racial suicide of  Canadians of European descent.  "The only immigrants we can get are  from countries of uncontrolled fertility", he said.  Moreover, the  Indians and Eskimos could "get the  country back by default", because of  what he believes is their higher-  than-average birth rate.  Test-tube babies may be a solution,  he suggests.  He says that he's not racist, just  controversial.  "I don't think it's  fair that we may disappear and be  replaced by others (immigrating to  Canada) who are not controlling  their fertility rates.  After all,  fair is fair."  (CP info) 19  INTCRNATIONAL N€WS  FRANCC  RAPISTS CONVICTED  Three men were convicted of rape in  France early in May.  The conviction  represents an important victory for  the women's movement.  The case involved the beating and  rape of two Belgian women on a  camping trip near Marseilles in     'p  1974.  The trial was a national  focus of attention, with large  women's demonstrations publicizing   |  the case and forcing the courts to   \  act.  Local male supremacists vehemently opposed the case, threatening and attacking women journalists, lawyers and spectators at the  trial.  The rapists' defence typified the  anti-woman bias of French justice.  The defendants admitted committing  the attack, but maintained that  since the victims had finally  "yielded," the men were innocent of  rape.  Defense lawyers also inferred that the women were to  blame because they are lesbians,  and frequently complained that the  women's movement was interfering  with justice by making a major  issue out of the case.  Guardian May 17th.  JOANN€ LITTLC  JOANNE LITTLE GETS EXTRADITION SETBACK FROM NEW YORK COURT  New York (LNS)—The New York State  Court of Appeals on May 9 upheld an  order to extradite Joanne Little  back to North Carolina from New York.  The ruling came after lawyers for  Little presented arguments before  the court in Albany, New York on a  motion to grant an evidentiary  hearing in the case.  Little and  her lawyers have been trying for the  past several months to prevent the  extradition and bring witnesses and  evidence into court to document  harassment of Little in the North  Carolina prison from which she  escaped.  In statement released after the  decision, William Kunstler, one of  Little's lawyers, charged that the  Appeals Court "had shirked its human  and legal responsibilities" by not  granting the hearing.  "The issue is not the innocence or  guilt of Joanne Little," stated the  Reverend Timothy Mitchell, a Black  minister who traveled to the Albany  hearing from New York City with a  busload of Little's supporters.  "The issue," he explained to LNS  shortly after the hearing, "is what's  going to happen to her if she is  sent back to North Carolina."  Last fall, Little escaped from the  North Carolina Correctional Facility  for Women where she was serving a  seven to ten year sentence for alled-  edly stealing $200 worth of goods in  a 1973 robbery of a trailer in Washington, North Carolina.  Little's supporters say she has continually been denied parole on the  basis of trumped up charges created  by prison officials.  Little became  a target of constant harassment, she  claims, after she won an acquittal in  the killing of a white prison guard  who attempted to rape her.  NICARAGUA  The people of Nicaragua are fighting a war against the repressive  dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza.  On April 13,  a militant,  Doris  Maria Tijerino Haslam was captured  in a battle near the Honduras border.  This is Doris ' fifth time in one  of Somoza's dungeons.   When she denounced to the world the brutal atrocities she had suffered at the  hands of her torturers,  she was  arrested and held for two years.  It seems unlikely that the regime  will allow her to survive to tell  the world yet again about that regime's brutality.  Doris was released  before only after massive protests  by the people of Nicaragua and world public opinion.  Now, another  world-wide campaign is being organized on her behalf.  Send telegrams or letters demanding:  1. that Doris Tijerino 's  well being be guaranteed;  2. that she be given due process  of law before proper authorities;  3. that decent living conditions  and freedom from torture be guaranteed all political prisoners in  Nicaragua.  Send these messages to:  1. The Presidential Palace  ' Managua  Nicaragua  2. Kurt Waldheim  United Nations Building  New York,  N.Y.  r    June 3,1900  Ihtemof ional ladies  Garment vbYKers  union founded.  TAKC BACK TH€ NIGHT  In response to the rising incidence  of rape, "battering" by husbands  and other forms of violence against  women, activists in Washington, D.C,  and Columbus, Ohio, organized  several activities during "anti-  rape week" April 23-29.  The highlight of the week was a  march "to take back the night"  April 29.  A total of 1000 women in  both cities marched through the  streets after dark, calling for an  end to rape and other anti-women  crimes.  Demonstrators also expressed support for women's rights to  self-defense and demanded the  right to control their own bodies  and lives.  The largest action was in Washington,  where over 600 marched through a  high-rape neighbourhood to a rally  organized by the Rape Crisis Centre  (RCC), the D. C. Area Feminist  Alliance and the Task Force on Abused  Women, the march also drew a show of  support from sympathetic bystanders.  At the rally, RCC director Nkenge  Toure encouragingly noted the presence of a small number of men and  third world women among the predominately white female crowd.  "We  must make people aware that we intend  to end batter and rape," she said,  "and we must unite the community to  do that."  A speaker from the Dessie Woods  Defense Committee demanded immediate  freedom for Woods, a Black woman  imprisoned in Georgia for killing a  white man who tried to rape her.  (Guardian '78)  ITALY  The Italian government has approved  a bill which makes abortion available to women over 18 within the  first three months of pregnancy.  Abortions can be performed for health  economic, social or psychological  reasons.  The law is one of the most  progressive in Europe.  Pope Paul describes abortion as  "homicide" and a statement from the  Vatican after passage of the Bill  reiterated that abortion remains "an  abominable crime" in the eyes of  God.  The Socialists, Social Democrats,  Republicans, Liberals and Radicals  voted in favour of the Bill which  carried in the Senate 160 to 148.  Christian Democrats and neo-Fascists  opposed it.  There are some negative aspects to  the Bill.  The doctor, for example,  must consult with the father of the  unborn child to evaluate "the circumstances that lead her to seek the  interruption of the pregnacy".  Such  a stipulation subjects the woman to  an enforced "discussion" with a  physician and partner, both of whom  may oppose the woman's choice to  have an abortion.  Despite these drawbacks, the bill  represents a victorious culmination  to four year's agitation by pro-  choice groups.  Their petition drive  against the old abortion law was a  major factor in the Christian Democratic government's resignation in  1976.  (Sun/Guardian info) 20  Rattuuell vs. Rathmell   by Connie Hunt  RATHWELL CASE: HAVE NEW PRECEDENTS  BEEN SET?  a Calgary Women's Newspaper article  by Connie Hunt  In January 1978, the Supreme Court of  Canada handed down a decision which  has been described as a 'landmark  case' for married women's property  rights, in Rathwell v. Rathwell, it  was held that a Saskatchewan farm  wife was entitled to a declaration  that she owned one-half of the land  and personal property acquired by  her husband and herself during their  marriage.  At first blush, the Rathwell case  would seem to overturn the Murdoch  case, in which the Supreme Court of  Canada denied the ownership claim  of a Turner Valley women to ranch  property on which she had laboured  for many years alongside her husband.  A close look at the Rathwell decision  reveals that it is less of a precedent-setter than one might have  originally hoped.  For while three  of the nine judges seem prepared to  vary the law as set out in Murdoch,  the others were able to distinguish  the Murdoch case on its facts.  The result is that the majority of  the Supreme Court of Canada still  adheres to the legal principle laid  out in Murdoch: where property is  registered in the husband's name,  the wife must have made a financial  contribution before she will be declared an owner.  *    *    *  Lloyd and Helen Rathwell married in  1944.  After the war they opened a  joint bank account into which each  deposited savings of $700.00 In  1946, 1947 and 1958 land purchases  were made with money from the joint  account.  In the first two cases,  the balance was paid by crop share  payments which were funnelled through  the joint account.  The balance on  the third acquisition was satisfied  by farm work which Mr. Rathwell  carried out for the vendor.  Title  to all three parcels were registered  in Mr. Rathwell's name:  Between 1944 and 1967 when the Rath-  wells separated, Mrs. Rathwell worked  very hard.  Mr. Justice Dickson of  the Supreme Court described her  contribution in this way:  Mrs. Rathwell did the chores  when her husband was busy on  the land; she looked after  the garden and canned the  produce; she milked cows and  sold the cream; she drove  machinery, bailed hay, provided meals and transportation for hired help and kept  the books and records of the  farming operation. Often,  while Mr. Rathwell worked the  fields, she fulfilled his  obligations under a contract  to drive a school bus. She  raised and educated four  children...to grain belt  farmers, the kitchen was just  as much an integral part of  the farming operation as the  feed lot, or the machine shed.  not the victory  it might appear  At the trial of the Rathwell case,  before the Saskatchewan Court of  Queen's Bench, it was held that  Mrs. Rathwell was not entitled to  any ownership of the property in  her husband's name.  Two judges  of the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal  declared that she was the half-owner  of all the land and personal  property.at issue.  The third Appeal  Court judge was of the view that  her contribution was not equal to  that of her husband's; he would only  have awarded her one-half of the  first two land purchases.  All nine judges of the Supreme Court  of Canada heard the Rathwell appeal.  Five of the nine held that Mrs.  Rathwell was half-owner of all the  property acquired during the  marriage.  The other four agreed  with the one Court of Appeal judge  that her contribution had not equaled  that of her husband, and that she  was only entitled to" share in the  first two land acquisitions.  As a result, Mrs. Rathwell succeeded.  But, in order to understand the  effect that her case might have on  future decisions, one must examine  the reasons of the Supreme Court of  Canada.  Three of the five majority judges  based her rights upon two separate  principles.  The first, called a  resulting trust, operates in the  following way.  The Court will look  to see whether the parties shared a  common intention that property registered in the name of one should be  shared by both.  Where both parties  have made a direct financial contribution, a presumption arises that  they intended each to be an owner.  Where there is no financial contribution, the Court must look at  other factors to ascertain whether  the common intention existed.  In the Murdoch case the judges  ruled that there was no financial  contribution by the wife, and the  Court was unable to find other indicators of common intention.  In  Rathwell, the fact that the land  has been paid for through the  joint bank account was considered  sufficient to establish a resulting  trust in favour of Mrs. Rathwell.  These three judges, however, went  further.  They also held that Mrs.  Rathwell was entitled to succeed  on the basis of a second principle,  the constructive trust.  Even if  she had not made a direct financial  contribution, she would have been  entitled to succeed because it  would be unjust, in all circumstances of the case, for Mr. Rathwell to retain the benefits of the  wife's labour.  It is the second principle which is  of greatest significance, since it  would permit courts to consider  factors other than financial  contribution (such as work as a  homemaker) in dividing matrimonial  property, and thus redress the  injustice of Murdoch.  The three judges were able to  distinguish Murdoch because no  financial contribution had been  recognized in that case.  They also  pointed out that the constructive  trust doctrine had not been  considered in Murdoch.  And, in  addition, they specifically stated  that to the extent that Murdoch  means that a wife's labour cannot  be viewed as a contribution, they  would not be prepared to follow it. 21  RATHWELL vs.  RATHWELL  cont. from p. 20  The latter statement in the case has  attracted a great deal of attention.  However, it must be viewed in its  proper perspective.  It was made by  only three of nine judges.  Indeed,  •the other six judges either explicity  or by implication took a contrary  view.  The other two judges who  found in Mrs. Rathwell's favor did  so on the resulting trust ground,  only because of her direct financial  contribution.  They declined to  discuss the constructive trust notion.  The four dissenting judges would have  awarded Mrs. Rathwell half of the  first, two land acquisitions on the  basis of her financial contribution  and denied her ownership of the third  parcel because her contribution was  less than her husband's.  They  explicitly denied the power of the  Court to invoke the constructive  trust in matrimonial disputes.  Thus, while five of the nine judges  granted a declaration of her entitlement to half the property, their  only -agreement was that her rights  arose because of her financial  contribution.  This means that  Rathwell can be distinguished from  Murdoch because of the joint bank  account, and that the Murdoch case  is still alive and well in Canada.  The Rathwell case underscores, once  again, the need for legislative  action in the matrimonial property  area.  For we can be no more certain,  after Rathwell than before, that the  Courts are prepared to take a nonmonetary contribution into account  in dividing matrimonial property.  •ucfflivtr. Sunday. Jut 19,1938.  Police end post office sit-in by  jobless: BLOOBT SD10U7!  MCOUVER.  SUNDAY. JUNE 18,1978  I0flft  ■ FOB A SHORTER WOK! 1  - in m all nunu  LIVE MUSIC-       ■ Speakers from Laboor, post office occonUr, afiemolo7«l -  STANLEY PARK ("ffl"")  If.!! DrizzlearS  Greater Vancouver Union of the Unemployed  xfllievTAKe -meYWiuBe  -xou ID Tfie    CQtWVG pws  Devor on Bryant,  cont.  from p.3  KINESIS:    What do you think is the  significance of Anita Bryant's  campaign against gay rights?  HOLLY:    Anita Bryant is not only  attacking the rights of lesbians  and homosexual men.  She is attacking the rights of all people. She  is pinpointing the rights of gay  peoples as her major target because  she is able to appeal most effectively to prejudice against a minority who have at present the fewest  rights under the law.  gays  an initial target  Homosexuals have only recently begun  to organize on their own behalf and  consequently public awareness of the  realities of the homosexual lifestyle is still very low and public  prejudice and belief in stereotypes  and unfounded myths is still very  high.  The last ten years has shown the  rise of a more open attitude in  society towards sexuality. Heterosexuals as well as homosexuals have  been moving towards a freer form of  sexuality.  Part of this has been  the institution of sex education in  the school system, scientific investigation into human sexuality (Kinsey  and Masters & Johnson), freer access  to birth control, and a general willingness to take the discussion of  sexuality out of the bedrooms and  into an open forum.  The women's  liberation movement has been one  of many large forces responsible  for bringing about this change in  attitude.  With the questioning of traditional  sexual values has come a questioning  of traditional roles based on one's  sex and a willingness to examine  and experiment in alternatives.  In  this atmosphere the gay liberation  movement has been growing. With its  growth, those who fear change have  become enraged. Anita Bryant is a  leader of the forces which wish to  oppose change and growth in almost  every sector of our society. Her  followers are those people who would  believe that it is possible that  our value system has already reached  perfection and no longer needs to  change.  Their appeal is an emotional one to  fear of the unknown, to fear of change,  and to hatred of people who are different.  These emotions can easily override reason, logic, and the law.  Once the freedom of speech and the  freedom of the press have been  censored, once our educational system has limited our ability to  examine freely all sides of an  issue, when workers have been denied  the right to organize into trade  unions, women the right to control  of the:Tr own bodies and to move  freely in\the world, minorities the  right to practise their own  .beliefs—when all rights have been  voted away in the exercise of righteous moral indignation, then we no  longer retain the right to dissent.  Therein lies the danger in  allowing what may seem to be a  lunatic fringe to continue unchecked.  In a democratic system if enough  people can be appealed to through  irrational emotionalism and hysterical fear tactics, our rights and  freedoms can be voted away from us.  Vancouver Status of Women  Tuesday, June 20 7-30  Kits Library  8th & Macdonald  ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING 22  M€N AGAINST S€XISM  MEN AGAINST SEXISM is a new group  aiming to raise consciousness and  engage in direct action around  issues of sexism. This is an open  group, which can be contacted  through Box 33863, Station D,  Vancouver, B.C.  This group recently protested the  Vancouver Sun's sexist coverage  of the March 8 parade with pickets,'  protests and petitions.  BLACKOUT  British Columbia's BLACKOUT is a  new anarchist newsletter. Available  for free from Box 758, Station A,  Vancouver, B.C. Updates on direct  actions, agitational and propaganda  campaigns around town. It aims to  act as a call-board, information  exchange and general People's Black  Pages. Send in your anti-authoritarian news.  RAP€ AWAR€N€SS  Rape Relief will be holding community  awareness programs this summer:  The Rape Awareness Project is  a Young Canada Works Summar  Project sponsored by Vancouver Rape Relief. The  project employs four women  and is concerned with research into community organizing projects, preventive  education, and outreach work  in schools and community  centres around rape awareness.  Breaking The Hold: a work shop on  rape prevention and rape awareness for teachers and counsellors  July 15 or August 12; 9:30 a.m.-  5:00 p.m.  Britannia Community Centre  1661 Napier Avenue  Vancouver  Pre-registration. Contact Rape  Awareness Project, #4 - 45 Kingsway, Vancouver 872-8212.  L£TT€RS  &  comments  Every month I can't believe it will  be better but it is.  Super job.  While agreeing that the body and its  rights are of utmost importance to  women, would appreciate equal  attention to her mind and its  achievements - which still have to  be greater than a man's to receive  similar attention.  I certainly enjoy reading Kinesis  and keeping up with what's happening  in Vancouver.  It would be an awful  loss if you had to fold.  I want to break all Vander Zalm's  windows, stick my finger up at Family  Court, sneer at all present party  systems going, start a feminist  party in B. C and sink ex-husband's  boat, march on Ottawa - but the  furnace keeps going off and the  buses are on strike!  Thank you for all the inspiring  articles and information in Kinesis.  Can we have more articles on women  and religion?  Thank you very much for producing a  fine, informative newspaper. We've  enjoyed receiving it immensely.  Isn't it remarkable these days what  Grace McCarthy and Jack Volrich find  to spend our money on?  Keep up the fight for women!  I admire what you are doing.  Couldn't you, however, soft-pedal  the lesbians? It reduces the sup^-  port from other women's groups and,  after all, they are a small,-nonproductive group, really not worth  all the effort you make.  L)orif jupporf naci5m  r ilencs: Protest 1  FRIDAY JUNE 16 IS THE SECOND ANN-  iversary of the shooting of black  students in Soweto.  There will be  a rally at the Vancouver Courthouse  from 4,30 ~6.30 to commemorate  Soweto and to campaign for the  end to Canadian bank loans to South  Africa.  The rally has been endorsed  by the BCFW and is sponsored by  the Southern Africa Action Coalition  and the Canadian Council for International  KINESIS  We are saddened to learn of the  death of Professor Geoffrey Ridde-  hough in London, England, at the age  of 76.  Those of us who worked in  the VSW office during the period  that Professor Riddehough was a  member of VSW remember his genuine  interest in the organization and its  work.  This interest was expressed  in his thoughtful comments and in  generously signing over to VSW  several hundred dollars of stock  dividend cheques.  Professor Riddehough never failed to  drop in at the annual VSW Christmas  Party for a chat.  We also retain  fond memories of his outrageous puns  and limericks and his spirited  defense of the English language and  its spelling which prompted him at  one point to offer his services as  a proof-reader for KINESIS.  Professor Riddehough even offered  to share his secret receipe for  peanut butter cookies with us.  VSW  has lost a good friend.  Sincerely,  Jo Lazenby  Nancy Conrod  Judy Bourne  Diana Ellis  Bobbie Patrick  Dear Friends  As an employee of the VANCOUVER SUN  I would like to comment on your proposed letter to the Sun about Dave  Stockand's coverage of IWD.  First, please understand that I am  not defending the Sun's action in  printing the article.  I was as  angry and ashamed as everyone else  when it appeared.  But I feel that  your argument should not be so much  with Dave Stockand, but with the  editors.  A reporter does not have  free licence to write whatever she/  he pleases.  Most articles go  through at least two editings before  they are published.  Why weren't  these comments cut out of the story  before it was printed?  It is sad  that Dave Stockand feels he has to  write like he did, but if that's  the way he is, it's the editors'  job to "reform" his writing.  Also a copy of letters should be  sent to Bruce Larsen, the managing  editor, as he has a great deal of  say on what goes, into the paper.  Name withheld.  JO  QAriJ  \  (604)733-3511  THE SPARK  In Struggle! Bookstore  Hours: Tues-Thurs. 7-9 p.m.  Fri. 6-9 p.m.  Sat.       10 a.m.-5 p.m.  Marxist-Leninist Books  & Periodicals.  2542 Kingsway Vancouver, B. C.  (604) 438-3121 2C  €V€NTS FOR F€MINISTS  SFU Women's Studies  WOMEN'S STUDIES SUMTER INSTITUTE  July 3, 1978 to August 19, 1978  WOMEN IN CANADA: 1920 TO PRESENT  Dorothy Livesay, poet and author  of Collected Poems: The Two Seasons,  A Winnipeg Childhood, Ice Age, The  Woman I am, and Right Hand Left Hand  Barbara Todd, historian and co-author  of Never Done.  WOMEN AND THE VISUAL ARTS  Maria Tippett, art historian and coauthor of From Desolation to Splendor:  Changing Perceptions of the British  Columbia Landscape and Emily Carr:  A Biography (forthcoming).  ISSUES IN WOMEN'S HEALTH AND HEALTH  CARE/ Abby Schwarz, biologist and  co-author of Our Bodies Our Selves.  WOMEN AND POWER/ July 21,22  WOMEN AS ARTISTS/ July 28, 29  PLUS:  "VARIETIES OF FEMINISM a six evening discussion series. An exhibit  of women artists.  Public Lectures.  For more information contact:  Margaret Benston or Meredith Kimball  Women's Studies Summer Institute  Faculty of Interdisciplinary Studies  Simon Fraser University  FILM CRITICISM  FEMINIST FILM CRITICS  Our first study group will meet  briefly on Friday, September 1st  at 7 p.m., at the VSW downstairs  office. The first assignment is to  read the film reviews of RIDDLES OF  THE SPHINX in the May 1978 issue of  TAKE ONE, available for $1.00 at  bookstores, free at the library.  Also, try to get a hold of the brand  new, comprehensive anthology, WOMEN  AND THE CINEMA, edited by Karen Kay  and Gerald Teary, published by Dutton, 1977. At $10.95 it's expensive,  but you may persuade your local librarian that for all movie'goers it  should be required reading. Meantime,  I'll see you at the movies I  Brig Anderson  1+  FULL CIRCLE  COFFEEHOUSE  152 East 8th Avenue  Vancouver 874-7719  Doors open at 8:30 performance 9:30  Admission $2.00  Wednesday - tvbmen and Men  June 14  CAROL STREET AND FRIENDS  Carol's bringing all her  friends for this one...so  don't miss it!  June 21  ALICE AGES  Well known Victoria poet  and storyteller  June 28  NELLIE fCLUNG  Well known Vancouver poet  with a famous ancestor...  Friday - Vfonen only  Canada      ■A WOMAN'S PLACE - 125 E.10th Ave  Employment (Second floor)  £         an alternative in Vancouver, B.C  Immigration women's  employment V5T 123  Commission        counselling 666-8115  thought about  driving a truck?  repai ri ng a  mak i ng furn i ture?  Would you 1 ike to be  a truck dri ver? a mechani  MIDDLE EASTERN DANCE  Barbara Stevenson  Barbara Moon  Lynette Harper  AN EVENING OF JAZZ  Kathy Kidd/piano  Colleen Savage/Vocals  Gail Griffin/Bass  ALICE AGES  Well known Victoria poet  and storyteller  MARY ROSE <and Sat- July lst>  From Portland, Oregon...  A strong woman's voice ...  Composed "I'm my own Woman  Now"  WORKSHOPS ?: SPECIAL EVENTS  CELEBRATION"  Saturday June 17th 8:30 p.m.  Dance...music...refreshments..  For Women only...$1.00  WOMEN EMERGING with Sara David  Gestalt...Body Awareness....  June 8-12 10 AM-5PM $75.  To Pre-register call 876-2937  KINESIS  ISSN 0317-9095  1978 June  Vol 7 #6  Kinesis is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew.  SUBMISSIONS:  VSW welcomes submissions from the feminist community and  in particular, from VSW members.  We  do reserve the right to edit, and  submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want  your work returned.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6J 1N3.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Lyn Buckle,  Judith Burke, Kris Craig, Portland  Frank, Janice Pentland-Smith, Dorothy Restall, Gayla Reid, Joan Woodward, Lorri Rudland.  Membership to Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation and Kinesis is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year and we would ask  members to base their donations on  this and their own financial position.  As we now have the status of a charitable organization and as we are  unable to pay for Kinesis from these  funds due to government regulations,  we will be issuing tax deductible  receipts for the balance of all membership donations over $8.00.  Please remember VSW operates on inadequate funding - we need member  support!  SOLIDARITY •  tyf FOfc  For information on union organizing or the  women's programme of the B.C. Federation of  Labour, please contact:  M-  Director of Women's Programmes  B.C. Federation of Labour  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B.C.  V5M 4A2  '430-1421