 yr  N^ncouver Stattjs of Women     2029W. Fourth Ave.     "736-3746-"7-8       Volume IV   No. 33  strategy  Women representatives from four organizations - Vancouver Status of Women,  the Childcare Federation, the NDP Women'  Rights Committee, and Women in Teaching  met recently in Vancouver to discuss  setting up a major strategy conference  of the women's movement in B.C.  In the  four legislative sessions since the  NDP government's election in August  1972, little legislation aimed specifically at meeting women's needs  has been enacted, 'although many, many  women's groups have made representations of various kinds to Victoria.  We feel that it is time for the B.C.  women's movement to come together to  discuss this problems collectively,  and to see if a united strategy for  solving it can be worked out.  The "Action for Women Conference"  will be hid on SATURDAY 25 MAY 1974,  at the LYNNMOUR CAMPUS OF CAPILANO  COLLEGE IN NORTH VANCOUVER.  We are  urging you and/or your group or organization to become involved in the  preparations for and planning of the  Conference. The next planning meeting  will be held on Monday 29 April 1974,  at Vancouver Status of Women, 2029  West 4th Ave, 736-3746,at 8:00 PM.  Please attend if you can - or write  a letter telling us what your ideas  are on what the Conference should  discuss, do, etc. Only if many  women and. women's groups get involved  will this Conference be the important  and decision-making gathering the  women's movement needs.  A tentative proposal for the Conference Agenda is as follows:  9:00 - 9:30 Registration  9:30 -10:30 Brief presentations  from Status of Women,  Childcare Federation,  NDP Women\s Committee  10:30-12:00  12:00-12:45  12:45- 2:15  2:15 - 2:30  2:30 - 4:30  & Women in Teaching  outlining mehtods they've  used to try to win their  goals, the success/failure thereof, and whatever  strategy proposals they  may have.  Plenary discussion on  strategy - further proposals, etc.  Lunch  Workshops to discuss  more thoroughly pro-  made in the morning  session; or if decisions taken in the  morning session, to  discuss thier implementation."  Coffee break  Plenary decisionmaking session.  As this outline shows, it is our feeling that the "Action for Women" Conference should be focussed intensively  on strategy - on the question of  What Is To Be Done - rather than on  informational exchange, acquainting  the various groups with each other's  activities, etc. We suggest, however,  that every group might prepare a  written account of its aims, activities, etc.; if these were run off and  submitted prior to the Conference,  each participant could receive a kit  containing all this material for  future use.  Such papers could.also  include strategy proposals.  Childcare will be provided at the  Conference site, and billeting for  women from outside the lower Mainland will be available. A sandwich lunch and coffee will be  served. A $2.00 registration fee  has been proposed, to be paid at the  Conference.  73-s305  Serials Division  Main Library  University of B.C.  VANCOUVER 8, B.C.  To register contact Gene Errington,  Vancouver Status of Women, 2029 W.  4th ave, Vancouver, V6J 1N3. To  apply for billeting, or to offer  billeting space, contact Cynthia  Flood, 2265 E. Pender St., Vancouver  6. Names and telephone numbers  relating to other aspects of the  Conference appear at the end of  this article.  A special brochure for the Conference will be available shortly.  If  you would like some for your group,  contact Gene Errington. Please use.  whatever means you have at your disposal to publicize the "Action for  Women" Conf«r»nce. We'd like this  to be the biggest and best feminist  conference yet in B.C.  Stephanie Barker  NDP Women's Ctee.  733-1225  Publicity  Cynthia Flood  NDP Women's Ctee.  255-7820  Billeting  Lynne Dyson  Childcare Federation  224-5201  Fund-raising  Linda Shuto  Women in Teaching  299-7847  General Info.  Gene Errington  Status of Women  736-3746  Registration/  General Info. thoughts and afterthoughts  I hate being cast in the. role of a  pessimist, but I am afraid that in  this instance I have no choice.  In  March, I wrote an article for Kinesis  about my equal wage case with BC Tel  that was being heard by the Department  of Labour Standards.  On April 1, a  representative of VSW, members of  Labour Standards, persons from the  CBC Ombudsman staff and I met in  Ottawa to discuss my case.  The  result of this meeting was simply for  the government to reiterate its previous decision that they could not  find any evidence of a case.  What  this amounted to in action was a  systematic acceptance or rejection of  documents presented by various persons  throughout the 14 month case in order  for the government to support their  pre-determined decision to have no  equal wage cases at this time.  What  I am saying, is the government, at  this time, is not willing to have a  case, no matter what evidence is  presented.  They will reject evidence  if it does not suit their purpose  (or deny that such evidence ever  existed.)  Another appalling aspect  of the case is, the government continually encourages me to pursue my case  in court privately; but they will not  pursue it for me.  That is they feel  I have quite a good case, but do not  want to risk the precedent themselves;  however they have no objections to  someone else taking all the risk.  Also they continue (I infer this  from statements made to me at various  interviews with government officials)  to believe that persons pursue cases  of this nature because they are out  to further the cause of the women's  movement, not that actual discrimination has taken place, or substantial  differences in wages exist.  So my advice to anyone who is thinking  about complaining is simply do not  bother at this time. The odds are  incredibly against you. Until the  government changes or until a  reasonable human rights act (which  the government will try to enforce)  is passed or until there are people  in the government who are willing  to (1) admit there is discrimination, (2) act to discourage discrimination, (3) attempt to interpret  the law with some reasonability and  fairness, there is no use wasting a  year of your life pursuing ideals  that no one is interested in.  That  and the fact that the government,  when asked, is unable to explain what  they would consider a good case.  Until the government is willing to  stop worrying about the WFL and start  passing reasonable legislation and  until they are really concerned  about the injustices of the present  system, all we can do is attempt to  put enough pressure on them to change  the present set up from the top, or  failing that to turn them out of  power to put some reasonable people,  with a sense of fair play and a  feeling for the dignity of all human  beings, in their place.  - Diane Ericksen Ryals  John Kenneth Galbraith on  WOMEN AND THE MALE MONOPOLY  "The male monopoly in business is  for the beneficiaries an agreeable  tradition; women have not challenged  it because they are conditioned to  the convenient social virtue — to  the notion that family duty and the  administration of consumption are  their proper functions.  "The male monopoly will not be broken  voluntarily.  It will require the  pressure of law   " given the past discrimination,  educational institutions, notably  universities and centres of professional training, must for a period  discriminate affirmatively in favour  of women.  To do otherwise is implicitly to perpetuate past discrimination.  The higher reaches of the  technostructure must be under legal  pressure to hire and advance women.  Professional and other schools must  be under legal pressure to provide  them.  When the effects of past discrimination have been erased the  same is true for racial minorities   selection can become sex-blind.  But  only then."  - JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH, in  Economics and The Public  Purpose, 1973.  (E.F.G.)  Susan Sontag on  WOMEN POWER  "Any serious programme for liberating women must start from the  premise that liberation is not just  about equality (the 'liberal' idea).  It's about power.  Women cannot be  liberated without reducing the  power of men.  Their liberation not  only means changing consciousness  and social structures in ways that  will transfer to women much of the  power monopolized by men.  The nature of power itself will thereby  change, since throughout history  power has itself been defined in  sexist terms being identified  with a normative, supposedly innate masculine trait for aggressiveness and physical coercion,  and with the ceremonies and prerogatives of all-male groupings in  war, government, religion, sport,  and commerce.  Anything less than a  change in who has power and what  power is, is not liberation but  Dacification..."  "...Until they become important to  the economy, not just as a reserve  labour pool but because in large  numbers they possess the major  professional aiTft executive skills,  women have no means of exercising  political power, which means gaining control of institutions and  having an effective say in how  society will change in the coming  decades.  Once again:  liberation  means power — or it hardly means  anything at all."  - SUSAN SONTAG, in  "The Third World of Women,"  Partisan Review, no. 2,  1973.  (E.F.G.)  woman   power  Recent appointments of VSW members  into non-traditional professions  is good enough news to be shared  by all.  Please note:  Jane Auxier, who has for the past  year taken time out from her pri-  'vate law practice to act as lawyer  to VSW members needing legal help  has been appointed one of the  two family advocates by the Royal  Commission on Family and Children's  Law.  In this capacity Ms. Auxier  will be attached to the unified  family court, for the Surrey-Richmond area and will have the responsibility of representing the  children in legal hassles that  come to the attention of the court.  Nowhere else in Canada does the  child have its own lawyer in court.  This is precedent setting work.  Hanne Jensen, vice-president of  VSW has been hired as Human Rights  officer for the provincial Depart-  ' ment of Human Rights.  Her duties  include investigating alleged discrimination under the Human Rights  Act and preparing reports concern-  ing findings in the cases investigated.  She will also monitor business practices to ensure compliance  with the act in hiring, wage and  promotion practices.  Nancy Conrod, legal advisor to Vb'W  has been appointed Executive Secretary of the B.C. Civil Liberties  Union.  With this position she  assumes the duties of co-ordinating~  civil liberties projects, and becomes a non-voting member of the  Board of Directors and Executive  Committees.  Our congratulations to these women  on their achievements.  Lets hope  to have many more women in worthwhile positions soon.  Kinesis  would like to hear about other  success stories.  D.E. the federal scene  THE ADVISORY COUNCIL ON THE STATUS  OF WOMEN  A detailed assessment of federal government action ( and inaction ) on the  recommendations of the Status of Women  Report has just been published by the  federal government's Advisory Council  on the Status of Women.  The 40-page report examines each of the  122 recommendations which require federal government action.  It concludes  that approximately one-third have been  implemented, one-third partially implemented and one-third not implemented  at all.  Among important recommendations are a  human rights act (although it has been  promised for the present session), inclusion of housewives in the Canada  Pension Plan, and changes to the Canada  Labour Code to prohibit sex discrimination by companies under federal jurisdiction (e.g. banks, airlines, etc.)  Single copies of the report are available free of charge from the Advisory  Council on the Status of Women, Box  1541, Station B, Ottowa, Ontario KIP  5R5.  Bulk orders can be purchased at  $1 per copy.  Dr. Katie Cooke, chairperson of the  Advisory Council urged women to study  the report and then write to their MP's  and appropriate ministers to urge action  on the recommendations not yet implemented. A list at the back of the  booklet tells which ministry to write  to in regard to each recommendation.  CANADA PENSION PLAN  In other business at the April meeting  of the Advisory Council, members recommend further study of a proposed method  of including housewives in the Canada  Pension Plan.  The suggestion,which  originated with a sub-committee of the  Canada Pension Plan Advisory Committee,  proposes that during marriage, 50  percent of the CPP contributions  made by either husband or wife should  be credited towards the pension buildup of the other spouse, whether or  not the other spouse is in the paid  labour market.  The Council emphasized that the split  must be made at the time the contribution is paid, not if or when the  marriage breaks up.  This proposal,  it said, could be implemented without changing the basic structure of  the CPP.  To quote from the Council's recommendation:  "This proposal would bring into  the Canada Pension Plan as contributors over three and one-half  million wives not now entitled to  participate because they are not  employed in the paid labour force,  or because they are working in a  family enterprise or on a family  farm.  It would, for the first  time, ensure that the women who  are performing a most essential  economic role in society - home,  child and family care - would not  entirely forfeit their independent  security rights because of that  role.  "At the same time men will benefit  too because they would be protected  in the event of the death or disability of the mother in the home.  Husband and wife would become a  unit, accepting mutual responsibility and receiving mutual benefits.  "This proposal is not a final solution," the council emphasizes.  "It  does not face the problem of the  woman who works for or with her husband in a small business or on a  family farm. Nor does it recognize  the homemaker's economic contribution "to the society.  It is merely  a recognition that husbands should  share in the sacrifice of social  security benefits a wife is expected  to make while she performs her  unpaid role in the family.  "We have yet to recognize that the  housewife is gainfully employed -  that she is an indispensible part  of our economic system.  We must  continue to search for ways to  quantify and evaluate the economic  contribution of the woman in the  family.  But we can no longer ask  her to wait for a final solution",  the recommendation concludes.  Make your views on this idea known  to the Hon. Marc Lalonde, Minister of  Health and Welfare.  Keep pushing for  inclusion of housewives in the CPP!  More Funds for Women's Groups  Promised for International Women's Year  The Advisory Council on the Status of  Women was told at their meeting in  Ottowa last month that the government  is planning to provide increased financial assistance for voluntary  organizations for the development of  special projects for international  women's year.  The amount available is not yet  known, but further details will be  available by next month from Sheila  Purdy, Vancouver Status of Women,  who is attending a psecial meeting  in Ottowa of women's organizations  to discuss international women's  year.  Corordinator of the project in  Ottowa is Mary Gusella, Privy Council Office, House of Commons, Ottowa.  Major emphasis by the government  during international women's year  will be upon informing and educating  the general public about the changing  attitudes concerning women's role in  society.  The general program, which is still  being discussed with provincial  governments and women's organizations,  will include:  1. A series of regional and national conferences, designed to  reach those in the community who  have not yet been involved;  2. A national educational and informational program involving the  public media and aimed at influencing the attitudes of society  towards equality for women;  3. The removal of remaining pro*  visions in federal legislation  which discriminate against women;  4. The hosting of an international  seminar, sponsored by the United  Nations, in Ottowa in September,  1974.  5. An increase in the number of  women representing Canada at international conferences.  MURDOCH TRUST FUND SUPPORTED BY  ADVISORY COUNCIL  A trust fund forlrene Murdoch, the  Alberta farm woman who was denied  any share in the farm on which she  had worked for 25 years with her  'ñ†husband, has been set up by the  Council of Women in Calgary.  The Advisory Council, at its meeting in Ottowa, voted to publicize  the fund in an effort to help Mrs.  Murdoch repay the more than $5,000  she owes for medical expenses,  court costs and"lawyer's fees.  Cheques may be sent to:  The Irene Murdoch Trust Fund  c/o Mrs. Donna Vine  901 - 19th Ave. N.W.  Calgary, Alta.  In other business at the meeting,  the Advisory Council:  - set up a new working group of  members to study in depth the  problems of one-parent families  and the recent report of the  federal Law Reform Commission on  family courts.  - demanded immediate action by ,  the Prime Minister on the promise  in the Throne Speech that crown  corporations and agencies would  be told to appoint a more proportional number of women to their  boards.  B.C. members of the Advisory Council are Susan Charlton, Box 261,  Rossland, B.C. and Joan Wallace,  5526 - 6A Ave., Delta, B.C. Write  them with your views on federal  legislation.  Joan Wallace sports conference  Glinda Sutherland will be in Toronto  on May 24, 25, and 26 for a sports  conference.  The conference is being  held by Sport Canada, a division of  the Department of Health and Welfare,  set up to develop a greater number  of world class athletes for Canada.  The conference will be attended by  teachers, athletes, coaches and  others among whom will be people  interested in the role of women in  sports.  The conference organizer is Marian  Lay,  a 1968 Olympic swimmer for  Canada and a teacher of physical  education at the university level.  She is a strong proponent of the  physically fit society.  In order to develop world class  athletes, the entire poulation of  Canada must improve its physical  fitness. With this in mind the  conference will examine the philo-  Glinda Sutherland (far left) with  Grace Maclnnes.  sophy behind male and female roles  in sport and particularly the areas  of female competition. This discussion should include:  the status  of women in physical education; the  media and women in sports; the pro  fessional attitude (i.e. You're ei-  their a winner or a nothing.)  The main goal of the conference will  be to equalize the oppottunities for  both sexes in sports by focusing on  solutions rather than problems.  It  is anticipated that the conference  will propose certain recommendations  to be carried out federally, provin-  cially and locally. Hopefully these  proposals will affect policies of the  media and many institutions. The  recommendations will derive from workshops on various subjects: discriminatory attitudes to women in sports;  women as PE teachers; the Community  Centre concept. Hopefully the  recommendations will stress the non-  support of facilities failing to  offer equal time and funds for programs for men and women.  skirting the issue  I recently had the opportunity to  bowl in the Provincial championships in Abbotsford and wish to  make a few comments with reference to the rules placed on the  women bowlers.  We had been informed by the pro-  prieter of our bowling alley that  we must wear skirts and that the  said skirt must be no more than  six inches above the middle of  the knee cap. I must admit^that  the first reaction from our group  was laughter which then turned  to absolute outrage that in this  day and age women were still  being suppressed and discriminated against. There was absolutely nothing^whatsoever in the  rules stating what the men should  and should not wear; so, if he so  desired, a man could show up in a  pair of old, dirty, faded blue  jeans and be allowed to bowl while  a woman in a new, clean, pant suit  would be disqualified.  We came to the alley with slacks  on but brought skirts with us as  we did not want to jeopardize the  rest of our team.  Before play  started, we asked if we would be  allowed to bowl with slacks and  were told we could but if we won,  we could not compete any further.  Had I been entered on an individual basis, I would not have  hesitated to walk out there and  then but because there were four  other girls involved, I did not  feel I should let,them down no  matter how strongly I felt about  it.  I realize this tournament is  sponsored by Thomas Adams Distillers, Ltd. and they have  the right to make any rules they  desire, but I feel what's good  for the goose is good for the  gander.  If women are going to  be restricted in their dress,  there should also be a stipulation as to what the men will and  will not wear.  I might also add  we were told that it was too late  to change the rule this year  (obviously there had been more complaints) but that next year consideration would be given to omitting  this rule.  Personally, next year is too late for  me.  I will never enter the tournament again. Also, as secretary of  one of my bowling leagues I will not  refuse to sign up bowlers for next  year's tournament, but I certainly  will not advocate it.  I might also mention that once it w  was found that we had brought skirts  with us we were told that we were  nothing but troublemakers. If protesting a restriction on women's  apparel is a form of troublemaking,  then I plead guilty. But I must  admit that considering the source  of the reamrk, what else could you  expect.  I trust Thomas Adams Distillers will  take these remarks in the right vein.  Once again I would like to make it  very clear that I am not about to  begin to tell the sponsor how to run  any tournament when he is paying for.  it, but isn't it about time things  were evened up a little?  M. Fieldhouse  Ed. note:  Since slacks are obviously far more modest than skirts  as sports apparel, one has to  assume that the sponsor of the  tournament is protecting the rights  of voyeurs rather than the modesty  of the female contestants.  weekend   man  Yes, it has finally happened, a book  about a liberated man, or at least  a man trying to liberate himself  within the confines of his society.  In Richard B. Wright's, The Weekend  Man, we meet Wes Wakeman, who on  the surface, is a moderately successful salesman about to correct  all that has been troubling his  life and marriage.  Or is he?  The motions of reconciling his wife,  mollifying his in-laws, and creating  a "stable homelife" for his retarded  son are present. Only Wes admits  his heart is not in it. He knows  he would be just as happy, though  not as financially successful as  those around him wish him to be,  with his unprestigeous Japanese  gardening job. He knows too his  success this far in his present 00--  cupation is due to luck and not  intelligence, diligence or any thing  that is logical.  Even more confusing is his disgust as his fellow-  men (acting normal, of course) continue to pursue women as purely sex  objects. Wes finally concludes that  his retarded son is closer to the  answer of what life is all about than  those of us supposed normal people.  The Weekend Man Is a book, showing  the problems and pitfalls of a man  who wants to view humans as humans;  and more importantly, an author, a  man, who realizes the value for all  people by the renouncing of the  sex-stereotype roles in society  today.  I cheered when Wes Wakeman  realized that his wife is more suited  to the male oriented taskssof driving  a car and having a career than he  is.  I applauded as he cringed watching the high school teacher lust  after the sweet young things in the  physical education.class. And, I  thank Mr. Wright for writing so  intelligently, humourously and  straight-forwardly about the whole  experience.  D.E. a Canadian comes  home  It was not until personal circumstances forced me to seek a place  for my two year old daughter that  the lack of suitable day "care  centres in B.C. became known to me.  All that was available was a sort  of custodial care in a private  home.  Sound like a problem of  today? Actually, it was more  than ten years ago.  Did I give  up the newly acquired job to go  on welfare, as was suggested by  all agencies contacted, or move  to a city where decent day care  was available at a cost my income  could bear?  I chose the latter and  went to Los Angeles.  There, women  who wished to enter the work force  with assurance of adequate care  for their children had a choice  of numerous types of good places  in which to leave them.  It was  my first contact with women who  had changed a situation to meet  their requirements.  I saw a lot of changes in the ten  years I spent south of the border  and was shocked to find that very  little has altered in B.C. in those  years. Our sisters in the United  States have been able to force  legislation which has made them  equal under the law.  There were  many test cases, but, by and large,  they are now equal in fact.  In most states a divorce can be  had in much less than a year when  either party wishes to dissolve  a marriage.  Property acquired  while the marriage was in effect  is divided equally and a sum for  child support set.  This sum, by  the way, is sometimes paid by  the woman while the man retains  custody of the children.  Whoever  is better able.  Most states allow abortion by'conscience. A recent decision (forgive  me for forgetting the state) ruled  that a woman does not have to seek  permission of her husband in order  to end her pregnancy. Her permission  was all that was required, as it was,  after all, her body.  Incidentally, those few states where  divorce is still contingent upon  adultery cannot prevent a person  from residing in another state to  obtain a divorce or an abortion,  which is then legal in the first  state.  Most American newspapers do not run  sexist ads for job openings.  It was  a happy day for the job applicant in  B.C. when the papers discontinued  advertising categories which were  oriented by sex. Now, if they would  onlyrewrite the ads which appear under  the "non-sexist"rheadings, we would  really be making progress.  Female  job applicants are still asked by  employment agencies, "How fast do  you type?" before they are asked what  kind of position they seek. And  how can I be a "Girl" Friday when  I am a grown woman?  Some of the law reforms in the  United States were difficult to  obtain but many were surprisingly  easy.  The difficult ones took a  lot of organization - like sitting  down once a week to write a letter  to each governmental representative  who was placed there to serve the  puboic, who pays the salary.  Isn't  there some issue that directly  affects you or will directly affect  your daughter? And what about the  men in your life?  Don't they deserve equality?  Lee Grills  Dear Status of Women:  I have just mailed the...letter iof  complaint which was included in your  April newsletters to Doris Hosiery  Milss, Ltd.  I feel better already,  since this ad had been bugging^ me  for several months and in the future  I intend to do more than just bitch  to whoever is nearby.  One ad that really infuriates me is  one for Benson & Hedges cigarettes.  Maybe you have seen it.  It shows  two hard-hat men in a manhole staring  up at a girl's legs.  The caption  reads, "The longer the better".  I  think this is really blatantly obnoxious, don't you. Anyway, I can't  find a copy of the ad right now, but  when I do I will send it in with a  complaint.  I've enjoyed Kinesis very much and  I'm glad I took out a subscription.'  Yours truly,  Roberta F. Murphy  Ed. Note: The ad in question is the  subject of this month's Media Action  Clip and Send feature.   Dear Editor:  Carol Easterday's article "Housewives  Equity" greatly cheered me.  Last fall  when I suggested to a few friends in  the women's movement that employers  should have both spouses on the payroll-each receiving half the wage or  salary, and each contributing equally  to pension schemems, etc., the opinion  seemed to be that the employers would  object so strongly and any effort  would only be wasted.  I still think it is the best way -  cash entitlement for work performed.  I like the phrase "pay for housework" rather than "pay to a housewife" as this would include either  spouse who assumed the responsibility for the housework.. It would  also remove the one' official recognition which a housewife now has -  that of a dependent on the income  tax form. What an anomaly! Man  and woman forming an equal partnership in marriage, and woman as a  dependent.  There have been many  fights for legal equality arid  rights upon divorce or death of  a husband, but little about equality during marriage.  gestion that wages should fee paid  for housework is from women who say  they are a wife and mother out of  love and would consider pay an insult.  I have tried to clarify this by  suggesting that being a father, a  mother, a wife or a husband is a  relationship and no-one is being  paid for that, and we are talking  about housework.  I see no government activity in this  area in spite of requests to the  Federal and some Provincial governments that they look into the possibility of pay for housework and I  would be interested in Ms. Easter-  dau's thoughts on forming groups  within the various Status of Women  Councils across Canada to deal  with this specific issue.  Pay for housework or instant comprehensive day care, instant end  of sex-role stercetyping, instant:  end to all-female, low-paid jobs,  and salary wage discrimination.  Sincerely,  Shirley A. Goundrey  we're funded  WE have good news to report.  Again  we are solvent; the provincial  government has granted us $ 50,000  to continue operation for the next  12 months.  The grant has no stipulations and will generally be used to  continue projects that VSW has been  pursuing since its inception.  Our second grant is from the Secretary  of State in the amount of $ 13,000.  These monies will be used in the  next 6 months to finance the organisation of a Western Canada communications network for women.  Keep your fingers crossed for our  student community service programme  grant application.  This latter is  a federal monetary aid to assist  volunteer organisations who are  interested in hiring student help for  the summer.  Canadian Feminist Magazine  A group of Toronto women are organizing now to establish a Canadian  national feminist magazine.  We don't  have a name for it yet but we have  started a fund drive to obtain enough  seed money to put out a first issue.  Canadian women desperately need such  a magazine and if you would like to  help found it, please send a donation  made out to:  Women for a Feminist Magazine  c/o Ms. Ottaline Leithwood  135 Fenelon Drive, Apt. 1807  Toronto, Ontario In the midst of the struggle for equal  opportunities and field in which these  objectives are being achieved to a  truly substantial degree. This is the  news field, which more and more women  are entering and in which they are  finding stimulation and satisfaction.  About a generation ago it was the case,  with a few exceptions - Mamie Maloney,  for example, who helped pave the way -  that women's activity in the news media was largely confined to describing  somebody's wedding gown or telling us  what to put in the Christmas pudding *  Recipes, consumer information, and  general homemaking advice remain extremely helpful. But the so-called  "Society" pages have given, or are  giving, way to newspaper sections devoted to a variety of topics - experiments in education, careers, avocations, unusual lifestyles, innovative  and helpful groups and agencies; you  name it. They are topics of interest  to both women and men.  Apa rt from such benefits to readers,  women writers are getting a much better deal in news coverage generally.  In increasing numbers they are becoming reporters, columnists, section  editors, editorial writers, desk  editors, feature writers, reviewers,  and bureau heads. And the subjects  they deal with cover a wide range of  political, sociological, economic,  and* cultural'developments. Most  of them are represented by the Newspaper Guild and there is no discrimination in working conditions or  pay.  Out of curiosity the other night  I went through the April 11th  edition of the Vancouver Sun,  noting down articles, columns, and  reports which carried women's bylines.  I'm going to list what I  found.  I don't think it will bore  you.  I think it will give you a  lift, as it did me. It's cogent  evidence that women are making it as  intelligent, thoroughly competent,  insightful purveyors of information  and provokers of thought.  1. An analysis of the legislative  session prior to the Easter  break - Marjorie Nichols.  2. An article on the creation of a  wilderness conservation area in  the Purcells - Moira Farrow.  3. A Business Page article on a  possible decline in the inflaT  tion rate - Judy Lindsay.  4. An article on People's Art -  Joan Lowndes.  5. An article on the findings and  activities of a marriage bureau-  Kay ce White  6. An article on the need for the  development of more ski facilities in B.C. - Anne Anderson  7. An article on family advocates  and the unified family court to  be set up in the South Fraser  judicial district - Marion Bruce  8. An article on a logging and railway belt on Vancouver Island and  the concern of fish and wildlife  officers - Moira Farrow  9. A column on two or three possible  new CBC TV drama series originating -in Vancouver - Lisa Hobbs  10. A report on parking problems for  residents of the PNE area-  Lesley Krueger.  11. Erma Bombeck's column (U.S. syndicate) .  .Must have been Simma Holt's day oft.  Anyway, it's an impressive list -  politics, conservation and ecology,  economics, sociology, the arts, sports,  and original humour.  Out of further curiosity I went to  the Public Library for a little research.  Scanning the microfilm for  the Sun of the same date in 1964, I  found 3 stories with by-lines by  women: a report on a Surrey girl winning a lower mainland high school  spelling bee, an article, on the page  devoted to religious matters, on  Christ's teachings being more important than his appearance, and, in  what was then callled "Women's News",  an article on the Children's Foundation Auxiliary seeking funds for a  Halfway House for emotionally disturbed children.  The April 10th Sun for 1954 had no  women's by-lines in the regul r sections. (April 11th was a Sunday.)  It is only fair to mention, however,  that the Magazine sections for both  weeks in '54 and '64 did have a few  articles by women.  Undeniably, the picture is very much  improved today.  So what's the payoff for this progress? Firstly, I  think it's high satisfaction for the -  women directly involved in news coverage and, secondly, great encouragement for the rest of us.  God knows,  there are women - though not enough  of them yet - performing with expertise in fields that were once virtually male preserves; medicine, the  judiciary, law, architecture, and so  on. But they're pretty well in the  background. Because of the nature  of the media,- the relatively numerous women reporters and columnists,  with their by-lines, are in a sense  carrying the banners.  By daily demonstrating their perception and ability to a large public - and perhaps  this is the real payoff - they must  surely be shattering some antediluvian,  but still prevalent, notions about the  feminine role.  My own job as a woman was in news,  though not on a paper.  For 25 years  I was an editor in the Vancouver radio  newsroom of the CBC News Service.  I,  too, encountered no discrimination,  Either in the work or the pay.  If you're considering broadcast journalism as a career, if you have a  daughter who is considering it, or if  you simply listen to the CBC, perhaps  you might be interested in an account  of what the work entails.  I'm afraid  it's going to be a bit lengthy, but  I'll go ahead because it's about the  mechanics of a job - challenging,  useful, and well-paid - that is open  to qualified women.  Basically, it's writing and editing,  on early morning, day and night shifts,  of numerous newscasts, ranging in  length from 3 to 15 minutes. A good  part of the material - reporters'  voice contributions aside for the  moment - is obtained from news  agency teletypes; Canadian Press and  United Press International, mainly,  with CP carrying some Associated  Press and Reuters stories.  The  news agency source copy has to be  collated and rewritten.  It is not  simply ripped off the machines and  read as such.  Rewriting is CBC  policy, based partly on radio style  considerations, partly the need to  extract the meat of an item without alot of extra verbiage, and  some news is good news  partly on the objective, through  comparing different sources, of  presenting a more comprehensive  story on major developments.  Sometimes one news agency will  have information that another lacks.  The rewritten stories are then arranged in order, according to the  news value judgment of the editor -  it's a rotating post - doesn't  merely arrange. He or she writes  a good portion, and incorporates  reporter's writte/voice material  in the broadcasts.  Since it's aregional newsroom,  regional items are given fair  prominence. But, of course,  national and international stories  are frequently of such importance  that they take precedence.  The broadcasts must be ready in  time for an announcer to do a  read-over before going on the air.  But, news being news and breaking  at any time, there are some great  old scrambles and last-minute  changes. With not much more than  minutes to go, you can find  yourself batting out the main  recommendations of a Royal Commission Report, which has just started  coming over the wires. And sometimes,  very close to the deadline, you will  have the frustrating experience of  having to rewrite all or a good part  of a 1 or 2-page story because a new  bulletin has completely changed its  complexion.  Things become particularly hectic when  ther's a major crisis in the news.  Come I vividly remember are the Great  Pipeline debate, Suez, the Hungarian  uprising, the Cuban missile confrontation, and the Kennedy assassination.  At times like these the news agencies  simply pour out the copy - flashes,  bulletins, 1st Lead, more bulletins,  2nd Lead, 1st add-lst Lead, 3rd Lead,  and so on - hundreds and hundreds of  words. A welter of paper piles up  around your typewriter and, with that  inexorable deadline rapidly approaching, the heat is really on to achieve  coherence out ^f what seems at times  very close to chaos.  Of course, with  major news breaks, special reports  are aired in addition to the scheduled  broadcasts.  Very rarely- fortunately - you get  whammed with something like Hurricane  Frieda.  I was in at 5:30 the morning  following that memorable storm (after)  a sleepless night with shingles sailing  off the roof) and recall that, except  for lighting numerous cigarettes, I  and my co-editor, fo'r about 3 hours,  virtually never stopped writing extra  and regular newscasts; taking phoned  announcements about road closures,  downed power lines, and other emergency situations; and rushing down the  hall to broadcast booth with all this  information.  Crises and disasters can sometimes  leave you a wrung-out rag but the  satisfaction in keeping on top of  them is immense.  For frenzied activity for a while  and a lot of exhilaration -keep-  -ing on top again - you can't beat  news coverage on an election night.  It's a suspenseful and crucial  occasion. The re-election or defeat  of governments determine the  direction our society will take  for the next few years and, in  the electronic media, you are  there to relay what is happening  as it happens. Needless to say,  a tremendous organizational job  is done beforehand; arranging  for special phone and broadcast  lines, mimeographing candidate sheets  for all the B.C. ridings, and recruiting staff from other departments  to help in a variety of ways.  The  suspense is high,-particularly  in provincial elections, as the  minutes tick off to the closing of  the polls. Then the first returns  start trickling in, the trickle  becomes a flow, and you're away.  In federal elections it's frequently all over by the time the  B.C. constituencies are heard from,  but once in a while, when it's  close, these really matter.  If  you're in a newsroom on federal  election day you will be in the  privileged position of being able  to watch the results roll in from  Newfoundland westward, hours  before the information can be  made public here.  I have made one or two references  to reporters.  In recent years  there has been an increasing use  of tape inserts in news braod-  casts and there is now a reporter  category in addition to that of  editor, though the reporters,  other than the so-called "national"  reporters, have to take turns on  editing shifts.  In their  reporting duties they cover news  conferences and other events  with tape recorders, collecting  voice and sound material for  use in the stories they will  write for braodcast.  If time is  very short, they will simply  phone in a voice account of  their own for recording. But  usually they return with their  material, which is transferred  from cassettes to larger tape  reels, and they must then do  their own cutting and splicing of  the segments they want to use.  There is often alot of deadline  pressure in this end of the job,  through the central newsroom in  Toronto on national and international stories.  About writing: I might just mention  that ther's a difference between  radio and newspaper styles.  Good  radio style approaches the conversational in manner. Newspaper  style, in straight news accounts,  too. Besides the material obtained 'by their own reporters,  the regional newsrooms have access to voice clips provided  at any rate, is more formal. Too,  newspaper stories often contain  most of the vital facts - the old  what, when, where, etc. - in a lead  paragraph, which you have before  you to reread, if necessary.  But  in writing for radio you hsrve to  space the information out a bit.  If you cram too much of it together  in the beginning, it may be more  than the listener can absorb at  once - and then it is lost in the air.  What are the qualifications for  this type of work? When I started  the CBC used to require a  university degree or 4 or 5 years  in newspaper or other radio news  work. But the requirements aren't  so stringent now. About 3 years  of related experience should  suffice, and even that is not  always necessary. In the past  few years the News Department  has hired graduates of, or  students who were completing,  the excellent course in Broad-  -cast Communications offered at  B.C.I.T. They were all taken on  as summer relief writers - a  very good way of breaking in.  You get 6 months experience in  writing plus some reporting, if  your inclination and ability  lie in that direction; and if  you do the job well, you will  , likely be first choice when a  vacancy for full-time work  occurs. B.C.I.T. grads,  incidentally, are particularly  adept at handling tapes. Two  B.C.I.T. women students are  currently employed as summer  relief staffers, one in radio  and one in TV.  Overall, of course, you have  to have a certain facility  with words and you have' to  have an interest in, and  knowledge of, current affairs.  Anyway, once you're in as a  woman, you will encounter no  discrimination or resentment.  If you happen to be desk editor-  -in-charge, your male colleagues  will make no objection at having  to write whatever copy you  choose to assign them or at  having their stories cut down,  or even eliminated, for reasons  of space or whatever. It's all  turn and turnabout in complete  equality.  A final word, if I may, about the CBC  News Service.  It's part of a Corporation that belongs to the people  of this country, not the government.  The government has no say whatsoever  as to the content or treatment of  the news.  It has been a precept  from the beginning of the News  Service and a point of honor with  anyone who has ever worked in it  that impartiality must be observed.  There is ho slanting of news in  favour of this party or that, this  cause or that. There are other  programs for comment.  In the News  Service your own opinions, political,  ecological, or whatever, have no  place in your work. You may hate  the guts of some political figure  and regard him or her as a real  threat to your own goals for society.  But you write what he or she has to  say and in detail, if it's newsworthy. Or, if some mill is alledr  gedly spewing out gunk and killing"  fish, you write that, butyou also  write the mill's possible denial  and you don't dismiss it in a sentence or two, no matter how much  any suggestion of pollution infuriates you.  I have nothing but respect for the  integrity of newspersons generally.  But some newspapers and some radio  stations have exes to grind, particularly political axes, and particularly near election times.  Some news is overplayed and some  underplayed. The CBC news editors,  if you think of the Service as  providing an electronic newspaper,  are not just the editors, but the  publishers, too. And they are  very conscious of the trust thev  hold.  I think this sense of obligation to  the public, the determination to  present the news in as truthful and  , balanced way as possible, was the  most satisfying part of the job.  and  then again...  Facsimile of a Suffragette post  card in the London Museum.  ^oncancccos/  The entire day shift of the Cannery  Restaurant has been laid off. The  company says that it has no work  for the employees who, incidentally,  were applying for certification to  join the Hotel Restaurant Employees  Union. vd epidemic  "There has been a lot of talking  about it but not much has been  done", remarked the Hon. Dennis  Cocke, Provincial Minister of  Health, in his opening speech  to delegates at the first B.C.  Conference on VD, held April 19th  and 20th at the Hotel Vancouver.  Representatives from the Vancouver  Status of Women and the Vancouver  Women's Health Collective were  among the 80 or so doctors, public  health nurses and social workers  invited to share information on  VD and to plan action programmes  for B.C. to counteract the spread  of the epidemic.  Day one consisted  of a heavy dose of factual information about gonorrhea, syphilis,  and other sexually transmitted  diseases. Did you know that:  * VBneral diseases are infectious  diseases transmitted only through  intimate sexual contact between  two persons.  * Gonorrhea and syphilis are the  two venereal diseases found in  B.C. and gonorrhea is the most  prevalent.  * There are 1.5 infections of VD  for every 100 people in B.C.  * Many private physicians are not  reporting cases of VD amont their  patients. .  * B.C. Medical Insurance does not  cover treatment of VD.  * Since 1968 the rate of gonorrhea  infections has increased by 15 -  20% every year.  * 80-90% of infected women compared  to 20% of infected men do not show  signs of gonorrhea and therefore  do not know they are infected.  Trudi Ruiterman from VD Control,  speaking on the Sociology of the.  Problem, emphasized that VD is  not a disease of the unwashed,  sinners, welfare people, or prostitutes; rather it is most frequent  among young people in the 19 to  29 age group who are living away  from home, and also among the gay  community, many of whom, because of  societal attitudes, are forced to  seek out transient contacts in gay  bars or steam baths. Ms. Ruiterman  pointed out, however, that "the  gay group has taken much responsibility for educating each other  about VD."  Although physicians and public health  nurses were advised by panelists not  to colour with moral judgments their  treatment of VD patients, nevertheless  as the conference progressed we heard  more and more about "promiscuous girls"  skid row women and prostitutes as the  core group who must be screened for  VD on a mass scale.  In fact it was  learned that women who are arrested  on certain streets in town and held  in the city jail are released on  vail only after they have submitted  to a VD examination. One group rec-  commendation from the conference  attempted to counteract this emphasis  on women as the source of the VD  problem by asking that if mass screenings are to be implemented in jails,  hospitals, clinics, etc. that both  sexes be included, not just women,  since it has recently been discovered  that at least 20% of all infected men  are a-symptomatie.  The second day produced several other  valuable recommendations from the  delegates, including:      '■-'■•■  1. that VD be treated like any other  epidemic.  2. that there.be no crash programmes  in the schools on VD; rather  that a comprehensive health and  family life programme be instigated from kindergarten to grade  12.  3. that the government provide funds  for more educational materials  (eg. the VD pamphlet called  "Rythrum and Blues") , more research  into vaccines, etc., and an extensive media campaign on VD directed  at all segments of our society.  4. that various community groups  and minority groups be encouraged  to produce their own information  and publicity on VD.  5. that the laws regarding age of  consent for medical treatment  be changed to encourage more  minors to seek treatment for VD.  6. that physicians be required to e  examine all patients for VD (with  their knowledge) during routine  checkups.  7. that since most women are a-sympto-  matic, men be made aware that they  have a responsibility to their  female sexual partners to name them  as contacts or inform them that they  may have contracted the disease.  The conference was cerntainly an eye-  opener for those delegates, like myself,  who had hitherto been completely ignorant about such things.  One thing that  bothered me, however, was the  reluctance on the part of the  conference organisers to talk  about VD as an "epidemic", given  that we had been called together  in the first place precisely  because VD has reached "epidemic  proportions'".  Also some of us felt that until  the attitudes of many doctors and  nurses have changed and to quote  Ms. Ruiterman, they ^tart treating "a person who has a communicable  disease and does not need anyone  supervising.his or her sex life",  the fear, shame, and ignorance that  permit VD to go unchecked will  continue and any serious attempt by  the B.C. government and the B.C.  Medical Association to eradicate the  epidemic will be* largely ineffective.  S. Purdy  international women's year  The United Nations has declared  1975 to be International Women's  Year and is encouraging its member countries to take measures  to ensure the full realization  of the rights of women and their  advancement on the basis of the  Declaration on the Elimination  of Discrimination against Women.  The government's eight point  programme of activities for  International Women's Year includes an emphasis on regional  and national conferences which  will bring together employers,  government, and men and women  whose lives are being affected  by the changes in women's role.  As well Canada has been chosen  to host an international seminar on improving the status of  women, to be held in Ottowa in  September, 1974.  In an attempt to obtain the views  of non-government organizations  on the government's programme for  1975, representatives from various non-government organizations  across Canada were invited to a  one-day meeting in Ottowa on  April 25th, to consult with the  government's Inter-Departmental  Committee on I.W.Y./75.  As the delegate representing the  Vancouver Status of Women, I was  most interested to see how productive a one-day feedback  session for 75 delegates from  groups ranging from the Girl  Guides to the National Farmers  Union would be.  We were asked  for our ideas on the structure  of conferences, who should be  involved, and the important  issues to be discussed.  Unfortunately there was too little  time for us either to get to  know who the other delegates  were or to make recommendations  based on our own particular  views.  Either a two-day meeting or a questionnaire in the  mail to all these organizations  would have been more fruitful.  It was also interesting to note not  only which groups had been invited  to Ottowa but also which had been  left out.  The majority of the groups  represented involved women but have  had little or no previous input into  the fight against sex discrimination  in society.  These groups included  the Junior League, the I.O.D.E.,  various church groups, the Federation  of Business and Professional Women,  etc.  Only approximately 10 out of  the 75 groups invited concern them-  selvs- primarily with status of women  issues.  It was encouraging to see  more women from other areas of society brought into «the government's  plans for 1975, but where were the  women's groups who for years have  been involved in the struggle for  equality? Why were there not representatives from the abortion groups,  the women's health groups, day care,  media groups, more women's centres?  How can the government dare ask for  our priorities for issues to discuss  at these conferences when they have  excluded representation from the  core issue groups such as day care  and abortion? . I find it hard to  believe that the government is not  aware of these groups or that it  was simply an oversight. woman and tiger  WOMAN AND TIGER  Not so long ago a lone woman was  alking through the tall trees in  the Forest of Life.  She went forward, sometimes whistling loudly; often humming, singing  or even making foolish noises to  hide the obviousness of her fears,  the heaviness of her loneliness,  and to bolster her courage for the  long journey,  One afternoon in the midst of her  wanderings she came across a tiger  sunning himself among the trees.  She stopped, waited, looking at  the tiger and, after a while, sat  down nearby.  Some time later she spoke to the  great creature, "Hello,tiger". He  returned her greeting. "Hello,  woman."  Silence moved between  them in the quiet and the trees  swayed.  I like you, tiger", she said softly.  "You are a handsome and likeable  tiger. May I come closer to you?"  He looked at the woman and, realizing she meant him no harm, he  moved himself slowly towards her.  She reached out her hand and touched  the tiger. He made small noise of  acceptance at her touch and for quite  some time they stayed that way - tiger  and woman, close and communing.  The woman was bemused by what was  happening and smilingly sat there,  warmed and happy.  The tiger by now had the natural  instinct to go, needing food. He  stretched to his full legnth and  slowly rose.  "Woman, I must go to my  hunting and eating and to follow  my paths through this forest. I am  well pleased we met and spent time  together. Now I shall go; and then  to my lair. We may meet again."  She nodded to him and leaned to  stroke him again in farewell. "I  shall be here in the forest, too. If  you wish us to meet and spend time  together again this way, watch for me."  The tiger looked down at her and they  stayed still a moment. Then, with  a movement of his head, "Goodbye", he  quietly padded off into the dark.  The woman sat on alone and was still  there when the sun once again began  to lighten the sky. She looked around  at the trees which somehow seemed  smaller. The whole Forest of Life  appeared much less frightening to her.  She stood up and began another day of  going forward. Her being felt a  mixture of happiness nad loss. She  wanted so very much to meet the tiger  again, remembering the warmth of him  and the gentleness of his strength.  The gladness and sadness went with her  as she continued through the trees  along the paths.  Meeting the tiger had had a sudden,  total deep effect upon her and her  view of the forest and she wanted to  share this; to tell him of the delight,  joy, and comfort she felt. Her hopes  were for them to meet again, many times,  She thought, "When I see that tiger I  shall tell him how things are with me.  Perhaps it will happen that we shall  meet, sharing strengths and weaknesses melded with love, humour, and  bring moments of peace to each other  as we follow our separate paths.  Thinking this, she smiled and gently  went on between the trees glancing  from left to right, waiting to see  the tiger. To tell him that a  woman can love a tiger without taming  him, or putting him in a cage, if the  tiger also wishes it to be.  Possibly such a mutuality of travelling  through the paths of the Forest of  Life apart yet somehow together could  ease the journey for both of the,  woman and tiger.  She continued on, gentled and warmed  and the days felt good to her.  Pamela Jay  sidetracked  "That's it!" My thoughts fell over  each other to get on paper. A perfect short story.  Aha. At last - proof I did something  while sitting around home raising  four children. Visions of an independent income and recognition as  my own personr-danced through my  head.  "Writing letters?" My husband  looked significantly in the direction  of his unironed shirts.  "What's for supper, Mom?" Always,  someone is talking at me hungrily.  Okay, tomorrow morning I'll get up  really early. Which I did...  Hurry, get it down before someone  wakes up.  "My, you're up early." My husband  called cheerfully on his way through  to the bathroom.  I gnashed my teeth.  "Don't bang the  door.' Or flush the toilet! I don't  want them up yet for God's sake!"  "No fear," he shouted gaily, clattering on his way.  Suddenly I was surrounded by a mob  howling for orange juice.  Okay  after lunch..  By the time I cleaned the spilled  gravy from the fridge, folded the  clothes left in the drier from Monday  and thought of something for my five  year old to do, the three year old  woke from his nap. Then, suddenly,  everyone else was home from school.  After supper?...;.  "Mummy! Wake up!"  "Huh?".... I leaped wildly to my  feet.  "Mummy, I can't get to sleep."  No the thing to do is to get up  early, get it all on paper while the  idea is fresh in my mind.  Next morning, the eight year old was  there before me. "My side hurts and  my head hurts."  That took a long, boring (her words)  week to clear up.  Then another had flu and another a  cold and the last an earache.  For weeks our sofa was never free  from languishing invalids.  Then I got flu so that all I could  cope with was grocery shopping,  laundry, cooking and cleaning.  Yesterday, while rummaging through  a dusty stack of books on the clothes  drier, I found a pile of foolscap  with a pin clipped to it.  "Odd," I leafed quizzically through  the pages.  "Why would this be here?"  "Oh yes," I breathed in recognition.  I paused before fiercely crumpling  every last page and throwing them in  to the garbage.  Paulette Cave 10  media action  The Media Action group is comprised  of Status of Women members who want to  do something about sexist advertising.  We plan to focus attention on one ad  in each newsletter. WE NEED YOUR HELP!  When you see an example of advertising  offensive to women, please send it to  us or write to the company concerned.  We suggest that you send copies of your  letters to:  Kathleen Ruff, Director  Human Rights Act  Department of Labour  3rd Floor, International House  880 Douglas Street, Victoria  V8W 2B7  P.S. If appropriate,  cott their product.  threaten to boy-  Media Action is effective. The  following letter was received  by a member of the media action  group in response to a letter  of complaint to the advertiser:  CLIP Sl SEND  IiteBenson&Hedges,,  Wliy settle for short?    *  Benson and Hedges Tobacco Ltd.  Suite 800  Place du Canada  1010 Laguachetiere St. W.  Montreal  President:  C.F. Lombard  Dear Mr. Lombard:  I find this advertisement highly  offensive and demeaning to women.  In my view women also have a right  to some dignity in our society in  spite of the heavy pressures that  exist which treat women as mindless or sexual objects to be  exploited.  I find no reason to buy your  products until women are represented fairly in your advertising.  Yours truly,  Ms. Karen Richardson  Media Action Group  Vancouver Status of Women  Dear Ms. Richardson:  I am replying to your letter complaining about the "legs" ad used to  promote Benson & Hedges cigarettes.  Based on your letter and several  others, we are withdrawing the ad  from the campaign mix as quickly as  possible, and are taking down the  outdoor advertising across Southwestern Ontario and Toronto.  We apologize for offending you personally with this ad and hope that  as you see the rest of the campaign,  which will show such visuals as two  people duelling, one person obviously  going to win because he has a longer  sword, or a bicycle built for four,  that you will appreciate the humorous, interesting visuals we are  trying to depict.  Since we are trying to respond to  your letter in a socially conscious  fashion, we hope that you will support us in the future by encouraging  your friends who smoke to use our  product.  Yours very truly,  Ronald W. Bulmer  Director of Marketing Services  Benson & Hedges Tobacco Co.  cc: Allan Dunphy  Vancouver Calendar Magazine  iwy/confc.  Although the odds were against us,  the delegates did manage to get in  some interesting recommendations and  advice to the government committee:  * Regional conferences should be  designed by local planning committee  and not organised federally.  Issues  for such conferences should be  decided locally and these could be  reflected at a national conference  on women.  * In some small communities a field  worker going into the towns would  be more useful than a conference.  * Regional conferences themselves  are not the best way to attract  the "uncoverted"; a good media  programme, maybe a national caravan, would be more effective.  Conferences are a better vehicle  for policy and action planning by  people already actively involved in  the fight for women.  * Concerning the government's efforts  to remove barriers to equality in  federal legislation, the Law Reform  Commission should review all sta  tutes for discriminatory content,  also, all levels of government  should implement the concept of  "affirmative action" as a means of  gaining fairer treatment of women  by employers.  Very little was learned about the  government's plan to provide financial assistance to ..groups or individuals doing special projects for  women in 1975, except that guidelines  for grant applications will be available by the end of the summer.  If  you are an individual or a group  wanting more information on projects,  more input into the government's  plans for I.W.Y./75 or more recognition for your efforts in the eyes  of the federal government, write to  Martha Hynna, Co-ordinator. for the  Status of Women, Privy Council Office,  Parliament Bldgs., Ottowa.  S. Purdy  I am full of bitterness to see that  my father, Henry, D.H. Lawrence, and  other men gave the best of themselves  to primitive women, endured them,  while I, being the woman whom men  associate with their creation, I get  treated in a superior, elevated,  mature way and so much is expected  of me that I cannot always live up  to.  The Diary of Anais Nin  Vol. I, p. 305  A district court judge in LA has  declared the states anti-prostitution  law unconstitutional on the grounds  that it discriminates against women.  Judge John S. Covington noted in his  ruling that the state makes it a  crime for a woman to receive money  for sex, but does not make it a  crime for a man to either give or  receive money for sex. U. VIC  In our March issue we listed names  and addresses of Vancouver Island  Women's groups.  We would like to  add to that list the University of  Victoria Women's Action Group which  was formed in January 1973.  The  group acts in the interest of all  women on campus:  students, faculty,  staff and alumnae.  They provide a  meeting place to act as a pressure  group for women's studies and for  day care facilities on campus.  Their  objectives include compiling a report  on the status of women at U. Vic.  and increasing awareness of discrimination.  The group acts as advocate  for women on campus.  In January '74, they introduced a  Women's Studies Program as part of  Camosun College's Community Education  Services.  The course "Women in  Society" consists of ten sessions.  Here is how we have acted upon some  of our objectives:  1. We have established a liaison  between our group at UVic and  the Women's Action Group at  UBC, the Women's Centre on  Trutch Street, in Victoria,  SWAG Victoria Branch.  2. On October 22, 1973, we joined  with other women's organizations  all across Canada by demonstrating in front of the Federal  Building in Victoria in connection with the Jeannette Lavell  case.  3. On January 15, 1974, we introduced a Women's Studies Program  as part of Camosun College's  Community Education Services.  Entitled "Women in Society," the  course consists of ten sessions  based on lecture-discussions  which explore historical perspectives, current writings on  women's roles, sex-role stereotyping of children, female sexuality, women and psychology,  commercial images of women, alternate life-styles and women in  literature.  Because of the interest shown about 100 people are  enrolled in the program we are  planning to expand the present  course in the Fall as a prelude  to its introduction at the University of Victoria.  4. On Valentine's Day, 1974, at the  University, we sponsored a panel  which discussed Sexism in Education.  Panelists were a school principal, a parent, an Education  student (all female), a teacher  and a psychologist (male).  The  topic brought out a good crowd  and provoked lively questions and  discussions and the entire proceedings were videotaped by a  female crew. We showed this tape  as part of our display at UVic's  Open House on March 9 and 10, 1974.  5. In February, 1974, we submitted .  our proposals regarding the redrafting of the Universities Act  to the UVic Senate and other  interested parties.  6. On March 14, 1974, we structured  a committee to draft our position  paper with regard to the Family  and Children's Law Commission.  7. We have two Consciousness Raising  groups meeting once a week now.  Each group discusses those things  that concern them personally. The  emphasis in both groups is on  communication and friendship.  One of the tenets of our group is to  be unstructured hierarchically. We  feel that we are making a political  statement when we reject a structured  system.  For example, instead of conducting our meetings along the line  of the traditional system, at the  beginning of each one of our meetings,  an agenda book is passed around and  anyone who has any business to discuss jots it down. The volunteer  chairwoman then proceeds with this  agenda'.  Business is conducted efficiently and effectively in this  way.  If you have an interest in the University of Victoria Women's Action  Group, you are invited to come out  to our meetings.  They are held at  12:30 p.m. every Thursday in Room  109 in the Lansdowne Residence  during the University's fall and  winter sessions.  During the summer  we will probably meet and read  women's literature as we did last  summer.  Come and be part of the action!  Summer address:  c/o Alice Ages  553 View Royal  Victoria, B.C.   479-2696  Usual address:  UVic Women's Action Group  Student Union Building  University of Victoria  Victoria, B.C.  CollaG-e  wil\ t^+urn nex-Y rviouth.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its  objective is to provide an open channel of communication between the  members of the organization and to  promote understanding about the  changing position of women in society.  PUBLICATION DATE:  The first week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE:  The 15th of the previous month.  SUBSCRIPTIONS:  KINESIS is provided  as a service to members of VSW in  good standing.  Membership is acquired by an annual donation.  In  determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per year  per person to print; and mail.  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE:  Kathy Sopko,  Diane Ryals, Margie Colclough,  Bobbie Patrick, Monica-Mui, Eloah  Giacommelli.  CONTRIBUTORS:  Joan Wallace, Sheila  Purdy, Gene Errington, Pamela Jay,  Paulette Cave, Lee Grills, M. Field-  house.  GRAPHICS AND LAYOUT:  Kathy Sopko  The newsletter is produced by  folunteer labour and printed by  College Printers.  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will  consider those from non-members.  All submissions, including letters  to the editorial committee, must  be accompanied by the writerrs  name and address.  Pseudonyms  will be used where requested.  Where necessar, the editorial committee will edit for brevity,  clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to:  Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 W. 4th Ave,  Vancouver 9, B.C.,  Telephone: 736-  3746.  subscribe!  ADDRESS   PHONE (home)_  (work)_  OCCUPATION  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  CORPORATE MEMBERSHIP $   RENEWAL     NEW MEMBER  I wish to become a member   I wish only to receive KINESIS_  In determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per person  per year to print and mail. If we arewomen, we trace our history  back through our mothers.  Virginia woolf  may  . 9  ORIENTATION MEETING  8:00PM  12 MOTHER'S DAY  15 NEWSLETTER COPY  DEADLINE  16 NEWSLETTER MEETING  21 GENERAL MEETING  "CHANGING IMAGES  OF WOMAN"  25 ORIENTATION MEETING  8:00 PM  25 WOMEN FOR ACTION CONF.  CAPILANO COLLEGE  29 EXECUTIVE MEETING  JUNE 11  MEDIA ACTION GROUP  25 MEETING 7:30 PM  general   meeting  This month's General Meeting will  feature a documentary, "Changing  Images of Women".  The slide-  presentation is a fast-paced survey  of visual materials which comments  on the way women have been perceived  through the ages by fine artists  and the various communications  media.  The show was produced by  staff members, Carol Gordon, and  Nadine Allan for a conference,  The New Woman, held at the University of California at Santa Cruz  the weekend of May 3, 1974/   General Meetings are held on the  third Tuesday of each month at  7:30PM in the Board Room of the  YWCA, 580 Burrard St., Vancouver  This month's meeting is set for  May 21st.