 oiiecTions $©iia *  ■;  IWD special interview with Afgan feminist Inside  K t N e S 1 s  Into the AAi  iHI-2000  #309-877 E. Hastings St.  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-7508  Email: kinesis@web.net  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our  officeis located at  309-877 E. Hastings St.  Production for our  April 2000 issue is from  March 14-24.  Founded in 1974, Kinesis is published  ten times a year by the Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are to  be a non-sectarian feminist voice for  women and to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting  sexism, racism.classism, homophobia, ableism, imperialism and anti-  Jewish oppression. Views expressed  in Kinesis are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW policy.  All unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  On hiatus.  GUEST EDITORS  Georgina Farah, Jenn Lo  PRODUCTION TEAM  Leila Amirifar, Nadine Chambers,  Pam Greenstock, Debbie Harford,  Fiona and Shakti Jeyachandran,  Robyn Kelly, Aseefa Merali, Healther  Miller, Monica K. Rasi, Colleen  Sheridan, Wai Yin Chew, Lisa  Wulwick.  Advertisng and Marketing: Jenn Lo  Circulation: Audrey Johnson,  Chrystal Fowler  Production Coordinator: Amal Rana  Designer: Jenn Lo  FRONT COVER  International Women's Day  created and designed by  Michelle Sotto and  Jenn Lo  PRESS DATE  March 28, 2000  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be submitted on  disk or by email. Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction. Editorial  guidelines are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are  double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (design required): 16th  (camera ready): 18th  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadian  Women's Periodicals Index,  the Alternative Press Index, and is a  member of the Canadian Magazine  Publishers Association.  ISSN 0317-9095  Publications mail registration #6426  News  Angela Davis in Vancouver   by Nadine Chambers  Violence in the Downtown Eastside.  compiled by Georgina Farah  Features  The 'DeKLEIN' of healthcare   by Ellen Woodsworth  Marriage in the next century   by Judy Lightwater  Assessing the needs of aging lesbians   by Emilie Adin  Valuing women's and women's unpaid work.  by Amy Salmon and Ellen Woodsworth  Miners Bay Books   by Jenn Lo  IWD calendar of events   compiled by Heather Miller  Scopin' out a zine   by Katja Cronauer  A critique of Seventeen magazine   by Karen-Marie Woods  Women's plight in Burma   by Esther Saw Lone  Giving back to the community   by Kelly Mathieu  Lifecycle of an unsafe tampon   by Amanda Walker  Centrespread  IWD Special: Afghan women caught in the web of a patriarchy    16-17  by Georgina Farah  Arts  LOUD: Drumming to a different beat.,  by deni tang  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 5  What's News 5,6  compiled by Fatima Jaffer and Nadine Chambers  Movement Matters 7  compiled by Amal Rana  Bulletin Board 29,30  compiled by Amal Rana  FEBRUARY 2000  KINESIS /U  Kincni  DDfJ    TO    PRCXI  As Kinesis goes to press, the  World March of Women 2000 is  busily preparing for their launch on  March 8th, International Women's  Day. This IWD promises to be big!  Women all over the world are  rallying together to demand the end  of poverty and violence against  women. We urge women to consider the solidarity needed to  change the existing structures that  perpetuate injustice.  This IWD issue covers some  challenging experiences faced by  women. Their stories reflect the  struggles of resistance and their  ongoing committment to systemic  change.  On February 14th, Aboriginal  women organized the 9th annual  Memorial March in the Vancouver  Downtown Eastside (DTES). The  march honoured women who died  violent deaths in the community.  Elders and other speakers voiced  their concerns about police discrimination and how it has contributed to  the invisibility of violence against  women, particularly Aboriginal  women.  Just days before this march, a  woman attempted suicide in the  DTES. Police response was said to  be neglectful at best. One week  later in Winnipeg, two Metis women  were found dead after police failed  to respond promptly to their pleas  for help.  As Kinesis goes to press, a  mother of four children in Langley,  British Columbia was murdered by  her husband. These are but a few  cases of the systemic onslaught of  violence against women.  Under this climate of injustice  against women and children, the  Minister of Finance, Paul Martin will  be releasing the federal budget on  February 28. If this- new plan includes 'across the board' tax cuts,  it will critically impact women and  children. 'Across the board' tax cuts  will widen the existing gap between  the rich and the poor, and significantly reduce funds available for  social programs. Joan Grant-  Cummings, president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) declares that,  "Women and children make up the  poorest part of our popluation and  their basic demands for a decent  and dignified standard of living must  be met!"  As NAC makes its' demands to  the federal government, Veteran Affairs Minister George Baker is set  to approve up to $1.5 million on  Viagra prescriptions for war vets!!!  Women's rights and social justice need to be ensured through resource allocation in the next budget.  Let's make our voices heard on this  millennial IWD and the worldwide  launch of the World March of  Women 2000!  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members  of VSW, renewed their memberships, or who made donations during the  month February.  Jennifer Bradley * Aileen Gerlinger * Catherine D'Aoust * Joanne  Namsoo * Jean Scott * College Institute Educators Association * Random House of Canada * Ticketmaster Canada  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our  programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Masoud Azarnoush * Helen Babalos * Tanya De Haan * Marion  Pollack  Hey guess what? It's March!!! And you  know what that means! Happy Internatinal  Women's Day to all our readers. This IWD,  we've got a very special issue for you—just  check out that snazzy front cover. We promise you're going to love it. Okay, okay, so  we've been making a lot of promises lately.  In the last few editions of Inside Kinesis,  we've gotten you excited by introducing all  sorts of new faces and describing a whole  slew of positive changes. Well, faithful readers, don't fret—this month shall be no different!  So what's been shakin' inside our magnificent mango walls? Where do we begin?  Let's start with this month's issue.  Check out that snazzy new cover (oh  did we mention that wonderful wonder  cover already?)!!! The March issue of Kinesis looks at International Women's Day and  asks that all important question: "What the  heck is IWD?"  In other words, what does IWD mean  to women around the world? What does it  mean to you, our readers. These are some  of the questions we asked while putting  together this issue and the variety of topics  covered reflect how diverse and broad the  meaning of IWD can really be.  The guest editors for this fabulous issue of Kinesis are Jenn Lo and Georgina  Farah. Yes, you've probably heard their  names before. Jenn has been with Kinesis  since September, 1998 as our designer/marketer. Along the way, she has also worn a  number of other hats: ruthless proofreader,  dedicated editorial board member, meticulous color separator and general comic relief around the office.  Jenn's endless energy and equally endless collection of clothes have made production at Kinesis both fun and stylish.  When not telling a joke, designing the latest edition oiKinesis or soliciting advertising, she puts her energy into attempting to  finish her Masters thesis on women living  in resource based communities and their  participation in community economic development. Whew! What a mouthful!  Along the way, she manages to find  time to raise an extremely cute but rebellious and temperamental bunny. Hey, get  that rabbit away from those wires!!!  Our other guest editor is Georgina  Farah, to whom we introduced you last  time around. Here are some of the things  we didn't tell you: Georgina is called  George for short, she absolutely loves olives and she has the most fabulous sense  of humor. She is a great writer and activist  with a passion for the issues of Afghan  women and anti-racism work.  Her passion also extends to her work  at Kinesis, where she has spent long hours  editing, proofreading and writing for this  issue alongside Jenn. On the brink of ex  haustion, she can easilv be revived with  chocolate raspberry truffle ice cream and  big Black dogs [only Lab mixes need ap-  ply]-  We want to thank both Jenn and  Georgina for all the time, effort and creativity that they poured into this issue. Well  done!  We are also extremely thrilled to introduce Georgina as the new full-time editor  of Kinesis. Yes, it's finally happened. We  found the woman who will lead us into a  new era oiKinesis and we couldn't be happier with VSW's choice. Kinesis has already  benefited tremendously from Georgina's  enthusiasm and creativity as editorial assistant and we think the transition into the  editor's chair will be a smooth one. We're  absolutely confident that under her leadership, we will not only thrive but grow in  new and positive ways. Congratulations  and a warm welcome to Georgina. You're  definitely a find.  Georgina will officially begin her term  as editor in April. April's issue will be co-  edited by two guest editors and the theme  will be Jewish women's diversity. Finally a  whole issue of Kinesis will be dedicated to  Jewish women. We're really excited about  that since it will be a first. We encourage  you to spread the word to Jewish women  that you know and ask them to submit  pieces or get involved! Production for the  April issue will be from, March 14 to the  24th, so feel free to drop by and lend a hand.  We'd also like to bring your attention  to a new feature in the paper. Every month,  we're planning to run a 'Readers' Writes'  page. This is where you get to talk back to  us or our sisters in the community! So write  in with any concerns, comments or suggestions that you may have. We love hearing  from you so pick up that pen or turn on  that computer!  Every month, a small group of dedicated women donate their time and energy  to help get Kinesis out to you. We'd like to  thank all our volunteers especially the new  faces this month: Heather Miller, Fiona and  Shakti Jeyachandran, Debbie Harford,  Assef a Merali, Leila Amirifar and Wai Yin  Chew. We'd also like to welcome new writers: Judy Lightwater, Esther Saw Lone,  Amy Salmon, Amanda Walker, and Karen-  Marie Woods.  Wow, this is starting to look like a  novel. Yikes! But before we go,we'd like to  quickly mention one small item. Our editorial board is currently on hiatus but we  are in the process of restructuring and recruiting new members. Change is in the air  and it's all looking very positive.  We'll keep you posted. So until next  time, enjoy your IWD issue and have a  fabulous time celebrating! On February 12, Angela Davis helped VSW celebrate Black  History Month and raise some money for the VSW campaign. I helped  by buying a ticket for the reception with Angela Davis and her talk. I  have a wonderful home and was thrilled to support VSW's intention to  secure one of its own for the ongoing benefit of Vancouver women. I  was honoured to have the chance to hear an icon of social revolution  speak.  I received a rude shock. The location for the reception was  inaccessible to me or to anyone else using a wheelchair. Imagine my  surprise (and anger and disappointment and disillusionment and...)!  The reception was upstairs at the Vogue Theatre with no elevator.  VSW could easily have held it downstairs. I asked to speak to Angela  Davis. She very graciously came down and I expressed my concerns to  her. I talked about how ironic it was that an event celebrating Black  History Month should prove to be so discriminatory. I suggested that  the needs of women with disabilities are being disregarded by our  sisters in the women's movement. I did not suggest that she include  access and the oppression of women with disabilities in her talk. I  should have. Instead, I suggested that she only give talks in accessible  venues. She said that she wasn't used to having to think about access  since she was from Berkeley, implying that in that, most accessible and  aware part of the world, she was unaccustomed to having to think  about it.  Angela Davis is a very accessible speaker with a disarming sense  of humour. She made clear connections between globalization and  poverty, racism, homophobia, sexism, oppressed workers and  prisoners. She said that sometimes, it's okay to be angry and that some  of us call ourselves socialists. She answered audience questions  thoughtfully, with empathy and understanding. Yet, she did not  mention ableism among the other kinds of oppression that she listed  and connected with globalization.  Pity.  Perhaps in 2030,1 will be able to look back to Angela Davis in  Vancouver and note the beginning of a lasting and active awareness;  that disregarding access is oppressive and that lack of access is as much  a social justice issue as fighting discrimination based on any other  difference, like race, sexual preference or gender. Perhaps not. It's up to  you.  In sisterhood,  Joan Meister  P.S. I'm sure that your new building will be accessible. If you need  any help with that aspect of planning, I'd be happy to help.  February 21, 2000  Dear Editor:  Ho; Davis on February 12 was truly a  coup, not only for the Vancouver Status of Women, but  also for the Vancouver women's movement,  exciting it was to witness a theatre full of acth  representing the diverse issues which encompass «  movement—all of them gathered to hear a feminist  icon articulate the links between oppressions of  women in North America and around the world.  is   fo I  monumental occasion, we (VSW) admittedly mad  in an area c  Vogue Theatre that was inaccessible. The irony of the  situation is that VSW is committed to issues of  accessibility, taking care to ensure that all our  ns are held in venues which meet the needs of  those with varying abilities. There is, therefore, no  excuse for this occv :;er had every '  reason   to   be   angered   and   disappointed   by   our  oversight.  We" thank her for bringing  this  matter to  our  attention and for offering her services to help us  would like to reiterate our commitment to ending all  forms st women, including women  with disabilities and will make every effort in the  future to lead by example.  The Coordinating Collective  Vane of Women News  A leader speaks:  Angela Davis In  Vancouver  by Nadine Chambers  Approximately a week before Angela  Davis came to Vancouver, I had the pleasure of seeing Barbara Smith in Seattle read  from her book "The Truth that Never Hurts:  Writings on Race Gender and Freedom".  The final section is called "Working for Liberation and having a Damn Good Time".  In it, she states how real leaders know that  humour, cooperation, reliability humility  Angela Davis at the Vogue Theatre, Vancouver, B.C.  and kindness are key characteristics of any  activist working towards social justice.  Angela Davis certainly exemplified  each of these key characteristics. I, however,  would like to add the word endurance.  From start to finish, one could not deny the  underlying strength that accentuates  Angela Davis' sonorous voice—a professor/story teller's best device for capturing  attention before delivering powerful messages. From her stories of her trip to Australia to the creation of a women's prison  in Montana, she carefully and simply  pointed out the links between globalization  and those monolithic prison complexes on  our social landscape. The speech was in a  sense an overview, and though she never  states it, the learning that any audience  needs to do is our responsibility.  The following is a small list of some of  the issues raised by Angela Davis, that I  hope will peak our interest in research and  activism here in Canada.  • Withthemcreasmgyouthfulnessof  the global prison populations, the  question arises " What would these  women be doing if they were in the  free world?"  • Do we think about the increasing  number of prisons and the number  An SFU criminology student asks Angela Davis  about 'restorative justice.'  of people devoured by prisons?  By February, 2000 she stated, there  would be a prison population  numbering 2 million in the  United States.  • Women who violate the patriarchal  social codes of acceptable female  behavior are denounced as  'psychologically off - kilter deviants'  and are legally drugged up in prisons.  • There is a movement of capital from  social welfare and public services to  profitable corporate sectors. Women  in prisons are part of the  globalization of assembly lines  • The privatization of education and  healthcare serves to increase the  gap between the rich and the poor.  •  An attack was launched in the  US (1980s) against women on wel  fare. This same attack is evident  here in Canada, even though welfare  is a fraction of the national budget.  In the US, as in  Canada, public attention should be  focused on dismantling the military  budget and the military industrial  complex.  • We must unlink the concepts  of 'crime' and 'punishment'. Many  people who commit heinous crimes  walk free and unpunished; the lack  of law on certain behavior does not  indicate a lack of criminal behavior.  Nor does the level of punishment  correlate to the level of damage. For  example, unsafe working conditions  and environmental pollution often  receive minimal punishment.  Dr. Davis spoke with power and conviction, as she asked us to imagine ourselves living in the year 2030. Looking back  on the year 2000, would we be able to say  that the new millenium was the start of an  era for:  Women standing up against the power  of global capital that exploits girls and  women in the Southern countries for  Northern profits? Could this be the time  when we stand up for the rights of refugee  women, fighting the racist character of immigration policies everywhere? Perhaps,  this would be the time that we really challenged the patriarchal power that intensifies racism in the State and its' apparatus  of violence. Or maybe this would be the end  to the chain of power that is funneled from  State to corporations and finally to women's homes where they suffer domestic violence. Will we be able to say we stopped  the flow of women who are incarcerated  because they are unable to maneuver  through this web of violence, racism and  exploitation?  It seems insurmountable, yet Angela  was certainly not without hope, as stated  in her closing remarks on the anti-WTO activism driven by youth. It is clear that she  believes that the work will continue in the  form of continued activism developed by  youth. With the trust and blessings of elders  there is hope that youth will figure out the  issues of racism, sexism, homophobia and  imperialism as they appear today.  I believe it. How about you?  Among her many projects, Nadine Chambers  continues to find time to write for Kinesis.  Titles for  further reading  The Invention of the Savage" by  Luanna Ross, focuses on the  criminalization of the Native  American population.  'The Angela Y. Davis Reader"  Prisons, Repression and Resistance  (Part 1), edited by Joy James News  Supporters of the Downtown Eastside gather for the February 14th Vigil march.  Aboriginal women lead the Downtown  Eastside community in Remembrance March  On February 14th, a day otherwise  known as Valentines day, Aboriginal  women gathered to remember and honour  women from the Downtown Eastside community who died at the hands of violence.  The crimes and injustice committed towards women living in this community  have been both perpetuated and ignored  by the mainstream media and the police.  Elders from different Aborginal communities began the march with opening  prayers at Carnegie Community Centre.  The march was then led by the elders, stopping at sites where women have died in the  Downtown Eastside. A brief smudge was  done and a rose left at each site.  One of the participant, Pauline Johnson  [of the Cree Nation] said, "This march  started for the honour, the dignity [and] the  respect that we wanted to give all these  women who passed away down here in the  Downtown Eastside. This is to honour all  the ladies, all the women that we love so  much, all the ones that were mothers, sisters, aunties, cousins, friends and wives."  At one point the march was led to the  steps of the Vancouver Police Department  where women spoke about the inherent  racism and police brutality that the community faces. Aboriginal Women's Action  Network member Fay Blaney [of the  Homalco people] said, "...we need to hang  on to who we are and where we came from;  we don't want these mean systems to make  us forget who we are. [This] includes doing the kind of healing work that we need  to do to, to be able to survive. I see so many  of us who are on that healing journey. We  need to hang on to who we are, so that we  can survive the onslaught of oppression  that we have to deal with at the hands of  the police and the rest of this Canadian  state."  Blaney also said that on September  25 th, the Aborginal Women's Day of Action  will be part of the World March of Women  2000 (March 8th to October 17,2000). "Our  voices as Aboriginal women are going to  be there and we're going to be counted!"  The Musqueam Nation, Squamish Nation  and the Burrard Nation were thanked for allowing the gathering on their territory.  Police fail to respond in time to Metis  women's calls for help  Two Metis women were found dead in  a Winnipeg home after calling the police  five times for help. Corrine McKeowen and  Doreen Leclair first phoned 911 on Thursday, February 17th at 9pm. They repeatedly  called for help but police did not arrive on  the scene, until 4:59 am the next morning.  By then the two women had been beaten  and stabbed to death. The provincial Justice Department and the RCMP are currently investigating the Winnipeg police for  their failure to respond to the two women's cries for help.  When asked whether the lack of police response was racially motivated,  Jocelyn Greenwood, a Metis woman at the  Ikwe centre said, "...it sure points in that  direction. I think that part of the problem  [of the lack of response] is the area where  the women were living in... a lot of aboriginal people [were] living in that area. I  think the people that are in charge of the  911 or who were answering the telephones,  basically are, or are almost as guilty, as the  person who stabbed the women," Greenwood said.  Upon questioning, Winnepeg Press  sources claimed that the 911 calls seemed  to be "incoherent^] fueled by alcohol and  were progressively more difficult to understand." Disturbingly, this implies that the  police will not respond to women unless  they speak in a clear, 'coherent' manner in  the face of threats and ultimately, death.  Bonnie Bryant, the Director for the Winnipeg crisis centre, Osbourne Shelter stressed  that, "[The role alcohol played] is very irrelevant." When asked whether a woman's  voice would appear incoherent during a  stalking, Bryant said, "that's very much the  case, particularly if the [perpatrator] had  been appearing at the door beforehand."  Staff and clients at the Ikwe centre feel  that this lack of response has happened in  the past and that police will often arrive  "when they have the time." Greenwood  commented, "I can't imagine the terror that  these women felt, phoning and phoning  and phoning and not having any response."  This information was compiled from the  Globe and Mail, as well as personal interviews.  On February 11lh, just three days before the annual Valentine's Day March in  the Downtown Eastside, a woman attempted suicide at the Balmoral Hotel,  which has traditionally been a site where  marchers stop to commemorate women  who have died violent deaths in the  Downtown Eastside (DTES). The following are comments by women from the  DTES about the police and ambulance  services' response to the woman's suicide attempt.  by Irene Tracz, Betty Williams,  Mona Ferenczi, Barbara Allan  (ChillyBean), Bernice Battersby,  Barbara Bray, Joanne  Shapwaykeesic, Darlene Obichon,  Selina Barton, L. Hawkins (not  necessarily in this order) as told to  Marg Scott   "I was told [about the suicide attempt] by the staff and the women who  came into the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre. They were really upset as  they told me what was happening to a Native woman, who had climbed up onto the  sign of the Balmoral Hotel.  At 11:30 am, I went to see [what was  happening at the hotel] on the corner of  Main & Hastings. To my amazement, [below] this troubled girl who was on the  sign, the police sat, just eating donuts  and coffee-policewomen and policemen,  just waiting and laughing. Fire trucks  were on the scene, just standing by. Firemen were just standing against the truck.  I was sad to see no air bags [had  been placed] under the Native girl, who  was going to jump. What is wrong with  the police and firemen? Do the police and  firemen have no respect for life in the  Eastside? It was sad. Police always assume the problem is drugs and booze, or  that there is always some family crisis.  But the police don't know how to respect  these people in the Eastside, how to talk  to the people. I once saw three policeman beating up on one suspect."  "Dear Media, and to all people... How  did I feel about this incident? How do I  feel about committing suicide? It was a  terrible feeling [seeing] how people reacted towards this [incident]!!! It was  crazy and wild to see such action taking  place in the Downtown Eastside, at the  Balmoral Hotel, on its sign [on] which she  stood to commit suicide. I felt women like  this should take this action because it  could be any one out there doing this. I'm  a women in pain for [how she must have  been] feeling, and towards her spouse.  We all love each other, like equals. We  should respect each other."  "'She's one of ours!' is a statement  one woman said, as the doors opened at  the Downtown Eastside Women's Center.  My prayers went out to [the woman on the  sign!] Please God, watch over her. Especially if she's a 'mom,' please don't let it  end this way. I thank the Great Spirits for  giving her the strength to live. "  "As women living in the DTES, we  witnessed a woman who was very desperate—desperate enough to stand five  stories high, on top of the sign of the Balmoral Hotel in the Downtown Eastside  (Main and Hastings street). Some onlookers coaxed her to jump, while some were  telling her to get another fix, or have another drink. The police closed the street  between Main and Carral, [but then] were  drinking coffee, eating donuts or having  a smoke, while a woman was in need of  a smoke, while a woman was in need of  HELP! If it wasn't for some of the people  that live in the so-called "Downtown  Eastside" with us, dragging their own  mattresses, their own beds, to break her  fall if she slipped or jumped.  Where was the airbag [that the firemen should have put out]? Where were  the fire trucks, the ladders? It would appear to all of us that live here together  that we do care for one another. Please  do not look down upon each and every  one of us that resides down here. We are  compassionate human beings. Some of  us may have taken another road in life  [from yours], but we at least care for one  another! This was not a freak show!!!  This is a woman from our community!!"  "[The incident] reminded me of myself when I went to jump at Canada  Place. The police were just standing  around, doing nothing. It was the community people who rallied around, not the  officials."  "To hear such neglect or non-caring  about Angie [the woman on the sign].  The police and fire departments' actions,  or nonactions, was uncalled for."  "Maybe she wanted to jump because  she's having a problem with her boyfriend. The police don't care about the  Eastside at all, don't care about the  women out here. Policewomen should  support a woman who is trying to kill herself, go up there and talk to her. I care  about women and it doesn't matter who.  [Angie's] got rights too, rights to be free.  They should have had a mattress under  her. She could have hurt herself. I was  treated like that too. [Angie] may feel different, maybe angry. Thanks to all the  women from the Center who support  "It was very sad and scary to stand  by and witness yet ANOTHER sister contemplate ending her life, yet not being  able to do a damn thing about it!"  "This lady is probably now slandered  by the [news]papers, the police and the  ambulance. [They] stood by waiting for  her to jump. No service was provided. As  bright as day, two policewomen stood by,  idly talking, smoking, like [they were on]  a normal coffee break, but excluding the  doughnuts. Where are your hearts sisters?  As for the police officers, (the men)  damages are done to women. Stories of  real life and abuse are verbalized. Victims are human beings with rights. We  suffer at the hands of injustice—police  violence, lying social workers who steal  our children, while mothers are beaten  by the cops that aid the social workers.  Get a real job, police brutalists! Go  after the murderers and rapists—men  such as yourselves. Abusers. It seems  you do not have a heart, only a mental  power block with a badge for where your  heart is. How do you feel when you sleep  at night? You know who you are. This  message is from a supporter who has  been beaten by police and who is a  mother whose children were stolen by a  woman social worker with a crooked  tongue and cruel heart. Do you sleep  knowing what you do? We have to live  with the EFFECTS!"  "Take action! It happened on the day  of February 11th, close to Valentines  Day!! But we love each other and we do  care—for our lives...[whether we are]  women, men or children. We [should] all  live equally, for we love God too."  KINESIS What's News  compiled by Fatima Jaffer and  Nadine Chambers  Poverty cause of high  TB rates  A study released last month confirms  the long-held belief of Aboriginal and anti-  poverty activists that legislated poverty is  a key factor for high rates of tuberculosis,  which is killing off Aboriginal peoples in  BC. The study, conducted by the BC Centre for Disease Control (CDC), also warns  that the rates of tuberculosis infection are  so high, there is danger of it spreading to  non-Aboriginal communities.  The fact that TB may affect non-Aboriginal communities may finally draw some  mainstream attention to the epidemic rates  in Aboriginal communities, says Viola Thomas, president of the United Native Nations. The UNN represents off-reserve Aboriginal peoples, roughly 70 percent of Aboriginal peoples in BC.  "Our people are dying from a disease  which is completely curable. What is  needed is an urban Aboriginal detox, so  people can really take their meds, and safe,  affordable inner-city housing," says Thomas.  The CDC study draws similar conclusions. Dr. Mark Fitzgerald of the CDC says  it is relatively cheap to treat TB through  medication, yet TB runs rife among Aboriginal people because of poverty, HIV infection, and needle drug use.  TB can be spread through casual contact such as coughing. The bacterial respiratory infection eats away at the lungs,  forming cavities where infection thrives. It  can be fatal, but modern antibiotics are extremely effective in curing infection. It takes  six to nine months of taking medication, at  least twice a week, to cure TB. People who  are homeless, transient, addicted to alcohol or drugs, or have few support systems,  have a harder time completing the treatment.  In mainstream BC society, only about  two people in every 100,000 are infected by  TB, while in Aboriginal communities the  rate is 100 for every 100,000.  "Why don't they just take a gun and  shoot us, if this is how little the government  cares," says Thomas, who has long been at  the forefront of a struggle to end legislated  poverty, alongside other feminist and progressive activists.  Fitzgerald agrees that what would  work to stop the killing of Aboriginal and  poor peoples in BC is "improving how  people live, monitoring patients who take  TB medication, and preventative drug  therapy for people who aren't yet infected  but have the disease dormant in their systems."  Fire on the sets of  Water  In New Delhi last month, right-wing  fundamentalists stormed the sets of Water,  the third in a trilogy of feminist films by  Canadian director Deepa Mehta, effectively  stopping the filming on the first day of the  shoot.  Hundreds of Hindu fundamentalists  smashed and burned the set on the shores  of the river Ghanga (Ganges), and a couple of protestors promised to drown themselves if filming resumes.  Wafer completes Mehta's trilogy about  the position of women in Indian society.  Fire, the first, explores the position of  women and issues of lesbianism in a middle-class family in New Delhi, in an era of  rising fundamentalism and changing values due to economic globalization [See Kinesis, Nov 1996]. Focussing on a lesbian  love story between two principal women  characters, it stars one of India's top actresses, Shabana Azmi, and the relative  newcomer Nandita Das. Three weeks after  its release in India, the cinema showing Fire  was forced to close temporarily after  protestors mobbed the theatre. However,  the right-wing onslaught on Fire also  sparked demonstrations of support by lesbians in New Delhi. Fire is now available  on video.  The second film, Earth, also stars Das,  and tells the story of a Parsi family and their  Hindu maidservant in mostly Muslim-  dominated Lahore during the 1947 partition of Hindustan into India and Pakistan.  Again, Mehta is critical of the use of religious fundamentalism in a power struggle  for right-wing control of resources, which  include women. The film played in Vancouver up to December 1999.  Water stars both Azmi (with a shaved  head) and Das, and explores the plight of  Hindu women who lose dignity, respect  and numerous rights upon widowhood  and loss of marital status. Like Mehta's  other films, the backdrop must inevitably  include a stinging critique and exposure of  the politics and woman-hatred that fuels  religious fundamentalism.  Hindutva (meaning Hinduness) which  promotes Hinduism as the superior faith,  and the notion that Hindus are the original  and only creators of Indian culture and the  nation, is reaching ever soaring heights in  India. The current ruling governmental  party, the BJP (Bharatiya Janata Party), is  the political arm of the RSS (Rashtriya  Swayamsevak Sangh) which is a rather  thuggish paramilitary-style nationalist organization modelled on, among other philosophies, Nazism's purging of Jews. Hindus currently make up 83 percent of India's  population, and Muslims make up 11 percent. The other prominent Indian religious  entity is Sikhism.  It is unknown as Kinesis goes to press  if the shooting of Water, which was originally intended to last through March, has  been able to resume.  Austrian women's  NGO's target of  right-wing cuts  The latest target of Austria's new right-  wing neo-fascist government are women's  organizations, which may see their funding cut after the government abolished the  Ministry for Women's Affairs last month  and announced that the budget for women's programs will be slashed 60 percent.  The cuts happened amid daily protests  of thousands of Austrians against a series  of cutbacks imposed by the Austrian government, made up of the conservative People's Party and the populist right-wing  Freedom Party, which regards women as  merely one part of their broader family  rights agenda. As well, government members have created controversy by openly  praising the Nazi regime of the 1930s-40s,  particularly with regard to its employment  practices, and playing down its atrocities.  The wave of protests has been gradually building momentum. On February  19th, over a quarter of a million Austrians  were expected at a rally where, among  other issues, demonstrators protested the  government decision to abolish the Ministry for Women's Affairs.  Vice-chancellor Susanne Riess-Passer  claimed in a televised interview that the  former ministry had merely served a symbolic function, as it had not had a budget  nor any power. But the ministry, which had  originally been set up by the previous Social Democrat government, had been pivotal in ensuring the growth and survival of  women's non-governmental organizations  (NGOs), many of which have received  funding for almost 30 years.  It is expected that some functions of  what was previously the ministry will now  be carried out by a junior department  within the larger Ministry of Social Affairs.  Austrian women are calling for donations to enable them to survive the current  crisis, as well as letters of protest to be sent  to the Austrian government, our own government (urging them to put pressure on  the Austrian government), and the media  (locally and nationally) to publicize the  government's campaign to destroy women's NGOs in Austria.  The women's contact in Austria can be  reached at WAVE Office, c/o Information  Centre Against Violence, Austrian Women's  Shelter Network, Hofgasse 9/1/4 A-1050  Vienna, Austria. Phone 43-1-5482720; fax  43-1-5482720-27; e-mail: wave@point.at;  website, http://www.wave-network.org.  There is also an Abolition Global Caucus  women can subscribe to on the net, to join  discussions on the abolition of the ministry. Subscribe to "abolition-caucus-  subscribe@groups.com.  Gun Control debate in  the Supreme Court  The debate over gun control continued  in the Supreme Court on Monday February 14th, 2000. In 1978, the federal government enacted a law requiring gun certification. In 1995, the federal government  passed a stronger gun law requiring own  ers to be licensed and their weapons registered. Currently, several provinces along  with gun lobbyists are challenging the 1995  federal laws as an imposition on provincial power.  Chief Justice Catherine Fraser's opening statement on the the Courts deliberation over the issue begins, "Guns preserve  lives... Guns employ people. Guns are used  for legitimate recreational pursuits, and  guns are the tools of some trades.  At the same time, guns intimidate,  guns maim and guns kill. It is precisely  because of this paradox—that guns are  used for good as well as evil—that controversy surrounds government efforts at control."  There are conflicting arguments for  and against gun control. Pro-gun lobbyist  have argued that the federal law restricts  citizen's ability to have the means of self-  protection. They argue that the federal law  oversteps provincial jurisdiction, despite  the fact that the federal government is constitutionally responsible for providing  'peace, order and good government.'  Some of the strongest anti-gun lobbyists are women shelters. They and other  anti-gun supporters have drawn on powerful examples such as the 1989 massacre  at Montreal's Ecole Polytechnique.  Alexander Pringle, representing the Alberta Council of Women Shelters argues  that the suffereing of women as the result  of guns outweigh any difficulties gun owners may have in registering their weapons.  There is a direct connection between ownership of guns by men and the significant  percentage of female victim.  As Kinesis goes to press, the Supreme  Court reserved its decision, drawing warnings from the pro-gun lobbyists of challenges under the Charter of Rights and  Freedoms, to continuing support of the  1998 Alberta Court of Appeal's 3-2 decision  to uphold the 1995 law.  Information from Globe and Mail.  They're going fast. This hot little  resource guide is packed with all  kinds of useful information on  child care, legal assistance,  employment and training,  housing, welfare, services for  First Nations women, freebies  and cheapies and more! To get  your free copy, pick one up from  our office during office hours, or  send us a self-addressed stamped  envelope with $1.50 return postage  on it (send a large size envelope  please). Organizations can place  an order for multiple copies by  phoning VSW at 255-6554.  We ask organizations to contribute  $2.00 per copy toward the   cost of the guides.   VANCOUVER STATUS  OF WOMEN  #309 - 877 E. Hastings  Vancouver V6A 3Y1  Don't miss out on your last chance to get the  latest edition of the Lower Mainland  Single Mothers' Resource Guide\  KINESIS  MARCH 2000 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  Women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Lisa Wulwick and Amal  Rana  Women's Health  Research Institute  (WHRI) to be created  s been submitted by the  Working Group on the Canadian Institutes  of Health Research, Gender and Women's  Health Research to create a Women's  Health Research Institute (WHRI) within  the CIHR. This working group is comprised  of researchers, health care providers, representatives of consumer groups, leading  clinicians, advocates and policy makers in  the field of women's health in Canada. On  April 1 2000, health minister Allan Rock  will announce the slate of institutes. It is  hoped that the WHRI will be named as an  institute in the CIHR.  Women account for 52% of the Canadian population and the issues surrounding women's health are of critical importance to Canadians. Women's health must  be recognized within the CIHR. Without  this recognition, sex, gender, and women's  health issues risk being ignored within the  research agenda of CIHR. The integration  of sex and gender into health research is  vital. Health, illness, disability, disease and  the experience of seeking and receiving  health care are strongly influenced by sex  and gender. Most research to date, with regard to health, has not included how sex  and gender interact and influence areas  surrounding health and illness. Assumptions made about women's health, historically, have been based on research done on  men. This leads to poor science, which in  turn places the health of women at risk.  The Women's Health Research Institute will conduct research in the four CIHR  quadrants. It will focus on health issues  unique to women, that are more prevalent  in women and that are less understood in  women and policy research. Having a  Women's Health Research Institute would  be beneficial for a variety of reasons. A  WHRI would greatly help to improve the  health of women which in turn would benefit families and communities. It would also  result in cost savings to the health care system and place Canada in a leading role with  regard to women;'s health. For more information on the WHRI contact Amanda Kobler  by phone at (604) 875-2345 x6871 or by email:  akobler@cw.bc.ca  Internet Access for  Women's Groups  Are you considering applying for Federal Internet funding? Womenspace is investigating whether women's groups are  receiving resources from any of the Federal  government's programs to connect nonprofit groups to the Internet. If your group  has applied, or has considered applying,  for funding from a government program  to get online, and/or offer Internet access  to women, please let the campaign know.  A short questionnaire will be sent to you.  The questionnaire is entirely about programs for Internet use, either connecting  your group/organization, and/or providing access to the Internet for women. This  project is funded by Status of Women Canada.  For more information or to receive the questionnaire, contact Womenspace at the following address: Womenspace, PO Box 1034,  Almonte, Ontario, KOA 1P0, email:  diamond@womenspace.ca  Links between child-  custody arrangements  and spousal abuse  The Saskatchewan Battered Women's  Advocacy Network (SBWAN) is conducting an assessment study on the issue of  child-custody arrangements in situations  where there has been a history of spousal  abuse. According to SBWAN, custody arrangements serve as yet another tool for the  continuation of the cycle of abuse. Federal  and provincial legislation fails to address  this issue adequately. In fact, neither the  federal Divorce Act nor the Saskatchewan  Children's Law Act specifically acknowledge that spousal violence is a valid consideration when making a decision on custody and access rights. Many women have  pointed out to SBWAN that the courts do  not take into account how the abusive relationship can be, and is perpetuated  through, custody and access arrangements.  SBWAN's assessment process began in  November, 1999 and will continue through  April, 2001. Around six to eight thousand  women throughout Saskatchewan will receive questionnaires. Much of the emphasis will be placed on rural and northern  areas. Focus groups will also be held in  communities. Collected data will be used  to formulate recommendations for change  and will be communicated to the National  Association of Women and the Law and the  Federal and Provincial governments. If you  work in a shelter or sister organization and can  help with the distribution of questionnaires, or  if you are interested in hosting a focus group  in your community, or for more information,  contact Julie Johnson, phone: (306) 757-7879  email: SBWAN@ywca. regina.sk.ca  Demands of World March of Women in the Year 2000  List of countries involved:  Afghanistan * Albania * Algeria * Andorra * Angola * Anguilla * Antigua and Barbuda * Argentina * Armenia * Aruba * Australia * Austria *  Azerbaijan * Bahamas * Bahrain * Bangladesh * Barbados * Belarus * Belgium * Belize * Benin * Bermuda *Bhutan* Bolivia * Bosnia and Herzegovina  * Botswana * Brazil * BruneiDarussalam * Bulgaria * BurkinaFaso * Burma * Burundi * Cambodia * Cameroon * Canada * Cape Verde * Central  African Republic * Chad * Chile * China * Colombia * Comoros * Congo * Cook Islands * CostaRica * Croatia * Cuba * Cyprus * Czech Republic *  Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea * Democratic Republic of the Congo * Denmark * Djibouti * Dominica * Dominican Republic * East Timor  * Ecuador * Egypt * EI Salvador * Equatorial Guinea * Eritrea * Estonia * Ethiopia * Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia-Montenegro) * Federated States of Micronesia * Fiji * Finland * France * French Guyana * Gabon * Gambia * Georgia * Germany * Ghana * Greece * Greenland *  Grenada * Guadeloupe * Guatemala * Guinea * Guinea-Bissau * Guyana * Haiti * Honduras * Hong Kong * Hungary * Iceland * India * Indonesia *  Iraq/Iraqi Kurdistan * Ireland * Islamic Republic of Iran * Israel/Palestine * Italy * Ivory Coast * Jamaica * Japan * Jordan * Kazakhstan * Kenya *  Kiribati * Kuwait * Kyrgyzstan * Lao People's Democratic Republic * Latvia * Lebanon * Lesotho * Liberia * Libyan Arab Jamahiriya * Liechtenstein * Lithuania * Luxembourg * Macao * Macedonia * Madagascar * Malawi * Malaysia * Maldives * Mali * Maita * Marshall Islands * Martinique  * Mauritania * Mauritius * Mexico * Monaco * Mongolia * Montserrat * Morocco * Mozambique * Namibia * Nauru * Nepal * Netherlands * New  Caledonia * New Zealand * Nicaragua * Niger * Nigeria * Niue * Norway * Oman * Pakistan * Palau * Panama * Papua New Guinea * Paraguay * Peru  * Philippines * Poland * Portugal * Puerto Rico * Qatar * Republic of Korea * Republic of Moldova * Romania * Russian Federation * Rwanda *  Saint Kitts et Nevis * Saint Lucia * Saint Vincent and the Grenadines * Samoa * San Marino * Sao Tome and Principe * Saudi Arabia * Senegal *  Seychelles * Sierra Leone * Singapore * Slovakia * Slovenia * Solomon Islands * Somalia * South Africa * Spain * Sri Lanka * Sudan * Suriname *  Swaziland * Sweden * Switzerland * Syrian Arab Republic * Taiwan * Tajikistan * Thailand * Togo * Tokelau * Tonga * Trinidad and Tobago *  Tunisia * Turkey * Turkmenistan * Turks and Caicos * Tuvalu * Uganda * Ukraine * United Arab Emirates * United Kingdom * United Republic of  Tanzania * United States of America * Uruguay * Uzbekistan * Vanuatu * Venezuela * Viet Nam * Virgin Islands * Wallis and Futuna * Yemen *  Zambia * Zimbabwe *  (More countries have been added since this update.)  MARCH 2000 Feature  The Vancouver Status of  Women thanks all you who  attended the Angela Davis  Fundraising event on  February 12th and those who  helped in other ways to  make the evening the  tremendous success that it  was. We greatly appreciate  your support!  5  OUR SPONSOR?  Simon Fraser University  GUPB§B£.  Canadian Union of Public  Women's Studies  Employees - BC Region  Ruth Wynn Woodward Endowment  Hospital Employees' Union  n  Random House of Canada  Women's Committee  CONTRIBUTORS  TICKET SPONSORS  BC Federation of Labour  Aileen Gerlinger  BC Teachers' Federation  Helen Babalos  Health Sciences Association  Joanne Namsoo  Nadine Chambers  United Food & Commercial  Georgina Farar  Workers: Union 1518  Lorraine Irlam  University of British Columbia:  Women's Studies  VOLUNTEERS  SUPPORTERS  Helen Babalos  BC Nurses' Union  Fatima Jaffer  Lotus Miyashita Design  Audrey Johnson  Full Bloom Flowers  Cat L'Hirondelle  Barbara Charlie  Andrea Mellalieu  Yvonne Brown  Sedi Minachi  Jennifer Johnstone  Irma Mohammed  Kim Hines  Naomi North  Jenn Lo  Bernadette Phan  Amal Rana  Ruth Sauder  Donna Tanchak  Rita Dhamoon  Cre/ebrQ^o rT  equityond   'n9en^r  zlQi justice.  tfafftf Internatf&naf  iVomefk? Pa4f £000/  BRITISH COLUMBIA  TEACHERS7 FEDERATION  100-550 West 6th Avenue  Vancouver, BC V5Z 4P2  (604) 871-2283  toll free 1-800-663-9163  fax 871-2289  www.bctf.bc.ca Feature   Ralph Klein pushes for hasty response to health care crisis:  I 'DeKLEIN' Privatized  Healthcare  by Ellen Woodsworth  As Ralph Klein, Alberta's premier,  pushes to introduce privatized healthcare,  ambulances race across the land to warn  people of the impact. If Klein succeeds, private corporations could use trade agreements like NAFTA to privatize health care  in every other province. This would effectively open the door to a system of health  care only for those who could afford to pay.  From coast to coast, students, housewives, farmers, unemployed people, businesswomen, health care providers etc. are  gathering to tell the ambulance attendants  what has happened to health care in their  communities.They are part of the Canadian  Health Care Coalition campaign to save the  public health care system. How could a  social program, that is so important to  every Canadian, be in such critical condition?  Why was there a drastic cut of 40% to  health care spending by the federal government in 1994? Why does the federal government today contribute only 13% to the  overall costs of health care? When the program was first established the federal government agreed to share 50 per cent of the  costs with the provinces. Considering, that  there is a federal surplus of over $95 billion dollars, why is the federal government  now only giving small, one-time grants to  the provinces, rather than solid annual  funding?  Our publicly funded health care system is being undermined by the same people who negotiated NAFTA and are presently negotiating with the World Trade Organization. The federal government is deliberately destabilizing our health care system by caving into private corporations  pressure. They see the $70 billion dollar  health care system as a lucrative field for  profit and expansion.  People are complaining about the lack  of service, shortage of hospital beds, long  waitinglists, inadequate facilities for the aging, wage freezes, and poor working conditions for nurses and hospital staff. The  quick response from government has been:  why not allow some privatization?  Why should Canadians believe that  privatized facilities would be more accessible? Canadians need only look south to  see that 70% of homeless Americans are on  the streets because of privatized medical  bankruptcies.  "We don't want an American style  health care system where they check your  purse before they check your pulse" said  Elsie Dean, from the Seniors Network B.C.  The Federal government has proposed  to make tax cuts which may put about $100  in each of our pockets rather than increas  ing annual spending on health care. However, if they took the same amount of  money and put it into health care, over  10,000 jobs would be created. Which makes  more long term, economic sense? A woman  with a job providing desperately needed  services or $100? Nowadays, $100 wouldn't  even pay for an appointment with a specialist.  There are problems in our health care  system that need to be addressed, especially  as Canada faces an ageing society. We need  to modernize our system and provide good  jobs for women. Apriority health care system would decrease unpaid work and cost  much less than a privatized system. Privatization gives services to those with money  and leaves the rest of us waiting. We have  seen enough of these inequalities. We must  say NO to health care just for the rich!  The Canadian Health Care Coalition  and the BC Health Coalition led by the  nurses unions are mobilizing people across  Canada to demand that Alan Rock, the Federal Minister of Health, designate funds for  health care. This Canada-wide ambulance  drive as well as public meetings, demonstrations, and a postcard campaign which  was launched last week are all actions that  for real change. This is not just posturing,  as the postcard clearly states:  "I 'deKlein' privatized health care.  I oppose Ralph Klein's plans to legalized private hospitals inAlberta. If he succeeds, private corporations could use trade  agreements like NAFTA to privatize health  care in every other province.  Please act now to stop Klein from privatizing Medicare. That means restoring  federal health care funding and taking  whatever legislative measures are necessary to safeguard Medicare."  These cards and more information are  available by calling toll free 1-877-600-1180  You can also refer to the Parkland Institute's new report addressing heatlhcare  issues and Colleen Fuller's new book, Caring for Profit: How Corporations are Taking over Canada's Health Care System".  You can read the ambulances' travel log  or check out the web site  www.healthcoalition.ca or www.cupe.ca. Get  your organization to join the BC Health Coalition, hold a meeting, call your M.P. and distribute the cards. Everyone needs to be involved. It is our future and we can make a difference!  Ellen Woodsworth is a writer for Kinesis and  a member of VSW.  I "deKlein" privatized health care  Dear Minister Rock,  I oppose Ralph Klein's plans to legalize private hospitals in Alberta. If  he succeeds, private corporations could use trade agreements like  NAFTA to privatize health care in every other province.  Please act now to stop Klein from privatizing Medicare. That means  restoring federal health care funding and taking whatever legislative  measures are necessary to safeguard Medicare.  Street Address  City  The Hon. Allan Rock  Minister of Health  House of Commons  Ottawa, ON  K1A0A6  British Columbia Health Coalition  MARCH 2000  KINESIS Feature  Samesex unions:  Marriage in the Next  Century  by Judy Lightwater  In August 1999 my partner and I decided to get married. To us, the decision  came as no surprise. We have both been  married before, legally and as common-law  partners. We are two mature women who  are deeply in love and ready to plan our  lives together.  While legal marriage is not yet available to us, we want the  public commitment  that comes with this  institution. We also  want to be part of the  political work that  makes civil marriage a  reality for same-sex  couples in Canada.  We believe all peo-  Perhaps lesbian  relationships  would be more  intentional and  enduring if we  created union  celebrations  more often.  pie, gay or not, are entitled to the choice between common-law  and married unions,  and deserve all the  civil rights and responsibilities that flow from  these choices.  Reactions to our  decision were sad, exciting and most of all,  confusing. Many of  our straight friends  live common-law.  They wondered why  we would bother with such a conventional  tradition. Some saw it as a religious ritual.  Knowing neither of us was affiliated  with a congregation, our friends wondered  why we would create this ritual if it wasn't  legal. Most were happy for us after a few  bemused moments. Though some of our  birth family members would attend and  others would not, their homophobia was  sadly predictable. For religious reasons and  unspoken beliefs about second and third  marriages not being as important, some of  them would miss this joyous occasion. We  felt invalidated and angry, but not surprised.  Our lesbian friends' reactions, which  were very important to us, ran from dreadful silence to hearty congratulations. We  felt like two kids seeking our parents' approval—happy when we could get some,  wondering what we had done wrong when  we couldn't. After two weeks of riding this  unexpectedly turbulent wave, we arrived  at some understanding of how political an  act it is for lesbians to marry.  The big mystery was why? Stories of  unhappy marriages to men had been recounted by many of our lesbian friends.  They swore never again to marry.  We also knew that for many the civil  right to marry had been lost in the romantic and religious trappings that surrounded  it. Still another factor might have been the  current attitude that marriage isn't hip and  certainly doesn't last.  My partner and I were shaken that  some of our lesbian friends—most of whom  are sensitive as well as political—were  caught up in their own histories and society's interpretations.  We also knew that legal civil marriage  for same-sex couples had unleashed a huge  reaction around the  world. The Christian  right has spent more  money opposing it  than they have on any  issue besides the right  to choose a safe, medical abortion.  Dr. Vicki Drader, a  heterosexual psychologist in Victoria, ventures that, "some people react negatively to  gay marriage because  they are threatened by  difference....especially  any difference which  breaks their rules. A  homosexual marriage  legitimizes and even  sanctions this threatening difference." Sam  Lucier, formerly a Victoria resident who now  lives in Penticton, creates rituals like marriages, funerals, and  baby blessings for people who are not affiliated with a particular church.  She proposes that, "our sexuality is  where our tar hits the road. People are tremendously insecure about so many things...  and our sexuality is one of those. We're influenced unconsciously and what's been  hidden is difficult. People are being challenged to re-evaluate their judgements and  people resist change." However, she is  hopeful that "common humanness unites  us."  My partner and I began to look for history and precedent of other same-sex unions and how they coped with the lack of  support we were experiencing. She found  the book Ceremonies of the Heart, written by  Becky Butler and published in 1990 by Seal  Press. Butler's description of lesbian unions  in Aboriginal cultures, acceptance of lesbian  relationships throughout history, and summary of the thirty year legal battle for gay  marriage in the United States were part of  her masters thesis.  In the book, Butler includes sixteen stories written by lesbian couples about their  unions. These stories inspired and comforted us. Butler documents experiences of  Asian (Japanese), Black, Jewish, Catholic,  white, Wiccan, young and old women who  designed every possible form of ritual—  from a traditional white wedding dress, re  hearsal dinner, and tuxedos tohandfasting  in the forest. Lesbian relationships were  celebrated and their lives changed in beautiful, enduring ways. The courage of the  women described in Butler's book contributed to our knowledge of this rarely discussed subject. Her book provided stories  which reflected how we see ourselves.  As the months passed the road to the  wedding grows smoother. We know that  marriage is right for us and we look forward to the ceremony and the sharing of  our love with our families of origin and  choice. Perhaps lesbian relationships  would be more intentional and enduring  if many of us created union celebrations.  Perhaps not.  In twenty years of being a lesbian I  know of only four union ceremonies that  have taken place. None of my close friends  have held these rituals. My fiancee and I  are committed to the legalization of same-  sex marriage as part of our constitutional  right to full equality. We treasure the power  to choose our form of union and be supported in that decision.  As our wedding date grows closer we  are excited about invitations, rings, and seeing loved ones from far away. Our close  friends are coordinating the food, the flowers, and the wedding rituals. My father,  who is considering marriage again at the  age of seventy-seven, will be there. We undertake this commitment with the belief  that our relationship and our community  will be strengthened by it.  Judy Lightwater is a writer, activist, and nonprofit management consultant living in Victoria. Judy Lightwater and Cynthia Callahan will  be married July 29, 2000. Many thanks do  Cynthia Callahan for meticulous editing.  Over thirty states and the U.S. congress  have now passed legislation prohibiting  same sex marriage.  Hawaii's court did not strike down the  state's legislation prohibiting gay  marriage but stated that gays and  lesbians were entitled to equality.  Hawaii's domestic partnership  legislation is one of the most  progressive anywhere.  In December, 1999, Vermont's supreme  court ordered the state to guarantee gay  and lesbian couples all the rights that  fall to heterosexuals who marry.  The upcoming challenge in Rhode  Island may result in same-sex marriage  being legalized for the first time in U.S.  history.  In California, the Knight initiative (a  strangely worded referendum), will  take place in March of 2000. It will  significantly influence the country's  progress on this issue.  On April 30, 2000, over a million people  will march to Washington, D.C. to  demand equality for gays, lesbians,  bisexuals and transgendered people.  In Canada, and particularly in B.C., we  have some of the most progressive  legislation in the world. Inheritance,  adoption, medical decision-making,  child guardianship, and pensions are all  areas in which we have won equality at  the provincial level.  A recent decision in Alberta gave gay  couples the right to become legal  parents of their partners' children.  In May, 1999, the M. v. H. decision  marked the first time the Supreme Court  of Canada ruled unanimously and with  a broad and progressive interpretation  that a law is unconstitutional if it fails to  treat same-sex couples equally.  Forced to amend Ontario's Family Law  Act to comply with M. v. H., Mike Harris'  government grudgingly added a new  'separate but equal' category for 'same  sex partners'.  This 'separate but equal' legislation is  now being challenged at the Supreme  Court level as being discriminatory and  not reflecting the intent of the M v. H  decision.  In June, 1999 the Liberals voted largely  in favour of a recent motion by the  Reform party to 'take all measures  necessary' to preserve the  heterosexual definition of marriage.  On February 11, 2000, omnibus  legislation was introduced in parliament  that would amend sixty-five pieces of  federal legislation to grant lesbian and  gay couples rights equal to those of  heterosexual common law couples.  The legislation did not amend the  definition of spouse or legalize marriage  for same-sex couples. EGALE is  currently considering a legal challenge  on these issues.  The Netherlands may be the first  country in the world to legalize same-  sex marriage. Legislation is planned for  January, 2001. Feature  Community-based research on:  Needs Assessment for  Aging Lesbians  by Emilie Adin  What is the situation for aging lesbians in the Lower Mainland? Is there appropriate and adequate community support,  housing and health care to meet their  needs? Have the effects of discrimination  based on gender, age and sexual orientation—and in many cases race, class and/  or ability as well—compounded to such a  degree that older lesbians are being grossly  overldoked within our communities and  our social institutions?  A group of older lesbians have come  together to find out the answers to these  questions. A community-based steering  committee is working with a graduate student from the University of British Columbia to do a needs assessment of aging lesbians in the Lower Mainland. In particular, this group is looking at how well these  women's physical, emotional, mental and  spiritual needs are being met within our  current health care system, and whether  current housing and community support  service options are adequate. "This is es  sential work to be done," says Hinda Avery,  one of this project's steering committee  members. "For so many older women, like  myself, the thought of having to leave my  home and be shipped off to a personal care  home is the most frightening thing to contemplate. What [the project] is doing is  about our future and about living our last  years with some kind of dignity."  Jon Leah Hopkins, also on the steering  committee of the needs assessment project,  is a member-at-large of the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC).  "I think the research is important because  lesbians are everywhere," says Hopkins.  "[I think] we'll be wanting to live in the  company of other women who are more  able to accept affection between women,  and discuss our lives with people who are  likely to have been there."  Hopkins also wanted to be involved  in the research to ensure that the needs of  women of colour are not overlooked in the  research process. "I bring [to the project] a  particular focus and point of view," says  Hopkins. "For example, I grew up in a  Black community, and therefore I bring a  different sense of what a community should  be like."  Through preliminary research, the research committee has found that conventional housing, support services and health  care services have failed to meet the needs  of aging lesbians in other cities across  Canada.  For example, in a comprehensive survey of Manitoba's lesbian and gay seniors  conducted by the Sum Quod Sum Foundation, 41% of aging lesbians who participated in the survey had reported incomes  at less than the poverty line. For many of  these women, their marginalization within  our society has resulted in a crisis of epic  proportions.  Donna Wilson, Executive Director of  The Centre (formerly the Gay and Lesbian  Centre) is encouraged that the project is  happening. "Research and action related to  the needs of aging lesbians is much  needed," says Wilson. "I am confident that  a community-based participatory action  approach will result in the identification of  needs and direction for action." As the Executive Director of The Centre I am very  aware of the invisibility of aging lesbian,  gay, transgendered and bisexual people  within our communities."  The needs assessment currently  underway in the Vancouver area will involve a broad-based distribution of surveys, and some follow-up interviews.  Project committee members are expecting  at least 100 responses to the survey and  hope to have survey results analyzed and  available for distribution in the fall of the  year 2000.  Emilie Adin, a Master's candidate at the UBC  School of Community and Regional Planning,  has undertaken work on the needs assessment  as part of her thesis research. For more information about the needs assessment, to have a  survey mailed to you, or to find out the location nearest you where you can pick up a survey, call (604) 684-9872 extension 2032.  SffiSf  World March of Women 2000  International Women's Day - March 8, 2000  t MARCH - 2000 women (and more) will encircle the  Federal Building at Library Square from noon until 1:00pm.  Gather at the Vancouver Art Gallery at 11:15am to march  to the Library Square.  t CELEBRATE - On the evening of March 8 women artists  will perform and we'll dance at:  "Crystal Ballroom" - Hilton - Vancouver Metrotown  Exit Metrotown Station - take the stairs to street level and  Central Boulevard. Turn left (west) one block  to McKay - go right on McKay to the Hilton.  Tickets are $10.00 (or whatever you can afford). Young  women are very welcome. This is a women's focussed event:  men are welcome if they accompany a female friend or  partner!  For more information contact:  at the BC Federation of Labour  Irma Mohammed  604-430-1421  2000 GOOD REASONS TO MARCH  Position Available  Full-Time Women's Outreach Worker  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre seeks a highly motivated individual and committed team player to provide HIV/AIDS outreach to  women in the Downtown Eastside (DTES).  □ Must be non-judgemental and wiling to work in stressful  environments.  n   Must have cross-cultural work experience and knowledge of issues  facing women in the DTES.  □ Excellent communication skills and knowledge of issues facing women  in the DTES req'd.  □ Full job description available.  Please submit resume and a one-page letter outlining  what you consider to be the issues facing women  in the Downtown Eastside to:  44 E. Cordova Street, Vancouver, BC, V6A1K2.  Deadline March 6.  First Nations and Aboriginal women are strongly encouraged to apply.  WOMEN OF THE WORLD, UNITE!  Greetings on International Women's Day and  the launch of Women's March 2000  Read the "RedFem Report" column in  People's Voice, Canada's leading revolutionary paper  New subscribers offer: $10 for six months  Send to People's Voice, 706 Clark Drive, Vancouver, V5L 3J1  JJ  KINESIS Feature   International Women's Day Global Women's Strike  Valuing all women's work  and all Women's Lives  by Amy Salmon  On March 8th, 2000, women from all  over the world will be taking to the streets.  This year's International Women's Day, like  many others, will be a time for women to  celebrate their power as women, mothers,  daughters, sisters, friends, lovers, workers.  Women's invaluable contributions towards  families, communities and the planet will  be made visible. It will be a time for women  of diverse ages, races, classes, religions,  sexual orientations, nationalities and abilities to join together and affirm their power  as agents of change. It is also a time to remember the victories that women have  fought for and a time to reflect on the work  that still needs to be done. On this IWD,  women are asked to join the Global Women's Strike.  Called nearly a year ago by the National Women's Council of Ireland, the International Wages for Housework Campaign and the International Women Count  Network for Housework, this strike focuses  on the enormous contribution women from  around the world make to every society  and economy. Although the market, businesses, families, places of worship, neigh  bourhoods, towns, cities and nations depend on women's work to function, most  of this work, which totals an estimated $11  trillion in value per year, is done for little  or no pay. Moreover, women's work is systematically devalued, and afforded little  appreciation or respect.  In joining the Global Women's Strike,  women are demanding that their work be  adequately acknowledged in a variety of  ways. While securing wages for housework  and global pay equity are important demands of the strike, organizers are calling  for additional measures to counteract the  continued marginalization and oppression  of women around the world. This includes  calls for the abolition of 'Third World  debts.' The heavy burden of the International Monetary Fund's programs have  been shouldered largely by impoverished  women and girls. In addition, women are  issuing demands for accessible, clean drinking water, ecologically sound technology  for households, affordable, accessible transportation, and, for protection from all forms  of violence.  However, the demands of the strike are  not limited to these alone. As the international coalition of women supporting the  strike grows rapidly, women from a variety of locations also add their demands.  Women of colour, refugee women and their  allies are raising their voices for an end to  racism that has exploited their labour and  kept them from high wage employment. In  addition, they are calling for rights to asylum, safety from violence, land rights and  changes to racist, sexist immigration policies. Lesbian women are striking for their  right to choose relationships and families  with other women, without economic, legal and social discrimination. Older  women living on fixed incomes are insisting they have decent pensions, reliable  medical care, the right to leisure and a social life with their peers. The International  Prostitutes Collective is supporting the  strike and calling for an abolition of prostitution laws and for legal, civil and economic rights for sex trade workers. They  also want protection from violence and the  right to form or join trade unions.  Women with disabilities will be striking to bring attention to the unavailability  or inadequacy of support services. They are  demanding recognition and remuneration  for the caring work that they provide to  their children, families and friends. This  work is often made invisible by ableist attitudes depicting women with disabilities  as 'invalid', 'incapable', or 'dependent'.  The Global Women's Strike calls for a  millennium which values all women's  work and all women's lives. In refraining  for one day from performing work inside  and outside the home, women the world  over will make their contributions visible.  When women stop, everything stops. On  March 8th, let us join and support the Global Women's Strike and make our demands  for equality, respect and justice be heard.  More information about the strike can be  found at:  http://www.womenstrike8m.server.com/  index.htm  Amy Salmon is a practicum student from UBC  Women's Studies working on unpaid work,  unemployment and underemployment.  Recognizing women's work:  The Status of UnpaidWork  by Ellen Woodsworth  Reprinted with permission, the following  is taken from a presentation given by Ellen  Woodsworth to the Women and Work panel at  the general assembly of the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women's (NAC)  annual general meeting, June 6,1998. A longer  version was previously printed in When  Women Count: Resource Manual on Unpaid  Work, produced by Mothers Are Women .  There is a very powerful women's liberation movement sweeping the world,  challenging the very ground that global  capital attempts to build upon. It is the  movement to recognize and value women's  unpaid work.  Women do two-thirds of the worlds  work, receive five percent of the worlds income, and own less than one percent of the  wealth. Like all other workers, women have  fought for more time for ourselves, more  recognition, more money and less work.  Our movement calls for a new economic order, and an end to global capitalism based on greed and concentrated  wealth, which uses the Gross Domestic  Product (GDP)* economic model. This  model excludes the environment and all  unpaid work,  showing economic growth  even as unemployment, poverty and women's work increase. Any economic model  that excludes ]  women's unpaid work precludes women's  liberation.  In 1978, the  Royal Commission on the Status of Women  produced a  document on  housewives saying if housework were included in GDP, it would be worth 40% of  the GDP.  Women do two-thirds  of the worlds work,  receive five percent of  the worlds income,  and own less than one  percent of the wealth.  In 1995, at Beijing, (International Conference on Women) Canada announced it  would include  questions about  household work  in its census.  All over the  world, women  have been organizing and  demanding recognition and  value for their  unpaid work,  giving more  strength to  women who  have been demanding more  pay for low  paid work.  In 1996,  Census Canada did include questions under household activities - though failed, un  fortunately, to call those activities work or  include them in the labour market section.  In November 1997, the Economic Gender Indicators (GEIs) document was released internationally - finally an economic  model to include unpaid work, and again  showing Canada to be leading the way.  Underneath all we are and do as  women is unpaid work. Our unwaged  work determines our roles, our status, our  income, the types of jobs we can get. Keeping unpaid work uncounted is a form of  slavery. Until we are all free, none of us  are free!  Ellen Woodsworth is working with the Vancouver Status of Women to examine the impact of the Canada Health and Social Transfer  on women in areas of unpaid work, unemployment and underemployment. She is also looking at the potential uses and impact of Canada's Economic Gender Equality Indicators. Feature  This IWD issue includes two stories about women and community  development. The women in these stories speak of overcoming different social barriers, including the negative stigma associated with being  a housewife' and the journey to becoming sober. In both stories, the  women do not mention theories of feminism or women's rights. There is  no discussion of the hip-hip-hooray for International Women's Day! These  women do not overtly talk about building self-esteem or the workings of  patriarchy. They do, however, share their experiences of arriving at a  place in their lives where they are fulfilling their personal goals by using their own resources and developing new skills. The common link in  both stories is how their experiences shifted their status in society.  Yvette Guigueno (see below), an active community volunteer and a  'stay-at-home' mom with three children, talks about how a group of moms  got together and made their chit-chatting ideas into a community book  store. Of course, childcare continues to be a juggling act. In the story,  "From Addiction to Passion" (see page 21), Kelly Mathieu shares her  views about the process of overcoming her addiction and her dissatisfaction with different unfulfilling jobs. She is now at a place where she  contributes a percentage of her business revenue to community organizations that supported her through her recovery.  These are not 'mega' merger stories. And with little sensationalism,  they definitely would not be considered headline news material. They  are, however, common stories about 'typical' women who face life's adversities. These women have found creative ways of overcoming their  positions as 'voiceless' women while making a difference in the community. These 'business-women' are in the business of changing their  lives. These are the often overlooked and unrecognized stories that  deepen the meaning of International Women's Day.  Moms on Maine:  Miners Bay Books  by Yvette Guigueno as told to  Jenn Lo   Jenn: What was your occupation before  the bookstore?  Yvette: Raising children. I haven't done  much work for money aside from one year  working at a local country inn cleaning bedrooms. I've facilitated some parenting  classes for money and done a little bit of  work with recycling, but really nothing  much.  Jenn: Can you describe a bit of the work  that you've done that has been unpaid?  Yvette: Raising my kids. I'm volunteering at their school. I started a preschool up  about four years ago. I was the chair of that.  Jenn: Why did you decide to open a bookstore?  Yvette: Actually, it wasn't my idea. It  was originally Emily's—a young woman  with two young children. Emily and I met  through the preschool which we started  about four years ago. The preschool kept  itself going and it actually provided a part-  time income for one woman on the Island  for these years.  Emily had been looking for ideas for a  business or a co-op for a couple of years.  She approached another woman and they  brainstormed and thought a bookstore-  internet cafe would be a good idea. They  then invited me and another woman  Mariam to join them. With the other two  women, we sort of got to know each other  in the preschool. So I don't credit the preschool with it, but it definitely brought us  together.  Jenn: So the initial idea started with one  woman speaking to another woman and then  they invited you into the idea?  Yvette: They invited me and another  women, so there were four [women]. The  two latecomers [Yvette and Mariam] took  over the idea.  Jenn: Sounds like you and your business  partner have other responsibilities like mothering. How did that impact you in terms of  opening the business?  Yvette:Well, it took us about four  months to renovate the space, figure things  out, build shelves and all that. It was diffi  cult to find large blocks of time to do anything without kids. I would go hammer  nails and pave after the kids were in bed  almost every night last summer. Sometimes  we'd bring our kids with us when we were  doing the renovating.  It's been a challenge. My business partner Mariam has one child so we trade  [childcare] a lot, and only one of us works  at the bookstore at a time. We just sort of  do the best we can. In the summer it's going to be more challenging because we'll  be open more hours. My oldest child is old  enough to babysit and my partner works  at home. So although he's not really available for childcare, he is at home. But  childcare is always a problem.  Jenn: How is sharing the childcare with  your business partner working out for you  right now?  Yvette: It works out okay, but it's never  settled. You're always looking or making  arrangements. You do tend to have [more]  options living in a small community because you know everyone and you feel  comfortable asking people to help you out  more than you might in the city.  Jenn: How big is Maine?  Yvette: There are about 900 people who  live here full-time and there are probably  three times that many in the summer.  Jenn: Earlier, you mentioned that you  would start renovating the bookstore after you  put the kids to sleep. Could you describe what  a typical day was like for you last summer?  Yvette: Okay. I would probably go  down there in the morning with one or two  of my kids for a couple of hours and then I  would come home or take them to the  beach and hang out for the rest of the afternoon. After I put them to bed, I'd go down  again at maybe 7:30pm and stay until about  11:00pm. Sometimes I'd go down three  times a day.  Basically, I'd probably spend three  hours in the evening and two hours earlier  in the day. Not every day. All days were  different. Somedays I just couldn't get  down at all because my partner Terry was  off Island, etc.  It took us a long time to renovate the  bookstore, because we couldn't be down  there for eight hours every day. Also, because we're [the bookstore] connected to a  really busy restaurant/pub, we couldn't  use any power tools for most of the day.  We had to do things really quietly, and often we could only use power tools between  9-llam in the morning.  Jenn: What kind of renovating did you  and your partner do?  Yvette: The part of the building that  we're using was built between 1875-1890  and it was really run down. There was a  deck off our door that was falling to the  ground so we hired someone to jack it up  and put a few beams to support it.  We hired someone to do electrical work  and someone to cut open a space between  two small rooms. Basically we did the rest.  We put all the trims on, fixed parts of the  deck and the stairs. We plastered, stripped  wallpaper and painted. We also built the  bookshelves and decorated.  Jenn: How did you know what to do and  how to start a business?  Yvette: We didn't. We did some research and we did a business plan. We did  see BOOKS page 25  MARCH 2000 Q^ woman • astree • magyar • aurat^p  International  Women's Day  he women of the Hospital Employees' Union send  greetings to our sisters everywhere as we all celebrate International Womens Day, March 8, 2000.  We look forward to joining hundreds of thousands of  women around the globe as we organize, educate,  mobilize, lobby, write, sing, dance and march in World  March of Women 2000 local, regional, national and  international events and activities, beginning March 8 and  continuing through to October 17.  We wholeheartedly support the Canadian demands:  1. Recognizing that women and children make up 70  per cent of people living in poverty in  Canada and around the world, we  urge the governments at all levels  in Canada to adopt a legal framework and strategies aimed at  eliminating women's poverty  2. Recognizing that violence against  women in all forms is a  violation of human rights,  we urge the government  and people of Canada to  put in place policies and  programs to end all  forms of violence  against women.  ^jr   kvinna • vrou • smulhats • frau  The Hospital Employees' Union is the B.C. Health Services Division of the Canadian Union of Public Employees tWD CakepiDefi ©f eve^TS  BBifnsy  GOLyiiHillgOA  March 4  The Canadian Union of Public Employees, Local 728Women's Committee  Women are invited to Celebrate International Women's Day. Enjoy refreshments,  song & conversation. Children welcome.  Bring a friend. FREE  1-3pm, School District 36,  Conference Centre, Room 5,  9260-140th St. Surrey.  Call (604) 581-9381 (days) or  (604) 584-3642 (evenings)  March 5  IWD Celebration  Join the Richmond Women's Resource  Centre to celebrate International Women's Day at the Richmond Art Gallery,  7700 Minoru Gate. Musical performance  by Silk Road, an Internationally acclaimed women's folk music group and  author Larissa Lai will read from her  book 'When Fox was a Thousand".  An Exhibition About Mothering  Victoria Art Gallery.  For more info call (250) 384-4101.  Lesbian, Transgendered, and Bisexual  Women's Health Day  9:30am-3:30pm at the Vancouver Native  Education Centre, 285 E. 5th Ave, Vancouver. FREE registration at (604) 684-5307.  March 7  Women's Ways ofWorking  Panel discussion  7:30-9:30pm, Vancouver Central Library,  Georgia & Robson.  Come out for this FREE event.  March 8  Circle the Feds  Launch the World March of Women 2000  by joining 2000 women (and more) to encircle the Federal building at Library  Square :Noon-1pm.  Gather beforehand at the Vancouver Art  Gallery and Burrard Street Station at  11:15am. For more info call (604) 255-  3998. FREE  World March Evening Celebration  Women and their partners are welcome  to come celebrate and dance! This is a  women's focussed event. Men are welcome if they accompany a female friend  or partner!  Open @ 7pm, Hilton Hotel, Metrotown.  Tix $10 (or whatever you can afford).  For more info call (604) 255-3998.  Celebrate all the Unpaid Work of Women  on International Women's Day  Come for Tea and Cake!  3-5pm, 509 E. Hastings St.  For more info call the Vancouver Status of  Women at (604) 255-6554 or Breaking the  Silence Campaign at (604) 682-3269.  Bus tickets and childcare available.  FREE  TaxingTimes For Women:The Gendered  Impact of Funding Social Programs  Through theTax system  Law Professor Claire Young  7:30pm, Capilano College  Lecture Theatre, Cedar Building, Rm 148.  For more info call (604) 985-0067.  FREE  MARCH 2000  Forum on Afghan women  There will be a forum focusing on the living conditions of Afghan women.Time and  date still to be announced.  For more info call (604) 255-5499.  March 8  Action Plan  Gather at the public are in front of the  Provincial Building  12 noon. Join everyone on a march to City  Hall, then to the Federal Building at 222  Victoria St. and finish with a rally at 310  Ward St.  For more info contact Hannah Hadikein,  NAC representative at (250) 352-3609.  March 9  When Physical Injury is Social Injury  Dr.Sarah Jain  12:30-2pm, Centre for Feminist Legal  Studies, Rm 157  1822 East Mall, Faculty of Law, UBC  For more info call (604) 822-6523.  March 11  IWD: An Evening of Performing Artists  Original works by vocalists, dancers, harpists and actors.  7:30pm, University Hill Congregation  Epiphany Chapel  6050 Chancellor Blvd, UBC.  For more info call (604) 224-3384.  The Purple Rose Campaign Concert  Sponsored by:  The Fillipino Women's Centre  A fundraising concert featuring exciting artists in celebration of I WD. Tickets $10 each.  7:30pm, Michael J. Fox Theatre, UBC.  For more info call (604) 215-1103.  March 14  Violence against women, substance use,  and child welfare  A half day forum of panel speakers and  discussion exploring the links between violence against women, substance misuse/  addictions, mental health, and child welfare. 8:00 - 12:00 noon, Justice Institute  of BC, 715 McBride Blvd, New Westminster. $15, includes coffee and muffin reception. Contact Jeanette at Atira Transition House Society 531 -9100 for more info.  March 14-15  Menopositive!  All female musical band.  Capilano College Performing Arts Centre.  For more info call (604) 990-7810.  March 16  Women and Economics  Marilyn Waring, world-renowned feminist,  political economist and author talks on  what's valued and what's missing in our  economic systems.  12:30am-1:30 pm  Simon Fraser University Burnaby Campus  Halpern Centre, Room 126.  For more info call (604) 801-5121.  FREE  The Environment  Dr. Marilyn Waring speaks about environmental issues  7pm, Robson Square Conference Centre,  Judge McGill Theatre.  For more info call (604) 801-5121.  FREE  Women and Economics  Dr. Marilyn Waring as guest speaker.  12:30am -1:30pm  Simon Fraser University  Burnaby Campus, Halpern Centre,  Rm 126.  For more info call (604) 801-5121.  FREE  March 17  Conflict Management Skills for Women  A workshop sponsored by Skillpath  Seminars.  For more info call 1 -800-873-7545.  March 2-5  Designing Our Future: Women's Learning, Education and Training in Canada  2000 and Beyond.  A national congress on women's learning,  prefaced by a series of on-line discussions.  Toronto, Ontario.  For more info call (416) 599 - 2854 or  visit www.nald-ca/cclow.htm  March 2-4  Forum des Femmes francophone du 3e  millenaire  For more info visit www. ffq.qc.ca  March 3-5  Maiden, Mother, Crone, Goddess and IWD  Festival  10,000 women expected to participate in  24hr dance, drama, and musical performances, panel discussions, and workshops.  Toronto, Ontario.  For more info visit www.feminist.org  March 8  World Literacy of Canada: IWD celebration  Authors Jane Jacobs, Barbara Gowdy,  Lilian Nattel and Sonja Smits read from  their latest works. Royal Ontario Museum,  Toronto, Ontario.  For more info visit www.nald.ca/wlc.htm  March 8  Potluck Supper  Open to all women for companionship and  inspiration.  Lotsa music.  6pm, Wilmot United Church Hall  Fredericton, New Brunswick.  For more info e-mail rinaa@unb.ca  March 13  Sex, Lies and Global Economics:Tackling  the Growing Gap  Dr. Marilyn Waring speaks on the growing  gap between rich, poor, the increasing  power of corporations and the need for  alternatives. Ontario Institute for Studies  in Education, Toronto Ontario.  For more info, contact the Ontario Institute  for Studies in Education.  March 24  International Women's Day Banquet  Come and celebrate the power of sisterhood and the World March of Women. A  Chinese banquet will be hosted by the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women  7pm, Bright Pearl Restaurant  346 Spadina Ave., Toronto, Ontario.  There is a limited number of seats.  For more info call (416) 932-1718, ext. 22.  nWTEIRMMn@)W^L  February 7-March 3  Women's Status: Vision and Reality -  Bridging the East and theWest  Hosted by the Trained Nurses Association  of India in collaboration with  McMaster University.  Conference in New Dehli, India.  For more info visit www.handa-travel.com/  iwc.del.htmln  Women's Global Strike  Join the international global women's strike  for a millenium which values all women's  work and all women's lives.  For more info visit  womenstrike8m.server101 .com  March 10-12  Euroconference: women, violence, and  reconciliation  Dublin, Ireland.  For more info e-mail wscentre@tcd.ie  March 31-April 2  Feminist Expo forWomen's  Empowerment: Celebration of women's  accomplishments and looking at issues  of our time.  Baltimore, MD. U.S.A.  For more info visit www.feminist.org or call  (323) 651-0495 (LA, Calif) or (703) 522-  2214 (Wash, DC).  i cWtf WM®Wffln fcpfS W  to all Kinesis readers from  Sounds & Fu  runes  \ Celebrating 10 years in the community!  ■ Sat March 11:  !  HOUSE A FIRE  ■ concert with Rhiannon, Jami Sieber and special guests Julie Wolf (from Ani Di  a Franmco band) and percussionist Michaelle Goerletz. "A lush and fiery evening of  ■ collaborative music and spoken word that will knock your socks off!".  a Norman Rothstein Theatre, 941 W. 41st Ave (JCC). Ticket $16 - $21  ■ sliding scale at Women in Print, Little Sisters, Urban Empire.  ■ Saturday March 18:  ,  CELEBRATING THE GODDESS 2000:  ■ A day and evening of artisans' market, performance, celebration.: Heritage Hall,  J 3102 Main St. 11 - 5 pm.Door donation $ 2 - 5. Night time performance starts at 8  ■ PM. Line up/Tickets TBA. Vendors and performers  ' (theatre, poetry, dance, etc) contact Sounds & Furies 253-7189 for more informa-  ■ tion.  KINESIS ]JT)   JVWUh   ii 111 Hil 71 VID Til -9 77;  ^  As I think of IWD, I try to piece  together my own Afghan history and  how it relates to the present day situation for many Afghan women. I've  since realized that this is a far more  complicated task than I could have  ever imagined.  My father was born in Kabul, Afghanistan's capital city (my mother is  American), in 1940. At the time, King  Zahir Shah was in power and Af  ghanistan was still very much locked  into a feudal land-based system. But  there was generally peace. Afghanistan has always been a mosaic of  many different ethnic groups includ  ing nomadic peoples. Their independent and de-centralized societies al  lowed them some measure of autonomy and ensured protection of  their cultural roots. Over the course  of the next few decades, Afghanistan,  and Kabul in particular, began to see  an era of 'modernization'.  The 1960s brought among other  things, western clothing and a general  sense that women were now contributing throughout more sectors of society. In 1964, a Constitution was  passed legislating the equality of  women and men under a secular legal system. Previously, the legal system had been governed by Islamic  Shari'a Law, to be interpreted by the  authorities. However, it further stated  that Islam would remain the sacred religion of Afghanistan. Some funda  mentalist leaders saw the equalizing  of women and men and the secular  state as an onslaught of westernization and contrary to Islam. At one  point, fundamentalists attacked a  girl's school, a women's public bath  and a cinema as symbols of 'modernization'. There has always been a level  of anti-western sentiment among  some devout Muslims—and rightly so  when we consider the patriarchal exploitation of women's sexuality in the  West. However, this sentiment has  never been equated to terrorizing  women, as it now occurs in Afghanistan.  by Habiba as told to Georgina Farah  The Revolutionary Afghan Women's Association is a non-profit feminist organization  that has been fighting the oppressive regime of  the Taliban and various other warring groups  in Afghanistan. RAWA is over thirty years old  and will be holding an IWD forum on Afghan  women. Habiba is an Afghan women living in  Pakistan and is a member of RAWA.  Georgina: I'd like to start with the withdrawal of the Soviet Union, because so much  of what we see today, began with this war.  When the Soviets retreated, the Mujahideen  factions began to fight amongst themselves for  power. What should the international community's response have been in terms of pushing  the Soviets out and preventing in-fighting of  thejehadi (thejehadi are thefundalentalist factions that emerged from the mujahideen)?  Habiba: When the USSR occupied Afghanistan in the 1980's, the CIA pumped  billions of dollars into Pakistan to support  fundamentalist militia forces called  Mujahideen. An anti-Russian resistance  war erupted throughout the country, which  led to the Soviet withdrawal in 1989. When  the puppet regime collapsed inApril 1992,  the fundamentalists took power and different factions fell into civil war.  /^(S-  ^   g/<^>£>£l/  During the 1970s, Afghanistan  began to strengthen its rapport with  the Soviet Union—a fatal mistake, as  it turned out. In power, was the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan  (PDPA) which had become dependent, in many respects, on the superpower. During this time, the communist party (PDPA under tight KGB  direction) worked hard to eradicate  any opponents of its regime. As a  growing movement formed against  the PDPA, arrests and disappearances  became the norm. Finally, the Kremlin  decided to invade Afghanistan. Just  before the Russians invaded, my  grandmother (my direct family had  left by this time) was able to escape  to Britain, but not before one of our  cousins had 'disappeared'.  Throughout the 10 year war, 2  million people were killed and over  6 million people were displaced as  refugees. The Afghans declared the  secular invasion as an attack on Islam  and announced a 'Holy War' known  as jihad. The freedom fighters of this  war were called the 'mujahideen' and  were often sensationalized by inter  national media. The US, Iran, Saudi  Arabia and many other countries  poured money and weapons into the  mujahideen. Upon questioning, one  US official said they supported one of  the most fanatical parties because "fanatics fight better". The Soviets eventually withdrew in 1989, but left in  their wake over 10 million landmines  and unspeakable atrocities.  After the withdrawal, the  mujahideen began to fight one another for control. The US and Pakistan  continued to back the most fanatical  parties. A group of trained mercenaries waving the flag of Islam emerged  from the mujuhideen in-fighting and  took control of Afghanistan. This  group, known as the Taliban is without question, the most violent, anti-  women group yet. It has been implied  that they receive covert backing from  the US and from Pakistan. The instability of the Taliban, their fierce drive  to eliminate anything 'un-Islamic' (a  threat to the Soviet sphere of influence) and the potential for an oil pipeline may be keeping the US interested  in supporting them. Of course, the US  After the fall of the Soviet puppet regime of Najib (leader), the fundamentalist  groups invaded Kabul and other cities and  committed such heinous crimes, that were  absolutely unprecedented in our history.  France, Iran, Pakistan, Turkey, Russia, the  Central Asian republics and Saudi Arabia.  Georgina:    How and why did the Taliban  gain enough support to 'conquer' most of Af-  The UN, US and other Western powers not  only didn't care about the blood bath inAf-  ghanistan, but they instead tried to fish in  the troubled waters of our country by arming and financing their favorite, treacherous, fundamentalist bands. All bands were  being funded by the CIA during and after  the resistance war. Presently, they are still  enjoying support from the US, as well as,  ghanistan? Who were the international and  internal players that supported their rise?  Habiba: With the direct interference of  ex-interior minister of Pakistan, Naseerulah  Baber, religious students (Taliban), were  trained as religious mercenaries in Pakistan.  They were armed and sent to Kandahar in  1994. The Taliban began their activities with  anti-jehadi slogans and support for King  claims it is against terrorism but will  not openly recognize the Taliban because they harbour the notorious terrorist, Osama bin Laden. The fact that  women are experiencing the worst  atrocities recorded in Afghan history  is of little consequence.  Women in Afghanistan cannot be  seen without the fully veiling 'burqa',  be heard with shoes 'that make  sounds', nor be seen in their homes  (windows are painted over). They are  routinely beaten and killed if they  stray from the strict codes of the  Taliban. In fact, the Taliban went so  far as to create a Ministry of Vice and  Virtue to regulate the behaviour of the  people. There are hundreds of thousands of widows who are forced to  beg because they are no longer allowed to work and their husbands (income generators) have been killed.  Millions of refugees are still in camps  living under horrible conditions. Most  of my family has been able to escape  Afghanistan, but there are those that  we have lost contact with and can only  pray for their safety, if they are still  alive.  The only possible conclusion I  can make about the madness in Afghanistan is rooted in a common  theme all over the world: fanatical  patriarchies. Their oppressive regime  could have been disguised under  Christianity or any other religion. The  equality of women under Islam has  been a contentious point for many, but  our first world eyes don't often allow  us to see the many women who are  happy and empowered. The Islamic  faith has nothing to do with the  Taliban. It is they who are the secular,  violent hypocrites.  Source: Holywar, Unholy Victory by  Kurt Lohbeck, 1993.   Zahir [Afghanistan's King from 1933-1973].  People innocently believed them.  Soon they seized most of the provinces  from the jehadis, captured Kabul in September 1996, then Mazar-e-Sharif and some  northern areas. Their foreign masters imagined they had achieved their goals.  Thereupon, they increased their monetary  and military support to the Taliban.  Georgina: tn ihe west, terrorism is always linked to Islamic fundamentalists. I find  Islam to be an easy target for the true crimes of  violence and oppression. What is your view of  the West's scapegoating of Islam?  Habiba: Yes, it is a grave 'blinder' that  the West links terrorism and Islam without  differentiating between the fundamentalist  rulers from the people and anti-fundamentalist forces. It is because of this ridiculous  hostile approach that the West fuels an anti-  West, religious outrage. Needless to say, the  anti-democratic and criminal rulers will  gain more than lose. The West must not mix  up a handful of fundamentalists with the  vast majority of Muslim nations who are  resisting and opposing their oppressive  fundamentalist regimes. It is also regarded  as a hypocrisy of the West, that on the one  hand, it poses as 'anti-fundamentalist' and  'anti-terrorist', but on the other hand col  laborates with some of the most oppressive  and fascist fundamentalists regimes like  Iran, Saudi Arabia, Afghanistan, Sudan etc.  This puts a big question mark to the anti-  fundamentalist rhetoric of the West.  Georgina:-^ there UN sanctions presently on Afghanistan? How do they affect  women? RAWA has suggested that the UN  should be sanctioning the countries that are  supplying money and weapons to the Taliban  and thejehadi. Do you think that there are any  effective forms of sanctioning that will stop the  flow of arms, but not harm women and children in other countries?  Habiba: Yes, there are UN sanctions  on Afghanistan, but once again, we emphatically want the UN to impose, first and  foremost, strict sanctions on the countries  supplying money and arms to the Taliban  and the jehadis. These countries must be  isolated and exposed as traders of death.  We are sure that if the big powers stop their  double-dealing, in terms of collaborating  with their blue-eyed fundamentalists, then  the UN [sanctions] will definitely succeed  without harming much women and children in the targeted  countries. If the UN  really DESIRES to  move according to  the wishes of the oppressed people of  Afghanistan, then  RAWA will be glad  to submit its own  detailed proposal in  this regard.  Georgina: Why  do you think the UN  has done virtually  nothing to stop the  gross Habiban rights  violations in Afghanistan?  Habiba: The UN has always been engaged in reconciling and forging [bonds]  among the criminal, warring factions without paying the least attention to the democratic-minded forces in the country. Nor  does it care about the consequences of its  efforts. RAWA has always asked that since  the fundamentalists' bands have committed so many crimes when divided, what  will happen when they come to an agreement and act 'hand in glove'?  What these 'respectable', world bodies do not give a second thought to, is their  pandering to a bunch of misogynist, democracy-hating, barbarian criminals (the  Afghan fundamentalist "leaders").  For all intents and purposes, they are  putting our people under the butchers'  knives so that fundamentalists can 'jointly'  and 'in consensus' slash and hack the Afghan people's political, social, economic,  material and spiritual identity and existence.  We demand to know why the United  Nations and other world bodies insist on  delivering the destiny of our people into  the hands of fundamentalist murderers.  Why is there no recognition of the hatred  and revulsion the Afghan people feel toward the fundamentalist entities? Why,  also, is there no recognition of the fettered  struggles and gagged voices of pro-democracy forces like RAWA?  Georgina: RAWA has stated that it views  King Zahir Shah as the natural leader of Afghanistan at this time because the people sup  port him. What kind of government stru  lure would you like to see? RAWA has mei  Honed the Loya Jirga - would the Loya Jir^  (council of national representatives) be a  elected body which ministers would com  from?  Habiba- ^e are not a*au royalist  We prefer Zahir Shah to the fundamen  talists, but not because he is an ideal  personality. We prefer him if we have  to make a choice between bad (Zahir  Shah) and worse (the fundamentalists).  We want an elected government  based on democratic values, a secular government which maintains   RaTy-ww^T^^1!!^^^^"^^^^TM"  6   ,    ■ , r       , L   "awa organizes literacy course for womei  women s rights and a government ' " w",,ien-  that will not reconcile with any brand  of fundamentalists.  Loya Jirga is an old traditional body  which is usually called at a time of national  crisis. Although it is not a democratically-  elected assembly and has been exploited by  previous rulers to legitimize their despotic  regions, it is still regarded as a respectable  body by our people. The Loya Jirga could  .Vtesf rrwsf  nrcsfcf frrc cnc!  im the vast  nations who a  wa (utitioruan fcrff:  make some important decisions but ministers would not necessarily be elected from  it.  Georgina: On your website, under hejab  (veil), RAWA states that wearing the veil is a  cultural issue and not a  religious one. Could you  expand on this a bit?  Habiba: The fundamentalists try to portray hejab as a 100% religious issue and intimi-  date the women  through their sword of  Shariah (Islamic Law).  We regard it as a cultural matter; a woman  cannot be called an  "anti-Islam" for not  wearing [a veil]. Hejab  is also a tool in the  hands of the Taliban  and their jehadi brothers to suppress and humiliate us in the name  of religion. We must resist it as much as we can.  Georgina: What problems do women in  refugee camps face?  Habiba: When our people, especially  women, immigrate to Pakistan, it really  means out of the fire, into the mire.  In the camps, there are fundamentalists who committ crimes and somehow  have influence. There are no health and  education facilities. We don't even have  clean water to drink and enough food to  eat. We don't have electricity. Women in  refugee camps find themselves in prisons;  they have to work hard to earn a living. The  lives of the new refugees are especially terrible. They don't even have mud (homes)  to live in. In Peshawar, you find thousands  of Afghan women and children beggars in  the streets. Among them, there are educated  women who find no  |     other way but to beg.  Also, a large number of  Afghan widows have  been forced into prostitution.  Most refugee camps  don't have any school for  children. In the camps  where fundamentalists  have influence, girls have  been banned from going  to school. In the few  schools, only religious  subjects are taught and  the level of education is  low.  In the refugee camps the women are at  least not in constant fear of bombing, abduction, rape, beatings etc. Therefore, they  *ir  Kabul's ophaned girls  prefer the camp over going back to Afghanistan.  It is not possible to describe the problems our women face in refugee camps in  a few sentences. They face many immeasurable problems, just as our women in Afghanistan do.  Over the last 20 years, international aid  for Afghan refugees in Pakistan has been  stolen away by the religious parties. This  has forced millions of refugees to live un  der inHabibane and miserable conditions.  The leaders and managers of the  treachorous Peshawar-based parties made  luxurious lives for themselves while totally  disregarding the educational, economic  and health needs of the refugees.  Georgina: What programs are in place  to re-build society?  Habiba- Until there is peace and even  a half-hearted democratic government in  Afghanistan, our badly bothered society  cannot be reconstructed. UN organizations  and NGOs are not able to implement their  aid plans in agriculture, income generation,  healthcare, water supply, education, mine  detection and clearance, shelter etc. The  Taliban are so bestial and unbridled that  thev have even credited the killing of peo-  ple'to the UN and NGOs!  Georgina: How can women in Canada  help women in Afghanistan and surrounding  refugee camps?  Habiba: It is a bitter reality that there  are many 'so-called' NGOs, who in the  name of being 'neutral' and 'non-political'  accumulate money for different sources  and inflate their own pockets. Knowing  there is an inhumane regime in Afghanistan, women in Canada must do their best  to help our women DIRECTLY (through  refugee sponsorship)  or through experienced, time-tested,  anti-fundamentalist  and honest women's  organizations like  RAWA.  We would also  like to take the opportunity to urge our Canadian, justice-loving  sisters to raise their  voices against the  bloody fundamentalists' rule in Afghanistan. Do not allow  your government to  engage with the killers  and rapists of our people. The fundamentalists are trying to eliminate RAWA - the only impressive feminist  and anti-fundamentalist voice of Afghan  women- once and for all. We alert our Canadian sisters and ask you to help us to prevent the sinister scheme altogether.  Information about RAWA can be found at  http://www.rawa.org.  photo courtesy of RAWA Feature  Let it be known:  Scopin' out a zine  by Katja Cronauer as told to Lisa  Wulwick   The word 'zine' is derived from  fanzines. The term dates back to the science  fiction fanzines that were produced in the  1930s and 40s. These fanzines were created  to provide a venue for readers to easily contact one another and discuss science fiction  material. Now, in the year 2000, an immense underground zine culture exists.  Historically, women have had limited  access to different forms of communication  and therefore to power. Few mainstream  avenues exist for women to articulate their  injustices and inequalities. Zines are an  arena of expression for many marginalized  populations. Many women and girls are  now making use of this grassroots form of  publishing.  Let It Be Known is a zine that publishes  the different experiences of women activists. The following is an interview that I had  with Katya Cronauer, one of the creators of  Let It Be Known.  Lisa: When was this zine created?  Katja: We decided to make Let It Be  Known in December 1997 and sent out calls  for contributions. We were really happy  with how it turned out and got really positive feedback, so we were inspired to put  out another one.  We are hoping that we will have our  second issue out for International Women's  Day on March 8. We would also like to produce a third issue in the near future and  welcome contributions by women activists  about their experiences (good and bad),  what they've done and what they've  learned.  Lisa: What was the inspiration for Let  It Be Known?  Katja: Before the zine was put out we  were involved with organizing against the  APEC summit which took place in November 1997 at the University of British Columbia. There was a lot of creativity and energy in the group, but there were also a lot  of internal problems. One of the problems  was gender inequality and certain men,  who were found to be dominating the  group.  At the time of APEC in Vancouver, we  unfortunately did not discuss group proc  esses thoroughly, as we were too caught up  in the organizational efforts of trying to mobilize people to rally against APEC. After  the summit we wanted to address these issues and share our experience with other  activists, particularly because we felt that  what we had experienced was not uncommon amongst other activist groups.  We had heard other women speak of  these same difficulties and we felt that it  would be good to exchange experiences and  to leam new methods on how to create positive group dynamics. I  find that while many  activists are critical of  the system, they are often not quite as willing  to be self-critical.  I view the zine as  a way for both women  and men to change  their perception and  treatment of women  activists. Sharing our  stories gives us  strength. I hope that  this will also be an inspiration for women to  continue their work,  share their knowledge,  support and talk to  each other.  Lisa: I noticed that  the range of backgrounds of women for  your last issue was  fairly wide, including  a First Nations woman, anarcho-feminist  groups in eastern Europe, a Black lesbian, a  formerly homeless woman, and many  more. What are your means of outreach for  [story] contributions?  Katja: Mostly e-mail. We realize, however, that with e-mail we only reach a very  small percentage of women activists in this  world. Therefore, we distribute flyers with  calls for contributions and we snail-mail flyers to organizations in other countries. So  far the latter has been rather limited due to  our small budget. We hope to be able to send  out more flyers in the future.  Lisa: What drew me to your zine was  how you wrote about your experiences  I find that while  many activists  are critical of  the system,  they are often  not quite as  willing to be  self-critical.  within your group that was organizing  against APEC. I have been in many activist groups that have had difficulties with  group processes and have felt the effects  of gender discrimination. I think that sometimes groups will feel that, "oh we're progressive so obviously we can't be sexist,  racist, homophobic, etc."  Katja: I definitely see that problem  within a lot of activist groups. Another reason we decided to create the zine was to  illustrate the variety of issues that women  activists are involved  in. Once in a while, you  read about it in various  magazines, but we  wanted to create a  compilation of women's stories as women  choose to relate them,  without editing or  choosing particular  stories over others.  If I had seen what  other women were doing when I became active, it might have prepared me more for the  problems that I have  faced. [It would have]  helped me to be better  equipped on how to  deal with these issues.  Lisa: I agree. It is  really necessary to create a space to hear  about what women activists are doing and to see the variety of  issues that women are involved in. I think  a lot of stereotypes exist about what it  means to be a woman activist.  What are some of the differences that  you have noticed between working within  mixed gender groups and women-only  groups?  Katja: I don't want to generalize, but  I often find that women's groups are more  inclusive in regards to group dynamics;  however, I have been in all-women groups  where certain women have dominated the  discussion.  Lisa: How can a group work on creating better internal dynamics?  Katja: It is important to be inclusive  and to address new people when they come  into the group. One should keep an eye on  the amount of time that people take when  speaking, as well as the manner in which  they are speaking.  It is also important to find ways to validate all levels of activism, and not just  praise those people who have the ability to  devote more time to an issue. I think groups  just need to make more time to talk about  process.  We have all internalized a lot of the values promoted by the system we live in. It  will obviously take an effort for us to 'unlearn' certain behaviours and act according to the values that we believe in.  Lisa: Is it important that Let It Be  Known be in a zine format?  Katja: I like the zine format for a couple of reasons. The zine is anti-copyrighted  in its entirety. We can send it to various  places and people are free to copy it. This  way more women and men will be able to  read our zine.  The zine is also available on the Internet at www.cs.ubc.ca/spider/cronauer/  zine/index.html. Zines can be purchased  through donation or by participating in a  zine swap. To receive a zine or to contribute a piece: email: letknown@vcn.bc.ca or  fax, attn: LET IT BE KNOWN c/o SEC (604)  822-9019 or post: LET IT BE KNOWN c/o  SEC, SUB.  LET IT BE KNOWN issue #1 is a zine  that compiles the varied experiences of women  activists. It contains comics,poems, interviews  and personal accounts by women in North  America and Europe. Responsible for the creation of this zine are three women who live in  Vancouver and Toronto. One of these women  is Katja Cronauer; she can be reached at 6138  Student Union Blvd, Vancouver BC, Canada.  Lisa Wulwick is a Vancouver based writer who  is currently involved with many different activist organizations.  \JA/       Book&  .     W     w^ Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6E 1N4  (604) 669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  from  DR. PENNY THOMPSON'S  DENTAL PRACTICE  • Dentistry in the Heart of the Community •  Phone: 251 -1322 Fax: 251 -1232  Call Us ... Be a Special Patient  Or drop by at 1 -1701 Grant Street (Commercial Drive), Vancouver  Advertisement paid by Dr. Penny J. Thompson, Inc.  KINESIS Feature  Profitable shame:  Exposing the seedy  underbelly of Seventeen  Magazine  by Karen-Marie Woods  For the past few years, I have been  waiting for an excuse to 'lay into' the glossy  shame-promoting pages of Seventeen  Magazine. After glancing through the December 1999 issue, I could no longer resist  such an opportunity.  Seventeen Magazine targets young  women who are western, middle class,  Caucasian, and heterosexual. The December 1999 issue focuses on the commercial  aspects of the Christmas season. Of the 222  pages, a staggering 118 are devoted to full-  page advertisements. In addition, 25 half-  page ads, as well as incognito ads that appear in the guise of articles present themselves to readers. For example, a section on  the health benefits of meditation suggests  several brands of aromatherapy candles  (prices included). Did I mention subtlety is  not a virtue of Seventeen???  My fascination with teen magazineslies  in the devious mechanisms behind them.  From an economic perspective, the teen  magazine phenomenon can be expressed  as a disturbing equation: shame + women  = cold hard cash. Buy Seventeen Magazine  and you can be pretty! You can be cool! You  can be better! Most important, you will  come closer to the 'feminine ideal'. Women  with eating disorders, young girls who often hate themselves and don't know why  these individuals are the casualties of the  profitable war against women's bodies.  To make matters worse, as teen magazines are confronted with these issues they  opt for superficial responses. Now more  : then ever, they are coupled with confusing  and contradictory messages as they claim  to address the very negative stereotypes  they promote. The December issue of Seventeen exemplifies this.  As if to fight mounting criticism that  Seventeen promotes anorexic and bulimic  behaviors, the December edition features  an article on art therapy addressing this  very serious issue. Unfortunately this is a  token gesture. Pages later, an article entitled, "Guilty Pleasures," contains the following subheadings: "They're disgusting.  They're ridiculous. They're secret. And  they're fun." Surprise, surprise, most of the  'guilty pleasures' pertain to eating.  Ads reflect similar trends as waif-like  models hock slogans. An advertisement for  lip balm reads, "Five delicious flavors. Zero  calories." Wow, we all better pay more attention to what we use to moisten our lips!  But wait! Seventeen doesn't stop at  shaming eating. Loads of other natural  body processes are targeted as well! Don't  forget menstruation and flatulence! An advertisement for 'Always' menstrual pads  stresses the need to hide menstruation and  the importance of having a small figure. A  young women at a rock concert is depicted  as thinking,  ...I'm wearing the biggest pad  known to woman. This thing  would be more useful as insoles  for my shoes so I could get a better  view of Jeffy, my fave New Guy.  Oh no! What if he pulls me up on  stage? He'll be totally turned off by  my bubble butt.  There's more! Under the section  "Trauma-rama," with the subheading  "Crime and punishment", a reader submits  a paragraph entitled "Miss Manners." The  reader discusses her experience at a private  school when she accidentally passes gas in  class. The teacher demands that she apolo  gize to the class. When the girl refuses, she  is penalized with a detention and a letter  to be sent home to her parents. Flatulence,  punishable by detention? Calorie free lip  balm? Pad-induced bubble butt anxiety?  Eating-ridiculous? In all of these analogies,  the biological processes of eating, menstruating, and flatulence are given horrible connotations. By simply existing as biological  beings, women appear to 'offend' western  society  Seventeen promotes unhealthy body  ideals, then capitalizes on the shame that  results from these views. Equally horrifying is the fact that almost the entire Seventeen staff is made up of women. Feminist  and anthropologist Martha Ward comments on this conflicting reality: "Women  often participate in systems of controlling  each other; this has been a difficult phenomenon for feminists and women's movements to explain." Young women often look  to magazines such as Seventeen as sources  of 'model' behavior. The creators of Seventeen Magazine are acting in an inexcusable  and irresponsible manner. We should be  encouraged to feel healthy and empowered, not ashamed.  Unhealthy gender ideologies are leaving 'holes' in the lives of young women as  they strive to be what society wants them  to be, not who they are. Seventeen Magazine makes a hefty profit by manipulating  this fact. I encourage readers to speak with  the young women in their lives about this  ugly marketing concept and the issues behind it.  Karen-Marie Woods enjoys a satisfying life on  Vancouver Island pursuing studies in  paleoanthropology, researching, doodling comics and much to her roommates' dismay, perfecting voice box rapping skills.  MARCH 2000  KINESIS Feature  Human cost of development:  Women's plight in Burma  by Esther Saw Lone  I was forced to flee Burma in December 1974 after the UThant uprising at Rangoon University. I had to leave my hometown and flee to the Thai-Burmese border  where I stayed with my community, the  Karen people.  Burma is composed of eight major ethnic groups and the Karen people are the  second largest population. I have been a  member of the Karen women's organization since 1985.  I would like to give you a brief history  of the Burmese women's struggle and incidents that occurred in my life with the  Karen people. My people now live in exile  in Thailand. According to a 1991 census,  52 per cent of the 45 million Burmese population are women. If we look back at the  history of Burma, women have faced ongoing discrimination in their daily lives and  their history is obscured.  During the rule of the Burmese Kings,  the primary task for women was to fulfill  the wishes of men. They were oppressed  by men, and treated as their property. Even  today, girls are told by their parents to behave with decorum and respect, as men are  their superiors. This type of traditional belief is one of the greatest obstacles for Burmese women.  After the rule of the Burmese Kings  came the British colonial rule. During this  period, Christian mission schools were established, and many women had the opportunity to achieve higher education. Because of their patriotism, Burmese women  became involved in anti-colonialism and  the Independence movement. They were  able to establish unity and solidarity among  themselves.  After Burma's Independence, women  did not maintain the same solidarity due  to their differing political beliefs. However,  since the ruling party was a democratic  government, women's organizations could  fully practice their freedom of speech and  fundamental rights. This was the only time  in the history of Burma that women took  high positions in the government.  The first and only woman who took a  ministerial position in Burmese history was  a Karen woman, Ms. Ba Maung Chain. That  was in 1952-53. The first and only ambassador was Daw Khin Kyi, mother of Daw  Aung San Suu Kyi. She was appointed as  the Burmese ambassador to India and Nepal between 1960-1967.  In Burma, six major uprisings occurred  against the military dictatorship. Women  came out on to the streets and joined the  demonstrations. Thousands of demonstrators were killed and many were women  and schoolgirls.  During the 1990 multi-party election,  only 84 out of 2,296 candidates were  women. Out of 485 members of parliament  elected in the May election, 15 were women  and all represented the National League for  Democracy (NLD). The NLD, led by Daw  Aung San Suu Kyi, was founded in September 1988. Women shared the leading  role in many political parties and set up  committees concerning women's affairs.  The military refused to recognize the  result of the May election and did not transfer the power to the people's elected representatives. Moreover, many elected MPS  were arrested. Among them were 4 women.  [More] women came out into the political  scene to fight the military dictatorship and  the human rights violations against them.  During the military rule in Burma, which  has now existed for nearly four decades,  Burmese women have not been able to let  the world know about the crimes committed against them.  Women are arbitrarily arrested for their  service as porters. They are forced to carry  arms and ammunitions during army  offensives against ethnic nationalities.  These women are also gang-raped at night.  Sometimes they are forced to cross minefields at gunpoint. Hundreds of thousands  of women, including pregnant women, are  being forced to work as slave labour for infrastructure projects, such as building airports, bridges, railway tracks and roads.  Since working with EarthRights International (ERI), I have interviewed many  women and men. One of  the women I interviewed  is a Karen woman from  a village in a gas pipeline  area. She was forced to  flee her village by the  Burmese soldiers to ensure security for a natural gas pipeline. She was  holding her two-month-  old baby while cooking  when five soldiers came  into her house and ordered her to leave. One  of them kicked her hard  in the ribs causing her  baby to fall into the open  fire. The woman made her way to the border, but her baby suffered from severe  burns and died shortly afterwards.  The military regime is waging a war  on the people for economic development.  We know that the people in the pipeline  area are made to suffer in order to promote  development. What kind of development  is this? Who really profits from it? The majority of people in Burma don't want this  kind of development to strengthen the brutal military regime. We don't want it at the  cost of ethnic cleansing.  Economic development has imposed  displacement and exploitation on ethnic  peoples. The military regime has actively  accused innocent villages of being insurgents. But consider the fact that the military regime in Burma has labelled every  new-born, non-Burmese an insurgent.  I was able to start a school for children  in Mergui-Tavoy district, Tenassarim Division—the area where the pipeline is situated. We had very few resources for the  school but plenty of enthusiasm. From 30  children and two teachers, we grew to 600  children with 24 teachers. Seventy per cent  of these children came from the fighting areas where they had gone through bitter and  fearful experiences.  These children became war victims  without knowing why their villages were  We don't want  (development)  at the cost  of ethnic  cleansing.  raided, their properties looted, their parents  killed, their family members taken away as  porters, and their sisters raped by Burmese  soldiers. These children learned that they  could not expect to live in peace. The Burmese soldiers showed no mercy.  The school, which we had built with  our hands, was overrun by the military regime in February 1997. The children and  teachers found refuge in the Tarn Him refugee camp. I went back to visit them in May  1998.1 did not have a chance to see many  of the children whom I had taught. Some  had been killed in the course of the military offensive and some had died of malaria and other serious illnesses.  The civil war in Burma has created millions of refugees inside and outside Burma.  The number of people who made it to the  border is a small percentage of the total  number of people who fled from their  homes. Women and children represent the  majority of the refugee population, yet their  situation remains unknown. Their problems don't end once they have escaped with  their families to the border. In the isolated,  malaria-ridden jungle  areas near the border,  their struggle for survival continues. As a  refugee or displaced person, access to education,  health care, training and  resources are extremely  limited.  Today, the trading of  Burmese women for  prostitution is big business in Thailand. Thousands of women from  Burma have gone to  Thailand to seek employment. This is because  there is a high demand for cheap labour  there.  Some women find work as labourers  on construction sites, or in factories, but  most of them enter the sex industry. The  dream of the women who go to Thailand is  to save a large amount of money by working hard, then to go back to Burma to improve their lives and help their families. But  these women are not able to earn and save  money as they wish. Women who work in  brothels are told to give their earnings to  the brothel owners for safekeeping.  The biggest problem is that the women  have no legal status in Thailand, thus they  are easily exploited. They usually end up  with less income than they expected. But  of more significance is the loss of their  health, their dignity and for a tragic  number, the loss of their lives.  According to the Public Health Research Centre in Thailand, about 80 per cent  of Burmese sex-workers in the towns along  the Burmese-Thai border are HTV positive.  The Women's Rights Project of Asia Watch  has done much research on this subject and  documented its findings in the book, A  Modern Form of Slavery. What is written in  this book will shock any reader. The stories  I heard from the lips of those who suffered  would cause shock waves that cannot be  measured.  KhSs  We need to bring women from all the  different ethnic groups together. All women  suffer similar oppression by the military  regime and have a vital role to play in the  development of the future generations.  Under the military rule, the first women's political party, "The Union for the Improvement of Myanmar Women" was  formed in October 1991 in Rangoon. Its  aims were to achieve peace, democracy,  equal justice, national unity, improvement  of the lives of women, and the preservation of world peace. This organization has  become inactive due to the military's policy  to silence all dissidents. Publication of  newsletters, bulletins and journals by political parties is banned.  The military regime has created several puppet grassroots organizations in the  guise of NGOs such as Union Solidarity  and Development Association, Myanmar  Medical Association, Myanmar Maternal  and Child Welfare Association and  Myanmar Women's Sports Federation.  These organizations benefit only the wives  and children living in villages engaged in  farming and agriculture. The lack of women's representation in the government, institutions, religious organizations and business enterprises in Burma clearly shows  that women have no voice whatsoever.  Several independent women's organizations have been founded along the Thai-  Burmese border with the aim of promoting the rights of women within their respective ethnic nationalities.  These women's organizations held  their first Forum in November 1998. The  Forum was an opportunity for women to  come together and share their experience.  This exchange allowed women to break  their isolation and identify commonalities  in their struggle for freedom, justice and a  renewed hope.  In December 1999 a second Forum was  held. Over forty women, representing 14  different women's organizations, including  refugee women in India, were in  attendence. At the end of the Forum, twelve  of the women's groups formed a coalition  called the Women's League of Burma  (WLB). The aim of the coalition is to build  and improve mutual understanding and  trust between the groups, with a particular  focus on women's issues and national reconciliation in Burma.  To do this, the WLB has slated its objectives for ethnic women to build understanding, improve the status of women,  raise women's voices at an international  level, work for refugee women and children, work to preserve the environment,  and increase women's participation in the  struggle for democracy and national reconciliation in Burma.  Esther Saw Lone is the Field Coordinator for  the Women's Rights Project of EarthRights International. Thanks to Betsy Apple, the Director for the Women's Rights Project who gave  Kinesis an update on the outcome of the second forum. For more info go to  www.earthright.org  MARCH 2000 Feature  From addiction to passion:  Giving back to the  community  by Kelly Mathieu as told to Pam  Greenstock   Pam: How did you hear about the Richmond Women's Centre (RWQ?  Kelly: I'm a recovered alcoholic. During the searching stage of trying to figure  out what I was  ^T supposed to  Mt ^^^^       do  or  even  fl ^^       what       the  t  h e  ich-  Women 's  Centre was always the first  place I would  land.  I'm a pamphlet addict,   j picking up little pam- ~^^H phlets here and  there. Some- where along  the line I knew they [Richmond  Women's Centre] existed. Itwas wonderful  to go to a place where I could just sneak in,  find out what I needed, and know that I  could do that time and time again without  anybody saying, "So are you back again?"  "What is it you're looking for?" You know-  just to give you the time to find the courage to find your own answers.  Pam: Did they help you in terms of going  through a recovery process?  Kelly: No, actually I found a pamphlet  at the Richmond Women's Centre for the  Richmond Alcohol and Drug Action Team.  The day I sort of quote, unquote 'hit bottom', I found this pamphlet and went from  there.  Pam: How old were you at that point?  Kelly: 26.  Pam: Was your family supportive when  you were going through all of this?  Kelly: Not at all. My father is an alcoholic and [he is] still very much in the addiction. When it comes to getting any support or anything from them, there's never  any support.  Pam: What about your mom?  Kelly: She's still around but she's crazier than the rest of them [family]. Classic  co-dependency—it's a very vicious cycle. I  keep trying to convince her that she needs  help, but she doesn't see that at all. She  doesn't quite realize that yes, he's the one  that's drinking, but she's a part of the system that helps keep it going.  Pam: Were there any other community organizations besides the Richmond Alcohol and  Drug Actior. Team that you used?  Kelly: In the last little while I've used  the Family Services of Greater Vancouver.  Coming from an alcoholic home and being  an alcoholic, it is very natural that my fiancee would be an alcoholic. We went through  a rough time in the beginning when he was  still drinking. He's been sober for a couple  of years now. Family  Services of Greater Vancouver came on board  through his work.  They're part of the three  organizations that I donate a percentage of my  sales to [now].  Pam: What is your  home-based business?  Kelly: I call it Promotional Management  Services. I've created a  job out of everything that  I know how to do. Most  of my work experience  [is in] administrative,  clerical, and entry-level  kind of jobs. I have a  strong background in the  print industry. Rather  than being caught in an  administrative assistant job, I realized that  the only way I could do everything that I  do was to do it on my own.  Pam: So what do you do?  Kelly: I do creative writing, copy writing, desktop publishing [and] graphic design. I [also] create and design databases  and funding directories. I call it a promotional system because I can do the administration and the promotions for my customers.  I've been laid off three times in five  years, all due to cutbacks, all from administrative positions and all from positions  that I didn't like anyway. Before I got laid  off I had thought about starting my own  [business].  Pam: So you thought about starting your  own business for a few years?  Kelly: Yes, but I didn't trust myself so  I took whatever job that came. That job was  a complete and total disaster.  Pam: What were you doing?  Kelly: It was another administrative  position in a graphic arts company but I  was the front person, 'just' the receptionist. It broke my heart because all of these  creative people were in the back and that's  where I knew I wanted to be.  I had all of this experience and I didn't  want to waste it. All my [past] jobs involved  some level of promotion, not necessarily  connected to my job. At the Richmond General Hospital, I was the only housekeeper  on the public relations committee and I  helped write and design their newsletters  and event posters.  I knew that I  could  communicate  with people  but I had no  When I was at Canadian Airlines' print  shop I was on the quality service committee and I did the copy writing for the brochure. All volunteer stuff. What blew me  away, especially when I started doing the  copy writing, was that I really had no idea  that I could write.  I agonized over it,  I thought about it and  when I went and presented what I had,my  boss had this look on  her face, (laughter) I  couldn't describe it,  and I thought, "Oh my  god, what have I done  wrong?" She said, "I  had no idea you'd be  this good!" Those were  the words that just  changed everything for  idea that I  could write  Pam: Why do you  think she would've said  that?  Kelly: I think because of the [housekeeper] position I was  in and certainly the way  I present myself. I'm not an aggressive,  "Hey how're you doing, this is me and I'm  terrific," kind of person. Most people are  surprised that I can do the things that I can  do. That was probably the beginning of  thinking that I could be more than just a  secretary.  When I got my first computer back in  1995,1 wrote a plan of what I was going to  do and how I was going to do it and I put it  away. I pulled it out of a box maybe a year  ago and I realized that I was doing what I  said. That was pretty powerful. Somebody  told me to write it [your plans] down. If  you write it down, it becomes real.  Pam: Was your family supportive of your  plans?  Kelly: They're supportive in whatever  ways they can be. They come from such a  totally different generation. My mom can't  understand why I wouldn't just go get a  job and stay home to have a baby and buy  a house. If my parents could have their way,  I would duplicate their life completely. I  would get their house and have two cars.  Until I've done all of that, I haven't succeeded.  That's the big journey of self employment—that you question everything, absolutely everything: your relationship with  money, your relationship with people, your  relationship with women. I was writing  down a list of who I wanted as a business  see Kelly page 24  MARCH 2000  kInSis Feature  Feminine Protection Against What?  The Lifecycle of an  Unsafe Tampon  by Amanda Walker  Tampon manufacturers aren't just trying to sell tampons, they are also trying to  sell ideas of discretion and invisibility.  Think of the television ads for tampons,  built around testimonials given by women  wearing white pants (often riding a bike)  who exclaim that "you'll hardly notice it's  there...small and compact... lets me do what  I want!" But what the big brand tampon  companies, like Johnson   &    Johnson,  Playtex  and Proctor and Gamble, don't want  women to think  about is how difficult it  is to make their products discreet and invisible.  If we trace the lifecycle of a box of tampons made by one of the big three plug producers—through production, use, and disposal—what is revealed are impacts to our  natural and human environments that are  anything but discreet and invisible.  Here I'll focus on a box of regular ab-  sorbency o.b. tampons (because that's the  brand I have used) bought and consumed  in Vancouver (because this is my back  yard), o.b. tampons are made by Johnson  & Johnson, a company with operations in  both Texas and Montreal. This north/south  split production seems strategic, considering the two main materials used in o.b.'s  are cotton and rayon; cotton from southern American plantations, and rayon from  northern Canadian forests. According to the  J&J telephone information line, regular ab-  sorbency tampons are made from 25% cotton and 75% rayon.  Let's begin with the cotton. Cotton  growers are notorious for using large  amounts of pesticides on their crops because of insect damage, which leaves a  chemical residue on the harvested cotton.  Since cotton generally is harvested after 150  days, the build up of chemical pesticides  also affects the soil's ability to support fu  ture crops. After it's harvested, medical  grade cotton is washed, bleached and sterilized, then transported to either Montreal  or Texas, ready for production.  Now rayon, the other 75% of an o.b.  tampon is a wood pulp derivative. Rayon  is used in all major brands of tampons because it's highly absorbent, despite the fact  that the chemicals used to make synthetic  fibres, such as rayon produce air and water emissions that contain organochlorine  compounds, of which 2,3,7,8  tetrachlorobenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is one.  TCDD and other organochlorine compounds accumulate within ecosystems because their complicated makeup makes it  difficult for them to naturally break down,  becoming a toxic hazard to plants, animals  and humans. According to the American  Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]  and a report by Environment Canada,  dioxins like TCDD are already 'prevalent'  in some ecosystems and their  food chains, resulting in concentrated dioxin  levels "...in the  tissues of top  predators," like  fish-eating birds,  animals...and  humans.  Scientific research has been  gathered showing dioxins to be  carcinogenic,  causing serious  environmental  damage and raising grave concerns about its  link to human  cancers and  health diseases.  As a result, B.C.  and Ontario  pulp and paper  producers have  been mandated  by the government to eliminate organochlorine emissions from manufacturing processes by 2002. Although toxic  emissions are being reduced, traces of dioxin found in rayon fibres remain at the  same level.  In raw form, rayon is shipped to one  of o.b.'s manufacturing plants, where it's  mixed with cotton, sterilized and then  coated with surfactants, a combination of  phenols, mercuric chloride, sulfurous acid,  as well as various bactericides and  fungicides. These chemical compounds are  applied to increase absorbency and fight the  growth of bacteria.  Scientific research  has been gathered  showing dioxins  to be carcinogenic,  causing serious  environmental  damage and raising  grave concerns  about its link to human cancers and  health diseases.  The compressed and shaped rayon/  cotton fibres are then secured to a cotton  string, wrapped in a polyethylene wrapper  and packaged in non-recycled cardboard  boxes. The box also contains an instruction/  information sheet (printed on bleached  paper) outlining the proper use of a tampon, and warning of the possible effects of  Toxic Shock Syndrome (TSS).  Looking even briefly at the production  of o.b. tampons, without even touching on  questions of labour, factory conditions or  the impact tampons have on air quality,  land use, consumption of natural resources  and the production of synthetic compounds, shows just how indiscreet  bleached synthetic tampons are. They become even more noticeable, their effects  conspicuous in use and disposal.  Tampons are either flushed down the  toilet into the sewage system, thrown into  the garbage to head directly for the dump-  or in the case of  public washroom waste-  taken to an incinerator to be  burned. The tampon waste is then  transported to a  landfill/dump  site. Either way,  they don't just  disappear.  If we look at  the sewage system in Vancouver, a tampon  would enter the  sanitation system  pipeline, and end  up at the Iona  sewage processing plant in Richmond. Screens  are placed over  the pipes to divert all solid nonorganic materials, which are  dumped into a  holding tank, to  be shipped to a  landfill site. But as I was informed by an  engineer in the Greater Vancouver Regional  District (GVRD) sewage engineering department, it is possible for the rayon and  cotton fibres in tampons to break down  making it unlikely that the screens would  catch them. Because of this, we can't say  all tampons going through the sewage system end up in landfill sites; a proportion  stay in the sewage water to be further processed within the plant. The Iona plant is a  see TOXINS page 26  KHMpSlS  MARCH 2000 Feature  Ta/<-e up sowz. s/socxi arvJ k& pa'-f at -f"/*z. -faaTM  /6ines/S u/abo*vies KTau- ^a'Avxs a^J i/oluerAiers.  X£ you're CMiiauS hcxrf ^/hcA ivei'a up -/o,  71/e us g coll erf CtO'v) •2-i~.r-.w99 o>-  a-^v^;/! us cA \u^a,SiS®\AyzhyyiA  VSW : te^eiss  Appreciation  Parteeeeee!!!  OPepi 7© ay-. woMQti mo  MikDftQn in Ttte  COMMUrliW  FoTkUGte. MUSIC.  teiDS ©awes!  funi  7pm  Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hasting^tr^et  *%  Vancouver, B.C ^ y  LOUD's new CD 'taikoelectric  now available through Festival Distribution Inc.  1-800-633-8282  http://www.festival.bc.ca  taikoelectric  also available at  Black Swan  Little Sisters  Highlife  Cosmopolts  Zulu  A&B Sound  on Seymour  Sam the  Record Man  on Seymour  HMV  Vancouver  Coquitlam  Metrotown  Surrey  West Van  Richmond  Langley  garopsiffl. .College  "LOUD's rich interplay of Japanese Taiko Drums, flute and electric guitar  offer something entirely new to the Vancouver music scene"  Namiko Kunimoto, Discorder  JOIN US  CD Release Party <& Webcast  Sunday March 12th 2000 doors 7:30pm, show starts 8pm  at the Western Front (303 E. 8th Avenue, Vancouver) $5.00  or LOG ON  http: //www. taikoelectric. com  above date and time Pacific Standard Time, use RealPlayer 5 or higher,  free RealPlayer download available from LOUD's site above.  for more info call: 604-874-0833  This recording was made possible through the assistance of  THE MUSIC SECTION, THE CANADA COUNCIL FOR THE ARTS  THE NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF JAPANESE CANADIANS ENDOWMENT FUND  MARCH 2000 Feature  from Kelly page 21  partner. I put a woman down first then I  crossed it out and said "no I need a man."  Pam: Why?  Kelly: There was an image in my head  that said, "A man will get the job done."  That's coming from me. My reasons for a  man were that people would respect him  more, people would listen to him more, a  man would be able to close the sale, a man  would be able to be that aggressive person  without having to be nervous about it.  Pam: So, financially, how have you done  it?  Kelly: Well, the last layoff from the  horrible job that I really hated, I decided  this time, I'm not going to fool around. I  went to an employment counsellor and told  them this is what I want to do.  They had all kinds of information and  I found out about a program being offered  through North Shore Continuing Education  called the Self Employment Equity Group  for Entrepreneurs. One of the Equity Group  categories was women.  Pam: Did you have to be on Employment  Insurance (E.I.) to access this program?  Kelly: Yes.  Pam: How long was the program?  Kelly: The program turned out to be  about two years and the bonus was that  they help you set the business up. I had two  months of classroom time that included  operations and marketing, sales and finance. The condition was that while you  were on E.I. you wouldn't have to pay back  any of the money that you made from your  own business. All the money could go into  the start-up of the business.  Pam: What kinds of ongoing support do  they offer?  Kelly: MosJy counselling and  mentorship kinds of programs. I wouldn't  have been able to start a business on my  own without the classroom time.  Personally, I didn't have the confidence  and I didn't have the discipline to do that.  This program really helped refine my business idea, and gave me a push to do more  creative stuff.  Pam: Do you rent or own a place?  Kelly: I rent and that currently is a big  issue right now. I make enough to cover my  debts and my expenses, but I haven't paid  rent and that's hard in a relationship, because I want to be as equal a partner as  possible—that's always hanging over my  head. When you're working from home  you can't get away from it.  I'm coming to realize how mixed up  my ideas are around money—in trying to  put a value on what I do. I'm always undervaluing my work. I should be charging  Join the  Richmond Women's  Resource Centre  to celebrate  March 5,2pm  at the  Richmond Art Gallery,  7700 Minoru Gate  Musical performance by  SILK ROAD,  an Internationally acclaimed  women's folk music group and  author LARISSA LAI  will read from her book,  "When Fox was a Thousand".  double of what I charge, but I'm so afraid  that people are going to not like me if I  charge them that much; but when I charge  them less, they don't respect me. They  phone at all hours of the night wanting me  to do things. They don't treat me as a business person. There's a part of me that wants  to find a business partner to take over the  money side of things because it's too anxiety provoking for me.  I've only ever been an employee. I was  telling the Self Employment folks that, "You  should really change  the name and not call it  'Self Employment', but  rather 'Owning your  own Business.'" That's  the mind trip that you  get snagged into. A lot  of people fail because  they don't realize that  you are actually running a business and that  you are working for the  business that you're  running.  Pam: You said earlier that you have some  printing connections.  Would they not be able to  cut you a deal?  Kelly: That's a  good point. That's one  of the things that I  haven't done—to turn around and say that  I need help. I'm trying to present this professional image and yet if you're out there  and you're doing it, you can't possibly do  everything. Even to go to my former clients and say, "Do you know of anyone who  can use my services?" is hard for me.  Pam: How long have you had your own  business?  Kelly: I started the course in 1997  while working part-time. I've been doing  it full-time since June 1999. It's a real testing of skills. I often wonder how wise it was  starting a business while being on E.I. because you don't have that much money to  begin with. You fall more into debt. It's a  wonderful opportunity, but you don't realize how much it actually costs.  Pam: What kinds of creative work have  you done for clients?  Kelly: One of my clients has a small  promotional items company. They produce  pens and stuff with logos on it. They're a  family-run business. I track and work on  their database for them and I set up fax  broadcasts to their clients.  Pam: How did they hear about you?  It's very  important  for me  to give  in whatever  way I can.  Kelly: They knew me from when I  worked at the print centre and they had remembered me. They had gone to the print  centre to get some work done and they  asked about me and phoned me up out of  the blue. That really pleased me to just even  be remembered. I thought, "Wow, that's  kind of cool." We've been working together  right from the beginning. My other main  client is a First Nations' proposal writer and  I do proposal writing for her. I have been  setting up a funding database and we've turned  that database into a directory which she is now  selling.  Pam: How did she  hear about you?  Kelly: She was one  of my classmates and she  was my first big client.  She had some funding  and was starting her  own business. She hired  me to do the initial promotional information  package. It's been really  fascinating because I'm  doing things that I hadn't  considered doing like  proposal writing.  Pam: Do people have  assumptions of you?  Kelly: Yes. It's very  easy to get caught up  with the, "Oh my gosh what am I doing?  I'm not skinny enough. Maybe I'd sell more  if I were a little bit skinnier. Maybe I'm not  dressing in corporate blue. Maybe I should  go out and buy a whole wardrobe of corporate blue. Maybe that's why people are  not accepting me." Rather than just going  from your own inner strength and saying,  "Okay, the clothes are clean. I've washed  my hair. I've got deodorant on and they're  not going to like me any better."  Pam: You'll probably have clients as  friends and they're not going to judge you for  all of those superficial reasons.  Kelly: Sometimes that's a problem.  With [one of my] clients, we've had troubles drawing the line between when we're  friends and when we're business people.  I was putting in a lot of hours and not  charging her because she's my friend. I was  under the illusion that it was going to be a  different kind of project. When I found out  that she was going to be selling it for profit  for herself, and I hadn't been charging her,  then all of a sudden, it was one of these  really awkward situations.  NEW SERVICES  TO BETTER SERVE YOU!  24 hour telephone banking with  MemberLink and direct access to  your account through the ATMs.  CCGC Credit Union  2250   COMMERCIAL   DRIVE,   VANCOUVER,   BC   V5N   5P9  TELEPHONE:     (604)   254-4100     FAX:     (604)   254-6558  Pam: Something else that interests me is  that you give back to the community. How does  that work and how did you come up with that  idea?  Kelly: When I was in my course I tried  to work backwards. I imagined, ultimately,  how would I want to be known as a business person. I wanted the kind of business  where I could give back to the community  and I certainly had a list of places that had  helped me.  I also realized that being self-employed, my time is very valuable and much  of what I do, I would love to be able to do  on a volunteer basis but I just don't have  the time. I had this anxiety, so the idea actually came out of trying to ease my own  anxiousness about wanting to give back but  not having the time to do so.  Somewhere, I had read about a gas station that was giving two per cent of its sales  to a Richmond Group. When I heard of that  I thought, "Hey, I could do that!"  Pam: So it's two per cent of your profits  that you donate?  Kelly: My gross profits. I give to the  three organizations [ Richmond Women's  Centre, Richmond Alcohol and Drug Action Team, Family Services of Greater Vancouver] and I rotate [my donations to]  them. It's not a lot of money. Sometimes  they might get $2.00 for a donation but I  just needed that component to be in there.  It's very important for me to give back in  whatever way I can.  Pam: It sounds like you've been going  through a lot of ethical dilemmas with the set  up of your business.  Kelly: It's just part of an evolutionary  process that happened when I sobered up.  Pam: How long have you been sober?  Kelly: It'll be 10 years in March 2000.  Pam: Congratulations. That's great!  Kelly: Thanks. Now there's a real sol-  idness that I have. I have ten years of sober  memories now. I'm actually looking forward and I'm not looking back anymore.  My life isn't about, "How did I turn  out to be this kind of a person?" It's about,  "This is who I am now." I know my ethics.  I know my morals. I know what's important to me and now it's time to make that  real in the world.  Pam Creenstock is enjoying her life with her  partner and her kids, Normie and Kimchi.  Paula Clancy, b.a.  Certified General Accountant  Auditing  Accounting  Financial Planning  Income Tax Services  for  Organizations  Small Businesses  and Individuals  Tel: (604)215-1720  Fax:(604)215-1750  pclancy @bc.sympatico.ca  kInesis  MARCH 2000 from BOOKS page 13  Feature  a business plan when it was the four of us  together and then we did it again. At some  point, we had someone look at the business plan and we realized that it wasn't  very realistic, so we had to start again. We  realized we couldn't really afford to borrow any money because we couldn't predict how it [the bookstore] would do. We  couldn't afford to make any payments on  it so we had to find money other ways.  Jenn: // you couldn't afford to borrow  money how did you get the initial start-up  funds?  Yvette: Well, we found ourselves an  investor/supporter—a bookseller who has  a place on the island and who has a large  secondhand bookstore in Victoria. We  asked him if he would be willing to give us  books and we could sell them on consignment. He was willing to be involved. We  asked him for some money and he gave us  a little bit of money, enough for us to pay  some contractors. Mariam and I put in our  labour. Neither of us had a chunk of money  so we paid for things on our visa's, etc.  Jenn: Were there community resources  and service organizations that you sought support from?  Yvette: No. There's not really anything.  Jenn: Was the initial business idea focused  on having women business partners?  Yvette: I think when Emily was first  looking at ideas, it was going to be women  friends getting some training. We worked  in sort of a very 'female way'—we all sat  together and talked about what we wanted  out of it.  We wanted different things. Some  wanted an environment where they could  have their kids, others wanted skills and  training, and [still] others wanted to gain  e runnine a business. A couole of  us were just interested in books and being  around books.  Jenn: When you mentioned that people  wanted different things out of this, what else  beside the books do you want?  Yvette: At some  point, I would like it  to provide an income. I would like it  to be self-sustaining.  I mean it's great and  the community really likes having the  bookstore as a resource, but it's not  something that can  operate indefinitely  for free. I'd like to  have a business that  is successful and  contributes to my  living.  Jenn: So right  now, it's not generating revenue for you?  Yvette: No it's  not. It's only been  open for four  months. We haven't  even been open during our peak part of  the year. Right now,  all the money that  we're making is invested in the business. Because we started  out with no capital, we have to make the  capital to spend the capital.  Jenn: When you say that it is self-sustaining, what does that mean?  Yvette: I just mean that we're not still  putting our own money into it. I'm not pay-  It's been a  challenge. My  business partner  Mariam has one  child so we trade  (childcare) a lot,  and only one of  us works at the  bookstore at  a time.  ing the bills out of my pocket. I'm working  for free.  Jenn: When did it become self- sustaining?  Yvette: Pretty well as soon as we  opened. The first month we earned enough  to pay our bills, but we haven't hired any  staff. It's just the two of us.  Jenn: Earlier you mentioned something  about starting the business in a female way.'  What do you mean by that?  Yvette: We sat around and spent a certain amount of time talking about how we  felt about things and what we wanted to  get out of it [the business]. One aspect was  that we all have young children and we  needed to have something that would accommodate that.  Jenn: How has opening the bookstore  changed your life?  Yvette: Well before this, a big focus that  I had was to get the hell away from this  small island because there were no opportunities. I think having this has given me a  little more possiblity. It makes it possible  for me to imagine being here for a bit longer,  rather than moving to a city because there  really aren't any economic possibilities here  if you want to raise a family. If you don't  want to clean bedrooms there are very few  opportunities. Probably in a year from now,  I'll be able to pay myself minimum wage.  At least I'll be working and doing  something that I like rather than something  I couldn't even imagine doing. There aren't  very many possibilities here unless you create them for yourself. I guess that is the  main change. I still may end up moving. It  is so small. Other changes? Less time.  Jenn: Less time to do what?  Yvette: Time to do volunteer work at  the school. T was takine some courses last  year—I don't really feel I have time to do  that. Mind you, I've been taking piano lessons and practicing an hour or two a day,  so I must have some time.  Jenn: You mentioned that there aren't too  many opportunities  for women on the Island. Does that go for  men as well?  Yvette: I think  it's more so for  women. The opportunities are limited  for men but there is  more work. There's  neighbour work.  Lots of it is skilled  but I think there's  more unskilled  work.  An unskilled  male worker might  chop firewood or  help with the census, but there's no  sort of unskilled,  decent paid work  for women. I mean,  you can work in one  of the little grocery  stores. You can do  home care or work  seasonally in one of  the inns or restaurants. There's not much. There are a few  crafts people and then there are some people who commute off Island, but that's  pretty hard for women with children.  Jenn: How do you think the community  has received the bookstore?  Yvette: Just yesterday, I had a woman  come in. She spent lots of time looking. She  It feels kind of  shitty in certain  company to say  that you're a  housewife. It's  kind of a snobbish thing I've  had to deal with  over the years.  bought four books and when she bought  them, she said, "I really want to see you  guys do well and I really want you to stay  here. I'm going to buy all my books here."  People tell us that they're happy we're  here and they've always thought the Island  was missing a bookstore. They really want  to support us. I think  that we've been re- ^^jjj^^^mg  ceived well.  Jenn: You mentioned that you didn't  know much about business before you entered  into this venture. How  do you see yourself now  as a business woman?  Yvette: I still see  myself at the very beginning of the learning curve. I still think  that we have tons to  learn, but we've  learned a lot.  Jenn: What are  some concrete things  you've learned so far?  Yvette: We have  new and used books,  so I would say I've  learned about pricing  used books, sourcing  them, deciding what  we like and don't like,  what we're interested and not interested in,  and what will and will not sell.  For new books, there's just a huge  amount of stuff to learn; [such as], understanding how the whole thing works with  publishers and distributors, ordering  books, setting up accounts and doing book-  keeDine. T've learned how to do business  plans. Ah, I learned how to make some really wicked bookshelves.  Jenn: How has this business venture affected you believing in yourself and your self-  esteem?  Yvette: Oh, I don't know if I really  think about things that way. I think I've always had fairly good self-esteem. I guess it  made me believe that it might be possible  to create something here, whereas before I  always thought my life was going to start  when I move away from here.  It feels kind of shitty in certain company to say that you're a housewife. It's  kind of a snobbish thing I've had to deal  with over the years. The more politically  correct my company is, the more likely I  am going to say that lama housewife. It's  no small thing that it's given me something  to say—something to identify with. What  do you call that? It's not prestige. It's given  me another label anyhow.  Jenn: Status?  Yvette: Yes, that's the word. It's status.  It's a weird thing. You have very very little  when you're a caretaker of children or  when you volunteer in your community.  Even though I'm not really making any  money from the bookstore yet, it changes  that [your status]. All of a sudden, I go to  the grocery store to buy some groceries and  I have to be nice to people, (laughter) You're  different all of a sudden, especially when  you live in an itsy-bitsy, teeny-weeny community where everyone knows you.  Jenn: Do you feel that it's more a transition of unpaid work to paid work?  Yvette: It would be if I was actually getting paid, (laughter) No, I don't. I think  that's generally so; but, there's no status  doing paid work—even if it's well paid—  like waitressing or something like that. You  might get paid way more than somebody  who does intellectual work, but there's no  status [attached] to it. I think there's status  [attached] to brain work, but there isn't with  other kinds of work like housework.  Jenn: So is status more about getting out  of the house and doing something separate from  the house?  Yvette: Yes, I  guess part of it is having another life. There  is something really really nice about working for yourself and  doing something  that's actually kind of  interesting and being  in an environment  that's attractive to  you.  Jenn: Do you feel  that the bookstore has  given you more independence?  Yvette: No. I  think it will give me  more independence  when it starts making  money. Independence, to me, is tied to  financial things. I'm  fairly independent  aside from money. Is  there any other kind  of independence?  (laughter)  Jenn: How about your life partner?  Yvette: He's been very supportive as  well. Considering that I had to put some  money of ours, like our household money,  into the business, he never really complained about that. He wants to see this idea  succeed. There's often been times where  he's had to do childcare and he lost time  and money at his work. I'd say he's been  really supportive.  Jenn: So when you work and he works,  who's doing the home work?  Yvette: Oh my god, my house is always  a mess. Nobody does it. It just doesn't get  done. The housework standards have to go  down. But they're pretty low anyhow.  (laughter) They're usually done when I go  to bed at night.  Jenn: Do you find now that you're working outside the home, you're far more exhausted  at the end of the day?  Yvette: It's actually not too bad right  now because we cut our winter hours  down, so I only have to work at the store  two days a week. But in the summer, starting in about May, we're going to be open  seven days a week. We open from 11am-  5pm, so the hours aren't really long. I have  time to get some things done in the morning. Dinner is usually a little bit pressed at  night, but it's not too bad. Usually I have  to spend one day a week off the island to  look for books or do other kind of book related business.  Jenn: So from 11-5 you 're at the bookstore,  who does the cooking?  Yvette: I do. Who do you think?  Jenn: So how many jobs are you actually  managing?  Yvette: Well [if] I don't do any of them  really well, do I still get to count them? If  nobody eats the dinner, does it still count?  (laughter)  see BOOKS page 27  SIS Feature  from TOXINS page 23  primary sewage processing plant, which  means it only uses non-chemical means to  process sewage water before pumping it  out into the 'receiving waters' of the Georgia Strait.  If the tampons don't break down and  end up in the Georgia Strait, they are transported to a landfill site somewhere in the  lower mainland (I wasn't able to pin down  the exact location from the engineers at the  Iona plant). If tampons are disposed of in  waste receptacles, they eventually end up  at the Burnaby incinerator which operates  '24/7'. The burning of waste involves a  natural gas furnace that has a regular temperature of 800 degrees celsius.  Carbon and de-hydrated lime are used  to control levels of air pollution created by  the incineration process. Of course, these  emissions are not benign and contribute to  the low yellow haze that hovers over the  lower mainland on our rare, sunny days.  The burnt waste is then transported to the  Braid Street landfill site.  Landfills are the final resting place for  the vast majority of tampons, leaving a conspicuous mark on our natural environment.  Keep in mind it is possible for one woman  to use approximately 11,000 tampons, if she  uses them regularly throughout her menstruating years.  Looking at BC alone, if only one third  of women in the province—that's around  330,000 women, use tampons consistently,  then over 360 billion tampons could end  up in landfills. Landfills require space, taking up land that could be used for other  purposes—if it isn't already suffering from  soil contamination. The runoff from  landfills also affects surrounding water  sources and natural habitats.  So, do you think the cost to our natural environment from Droducine and disposing of bleached (partially) synthetic  tampons is discreet and invisible? I don't.  The costs are as obvious as the profits made  by the three main producers of tampons.  In fact, $718 million worth of tampons are  sold each year in North America alone by  Johnson & Johnson, Proctor and Gamble,  and Playtex. Feminist and environmental  activists are clear that the toxic effects of  producing bleached cotton tampons containing rayon are not 'just' a women's issue. Their production processes affect our  entire ecosystem.  Women's health is also at great risk.  Since the artificial makeup of dioxins makes  natural breakdown long and difficult,  dioxins such as TCDD build up with repeated contact and exposure.  LEGAL REPRESENTATION  AND MEDIATION  SERVICES  in:  labour and employment law  human rights  civil litigation  public interest advocacy  MUNRO . PARFITT  LAWYERS  Melinda Munro and Clea Parfitt  401-825 granville street  Vancouver, b.c. v6z1k9  689-7778 (tel)        689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  Most reports  concerning the impact  of bleached rayon  tampons on women's  health have been  funded by tampon  manufacturers.  In Vikki Krantz's article, "Guinea Pigs  Should Not Wear Tampons," Dr. Phillip  Tierno is quoted as saying, "Dioxin is the  most potent toxin known to man [sic]... one  millionth of a gram can kill a guinea pig."  Krantz also presents evidence from Proctor and Gamble (makers of Tampax) and  the Food and Drug Administration [FDA],  which outlines how chlorine bleaching and  its associated  health risks  have been  eliminated  from rayon  production.  Or, more  potently, that  the traces of  dioxin found  in rayon tampons are so  low that, "...  No risk to  health would  be expected  from these  trace  amounts."  The FDA report goes on to  add that because dioxins  have already  built up in our air, soil, water and food supplies, trace amounts of toxins found in tampons are not the fault of the manufacturer.  These toxins may be present from 'environmental sources'.  I think it's also important to note that  the FDA report was written and published  on the internet in response to 'rumours' of  asbestos and dioxins being found in tampons. It's a report that's carefully worded  to convince women that tampons are safe:  it does this by telling women that there may  be trace amounts of dioxins in tampons, or  possible links to Toxic Shock Syndrome, but  that they pose almost no health risk to them.  The report states chlorine bleaching  processes have been instituted by wood  pulp (thus, rayon) manufacturers because  of pressure from environmental agencies  and government regulators. It's reassuring  that both 'elemental chlorine-free bleaching' and 'totally chlorine-free bleaching'  don't use elemental chlorine gas anymore  - but then how is the bleaching done?  And what about the traces of dioxins  still found in pulp, and the pollution created by the pulp mills? What do trace  amounts mean when you're dealing with  a chemical compound that is most threat-  sophidsi  palace  The FINEST FOODS  DIRECT FROM  NATURE = AMORE  FRESH, FROZEN NUTRITION  FOR CATS & DOGS  Locally made Natural Treats  and SO MUCH MORE  Mary Brookes, PROPRIETOR  1280 Commercial Drive  255-1211  ening because it just keeps building up?  What do trace amounts mean for women  who use these tampons month after month  after month?  Alongside the increased risk of dioxin  related cancers, systems failures (reproductive, immune, respiratory and cardio vascular), and endometriosis, one of the only  independent reports examining the risks of  dioxin exposure through  tampon use  has shown a  high correlation between  rayon and endometriosis,  plus the more  well known  Toxic Shock  Syndrome  (TSS).  Once the  S. aureus bacteria is introduced into the  system, the  TSST-1 toxin  spreads  quickly, and  has proven resistant to  penicillin-  based antibiotics. TSS is treatable, but can  rapidly damage the body's major organs  and immune system. Researchers concluded that dioxins present within the tampons, coupled with synthetic rayon fibres,  actually aided the production of staphylococcus aureaus, the bacteria that causes the  TSST-1 and TSS. Dr. Tierno's research, comparing rayon tampons to 100% cotton tampons, found that all eight brands of rayon  tampons he tested produced the TSST-1  toxin—unlike any of the cotton tampons!  The FDA states that while TSS is generally associated with tampons and menstruating women, cases of TSS have also  involved non-menstruating women, children and men. But the report does not say  how children and men came into contact  with TSS, nor does the FDA say that the  majority of reported TSS cases still involve  menstruating women who use tampons.  (Doctors in Canada are not required to report if women were using tampons when  they contracted TSS, so there are no accurate figures in Canada).  In many of these cases, it was found  that TSS struck on the second or third day  of a woman's menstrual cycle, leading researchers to believe that the likelihood of  TSS increases with prolonged exposure to  the rayon tampons. On top of all of this,  through prolonged use of rayon tampons,  and/or using tampons of higher absorb-  ency than needed, as well as through repeated contact, rayon fibres can become  embedded in the very porous vaginal wall,  often leading to chronic vaginitis, vaginal  ulcers, and lacerations.  Most reports concerning the impact of  bleached rayon tampons on women's  health have been funded by tampon manufacturers. But despite this bias, an American bill (H.R. 3796) was put before congress  requiring the National Institutes of Health,  "...to determine the health risks related to  the use of menstrual products, including  cervical, ovarian and breast cancer, endometriosis and TSS." This bill refers specifically to dioxins in menstrual products  as a health hazard.  One of the reasons tampons are discussed in the U.S Congress is due to their  classification as medical devices; as such,  tampons fall under federal health regulations. But unlike our southern neighbours,  the Canadian government has not classified tampons as medical devices. So tampons are manufactured and sold under general government guidelines, which leaves  pre-testing of products and safety monitoring to the jurisdiction of the manufacturers. Women have been successful in raising awareness as well as lobbying the Canadian government to bring tampons under the Medical Device Policy. But it hasn't  happened yet.  Over the last decade, more and more  women have become aware of the effects  of bleached and synthetic menstrual products, and there's lots of evidence to support the activism taking place on both sides  of the border.  In 1997, Maria Minna, a Toronto M.P.,  pledged to work toward legislation that  would require Canadian health authorities  to investigate tampon related health risks  to women. And more recently, on the other  side of the border, Carolyn Maloney introduced "The Tampon Research and Safety  see TOXINS next page  100% Cotton        *  Washable Menstrual Pads  - Soft and Comfortable  - Easy Use and Care  - Environmentally Responsible  - Economical  - Organic Cotton, too!  www.lunapads.com  &    Never Buy Tampons or Pads Again!  KEEPER "Sma" rubber cap worn internally  —XjC— -Sanitary & reliable        -Comfortable, easy to use  >r      -Lasts at least 10 years -Safe for overnight wear  -Great for sports, camping, backpacking, swimming.travel, overnight  wear, etc. -Accepted FDA 1987, Health & Welfare 1992  -No more pads or tampons to pack  -No more worries about running out of supplies  "This is a hidden treasure. It's clean and odorless. " (Keitha)  "I can't believe every woman in the world isn 't using The Keeper!" (Chris)  Menstrual Cap  Free Brochure  800-6634427 Feature  from TOXINS previous page  Act" to congress for the second time. It was  dropped from debate the first time around,  so Maloney is trying again to get tampon  safety on the agenda. Once again, it hasn't  happened yet. In less visible positions are  the women in local communities who are  active in creating alternatives for women  (see sidebar).  Before doing research for this article, I  hadn't given much thought to how my o.b  tampons were made, or their impact on my  own health and the health of the environment. For the most part, I'm an armchair  environmentalist. I get up to take out my  recycling, to hop on a bus, and to buy recycled and unbleached paper products. But I  started imagining what it would be like if I  had to literally dump all my tampons in  my own back yard. How would my garden fare from all the chemicals and rayon  fibres piled in a heap, not to mention air  and water degradation? On top of all of that  were the risks to my own health. Abig picture, but not a pretty one and certainly not  an image that is expressed by the big tampon manufacturers.  There are alternatives. And as more  and more women choose them, costs will  come down, their availability will increase,  and attitudes towards the use of menstrual  products will change. But first we need to  be able to talk about how these products  affect our health, and the health of the  world around us.  Remember, in the grand scheme of  things, we all share the same backyard.  Tracing the lifecycle of o.b. tampons took  me on the conspicuous trail of a product  that isn't providing discreet 'feminine' protection for the women of today ... or for tomorrow's children.  Amanda   Walker strolls around Vancouver.  She no longer uses o.b. tampons.  RESOURCES &  INFORMATION  "Pulling the Plug on the Sanitary |  Protection Industry" by Karen  Houppert.  S.P.O.T: The Tampon Health Website.  http://critpath.org/~tracey/spot.htm  The Curse: Confronting the Last  Unmentionable   Taboo.   Karen  Houppert, 1999.  Terra Femme Webpage  http://www.biobiz.com/terrafemme  Whitewash: Exposing the Health  and Environmental Dangers of  Women's  Sanitary Products and Disposable!  Diapers-What You Can Do About It.  Liz Armstrong and Adrienne Scott,  1992.  "Toxic Tampons Pose Health Risks"  Sara Chamberlain  http://www.earthisland.org/ei/jour-  nal/tampons.html  "Tampons and Asbestos, Dioxin,!  and Toxic Shock Syndrome" Food!  and Drug Administration Report,!  1999.  http://www.fda.gov/cdrh/ocd/!  tamponsabs.html  Environment Canada:  The Green Lane  alternatives  By choosinq alternatives to  biq brand, bleached cotton/  rayon tampons, women tan  have an impact or\ the kinds  of menstrual products available.  Considering we're, the  number one consumers of  tampons and! pads, the  choices of what we buy every  month, <xnd u/hat u/e spend our  money on, sends a clear message to the  producers of o.b. and the like,  as well as to government  regulators.  I'm weaning myself off  tampons, choosing InsteadTM,  the disposable (available in  stores, even Safeway!) version  of the keeperTM.  Both the keeperTM and  InsteadTM look like a diaphragm, a small cup that is  inserted below the cervix, to  act as a catch basin for  menstrual blood. The keeperTM  (.available at Circling Oawn  and Womyn's Ware)   has an  initial i$0 price tag, but can  last up to ten years. InsteadTM  are cheap, $¥ for a box  that'll last you a month (however, they are disposable and  contribute to the landfill dilemma).  Companies such as Terra  Femme and NaturaCare are  producing non-chlorinated  100% cotton tampons and  pads. These products can be  found in your local co-op or  organic shops for around $$,  but are really hard to find in  larger chain drugstores.  And, if you're trying to cut  down on waste products, as  well as exposure to dioxins  and other health risks, there  are companies, Itke Lunapads,  that make 100% re-useable  cotton pads. With washable  cotton inserts, these pads  fasten to your undies with  either velcro or snaps. They  even have wings.  Another alternative to  tampons is the sea sponge,  which has been cleaned and  sterilised especially for this  purpose. You can buy them in  health food stores, marketed  as alternatives to tampons.  You can also find them in the  makeup section in your local  drugstore (which tends to be a  cheaper alternative).  from BOOKS page 25  Jenn: What other barriers stand out where  you've fell that your creativity smashed against  a wall?  Yvette: I would say the main barrier  to starting a business is not having enough  capital.  Jenn: How do you see the link between  moms with kids starting a business and not  having the capital—is it a gender thing?  Yvette: Oh, I don't know if you can say  it's gender. I think that it's common with  men and women. It's more common when  you're raising a family to not have money.  The women I know don't have money to  start a business, but neither do the men.  I think it was hard in our case because  we couldn't go to the bank to get money  for lots of different reasons. When we did  our business plan, we realized that it would  cost us too much to get a loan. Even two or  three hundred dollars a month would have  been too much. Both of us didn't have any  credit of our own. [If we applied for a loan]  we would have had to rely on our husbands' income because we haven't been in  the work force.  When we started out, we got money  from our silent partner, and after we were  open for a couple of months, we realized  we needed more money so we borrowed  money from my sister. We're looking at  more creative solutions than going to a  bank and getting a traditional loan. We used  our own resources and our own skills. For  me, I knew how to build stuff so I could  cut a lot of costs as far as the carpentry went.  We [also] had friends who donated labour  to us. We called in a lot of favours. You have  Happy IWD  to be really creative when you don't have  any money.  Jenn: In terms of the customers, are they  mostly locals or off-islanders?  Yvette: This time of year, they're  mostly local. We've only been open since  October. We've had a few weekends where  there's been a lot of weekenders. When they  come, they buy a lot.  In the summer, our  business will be  mostly weekenders  and tourists. Weekenders refers to people who own cottages here.  Jenn: What kind  of vision, dreams and  goals do you see?  Yvette: For the  business itself, I can  easily see it becoming  bigger and better.  Right now, we're in a  really small space—  300 sq. ft. plus a really nice deck. I can  see that we would  need 500 sq. ft. The  actual location we're  in now is quite good.  I can see getting more books and possibly expanding into some other items. A  lot of people have suggested that they  would like some music, eds and tapes.  Another thing would be antiques and  collectibles. But right now, we're happy  with just learning about the books and try-  At least I'll be  working and  doing something  that I like rather  than something I  couldn't even  imagine doing.  ing to get good at that before we start anything else.  Jenn: So is this a dream come true?  Yvetter: No, I never imagined opening  this kind of business. I never really imagined that it would be possible. It's a dream  that I never dared to dream. I credit my  friend Emily who isn't on the ride with us.  It was her that allowed us to think  that it might be possible.  Jenn: How can  others help in the success of your bookstore?  Yvette: Come to  Maine Island. Come  to the bookstore and  buy books! If people  are on Maine Island,  they should come  and say, "Hi."  Jenn Lo is completing  her thesis on related to  women and community economic development.  from the Kinesis  Massage Therapy • Cranial Sacral Therapy Energy Balancing  ^  fara  r  /heal  ing centre  &as  *&cfou  r    R« ist.red M«sa e Th.,1 i,.  10-2495 Commercial Drive 8 Broadway   Telephone: 251-6879 |  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discountsfor  book clubs  Special orders  MARCH 2000 Arts  Drumming to a different beat:  The Bold Frequencies of  LOUD  by deni tang  Most people know LOUD as a band  that stands up for issues and pushes the  words 'social responsibility' into the music arena. In an industry where competitiveness and 'fitting in' demand an unnecessary degradation of musical taste, LOUD  not only preserves its melodic integrity but  also its firm position on pro-choice, prisoners' rights and environmental concerns,  just to mention a few.  As the most respected instrumental trio  to fit into the category of 'Music Group for  Social Causes', LOUD's music has been described as alternative, inventive and taiko-  grunge. If you ask me honestly how I would  describe LOUD, I would have to offer the  following scenario:  Imagine yourself in a fully crowded,  alternative gig with tons of people around  you. People you kind of know from the past  or recent present, having declared yourself  'a community activist'. The show has been  going on for two hours or so. Bands have  played one after another and the players  have gone on and off the stage. Even  though it was an absolute cruising scene,  you were getting a bit bored.  Then you heard these women using an  electric guitar and a few taiko drums. They  came up with a tune that sent a quiet and  consistent rumble through every vein and  artery of your system. You paid attention  to the ease of the taiko drummers with their  bachi, and the guitarist's intensity and purpose. You woke up.  So, 251 words later, I want to tell you  that LOUD is one rhythmically distinct  band. Formed in 1996, LOUD is composed  of electric guitarist Elaine Stef and taiko  players Eileen Kage and Leslie Komori. Stef  has been involved with alternative bands  such as Lillian Allan Band, Rhythm Activism and Moral Lepers. Kage and Komori  are active in the Asian Canadian performing arts scene with groups like Uzume  Taiko, Kokoro Dance, Katari Taiko and  Sawagi Taiko.  With the catchy title Loudzilla, the CD  begins with a low drumming rhythm and  gradually introduces guitar chords. The  deeper tones slowly bring in more distinct  sounds of the bachi being struck on the rims  of the taiko drums. Stef's strumming intensifies. Kage and Komori join in. Fiery as it  grows, the tune remains dark and calm.  A composition dedicated to mark the  end of apartheid in South Africa, 'April 26'  incorporates the beautiful melody of a flute  played by Komori. The effect is a long sad  ode to acknowledge the pain and suffering  of apartheid victims.  In memory of a woman who died in  prison, 'Johny Bear' represents loneliness  and isolation. The guitar chords are played  in a simple yet powerful percussion arrangement.  'Tarantella', the sixth tune on  taikoelectric, captured my full attention with  the combined sounds of electric guitar,  sumo, josuke, cymbals, shims floor torn and  fan drums. The ensemble fosters reminiscent feelings of walking through alleys and  urban pathways with nowhere to turn. It's  one of my favourite tracks. I was left in a  confused state of emotions after listening  to 'Tarantella,' but the confusion was desired.  As the rhythm faded in and out of the  central movement, my emotions followed  the mysterious modulation. Expecting it to  stop at any moment, it continued until a  series of drumming signified its end.  The last track, 'Hush,' holds a longer  sequence of Stef's strings and pulls the  drumming together to make a more subdued piece of music. 'Hush' is a modest  piece to announce the end of the CD. It  draws listeners into a grey dimension—to  listen for more to come. The rumbling pulse  that listeners experience in the last three  minutes and eighteen seconds is finally released into open space.  I have seen LOUD perform in various  venues, such as Oppenheimer Park and  Stanley Theatre—contrasting in their physical environment and audience participation. Aside from their innovative compositions, LOUD's strong stage presence has  created atmospheres where I felt their energy overflowing from the stage to the audience. Their energy is passionate, bold,  vigorous and sonorous. I am overwhelmed,  amazed and deeply affected by the vibrations of the music and how it pounds  within me.  The urgency of LOUD's music demands our focus for its rhythmic frequencies. It will prompt you for an active ear. It  will ask for a sentiment. It will promise listeners an electrical effect.  LOUD'S debut CD, taikoelectric, was  co-produced and engineered by Greg Reely  who also produced Spirit of the West, Sarah  McLachlan and 54-40. Taikoelectric is distributed through Festival Distribution Inc.  Their official CD release performance  will be held on Sunday, March 12 at the  Western Front, 303 East 8th Avenue. Show  time is at 8pm. Doors open at 7:30pm.  Cover is $5. The performance will also be  webcast at Pacific Standard Time 8pm  through their website: http://  www.taikoelectric.com  I don't know about you but I already  informed my friends on the other side of  the world that it is a mandatory requirement of our friendship to tune in. So if you  cannot make it (for obviously no good reason), you should break-in somewhere and  log on to a computer for this purpose.  deni tang was so excited about writing this review that she ate only preserved plums for 72  hours to calm her nerves.  KINESIS  MARCH 2000 Bulletin Board  NVOLVEMEN  GROUPS  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum of 50  words. Groups, organizations and individuals  eligible for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit objectives.  Other free notices will be items of general  public interest and will appear at the  discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for the first  50 words or portion thereof, $4 (+$0.28  GST) for each additional 25 words or portion  thereof and must be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 1 8th of the month preceding publication.  Note: Kinesis is published ten times a year.  Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a contact  name and telephone number for any  clarification that may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the  goods and services advertised in Bulletin  Board. Kinesis cannot guarantee the accuracy  of the information provided or the safety and  effectiveness of the services and products  listed.  Send submissions to Kinesis, #309-877 E.  Hastings Street, Vancouver, BC,V6A 3Y1, fax:  (604) 255-7508, or email: kinesis@web.net.  For more information call (604) 255-5499.  NVOLVEMENX  INQUIRING MINDS WANTTO KNOW!  Do you ever wonder how the pages of text  in the newspaper you're holding get lined  up so neatly? Want to know the fastest way  to get wax off your hands? How about all  the cool things you can do with a scanner?  Does thinking about the right dot pattern  keep you up at night? Or do visions of  rubylith enter into your dreams? If so, then  you definitely need to come down and help  put Kinesis together. Just drop by during  our next production dates and help us  design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper, and all your questions  will be answered. Come and join us. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All women  interested in what goes into Kinesis—  whether it's news, features or arts—are  invited to our Story Meetings held on the  first Tuesday of every month at 7pm at our  office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For more  information or if you can't make the meeting  but still want to find out how to contribute to  the content of Kinesis, give Georgina a call  at (604) 255-5499. New and experienced  writers are welcome. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you want to learn to do referral and peer  counselling work, at VSW we are offering a  great opportunity to women interested in  volunteer work during the day. Come  answer the phone lines, talk to women who  drop in, and help connect them with the  community resources they need. For more  information call (604) 255-6554. Childcare  and travel subsidies available.  FEMINIST FUNDRAISERS WANTED  VSW is seeking enthusiastic, energetic  and creative women to join the Finance  and Fundraising Committee. If you enjoy  raising money for a great cause, organizing events, or just want to have fun, call  Audrey at (604) 255-6554 today!   KINESIS MARKETING GANG  Interested in being on the hottest committee at VSW? Then check out the Kinesis  Marketing Gang. We're looking for women  who have experience or are interested in  advertising and marketing. The Marketing  Gang works as a collective to strategize  on innovative ways to promote and raise  the profile of Kinesis. The gang meets  monthly. Training and support will be  provided by Kinesis marketing coordinator  Jenn Lo. Call her at (604) 255-5499.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Empower your community while developing job skills. The British Columbia Persons with AIDS Society needs volunteers.  There are opportunities for all interests  and skills. Particularly needed now are  people with law, administrative, research  or data entry skills. For more information,  contact Gillian Barber at (604) 893-2298.  GROUPS  JAPANESE QUEER GROUP  A new group has started up in Vancouver  for lesbians, bisexual women and  transgendered women of Japanese  heritage. Meetings will be every third  Thursday. We will provide you with a safe  and joyful place to meet others. For  location and more info call Tomiye at (604)  728-0097; or contact Aki on her pager at  (604) 708-6867 or by email at  aking1975@hotmail.com  NACYOUNG WOMEN'S CAUCUS  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women presents its Young  Women's Caucus for women between the  ages of 16 and 30. It is imperative that  young women have space where their  voices are validated, celebrated and  honoured. The NAC Young Women's  Caucus is committed to providing that  space, as well as demanding it! Please  join in the struggle. For more info contact  Rachel at (416) 755-9605, email:  thedivas@pathcom.com; or Kelly at (905)  525-0629, email: hwetl-pr@interlynx.net.  OTTAWA RCC  The Ottawa Rape Crisis Centre is looking  for committed volunteers to work on its  crisis line, or Public Education and  Fundraising program. Ottawa RCC is a  volunteer-based organization which relies  on over 8,000 volunteer hours a year.  Volunteering can and often does lead to  paid work. As part of the Centre's diversity  plan, priority will be given to women from  diverse ethno-racial/cultural backgrounds.  If you would like to join the Ottawa RCC in  building a fully inclusive anti-racist service,  call (613) 562-2334, ext 24 for an information package.  SURVIVORS FOR SURVIVORS  Survivors for Survivors, a self-help group  run by and for women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, offers referrals and  weekly support meetings. The group aims  to maintain a warm, safe and judgement-  free environment in which women can  speak about their lives, be heard by open  ears, and move towards healing. Meetings  take place in the North Vancouver area.  For meeting dates or more info call Maya  at (604) 987-6486. All calls held in strictest  confidence.  PRIDELINE  The Centre's Prideline offers information,  referrals, and peer support to lesbian, gay,  transgendered and bisexual people 7 days  a week from 7-1 Opm. In the Lower Mainland call (604) 684-6869. Elsewhere in BC  call 1-800-566-1170.   BI-WOMEN'S GET-TOGETHER  A bisexual women's get-together in  Vancouver is being held once a month for  conversation, munchies, laughs and the  occasional bi-related movie. For more info  and to get on the email list, call (604) 734-  9407 or email Liane at  angelbum @ netcom.ca.  BWSS SUPPORT GROUPS  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver offers a range of support groups  for women who are in or who have been in  abusive intimate relationships. Women  meet to share common experiences and to  receive emotional support, information and  practical help on resources. BWSS has  various drop-in groups, including a custody  and access support group, a group for  Japanese women, a group run through the  Downtown Eastside Women's Centre, and  10-week groups. Bus tickets and on-site  childcare or childcare subsidies are  available. Call (604) 687-1867 for more  info.  SATRANG  If you are into drama, theatre sports, et  cetera, and feel strongly about issues  affecting South Asian women, come and  check out the South Asian Theatre and  Networking Group. Satrang is about  enthusiasm and having fun with your  creativity in a positive scene. Meetings are  every Monday from 3:30-5pm at the South  Asian Women's Centre, 8163 Main Street,  Vancouver. For more info call Anu at (604)  592-0013 or Sonia at (604) 325-6637.  MENOPAUSE AWARENESS GROUP  The Surrey Women's Centre is sponsoring  a Menopause Awareness Group which  meets the 4th Monday of each month for  informal discussions around menopause  issues. The group starts at 7:30pm and will  be held at the centre. For location or more  info call Janet or Sharon at (604) 589-  1868.   BUILDING BLOCKS  Building Blocks Vancouver offers information and support for Spanish-speaking,  Vietnamese and Aboriginal women living in  the Grandview Woodlands area expecting  their first baby or with newborns under  three months old. The program has a great  team of Home Visitors to assist women. For  more info call Mosaic at (604) 254-9626 or  the Vancouver Aboriginal Family and Child  Services at (604) 251-4844, local 311.  GROUPS  RAPE RELIEF VOLUNTEERS  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Volunteer training sessions are  held Tuesday evenings. For more info and  a training interview call (604) 872-8212.  SHAKTI  Shakti (meaning "strength") is a self-help  group in Vancouver for South Asian women  who have experienced the psychiatric  system. The group meets every 1st and  3rd Sunday of the month 1 -3pm at South  Asian Women's Centre, 8163 Main Street,  Vancouver. Join the group for outings,  discoveries, peer support, and non-  traditional therapies. Participation is free.  For more info call Helen (604) 733-5570  (for English). Sponsored by the Vancouver/  Richmond Mental Health Network.  LESBIAN SOCIAL GROUP  In the Company of Women, a social group  for lesbians in the Lower Fraser Valley  meets one Friday every month in the  Surrey/Langley area to plan social activities. For more info call Jill at (604) 576-  8107.   ALLIES TO FIRST NATIONS WOMEN  "Allies to First Nations Women," a subcommittee of the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women-BC region, has been  re-activated. The subcommittee works in  solidarity with Aboriginal women, particularly in the areas of research, proposal  writing and organizing. Any woman wishing  to join is welcome. For more info call Jenea  at (604) 294-8092.   MOTHERS INTRANSITION  Mothers in Transition Support Group holds  regular coffee meetings for mothers who  have lost custody of their offspring due to  mental illness. Come meet other moms of  like mind and situations. Share experiences and interests. We hope together to  lessen the burden of living without our  offspring. We create friendship. Private  meetings with Dawn are also available. For  more info, contact Dawn at (604) 871-0151.  OPENING FOR PRACTITIONERS  Pam Fichtner, registered massage therapist, is pleased to announce the new  location of her practice: The Sephira  Healing Centre. The primary focus of the  practice is women's health with a focus on  massage therapy, cranial sacral therapy  and sematoemotional release. Pam  Fichtner serves a diverse population of  women and is interested in addressing  bisexual and lesbian health issues. Complimentary health practitioners interested in  joining the centre should call (604) 434-  9943.  WOMEN ABUSE SUPPORT GROUP        SWIMSUIT OPTIONAL SWIM  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver is offering a support group for  women who are in or have been in abusive  intimate relationships with women. The  group provides emotional support, legal  information and advocacy, safety planning,  and referrals. The group is free and  confidential. Bus tickets and childcare  subsidies are available. For more info (604)  687-1867.   COMPULSIVE EATING SUPPORT  A drop-in support group for women with  issues of compulsive eating is held twice a  month at the Eating Disorder Resource  Centre of BC, St. Paul's Hospital, Room  2C-213, 1081 Burrard St, Vancouver. Drop-  in times are 7:30-9pm every 1st and 3rd  Wednesday of the month. Facilitated by  Colleen Hyland and Cynthia Johnston. For  more info call (604) 631-5313.  Women finally have their own swimsuit-  optional sessions at a local indoor public  facility. All women, girls and ten year-old or  younger boys welcome. Facilities are  wheelchair accessible. Swim held every  second Saturday of each month Mar 11,  April 8, May 13, and June 10.700  Templeton Dr. Vancouver BC. For more info  call (604) 687-7637.   BREAST SCREENING CENTRES  The Screening Mammography Program of  BC is pleased to announce the opening of  3 new breast screening centres in Vancouver: St. Paul's Hospital (604) 660-3639,  5732 Victoria Drive (604) 321-6770 or  #505 - 750 West Broadway (604) 879-  8700. For more information or to get a list  of existing centres, call (604) 660-3639.  K%£lS Bulletin Board  GROUPS  FREE LEGAL SERVICES FOR  ABUSED WOMEN  Free legal services for abused women are  being offered by Battered Women's  Support Services (BWSS). This program is  coordinated with other BWSS services. For  more info call (604) 687-1867.   LTBI DISCUSSION GROUP  A drop-in discussion/social group for  lesbian, transgendered, bisexual women  and their women allies will be held every  Friday from 6:30pm-8:30pm at The Centre,  1170 Bute St. For more info call (604) 684-  5307.   VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN  Atira Transition House and the Justice  Institute of BC are offering a half-day panel  forum to discuss the links between violence against women, substance misuse/  addictions, mental health and child welfare.  Panel speakers and audience participation  will address the conflicts that arise between workers coming from diverse  systems and viewpoints, in order to begin  to build a common ground approach to  working with women and/or their children  who are facing these issues in their lives.  The forum will take place Mar 14 at the  Justice Institute from 8am-12pm.  To register or for more info contact  Jeanette at Atira Transition House Society  at (604) 531-9100.  EVENTS  UBMISSION  EVENTS  WOMEN SCIENCE &TECHNOLOGY  On Tues Mar 14 Professor Mariane Ainley  will talk about Gendered Careers: Canadian Women and Science, 1890-1970. On  Tues April 11 Professor Indira Samarekera  will speak on Women and Engineering - A  Challenging Frontier. All talks begin at 5:15  pm and are held in Lecture Hall Room  1080 at 2111 Lower Mall, UBC. For more  info call (604) 822-8781 or (604) 822-8788.  WORKSHOP FOR WOMEN OF  COLOUR  A free potluck workshop on Career Information for First Nations women and  women of colour will be held on Thurs Mar  2 and Tues Mar 7 from 5-8pm. The workshop is led by Kim Leslie, a career counsellor and advisor. The event takes place at  Buchanan penthouse, Block B, UBC.  Registration required. For more info, to  register and childcare call Benita or Jen at  (604) 822-0617.   AFRICAN FILM FESTIVAL  The African Canadian Association will be  hosting an African Film Festival from Feb 5  to Feb 26 at various locations around  Vancouver. Admission is free. For more  info phone one of the following numbers:  (604) 739-5187, (604) 253-3018 or (604)  324-1194.   LESLEY DILL BILLBOARDS  Artist Lesley Dill has designed a billboard  using images and the words of poet Emily  Dickinson. The billboard can be seen  during the month of February at the corner  of Georgia and Homer streets (across from  the library) in Vancouver. This project is  brought to us by Presentation House  Gallery.  Lazara Press is hosting the Vancouver  Launch of Halfway to the East by Marusya  Bociurkiw on Wed Mar 29 at the Templeton  Restaurant, 1087 Granville St. Kitchen  opens at 6pm. Reading at 7:30pm. Restaurant is wheelchair accessible. Washrrom is  not. For more info call (604)-1134 or email  lazara@web.net  BRICK POETRY BASH  Join us for a wonderful and inspiring  evening of poetry on February 24, at 7:30  pm and hear the work of Helen  Humphreys, Julie Bruck, and Mariene  Cookshaw. These three Canadian women  will read from their latest collections of  poetry, guaranteed to be provocative,  powerful and unforgettable. Reading held  at Women in Print 3566 W. 4th Ave.  Vancouver. For more info call 732-4128.  LEE MILLER PHOTOGRAPHS  An exhibition of the work of photographer  Lee Miller will be held until Sun Feb 20 at  the Presentation House Gallery, 333  Chesterfield Ave. North Vancouver. This is  the only Canadian venue on its international tour. For more info call (604) 986-  1351.   KULDIP GILL  Kuldip Gill will be reading from her first  collection of poetry, Dharma Rasa on Tues  Feb 22 at 7:30pm. This magnificent  collection intertwines life experiences in  Canada and India, and the languages of  Punjabi and English. It is a rich and lyrical  collection and a treat for the poetry lover.  Reading held at Women in Print 3566 W.  4th Ave. Vancouver. For more info call (604)  732-4128.   WOMEN'S CONGRESS  Designing Our Future: Women's Learning  Education and Training in Canada: 2000  and Beyond,a congress to celebrate the  twentieth anniversary of the Canadian  Congress for Learning Opportunities for  Women (CCLOW) will be held in Toronto  March 2-5, 2000. For more info email  cclow@web.net or website http://-  www.nald.ca/cclow.htm or contact Eileen  Page at (416) 599-2854 or fax (416) 599-  5605.  ENHANCING SERVICETO  TRANSGENDERED CLIENTS  A one-day conference for service providers  and health professionals will be offered on  Mar 17, 8:30am-3:30pm at the New  Lecture Theatre, St. Paul's Hospital, 1081  Burrard St, Vancouver. For more info call  (604) 684-5307.   NOT SO STRICTLY BALLROOM  Where same sex-dancing is not so queer.  Dance classes on Thurs 7-9pm at St. Pauls  Church Hall, 1130 Jervis and Sat 10:30-  am12:30pm at the Wise Hall, 1882 Adanac  St. Come out to our Sat Mar 4 dance at  Let's Dance Studio at the Harbour Dance  Centre on Granville, across from the Vogue  Theatre. Starts at 8:30pm. Tickets at  Harry's, Little Sisters or at the door. Two  step, line dancing, waltz, jive, cha cha,  rhumba, tango—the works!  For more info call (604) 688-West ext.  2145.  CARE ADVOCACY  Dr. Susan Prentice, a professor in the  Department of Sociology at the University  of Manitoba, is seeking submissions for an  edited text on the history, politics and  practice of child care in Canada from 1945-  1995. The aim of the anthology is to  identify the particular ways that child care  mobilization has contributed to the development of policy and services in Canada.  For suggested topic ideas or if you wish to  submit a paper, contact Susan Prentice,  Department of Sociology, University of  Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3R 2N2;  tel: (204) 474-6726 (call collect); fax: (204)  261-1216; e-mail:  sprenti@cc.umanitoba.ca. The submission  deadline is June 2000, but is flexible.  ZINE FOR WOMEN/LESBIANS  Let it be known - Experiences of women/  lesbian activists. Seeking stories (500-  2000) words, drawings or photographs in  any of the following imperialist languages:  english, trench, Spanish or german.  Submissions can be mailed, emailed or  faxed to Let it be Known c/o Student  Environment Centre, sub, 6138 Student  Union Blvd., Vancouver, BC, fax: (604) 822-  9019 (attn. Let it be known), email:  letknown@vcn.bc.ca  QUEER INSPIRATIONS  Rainbow Pride Press is seeking inspirational stories that motivate, inspire and  uplift individuals. Submissions should be  no more than 1,400 words or between one  and six pages, typed and double spaced.  Multiple submissions are welcome. Deadline for submissions is March 31, 2000.  Please mail or email submissions with  short biography to Rainbow Pride Press,  "Journeys Across the Rainbow", 6525  Gunpark Drive, Suite #150-117, Boulder  Colorado, USA 80301, email:  EditorRPP@aol.com.  ART SHOW SPACE  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  has opened its space to women artists.  Shows will run for 4-6 weeks under  contract guidelines. The Collective will host  an opening, and provide some advertising  as well as hanging materials. For details,  leave a message for Christine Campbell or  Tamara Flick-Parker at (604) 736-4234.  ANTI-RACIST CONFERENCE  An international conference on anti-racism  activism will be taking place from Nov 23-  25, 2000 in Vancouver, BC. The 3 day  forum will bring together community  groups, NGOs, academics, policy makers  and practitioners to re-think concepts,  practices and strategies for eliminating  racism in the new millennium. Proposals  are being accepted for paper sessions,  individual presentations, workshops,  demonstrations, exhibits or performances.  Deadline for submissions is Mar 15,2000.  For more info contact Audrey Kobayashi  by fax @ (604) 822 -6150 or by email at  kobayashi @post.queensu.ca  BLACK HISTORY MONTH  The Women's Resource Centre in Fort  Nelson is planning to celebrate Black  History Month by inviting submissions for  an essay contest for their newsletter. The  subject will be Black people who have  made an impact on society. Past participants have been high school students as  well as Northern Lights College students.  The winner receives $25 cash and an  award. Entries will be accepted for both the  Feb and March newsletters. Send submissions/ inquiries to shagrilala@yahoo.com.  SUBMISSION  HEALTH NETWORK  The Canadian Women's Health Network  invites submissions for its quarterly  newsletter, Network. If you'd like to contribute or wish to suggest a topic we should  cover, please email the editor at  news@cwhn.ca. Or contact her at CWHN  Network, 203-419 Graham Ave, Winnipeg,  MB, R3C 0M3, or visit the CWHN website  at www.cwhn.ca.  PHOTOS OF GAY AND LESBIAN  FAMILIES  A Safer World, a National Film Board  documentary/animation project, is looking  for a diverse array of out gay couples and  their families to share their photos or to be  photographed. For more info or to make a  submission, call Chris at (604) 255-0057.  ESSAY COMPETITION  The National Association of Women and  the Law and the Charitable Trust invite  women to submit essays on a topic of the  author's choice within the general themes  of "Women March in 2000: To End Poverty  and Violence Against Women." Essays  should address a legal issue or themes of  importance in achieving these two goals at  a domestic, national or international level,  and should incorporate feminist research  and analysis. Competition is open to all  students registered at a post-secondary  institution in Canada. Deadline for submissions is May 31, 2000. Send submissions  to National Association of Women and the  Law, 604-1 Nicholas Street, Ottawa,  Ontario K1N 7B7. For more info phone  (613) 241-7570 or email nawl@ftn.net.  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call (604) 876-6390.  CITYVIEW CO-OP  Cityview Housing Co-op is accepting  applications for its short waitlist for one,  two and three bedroom suites. Carpets,  blinds, appliances, parking and laundry  room. Children and small pets welcome.  Friendly and multicultural! Participation  required. Please send a business size  SASE to Membership Committee, Cityview  Housing Co-op, 108-1885 E. Pender St,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 1W6. For more info,  call (604) 215-1376.   MINDFULNESS-BASED STRESS  REDUCTION FOR WOMEN  This meditative approach to working with  stress, pain and illness is offered in  introductory classes, eight week courses or  individual sessions. For more info call  Deborah Prieur at (604) 733-6136.   SEA KAYAKING FOR WOMEN  You can learn to sea kayak with Bonny  Glambeck of Rainforest Kayak Adventures  in Tofino, B.C. No experience necessary!  Join us for LunaSea, A Women's Solstice  Journey, working with the Elements of  Nature, we will embark on a gental journey  of healing and rejuvenation. On our Women  Who Run with the Waves course, you will  learn the basic skills necessary to do trips  on your own. For more info call toll-frre  1 (877)422-WILD, or check out:  www.rainforestkayak.com. Lodge-based  staff or board retreats, custom trips all in  Clayoquot Sound. Go wild!  KINESIS Responsible Advertising  for  Responsible Rates  Display ads start from $23.00  For more info call jenn @ (604)255-5499  MARCH 2000