 Special Collections Serial  /august 1989 A new epidemic? Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of  the paper. Call us at 255-  5499. Our next News Group  is Thurs. Aug. 3, at 1:30 pm  at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant  St. All women welcome even if  you don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Marsha Arbour, Joanne Ar-  nott, Gwen Bird, Donna Butorac, Suzanne Cook, Donna  Dykeman, Sylvia Fuller, Kim  Irving, Suzanne Jay, Leslie Komori, Sonia Marino, Allisa McDonald, Nancy Pollak, Noreen  Shanahan, Esther Shannon,  Elizabeth Shefrin, Erin Soros,  Bonnie Waterstone  FRONT COVER: Photo by  Chris Poellein  EDITORIAL BOARD: Marsha Arbour, Gwen Bird, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Shanahan,  Esther Shannon, Michele Valiquette.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Gwen Bird, Cat  L'Hirondelle, Esther Shannon  ADVERTISING: Marsha Arbour  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle,  Esther Shannon  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $17.50 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $25.50 or what you can afford/includes subscription to  Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit and submis-  n does not guarantee publication. All submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  n address and phone number.  Please note Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews the 10th of the month  preceding publication; news  copy, 15th; letters and Bulletin  Board listings 18th. Display  advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Periodical Publishers Association and is indexed  in the Alternative Press Index.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and  an in-house laser printer. Additional laser printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by Northwest Graphics.  Printing by Web Press Graph-  Zenaida Uy brings news of Aquino's Philippines—and the news isn't  good 12  Stella    Chiweshe    breaks    musical    ground    in  Zimbabwe 19  INSIDE  Striking for health—and healthy pay 3  Elderly women hit hard 3  Young women tired of ageist attitudes 5  Press Gang—union maids, at last 5  Indian Homemakers^-J^ealth, wholeness threatened. 6  EAT  "We're dealing with an epidemic" 7  by Joni Miller  Class, poverty and issues of power 9  by Marusia Bociurkiw  Chile: how to destroy a health care system 11  by Isobel McDonald  By virtue of her sex, by virtue of her class 12  as told to Cecilia Diocson  ARTS/  c>  On a video coach bound for Delhi 15  by Dorothy Kidd  Speaking of feminism and painting 16  by Susan Leibik  Rebel Girls: moving into the spotlight 17  by Jennifer Babcock  Reclaiming forgotten ways of knowing 18  by Lin Patfield  by  Rfqmtfs  /ement Matters 2  What's News? ... ..  8  >y Donna Butorac  Making Waves 19  by Laurie E. Nerman  In Other Worlds 20  by Melanie Conn  Letters   21  Bulletin Board 22  compiled by Donna Dykeman  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  Women, 301-1720 Grant St  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  of  KINESIS Movement Matters  /ement  atters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  [network of news, updates and informa-  of special interest to the women's  sment. Submissions to Movement Mat-  should, be no mote than 500 words,  i, doable-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for,  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Going their  separate ways  The Women's Skills Development Society, better known as WomenSkills, is in the  process of formalizing the separation of its  three working groups, a move designed to  enable the groups to pursue goals more effectively. If the WomenSkills membership  consents to this friendly separation at the  upcoming Annual General Meeting (July  17th), WomenSkills will cease to exist.  The three working groups, now formed  into distinct societies, are the Westcoast  Womenfutures Community Economic Development Society (#206, 33 E. Broadway, Vancouver, V5T 1V4, Tel. 874-1777);  Women and Work Research and Education Society (4340 Carson St., Burnaby,  B.C. V5J 2X9, Tel. 430-3919 (Microtech)  and 430-0458 (Clerical Workers' Health  and Safety))-, and The Learning Resources  Group (#1 2445 E. Hastings St., Vancouver,  Teh 251-7476.  For more information about the groups'  range of projects and activities, contact the  Burnaby address (above) for the latest issue  of the WomenSkills newsletter.  Popular  education  in Nicaragua  The Nicaragua Collection is a newly  released set of publications that examines Nicaragua's use of popular education methods throughout its entire educational system—an experiment that deserves  worldwide attention and support.  In Nicaragua, education is seen as a key  element in the development of democracy,  helping ensure that the revolution remains  in the hands of the Nicaraguan people. The  building of a new society requires a constant search for creative responses to the  ever-changing social, political and economic  needs of the country. Popular education  strives to teach people how to participate in  the decision-making that affects their Uves.  The Nicaragua Collection is for those  concerned with broad educational issues,  with the relationship between education  $  Press Gang  Printers  603 Powell Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6A 1H2  253-1224  and democracy, with women's pivotal role  in social change, and with the Nicaraguan  revolution in particular. One of the four  booklets in the set is The Moon Also Has  Her Own Light, an account of "the struggle to build a women's consciousness among  Nicaraguan farm workers."  The Collection is published by the Par-   ;  ticipatory Research Group and the ICAE   ?  Women's Program. For ordering information write to PRG, 394 Euclid Ave., Suite  308, Toronto, Ont. M6G 2S9  Festival time  in Kootenays  Come and join the women of the Kootenays at their annual Women's Festival, Aug.  12 and 13, at the beautiful Valican Whole  in the Slocan Valley, B.C.  Festivities start with a Friday night bonfire, followed by two days of theatre, music, dancing, workshops, good eats, poetry  and lots of children's activities. Workshops  reflect this year's festival theme, "The Forbidden festival," and include Feminism and  Leadership, Body Image, Reclaiming Our  Playfulness, Homophobia and Broadening  Our Base. An arts and crafts bazaar, camping, swimming and sunshine are guaranteed.  Admission is $35 including all meals  (bring a side dish to the Sat. barbecue).  An hour's work commitment is asked for;  no women will be turned away for inability  to pay. Women wishing to reserve display  space at the bazaar or to perform at Sunday's Stage should register before August 1.  Contact the Women's Festival Cmtte., Nelson Women's Centre, 601 D Front St., Nelson B.C. V1L 4B6 or call 352-9916.  Calling  Black women  playwrights  Sister Vision: Black Women and Women  of Colour Press is calling for submissions  from Black women playwrights in Canada  for Black Stage Women, the first anthology of its kind in this country.  One act and full-length plays, and dramatized prose/poetry are welcome. Both  new and previously produced scripts, as well  as works-in-progress will be considered. Information about previous/proposed production dates or projected completion dates  should be included.  Send submissions by Aug. 31, 1989 to  Black Stage Women, c/o Sister Vision  Press, PO Box 217, Stn. E, Toronto, Ont.  M6H 4E2.  For women  who have  miscarried  Shattered Dreams is a Canadian newsletter aimed at women who have experienced single or multiple pregnancy losses.  Published by Ontarian Cathy McDiarmid,  who has had five miscarriages, Shattered  Dreams is attempting to bridge the information and support gap among the countless women who miscarry each year, and  SUPPORT VOUR LOCAL WOMEN'S PRESS  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  732-3227  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  Inside  Kinesis  by Nancy Pollak  The letter came early in June. "Dear  Tapestry subscriber," it began. "The  Tapestry Collective is sorry to inform you  that due to funding difficulties, we are unable to pubUsh the Spring issue of our journal."  Tapestry, a newsletter published by the  Vernon and District Women's Centre, is the  news source—and outlet—for feminists in  the Okanagan. Why the difficulty publishing? As their letter explains, "Tapestry no  longer receives any part of the Women's  Centre grant from the Secretary of State  [Women's Program] ..."  Why talk about Tapestry in the "Inside Kinesis" column? Well, we're always  distressed at the news—heard so often  these days—that a sister publication is being silenced simply because the bills can't  be paid. And we are particularly alarmed  when the economic crunch comes from the  Women's Program, the body that funds our  publisher, the Vancouver Status of Women.  As we reported last issue, VSW has been  dealt a 15 percent funding cut from the  Women's Program. This month, we have  been informed—informally—that the cut  will be targeted at the Kinesis editor's  salary. In the upcoming weeks and months,  we will be enlisting your support—as readers, subscribers and contributors—to resist  this attack on English-speaking Canada's  most comprehensive feminist newspaper.  Meanwhile, life around the paper goes on.  We have set a date for our 4th Annual Out-  of-town Retreat: Oct. 13-15. Any woman interested in finding out about femimst journalism (and Kinesis in particular) is encouraged to attend this weekend of workshops and fun. Details are being hammered  out and we'U have a full report next issue;  for now, mark your calendar.  Our Open House and raffle in June were  a success (thanks for coming, everyone).  We'd also Uke to thank the raffle prize contributors: Custom Colour, the Vancouver  Folk Music Festival, Janet Bristeir, Kiss  who receive Uttle information or support  from the medical establishment.  Shattered Dreams carries book reviews,  research updates, stories and poems, and  maintains a resource Ust. For subscription  information write: Born To Love, 21 Potsdam Rd., Unit 61, Downsview, Ont. M3N  1N3 or call (416) 663-7143.  "No Place To  Go" Forum  The Tenants Rights Coalition in Vancouver is sponsoring a community forum  & TeU, and SFU Writing and PubUsh-  ing Program—and Horizon Distributors for  goodies. Thanks also to everyone who sold  and bought tickets, and helped organize the  event.  In the last few months, Kinesis has  had plenty of comings and goings, and the  trend continues. This month, we say goodbye to Donna Butorac who is San Fransisco-  bound. Between painting houses and other  paying gigs, Donna has been a steady presence at Kinesis, writing What's News and  other material, proof reading, pasting-up—  and cracking us up. We'U miss you, Donna:  skiUs and laughs and aU.  We say goodbye also to Allisa McDonald whose leave from the Editorial Board  turned into a full-fledged fareweU this  month. Allisa has been, among other things,  our volunteer computer whiz and all-round  thinker: a woman who always gave careful  consideration to the many issues facing this  community paper. You'U be missed, Allisa.  A couple of vital Kinesis positions found  new blood this month. Donna Dykeman has  taken on the volunteer task of compiling  BuUetin Board, a job that depends both on  her thoroughness (and she is thorough) and  you, dear reader (another reminder to get  notices in by the 18th). Welcome, Donna,  to the world of knowing what's happening  when and why.  Joanne Arnott has been hired as our new  Advertising Coordinator, a commission job  that is Ukely to become increasingly important to our survival. Joanne brings lots of  energy and interest to this job, and we're  reaUy pleased to have caught her eye.  FinaUy, we have a big goodbye for Marsha Arbour who is retiring from her two  Kinesis jobs, Production Coordinator and  Advertising Coordinator. Marsha has made  a tremendous contribution to both roles,  wrestUng workable systems out of (relative)  chaos so that the rest of us could breathe a  Uttle easier, knowing some parts of the paper were really taken care of.  For almost two years, women volunteering for hands-on work at Kinesis have met  with Marsha in the production room, finding in her a skiUed trainer and a warm coworker. Marsha created a production space  where an adventurous newcomer could have  a page aU to herself, and where a more hesitant volunteer was assured of plenty of instruction and encouragement.  Marsha is looking forward to joining the  ranks of the essential volunteers, Ulustrat-  ing a story, designing a page. We're looking  forward to that, too. Thanks for everything,  Marsha,  on strategies for affordable housing on Saturday, July 8th. Individuals who are concerned about—or directly affected by—the  housing crisis are encouraged to attend, as  are groups who have endorsed the housing  program, "A Way Out Of The Crisis"  The CoaUtion is hoping to stimulate community discussion on actions to save affordable housing and ways to encourage the creation of new affordable housing. There is  no need to pre-register for the forum which  starts at 9:30 am with a screening of the  video The Right To Fight, at the CoaUtion offices, 2250 Commercial Drive, Vancouver. Tel: 255-3009 for information.  L  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday- Saturday  ^  A  Corrections  Our apologies to Victoria Status of  Women Action Group (SWAG). Comments  attributed to staffperson Marianne Alto  ("Services in peril" June, 1989) were incomplete and out of context. Any difficulty this  may have caused SWAG is regretted.  In a photo accompanying "Farmworkers  hit hard by U.L cutbacks" (June, 1989),  the language on the demonstrators' placards was Punjabi, not Hindi.  I\INLSIS   July/Aug. 89 /////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////^^^^^  News  Nurses, HEU  Striking for health—and healthy pay  by Nancy Pollak  With public opinion solidly behind them and picket-Une morale  soaring, B.C. nurses have been  asked by their union to approve a  contact that falls far short of their  original demands.  As Kinesis goes to press on  June 27, nurses are studying the  negotiated settlement which came  after a two and a half week strike,  the first province-wide job action  by nurses fed up with low pay and  chronic staff shortages.  "We're not in a very good  mood about what we've seen of  the agreement," reported a nurse  at Vancouver General Hospital  (VGH). She also expressed concern about nurses returning to  work before voting on the proposal, a condition of the settlement.  Voting wUl occur no earlier  than July 6th. At present, nurses  are honouring the picket Unes of  the striking Hospital Employees  Union (HEU). Another condition  of the proposed settlement was  that nurses no longer wear signs  declaring their own strike.  There is also concern that, if  HEU's strike ends before the vote  on the 6th, aU nurses wUl return  to work—making a resumption of  their own strike extremely difficult.  Excepting a first year "attraction and retention bonus" of 6.5  percent, the proposed monetary  settlement is very close to the Hospital Labour Relations Association's (HLRA) opening offer.  Nurses, anxious for a contract  that would offer incentives to  people to enter—and remain—  in the nursing field, don't beheve these increases wUl do the  trick. British Columbia suffers  from a weU-documented shortage  of nurses, largely attributable to  the province's refusal to fund the  health care system—in particular,  wages—at a level competitive with  other job markets.  The proposed contract isn't the  only flak the union leadership  has caught this strike. Nurses at  St. Paul's Hospital heard rumours  that HEU and the B.C. Federation of Labour, unhappy with the  number of nurses stiU working on  "essential services," threatened to  declare the strike an information  picket only.  Such a declaration would have  meant there was no picket Une to  honour.  While the figures varied from  hospital to hospital, the majority  of nurses remained on the job during the strike, providing services  they agreed upon with management.  IronicaUy, providing essential  services underscored the seriousness of the nursing shortage. At St.  Paul's, one nurse estimated 90 percent of nurses were stiU on the job.  Another RN, Zaitun Jiwa, described how she and one other  nurse care for 29 patients at night  on a Rehab and Medical ward—  even before the strike. A nurse for  ten years, Jiwa has worked in Alberta and Newfoundland where,  she says, "there's better pay, better benefits, better working conditions."  The HEU strike, now moving  to centre stage, involves 25,000  workers—mainly women. At issue  are low wages, pay equity and  staffing levels.  Please see Nurses pg 4  *^te  Housing crisis  Elderly women hit hard  Irene Ludlan, a member of SAD (Seniors Against Demolition),  demonstrates in late June against the recent loss of her Kerrisdale home.  by Noreen Shanahan  Let's put a face on Vancouver's  housing crisis.  An eighty-five year old woman,  Uving in a three story walk-up in  Kerrisdale, has paid her monthly  rent the last 25 years—an estimated $50,000.  A couple of months ago, she  was told to get out. The buUding  was sold and plans to demolish are  now in the works. Soon her home  wUl be rubble, then a hole in the  ground, then it'll sprout into a luxury condominium.  This woman is real although  she wishes to remain anonymous.  She and one other elderly woman  neighbour are the only tenants remaining in the Kerrisdale buUding; remaining not as a form of  protest, but because they have  nowhere to go.  Roneen Marcoux was recently  hired by Vancouver's city hall as  researcher/relocation person. Her  job—and she's the only one doing  it—is to house 'displaced tenants.'  On the job for less than two  months, Marcoux is already aware  of 500 units being demolished,  which she calls the tip of the iceberg.  "Typically, three story walkups  with 25 units are coming down.  We're losing half the density and  gaining three times the height  (with condo construction). What  this means is a 100 percent loss  of affordable rental accommodation."  Those hardest hit are elderly  women, women already paying 50  percent or more of their income  on rent. She says re-housing these  women at comparable rents in  their neighbourhoods is almost im-  lossible.  Attempting to help one woman,  Marcoux tried for several hours to  reach one landlord about a suite  advertised at $525. "After I was finaUy able to speak with him, he  said he'd had 50 calls already and  it was "first come first serve."  "But the woman I was trying to  help re-house is seventy-five; too  old to stand in Une for several  hours."  These women are told to leave  their homes and neighbourhoods,  often at risk to their emotional and  physical health.  "It brings up different emotions  buUding in me," says Suzanne  Pearson, recently evicted from her  Kerrisdale home after ten years.  "I feel anger and hurt because  it just brings up everything else,  just pushed and pushed out of one  apartment, pushed out of another  apartment. Always some reason  I'm pushed, I feel so used and  abused."  Pearson has gone as far afield as  Richmond looking for a new home,  and finds rents double what she  used to—and is able to—pay.  Being forced to move "takes  the starch right out of me," says  Pearson. "I feel debiUtated to the  point where my muscles are weak.  I'm going to have to cut back—  whether it be food or shoes or  clothes—because I'm needing a  roof over my head."  Both Marcoux and Pearson,  and presumably several hundred  other tenants, are angry at the  lack of response from Vancouver  city hall to the housing crisis.  According to Marcoux, hiring  only herself to serve the needs of  so large and desperate a community is next to useless. She's already received calls from 30 buUd-  ings slated for demolition.  Furthermore, she was given a  zero operating budget, no money  for advertising her service (she  presently walks around the streets  and leaflets buUdings), and no  money to actually help people  move.  "They have to cover moving expenses themselves, and many of  these women have no savings and  not enough to cover damage deposits. AU the money—including  increased rent—has to come out of  an income of about $800 a month."  Marcoux's relocation services  are city-wide, and she often gets  referrals from city haU's social  planning and health department.  She tells of the time spent with  one woman who isn't capable of  looking for a place on her own and  has no famUy to help her.  "This eviction has thrown her  right off balance. I've spent hours  and hours going to her place, helping her fiU application forms, writing letters to her landlord..."  What she'd Uke to see is a freeze  on demolition ("of perfectly sound,  fine, older apartment buUdings")  untU tenants are protected.  What Suzanne Pearson would  Uke to see is "A massive movement  Uke in China, against our city government and province.  "Kids are hungry, single mothers aren't getting a decent place to  Uve, old women are being thrown  out just Uke an old shoe. We  should blare aU through the different streets and shout from the  rooftops ..."  VSW's  AGM  The Vancouver Status of Women wUl hold its Annual General  Meeting on Wednesday, September 6 at 7:30 pm at our premises:  Suite #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver.  For more information caU 255-  5511.  1\INESIS July/Aug. 89 Across B.C.  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^  Dorothy Restall—neighbourly, strong  by Nora D. Randall  Many people in the Fraser Valley and Vancouver were deeply  saddened when Dorothy Restall  was kUled in a car accident on June  2. Everyone who met her remembered her and she remembered everybody. She knew her neighbours,  she knew what was going on in the  municipaUty, she knew what was  going on in Russia and China and  she cared about aU of it.  During the NDP government  (1972-75), Dorothy was hired as a  secretary in the controversial Research and Development Department of the Ministry of Education. Within six weeks, the stories had spread through the entire  civU service in Victoria that there  was a "secretary" over in R & D  who was sitting in on poUcy meetings and voting on decisions along  with the "professionals." Also, she  would not make coffee.  When the department head and  researchers were summarily fired,  Dorothy saved the files with a  piece of secretarial theatre which  has already become so legendary  there are at least three versions of  the story.  Dorothy moved with the researchers to Vancouver and quickly  became known at the school board  buUding. Everyday on the way to  her office she passed the typing  pools wearing what she wore to her  secretarial job—work boots, blue  jeans and flannel shirts. Sometimes she wore a Mao hat with a  red star too. She started talking to  the secretaries about having more  say in their jobs.  When they had evening meetings in homes, Dorothy would  leave the men meeting in the Uv-  ingroom and go into the kitchen  where the women were sitting with  the kids. She'd say, I'd rather be  in here talking to you. Then she'd  take over looking after the kids so  the women could get out of the  kitchen.  When the Vancouver School  Board job was closed down Dorothy moved with the researchers  again to the Legal Services Commission. There she succeeded in  helping organize the office workers  into the Service, Office and RetaU  Workers Union of Canada (SORWUC).  In one of the eulogies at her  funeral, Dorothy was remembered  for her love of women and chUdren. She had Uved in a women's  collective house and helped out  a lot at the New School, an alternative school for grade school  kids. Kids loved Dorothy and vice  versa, though she would never admit it. She took kids on camping trips, fishing trips, trips to the  corner store, whatever seemed to  be needed at the time. Kids could  hang out with Dorothy.  After the School Board job,  Dorothy moved to Whonnock with  Sue Moore and they started farming. At first goats, chickens and organic vegetables, later they added  pigs and turkeys. Dorothy loved  the farm. Whatever needed to be  done, she learned how to do it and  did it. Dorothy didn't just raise  pigs. Each one had a name, she  could tell them apart.  Dorothy helped Sue raise her  two boys and they also took in  foster chUdren including an eighteen month old battered baby  who Dorothy cared for in her offhandedly fierce way.  They moved to a larger farm in  Mission and started to buUd a new  house. Not everyone would take as  New era  their first buUding project a 1,500  square foot, three story house, but  Dorothy did. Dorothy would tackle  anything.  Besides farm work, Dorothy  went to work as a cook at the BUly  Miner Pub in Haney. She got the  job by teUing the owner she cooked  in the Navy. Soon she became  known as the place to go for a  hamburger and advice on what to  do with your animals. She joined  the BUly Miner dart team and won  trophies. Sue says, "Her elbow got  a workout at the pub: she flipped  hamburgers, Ufted pints and threw  darts."  In another eulogy Dorothy was  remembered for her neighbourU-  ness and her strength. Once a  neighbour called her to ask if she'd  bring her tractor over and help  him get his tractor out of the  mud. Dorothy drove over and took  a look at her neighbour's tractor. Then she went over and put  her arms under the front end of  his tractor. She picked it up and  moved it out of the mud.  Her funeral brought together  her conservative famUy, leftists,  feminists, lesbians, farmers, and  pub people at least for an afternoon. As Bernie from the pub said,  "My god, she looked after our every individual need and catered to  our whims. She'd remember aU of  the things we forgot, and sort out  aU our problems, and then, without batting an eye, she'd look right  at us and say, 'TeU someone who  Pay equity at City Hall  by Pat Davitt  and Judy Lynne  In early June, the Women's  Committee of the Equal Employment Opportunities (EEO) Program presented a pay equity brief  to Vancouver City Council's Finance and Priorities Committee  caUing for immediate action to  equaUze the entry level salaries of  Clerk Typist II (a clerical classification within the city) and  Labourer I.  At present, the male-dominated  labourer classification starts at  over $3/hr higher than the female-  dominated clerical job.  The brief also called for the  eUmination of increment steps—  the stages through which employees must advance before getting  the fuU salary for their classification of work.  It presently takes anywhere  from four to five years to make this  full salary; pay equity activists advocate that full salary be achieved  after a normal probation period,  usuaUy of several months.  As weU the brief recommended  the implementation of any other  useful strategy to move towards  pay equity.  The pay equity brief was prepared by the EEO Women's Committee, which is made up of representatives of various employee  groups within the city: Vancouver Municipal and Regional  Employee's Union (VMREU)—  inside workers; CUPE-1004—outside workers; B.C. Nurse's Union  (BCNU)—nurses; CUPE-391—  library; city excluded staff—i.e.,  not unionized; and Ubrary excluded staff.  Women have been working on  the issue of eUminating the discriminatory wage gap between female and male workers for as long  as we've been in the paid labour  force. More recently, we've struggled with a number of ways of having women's work recognized with  a fair wage.  There have been many definitions, including equal pay for equal  work, equal pay for work of equal  value, and now pay equity.  Moreover, there are different  ways of trying to resolve the sit  uation, most commonly by setting  up a system-wide, years long, job  evaluation study.  In such studies, the ingredients  that make up a job—education  level, skiUs required, responsibiU-  ties, level of difficulty, etc.—are exhaustively documented in an effort to determine which jobs are of  equal "value."  These job comparison systems  can be—and are—purchased from  the same management consultant  firms which reinforce the work  place structures and norms that  created pay inequities in the first  An eight year job evaluation  in Washington State produced exactly this result at great cost in  time, energy and money.  The Finance Committee, which  includes every CouncU member,  voted to accept the brief. A majority on CouncU acknowledged  that clerical work has been histori-  caUy and systematicaUy undervalued, and accepted the idea that  poUtical solutions must be sought  to correct such wide-spread and  deep-seated inequities.  The Finance Committee recommendations, which also include di-  We hope we won't have to wait  too long. We'd like the money now.  place. So aside from being time-  consuming and forcing women to  wait yet again for studies to be  completed before maybe getting  a fair wage, they also reflect the  historical biases which undervalue  women's work.  A simple solution to wage inequities is to identify the wage gap  between predominantly male jobs  and predominantly female jobs.  Then the two jobs are pegged at  the same entry rate (base rate  equaUzation) and the wage gap  is closed, without loss of pay to  presently higher paid workers.  Clerical workers should move up  proportionately, untU senior secretaries are roughly equivalent to  trades rates.  Nurses from page 3  Because HEU is supplying a  minimal level of essential service workers as a strategy for  accelerating negotiations, hospital employees have suffered higher  wage losses than nurses during  the nurses'—and now their own—  strike. Relations on the picket Unes  have been supportive.  The pay equity issue for HEU  is classical. Women workers are  concentrated in the lower paying jobs—and the pay is low.  Even under the HLRA's current  rections to the City Manager to assess the city's progress on pay equity and to prepare a brief for the  provincial government requesting  legislative action, go to a regular  CouncU meeting for debate and final vote, just as Kinesis goes to  press, June 27th.  Whatever happens, we are entering a new era in the move to pay  equity in Vancouver. Other municipalities are anticipating the potential impact. Private sector employers will be trying to derail the  process, whUe the clerical workers  cheer it on.  We hope we won't have to wait  too long. We'd Uke the money now.  proposal, Clerk l's—almost aU  women—would stay 16 percent below the poverty Une.  HEU is proposing a pay equity  clause that would establish a nondiscriminatory base rate of pay at  the "cleaner" (a male- dominated  job) rate of $1879/month.  PhyUis McDiarmid, a lab worker  at St. Paul's, reports that the top  wage for her trade (phlebotomy—  drawing blood) is $11.60/hr.  "Most of us are female in the  lab ... I don't know many men  who would work for that amount.  I used to drive a dump truck and  I made more money."  KINESIS July/Aug.£ Across B.C.  Press Gang  Union maids, at last  by Bonnie Waterstone  When the phone call finally came through  to Press Gang at the beginning of June, the  women working there burst into song.  "There once was a union maid" reverberated off the colourful posters on the  walls of this PoweU Street print shop. Press  Gang had officially joined the Communication Workers of America (CWA).  The women at the 15 year-old, feminist,  worker-controlled collective had been thinking about unionizing for a long time. Press  Gang Printers has always supported union  struggles. "Being a union shop more accurately reflects who we are," says Jane Mac-  Dermot. "Our social commitment and our  concern for our working conditions go together with being in a union."  The effects of unionization on Press  Gang? MacDermot expects the work, the  wages and the staff to increase. Business  has already increased. Many of Press Gang's  customers are labour groups, or are affiU-  ated with labour.  With the union label—the "bug"—on  their printing these groups won't be penalized for using Press Gang. They can now  have Press Gang material distributed by  labour groups, can take them to labour-  sponsored workshops and so on.  The first printers' unions Press Gang approached couldn't understand why these  workers wanted to be unionized. From the  point of view of protecting workers from adversarial management, the women at Press  Gang had already won control of their working conditions for themselves: what more  did they need? As co-operative businesses  became more common, the time for unionization seemed right.  The chief stumbUng block to joining a  union was the low salary rate at Press Gang.  To overcome that, the women calculated a  dollar value for their generous benefits and  time off. They also made a commitment to  bring their wages up to a reasonable level.  "It's important to us to work collectively,  but it's also not okay to pay starvation  wages," stated MacDermot.  Printing was one of the very first trades  to become unionized and aU printing unions  are international. MacDermot is not certain  about the number of women participating  in the CWA, although the recent changes  in the typographical industry have aUowed  more women to enter this trade in recent  years. Telephone workers are also part of  CWA. Press Gang belongs to Local 226, but  as yet there have been no union meetings to  attend.  To create their first union contract, the  women blended some standard elements of  a union contract with an existing contract  they had drawn up among themselves years  ago. This "collective" contract laid out such  things as holiday, sick leave, and wage  increase provisions. Some standard union  Sixteen Years of Keeping Our Books  The Vancouver Women's Bookstore and Centre is having another birthday—  their sixteenth, to be exact—making them one of the oldest volunteer-run  feminist bookstores in North America (possibly the oldest: no one really  knows for sure.) Two of the founding members still work on the collective.  To celebrate, the store is having a "15 Percent Off Everything" sale on July  22. Find them at 315 Cambie Street in Vancouver.  Sheila Gilhooly (in front) and Gayle Robinson at the press  wording was changed to more accurately reflect what they actually do at Press Gang,  and letters of agreement were added to the  end.  Two new positions, a managers' representative and a workers' representative,  were created. "We already perform those  two functions," MacDermot said. "We're aU  managers here and we're aU workers here."  The two positions wUl be rotating.  Unionized co-operatives aren't common  in the West but there are some in eastern Canada and in the U.S., according to  MacDermot. Other unionized co-operatives  have apparently had heated discussions between their management rep and their  workers' rep, even though these positions  rotate.  The discussions in the collective about  the union contract were useful in focussing  on the way Press Gang actually works. Certain aspects of the workplace which the  workers had never dealt with before, such  as seniority rights, were clarified.  "We're much happier being a union shop.  It goes together with our beUefs. In practical terms we think it wUl be a real benefit.  The better our wages are, the more women  can afford to work here," said MacDermot.  Young women tired  of ageist attitudes  by Sylvia Fuller  The long term success of any social movement Ues in its abiUty to win the minds and  hearts of the youth.  Obvious as this statement may be, it is a  maxim that feminists are in danger of being  too busy to heed. A quick analysis of the  composition of most Vancouver area feminist groups reveals very few women under  25 actively involved in the movement.  Even WAVAW (Women Against Violence  Against Women) which recruits in university and coUege Women's Studies courses  boasts only five women who are under 25  out of the 31 women involved in the organization.  One reason for the lack of participation  by younger women may be simple apathy  and/or ignorance. The fact that most social  institutions now pay Up-service to equality glosses over the ongoing and deeply entrenched sexism of our society, and reinforces the popular image of feminists as dissatisfied man-haters.  Raising the consciousness of young women so that they are aware of the barriers  that stiU stand in their way may be time  consuming and frustrating, but it is necessary in order to safeguard the victories feminists have won and to pave the way for the  eventual eUmination of aU gender inequaU-  ties.  Yet apathy and ignorance cannot entirely  account for the dearth of young blood in the  feminist movement. Ageist attitudes among  feminist themselves can just as effectively  : participation.  CoUeen, a young woman involved in  WAVAW, says that whUe her experience  there has been very good, other femimst  groups have not been so welcoming.  She admitted to frequently feehng as ii  she had to "prove myself to women who  stressed their own experience with condescending statements such as "weU, I have  been in the movement since 1969."  Young women are accepted only if they  act as if they are 40. "You have to fit  yourself to their ways," CoUeen remarks, as  youthful energy is associated with flighti-  ness.  Unfortunately, CoUeen's experiences are  not unique. Krista found similar ageist attitudes in Unlearning Racism workshops and  the Women of Colour group.  "I was always the youngest woman there,  so people just assumed I was a lot older than  I was," said Krista. "When they found out I  was 18 I was reaUy looked on as a Uttle kid  ... Being young doesn't mean that I can't  think. I can and I deserve to be heard and  noticed and taken account ot"  Feminists cannot afford to alienate young  women, but must make a conscious effort to  be accessible. Greeting young women with  a smUe and directing them to a desk to  Uck envelopes is not enough. Remember,  someone new to the movement faced with  a roomful of older women may feel rather  intimidated and ignorant; encourage their  participation in discussions and be open to  their ideas.  Please see Ageist page 6  KINESIS Julv Across B.C.  Indian Homemakers  Health and wholeness  threatened by inequality  by Suzanne Cook  Promoting Native Women's WeUbeing:  The Circle of Healing" was the theme  of the Indian Homemakers Association's  (HfA) annual conference in June. Some 50  women from Native reserves and communities around the province attended the Vancouver conference which presented speakers  and workshops on the prevention of cancer  and infectious diseases, PMS, menopause,  pregnancy, suicide, sexual abuse and addictions.  The IHA beUeves that Native women in  B.C. do not receive adequate health care  from federal or provincial agencies. The average Native woman does not just walk into  her doctor's office and ask for her yearly pap  smear test. Nor does she receive pre- and  post-natal care or birth control information.  The IHA membership beUeves this is due  to the insensitivity and general lack of understanding of government agencies to Native women's needs. Native women who  Uve on reserves do not have access to the  information and services needed for good  health care; Native women who Uve in cities  find existing health care services intimidating because they are predominantly male,  white, middle class and impersonal.  The IHA and it's membership are trying  to change this by increasing the awareness  of Native women, government agencies and  the public as to the problems with the existing health care system.  At the conference, one speaker noted that  attaining a balance between the spiritual,  physical, emotional and intellectual is what  it takes for overaU weUbeing. IHA president  Rose CharUe beUeves one of the greatest  threats to this balance is the apprehension  of Native chUdren by provincial authorities.  Of concern are the number of chUdren  apprehended (one in three chUdren apprehended in B.C. are Native) and the provincial government's inabiUty to provide services untU after a chUd is apprehended (untU then the cluld is under federal jurisdiction).  A representative from the Provincial  Ministry of Health acknowledged that,  whUe provincial medical services are avaUable to Native people as long as they are  registered with the medical services plan,  some Native women don't avaU themselves  of provincial facilities for fear of their chUd  being apprehended when they ask for services.  PoUution of B.C.'s waterways was a major concern of women attending the conference. Mary Pius from the Shelly Reserve,  13 miles from Prince George, told how after  visiting her doctor for stomach problems—  which he could not explain—she had her  drinking water tested. Mary was told her  water was extremely contaminated and advised not to drink it, but could not find out  the nature of the contamination.  Government representatives were asked  by Rose CharUe to look into making medical services more accessible to Native people  by providing readily avaUable transportation to remote areas. Currently, walking or  hitchhiking are how most Native people get  Women shine at diamond  by Diane Dupuis  The fourth annual Vancouver women's baseball tournament took place on the June  17 weekend. Eight teams participated in two divisions: A Division teams play in leagues  around the city, whUe the B Division teams are less competitive and more recreational.  The DeadUes and the Steppers made it to the B Division Final. The DeadUes had only  played one game as a team before Saturday, whUe the Steppers have been playing or practicing weekly since spring. Although the DeadUes won, Jackie, the Steppers' right fielder  playing for the first time in 21 years, said "they exceeded their expectations."  There was one casualty in the final. Cindy, the Steppers' catcher, and EvangeUne, the  DeadUes' third-base person, colhded at third. Although EvangeUne was taken to emergency, the injury was not serious.  In the Division A final, the Breakers—a league team—beat out the Commercial Drivers,  an up-and-coming league team.  The tournament provided the opportunity for women to compete in a supportive environment as aU women played regardless of abiUty. Less emphasis was placed on competition and more on having fun. Tammy, a DeadUes player, said it was "a good clean tournament and lots of fun. The tournament showed how hearty women are to be over 21 and  play in the rain."  . KINESIS _ ""  Bev Julian, a healer from the Matsqui  from their reserve to the nearest doctor, a  situation Rose Charlie described as unacceptable. Sometimes seeing the doctor also  involves camping outside, since there may  be no money for accommodation.  The IHA beUeves a mobUe health care  service traveUing throughout B.C. reserves  offering x-rays, mammograms, birth control, pregnancy monitoring and information  would contribute to improved health among  Native women. Funds for initiatives Uke this  are nonexistent at this time.  Rose talked about her concern that Native people are "watering down" their powers through dealing with the province in  the area of health. It is the federal government's responsibihty to provide adequate  health care to Status Indians, and Rose beUeves these Native people should not have  to involve themselves with provincial and,  in some cases, municipal governments—as  weU as federal officials—to try and attain  adequate health care.  Several speakers discussed  the impor-  Ageist from page 5  Ageism is an issue that has not really  been considered within the women's movement. Most of the groups I spoke to had  never questioned why there were so few  young women among them, nor did they  see this as a problem. The Women's Research Centre explained that it has no  young women on its research committees  because it recruits members from within the  estabUshed women's network.  It may seem easier to work with women  who already have experience with feminist  issues but whUe this approach ensures competent committees, it also reinforces an "in-  EpidemiC from page 7  row," ChUton explained. Group members  say that any arrangements they make are  prefaced with "If I'm weU, I'U be there."  "We need weU people to work with us,"  Vida says. "We need advocates." One of the  difficulties has been in getting any medical  recognition or help. "Doctors who do recognize it [beheve that their patients are UI]  are flooded" says Vida. "Several have closed  their practices [to M.E. sufferers] because  otherwise they would be dealing with nothing else."  In the U.S., where over 200 support  groups exist, funding for medical research  is just starting. Canadian researchers, she  says "need to get interested."  The support group also wants to focus  on education. They say that sufferers need  tance of settUng land claims and recognizing aboriginal title. Carole Dawson, a Native social worker, stated that "untU this is  settled Natives are not equal to other people in the province and cannot be healthy  and whole untU equal."  Attending the conference as the keynote  -speaker was Bev Juhan, a "hands on" healer  from the Matsqui Reserve. Bev related how  a year ago she was asked to resign from her  federal government position as community  Health Representative for nine ChiUiwack  area bands because she was using half of her  24 hour on-call time for healing.  Bev has studied acupressure, acupuncture and nutrition and now spends her time  traveUing around Canada responding to requests for help through her healing powers.  The provincial minister for Native Affairs and Kim CampbeU, federal Associate  Minister for Indian Affairs, were invited to  the conference, but were unable to attend.  CampbeU promised to meet with the IHA  at a later date.  group" mentality. Groups such as the Research Centre might do weU to take a leaf  from Media Watch's chapter—one organization whose members do include a sizeable  number of younger women—and recruit in  University Women's Studies classes. Students are no strangers to research and would  bring new energy and ideas to the group.  H feminism is to survive and gain  strength, it must make room for aU women,  regardless of class, colour or age. A closed  community of self-righteous converts can  only proceed so far. Only in opening the  doors to new people and new ideas can the  women's movement continue to grow and  flourish.  medical and legal help. People who are too  sick to work need help to get on welfare and  disabUity payments. At this point, because  M.E. is not an"official" disease, doctors are  unwiUing to label it as a permanent disability.  Pauline ChUton remains optimistic about  the prospect for a cure. "There has to be a  cure," she says. "There are several places I  have yet to go. I have to get weU."  The Myalgic Encephalomyelitis  Group (MEG) can be contacted at 688-  0544- Meetings are twice a month at  the Victorian Order of Nurses, 1645 W.  10th.  In the next issue of Kinesis we will  feature an in-depth report on the growing epidemic. s/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyys  //////////////////^^^^^  Across Canada  "We're dealing with an epidemic"  by Joni Miller  A few photocopied handouts brought 17  new members to the last meeting of MEG  (myalgic encephalomyeUtis group), a support group for sufferers of the disease that  has been called everything from the yuppie  flu to Chronic Epstein-Barr Syndrome.  One U.S. researcher predicts that in the  next several years, 12 million Americans wUl  be afflicted.  "What we're dealing with is an epidemic," says Essence Vida, a member of  MEG. The disease—or syndrome—is characterized by extreme fatigue, muscle weakness, body aches, headaches, dizziness,  fevers, confusion, frequent infections and  depression. Medical scientists have yet to  discover what it is exactly, and most doctors don't acknowledge that it exists. There  is no test, and no cure. It may be contagious,  but no one knows how it is transmitted.  Sufferers, who are mostly women, have  often been told that it is aU in their heads.  "If you don't get weU in six months, they  send you to a shrink," says Vida. Many people have been sick for years.  The disease got the label "yuppie flu" because of its association with high-achieving  professional people. "ActuaUy, we think it  cuts across all socio-economic Unes," says  Vida, "it's just that poor people have a  harder time being heard."  Pauline ChUton used to regularly swim a  mile at a time. Five years ago she got what  seemed to be a flu—only it didn't go away.  She complained of chronic, extreme fatigue  and problems concentrating. "At your age—  [56]—what do you expect," she was told.  No one took her very seriously untU  she collapsed on the floor. "When you've  been healthy aU your Ufe, you expect to be  healthy," she says.  Before she was struck with the debiUtat-  ing Ulness that left her unable to type, speU,  read long sentences or find her way around,  Lea Safran was studying for a university degree. She used to cycle, perform with a folk  dance group, swim, run, do yoga and was  learning baUet.  Now, some days she is too exhausted to  get out of bed. Forty-one years old, Lea has  been sick for a year and a half.  Essence Vida was working as a teacher in  Toronto when she encountered a flu-Uke Ulness that left her flat on her back for seven  months. She went from doctor to doctor and  was investigated for everything from bowel  cancer to tuberculosis. A naturopath finaUy  told her it might be the poUution in Toronto.  After moving to Vancouver, she experienced a year of good health and then mysteriously the symptoms returned. She began  to experience low level fevers, muscle aches  and a fatigue that just wouldn't quit. But  worst of aU was the mental disorientation.  "I get lost in my own neighbourhood,"  she says. "I would gladly have my arm cut  off in exchange for this disease. Then I'd just  have one disabihty."  These women are aU members of MEG.  To hear them detaU the destruction of their  Uves is chUUng.  "We try to keep it [the group] upbeat,"  Vida says. "We use a lot of humour. We joke  about having 'horizontal' parties.  "People alone with this go through  bloody heU," says ChUton. In her case, a  supportive husband and friends have been  an enormous help, but she wanted to reach  out to other sufferers. The first step was to  contact a group in Port Coquitlam that was  already organized. From there, she got the  phone numbers of a couple of other people  and began a Vancouver chapter.  At the beginning of the meetings, each  person gets five minutes to talk about how  their Ufe is going and what new things  they've tried. In the absence of a cure, almost anything is worth trying.  "I have a neighbour who does aU the  health food stuff," ChUton says, "but she's  no better than I am. I tried to wUl myself  out of this. Believe me, I can't wUl myself  out of this."  ChUton says that one of the most difficult aspects of the disease is that there are  few outward signs. "It's hard to be UI when  you look weU," she says. It is characteristic  for victims to suffer many ups and downs—  feehng weU for days, weeks, even months—  and then suddenly crashing. At its most  acute, it may be aU one can do to get out of  bed once a day to perhaps shower and eat.  Formerly active people are left with endless amounts of time and no way to fill  it. Even during periods of relative weUness,  muscle weakness can attack without warning. ChUton describes being in the middle  of a swimming pool when her muscles collapsed.  "I managed to make it to the other side,"  she says, but the incident left her frightened.  "AIDS gets aU the attention because no one  is actually dying of what I've got, but this  disease robs you of your Ufe."  The accompanying depression is described as "a greyness descending on your  Ufe. It's awful. I was never a depressive  person—before."  The women also describe personality  changes—irritabiUty and aggravation. "It  makes you want to stay in the house and  stay away from others." Some people have  lost friends who were unable to accept or  beheve what was happening to them. Also,  friendships take time and energy—energy  that sufferers no longer have.  "Doing something today means that  there's something I won't be doing tomor-  Please see Epidemic page 6  Validating positive  images of women  by Terri Hamazaki  Let's not rock the boat once we're  there, otherwise we'U jeopardize our positions, said keynote speaker and CBC radio broadcaster Lucie McNeUl last month  from stately Hycroft Manor, site of Media  Watch's second annual Awards of Merit ceremony.  A national non-profit organization dedicated to improving the images of women  in the mass media, Media Watch's Annual General Meeting coincided with the  ceremony which publicly acknowledges the  progress made by Canadian advertisers,  producers and broadcasters in their depiction of women and girls.  Celebrating Ten Years of Revolution  The tenth anniversary of Nicaragua's revolution will be celebrated at La Quena's Fiesta, an annual event that brings  together activists of all ages for a full day of music, food and political high spirits. Entertainers this year include the  Raging Grannies (pictured above at last year's event), Kin Lalat of Guatemala, Maori singer Mahinaaringi Tocker and  many others.  Proceeds from the event (people are asked to purchase a $3/$5 button) will go to La Quena Coffee House and Tools  For Peace, which ships supplies to Nicaragua to rebuild the country. Fiesta this year is July 23 at Grandview Park, 1200  Commercial Drive, and runs from 12 noon to 7:30 pm.    The awards recognize those who have validated positive images of women in the media, said Suzanne Strutt, Media Watch's executive director.  Winners were selected by a jury representing academic, professional and community interests after a national caU for nominations was published in women's journals,  Strutt said.  Radio-Canada, CBC's French-language  network, won honours in television drama  for their weekly series, Dames de coeur.  which addressed such topics as lesbianism  and reproductive issues.  Northern Native Broadcasting Yukon  was one of three honoured recipients in the  category of television pubUc affairs for their  Profile of Margaret Joe ( a Yukon MLA)  from their program Nedaa.  Second honours in this category went  to Radio-Canada for their monthly series  Actuel, which treats subjects related to the  status of women.  The third award went to local independent filmmakers Annie O'Donoghue and  Juhe Warren for their film about women  athletes, Closing the Gap, which debuted  on CBC's Canadian Reflections.  In television advertising, BC Tel's ad  nicknamed "Sushi" won for its commercial  portrayal of, in Media Watch's words, a genuine woman: one who is an active, caring,  social being with wrinkles and celluUte.  For radio, the network Reseau des Ap-  palaches (CFDA, VictoriaviUe) won for  their aU-women produced series Tant de  femmes which addressed such issues as violence against women.  And finally, awards named after pioneer  broadcaster Dodi Robb—who apparently  did rock the boat—went to two women who  by achievement and example contribute to  the promotion of the status and image of  women. They were Gertrude J. Robinson,  director of McGUl University's Graduate  Program in Communications and author of  several submissions to the CRTC about the  representation of women in the media, and  to Barbara Janes, who heads the National  Film Board's Pacific Centre and whose film  credits include, Doctor, Lawyer, Indian  Chief.  "With an event Uke this, we're actively  working towards raising our profile and celebrating our integration into local women's  communities," said Strutt. A mostly female  audience of 125 were on hand to support  their efforts.  KINESIS ^^^S^5^  Across Canada  WHAT' S NEWS?  by Donna Butorac  More U.S.  bombers  over Canada  An arrangement between Canada and the  U.S. wUl aUow the U.S. Air Force to conduct  mass, low level training runs over the Canadian Northwest. The U.S. wants to send as  many as 25 bomber aircraft at a time along  two 1,300 kUometre tracks in the North  West Territories, British Columbia, Alberta  and Saskatchewan, at altitudes as low as 100  metres.  The simulated attacks of B-l, B-52 and  F-lll bombers are strongly opposed by  many northern Native groups who fear that  hunters, trappers and wUdlife wUl be disturbed.  "This whole issue is as controversial as  the low level flights that the Innu are op  posed to in Labrador," says Ethel Blondin,  a Slavey Indian and Liberal MP for Western Arctic. "The North is becoming a miUtary playground."  According to the miUtary head of Northern Command,YeUowknife, the exercises are  designed to enhance the capabiUties of  North American Aerospace Defence (NO-  RAD)."The fellow driving the bombers  would get to fly over terrain similar to the  opponent's, and in aU UkeUhood, the aircraft would not be seen because they wUl be  flying away from buUt-up areas," said Brig.  General Paddy O'DonneU.  Stephen Kakfwi, the NWT's Deputy  Government Leader and Minister of Aboriginal Rights, thinks it unUkely the federal  government would ever impose such flights  on southern Canadians. "What they're doing is planning miUtary exercises where they  think there is going to be the least amount  of controversy."  The U.S. proposes a maximum of four  one-day bomber exercises a year on the two  western routes, one of which wUl involve  more than 15 bombers.  Source: Globe and Mail  Opposition  to midwifery  Quebec physicians have renewed their opposition to the granting of legal status to  midwives, claiming that a genuine perinatal  poUcy was needed and should be given priority for funding before recognizing a new  profession.  Dr Augustin Roy, president of the Corporation ProfessionneUe des medecins du  Quebec (CPmQ), says "it would be scandalous to recognize midwives before we deal  with women giving birth in poverty."  L'AUiance des sage-femmes, which represents 200 Quebec midwives, questions why  the physicians' corporation has done httle  in the past to assist low income women, and  now decides they must become a priority.  According to midwife Marie-Paul Lanthier,  the corporation's stance is one more way of  resisting the legalization of midwifery.  L'AUiance beUeves that government-  funded midwifery projects for poor women  would not interfere with the CPmQ's priority. "Midwives spend more time with  women discussing nutrition, exercise, relaxation and alternative remedies," says Lanthier, "as weU as offering psychological and  social support. Since we go to the woman's  home for appointments, we gain an understanding of her miUeu, and we are able to involve her partner and/or family. These factors would Ukely ensure a healthier pregnancy and baby for low income women."  Source: Healthsharing  Protesting  Native  education cuts  Native Indian groups are continuing to  protest the reduction in federal government  financing of Native education by camping  near the ParUament buUdings in Ottawa.  Among the protesters is a 25-yeax old Micmac woman, Katani Julian, who says a university education is her only hope of getting  off weUare. JuUan is from the Eskasoni reserve in Cape Breton where unemployment  among Native people is very high.  JuUan is one of a large group of Native  people who say reductions in a federal financing program for Native students wUl  cut them out of a chance to attend university and condemn them to a Ufe on social  assistance.  Native students say moves by the federal  Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development would eUminate a $65/  week aUowance for chUd care and a $50/  week transportation subsidy, making it impossible for many to go to university.  "I've been on welfare for a long time,"  says JuUan, "and I'm trying desperately to  get off it so I can make a good hfe for my  daughter."  Source: Globe and Mail  Birthing  centres  for Ontario  The Ontario government has announced  financing for three birthing centres for  women with low-risk pregnancies who wish  to dehver their babies outside of hospital.  Elinor Caplan, Ontario Health Minister,  said the centres would be operated by private organizations in the community. Costs  wUl be covered by the Ontario Health Insurance Plan.  "Hospitals wUl always be an important  source of care for mothers and babies, especiaUy in high-risk births," said Caplan, "but  it is important * ■» explore alternative kinds  of care for uncompUcated births." In order  for the centres to go ahead, the province  must first pass a law permitting such freestanding health facihties.  In fulfillment of last year's Throne Speech  promise to improve health care for mothers  and babies before, during and after birth,  the Ontario government wUl also spend  about $1.5m annually on pUot projects designed to reduce the number of premature births among low-income and teenage  mothers. Another $600,000 wUl be spent  on providing home helpers for new mothers and those with premature or multiple  births.  Source: Globe and Mail  Suing  over language  training  Two immigrant women are suing the  Canada Employment and Immigration  Commission claiming its subsidized language training program discriminates  against women.  Although more men than women can  speak at least one of Canada's official languages, the language training programs are  said to favour the needs of men over those  of women.  One of the plaintiffs, Emma MoUna, who  emigrated from Ecuador in 1975, said she  was told by the Canada Employment Centre (CEC) that she could get a sewing job  without any language training, yet she was  never asked if she wanted to be a sewing  machine operator.  After suffering much humUiation in the  workplace due to her inabiUty to communicate in EngUsh, MoUna again asked CEC  whether she would qualify for subsidized  language training. She was told that because she had found a job without it, she  did not qualify.  Sonia Casas, who arrived from ChUe  in 1981, suffered similar treatment at the  hands of CEC. Although her husband was  accepted to the subsidized language training program, Casas was refused on the  grounds that "she did not require EngUsh  to find employment." Another reason given  was that she was the "accompanying dependent of the head of a family."  After working as a labourer in a textUe  factory for six months at minimum wage,  Casas was laid off. On re-applying for the  subsidized language training program, she  was told by CEC that her "lack of fluency  had not prevented her from finding work."  Backing the two women's court challenge  are the Centre for Spanish Speaking Peoples, LEAF and a coalition of seventy organizations.  Source: Globe and Mail  Welfare study  reveals racism  A study conducted by a welfare field  worker in Metro Toronto has found that  women of colour are three to six times  more Ukely than others to have their famUy benefits payments reduced, and that the  amounts deducted are greater for them.  Kathleen Lawrence, who conducted the  study, reported that of 311 mothers with dependent chUdren, 17 had benefits reduced  under Regulation 8, which requires that recipients establish that they have no other  means of support. (For single mothers with  chUdren, this usuaUy means proving that  support cannot be obtained from the chUd's  father.)  About 70 percent of the women who  received deductions in Lawrence's study  group were women of colour although, as a  group, these women made up less than one-  third of the total. The average deduction  was $62 a month for women of colour, compared to $44 for white women.  Carmencita Hernandez, chairperson of  the Coalition of Visible Minority Women,  notes that many women are not told their  benefits are being cut or that they have the  right to appeal such decisions.  On the basis of Lawrence's report, the  Ontario Human Rights Commission has  been asked to investigate this discrimination.  John Sweeney, Minister of Community  and Social Services, disclaims the charges  of racial discrimination, stating that Regulation 8 has been applied inappropriately to  aU family benefits recipients. He said that  changes were being made to ensure that  caseworkers and supervisors have less individual discretion to decide whose benefits  wUl be cut. Also, new training programs are  being put into place so that staff wUl treat  social assistance recipients from varying cultural backgrounds with greater sensitivity.  Source: Globe and Mail  Inquiry  probes murder  cover-up  The Manitoba Aboriginal justice inquiry  began formal hearings in June to investigate  the cover-up of the brutal murder of Helen  Betty Osborne, a teenage Cree Indian who  was raped, then stabbed to death with a  screwdriver in 1971.  Although four local white men were  known to have been present at the scene of  the murder, no one was arrested untU sixteen years after the kiUing. After trial, only  one of the four was convicted of the crime.  Another confessed to a sheriff in 1977, but  the sheriff did not tell the RCMP untU 1986.  The two member provincial inquiry  empowered to investigate the "acts and  omissions" of anyone who may have shielded  the murder suspects. It wUl also try to decide whether racial prejudice was a factor in  the poUce investigation of Osborne's murder.  The Winnipeg PoUce Association tried to  block the inquiry by obtaining a court order  to halt it, but it has since been revived by  a Legislative bUl.  Native groups in Manitoba demanded an  inquiry into Aboriginal justice in early 1988,  after Indian leader J.J.Harper was kiUed by  poUce.  While expressing guarded optimism a-  bout the latest phase of the inquiry, The  Pas Indian Band Chief Oscar Lathlin also  predicted that many people wUl simply ignore the findings. "There are some deep-  rooted problems in the justice system," he  said. "They'U [pohce] go to great lengths to  try to stop the inquiry."  Source: Globe and Mail  KINESIS  July/Aug. 89 Across Canada  Class, poverty and issues of power  by Marusia Bociurkiw  Feeling a bit Uke TV detectives, we had  cased the joint the night before.  The Toronto City Wetfare office was  on the eighth floor. It would be open  on Saturday—though the elevators seemed  rather smaU.  The march across the Square would be  easy enough, but what to do when we got  to City HaU? Four years earUer, striking  Eaton's workers had led the International  Women's Day March and, in a spontaneous  show of solidarity, the entire march had de-  toured into Eaton's. We took this as our inspiration.  We went to City Hall with our eviction notice for the Metro Toronto  Housing Authority (MTHA) and our  pink slip for the Welfare Administration. We got to the doors and the security guard said, 'What're ya doin  here?'  women; an ongoing "housing crisis" (two  vacancies in 1,000); a large and diverse  women's community (some 30-40 women's  organizations), and a yearly women's march  that attracts an average 8,000 people, buUt  by a coahtion that represent a majority of  these organizations and from which poor  women are completely absent.  Class and race have always been the  two orphan daughters of feminist practice, thrown the scraps of energy left  over from the "larger" struggles. And yet,  whUe extremely belated discussion about  racism—initiated by women of colour—  begins to transform the white, middle-class  dominated women's movement in Toronto,  poverty remains an invisible element in the  complex grid of theory, practice and culture  which create a movement.  Poverty  and  race  are  inseparable, ■  poverty being one of the most insidi-;  ous by-products of racism. Why do they  get separated out? Why is the mention.  of poverty or race such a divisive issue  We said, 'We have some things to  deliver!' She said, 'You can't come  in!' ... We went in anyways and  went to the central foyer and did our  action. Must've been about 20 people there ... We made a circle, left  our things, Anne and Joyce led the  MTHA prayer [a mock prayer satirizing conditions in public housing].  It was deathly quiet—just us, and a  couple of security guards.  Then we went back to find the march  that left us!  -Ruth  The organizers of the Toronto 1989  IWD parade—with poverty as their  chosen theme—had not allowed 5,000  marchers to stop at City Hall in support  of this planned action by poor women  and poverty activists.  "When we reached City Hall, the  march decided to go on without us ...  I felt very angry, because yet again,  I feel sold out by a movement that is  so concerned with mass actions, and  has no concerns for the individuals in  the mass.  They want to mobilize the working  class and the poor but they don't seem  to respect us."  -Sandra  An Invisible Element  This is an inside story, told against a Toronto setting, where the conditions of feminist organizing have their own peculiar contradictions: a provincial budget that actuaUy raised (to a stiU inadequate level) shelter subsidies and weUare rates; thirty-five  thousand homeless, many of them abused  among feminists? Should poor women  even bother with feminism? What's the  best strategy: autonomous, or paraUel  organizing? Or a politics of kick-ass  confrontation ?  Four months after IWD 1989, two  months into one of the scariest federal  budgets in recent history and with many  other battles to wage, these are the questions which preoccupy a group of poor  women and anti-poverty activists who  have continued to meet since the City  Hall fiasco.  What I find amazing is ... how  much you still have to define poverty,  give the statistics, and analyze it  ... Poverty is always having to justify your existence. I don't know too  many rich people who have to explain  why they live the way they do.  -Carolann  Two days before IWD, some women  at a community centre got together  to make banners. Most of them were  women who had never been to—or  heard of—IWD before. One of their  banners read: "Poor women have no  choice."  The slogan makes an apt critique of the  legalistic 'equal rights' bias of much of contemporary Canadian feminism. "Choice"  has been an important slogan for the reproductive rights movement. It's worked weU  in the courts and in the media. It's taken  the emphasis away from the stereotype of  angry, baby-hating feminists and replaced  it with a positive vision of women making  their own choices about their bodies.  It's also wonderfuUy inclusive, referring  to the whole range of alternative medi-  cal practices for women: midwifery, feminist  therapies and woman-centered healthcare,  as weU as choices in sexual orientation and  reproduction.  It's no secret, however, that most of  these choices are only available to middle and upper income women. The state  fails to provide adequately for the health  of women who raise children on their  own. Poverty becomes an assault on  autonomous sexuality and, very often,  celibacy becomes the price of that autonomy. Choice is not part of the picture here.  Politics Cost Money  Another clearly-held assumption of feminist  practice is the notion of seU-determination,  of organization around an oppression.  When, at the evaluations after IWD, the  anti-poverty contingent complained about  its ousting from the march, it was criticized  for being "disorganized."  Organizing—and being organized—are  skiUs that aU good femimsts learn early on.  It's a smaU matter to get word out quickly  , about an action or a meeting: members with  access to computers, xerox machines and  even fax's can make flyers; phone calls can  be done, if need be, on office time, and answering machines wUl take care of the rest.  It's taken for granted that everyone wUl  have the bus fare, bicycle or car to get to  the event, and the cash for beers afterwards.  None of this makes it easy to organize, it  just makes it possible. But this, in itself can  be a luxury.  Like pleasure, politics costs money.  Poor people are collectively starved of  One of their banners  read: "Poor women  have no choice."  political resources and support. The  cult of self-help, usually visited upon  poor people, actually belongs to ...  institutions of organized communities  and classes. The very fact of unemployment cuts the wageless off from  the resources of the waged working  class and its labour movement.  -Beatrix CampbeU  Wigan Pier Revisited  The inadequacy of our definitions, and  therefore of our understanding of class difference gives rise to these false assumptions.  H the words don't exist to describe something, it can become invisible and this, in  turn, helps to maintain the Ulusion of general weU-being.  A basic Marxist definition of class would  make a primary distinction between those  who own capital and those who don't, or  between those who employ and those who  work for a Uving. This puts most of us in  the same boat, a claim even the most diehard socialist feminist would be reluctant to  make. And yet, there has been Uttle to replace old-fashioned Marxist theory.  Class is also a culture—and culture  doesn't always coincide neatly with economic theory. The culture of poverty is  a visible and oppressed culture, lacking  easy entry into feminist language and social  space.  Marlene Nourbese PhiUp, in her article  "Women and Theft" (Fuse), identifies the  u.  traditional distinction between labour and j  work as the lynchpin of conflict between J  poor and middle class women. "Class" gets  defined as "working class" within feminism.  WhUe important support work by feminists in Toronto has occurred during pivotal  strikes (eg., Radio Shack, Mini-Skools, McGregor Socks, Eaton's), no such work has  been done around poor women's issues, although ample opportunities have existed.  According to PhiUp, those who produce  objects are recognized as worthy of support (workers) whUe those who do work that  doesn't seem to produce anything (labourers) are ignored.  Under the general rubric of labour we  can include cooking,  cleaning, general caretaking—all of which are indispensable to living. Despite its essential quality,   however,   or probably because of it, every attempt has  been made to keep this type of work  and those that did it—women and  slaves—hidden away from public life.  -Marlene Nourbese Philip  IronicaUy, the only middle class feminist women who might have any contact  with poverty issues or with poor women  would be those who work in social services.  This presents a vexing contradiction, making the differences between classes something it may not be in the best interests of  these feminists to resolve. Poor women are  these women's "chents," and their jobs depend on them.  Unnamed Power Structures  And finally, there are issues of power. This  is where things get murky. As pressure from  the state increases—to give up, to con-  servatize, to shut up, to close down, to  dwindle away—pressure grows within the  structures of feminism. The consolidation  of power happens subtly and is almost always justified by poUtics. These unnamed  power structures—who sets the agenda,  who gets the information between meetings,  who makes the five-year plan—do much to  maintain racism and classism.  These structures also succeed in eliminating difference: the pressure to be in  a position of power becomes the pressure  to think Uke everyone else and this, rather  than frank discussion, becomes how' we  "buUd" analysis. The ehmination of those  who bear the brunt of women's oppression from whatever discussion does occur  plays neatly into the hands of the state  particularly since it's poor women who  could provide some of the most clear-headed  assessments of how the state reaUy does intervene in women's Uves.  Please see Class page 10  KINESIS Ju.y/Aug. 89 International  HI  China—up against a hopeless regime  by Vera Ritt  Despite near-saturation coverage of recent events in China by mainstream media, httle has been said about what student  protesters have meant by "democracy," who  the protesters are—and what role women  have played in the demonstrations.  From visual evidence, we know that  women were present in Tiananmen Square,  the Beijing plaza where, for seven remarkable weeks, miUions of Chinese students sent  a message to their government to open up,  to talk.  We have learned that a major student  leader was Chai Ling, a 23-year old woman  whose moving description of the June 3—  4 massacre in the square was smuggled out  to Hong Kong on a half-hour voice cassette,  then transmitted back to mainland China  on short-wave radio.  At this time, there are unconfirmed rumours that Chai Ling has sought refuge in  the AustraUan embassy in Beijing.  In an effort to find out more about the  protests in China, Kinesis made contact  with a mainland Chinese university student  who has been foUowing events in her homeland with great concern. For reasons of personal safety—Chinese students in Canada  have been harassed by Chinese embassy officials, and fear for the safety of their fam-  Uies back home—she chose the pseudonym  Jenny Jhang.  WhUe Jhang had no specific information  about women protesters, she offered a profile of the students as "young—not seniors,  but first or second year ... At the beginning, they were arts students, but later students from aU disciplines."  The youthfulness of the students was a  key factor in their wUUngness to demonstrate. On the one hand, they are unmarried and without chUdren. "FamUy ties are  very strong in China and people fear their  chUdren will be punished," says Jhang. On  the other hand, arts students in Beijing  have been exposed to "western" ideas about  democracy, ideas imported along with the  trade and technology exchanges of the 70's  and 80's.  Jhang beUeves the influence of those  ideas is real, but also cited economic discomfort as a major factor in bringing  "inteUectuals"—the teachers, doctors, engi-  Class from page 9  Poverty is the struggle to survive on  an income that rises half as quickly  as the inflation rate ... Poverty is  78,000 families depending on food  banks to get them through the month.  Poverty is the loss of human dignity and respect for its victims ...  Poverty is the thing nightmares are  made of.  Poverty is not, however, synonymous  with ignorance, or the inability to articulate.  -Carolann  The beginnings of a strategy to include  poor women into feminist organizing would  have to begin with poUtical wUl—something  many of us are not certain exists. Whether  the wiU is there or not, poor women are organizing and demanding to be heard. Poor  women have much to gain from an affiance  with feminism, given the male-dominated  nature of anti-poverty organizing. And feminists wUl benefit from a more dialectical  process, in which we take seriously, and look  closely at, our areas of difference. If nothing  else, it could take femimst organizing out of  some stagnant waters.  ... Women are being attacked from  all angles for all sorts of reasons. It's  neers and other professionals—into the pro-  democracy movement.  "In the early 80's, the economic situation  was improving and people didn't feel it necessary to change the poUtical system," says  Jhang. "But in the last two years, inflation  has been running at 20—30 percent and the  hving standard has decreased for many ...  "Professionals suffer the most because  they earn a salary. That's why the students  are worried [because they are future pro-  have limitless power. There is no opposition  party, no freedom of speech or press. You  can't complain publicly."  The corruption of government officials-  made aU the more galling by inflation—is a  prime complaint. Jhang described how officials and famUy members get stocks of  sought-after consumer goods from state factories and seU them at a tidy profit on Ulegal markets. The example Jhang cited was  colour tv's.  Jhang explained that workers  aren't as affected by inflation since they receive productivity bonuses.  When asked about the stance of workers and farmers towards the student movement, Jhang felt that "ordinary people in  China don't yet understand the Unk between democracy and daUy Ufe." For a  few days of the Tiananmen Square occupation, minions of workers—young workers, says Jhang—joined the students. "But  when they would try to participate, the factory leaders would say 'I won't give you any  pay if you don't work.' "  As for the farmers, Jhang says "their Uves  are stUl pretty hard and democracy is a luxury thing after you have enough to eat ...  their only news source is from the government and they beUeve what the government  says. It is difficult to expect their support."  What the students mean by "democracy," says Jhang, can best be understood  by grasping just how unaccountable the  Chinese ruUng eUte is. "Now, the leaders  really important that we all get together and support each other, find  ways to network so we don't duplicate actions but instead strengthen  one another' action ... We can really use the power and potential of the  women's movement...  -Jo  Discussion and debate wiU only be effective if based on a nuts-and-bolts strategy of  community outreach, caucus structure (autonomy of, and leadership by, the most oppressed) and responsible consultation. This  means a complete overhaul of many of our  feminist processes which have turned inward over the years.  The context for coahtion poUtics has altered greatly since the 70's when coahtion strategies became popularized within  the women's movement. It's clear that the  strategies have not changed swiftly enough  with the times. Change wUl be painful,  because re-buUding also requires a certain  amount of buUdozing. The question of who  wUl have the courage to storm the doors and  who wUl have the courage to stand aside,  remains—as yet—unresolved.  Thanks to poverty activists Ruth  Mott, Sandra Laing, Carolann Wright  and Jo Grey for their words, and to  Nomi Wall for her documentation of  them.  In early June, students transmitted facsimile messages  from Beijing to Hong Kong—  and then to Vancouver.  On the ideological level, Jhang said the  students recognize "the idea of communism  is good, but now [in China] it's a dictatorship." As for perceptions of "western  democracy," Jhang described how "before  we came to stay, we thought everything here  was wonderful...  "Some young students think we should  import the total American model. The more  mature leaders in China don't think hke  that. We know we couldn't do that, that the  western model is not that perfect. We're not  as naive as that."  There has never been anything Uke this  democracy movement before in China, said  Jhang. "Unhke the Cultural Revolution,  this came from the bottom of the people.  It lasted long enough to be recognized in aU  the big cities."  The students were surprised the government cracked down on them with such brutality. Jhang beUeves there is a long education process ahead.  "Educating people about democratic  ideas is the most important next step, in  particular Unking those ideas to daily hfe.  [We have to show people how] freedom of  the press, for example, wUl lessen the government's power, which wUl reduce the corruption and then inflation wUl diminish. H  we give feedback to the government, we can  get what we want.  "It won't be easy. It wUl take a long  time."  As a parting message to Kinesis readers, Jhang wanted it understood that Chinese students in Canada who are currently  applying for refugee status are doing so with  regret. "After the crackdown, we realized  the current [Chinese] regime is hopeless. It  feels useless for us to return to China now  ... we can do more if we stay. If we get  Canadian citizenship, we can't be arrested  if we return to China.  "We love our country. We are always  proud of our people."  Nigeria  Breaking down secrecy  by Hannah Edemikpong  A recent study published in Nigeria's  most popular daily The National Concord  has revealed that 60 percent of Nigerians  are UUterate—60 million Nigerians.  In a survey on attitudes towards female  genital mutilation conducted this year by  our Women's Centre in Eket, Nigeria, it  was revealed that, of the 100 women interviewed, the 55 women who favoured continuation were UUterate.  They were the ardent traditionaUsts who  had wUlingly been circumcised and would  be wUUng to see their daughters circumcised. Only 10 educated women (primary  education) favoured continuation of the  practice, but without compulsion. The remaining 35 respondents with college or  university education favoured stopping the  practice.  They expressed shock at what happened  to them on the day of circumcision. "It was  not what they expected," they said. Five  respondents said they have suffered severe  bleeding and re-current urinary tract infection and four respondents said their sexual feehngs have diminished. The 35 respondents promised never to allow their daughters to be subjected to such operations.  The 55 UUterate women who responded  in favour of female genital mutilation appeared to have resigned themselves to the  fate which the society had decreed for them  and said they would not aUow their male  chUdren or relatives to marry uncircumcised  women because such women are unclean  and oversexed.  On the whole, the survey reveals that, because of family background or gender discrimination, no educational opportunities  were given to the respondents who favoured  continuation of the practice. The respondents were ignorant of sex education so  there is no opportunity to teach or show the  women the implications of the practice to  their health. Moreover, sex talk is taboo in  most African societies and sex is never to  be discussed even with one's own husband.  Women's ignorance about themselves  and their rights has therefore been greatly  exploited by their mensfolk who use the situation to dominate them. This is extended  to other fields Uke poUtics where women are  denied equal opportunities with men. This  is why we consider our present educational  campaign against female genital mutilation  and other traditional practices that endanger the Uves of women as a first step of revolutionizing our society, creating an awareness and educating women about their bodies and sex so that they must start freeing  themselves from ignorance, fear and mental  servitude.  We do not beUeve in legislation as a  means of changing people's minds. The  practice of female genital mutilation emanates from the minds of people and it is  there that we talk to. Those women who  know the health hazards of female circumcision are joining us in the education of  their sisters as evident in the protest march  by the Nurses and Midwives Association  against the practice in the Western Nigerian town of Akure on AprU 6, 1989.  Only with the involvement of women  themselves can programs and plans for  eradication succeed. Since secrecy surrounds the operation and has been maintained amongst those who practice it in order to protect the custom, it is necessary to  expose the practice and educate the community.  To support our campaign send your  donation or inquiry to: Hannah Edemikpong, Women's Centre, Box 185,  Eket, Akwa Ibom State, Nigeria, West  Africa  0l\lr>bbl b    July/Aug. 89 INTERNATIONAL  How to destroy a health care system  Patricia TaUoni has seen ChUe's health  care system go from one of the finest  in Latin America to one which effectively  serves only 20 percent of the population—  the richest 20 percent.  As president of the CoUege of Nurses of  ChUe and long time health care critic and  activist, she and other nurses have received  death threats from clandestine groups in  ChUe. The death threats began in 1987,  soon after nurses spoke out against what  they regarded as unsafe patient care. Despite the potential danger, TaUoni stated at  the time that, "We are being asked to attend the greatest number of patients in the  smallest time possible ... No one appears  concerned about the quality of attention but  it matters to us. The threats wiU not stop  us."  TaUoni was in Vancouver recently as  part of a cross-Canada tour sponsored by  OXFAM-Canada and the Newfoundland  and Labrador Nurses Union. She met with  Chile and privatization  by Isobel McDonald  The first step was to  make drastic cuts  in personnel...  a variety of nurses' groups, members of the  ChUean community and solidarity groups,  and toured UBC hospital and the Everywoman's Health Centre.  TaUoni describes ChUe's health care system today as "seriously dUapidated." Following the coup in 1973, TaUoni says, government emphasis has been to privatize  health care services and support a free  enterprise system. Poor people with high  health risks are sent to inferior pubUc  sector-funded facUities and only those with  high incomes have access to modern medical care in private sector facUities.  Although health care needs have increased dramaticaUy, government spending  for health care has decreased by 20 percent since 1970. No money goes into prevention services and the incidence of easily preventable diseases such as hepatitis, typhoid  and malnutrition has increased.  The only area where the state has increased funding is to support programs to  lower the infant mortaUty rate (IMR). The  IMR is internationally accepted as an index  of the general health of a population and  the ChUean government wants to have acceptable statistics.  All this is particularly tragic because,  prior to the Pinochet dictatorship, ChUe  had a weU-developed and advanced health  care system, comparable to Canada's.  Health, considered a right for aU, was jointly  sponsored by the state, the employers and  the workers. An extensive national public  health system focussed on health promotion, care and rehabUitation, occupational  health and safety and economic protection  for workers and their families.  In at least one way, ChUe's public health  system was more advanced than what Canadians have now. The current "achieving  health for aU" movement just now gaining  momentum in Canada is a strategy which  seeks to increase citizen participation in  health care poUcy decisions at the community level. Prior to 1973, ChUean citizens  participated in creating health care policy through community councils and neighbourhood organizations.  TaUoni has watched the demise of this  health care system and explained the steps  the regime took to institute a "free enterprise system of health," or health care for  profit, not people.  The first step was to make drastic cuts in  personnel, freeze the salaries of health care  workers and demand greater productivity  at the expense of quality. Nurses' salaries  now are about $250 a month, below the  poverty Une. Doctors make more, of course,  but those in government cUnics make significantly less than those in private hospitals.  As a result, private companies now have  the responsibUity for workers' health coverage, forcing workers to use private clinics on  a fee-for-service basis. Municipal clinics and  hospitals that were once state controUed  were handed over to private corporations.  There are now seven major private hospitals in ChUe. There is no need for more, because those who would use the services can't  afford them.  Another legal change took place with the  enactment of the Health Care Law. The  government's mandate was changed so that  services which used to be universaUy guar-  CARIBBEAN  \SALifiAGOSiSLMD$ ..;  ... ,/c> • ':  "      ^>  JO*  b  ^.  ■     "-.-'.  '■:£> ..  &.  .  %  J  A typical nurse is responsible for 100 beds  or five wards, as compared to one nurse  for every eight beds in Canada. Patients  wait months for appointments to receive the  operation or examination they sometimes  urgently need. Patients in pubhc hospitals  must provide their own bandages and sometimes even Unen.  The first legal measures to dismantle the  health care system occurred in 1979. The  most important health institution in the  public sector had been the National Health  Service (NHS), serving about 70 percent of  ChUeans, including workers, their famihes  and the poor. The NHS was replaced by 27  Health services, each controUed by government appointed officials. These new agencies work autonomously to determine fee  structures, pohcy and private contracts.  anteed are now Umited or have been ehm-  inated completely. For example, whUe detection of prevalent diseases is supposed  to be covered under the program, their  treatment—along with Ulnesses of pregnant  women and chUdren under six—must be  paid for by the patient.  Prior to 1973, ChUe also had legislation  to help the pubUc make informed decisions  when buying pharmaceutical products. The  Ministry of Health required aU pharmacies  to post a waU chart describing common Ulnesses and the generic name of the drug recommended for treatment. This was called  the National Formula.  This practice was stopped because it  was determined to be "anti-free enterprise."  People who cannot afford a physician or a  chnic now go directly to the pharmacist,  running the risk of being sold products thai  fit the pharmacist's business needs or an allegiance to a certain suppUer.  Between 1973 and 1981, the CoUege of  Nurses was run by leaders designated by  the miUtary regime. It was impossible for  grassroots and critical nurses to participate  in the CoUege. With huge cuts in funding  to the health system and rapid privatization, working conditions for nurses declined  sharply. For the first eight years after the  coup, nurses had no organized voice. They  were spoken for.  In 1986, the CoUege elected Patricia Tal-  loni and a progressive slate dedicated to  restoring democratic representation and an  activist program. They speak out not only  to defend social rights and a return to  democracy, but also to defend the rights  of patients and their unmet needs. They  work hand-in-hand with other professionals in coahtions. They are seen as a powerful force and are subjected to repressive  measures by the Pinochet regime. Many, including famUy members, continue to be harassed, threatened and monitored.  The CoUege represents 60 percent of  ChUe's nurses and faces several obstacles in  recruiting nurses to join. First, nurses are  not required to be a member in order to  practice. This poses problems for monitoring the quality of nursing care and in uniting nurses in one organization with common  goals and concerns to lobby the government.  Secondly, many nurses cannot afford the  fees. It costs 560 pesos a month ($2) out of a  poverty wage of $250 a month to be a member. Nor can the CoUege afford to provide  its members with benefits and education at  this point. And there are, of course, nurses  who won't join the organization out of fear  of government reprisals.  (Nurses) defend the  rights of patients and  their unmet needs.  Canadian nurses across Canada ha  chance to meet with TaUoni and discuss  common concerns. Both the B.C. Nurses  Union and the Hospital Employees Union  have spoken out strongly against privatizing any aspect of Canada's health care system. TaUoni described a system that operates with the goal of maximizing profit, not  attending to the health needs of a nation.  The Newfoundland and Labrador Nurses  Union has established Unks with the CoUege  of Nurses in ChUe. A representative from  the NLNU traveUed to ChUe in November,  1987, as part of an OXFAM labour delegation. The group returned with the goal  of developing ongoing Unks of solidarity between unionists of both countries, including  financial assistance to worthwhUe projects.  The NLNU responded by funding a project  and developing its relationship with the College. Their sponsorship of TaUoni's visit is  the first project of its kind from the Canadian nursing community and other provincial organizations are now considering initiating partnership relationships.  More information about linkages anc  partnerships to support local and international development is available from  the OXFAM Global Health Project.  Phone (604) 738-2116 or write 2524  Cypress St., Vancouver, B.C. V6J SN2.  KINESIS July/Aug Women in the Philippines  By virtue of her sex, by virtue of her class  as told to Cecilia Diocson  Zenaida Uy is a professor of Sociology and Anthropology at San Carlos University in Central Philippines,  and General Secretary of BA YAN, the  largest grassroots alliance in the Philippines today. Invited to Vancouver by the  B. C. Committee for Human Rights in  the Philippines, Professor Uy, or Zeny  Uy as she is popularly known has been  advised by friends in the Philippine? not  to return home yet because of -threats to  her life by right wing death squads.  Zeny Uy: I represent the  Alyansang Makabayan or BAYAN—which  means New Patriotic AlUance. BAYAN is  a federation of more than 2,000 grassroots organizations of peasants, workers,  tribal minorities, fisherfolks, women, students, out-of-school youth, religious and  other church people, artists, technologists,  scientists, teachers and other professionals  and medical practitioners.  We have chapters in almost aU provinces  and have about 3 million individual members. As a federation of grassroots organizations, we are bound together by the principles of nationalism which means anti-foreign  domination, unity amidst diversity, people's  welfare and development, people's democracy and finally, international solidarity.  Cecilia: Amnesty International and  other human rights bodies have criticized the human rights record of the  Aquino government. Could you comment on this and its impact on women?  Zeny Uy: The president herself said her  government would be the exact opposite of  Marcos. Yet if we make a performance audit  of the present government's human rights  record, it is not just bloody, but it is worse  than that of Marcos. For the year of 1988  alone, 141 people were declared missing. We  also have a total of 784 torture victims;  73 cases of frustrated massacres and massacres outside ManUa; and two cases of massacres and frustrated massacres in ManUa  and the suburbs—totalhng 196 kUled and  118 wounded. Then, we have a total of 33  heved that women in the countryside should  not just occupy themselves with reproductive processes because this is a process common to the animal kingdom. She caUed  on women to go beyond this and organize  themselves and be potent forces in transforming Phihppine society—to make it truly  just and more humane and progressive. For  this, she was kUled.  And in the island of Cebu where I come  from, holy week of 1987 there was this  young female organizer of rural farming  women. She was killed by the Tadtads or  death squads—rehgious fanatics who carry  18-inch bolos or machetes. Her dismembered body was dumped in a dried weU near  her parents home. For one week every night,  members of the death squad would shout up  in the hUl to let the people in the vaUey below hear that before they kUled this woman,  they had abused her.  This is the horrible picture of our women  in the PhiUppines especially those who are  actively organizing people and mobilizing  them for self-reUance and action.  Cecilia: There is a vibrant women's  movement in the Philippines today.  How does it relate to the Filipino people 's struggle for national Uberation ?  Zeny Uy: The ongoing struggle of the  Filipino people for justice, freedom and  democracy has always been constituted by  men and women together. The women's  movement has been an integral part of the  overall people's movement for social change.  And yet, very recently, the women's  movement itself has been focusing prominent attention to specific women concerns:  issues that have to do with reproduction  and development of the female gender. The  continuing objectification and commodifica-  tion of the female body have to be frontally  faced—putting and end to double oppression and exploitation by virtue of her sex  and by virtue of her class.  There is also a growing appreciation that  the FiUpino woman who leaves our country  suffers additional exploitation simply because she comes from a Third World country.  The record of Cory Aquino is bloody because  her framework of government is based on total  war policy.  cases of frustrated "salvaging" (summary  execution) victims; 249 victims of summary  executions and a total of 2882 arrested persons.  The record of Cory Aquino is bloody because her framework of government is based  on total war poUcy. This is in consonance  with the theory of Low Intensity Conflict.  And this is felt not only in the PhiUppines  but in aU Third World countries that are asserting their right to seU-determination and  therefore are waging a national and democratic revolutionary movement.  In a classic war, chUdren and women  are spared because it is a battle between  armed combatants. But in the total war policy of President Aquino, women—including  pregnant ones—and chUdren are no longer  spared. We have a case for example, of a  pregnant woman in the island of Panay. She  was eight months pregnant and yet she was  kUled by the armed vigUantes—her unborn  fetus kUled in the process.  The only distinction of this pregnant  woman is that she was an organizer. She be-  In the PhiUppines, there is a coaUtion  of women's groups called GABRIELA: the  General Assembly Binding Women for Reforms, Integrity, Equahty, Leadership and  Action. Since it has earned international  recognition as the legitimate women's coaUtion in the country, I am pleased to let you  know that most of the groups making up  GABRIELA are members of BAYAN.  Semi-feudal, Semi-colonial  GABRIELA has specific programs that are  intended to harness the potential of women.  A semi-feudal, semi-colonial society Uke the  PhiUppines maintains a system which continues to dominate women. GABRIELA  works to establish a system where the  male-female relationship would be based on  equahty and respect for each other. In effect, as the national and democratic struggle tries to empower the FiUpino people as  a whole, it is equaUy important to empower  women within this context.  GABRIELA, as a coaUtion, comprises  more than a hundred organizations throughout the country.  Cecilia: Are there other women's  groups besides GABRIELA that are  actively involved in the national and  democratic struggle of the Filipino people?  Zeny Uy: What I have discussed so far  is what we technicaUy caU the legal left.  BAYAN and aU the federations that make  it up are part of the legal left.  Zenaida Uy  There is an important women's underground group called MAKIBAKA—  UteraUy translated as Free Association of  New Women. The issue of landlessness, injustice and domination is an issue of Ufe  and death and these women, Uke their male  counterparts, have taken upon themselves  the necessity of fighting the status quo  through armed struggle. They beUeve it is  only through this approach that society can  be changed.  For them, the Uberation of the FiUpino  woman can only be facUitated when PhiUp-  pine society has succeeded in freeing itself  from foreign and feudal control. It is about  time that this dedicated group of women be  appreciated as a necessary component of the  Uberation movement.  Cecilia: What is the government's attitude towards the export of women domestics ?  Zeny Uy: A few months ago President  Aquino went to Hong Kong and met with  the FiUpino domestics. Since a good percentage of our gross national income comes  from the income of our overseas domestic  workers and nannies, she saluted aU the domestics in Hong Kong as the modern heroes  of the country.  And yet we know that these domestics  undergo terrible exploitation not just because they are women, not just because they  are daughters of landless farmers and workers and urban poor and even average middle  class families, but because they come from  the Third World.  Cecilia: How extensive is the sex-  trade, especiaUy mail order brides and  child prostitution, and how does the  Aquino government deal with these  problems?  Zeny Uy: I have data showing there  are about 30,000 chUd prostitutes, predominantly found around miUtary bases  and around tourist belts of ManUa, The  youngest age recorded is seven years old.  As we look into the overaU human rights  situation in the country, the Uves of our  chUdren are cut short through the process  of militarization. As you leave the mUita-  rized areas and go to urban centers, you see  the dehumanization of our chUdren through  chUd prostitution. No God-loving, freedom-  loving citizen anywhere would aUow her  own chUdren to continue in such a state  of hopelessness and exploitation. Trafficking  in women, maU order brides, chUd prostitution, tourism which manipulates chUdren  and women should be ended.  Trafficking in Women  It is revolting to know that the PhiUppines  has the notoriety of being a great source of  chUd prostitutes throughout Asia. The phenomenon of maU order brides basically revolves around the countries of Japan, Australia, the Netherlands, Germany and other  countries in Europe.  We are alarmed that the same phenomenon has now attracted males in North  America. There is an increasing number of  agencies that cater to this system of exploitation of FiUpino women. And the trafficking in women is a scandal condoned by  the present regime of Cory Aquino.  It is equaUy important to context the  phenomenon of the brain drain and the  brawn drain in the country. So much  poverty and so much hopelessness have  pushed people to leave to look for greener  pastures, only to end up exploited. Even  the very human process of courtship and  marriage is eroded because women just end  up as maU order brides. We know of cases  where brides are maltreated and exploited.  The First or Second World husband has for  himself a Ufetime slave to cook for and serve  him and offer him sex anytime he wants. We  would Uke to put an end to this.  The framework of the women's movement  is for the emancipation of women from aU  forms of economic and pohtical discrimination, from sex objectification and commod-  ification, from sexual violence and abuse,  and from the neglect and denial of their  health and reproductive rights.  Cecilia: Do you see any parallels between women's struggles here and in the  Philippines ?  Zeny Uy: The paraUels are definitely observable. But given distinct socio-cultural  and historical pasts, the degree and methods of addressing the problems are different.  The problem in the PhiUppines is basically one of immediate survival from  poverty. Since society is semi-feudal and  semi-colonial, only a total social transformation can guarantee women their rightful  place and equahty with men. Women's Uberation can be assured only within the context of our struggle for national freedom and  democracy.  Canada meanwlule, is relatively affluent.  Many of the major issues revolve around  equal representation in ParUament, problems Uke chUd pregnancy and single parenthood, and issues Uke AIDS and other social  diseases. While poverty among women is an  issue here, it may not be as massive a problem as in the Philippines.  But as I go around North America, I am  generaUy struck by the fact that, within the  whole area of household or domestic problems, it is the woman who tries to make  both ends meets. When you speak about the  poor sector of society, we find that whether  it is in the First or the Third World, the  women are visibly the poorest.  It is sad because these are supposed to be  the perpetuators of the human race. They  make possible the continuation of the human race and yet, ironically, they are powerless. They cannot decide what is good  for themselves and they cannot decide what  they should do to develop themselves as human beings.  Therefore it is equaUy important for  the women's movement aU over the world  to assert that basic right of women—as  women—for self-determination. Women of  the world—Caucasian or brown or from the  First or the Third World—should hnk arms  to push for their basic issues and to achieve  a world where women can develop freely as  human beings.  Cecilia: What are the major planks  of the national democratic agenda that  your group is espousing?  Zeny Uy: After the ratification of the  constitution under Aquino, we presented  what we call the nationalist alternative for  Phihppine development. Firstly, this is anchored on an authentic agrarian reform program given the fact that the key problem in  the country internally is the landlessness of  the peasants.  This program for authentic land reform  focuses on free distribution of lands to the  landless farmers. Firstly, we wUl concentrate on idle lands owned by government.  These should be given free to the landless  farmers.  Secondly, lands which were acquired by  Marcos and his cronies immoraUy should be  Thirdly, we would Uke to see the development of a very strong Phihppine entrepreneurial class. Because we do have nationalist businessmen. What they need is  just government assistance.  And finally, in so far as foreign businesses are concerned, we would Uke to see  them contributing to the development of  the country. The government should control  their profit-making, especiaUy repatriation  of profits out of the country. Also, workers  should get their fair share of wages.  These four things we call a system of  mixed economy. This is the alternative we  are proposing in BAYAN. The present economy is export-oriented, import-dependent,  debt-dependent and aid-dependent. All this  dependency from outside has led us to a  debt trap and we would Uke to put an end  to this.  And aU these years have shown that these  foreign loans and foreign aids have not contributed to the benefit of the average person that makes up the grassroots of Phihppine society.  We also have to look into the system  of government. Just Uke its predecessor,  It is revolting to know that the Philippines has  the notoriety of being a great source of child  prostitutes throughout Asia.  given to the landless farmers free. Thirdly,  idle lands foreclosed by government banks  should be given to the farmers free. And  finally, huge landholdings owned just by a  few famihes or individuals should be bought  by the government at current price, leaving just enough hectarage for the owners  for their needs and for their chUdren. These  lands should be given to landless farmers  free of charge.  BAYAN beUeves in the free distribution  of these lands to the tillers. This is based  on our study and analysis that aU farmers  who are tenants and their parents and great  great grandparents before them, have long  paid for the land they are tiffing.  This authentic land reform wUl lead to increased productivity, make the farmer self-  reliant and therefore, generate surplus. But  this would require comprehensive technical  and financial assistance. To do this, affordable assistance from the government should  be made avaUable so that the farmers can  really be motivated to make their farm lots  productive.  A Mixed Economy  But this is only one side of the picture. What about the working sector?  The present economy is predominantly  controUed by multinationals and foreign  agribusinesses. We strongly propose a na-  tionahst industriaUzation program where  basic industries such as food processing, garment manufacturing, communication, transportation, drugs industry, chemicals and other basic industries be run  by government. Thus, they become main  source of service to the people rather than  private profits.  Secondly, we propose more promotion of  and assistance for co-operatives—whether  it's farmers' co-operatives, consumer cooperatives, credit co-operatives or bank cooperatives. This co-operative system has  been found to be very functional in other  societies.  the present government is controlled by the  landed few. What we have aU these years is  an ehtist form of democracy. We are proposing what we call a democratic coaUtion government.  The basic sectors of Phihppine society—  the farmers, workers, fisherfolks, tribal minorities, women, students, out of school  youth, and others—be given a voice in  the government pohcy and decision-making  concerns. We call this a democratic coaUtion  government of peoples making up PhiUppines society.  It wUl be a departure from the ehtist form  of democracy where only the few decide for  the majority. Land reform for example, has  never been implemented for the benefit of  the peasants because a congress dominated  by landlords wUl never pass a bUl which wUl  reduce their wealth and therefore destroy  the basic source of their control.  What about the miUtary? The present  armed forces of the Phihppines has been formed during the colonial period by the U.S.  to divide and conquer the people. Hence,  the framework has always been anti-people  and pro-landlord. We would hke to reform  by forming instead a citizen's army of the  people.  Cecilia: Is there any other message  you would like to convey to the people  of Canada?  Zeny Uy: Oh, yes. Thank you for the  chance to talk about the Phihppines and  the struggle of our people. Although the  PhiUppines is halfway across the world, I  realize that Canada and the PhiUppines  are not apart from each other. The Pacific  Ocean that separates them, in fact, connects the PhiUppines and Canada. Therefore our quest for one green world and one  blue sea and our struggle for unity with humankind and unity with the environment is  very reachable. Together we can make the  world a better place to Uve.  19I<JNESIS Arts  Careening from one  adventure to another  by Joni Miller  GLORY DAYS  by Rosie Scott  Seattle: Seal Press, 1988  Glory Day is a (seU-described) fat, aging  artist with one Downs syndrome daughter—  Rina, who Uves with her—and one teenage  son—Johnny, who does not. Both chUdren  are by different husbands. Both husbands  are cruel and useless.  Glory Uves among the down-and-out in  Auckland, New Zealand. Her world is populated with bikers, junkies, punk artists and  smaU-time "crims." Her paintings are saturated with seedy violence. She's working  on a series caUed "Senseless Violets"—aU  about corpses. Rich people buy her art.  For love and money she sings part-time in  a rock and roU band at a bar caUed Main-  street. It is here that she runs into a teenage  junkie zonked out from an overdose and decides to rescue her.  WhUe walking the young woman around  the night streets in an attempt to snap her  out of it, Glory runs into Grace, a transsexual prostitute. Grace persuades Glory that  the girl is in serious trouble, and they high-  taU it up to an emergency hospital. The next  day, when Glory gets word that the teenager  is dead, her troubles really begin.  The plot runs fast after that. First the  pohce come. Then the ex-husbands begin  showing up—one Uve, one dead. Glory careens from one adventure to another, usuaUy driving too fast in a car that barely  holds together. She worries about money  and when she's going to finish the paintings  she's committed to produce for an upcoming gaUery showing.  When things get rough, her daughter  Rina plays Bruce Springsteen fuU blast.  Glory drinks beer in the morning to cope  and sometimes wakes up in chair instead of  her bed. Her agent, Nigel, usuaUy shows up  just when things are out of control.  Then there's Roxy—a beautiful, spaced-  out model who's been working for Glory.  "The first time I met her I knew she was  poison. She'd eat you ahve," advises Moe,  one of the "next doors." Could Roxy be connected to the bizarre series of events that  are unfolding? You'U have to read the book  to find out, because I'm not going to tell  you.  Rosie Scott has a keen eye for uncomfortable situations, and there are plenty of them  in this book. Glory often manages to be in  the wrong place at the wrong time—like the  afternoon she stops in for a beer with Grace  in one of those uptown fancy lounges. Although she insists on doing things her own  way, she maintains a running inner dialogue  of insecurity. At any moment, she fears her  whole Ufe wUl come tumbUng down around  her ears. Possibly my only complaint about  the book is that Glory spends just a Uttle  too much time worrying.  Glory Days is part of the Seal Press's  "International Women's Crime" series. It's  a roUicking good read. Go out and buy it.  Rosie Scott should be encouraged.  More mag than book  by Frances J. Wasserlein  THE SISTERHOOD:  The Inside Story of the Women's  Movement and the Leaders  Who Made It Happen  by Marcia Cohen  New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1988  $14.95  For those who Uke to read magazines, this  is a perfect book. It's longer than a magazine, to be sure, but it has the same kind  of feel. You can read around in it, flip from  place to place, and look at the pictures. And  if you have a special place in your heart for  People or Vanity Fair and are interested  in information about Betty Friedan, Gloria  Steinem, Germaine Greer and Kate MUlett,  then this is a book for you.  You'U find out about what they wore to  everything, and what everyone else thought  about how they looked. You'U find out  about their fights with each other, and their  fights with other women who challenged  them. But you won't find out much about  their poUtics, about what they thought.  You'U read Cohen's sensationalized versions  of their Uves, you wUl not get a sense of  these women as whole people.  And you won't be able to figure out why  Cohen wrote the book. In the end you'U  probably decide that she did it because she  figured the 60's nostalgia wave could hold  up a journalistic account of what the media  thought was happening with the beginning  of the Women's Liberation Movement. And  she could seU it.  It's certainly true that Steinem, Friedan,  MUlett and Greer were in the pubUc eye  and that reading about them may have led  women to investigate the Women's Liberation Movement. It's also true that aU over  the continent, not just in New York, a mass  movement was buUding. The thing is that  a book hke this one could be written about  any women who were activists in the early  WLM, or today for that matter.  Would it serve any useful purpose? I  think not. There is an "inside story" for  every woman who's ever been born. The  Women's Liberation Movement is, however,  a social movement, and the stories of individuals are not the point: what the movement does, and how it came to those ac  tions is. In order for us to understand our  movement, in order to know the history, we  don't need information on Gloria Steinem's  dress size or her lovers. We do need to understand how decisions are and were taken.  We need to know what the consequences  of those decisions were. In other words, we  need to study our poUtics.  There's something mUdly disgusting  about the current commoditization of the  60's. What does it say about society that  seUing the media-created images of 20 years  ago is profitable? I think the main problem  with books of this kind is that they trivialize the poUtics and the passionate desire for  revolutionary change which drives activists.  Cohen's book, and others Uke it, are intended to make "interesting reading" and  high profits. Such books do not aim to help  change the world, or even your mind.  For considerably more conscious accounts  read Judith Hole and Ellen Levine's book,  Rebirth of Feminism (1972), or Todd  GitUn's The Sixties: Years of Hope,  Days of Rage (1988). Don't encourage the  publication of any more books Uke Cohen's  The Sisterhood. Don't buy this book.  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?   K.  There is a vocation for  you   - proofreading  Kinesis.  , Please call  AINESIS Arts  ///////////////////////^^^^^  Indian women and film  On a video coach bound for Delhi  by Dorothy Kidd  We are just leaving Jaipur when I notice  the red fort sprawUng down the hUlside.  It dominates what is otherwise flat desert  landscape for mUes around. Images of Rajput courts of maharanis and maharajahs  float me back to the women's studies conference the previous week at the University of  Rajasthan. The talk there had been about  the distinctive Indian face of feminism, with  many arguing for ways to reclaim positive  female images from the numerous epics and  mythological accounts of earlier periods.  A more modern set of myths shatters my  reverie. I am on a video coach bound for  Delhi and the conductor has puUed curtains  across the windows. As he switches on the  monitor at the front of the bus I realize I  am sitting right underneath the speakers. I  try frantically to stuff my ears to keep out  the violent blaring from this latest Bombay  flick.  India has the largest commercial film industry in the world and it's hard to escape.  The same song I am hstening to now had  already kept me awake one night. A month  before it had been played over and over  again at the wedding across the street. It's  a catchy tune, and since then I had often  found it in my subconscious, reinforced by  other loudspeakers in the markets or sung  by kids in the back lanes.  Now I am watching the video version.  With western instrumentation, it is sung  cabaret-style by a woman in very western  dress (read: short skirt, shoulderless top,  not what Indian women normally wear). My  curiousity at seeing the song, static and aU,  draws me in untU the visual violence begins. The film was punctuated with fights  between the men and a Utany of whip lashings, slappings and acid burnings against  the women.  I feel trapped. It's not hke on a plane  where you have a choice of whether to get  headphones and hear Rambo or CUnt Eastwood. I can't get away from the sound, but  I can shut my eyes. As I draw my knees  up I hunch on the back of my seat and try  to replace those victim images with ones of  women fighting back ...  Striking Chords, Immediately  We were sitting in a most famihar spot,  amidst boxes of books from aU over the  world. Some were being reshelved, others  were  being  coUected  to   take  to  a  women's cultural festival. I was interviewing women from Vimochana, the Forum for  Women's Rights in Bangalore, in southern  India. They share a meeting centre with  Streelekha, the only women's bookstore in  India, in the back of the Blumoon Theatre,  around the corner from Bangalore's main  drag, Mahatma Gandhi Road.  Between phone calls, book packing, conversations with other visitors and numerous  cups of tea, Madhu Bushan and Donna Fer-  nandes told me about their group's focus  on personal and structural violence against  women. One of the ways they respond is  through organizing legal and pohce help  and, that afternoon, they were getting ready  to visit a woman in prison who was being  held for murdering her husband.  I had read about their other focus in  an article Madhu wrote for the 1986 Third  World Women's FUm Festival, held in  nearby Hyderabad. Vimochana see themselves as "creating pubUc debate and  consciousness-raising through seminars,  demonstrations, street theatre, publications, posters and films." Film has become  increasingly important for them.  PrimarUy a group of middle class poUtical activists, they began in the early 1980's  by showing films to working class women in  the urban slums. It was a way to discuss  and organize protest around issues such as  dowry and other marital problems, as weU  as the lack of basic services such as water  and housing. The women viewers connected  easily with the issue-oriented films.  Films about women on strike "struck immediate chords as they themselves were in  a strike situation," wrote Madhu. A TamU  film on the issue of water inspired the  women to take out a demonstration carrying empty water pots to the local municipality.  "However, when attempts were made to  discuss or critically look at sexist ideology in  films, very different perceptions emerged."  For example, some women Uked one commercial film which features a rape scene,  whUe others were very critical of the end  ing of a film where the woman leaves home.  The Vimochana women felt a need to look  at these different ways of seeing women on  the screen and of the impact the film industry has on women's role in Indian society.  Since 1981 they have held an annual film  festival showing both commercial and progressive feature films. WhUe some of the  original audiences of working class women  continue to come, the festival primarily attracts critics, directors and students, as weU  as other middle class people.  For the first few years, the discussions after the screenings centred on the negative  ways that women were portrayed. Last year,  the theme was women's strength. From  what I understand from Madhu's article,  this switch came from a recognition that  there was no correct way to interpret women  in film, and that it was more important  to appreciate the specifics of where women  were coming from and how they expressed  their dissent. This meant re-evaluating the  diverse ways that women's strength is ex-  She told me of the questions they had  considered: "What have been the definitions  of strength related to women? How do the  directors conceptualize a strong woman? Is  it saying that, for example, in a tense famUy  situation, a strong woman is one who walks  out of the house, or is it one who stays inside and transforms the situation?"  It sounds a lot hke the conversations  at the women's studies conference in Rajasthan. "In Indian culture, we have certain  very positive dimensions related to womankind which are used as basic principles  even in our phUosophy and culture," said  Madhu.  "You have the female principle which  has been a very pivotal principle in Indian  culture. It has become perverted over the  years, but nevertheless you have images Uke,  say durga and kah, female goddesses."  Culturally Rooted Myths  "So we see," continued Madhu, "even in cinema, that a lot of the images which are related to strong women are based on these  kind of myths. We wanted to see how these  culturaUy rooted myths have been used.  They have been used both positively and  negatively.  "So we got films Uke Devi by Satya-  jit Ray. On the one hand, she was raised  to the level of a devi [female goddess] and  worshipped. On the other hand, that same  woman's womanly feehngs were totaUy ignored. She was so projected as a goddess  that her more humane quaUties were subsumed.  "Then we had other kinds of films where  it was used far more positively, even the  same devi myth. It became much more of  a principle for the reconstruction of human  kind, of how it could become a basic principle for restructuring the world ..."  The previous year the festival looked at  how women's issues were being popularized  in films. Madhu told me that women's issues  have become the "in" thing in film and television and in numerous government pubU-  cations. As in North America, women's issues have become commerciaUy viable, with  a spate of films showing dowry deaths and  rape.  "But these kind of films," said Madhu,  "Uke say a film on rape—a very sociaUy relevant kind of subject—what they were in  effect doing was exploiting the whole subject and exploiting even the woman there.  So they'd show a rape scene and it was not  so much looking at rape as a traumatic experience for the woman but ultimately it  just became a spectacle for the audience.  So [we wanted] to look at this phenomenon,  how the commercial cinema was taking-over  these issues."  The Vimochana festival has not only  shown commercial films, but has also shown  many so-called progressive or art films  about women, made by both women and  men directors. The seminars afterwards  have been unsparing in their criticism of  these, as participants discuss whether such  films provide any alternative ways of presenting and of viewing women.  Through the most gruesome scenes of the  video on the coach, I feel comforted by these  memories. I remember too that we in Vancouver may get a chance to see some of these  women's films from India at the upcoming  Third World and Women of Colour Film  Festival (In Visible Colours) this October.  This is the first part of a two-part article on women's film and video in India.  KINESIS, .^^^^^^^^^^^^^^  ARTS  At the VAG  Speaking of feminism and painting  by Susan Leibik  Feminism, painting and history are  realms that have "interesting, complex,  and paradoxical" relationships, according  to Griselda PoUock, a professor of art history at the University of Leeds, England.  PoUock spoke in Vancouver recently, at a  weU-attended lecture sponsored by the Vancouver Art GaUery.  Her talk took the form of a mock panel  discussion where feminism held the central  position: history was to the left ("I'm a  Marxist," she explained), and painting she  positioned "unfortunately," to the right.  PoUock herself assumed aU these roles  throughout, raising issues and questions  from each forum, often quoting from other  writers. The tone and strategy of her lecture  was one of questioning and investigation; indeed, she sees feminism as a force which  "transgresses, troubles, and poUticizes the  domain of painting."  PoUock began with the issue of images  as cultural artifacts; they caU into play  not only "what we see, but how we see,"  and give evidence of social and pohtical  manipulation. Feminism poses questions of  sexual difference—in art-making and art-  viewing—and seeks to point out how these  differences are encoded in culture.  Showing a sUde of a painting by 19th century French artist H. Matisse, PoUock reviewed some of the ways in which feminist  analysis can reveal cultural and pohtical implications. The Matisse work shows "no obvious gender reference," yet PoUock pointed  to the "organized codings" within.  The picture shows a male artist in a studio, painting a female model. Assumptions  of gender are buUt into the work; the figures embody "purpose and passivity": the  upright, active, male artist, and the supine  female model. Stated simply, "men look,  women appear." The active, male gaze is  one that is promoted throughout art history  and popular culture.  Photographs of American painters Helen  Frankenthaler and Jackson PoUock revealed  both artists working on the floor, pouring  paint on large canvases. The images of the  artists were used to raise questions of difference hinged on gender, both in the artwork and in the gestures and stances of the  painters themselves. (As weU as how photographers chose to portray them.)  Jackson PoUock's "slashing, throwing of  paint, his macho gyrations and painted  tracks," have been seen as "definably masculine" and his work was Uonized in heroic  terms. By contrast, Frankenthaler's physical stance is one of containment and calm,  holding her body in close as she paints. De-  Your  CltftbM  "P£5!6,NfAKz  yjJ AVAJLABLs AT;  OCfWttfB**?  \»   *W ok:  I VMCdwsr  11804:  16l<JNESlS  scriptions of her work caU up notions of "fluidity and lyricism."  By investigating even the physical postures of the artists, PoUock pointed to attempts to devise a language in which these  factors can be described and validated, citing French femimst theory, with its notion  of the body as "signifier"—something which  inscribes itself onto the work.  PoUock noted that, in 1950's, consideration of gender in Frankenthaler's work was  non-existent. In the critical writing of that  time, "sexual difference has been cauterized, and cannot be spoken about."  PoUock identified two modes utUized by  women as image-makers to deal with problems of female representation. One method  emphasizes affirmation: the positive identity of women depicted in artwork. The  other expresses a "refusal of meaning,"  as seen in some non-representational work  backed by French semiotics theory.  This deconstructive stance does pose  some dangers for women. PoUock observed  that a position of "de-affirmation" of identity, as expressed in "the abohtion of author, the death of subject," cannot reaUy work for women. She contended that  "women are not burdened by too much self,  or ego, or cognito," and therefore do not  need more methods of self-negation.  Her remarks on history reiterated questions of social construction of gender and  the "discourse of tolerance," a method of social control where differences of age, class,  race, and sexual orientation are not acknowledged or accepted, but rather held  against a supposed norm. Specific conditions of women's hves have been-ignored or  marginalized, and traditions of art history  reflect this.  Looking at work by 19th century British  women painters who worked in the mainstream tradition, PoUock spoke of the "constructed femininity" of the Victorians. A  meticulously painted image of a beautiful,  but dead woman Ulustrates the going concerns of the day.  PoUock touched upon attitudes of art-  making in the post-modern era, and spoke  of feminism's role in the "disruption and  de-affirmation" of mainstream structures.  Feminism brings awareness of social processes of representation, in both viewing  and creating visual works. She sees the female subject as viewer and "producer, respondent, and participant" in image making.  Asking, "how can we be positioned as  subjects of our desire?", she looked towards  works that "dis-affirm" the dominant culture, and at the same time speak as "affirmations of ourselves."  PoUock's talk was from an academic perspective and the lecture often veered into  the dense, dry terrain that is a hazard of  her trade. Many of the ideas she put forth  could have been expressed in simpler, more  vital terms. The places where history, painting and feminism inform each other covers a  complicated territory, and one that beckons  exploration. HopefuUy, the academics won't  be the only ones who venture there.  Private parkland: 15 acres provide two  separate creekside cabins and camping.  Easy mainland ferry access.  EMILY'S PLACE  Box 220, Coombs, B.C. VOJ1 1MO   (604) 248-5410  Griselda Pollock  Is it a language worth learning'*  Feminism, Painting and History—  with soaring heart I went to hear famed  art historian and writer Dr. Griselda  Pollock speak to a packed audience, the  first of a series of special lectures sponsored by the Vancouver Art GaUery in  June.  Pollock opened with an interesting  piece of theatre in which she arranged to  play the parts of three people discussing  the three aspects of her talk. And then,  for approximately the next three hours,  she proceeded to say practically nothing.  Her presentation seemed confused,  redundant, incomprehensible. What little she managed to convey came across  as shockingly old news. It was a personal triumph for me to stay awake—  many didn't. I left frustrated and paranoid that there was something terribly  wrong with my mind—J couldn't "get"  ta#  Let the Healing  Begin .  Shirlayne's Personalized  Service Includes:  - Retreats for Women Only  ■ Therapeutic Body & Mind  Techniques  ■ Home Cooked Meals  - Comfortable. Safe. Laving Setting  - Cozy Fireside & Bedroom  ■ Nature & Ocean Nearby  -Yoga. Workshops -Tai Chi Chih  LAYNE HEALING  CENTRE  133 Spinnaker Drive  C 14. RR1 Mariner's  Way  Mayne Island, B.C.  V0N2J0  1-604-539-5888  Luckily I met up with several women,  all of whom confirmed my perceptions.  Many were academics but none was familiar with the heavily theoretical vocabulary of "The New Criticism." So,  in affect, we were lost in terms of language.  But is it a language worth learning?  Does it actually express new ideas or is  it a system of invented codes of cloaking  old concepts ? Like the empress' clothes,  it appears to be gobbly gook strung together to conceal the absence of real critique, strong statement about art work.  Pollock made no attempt to communicate to anyone other than, I imagine,  a smaller insular group. She was barely  coherent as either feminist, art analyst,  or the marxist she claimed to be. Instead of leaving stimulated and with a  renewed sense of connection, I left feeling exhausted and alienated.  I am not anti-intellectual, nor do I  believe in talking "down" to the lowest common denominator. But there are  ways to express ideas articulately so  that more than a handful of people can  understand them.  There's a reaction brewing to the gibberish art criticism Pollock represents.  Let's hope it's a progressive commitment to opening up communication and  creating badly needed dialogue about  art.  -Renee Rodin  CROSSLAND CONSULTING*  Personal Management  Services for Artists  Arts Organizations  * FIRST CONSULT*  By Appointment Onfy Arts  /^^^^^^^^^^%^^?^  Rebel Girls: moving into the spotlight  by Jennifer Babcock  High atop the Vancouver Art GaUery in  a smaU room on the east side something unusual is happening.  It's video art. Feminist video art, as a  matter of fact.  Video can be tough because the format  is so famihar—it looks Uke tv. But instead  of the shck, air-brushed constructions of  beauty and perfection we're used to seeing  on tv you'U see famiUar people. People Uke  your friends or family or maybe even yourself. Are you ready for this? Us on tv? You'U  see the working class, Native women, single mothers, and even—I better whisper—  feminists and lesbians. Right there in the  Vancouver Art GaUery.  It's Rebel Girlsl  Representing Ourselves  In the 1960's, video equipment that was  portable and relatively inexpensive came on  the market. Very Uttle training was needed  to get satisfactory results and those results  were immediate. Canadian women took  the opportunity to represent themselves—  to take a medium with Uttle or no history  and give it their own history, their own tradition.  Women in Quebec especially had the  chance to make tapes that were Canadian  not American, female not male, and French  not Enghsh. Women's hves are represented,  recorded with an air of authority, realism,  and truth that rivals the male regime on tv.  Rebel Girls consists of 32 video tapes  by women from across Canada including 10  tapes from Quebec. The show samples work  done over the last 14 years and comes from  women with varying levels of experience in  the medium.  Sixteen hours of video may seem a httle intimidating but it's been divided into  seven easy-to-view parts of approximately  two hours each: The Body PoUtic; Requiem for Romance; The Personal is PoUtical; Memory; Mythology; Desire; and She  Works Hard For Her Money. Some of the  work comes from performance or installation; some is scripted drama and some is  documentary. The pacing is different. There  isn't a car chase every seven seconds but  you'U get used to that.  The French tapes have no subtitles and,  unfortunately, I'm another Western anglophone. Femmes de Reve and Histoire  Infame are quite clear without the text  but longer pieces hke Quebecoiserient are  lost without an understanding of the testimonials. VisuaUy the French tapes are  beautiful—romantic, multUayered, and very  weU produced. The rich texture of Les  Tatouages de La Memoire and Histoire Infame works especially weU with the  themes of history, mythology and memory.  Reclaiming Our Bodies  Women's bodies are used, abused and  fetishized everywhere we look. Tapes in The  Body Pohtic attempt to reclaim our bodies  and our images. Delicate Issue and Birthday Suit: Scars and Defects fetishize  to an extreme and rebuild meaning. Both  works show women's bodies examined clinically with a close-up macro lens. Kate  Craig's voice over tells us "this is as close  as you can get; you can't get any closer" as  the camera explores every texture and orifice. Lisa Steele's body parts don't conjure  up images of new sports cars or vacationing at Club Med as she describes yet another chUdhood accident that has left her  'imperfect.' Lorna Boschman's Scars contains horrendous testimony by people who  release their anger and frustration on their  own bodies. The body continues to be the  battle site.  Hot Chicks on TV, by Elizabeth Vander Zagg  Having been brought up on tv, I must  confess that I consume narratives more eas-  Uy than experimental works. Because of  this, the Requiem for Romance segment  moves smoothly. Manufacture Romance  and Relative Activities imitate soap operas and harlequin romance novels. Easy to  swaUow since pre-packaged romance has always been aimed at the female audience.  From Anne Ramsden's script: "Sometimes I can't beUeve how naive you are."  "What do you mean 'naive' ?"  The last two tapes in the program Sugar  Daddy and The Gloria Tapes both have  exceUent performances. Ardele Lister is incredible playing her father's mistress an unusual story.  Strong Documentaries  AU the documentary work is strong and incredibly important as a recorded version of  history that would otherwise be nonexistent. The Fleck Women reminds us that  it was only ten years ago that the factory  workers were striking for a wage increase  from $2.85 to $3.80/hr. No SmaU Change  paints a different picture of the T.Eaton  Company than what we've seen in their ads,  and Concerned Aboriginal Women allows Native women to speak for themselves  about their hves.  These three tapes Ulustrate again where  the power is and how the usual mediums  are controlled by those powers. These works  echo recent events in Beijing—a large group  of people demonstrating peacefuUy for human rights, an unreasonable show of force  against them, and a distorted view of the  demonstrators put out by the dominant media.  The Last Screening Room: A Valentine laments the end of culture—artists and  rain have been outlawed. This piece romanticizes the role of artists as storyteUers, as  makers and protectors of culture. Judging  by the audiences I witnessed at the art  gallery and the Uneups I saw for Star Trek  V, someone else is forming our culture.  Lisa Steele and Kim Tomczak explore  their Utopian fantasy in Working the Double Shift. The government votes itself out  in favour of full cultural representation; aU  those white, heterosexual, upper class males  replaced by peaceniks, gays, artists, etc.  makes for an entertaining tape.  Hormone Warzone is hUarious—a woman is confronted by a number of characters  fuU of helpful suggestions on how to control  her fertility. A man can go to the moon to  play golf but there is still no safe, effective  birth control and she's baffled. Aren't we  aU?  Pure Virtue documents Tanya Man,  performance as Elizabeth I; a very clever  and funny monologue on the power of sex  in relationships. Decency and sexuahty conflict in Playing With Fire which foUows  the relationship between two women one  of whom has no social memory, no sexual  memory, no shame.  Heroics: Definitions and As A Wife  Has A   Car are interview tapes, actual  688-6138  women relating actual events. Their matter of fact renditions of bravery and endurance are a pleasure to witness. Uncelebrated strengths and triumphs are documented at last in many of these videos.  Women's hves and activities have been hidden and this technology aUows them to  move into the spotUght. Here are the representations you never see in advertising,  tv or in mainstream theatres.  If you've been let down by mainstream  media, if you're tired of trying to identify with Susan Dey and Meryl Streep, the  Rebel Girls is the show for you. Watching  these tapes is comfortable and famihar, encouraging and occasionaUy inspiring.  The exhibition runs until August  21—timetables and catalogues are available at the admissions desk. Don't forget: Thursday nights are free and video  starts at 6 pm.  311 W.HASTINGS ST  Over 250 periodicals  Drop by & check out  what women are doing U  elsewhere £/  O  SPARTACUS  UPRISING  BREADS  BAKEDY  Oat bran  cookies and  muffins are  wheat and  dairy free  Sourdough  pumpernickel  yeast free  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  rt of CRS Workers' Co-op  KINESIS, ^^5i^^^^^^^^^^^  Arts  Reclaiming forgotten ways of knowing  by Lin Patfield  For thousands of years prior to the rise  of major patriarchal reUgions such as Christianity, Islam and Judaism, cultures in virtuaUy every location throughout the world  had some form of goddess worship. Archeo-  logical evidence uncovered in China, Great  Britain, Central and South America, the  Middle East, Africa, the South Pacific Islands, India, North America, Japan and  many areas in Europe strongly indicates  that goddess worshipping societies, far from  being anomahes, were widespread.  Why haven't we heard? How did this information get overlooked?  According to EngUsh author Merlin  Stone, part of the explanation is that, typ-  icaUy, invading nomadic cultures would impose the names of their gods onto the scriptures and shrines of the more peaceful agricultural goddess worshipping societies, after conquering their people and destroying  most of their art. What httle evidence remained, untU recently, was dismissed by archaeologists and historians,as puzzhng but  isolated instances, and therefore considered  unimportant.  Thanks to women Uke Stone, whose persistence and years of painstaking research  has pieced together so much of what had  been suppressed and forgotten, we are now  starting to understand how pervasive goddess reverence was. It has been almost 15  years since Stone published her book When  God Was A Woman and, since that time,  more women are becoming aware of the  importance of remembering the forgotten  past, our heritage as women.  The last 10 to 15 years has seen a revival or "reclamation" of the ancient goddess rehgion. More and more books are being written, art work and plays are being  done, indeed, women throughout the world  (and some men) once again are reclaiming  the image of goddess as a spiritual source of  nurturing and guidance.  "AU I wanted to do, basically, was say  'let's at least know that this had happened  in the past so that we'd know that we  weren't second class citizens and it wasn't  the divine plan that women be subservient  to men, as the Genesis story would have it.'  I had no idea what it was going to start,"  said Stone at a talk in Vancouver in June.  It is unfortunate that Christianity (in  particular) has turned many feminists away  from rehgion. Women's spirituality is an  extremely important part of our psyches  and the possibilities for sharing that experience with other women in creative rituals are exciting. Stone points out that "it  is very much a part of this entire reclamation in women's spirituaUty, of the forgotten ways of knowing, of the ways that have  been put down and trivialized in our society: our intuition, paying attention to Uttle  synchronicities, dreams, signs ... We are  opening up areas that have really been spoken of in negative ways and realizing that  there is aU kinds of information and wisdom  in these ways.  "It's a rehonouring of this way of knowing."  Rubymusic, Women Do This Everyday,  & Vancouver Extract present  Benefit Dance  for  Everywoman's  Health Centre  AMANDA HUGHES  THE NYETZ  THE DOTS  THURSDAY  JULY 6   8 PM  The Commodore  870 Granville St.  Tix: Advance $10; Door $12.  All Ticketmaster locations. Info & Charge  280-4444. Also Black Swan, Highlife,  Zulu, Track, Ariel Books, and  Women's Bookstore.  COOP  B.C. Coalition of Abortion Clinics. All Welcome.  18KINESIS  While acknowledging that the goddess may  mean something different to each of us,  Stone envisions her as energy, as process, as  the flux and flow of Life. She emphasizes the  importance of appreciating Life as change.  "Perceiving everything as flux and flow is  different from seeing everything as static,"  said Stone. "Death and Ulness are part of  the ongoing cycle, part of the continual  changing. When we learn to more and more  trust the changes, we find them easier to accept. Life is a continual transition, we must  trust in the process of Life."  While energy can hardly be assigned a  gender, for many centuries we have been  taught that men, not women or even the  more inclusive 'humans', were made in  the image of a divine creator. Stone beUeves that women need time to regain their  strength, by revisioning their spiritual roots  in feminine terms.  There are so many male heroic images,  women need images that remind us—and  teach our daughters—that being strong and  sure and powerful are equaUy a part of the  feminine psyche. Artemis was Greek goddess of the Hunt, and the warrior goddess  Athena, during wartime, presided over bat-  IfcECkWOMANBI  15-ftREPRoNt Afcr 5~NDifl--Gifts  MS MOVEXL^  " across -fte sfree-t-To  |i31if COMMERCIAL DK.  Display  Advertising:  Ask us about discounts.  Phone 255-5499  tie strategy. Archeological evidence suggests  that historical women of this era were great  hunters and warriors too.  Stone emphasized that, whUe reimagin-  ing the goddess in this way can be invaluable to women on a personal and psychological level, goddess reverence has an important global and ecological significance as  weU. HistoricaUy, within women's spirituality, there has been the understanding tha\  nature is sacred.  "Nature is not something we use anc  stomp on but it is the goddess. As we  are part of the goddess, nature is part of  the goddess and aU that is around us—the  oceans and rivers and trees and mountains  and the animals, and aU the races—aU o  Ufe is sacred ...  "When we start thinking of nature a*  cred, we realize that dumping chemicals in  the rivers or spewing radiation out, and the  various things that are being done are not  only poUution, but they are blasphemy, i:  you truly understand the sanctity of aU nature."  Stone feels that in reclaiming our heritage, and trusting our selves, trusting our  intuition, our excitement, our perceptions  our judgement and opinions ... and by not  letting anyone talk us out of it, we regain  the strength to speak out.  "Women aU over the world are picking up  on these ideas. Consciousness is being raisec  by this kind of thinking, and perhaps—anc  its almost hke a race—we're going to win  Instead of being poisoned out of our planet  or being blown out of our planet, there  might be a chance to save it, and to really  understand that the planet is our home, the  planet is part of the goddess."  Stone cautions that goddess reverence  not be turned into a cult, and not to become rigid about it, as has happened with  Christianity. Rather, that it be a way of perceiving, a means of effecting—positively—  the flux and flow of hfe that we are aU a pari  of. She also cautions women not to faU for  goddess "gurus" or "priestesses," or anyone  trying to tell you that they have more of a  "direct Une" to the goddess than anyone else  because "we are ah important, so importan1.  that we can actually change the future."  In this reawakening of women's spiritual  ity, by joining and directing goddess energy,!  by hstening to "goddess as guidess," Stone  beUeves we can find ways to do what we  can to redirect the flow in a positive, more  life-nourishing direction, towards a more cooperative world and existence.  Thanks to Lina, Maggie, and Doe for  their comments. Arts  /////////////////////^^^^^  Sounds of courage and conviction  After years as a session drummer, Real-  Life Story is her first album as a leader.  The music is a departure from the more  mainstream jazz she played in the past. Carrington is a brUUant composer and when  she performs her own work she soars. The  album is also highhghted by her coUabora-  tions with composer and keyboardist Patricia Rushen.  by Laurie E. Nerman  Welcome to Making Waves, a music column which will run every other  issue. I will be covering all aspects of  women's music, as well as addressing  the political and topical through interviews, reviews and tons of information.  Expect the serious to the light-hearted.  Victoria-based, I produce a radio  show on women and music, serve as  a music consultant and write about  women's music. I am particularly interested in independent music produced  internationally and domestically. As a  lesbian feminist I have definite opinions  about the limiting sound of most traditional women's and lesbian music—but  that's for a future column.  I hope to challenge and inform you  about all kinds of music, whether it be  current or past. I believe good music by  women is good music, and we need to  walk away from the popular belief that  all music is disposable after an arbitrary period of time.  Comments, suggestions or any questions about the information you read  are most welcome, c/o Kinesis. So let's  open up our eyes and ears—happy reading and listening.  —L.N.  Summer is when I begin my annual  record inventory process. My collection  spans over a 20-year labour of love, so the  task is often slow and long. I take a lot of  Ustening breaks and am often reminded of  some of my favourite albums. The foUowing  three women share the qualities of courage  and conviction within their varying sounds.  Anna Domino is not a household name in  her native Canada, although she is recognized as an important musician in Belgium  (her second home) and Japan.  domij  na ttomino  Stella Chiweshe  This Time is a rare album, working  flawlessly on multi-levels. Its power Ues in  the speak-sing quality of Domino's voice  and the contrast of musical sound which  ranges from the lyrical to the sparse. On her  previous E.P.'s there is such fuU orchestration one senses her singing as an apology.  After years of being told by male producers  that her sound was too small, Anna Domino  has found her own voice and sound, and is  hstening strictly to herself today.  Most of these songs are about love without embeUishment and it is clear that the  lyrics arise from the music with an emotional and thematic charge. The mood is  contrasting: ranging over anger, resignation and personal empowerment. One senses  that what is left out of each song is as important as what the Ustener is given—evocative  imagery that is both dense and visual.  In the surreal piece "Lake" (my favourite)  she states: "In the sky/pale and empty/no  wind ever blows/and the flowers of dreams/  slip by as I go." Entering Domino's world  is Uke entering a dream-world with two feet  on the ground, and recognizing ourselves in  the process. HopefuUy we wUl recognize her  importance as weU.  Brilliant Composer  Terri Lyne Carrington has been playing  drums most of her hfe within a male-  dominated field that has great difficulty accepting a woman jazz drummer. Despite the  odds and obstacles, she cut her first album  at the age of 16 and has not looked back.  Included are two tracks which feature  Carrington on vocals. Her voice is solid yet  doesn't reach the depth and passion of her  instrumental work. All of the pieces verge  on the experimental side yet are easily accessible to the hstener, as there is a soft and  relaxing mood throughout.  She said recently, whUe discussing the  problems of sexism in her Ufe, "The bottom  Une is the music, nothing else should matter." Fortunately, this album matters.  SteUa Chiweshe began her musical career  in 1966 within a tradition that had previously been reserved for men in her native Zimbabwe. Her mastery of the complex mbira is legendary there. The mbira is  a thumb piano with metal keys fixed to a  wooden sound-board which is then wedged  into a calabash (gourd) resonator. Various  articles are attached which produce buzzing  when the keys are plucked.  She was told that a woman playing this  instrument showed no respect for tradition.  She admits that the physical playing of the  mbira is painful—it is a painful instrument  to pluck—but not to play is more painful.  During Zimbabwe's colonial period, the  mbira was banned from pubhc performance  because of its spiritual roots. Says Chiweshe, "Before Independence, you weren't  aUowed to play mbira on stage ... because the missionaries were saying if you do  these things, it's Satan's work, it's uncivi-  Uzed, you will go to heU." Mbira music honours the souls of ancestors and the music is  played for these spirits.  Today SteUa Chiweshe is an important  recording artist with over 20 singles to her  credit. Ambuya? is her first album avaUable to western audiences. Most of the songs  resonate with an infectious beat and feature  her artistry as a musician and singer. With  its evocative blend of instruments, "Mu-  gomba" is haunting in its depth of tone and  sound.  The songs encompass her spiritual be-  Uefs as weU as the compeUing tales of the  hberation struggle of Zimbabwe. "Sarura  Wako," one of my favourites, translates into  "Choose Yours." It is about choosing the  one who is wearing the symbol of a great  person, and its sound is upbeat, celebratory  and danceable.  This highly inspirational album reflects  Chiweshe's conviction during periods of  deep pohtical and personal struggle. Like  Domino and Carrington, she has translated  her personal vision into transformative and  positive music. What more could we ask for?  Discography  THIS TIME  Anna Domino  Giant Records, 1987  P.O. Box 570 RockviUe Centre  New York 11571  REAL-LIFE STORY  Terri Lyne Carrington  Polygram Records, 1989  AMBUYA?  SteUa Chiweshe  GlobeStyle Records, 1987  48-50 Steele Rd.,  London NW10 7AS  Airfare Vancouver-Grand Rapids, Mich.  Return $526.00 Including tax.  Deposit of $200.00 immediate  Balance July 1, 1989. Medical insurance $9.00 extra  depart: August 8, 1989  return: August 14, 1989  Soto  14th  Michigan  Womyn's  Music  Festival  1 989  Airheart  CO-OPERATIVE TRAVEL CENTRE  Worker Owned & Operated  2149 Commercial Drive  Vancouver  (604)251-2282  Bus. Hours: 9:30 to 5:30 Mo-Fr  KJlNbSIS July/Aug. 89 .**ms*ss**s*s*s***s^ws^^\  ARTS  /N^O>YK*  Great beach book  has Vancouver setting  by Melanie Conn  Summer weekends are aU the sweeter  when there's a shelf of new science fiction  to choose from. This spring, several titles  came out in paperback and are avaUable at  local bookstores and public Ubraries.  THE SARSEN WITCH  by Eileen Kernaghan  New York: Ace Books, 1989  $4.75  A few years ago I interviewed Eileen Kernaghan, a Burnaby writer. I had read her  first two books, Journey to Aprilioth and  Songs from the Drowned Lands, and had  been struck by her knack for creating characters who Uve and breathe on the page.  I was delighted to find that Kernaghan  displays the same magic in Sarsen Witch.  A kind of sequel to the earlier books,  Sarsen Witch reflects the author's fascination with EngUsh prehistory and the talent of the geomancer to locate the earth's  energy fields and mobUize them against destructive chaos.  The witch of the title is Naeri, a young  woman who embodies the struggle for survival of the Mother's people in the aftermath of the warUke horsemen who have conquered the land. From the first page, as she  "sets a pot of barleymeal and water over  the hot coals, and stirs in a duck egg from  the morning's forage," the reader is swept  into Naeri's hfe. Sights, smeUs and tastes are  vividly served up as we enter the horsemen's  camp with the young woman and visit the  hidden communities of The People where  the ancient ways are preserved.  One of the pleasures of Kernaghan's  books is her ability to present magic as a  hands-on aspect of people's Uves. In Sarsen  Witch, the story is so weU-grounded in  character and setting that Naeri's exploration of her remarkable birthgift to communicate with the earth and with the  sarsen-stones never seems mysterious.  The book ends with Naeri on the road,  hopefuUy to another adventure we can look  forward to reading.  AN ALIEN LIGHT  by Nancy Kress  New York: Avon Books, 1989  $4.25  This second novel by Nancy Kress is a  perfect example of science fiction as a genre  for exploring complex and contemporary issues from a unique perspective.  The action takes place on an unnamed  planet overhung with purple skies and  populated by warring human communities.  Menacing, carnivorous vegetation and rapid  cycles of extreme cold and bhstering heat  make the environment inhospitable even to  its most hardy inhabitants. In this tough  setting the reader encounters Ayrys, just  exiled from her city. An artist and a victim of pohtical censorship, Ayrys is a weU-  developed character who held my interest  and admiration throughout the book.  Ayrys' only hope for security from the  hostUe landscape is to enter the Gray WaU,  rumoured to be a source of remarkable  weapons. It doesn't give too much away to  say that the WaU turns out to be an enormous laboratory—an entire city, in fact—  called F'row, established by the Ged, a  technologically advanced ahen race who are  studying the nature of human interaction  and potential.  There's a lot to observe as the members of various communities assemble in  F'row and are forced to co-exist despite  their traditional enmity. Bloody confrontations soon develop between the highly regimented, warrior Jellites and the much  more casual and anarchistic Delysians.  Despite the violence, Ayrys and one or  two others become fascinated with the scientific information made avaUable to them  by the Ged. As the story unfolds, the lure  of technology becomes an obsession, threatening to blinker the humans to the motivations of their captors. Using her intuition  to complement her intellect, Ayrys manages  to stay centred in the midst of this classic  conflict, providing, one could say, a feminist  perspective on the situation.  A sub-plot explores the enormous difficulty of establishing intimacy between cul  tures, particularly around gender-related  differences. The Delysians Uve a Ufestyle  that aUows same-sex and heterosexual relationships, serial monogamy and single-  parenthood. Within the rigid Jellite culture, sister-warriors love one another, having sex with men only to procreate; Jellite  men are "serviced" by female prostitutes.  In the F'row melting-pot, the unimaginable happens and Ayrys, a Delysian, becomes lovers with a Jellite man. Ultimately, though, she has to accept "the size  of the abyss between them and the dark currents at the bottom."  This is a long book with lots of action and  Nancy Kress manages to keep it moving and  thought-provoking untU the end. I'm on the  lookout now for her first novel, The Prince  of Morning Bells.  I've often recommended it as an introduction to women's SF.  But there's a whole new batch of Vonda  Mclntyre books now. She's the best-seUing  author of the Star Trek series, and if you've  read any of the Trek books (or seen the  movies), you know the style: lots of chatty  dialogue, entertaining references to famihar  issues and a concentration on relationships.  Starfarer foUows suit, although it's an adventure story aU on its own.  Mclntyre is a Seattle resident and this  book was definitely written with her Canadian friends and fans in mind. Reading it is  a Uttle Uke watching a movie filmed in Vancouver and identifying various locations.  Starfarer is an unarmed spaceship preparing for interstellar exploration. Its multi-  ifil ACE.0-44»-75052-4-[$*.75CANAOAl-$lSOaS.  r  SSRSENITCH  Eileen kernaghan  /  \- /-it t    Award-Winmng-Author of JOURNEY TO * ;.;-■ '"/''  S ,<;• "•'• L ti        APRUJOfH and SONGS FROM THE :',.  "'(■■■■•*::'>%&. .   ^>r-   DROWNEDLANDS & ;':'4" --'*'<  Thesinofngof •;  the stone? Hired-  her into battled  With the darkest  L   of magics...,'  STARFARER  by Vonda Mclntyre  New York: Ace Books, 1989  $5.25  I've been a fan of Vonda Mclntyre  for years. Her 1974 noveUa Dreamsnake,  about a woman healer, is one of my aU-time  favourites. For depth of character and simple, beautiful writing, it's unsurpassed and  iCte^^fema^> ^£JeAiUi4^y  |^...y/\ kmow,,  Pvf> ...  So MET  IMES^H  fwHEAj    WE'RE1  OUT  CAMP/MG  AAJP ll  p  S^RKoOA/i>t>  gy au_  THiS  6EAi/Tyj|  I A^P    TKAMQ\JiLtT-fy    X  pEeu  L.\K£   «|  '    X'M   A&ovT   1  o HAVE  SoM£  KIND      *  I   OF UNIQUE  REUGlOOS  fi'xpeft.iE^ce:'  MIGHT, Soppy...  t^ESLi  WM  -k  racial, international scientific crew is headed  by Victoria MacKenzie, a determined and  colourful woman whose home is Vancouver.  On one level, Victoria's character is a  kind of cartoon Canadian: her speech is peppered with "eh's", she gets teased for saying "oot" and "aboot" and she loves visiting  her grandmother on Vancouver Island. The  plot, which hinges on outwitting the U.S.  hawks who want to use Starfarer to dominate the rest of the world, aUows Victoria to  speculate gloomily that her government is  sure to go along with the Americans. (There  are several other Canadian references, but  you'U enjoy finding them yourself.)  In this book, Mclntyre continues to  plore her interest in whales, a focus of Star  Trek IV: The Voyage Home. One of the  characters in Starfarer, J.D. Sauvage, is an  "ahen contact expert" with a deep affinity  for orcas. A long section of the book concerns J.D.'s decision about whether to make  a Ufe-long commitment to the sea-dweUers  or to become part of the steUar exploration.  The evocative depiction of J.D.'s experience  with the orcas and with the altered humans  who protect them reminded me of Mcln-  tyre's earlier writing.  Starfarer is an entertaining read—a  great beach book!  .KINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  /////////////////M^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  More Rape  Relief comment  Kinesis:  The attacks, over time, on Vancouver  Rape ReUef (VRR) raise fundamental questions. In the article "Rape ReUef Centre  under attack" pubUshed in the Vancouver  Sun, AprU 6, the accusations made against  Rape ReUef are essentiaUy about being too  poUtical and indoctrinating women.  Like VRR, we beUeve that men's violence  against women is the result of a patriarchal  society, a society based on the power of men  and the oppression of women. This analysis, different from what we've been taught,  is at the origin of the centres against sexual  assault in Quebec and Canada.  Consequently, we beheve that the support and the services we offer women must  reflect our vision. We beUeve it is a priority  to show this to women. Women must have  the possibiUty of becoming conscious that  sexual assaults are not isolated acts which  they have in any way contributed to, but a  manifestation of cultural acts.  Neither men nor poUce, medical, justice  or poUtical authorities are in a hurry to  recognize the breadth, the causes, the consequences of sexual assault against women,  and the threat to daily Ufe of aU women.  The treatment of abused women by institutions is the object of numerous criticisms.  Concerning the judiciary system, it unfortunately carries the same values. It does  bring a kind of protection and security to  women. But we know that these effects are  very relative. And most of all, we do not  forget that we cannot impose on individual  women the responsibihty to change institutions and mentalities.  If, for aU these reasons, Vancouver Rape  Relief is accused of being poUtical, you  should do the same for Quebec centres  against rape. We too consider this poUtical  view is fundamental in the fight against sexual assault.  Also, we consider Rape Relief to be an  extremely dynamic group and an incontestable leader in the Quebecois and Canadian movement against rape. The choices,  orientations and analysis of Rape Relief inspire a deep respect on our part.  We have a clear impression that it is fundamentally different views about rape and  about services to women that are at the root  of the accusations against Rape Relief. We  hope that the debate on this issue wUl continue.  Diane Lemieux for the  Quebec Coalition of Sexual Assault Centres,  and Regional Representative for the Canadian Association of Sexual Assault Centres  Sherbrooke, P.Q.  Even more  R.R. comment  Kinesis:  To the Vancouver Sun:  Karen GaUagher is right about something—women do have a right to know so  that they can make informed choices. The  article "Rape Relief under attack" omits a  great deal of information.  Women have a right to know that Rape  Relief offers a woman counselUng, support,  her choice of options (the courts are not  the only one) and an opportunity to work  for social change if she chooses. They also  offer shelter, food, and clothing—free if necessary.  Women have a right to know that it is  not an accident that one woman in four  is raped—nor is it a genetic defect on the  part of men—nor is it her fault. It does  have something to do with the way this culture is organized. It is extremely important  that women know that we can do something  about rape and the conditions that encourage it. Changes have been made in the court  system (although it is stUl not ideal) as a  result of pressure from women's groups—  Rape Relief among others.  Women have a right to know that they  can stay in Rape Relief's Transition House  for as long as they need—whereas the government places restrictions on government  funded shelters.  Women have a right to know that there  are other feminist organizations that support Rape ReUef's work—a fact that the reporter did not see fit to divulge.  Many women have gained much from  their contact with Rape Relief—again a fact  that the reporter did not see fit to investigate.  Women should be happy that enough  women over the years have cared enough  and worked hard enough so that there is a  shelter in Vancouver that is not beholden to  anyone and can therefore offer service to a  woman based on her needs.  H the Sun is to do articles on the  women's movement, it would have more integrity if it assigned a reporter who was  not so obviously biased and who would dig  deeper to do justice to some difficult and  complex questions about how to best support both individual women and the cause  of women in general.  Producing a biased, sensationalized story  on one women's group puts us aU unnecessarily further behind in our work to create  a world that is safe for us aU.  Bet CeciU, Jiwan Fischman, Kathy Atkins,  Pam HaU, Karen Jackson, Ann Bradbury,  Sage DeBeUe, Danielle Bourassa, Sandy  Goundry, Mary Brooks, Ann Burrows, Kim  Nightingale, Karen Kjonhcka, Lea Dawson, EUen Woodsworth, Suzanne Perreault,  Nym Hughes, Karen TuUy, Carol NeUsen,  Sherie Hethrington, Joanne Beatty, Maureen MiUs, Yvonne Johnson, Fredricka  Staiger  Vancouver  Lesbians and  spousal benefits  Kinesis:  We were very interested to see the article  "Lesbians: Organizing for spousal benefits"  (May 1989).  Like the participants in the Vancouver  meeting reported, we feel that the "spousal  status" strategy is necessarUy a Umited one  and does Uttle to challenge the institutionalization of the "family" structure in our  society. Nevertheless, it is difficult to ignore the financial rip-off and the blatant disrespect of the heterosexual majority who,  through our governments and legal system,  issue edicts that only their own relationships merit the social benefits and protections for which we aU pay.  According to the article, two routes for  obtaining spousal coverage were discussed  at the meeting—grievance procedures and  court challenges. We think it is important  that collective bargaining as weU, be given  some serious consideration.  The use of a grievance procedure presupposes a collective bargaining environment. But the procedure itself is only useful  if your contract already contains language  which offers a reasonable chance of success.  Most do not. Through collective bargaining  you can change the language and make it  say exactly what you want it to say.  Homophobia, of course, can erect as effective a barrier to successful collective bargaining as it can to successful grievances or  court chaUenges. First one's bargaining unit  must be convinced and then the employer.  StiU, it costs a lot less to try—both in time  and in money. And even an unsuccessful attempt can be an invaluable vehicle for consciousness raising as the process necessarUy  involves many people on both sides of the  table.  Unhke court chaUenges, contract proposals are not bound by precedent and can  be submitted in thousands of workplaces  across the country, whenever negotiations  are pending. An unsuccessful attempt in one  place or in one round of bargaining does not  prevent or even seriously prejudice another  run at it elsewhere or later.  CoUective bargaining, of course, cannot  be utilized to change legislated benefits.  However, once insured benefits for same sex  couples become common in union contracts,  market pressure wiU dictate changes in nonunion employment contracts, in insurance  company poUcies and the Uke. The changing  "norm," as weU as the integration of many  insured benefits with pubhc benefits wUl result in legislation changing to accommodate  the new "norm," as it changed to accommodate the common law heterosexual couples.  Pressing this issue through both grievance procedures and court chaUenges is, of  course, extremely important. However, legal challenges wUl be greatly assisted by a  changing societal norm reflected in union  contracts. The more common freely negotiated same sex spousal benefits have become by the time the test case gets to the  Supreme Court of Canada, the more hkely  that case is to succeed.  In Solidarity,  Nancy Rosenberg,  Margaret Evans,  Ottawa, Ont.  Birth parents  and adoption  Kinesis:  I would greatly appreciate you publishing  my letter as I feel that other women ought  to be informed of potential violation of their  rights within private adoption, even where  government legislated.  Recently I became aware that existing  laws governing individuals who hold a government Ucence to practice private adoptions in Ontario are insufficient to protect  the rights of biological parents who elect to  rehnquish their chUdren.  I was led to examine the relevant legislation within the (Cluld and FamUy Services  Act) after I gave up my biological chUd for  adoption in 1987 through the executive director of the oldest and largest private adoption agency in Ontario.  Several months after the baby's placement I discovered, as a result of reading  an article in the Toronto Star, that the  baby's father and myself had been misled  about the options at the Toronto Metro  ChUdren's Aid Society (CAS) and had valuable information withheld from us about  the agency we dealt with for approximately  seven months.  SpecificaUy, we requested to be as involved as possible in the selection of adoptive parents. We were told that at the CAS  the social workers do the matching, whereas  at the agency we dealt with we could specify  the characteristics of the adoptive parents.  We were informed that we would be presented with two or three couples who were  the closest match to our criteria,  I was asked if one criterion was essential (which is easUy met by many couples). I  specified that it was. In the next meeting we  were presented with two couples: the first  couple met the criterion; the other did not.  Months after the placement, the newspaper article revealed that the CAS had been  permitting biological parents to specify criteria of the adoptive parents and had been  providing the option of the biological and  adoptive parents meeting for the previous  three years. Upon investigation, I learned  that the agency we dealt with had begun  such meetings even before the CAS.  As a result of us meeting with the director, in which he had considerable difficulty answering our questions, we brought  our concerns to the attention of the Ontario  Ministry of Community and Social Services  and the Ontario CoUege of Certified Social  Workers.  The CoUege recently found the agency's  director to be "guilty of incompetence" but  decided not to publish this finding and requested that the baby's father and I keep  this information confidential. In our opinion, our objective of providing greater protection of birthparents who place tremendous trust in adoption workers has not been  realized.  Two MPPs, Mr. Rick Ferraro of Guelph,  and Mr. Richard Johnston of Scarborough  West support my efforts. I would greatly appreciate your readers taking a few minutes  to express their views to Kinesis and to  The Honourable John Sweeney, Minister of  Community and Social Services, 6th Floor,  Hepburn Block, 80 Grosvenor St., Toronto,  Ont. M7A 1E9.  CCEC Credit Union  The Credit Union for  Cooperatives, Community businesses  and the non-profit sector.  • Preferred Rate Loans for  societies and cooperatives.  • Operating Loans  • Mortgages.  • Term Deposits.  • Chequing Accounts.  • and other banking services.  "Keeping our money  working in our  community"  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  MON. & WED. 11 am-5 pm  FRIDAY 1 pm-7 pm  876-2123  KINESIS BULLETIN BOARD  Read this  AU Ustings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are Umited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 |  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubUc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wUl not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information call 255-5499.  EVENT SIE VENT SHWORKSHOPS  MAHINAARINGI TOCKER  Mahinaaringi Tocker will give her last performance before heading off to perform  at the Michigan Women's Festival, then  home to Aotearoa, N.Z. La Quena, Tues.  July 25, 8 pm. Tix $3-$5  GALLERIE ANNUAL SHOW  To celebrate the second Gallerie Annual  featuring 17 B.C. women artists. Show  runs July 11-29 at the Van. Community Arts Council, 837 Davie St. Opening  night festivities July 11, 7-9 pm  A ONE NIGHT STAND  Women artists—the Passionists—present  their second show, "A One Night Stand,"  at Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St., on July  11, 3-11 pm. Paintings, sculpture, and ceramics express women's ability to survive  as artists  EVENTS  LA QUENA FIESTA  Music, food, and fun in Grandview Park,  1200 Commercial Dr. July 23, noon-7:30  pm. Buttons $3/$5 support La Quena  and Tools for Peace. For info, call 251-  6626 or 879-7216  ANARCHIST POSTER SHOW  International exhibit with posters going  as far back as 1886, at Pitt Galleries, 36  Powell St. Show runs from Aug. 7-25,  benefit with rebel music, poetry on Aug.  5511 (between 1-5, Mon.-Thurs.) for 18, 8 pm. Proceeds to Open Road anar-  more   info chist newsjournal. For info call 681-6740  VSW AGM  VSW's Annual General Meeting will be  held Sept 6, 7:30 pm at our offices, #301-1720 Grant St. All members   are   asked   to   attend.   Call   255-  OlU  T  R  presents  THE FIRST ANNUAL  LESBIAN & GAY  FILM FESTIVAL  AUG. 4-7, 1989  at  Pacific Cinematheque  1131 Howe St.  Shows at 7:30 pm & 9:30 pm  with midnight shows on Fri. & Sat.  $5 per screening  $25 for a festival pass  (.50 initial membership fee)  Programs available at:  VIDEOMATICA  VANCOUVER EAST CINEMA  OCTOPUS BOOKS EAST  LITTLE SISTERS   and  THE RIDGE  LESBIAN ETHICS  Spend an evening at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection (VLC), 876 Commercial  Dr., with author Sarah Hoagland. July 8,  8-10 pm, tix $2-$5, pay at the door  EVERYWOMAN'S BENEFIT  Amanda Hughes, the Nyetz and the  Dots perform a benefit for Everywoman's  Health Centre, July 6 at the Commodore,  tix $10. For more info call Co-op Radio  684-8494  GAY /LESBIAN PRIDE WEEK  The Vancouver Gay/Lesbian Pride Festival takes place July 28-Aug. 7. The  Pride Parade is Mon. Aug. 7, starting at  noon in Ceperley Beach parking lot, Stanley Park. For more info call 731-0104  VLC SUMMER DANCE  Dance at the Capri Hall, 3925 Fraser St.,  July 28, 8 pm. Wheelchair accessible,  childcare provided. Tix $4-$6, available at  VLC, Ariel Books, Women's Bookstore.  For more info call 254-8458  ROCK AGAINST PRISONS  Free outdoor concert for National Prison  Justice Day, Aug. 13, 3-8 pm. Crab  Beach, foot of Main St., live bands,  speakers, info booths. Kids welcome, limited access but help available  KINESIS RETREAT  Planning is underway for our annual  weekend retreat: workshops, discussions  and plain fun for experienced and would-  be Kinesis volunteers. Oct. 13-15. A  great way to get involved. Call 255-5499  for info  SOUTH AFRICAN WOMEN'S DAY  Will be observed in Vancouver on Aug.  12 in the evening. Activities include a  dance, speakers and much more. Childcare provided. All welcome. Exact time  and location TBA. For more info (after  July 4) call Nancy at 255-5499  POWELL STREET FESTIVAL  13th Annual celebration of Japanese  Canadian history, arts and culture. Featuring music, dance, drums, martial arts,  and food. Aug. 5-6, at Oppenheimer  Park, 400-block Powell, noon-7 pm. For  more info 682-4335  WOMEN'S STUDIES COURSES  Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University is offering the following courses  in Fall 1989: Issues in Women's Health  and Health Care (Susan Penfold, Harbour  Centre, Evening; Mary Madsen, Burnaby Campus, Evening); Perspectives on  Women—An Introduction to Women's  Studies (Mary Lynn Stewart, Burnaby  Campus Day; Maggie Benston, Distance  Education); Women in Cross-Cultural  Perspective (Jyoti Sanghera, Burnaby  Campus, Evening); Women in Canada,  1600- 1920 (Frances Wasserlein, Burnaby  Campus, Day); Female Roles in Contemporary Society (Meredith Kimball, Burnaby Campus, Day); Women and Film  (Jackie Levitin, Burnaby Campus, Day);  Women and the Media (Lynne Hissey,  Harbour Centre, Evening and Kwantlen  College, Evening); Canadian Women and  Economic Policy (Marjorie Cohen, Burnaby Campus, Day); Women and Contemporary Canadian Literature (Patricia  Matson, Harbour Centre, Day; Michele  Valiquette, Burnaby Campus, Evening).  For further info call 291-3593  WOMEN'S STUDIES  Langara Women's Studies Program will  sponsor two courses in the Fall '89 term:  "More Than Money: Economic Development as if Women Mattered," and "Good  Girls/Bad Girls: Exploring Women's Reality." Both are credit courses with university transfer. No prerequisites needed.  Register at Langara, 100 W. 49th Ave.  Aug. 31 or Sept 1. For more info call  324-5379  WOMEN'S INTENSIVE  The Fifth Annual Women's Intensive:  Three weeks of Transformational Movement for women only. Aug. 7-25 Mon.-  Fri., 6-10 pm. Cost: $400. Move with  other women to embrace your vulnerability and your power. Step into your  body and your life! For more info, contact the Institute for Transformational  Movement, 1607-13th Ave., Seattle, WA,  98122, phone 329-8680  GRO UPS  FACILITATOR TRAINING  Battered Women's Support Services will  offer group facilitator/peer counsellor  training in Sept. Call 734-1574 for an application form. Application deadline is Fri.  Aug. 25  COMING OUT GROUP  The next VLC coming-out group will start  in Sept. Call 254-8458 for more info  XINESIS yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  //////////////////^^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  GROUP SICLASSIFIED  SINGLE MOTHER'S GROUPS  YWCA sponsored group has room for new  members. The group meets for emotional  and practical support every Wed., 6-8 pm.  Childcare provided. Call Beverley at 876-  4827 for info.  Moms who parent solo will meet for 12  Mon. nights, 7-9 pm at Little Mtn. Neighbourhood House, 3981 Main St. Group  starts July 3, childcare available. Register now by calling 879-7104  The Kinesis news group meets monthly to  plan for the upcoming issue. Next meeting is Aug. 3, 1:30 pm at the Kinesis office, 301-1720 Grant St. If you are interested in writing for Kinesis, come to the  news group meeting. If you can't make  the meeting, call 255-5499 to find out  how you can get involved. No experience  is necessary  KINESIS EDITORIAL BOARD  The Kinesis Editorial Board meets every  month to discuss upcoming issues and  ongoing planning for the paper. Kinesis  readers and women interested in getting  involved in the paper are welcome to attend. Next meeting Aug. 9 7:30 pm at  Kinesis, 301-1720 Grant St. For more info  call 255-5499  HEALTH COLLECTIVE  The Van. Women's Health Collective will  be holding training sessions for new volunteers in Oct. If interested call 255-8285  TENANTS RIGHTS CLINIC  The Tenants Rights Coalition will be offering free legal advice and information  every Sat., 9 am-12 noon at 191 Alexander St.  AIDS VANCOUVER  Volunteers needed to work on the hotline.  If you have a fixed availability one day a  week, please call 687-AIDS  REDEYE WANTS YOU  The Sat. morning arts and public affairs  show on Co-op Radio needs your help,  whether it's once a week or once a month.  For more info, call Jane at 255-8173  INT'L LESBIAN WEEK  The ILW organizing committee will meet  Sun. July 9 & 23, 7:30 pm, 1009 Salsbury Dr. (upstairs). All lesbians welcome.  For more info call 874-8567  CLASS F E  SPACE NEEDED  Be richly rewarded and greatly appreciated! Shiatsu practitioner seeks workspace. Could be an attic, a room, a shared  office, a funky storefront... Must be dirt  cheap and in the Commercial Dr. area.  Please call Astarte 251-5409  KEEP ME BUSY JULY 11th  Why? Cos' July 11 is the day that all  money made from Shiatsu appointments  goes directly to VLC. That's right! Here's  a chance to indulge yourself guilt-free. So  if you've been curious about Shiatsu but  haven't "got around to it," do it now. Call  for an appointment. Astarte—251-5409  PRESS GANG IS HIRING  We are a feminist, anti-capitalist, union  print shop, in operation since 1974. We  will be hiring a full-time production person in Aug. or Sept. 1989. Deadline for  applications is Aug. 1. Experienced press  operator preferred but we will accept applications from persons experienced in related areas. We are also willing to train.  Experience working collectively is an asset. Phone 253-1224 for more info or send  resume to 603 Powell St., Vancouver,  B.C. V6A 1H2  PERFORMING ARTS MANAGER  Katari Taiko, the Japanese drumming  group, seeks a Performing Arts Mgr. Part-  time, 20 hrs./wk at $10/hr for 6 months,  with possibility of full-time employment.  Send resume to 720 W. 19th Ave., Van.,  B.C. V5Z 1X2 or call 251-3908 or 876-  7358  ATTENTION GARDENERS  Single disabled woman is in need of  fresh fruit and vegetables. Any donations  greatly appreciated. Contact 872-0555  ATTENDANT REQUIRED  Single disabled woman requires attendant  for the Van. Folk Festival July 14-16. Free  admission in exchange for attending. Patience necessary. Contact 872-0555  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads, PO Box 3177, Burlington VT, 05401.  OFFICE FOR RENT  Office for rent with the Van. Women's  Health Collective. Quiet, non-smoking.  Use of office equipment including computer and printer negotiable. Short term  rental okay. $200/month or negotiable.  Phone Shelley at 255-8284 or drop by.  Suite 302-1720 Grant St.  SOFA BED WANTED  Looking to buy used futon sofa-bed which  I'll pick up. Needed by Aug. 1. Call Terrie at 321-0575 or 266-5533  Potting oui-or-  X) VfiMCOUVEf? f0Vf: -pE5T"  ^geaBflSg^ pcaMCNii&£>  The NAMES Project AIDS Memorial Quilt—a stitched tribute to those who have  died—ends its national tour in Vancouver. From July 12—16, quilt panels will  be displayed in three locations: the Vancouver Art Gallery, the Robson Square  Exhibition space and the rotunda of the Pacific Centre Mall. Hours of the displays  vary, so contact the individual venues.  ALCHERINGA  Have you showered under the stars after  a sauna on a clear summer night or snuggled with your honey by candlelight in a  meditation out house? Perhaps it's time  to visit ALCHERINGA, a quaint and private housekeeping cabin for women on  Salt Spring Island. Summer rates are $40  single, $50 double, with a two night minimum through August. Call Phyllis at 537-  4315 for info and reservations (evenings  are best)  CHARLES SQUARE CO-OP  Charles Square, a 36 unit housing co-op  in East Van has an open waiting list for 1,  2, and 3 BR units. Rents are $460, $570  and $705 with $1,000 share purchase (financing can be arranged). Near park and  community centre; meetings run by consensus. To get on waiting list, send SASE  to Membership Ctee., 1555 Charles St.,  Van. V5L 2T2  WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL  Looking for 4-5 women, motivated and  committed to organizing an ongoing,  annual Womyn's Festival in the lower  mainland—to come together and create  a womyn's community for 3-4 days a year  where we work, play and celebrate together. (Meanwhile, it's possible to get  an indoor event organized for this year.)  Skills needed: business, including financial  planning, budgeting, fundraising, knowledge of music industry contacts, and a desire for this to happen. Call Pat 253-7189  WELLS BOOK GROUP  Autobiographies, biographies, books by  and about women. Adams, Barrett-  Browning, Brontes, Carr, Dinesen,- Davis,  Farraro, Earhart, Freidan, Gonne, Greene,  Hickok, Joplin, Laurence, Mandela, Mil-  lett, Roosevelt, Rhys, Roy, Sackville-  West, Stein, Suyin, Steineim, Wilson,  Wolfe ... are just a few of the books  for sale. We also sell Arctic and Sea materials. To order write: Diane Wells, The  Wells Book Group, 958 Page Ave., Victoria, B.C. V9B 2M6. Women Booksellers  ACUPRESSURE-REIKI  Give yourself the gift of loving healing  energy with an Acupressure or Reiki session to relax and balance your body and  mind. I also use stress management techniques and applied meditation as appropriate. Independent distributor for Pure  Life products—nutritional maintenance  program, colon cleansers, yeast-aid programs, skin care and herbal remedies  available. Call Sarah L'Estrange 734-2950  for more info  COVER ALL PAINTING  Specializing in residential interior and exterior decorating with a personal touch.  Roller and brush painting, staining, wall  papering. All our work is guaranteed,  quality and clean. For a free estimate give  us a dingle: Charlotte Paquette or Barbara Sarahan 874-9310  f      CARDS #-{  VRECORDS  f^\(SpoTViNG m&oiwa t)in>  vS/«kM»i*A BeRNrlA^o AT  y^GnlGftN WOMEN'S F&TMi..  m?im IS FUNU.  DOyouTnlr^ THOSE MEN  CAMPING 6KIDE uc,wru  DRJNK. all Jwf\ 6eeR JM  owe   pfiv?  jjOKTttfcS^AcH,  EVBtfTrttNfc  WASSEALfeP  IN PMSTiC /IN* ilSHkb  HAS £A*f> TM IT'  1146 Commercial # 253-0913  KINESIS July/Auq, LIBRARY PROCESSING CENTRE - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER ,  V6T 1Z8       INV-E 9004  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis subscription only - $17.50       □ Sustainers - $75  □ Institutions - $45                                  □ New  □ Here's my cheque                                 □ Renewal  □ Bill me                                                  □ Gift subscription for a friend  8  E  Address  c  8  #