 \ feb. 1992 Tight lips sink Royal Commission? cmpa $2.25  News About Women T>    L L    '*'Ģ In The Dailies  4$t  WOO ^OUGH  JO WORK  GOOD ENOUGH  .'121932  Domestic workers fight back Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next Writer's Meetings  are Tues. Feb. 4 and Tues.  March J at 7 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Fatima Jaffer, Nancy Pollak,  Janisse Browning, Agnes Huang, Gladys We, Cathy Griffin, Gabrielle Chew, Ria Bleu-  mer, Donna Dykeman, Kelly O'Brien, Christine Cosby,  Libbie Morin, Frances Wasserlein, Janette Hellmuth, Harriet Fancott, Deborah Mclnnes, Chris Meyer, Marsha Arbour, Debbie Bryant, Luce  Kannin, Tamara Mac Kenzie  and Susan John  FRONT COVER: The Domestic Workers Protest rally,  Vancouver, January 12. Photo  by N.J. Pollak.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Nancy Pollak, Heidi Walsh, Agnes  Huang, Debbie Bryant, Christine Cosby, Sandra Gillespie,  Lizanne Foster, Gladys We,  Fatima Jaffer.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Jennifer Johnstone,  Birgit Schinke, Tory Johnstone, Cat L'Hirondelle.  ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  OFFICE: Jennifer Johnstone,  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year (+ $1.40 GST)  or what you can afford. Membership in the Vancouver Status of Women is $30 (+ $1.40  GST) or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make submissions. We reserve the right  to edit and submission does  not guarantee publication. If  possible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication.  News copy: 15th. Letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  16th.  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  MEANS MOMENT  Blaming South Asian culture for women's oppression can be racist 11  The Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies is going  down fast ... or is it? 12  A major women's theatre conference in Calgary—  a critical review' 18  nCfi/Jl/Ah  IS  Domestic workers: good enough to fight back   ..3  by Vera Rltt  Pr(jlAL-f\*y  JS*f  New sexual assault bill: defining "no"   ..3  Ixji^yv*  by Karen Duthie  i ~    i  Striking women at the Bank of Commerce   ..4  by Pat Barter  Panel on violence begins public process   ..4  by Karen Duthie  Woman charged with aggravated sexual assault...  .5  by Jackie Brown  Repetitive strain injuries: an epidemic at work   ..6  Inside Kinesis    2  by Sharon Saunders  Not just another page   ..7  by the Kinesis Women of Colour caucus  Women in Focus: the damage done   ..8  Movement Matters....   2  by Nancy Pollak  ..8  by Harriet Fancott  What's News    6  ..9  by Gladys We  by Catherine Burke  Violence and resistance on campus   .10  by Jesse Sutherland  South Asian women: whose point of view?   .11  Paging Women   ...15  by Sunera Thobani  Reproductive technology: a commission in chaos  .12  by Gabrielle Chew  by Heidi Walsh  If Women Counted: in review   by Ellen Woodsworth  .14  Letters   ...19  She Who Was Lost Is Remembered: in review   .15  by Shani Mootoo  Shakespeare and patriarchy: feminist or not?   .16  Bulletin Board   ...21  by Janette Hellmuth  Brown Women, Blond Babies: an interview   .17  compiled by Cathy Griffin  as told to Cecilia Dlocson  Women's theatre: surfaces need breaking   .18  by Janisse Browning  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and an  LC-800 laser printer. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing by  Web Press Graphics, Burnaby  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association. ISSN 0317-9095  Second class mail #6426 m  Movement Matters  \\x\\\x\\\vv\xv\\\N\^x\\Nxx\\\^\\\^\\^N>^^^^^  Xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxv^S^^  ^xxxxxxxxx*^^^^**^^  Movement  Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be  a network of news, updates and information of special interest to the  women's movement. Submissions to  Movement Matters should be no  more than 500 words, typed, double-  spaced on eight and a half by eleven  paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  Canadian Women's  Health Network  A dream of many women is becoming a  reality: a Canadian Women's Health Network is being formed. Women Healthsharing, a feminist organization which promotes  women's health through the quarterly magazine Healthsharing, has received funds  from Health and Welfare Canada to establish links among organizations, groups and  individuals throughout Canada working on  issues which affect women's health.  This three year project aims to lay the  groundwork for the network by: 1) gathering information about women's health activities and organizations in six Canadian  regions to create a current resource bank;  2) devoting an issue of Healthsharing to  each region (the issue will include the region's resource bank and will be freely distributed within the region); 3) organizing a  Canada-wide conference on women's health  which will focus on sharing resources, Unking our struggles and determining a structure and direction for the network.  This is an opportunity for women to  share resources, analysis, vision, and strategies for change. Links can be made between  women's health and social problems such as  poverty, sexism, racism and heterosexism.  Women Healthsharing will do everything we  can to help the network develop in a way  that represents, and includes the concerns  of, women from diverse classes, races, cultures, sexual orientations, ages and physical  abilities.  Please contact the organizers as soon as  possible if you would like to be involved in  the network, have your work hsted in the  regional resource bank, or write an article  for Healthsharing.  If you Uve in British Columbia or Alberta, contact Anne Fraser, Regional Animator, BC and Alberta, 131 East 27th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, V5V 2K5, (604) 879-  1747. If you Uve anywhere else in Canada,  contact Hazelle Palmer, Project Coordinator, 14 Skey Lane, Toronto, Ont., M5J 3S4  "Faces of  Feminism"  seeks support  Faces of Feminism is a portrait and  text series documenting the Canadian  women's movement. For five years Pamela  Harris researched, photographed and collected the words of women across Canada.  The selected exhibition of Faces of Feminism is now touring Canada, and includes  women from aU provinces.  Urban and rural women, individuals and  groups, women from different races, ages  and lifestyles have aU contributed to this important historical document.  Second Story Press plans to publish  Faces of Feminism. The book will include  75 portrait and text combinations, with an  introduction by Angela Miles and an afterword by Pamela Harris. In order to make  the publication possible, people are invited  to pre-order an autographed, cloth-bound  Umited edition of the book, printed in duo-  tone, at a cost of $50.  To order, or for more information, write  to Faces of Feminism, Second Story  Press, 760 Bathurst St., Toronto, ONT.  M5S 2R6 Tel/Fax: (416) 537-7850. Cheques  should be made payable to Second Story  Press and include $8 for mailing and handUng to locations outside of Canada.  Ante up  for WomenFutures  The WomenFutures Loan Guarantee  Fund was established to help women working collectively to secure financial support for new projects. The Vancouver-  based fund, administered by WomenFutures  Community Economic Development Society, is designed to help women participate in  community-based businesses while balancing the social, economic and environmental  needs of the community.  A recent WomenFutures' study showed  that women doing business collectively were  having a very hard time getting credit from  financial institutions. Sexism, racism, homophobia and the lack of acceptance of non-  traditional structuring of business aU create  barriers for women trying to obtain loans.  In November 1991, WomenFutures negotiated their first loan guarantee—$5000 to  help Press Gang Printers buy a new printing  press. Press Gang is a feminist printshop,  owned and managed collectively.  To support other community-based initiatives by women, WomenFutures is launching a campaign to obtain returnable contributions and donations to expand the Loan  Guarantee Fund. A returnable contribution  is a contribution of at least $100, to be returned with interest after a stipulated period of time.  To make a returnable contribution, a  donation or for more information about  WomenFutures, contact WomenFutures 217-  1956 W. Broadway, Vancouver BC V6J 1Z2.  Tel: (604) 737-1338  Correction  In our December/January 1992 issue, we  misspeUed the name of budding photographer, Hula Cad Goldsmith (page 18).  imiiiiiir ■■•■linnttliiiiiif mill tmiiiif ■■inn mi I r ■■■!] i iiiiiiiiimi  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4185  Feminist training, cons'ilting, research,  program evaluation and career counselling.  Twelve associates with dh erse  educational/cultural backgrounds.  BEVERLY SUEK  (204)452-4925  TLS Creative Enterprises  Inside  Kinesis  Kinesis is offering readers a new feature—"Paging Women." We've puUed together brief descriptions of recent books,  to keep you informed—and to entice some  budding (or established) book reviewers to  join the crew of Kinesis volunteers. "Paging Women" appears on page fifteen.  As weU, check out page 7 - a feature from  the Kinesis Women of Colour Caucus.  We're bidding a sad fareweU to Lauri E.  Nerman's "Making Waves" music column.  Lauri is just too damn busy, which is too  damn bad since we appreciated her tips on  what was movin' 'n groovin' on the women's  scene. Lauri will now write for Kinesis on  an occasional basis—watch for her interview  s i mm®  with Ferron next issue.  HeUo this month to Gabrielle Chew,  who is doing her Simon Fraser University  Women's Studies practicum with Kinesis  this term. And greetings also to our many  new contributors this month: new writers  include Sharon Saunders, Pat Baiter, Harriet Fancott, Catherine Burke, Jesse Sutherland, Shani Mootoo and Janette HeU-  muth. New production volunteers are Ria  Bleumer, Libbie Morin, Susan John, and  Luce Kannin.  And last, but not least, Kinesis is in the  market for an Editor. For details, see our ad  in Bulletin Board.  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the foUowing supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated in response to our direct mail appeal in  December and January:  Anonymous • Donna Abram • Sam Archer • E. Baerg • Cath Bray • Regina Brennan  • Heather Brenneman • Judith Burke • Betty Ann Buss • Rita Chudnovsky • Margaret  Coates • Gazebo Connection • Fatima Correia • Sharon CosteUo • Marlene Coulthard •  Jane Covernton • GaU Cryer • Sharon Dahl • Frances Darling • Nancy Dickie • Ann Doyle  • Glenn Drover • Jean Elder ♦ Catharine Esson ♦ Betty Fairbank • Karlene Faith • Al-  Uson Flack • Madeleine Gilchrist • Marian Gilmour • S.R. Goldberg • Christine Gordon  • Barbara Grantham • Valerie Gruson • Mary Hackney • Linda Hale • Sally Hammond  • Cheryl Hcinzl • Sylvia HoUand • PhylUs Kenney • Donna Kidd • Lorraine Kuchinka •  Cat L'Hirondelle • Joan Lawrence • Deborah LeRose • Judith Lynne • Patricia Maika •  She! Marcuvitz • Barbara Jo May • Sharon McCoUough • McGrady & Company • Susan  Mclver • Arlene McLaren ♦ Sara Menzel • Anne Miles • Jennifer Mix • Sandra Moe •  Kerren Moore • Audrey Moysiuk • Denise Nereida • Janet Patterson • Carol Petttigrew  • Janet Pink • NeU Power • JerUynn Prior • Judith Quinlan • Ginette Racine • Diane  Ransom • Ronni Richards • Janet Riehm • Harley Rothstein • Moninna Running • Maya  RusseU • Alison Sawyer • Marguerite Scandiffio • Sally Shamai • Pamela Sleeth ♦ Diana  Smith • Judith Snider • Irene Sobkin • Betsy Spaulding • Donna Stewart • V. Stikeman  • Eunice Stronach • Veronica Strong-Boag • Johanna Te Boekhorst • Gisela Theurer •  Hilda Thomas • Patricia Tracy • Michele VaUquette • Peggy Ward • Elinor Warkentin •  Gladys We • Cathy Welch • Susan Witter • Jane Wolverton • Elaine Young • CeciUa Yung  We would also Uke to thank the foUowing volunteers for their many hours of work at  our recent charity casino event:  Christine Cosby • Anne FiUpowski • Miche HiU • Cat L'Hirondelle • Patricia Lust • Alex  Maas • LesUe Muir • Nancy PoUak • Esther Shannon • Penny Thompson • Terry Thomson • Heidi Walsh • Gladys We  5766 Fraser    Street  Uancouver, B.C.  V5W 2Z5  Sarah-Jane  C604J  322-0107  KINESIS F yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy^  ////y////////////y//y/^^^  Domestic workers:  Good enough  to fight back  we   work  by Vera Ritt  Domestic workers and nannies across the  country are angry and concerned that the  federal government is shutting down their  access to fuU Canadian citizenship—and doing so in a particularly back-handed way.  Their concerns focus on an abrupt change  made to the Foreign Domestic Movement  program (FDMP) in December. The FDMP  included an overseas selection process which  screened women on their eligibility to apply  for landed immigrant status after two years  in Canada.  This feature of the program, won by domestic workers after extensive lobbying in  1981, was widely regarded as a crucial acknowledgment that domestic workers were  not just "good enough to work" but also  "good enough to stay" in this country.  In mid-December, domestic workers' organizations learned that Canadian embassies had been instructed to suspend the  overseas selection process and to grant foreign domestic workers temporary work visas  only.  While the government says the move was  a relatively insignificant step prompted by a  recent court decision, domestic workers beUeve a badly flawed program has now been  made worse.  The majority of domestic workers and  nannies coming to Canada— 10,000 a year,  by some estimates—are from the PhiUppines and other Third World countries. For  many, employment in Canada is marked  by exploitation and insecurity, factors buUt  into the FDMP itself. With the apparent  loss of one of the program's few good features, domestics expect their circumstances  could deteriorate, and they've launched a  nation-wide campaign to force the government to restore and improve the program.  Aster Chua works with the West Coast  Domestic Workers Association (WCDWA),  an advocacy and support organization in  Vancouver. "The problem with this [move],"  says Chua, "is now domestic workers are  not really sure if we wiU be able to become  landed immigrants." With this uncertainty,  says Chua, workers wiU be less wUling to  speak up if they have problems with their  employers.  And the problems can multiply. Under  the FDMP, women are required to Uve and  work in their employer's home for two years.  They cannot work part-time elsewhere or  Uve outside, and they have no entitlement  to overtime pay.  "I worked 12 to 16 hours a day when I was  a nanny," says Chua, who has completed her  two years and now works at the WCDWA.  Chua reports that in January, a domestic  worker in BC grossed about $880 a month  use dmj  iiA/HA' '     rXNLD I01«ttf,£ are  mi  numwmmH      *^  c0f4PATil6NAT£  GOVERNMENT?'  Domestic workers protest in Vancouver, January 12th.  (based on a $5/hr for a 40 hour week) which  dwindles to $509 after deductions for room  and board, CPP and taxes.  In order to qualify for landed immigrant  status under the FDMP, the women are required to show proof of savings, perform  volunteer work in the community, and take  training courses—to demonstrate their worthiness to be Canadian citizens.  "We are supposed to get two days off a  week," says Ch.ua, "and our employer is required to give us three paid hours a week  for training." WhUe the women rarely get  the three paid hours off, "it's reaUy common for domestic workers to spend one day  off doing volunteer work and the other day  off taking a course," says Chua.  Besides the obvious economic exploitation and loss of freedom, domestic workers may also be subjected to harassment  (sexual and otherwise), forced to Uve in  laundry rooms or with young chUdren—aU  Sexual assault bill:  Defining 'no means noy  by Karen Duthie  Proposed amendments to Canada's sexual assault laws, announced in December by  Justice Minister Kim CampbeU, have been  received by women's groups with a mixture of hope and skepticism. WhUe BUl C-  49 does not replace aU the protections of  the old "rape shield" law, struck down last  August by the Supreme Court (see Kinesis, Sept. 1991) it nevertheless introduces  some progressive reforms.  The rape shield law (sec. 276 of the Criminal Code) was designed to protect rape victims from being cross-examined about their  sexual history. The proposed legislation includes a definition of consent to sexual activity (a new feature), guidelines in determining the admissability of past sexual history as evidence, and procedures to be followed in admitting such evidence.  The bUl also includes a preamble outUn-  ing how ParUament "beUeves that at trials of sexual offence, evidence of the complainant's [women's] sexual history is rarely  relevant and that its admission should be  subject to particular scrutiny, bearing in  mind the inherently prejudicial character of  such evidence." This is the first piece of  Canadian legislation to include a preamble.  Consent is defined as "the voluntary  agreement of the complainant to engage in  sexual activity." The proposed legislation  also recognises situations that do not constitute consent, such as a woman "expressing  by word or conduct, a lack of agreement or  revocation of agreement to engage in sexual  activity" —in other words, when she says  'no' or physicaUy resists.  Also, consent must be expressed by the  woman, not by a third party such as a pimp  saying a woman was avaUable for sex. As  weU, consent wUl not be deemed to exist if  a woman was too drunk or if she engages in  sexual activity because the accused held a  position of trust or authority, such as a doctor, teacher or family member.  The amendments also say that a woman's  past sexual history cannot be used in a trial  if it is being used to suggest that "the complainant is more Ukely to have consented  to the activity in question or is less worthy of behef." A Ust of eight factors a judge  must consider before determining whether  the evidence should be admissible at trial  includes: the right of the accused to make a  complete defence; the need to remove "discriminatory behef or bias" from the process  (i.e. sexist attitudes about women's sexuaUty); and society's interest in encouraging  the reporting of sexual abuse.  The procedure in admitting past sexual  history in a trial requires the defence to submit a written appUcation to the judge, who  wUl in turn consider the defence's application in the absence of the jury and the pubUc.  As Kinesis goes to press, representatives of 60 women's groups are meeting  with government and judicial officials in Ottawa from January 27-29 to outUne their responses to the proposed amendments. The  bUl receives the second reading in February.  Anita Braha, of the National Association  of Women and the Law beUeves the law is  generaUy positive and "reflects the concerns  of a broad coahtion of women's organizations."  Braha is pleased the definition of consent recognizes that women must voluntar-  Uy agree to sexual activity and that the onus  is on the accused to make sure the woman  wants to have sex. She is concerned, however, that too much discretion is vested in  judges who are vested with the power to decide whether the woman's sexual history is  admissible.  "It's ironic," says Braha, "that trial  judges are themselves the subjects of at  least half a dozen studies on judicial gender bias, yet wUl be entrusted to make unbiased decisions on sexual history evidence.  She urges CampbeU to implement a mandatory gender bias program for the judiciary.  Linda Schulz, spokesperson for Women  Against Violence Against Women Rape Crisis Centre in Vancouver, beUeves the new  bUl is not reaUy new at aU, but simply  embraces the Supreme Court's thinking in  the rape shield decision. "We will stiU have  the same old judge who says 'no' may be  'maybe' or 'wait awhUe'," Schultz says.  Feminist lawyer Megan Elhs is also un-  enthusiastic about the proposed law. "AU  amendments and prior attempts to amend  the Criminal Code ... have been undermined in implementation," says Elhs, and  the same thing wUl happen now. Elhs says  that a huge amount of resources are aUocated to law reform and not enough into reforming the judicial system, leaving gender  bias stiU rampant.  "Besides," EUis says, "you can reform an  automobUe, but if it's on a dirt road, who  Karen Duthie is a regular contributor  to Kinesis.  against a backdrop of powerlessness. Complaints about working or Uving conditions  may be met by an employer's threat to report them to Immigration for trumped-up  violations of their employment contract.  Without a guarantee that they are eligible to apply for landed immigrant status, live-in domestic workers wUl be even  more vulnerable to exploitation, says the  WCDWA. In fact, says the WCDWA, the  new pohcy "goes back to the pre-1981 situation where visible minority women are  brought in to perform domestic duties and  provide 'cheap labour' for Canada's daycare  crisis, but denied any right to stay, even after years of service."  The Phihppine Women Centre in Vancouver agrees. In an information flyer circulated at a rally on January 12th, the  PWC says domestic workers: "have enabled  many Canadian women to work outside  their homes and contribute to the Canadian  economy ...  "Now that Canada is in the midst of a recession, these women have been found unworthy of becoming Canadians ... in short,  they have become expendable and have to  be sent back to their countries of origin."  Employment and Immigration Canada  has been less than forthcoming in pubUciz-  ing or explaining its December move. Domestic workers groups heard of the pohcy  change through newspaper reports, which  were based on an internal External Affairs  communication to overseas visa offices. After over a month, the West Coast Domestic  Workers Association is stUl awaiting a reply  to its concerns from Bernard Valcourt, the  Immigration minister.  According to a pubUc affairs spokesperson with Immigration, the government  changed its poUcy as a result of the Pinto  decision in the Federal Court. The Pinto decision, brought down early in 1991, involved  a challenge to the criteria by which immigration officers selected domestic workers. The Federal Court found the criteria  too rigid (in fact, their ruhng was considered progressive) and dictated changes to  the overseas selection process.  "From this, the ministry decided to trash  the whole process," says lawyer Lois Shel-  ton of the WCDWA. "We beheve there  were other ways the ministry could have responded to the Pinto decision. We're suspicious about the motive behind the change.  Our association is concerned that [the government] has a desire to restrict the number of women immigrants of colour."  According to Ottawa, the FDMP is "under review."  Domestic workers are asking all concerned people to pressure the Minister of Employment and Immigration  Bernard Valcourt to restore the FDMP  and allow domestic workers to be assessed as potential landed immigrants  before coming to Canada. Write to him  at the House of Commons, Ottawa,  ONT. KlA 0J8  KINESIS F ^SSSS^SSSS^S^NXXX^^^  NEWS  Women strike in Powell River:  Don't bank on the Commerce  by Pat Barter  Bank workers at the PoweU River branch  of the Imperial Bank of Commerce have  been on strike since November 20,1991. The  issues behind the strike are:  • seniority call-in for casual employees;  • wages parity between branch employees  doing simUar jobs; and  • contract language to prevent harassment.  The women workers originaUy joined the  United Bank Employees in 1985. After that  union dissolved, they joined the BCGEU  (BC Government Employees Union) in December, 1990.  AU 29 employees (not including the manager and administrative officer) are in the  bargaining unit, which is composed of 13  fuU-timers, 6 paxt-timers, and 10 casuals.  Everyone in the bargaining unit must pay  union dues, but they do not have to belong to the union (Rand formula). There are  24 union members and combined branch seniority among them totals 155 years. Eight  of the strikers are single and of these, five  support chUdren or other family members  weU. Of the five employees who are not  union members, three scabbed for the first  13 days of the strike.  The branch closed briefly, 13 days after  the strike started, whUe the bank tried to  obtain a court injunction limiting the number of pickets. Madam Justice Kirsti GUI  refused the bank's demand, and instead directed the union to simply refrain from intimidating scabs and customers. "We never  did intimidate anyone," said one striker,  it's not our fault that scabs are intimidated  by a picket hne." The bank is in a maU,  which aUows only strikers to picket in front  of the bank entrance.  PoweU River is a coastal community of  about 18,000, about 100 mUes north of Vancouver. Major employment is provided by  a large miU owned by MacMUlan Bloedel  and unionized by the Canadian Papermak-  ers Union (CPU). Banking services are provided by single branches of the Royal, Nova  Scotia and Commerce banks, two branches  of the bank of Montreal (one, certified with  SORWUC's United Bank Workers Union in  the late 70's, has since decertified) and one  credit union. The credit union, founded by  the CPU, is also unionized by the BCGEU.  Its employees achieved parity with unionized credit unions on Vancouver Island after  striking for several months two years ago.  Pubhc support for the strike is strong and  few people cross the Une to use either the  Instant TeUer or the services of the scabs.  Picketers spend a lot of time advising customers on how to handle banking without  crossing the picket hne, and the union leaflet  describes how to make alternate arrangements for loans, mortgages, direct deposits  and automatic debits. Many people have  transferred their money to other banks in  town, or to the local credit union. Of those  who do cross, the majority are women—the  strikers say this is what hurts the most.  Currently, every employee at the branch  has a different wage, the average being  $10.50 per hour. As one striker points out:  "The bank would have us beUeve that wages  and promotions are based on merit and performance, per our yearly reviews, but this  isn't really true. Two people doing the same  job and with the same length of service  may both receive a satisfactory rating on  their review—and still get different wage increases."  "The personnel reviews are based on the  supervisor's personal opinion of our work,  not on a standardized evaluation of job performance," said one woman.  Seniority for casual workers is very important for aU working women because it is  the cornerstone of job security. As the people with the major responsibihty for chUdren and domestic work, women are often  forced to accept casual work. At this bank,  casuals who are union members are not offered as much work as non-union casuals.  Protection from harassment is on the table because the bank refuses to write its  own harassment poUcy into the coUective  agreement (where it would be subject to the  grievance procedure). The strikers say sexual harassment is not the problem, rather  it is the petty, day-to-day stuff, and performance reviews that made this a major issue.  "The bank seems to criticize and behttle  some union members in many petty ways—  dress, sick leave," says one woman. Says another, "These incidents don't seem to happen to the non-union employees."  The BCGEU is supporting the women  with strike pay at 70 percent of their wage,  if they picket. The union has initiated a  boycott campaign. Local unions and their  members are being urged to withdraw aU  possible accounts from the Bank of Com  merce. The strikers are also circulating a petition to federal labour minister Marcel Da-  nis, asking him to intervene and force the  bank back to the bargaining table.  If you have ever worked for a large,  non-union company you know the score:  favouritism, petty power trips from low  level management, lousy wages and no  recognition of the value of years of service. These things all foster competition between employees, creating anxiety about job security and financial  instability. These women deserve and  need your support. Please withdraw any  accounts you have with the Commerce  Bank, and tell the manager why. Please  ask your friends and organizations to  do the same. You can send letters to  the strikers at: Judi Parsons, 3112  Mackenzie Ave., Powell River, BC V8A  Pat Barter is a former SORWUC  member who has lived and worked  around Vancouver for 40 years, mostly  as a waitress and office worker. She  now lives in Powell River and is working on a women's research project.  Panel on violence:  The public process begins  by Karen Duthie  The Canadian Panel to Address Violence  Against Women launched its pubUc process  in Vancouver in January, and amidst the  frowns of frustration from women who have  seen many panels come and go on the same  subject, there were expressions of anticipation and determination—especiaUy from  the panel members.  Through "interactive, responsive and  grass-roots dialogue", the panel, appointed  by the federal government in August, intends to encourage women to discuss violence from their own perspective and enable  participants to form their own solutions to  the problem.  "We're here in response to thousands of  women and organizations" said co-chair Pat  MarshaU. She hopes a blueprint for action  including a "road map for zero tolerance of  violence" can be achieved from the panel's  work in the next year.  MarshaU said the two objectives of the  panel are to fiU in the gaps about the existing information on violence—including  pornography, violence against the aged, and  Native and immigrant women—and to develop a comprehensive set of solutions to  help combat the problem.  The nine-member panel is working with  a 23-member advisory committee and four-  member Aboriginal circle. In the first phase  of consultations, the panel wUl visit 100  communities, starting with BC and Alberta  and ending in AprU with the Yukon and the  North West Territories. The second phase  wUl involve more formal hearings.  The panel has a way to go to win credi-  bUity among women. In Vancouver, groups  were frustrated by poor organization and  scant pubUcity on the panel's pubUc meetings.  As weU, there are concerns about co-  A&fefo jgJ&VfoYuJtvvi, ly^j^&nAAjlx^J^J:'  Mm  ^VfoigouvSR, ART   GAlxUERYl  mmmmmMm  chair Pat MarshaU's use of the phrase "zero  tolerance"—a phrase that has also been  used by both Canada Customs officials and  George Bush on the subject of Ulegal drugs.  Trisha Joel, of the Vancouver Status of  Women, says that whUe women obviously  want a society where violence is never condoned, the panel may lose credibiUty by using the phrase "zero tolerance".  "I'm afraid this slogan is one the Tories  could easily co-opt," says Joel. "Soon we  may be reading ads in the papers about how  the government endorses zero tolerance on  violence. WeU, big deal. After aU, the Tories  are also promising to end chUd poverty by  the year 2000. These are all great slogans  with Uttle behind them.  "As weU, I'm concerned the zero tolerance slogan won't ring true with many  women who are experiencing violence.  They'U think, 'yeah, sure.' And that wiU  damage the effectiveness of the panel."  Lee Lakeman of Rape ReUef, a member  of the panel's advisory committee, says the  Vancouver meetings left her "impressed and  encouraged by grass roots women's work,  stiU ahve after 10 years of the Socreds".  Lakeman has concerns about the panel—  how the information it gathers wUl be used,  and how short and intense its time frame  is. She is also concerned that the advisory  committee has an unclear role.  The panel has not had the chance to  make any real social or bureaucratic waves  yet, says Lakeman. She is skeptical that the  media, in its shaUow coverage of the pubUc  hearing and its ignorance of the issues thus  far, wUl be able to sway public opinion.  Lakeman beUeves women in BC wUl be  making a judgement on what would have  been the best way to deal with the panel—  to boycott, to protest, or to offer one agreed-  upon set of resolutions. She hopes that feminists elsewhere wUl get together for a strategy by the time the panel arrives in their  town.  KINESIS F NEWS  /y/yyyyyy//yy//yy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  Woman charged with aggravated sexual assault:  Dangerous*, insulting charge  by Jackie Brown  Feminists and AIDS activists across  Canada have expressed outrage and dismay  at Nanaimo Crown Counsel's decision to  charge an HIV-positive woman with aggravated sexual assault after she aUegedly had  unprotected sex with two men.  Not only does the charge insult aU women  who are victims of male sexual violence,  critics say, but it also ignores men's respon-  sibUity to practice safe sex and wiU do nothing to help stop the spread of HIV/ADDS.  From a legal standpoint, lawyers suggest the  charge—never before laid against a woman  in Canada— wUl be difficult to prove.  The 20-year old woman was charged in  December, 1991 with one count of aggravated assault and two counts of aggravated  sexual assault after the two men filed a  complaint with Nanaimo RCMP. Attorney  General Colin Gableman has been reported  as saying the woman was under a previous  court order not to have unprotected sex.  (Kinesis was unable to interview the  woman and has decided not to report her  name out of respect for her privacy. As weU,  there is a ban on evidence so details of the  charges cannot be reported.)  The woman was granted baU on condition  she stay at a Nanaimo women's shelter untU  her trial date, not have unprotected sex and  report to health and probation officials. She  left the shelter late in December and was  picked up by pohce several days later at a  Nanaimo hotel. She was then charged with  three counts of breach of baU conditions and  released. Her trial is scheduled for February  24, 1992 in Nanaimo Supreme Court. She  has elected trial by judge alone.  In the meantime, women's and ADDS organizations are raUying to her defence. The  Vancouver Island ADDS Society has started  a legal defence fund and the Nanaimo Sexual Assault Centre is circulating a petition  calhng for the charges to be dropped.  NationaUy, the ADDS Committee of Ottawa, the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women (NAC) and the Canadian Association of Sexual Assault Centres  (CASAC) issued a joint press release stating  that aggravated sexual assault laws are designed to protect women from violence and  should not be used to incriminate women  "for the faUure of consenting partners to engage in safe sex." They too are calling for  the charges to be dropped.  CASAC's Caroline Ford caUed the charge  Remember the Gulf War?  Yasaman Hossein (pictured above) was one of a small group who gathered for a  candle light vigil in Vancouver January 16th, marking the anniversary of the start  of the Gulf War, the war most westerners would rather not remember.  According to international reports, more people are dying in Iraq now than were  killed by the saturation bombing last year. Massive destruction of the country's  infrastructure—hospitals, sewage treatment plants, agricultural resources—have  lead to widespread hunger and disease. One million Iraqi children are malnourished  and another 100,000 are starving, according to public health specialists who toured  Iraq last summer. The country's infant mortality rate has tripled.  Activists are angered that the US-lead alliance (including Canada) still enforces  sanctions against Iraq, sanctions which prevent repairs to the country's damaged  civilian facilities and hence prolong the civilian suffering. To get involved, or for  further information, contact the Middle East Peace Action Coalition, PO Box  69202, Stn. K, Vancouver V5K 4W4 (Tel: 298- 9638).  "unconscionable" particularly since, she  said, it is rarely used against men who commit the vast majority of sexual assaults.  (Men are rarely charged with aggravated  sexual assault—the most serious charge.  More often, a lesser charge such as sexual  assault is used.)  "It's unbehevable and I want an accountability check," says Ford. "I want to known  why, if the state has aU the resources to  go after this woman with Ml guns, that  they're not also turning this kind of Ml  effort against the men who rape and HU  women and cMdren."  And, says Ford, attempting to protect society by singling out and punishing people  who supposedly wiUfuUy infect others wiU  not help prevent the spread of HIV/ADDS,  which is a health issue and must be dealt  with in that context.  "No one disagrees that something has to  be done if people are deliberately infecting  others," says Ford. "But that's not the issue because the fact is, most people who are  spreading the disease are doing it unknowingly." The solution hes in education, not  criminalization, she says.  Tina Hurd, co-ordinator of the Nanaimo  Sexual Assault Centre, also questions use of  a charge associated with forced sexual activity when the men involved consented to  intercourse but chose not to wear condoms.  "The aggravated sexual assault charge is  designed to protect women but it is now  being used against a woman because men  didn't engage in safe sex. Where is men's responsibiUty in aU this?" asked Hurd, whose  organization is calling on government to examine the use of criminal law in relation to  AIDS and to recognize HIV as a health issue.  B.J. Traynor, staff person at Women  Against Violence against Women in Vancouver, adds that charging a woman with  aggravated sexual assault also undermines  the real trauma and suffering women experience during any kind of sexual assault.  "With this charge, you first have to be  committing a sexual assault, so what is being implied here?" says Traynor. "That the  men were in fear of their Uves and had no  control over the situation? I guarantee you  those men didn't experience that."  According to the Criminal Code, a person  who commits an aggravated sexual assault  is a person who "in committing a sexual assault, wounds, maims, disfigures or endangers the hfe of the complainant." The maximum sentence is Ufe in prison.  What's more, says Traynor, the charge  implies that women—historically and falsely  blamed for spreading sexuaUy transmitted  diseases—are also responsible for the spread  of AIDS within the heterosexual population, even though it is far more hkely that  women get HIV through sex with infected  men.  Beth Easton, co-ordinator of Vancouver's  Women and ADDS project agrees. "Research  clearly shows that women are anywhere  from 10 to 17 times more hkely to get HIV  from an infected man [than a man from a  woman]. This is understood so I feel this  woman is being scapegoated," says Easton.  Adds Michael Rekart, director of the BC  Ministry of Health's STD division: "The  UkeUhood of a woman transmitting the  AIDS virus during vaginal intercourse to a  man is minimal compared to transmission  the other way around. It does happen, but  the likelihood of a man transmitting to a  woman would be another power of almost  one hundred."  Rekart adds that some American research suggests that the possibility of a  woman infecting a man during one episode  of vaginal intercourse without a condom is  less than a thousand to one.  For Easton, the greatest source of frustration is that after years of ADDS prevention  education stressing the individual's responsibiUty to protect themselves and their partners, women are stiU being made responsible for safe sex.  "As if women have final control over  whether men use condoms or not," says Easton. "There seems to be a surprising lack of  "As if women have  filial control over  whether men use  condoms..."  awareness of what goes on between heterosexual partners."  LegaUy speaking, lawyers suggest the  charge wiU be hard to prove. For example, says lawyer Jessica Gossen, it wUl be  difficult to establish that an assault took  place since in criminal law, a charge must  be proven beyond a reasonable doubt by  the crown. That wiU mean proving that the  men were harmed or at risk even though by  all reports, there is no evidence that either  are infected with the virus, she says. Even  if they were, adds Gossen, how can anyone  be certain the woman was the source?  And there are the questions of intent and  consent. "You would have to prove she intended to harm the men and that they  didn't consent to the sex," says Gossen.  "But men know the risks involved so if they  don't wear a condom then they are voluntarily taking on a risk in terms of any sexual  contact—including with a person who may  or may not have the HIV virus."  Jackie Brown is a freelance writer.  * know how busy you are. So lis out you-suCscnpoon on  ■ ■*— lamt) or wrule you're BMng o your mar*-- ~* "—  nt get paid oi note wee*, postdate yoir d>?  S2I.W(S20plusGST|forayeartsudsaipoon(4!SSjes|.  first issue when it comes off trie press in February '92.  umed unless mere are 3.000 jutjsonbers. Send  KINESIS F ssss^sss^s^  WHAT'S   NEWS?  Abortion clinic  wins charitable  tax status  The Everywoman's Health Centre Society, which operates an abortion chnic in  Vancouver, is now legaUy a charity. After  a three-year struggle to obtain a charitable tax number from Revenue Canada, the  Federal Court of Appeal ruled in November 1991 that Everywoman's was entitled to  register as a charity because their services  are "beneficial to the community." This  means that financial contributions to the society are now tax-deductible. Calling the decision "a tremendous victory for women,"  Everywoman's Hilda Thomas thanked everybody who has supported the clinic without a tax break.  Everywoman's has been forced to do  extensive fundraising because the Social  Credit government refused to provide standard health care funds to their free-standing  clinic.  The ruhng holds several imputations for  Canadian women. Abortion rights groups  predict the clinic wiU receive more revenue, and pointed out that other abortion  clinics across Canada may now be able to  gain charitable status. Thomas also felt the  ruhng would give women across Canada  greater access to abortion cUnics. Lawyer  David Mossop, who represented the Everywoman's in court, said that the ruhng  could be a basis for future chaUenges to the  Canadian Charter of Rights because abortion is not equaUy avaUable to aU Canadian  women.  RU-486 research  coming to  Canada?  The controversial drug RU-486, caUed  the "abortion pUl," may soon be tested in  Canada as a treatment for breast cancer.  As an abortifadent, RU-486 interferes with  the normal action of the hormone progesterone. Some researchers beheve this abU-  ity to block the action of progesterone may  make RU-486 a natural weapon against  some breast tumours, which seem to be dependent on the hormone for growth.  The proposed study is called a "coup" for  Canadian researchers. WhUe American researchers have wanted to test the drug, the  French manufacturer, afraid of retaliation  from the strong American anti-abortion  movement, has been reluctant to supply the  drug to American researchers.  Dr. Elizabeth Eisenhauer, director of the  new drug program of the chnical trials  group of the National Cancer Institute of  Canada, said that final details of the study  are being worked out with the Montreal-  based subsidiary of the French firm. How  ever, no trials can begin untU they are approved by the federal government's health  protection program.  Deplorable  ruling in  rape trial  In a rape trial in January, judges on Australia's Supreme Court ruled that: "Prostitutes suffer httle or no sense of shame or defilement when raped," and reinforced their  support for a 1981 ruling that said raping a  prostitute was "not as heinous as when committed on a happUy married woman." The  judgement touched off protests by women  across Australia, and may contravene the  1984 United Nations Convention on the  Elimination of AU Forms of Discrimination  against Women.  Madam Justice Elizabeth Evatt, president of the Australian Law Reform Commission, said: "The idea that it is a less serious offence to commit rape against a prostitute is a dangerous concept for the law  to take up. It suggests that one category of  people is less entitled to the protection of  the law than another."  Except in Tasmania, prostitution is legal  throughout Australia. A Melbourne University study found that men who rape prostitutes tend to receive shorter sentences than  men who rape other women, even though  rapists are more Ukely to use violence and  weapons against prostitutes, and that, as a  consequence, prostitutes suffer greater injuries.  Paulette, a Melbourne street prostitute  whose rape was the subject of the 1981 ruling said:"Fm a working girl but that doesn't  mean I have to put up with such violent behaviour." She added that the recent judgement would encourage men to attack prostitutes because they knew the courts would  treat their crime lightly.  Hospital workers  seek pay equity  Negotiations between the Hospital Employees' Union (HEU), which represents  35,000 hospital workers in British Columbia,  and their employers were suspended on December 19 by mediator Stephen KeUeher.  Despite the NDP removal of wage controls  instituted by the previous Social Credit government, the Health Labour Relations Association (HLRA) has been unwilling to table a wage offer. In fact, wage roUbacks remain on the bargaining table. HEU members were taking a strike vote as Kinesis  goes to press.  Pay equity is one of the major demands  the HEU has taken to the bargaining table.  Women make up a majority of the members of the HEU, but earn only 63 cents for  every doUar earned by men. The HEU has  demanded that the current base of $12.34  for jobs normaUy performed by women be  raised to $14.22, the base rate of jobs normally performed by men. Other demands  include an adequate wage increase to offset the past years of wage controls, better working and caring conditions, and improved benefits.  Repetitive strain injuries:  An epidemic at work  by Sharon Saunders  Sunera worked for 25 years at the same  job in a garment factory. She was employed  as an invisible mender, required to sit in  a hunched position over a magnifying glass  and do fine and intricate stitching. Sunera  was highly skiUed and her company saw her  as an expert. Because of this, she was sent  garments for fine mending from other factories in Canada and the United States.  Ten years into the job, Sunera experienced pain in her arms, shoulders and neck.  She did not think her pain was from her job  duties. Two years later, the pain became severe and Sunera sought medical help.  Her treatment began with injections in  both shoulders, and continued over a 12  year period, involving 8 surgeries. She returned to work after each treatment, but 14  months ago, her doctor finally advised that  she should no longer work.  Sunera filed for Workers' Compensation,  appealed, but was turned down. Workers'  Compensation says that there is no medical evidence to show that her condition is  work-related.  Sunera's story is one of several in the  booklet Repetitive Strain Injuries in the  Workplace, recently published by Women  and Work Research and Education Society.  In talking with clerical workers around BC,  project co-ordinators Lois Weninger and  Lynn Bueckert discovered there was a critical need for information on what has become North America's number one occupational health problem, Repetitive Strain Injuries (RSI).  What is RSI?  Repetitive Strain Injuries (RSI) is a term  used to encompass a number of physical  problems that result when muscles, tendons  and joints are overloaded, problems such  as tendonitis, tenosynovitis, tennis elbow  (epicondyhtis), carpal tunnel syndrome and  bursitis.  It is estimated that over 50 percent of the  workforce is at risk from RSIs. In some occupations, workers see injury as part of their  job description. Fish plant workers, typists,  bakers, garment workers and meat cutters  and processors have suffered for years from  RSIs.  But it is the introduction of the computer, wide-spread mechanization of work  and the demand by employers for greater  RSI victims face more problems than  their injury. There are stiU doctors who  are not famihar with work-related RSIs and  some have treated sufferers as hysterical or  simply unhappy with their job or home hfe.  Even with a sympathetic doctor, accurate  diagnosis and effective treatment is a problem. Furthermore, workers who continue to  perform .the same work under the same conditions risk developing a chronic problem or  a more serious injury.  Such injuries have been recognized in  athletes for years, resulting in the growth of  the field of sports medicine. However, their  role as an occupational hazard has been  Area where muscle  joins the bone  - EPICONDYLITIS  1 REPETITIVE STRAIN INJURY - WHERE YOU FIND IT f  Area where tendon  joins muscle-PERI-TENDINITIS,  Area where tendon  joins bone  Nerves and tendons pass  through the CARPAL TUNNEL  -CT. SYNDROME  "TENDON SHEATH  which provides lubrication lor  the tendon inside it - TENOSYNOVITIS  TENDON -  TENDINITIS  and greater productivity levels that have  created the current epidemic of injuries.  Clerical workers, cashiers, assembly hne  workers, bindery workers, bank teUers, airline reservation personnel, telephone operators, data processors, maU coders and  sorters, musicians and Ubrary workers are  just a few of these high risk occupations. A  high percentage of women work in these occupations.  very slow in gaining similar recognition and  attention.  The Workers' Compensation Board of  BC stiU denies a great many cases, forcing costly and time-consuming appeals to  review boards, medical panels or the new  appeals division. This places added stress  on the worker and also strains union resources or the understaffed Workers' Advisors who represent non-union workers.  Too many workers do not file compensation  claims and many more don't bother to appeal when their claims are denied.  Prevention is Key  RSIs in the Workplace offers information  which can prevent injury or help a worker  cope with an existing injury and claim for  compensation. Written in plain, accessible  Enghsh with many Ulustrations, this booklet is also being translated into Punjabi,  Chinese and Spanish.  RSIs can be prevented, but it wUl take  changes to practices in the workplace to  make a serious impact. Employers must redesign workstations and equipment to meet  the needs of the worker rather than the  needs of the job. Jobs must be redesigned  to limit repetitive tasks and eliminate pacing and electronic monitoring. Education  and training programs should be implemented to provide information on healthy  postures and motions and how to adjust  chairs, desks, workstations and hghting.  Prevention is the key to dealing with  RSIs, but as long as employers, doctors  and the WCB refuse to recognize the problem, prevention programs wUl not be implemented and workers wUl continue to be injured.  Repetitive Strain Injuries in the Workplace is available for%2 per copy. Women  ' and Work provides information on all  aspects of RSIs and is available for  workshops and discussion groups. Call  430-0458 or write to 4340 Carson  Street, Burnaby, BC, V5J 2X9.  Women and Work is sponsoring a  conference on RSI on April 10th and  11th, in Vancouver. See Bulletin Board  for details.  After developing an RSI in 1988 as a  result of VDT use, Sharon Saunders began working with her union (The Communication Workers of America) and  Women and Work on RSI prevention  and support.   KINESIS f NOT JUST ANOTHER PAGE  ,2^######m^*^^  Who we are and why we are here  The Kinesis Women of Colour Caucus was formed over a year ago to attempt to fiU a ) \  ! l void in the predominantly white feminist press. Through the caucus, women of colour have ^ i  1 accessed Kinesis as writers, Ulustrators, staff, and editorial board members. We wanted to ' l  I l make ourselves known to Kinesis readers, and, for the first time, share our work on a page J [  \ I with each other. The caucus has a very fluid membership and encourages women of colour J *  \ k and First Nations women to join us. We provide chUdcare subsidies, and are currently or- , '  i ganizing to meet at members' homes. We meet on the last Thursday of each month. De- , J  {tails for meetings are advertised in each issue of Kinesis. Our next meeting is set for Feb. \  i 27th—call 682-0080 for detaUs. , |  Our objectives as a caucus are to: ' i  I [ * Make Kinesis more accessible for women of colour and First Nations women; ,  ! ^ • Encourage work by women of colour and First Nations women for publication; l i  i ^ • Create a safe space to express our diverse reaUties and diverse interests within ourselves   k  [    and with each other (eg., with respect to age, abihty, mothering, class, economics, sex- ,  i    uality, spirituality, and humour). , ^  ^ • We share our food, our stories, and exchange seats. We invite women of colour and First' {  ■ k    Nations women to eat with us, share seats and stories. ' k  »f>M'iX/^»>JX^^^^^»>»>^^*>»>  I think the caucus should continue to reconsider changing its name to be more welcoming for First Nations women. Maybe we  can name the caucus something more inclusive which respects our diversities. I've written this publicly so readers may also ponder this question, with aU its impUcations.  NOTE: since I have written this piece,  caucus members proposed a new name:  "The Not Just Another Page Collective". And now, a story: According to popular Western stereotypes, chUdren suck their  thumbs for security and comfort. But I was  different. I sucked the index and middle fingers of my right hand.  My mom tried several home remedies to  thwart my bad habit and warned that my  teeth would grow in crooked, but I was reaUy hooked. Only an ugly mouth infection  finally stopped my finger sucking.  Without praising nasty habits, I think  finger sucking helped me get a head start  in the Canadian public school system. As a  young student, I was asked to rest my head  on my desk after finishing class assignments.  I saw that as an invitation to suck my fingers in private—cradling head and fingers  in the comfort and darkness of my folded  arms. Much to my teachers' amazement and  chagrin I became better and faster at completing class assignments for a few brief moments of finger sucking. I was motivated to  finish my school work efficiently, correctly,  and quickly. So, I wonder whether that early  habit actually helped me hone some skiUs  early in Ufe so that grad school would take  me three years to complete instead of five  or twenty. —Janisse  ICE-OH-LAY-SHUN  my pain  caresses (CARESSES)  my body  hcks my wounds  my heart  screams (SCREAMS)  for touch  which burns away  the agony —Farhat  J>  Y*&  I encourage aU readers to educate themselves and support Aboriginal women by attending the premiere of "The- Strength of  Indian Women," a StoryteUer Theatre production by Vera Manuel. Based on the ordeals of four Native Indian women, the play  focuses on their strength and determination to survive. Respectful use of stories related by older women highlights the sense of  strength, wisdom and endurance that they  pass on to the next generation. The cast includes a daughter and a granddaughter of  one of the survivors. Jan. 31-Feb. 2. See  the Women in VIEW Festival program or  call 685-6201 for times and ticket information. I beUeve this work is part of the new  wave of cultural expression empowering Native women. —Allisa.  graphic by SSCCJ  I say, don't ask me where I'm from.  I'm from Vancouver. And you say, "No, I  mean, where are you really from? And I  say, London, Ontario. "No, I mean before  that. Where are you reaUy ..." And I say  Montreal. And I say London, England. And  I say Colwyn Bay, North Wales. And I say  Mombasa, Kenya. And you say, "But you  don't look African." And I say I'm Indian,  my parents are Indian. And you ask, "So  they came from India?" And I say no, they  were born in Africa. And you say, "oh." I  guess you're tired now. We talk about the  latest movie everybody saw.  Who is that? Who's talking, who's interpreting, who's judging, who's hstening?  Who's searching for meaning and truth?  The Women Of Colour Caucus at Kinesis  is asking and talking and hstening and interpreting and reviewing. We're not telling  you if you don't want to know, but if you  want to know, hsten and you'U hear us. —  Fatima  Are we are we are we  finished yet? You teU me  You know what I Uke don't you  don't you  Ham or bacon honey  Which is it that I prefer, I forgot  You see.  But, I wUl not sing in a locked cage  Oh my lords,  Then, I am of no use to you  Take me away, I say take me away  take me away'  You put a naU in my head, took it out  and told me  There is no hole there. —Burcu  To the beautiful asian  girl dancing in white circles:  In smoke-fiUed dance halls I can  smeU you first  We are the same; chameleons of denial  sUencing our past into unknown futures  creating ourselves in shadows  We are the lost  what face do you see when you  look in the mirror  blond madonnas or black geishas?  with age your cute exotic desire  wUl fade and your disguise faU  looking at you  looking at me  white is an ideal we are not  I see you  do you see me? —Susan  words words words words words  words words words words  words words words words words  words words words words  I'm not a poet but I try.  H you've got words to write but cry  at being sUenced and are a woman  of colour or a First Nations woman  the W.O.C. Caucus at Kinesis  a great space to be is.  I'm not a poet but I try  I hope tMs attempt didn't make you cry.  Fatima  vjowo^ver >  I %. & fa %  1-?-,      Hi.    %ft   -4a    *fc     s[&sl   ir    /A.-#T   &»     1%,    ')&  %    **,  ^ *% fc,   % &fe H.  **hlu'%*6 *fr  ",%  T  ^   %   ^ <&v* % Vfe.   *p~ K*. to  f   --K £ .*£   £_ if. . ;&.  %!Sr 5- 5- 1^3 -M "ft . i£   'I-4 'r%  & £4 '& % £ *ste -8tf.  & %, ic %. f * n +3.. & -T- * i* ft if^ *©, & &. ^ GP k  © *)   -%c % a fcp *3. 3V *F %,,  %^. © *> i£ % ^ %: | *| ^ ^ , te ? <? * &i  il  %   *&    $.    %**   *\.    I,    ft t      S.  ^   **   ^~^>   te  KINESIS M " ssassssssss^^  NEWS  by Nancy Pollak  Women in Focus:  Damage beyond repair?  Actions by the directors of Vancouver's Women in Focus—and inaction by its  membership—have done irreparable damage to relations between women of colour  and white women, say some women of  colour artists.  Since last spring, the feminist arts and  media centre has been in constant conflict,  largely due to decisions by the board to  engage in legal actions against In Visible  Colours (IVC), a woman of colour film and  video society, and by the board's refusal to  heed the wishes of its membership to stop  the harassment of IVC and caU an annual  general meeting (AGM). On January 24th,  the WIF membership finaUy took the WIF  board of directors to court for its refusal to  caU an AGM.  WIF's legal fight against IVC has centred on the ownership of almost $50,000,  the profits from IVC's internationally acclaimed 1989 festival in Vancouver (see Kinesis, June 1991 for details.) The In Visible Colours Festival was co-sponsored by  WD? and the National Film Board.  Despite a court ruhng in September  which awarded 75 percent of the festival  profits to IVC (and 25 percent to WIF),  the WD? board, represented by director Sue  Jenkins, returned to court in December to  prevent the money being dispersed to IVC's  account. (The money was being held in  IVC's lawyer's trust account; WIF launched  its action the day it was due to be released.)  Jenkins, the only elected director, was  acting with the support of three other directors she appointed—Judith Mastai, Sherry  Grauer and SheUey Novazek. The three resigned shortly after for a variety of personal  asons.  In the December 19th action, WIF's  lawyer argued that IVC's money should not  be released untU WIF had completed a thor  ough audit of the festival's books, suggesting that IVC and its directors may have  breached their duties with respect to the  festival's funds. According to WIF's lawyer,  the money left over from the IVC festival  could not properly be described as profits  untU the audit was completed and it was  established that WIF was in good standing  with its funders.  IVC's lawyer, Kyong-ae Kim, successfuUy argued that the September ruhng  had settled the question of whose money  was whose, and after an almost three-week  freeze, the court released IVC's funds.  In fact, an audit was completed and financial statements were presented to the  WIF board in early December, before the  December 19th action. They were signed by  all directors except Jenkins.  Former WD? director Judith Mastai, who  heads pubUc programming at the Vancouver Art GaUery, says Jenkins didn't sign  the audited financial statements because  she was working night shift at the post office. (Jenkins would not be interviewed by  Kinesis, saying the matter was before the  courts.) In Mastai's view, the action against  IVC was just part of the effort to tidy up  WIF's books.  "It's not a scenario that has anything to  do with being vindictive." says Mastai. "It's  to do with bringing order to the house, to be  able to carry on, make arrangements with  creditors, reduce the deficit and straighten  out internal difficulties. H you have an organization that is unable to give audited financial statements, no funder wUl touch you."  Mastai, who was out of the country for  much of the faU, said that meetings with  funders in September impressed on the  board the need for a soUd financial picture. Further, says Mastai, "the difference  between the membership and the board is  that the board is Uable."  To date, no WIF board member has  explained what habUities they fear, which  creditors are at the door, or which funder is  threatening to withdraw.  Fumiko Kiyooka, an independent filmmaker and WD? member, has been active in  the struggle to bring WD? under the control  of the membership.  "After the original court decision [in  September], people didn't feel great, but it  was okay," says Kiyooka. "Then Sue Jenkins tried to freeze IVC's money—for a long  time—which could have caused IVC to go  under. She had no regard for how this action would affect IVC.  "The membership has been left out and  left uninformed, because the AGM has been  [repeatedly] delayed—and now we have to  try to get an AGM through the courts."  The active membership has tried since  May 1991 to hold an AGM. In July, 10 percent of the membership legaUy requisitioned  an AGM under the Society's Act. The board  scheduled a meeting for September 30th,  rescheduled then indefinitely postponed it,  citing delays with the audit. As recently as  January 24th, Jenkins—who has appointed  several new directors—refused to caU an  AGM when asked to do so by a lawyer for  the WIF membership committee.  (Among other reasons, WD? members retained a lawyer because Jenkins would not  turn over a hst of members or aUow access to financial records, when requested by  member Lorna Boschman. She finally did so  on January 24th.)  Haruko Okano, an artist who actively  campaigns against racism, says the WD?  membership has to take responsibihty for  their board's actions. "Condescension and  apathy within the organization aUowed this  to happen. The membership moved too  slowly—and the damage has been to In Visible Colours, who have spent almost $20,000  Lesbians and immigration:  Breaking down borders  by Harriet Fancott  January 14th, 1992 may weU be an historical day not only for Christine Morris-  sey and her lover Bridget CoU, but for gay  and lesbian citizens throughout Canada. On  that day Morrissey filed a statement of  claim to the federal court asserting her right  to sponsor CoU, her hfe companion, for immigration to Canada.  Morrissey's chaUenge is the first of its  kind and may weU be a precedent-setting  case. Her lawyer, Rob Hughes, wiU argue that the Immigration Act discriminates  against same-sex couples on the basis of sexual orientation, a violation of the Canadian  Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Morrissey, a Canadian, and CoU, an  American citizen, have been in a committed relationship for over 14 years and are fi-  nancially and emotionaUy dependent upon  each other. They met in 1977 and have hved  together since 1979.  CoU has been hving and working in Vancouver for three years under various work  permits, a situation that has proved increasingly difficult. Unwilling to risk being rejected for another work permit, Morrissey  and CoU decided to apply for immigration  under the "famUy class."  Morrissey's appUcation was returned, unprocessed, with a note stating that CoU did  not fit into any of the categories. Because  the appUcation was not officially rejected—  CoU, in this case, simply did not "exist"—  Morrissey had no right to appeal. The only  route avaUable to the two women was to  chaUenge the regulations through Federal  Court.  They received funding through the Court  ChaUenges Program, which provides monies  for test case htigation on equahty and minority language rights. "Ms. Morrissey's  case wiU be the first test case to challenge the Immigration Regulations for discrimination on the basis of sexual orienta  tion," said Andree Cote, director of the program. When cases hke this are won, they  set important legal precedents that clarify  the scope of equahty rights in the Canadian  Charter of Rights and Freedoms."  Morrissey is chaUenging the "famUy  class" section of the act which is defined in  terms of individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption to the sponsoree.  The Vancouver-based Lesbian and Gay  Task Force on Immigration said the existing law encourages gays and lesbians to  he and cheat in order to gain entry into  Canada by entering marriages of convenience. The Task Force, co-chaired by Morrissey, is based on one established in Aus-  traUa which provided the pressure necessary  to gain same-sex sponsorship there.  New Zealand, AustraUa, Denmark, Sweden and the Netherlands aU permit sponsorship of same-sex partners.  on legal fees ... How many members wiU  examine what happened? There is a complacency buUt into the dominant culture—  you just faU asleep and let things happen.  "On one technical level, IVC is conceived  to have won [the court cases], yet this has  damn nearly crushed a group that was so  successful. The actions of this predominantly white organization [WD?] is so typical of a colonialistic, imperialistic attitude:  to solve the problem by taking advantage of  a group that trusted you."  Farhat Khan of the IVC board echoes  Okano's view. "We had a lot of frustration and anger about not going pubUc when  [the harassment] first started," says Khan,  "but the WIF membership were concerned  it would aU just be seen as 'feminists against  feminists.' We thought we had a strong case.  And we felt frustration and disappointment  that nothing much was being done by the  membership."  The legal action by the WIF membership committee re: the AGM will be  heard on January 29, after Kinesis goes  to press.  Harriet Fancott is a whirled traveller.  FED UP WITH MALE  MISOGYNIST HUMOUR?  EXPERIENCE THE BEST  IN FEMINIST AND WOMEN  STAND-UP COMICS IN  THIS BRILLIANT AND  HILARIOUS NEW FILM.  "REFRESHINGLY VULGAR  AND WITTY... A HOOT,  A GUARANTEED LAUGH."  i  STARTS FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 7  7:00 & 9:00 NIGHTLY  KINESIS, //y///yyy///y/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy  Constitution  Looking at the latest conjob  by Catherine Burke  Ottawa's latest constitutional proposals,  unveUed September 1991, do Uttle to address the needs of the pohticaUy powerless  or the average woman on the street. This is  nothing new.  So far, no First Ministers' meeting has  been called to hammer out the final proposals, hkely because such behind-closed-  doors scenarios were heatedly criticized during and after the faded Meech Lake Accord. Instead, the Dobbie-Beaudoin committee (the federal parliamentary committee) and several private research institutions have been commissioned to study and  review the opinions of constitutional experts, interest groups and provincial pohticians.  The 28 proposals to amend the 1982  Constitution can be divided into three  broad categories: citizenship, institutions,  and economic/federal-provincial relations.  Under citizenship, the proposals include:  the reaffirmation of the rights and freedoms  of citizens (the "Canada Clause"); the acknowledgement of Quebec as a distinct society; the entrenchment of property rights (a  new element); and a commitment to some  kind of Aboriginal self-government.  Under institutions, the proposals address: Senate reform; appointments to the  Supreme Court; aUowing MPs more free  votes; and a formula for amending the constitution.  The proposals involving economic/federal-provincial relations include: the division of jurisdictions and power between the  federal and provincial governments; special  power granted to the federal government  to "manage the economic union;" limits on  federal spending power; and the creation of  a CouncU of the Federation.  Most 'ordinary citizens' are overwhelmed,  exhausted and angry about the state of the  constitutional debate, and critics have given  the Conservatives low marks for handing  out such a complex set of proposals.  Outside Quebec, the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women (NAC)  has provided the most tangible feminist reaction. Evaluating the proposals from the  perspective of women's equahty, NAC finds  them hkely to "threaten social programs; to  jeopardize the rights of women and other  disadvantaged social groups; and to further  entrench the power of male economic and  poUtical eUtes."  NAC also comes out strongly supporting  the right of Quebec to define itself as a distinct society, with distinct powers to protect its language and culture (the "asymmetrical federalism" concept). NAC also  agrees with the constitutional entrenchment  of Aboriginal peoples' inherent right to self-  government.  Property Rights Wrong Women  One of the new proposals in the package was  the entrenchment of property rights in the  Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The business community hails the idea, whUe feminists, Aboriginal peoples, environmentalists  and the labour movement are strongly opposed to such a move. "Property" is a concept that goes far beyond personal possessions or real estate. NAC points out that,  with entrenched property rights, employers can challenge minimum wage and pay  equity laws, landlords can fight rent controls, and restaurant owners can fight antidiscrimination laws—to name a few scenar-  Vancouver lawyer Fran Watters says that  property rights could have far-reaching implications for women in family law matters.  For example, if the marital home is in the  husband's name, guaranteed property rights  could aUow the courts to award the man exclusive use of the property in a divorce settlement. At present, a woman can obtain an  order to hve in the house under the FamUy  Rights Act. With a conservative judiciary,  there are no guarantees that women's rights  would be upheld.  Devolution: Who Survives?  However, the proposals to alter federal/provincial jurisdictions (devolution) and to restrict the federal spending power are the  ones that could have the farthest reaching  consequences.  The proposed devolution would involve  transferring power from the federal government to provincial governments in areas such as job training, housing, forestry,  mining and municipal affairs. Partial power  transfers would occur in immigration,  culture and broadcasting. NAC is concerned that without federal initiatives in  these areas—particularly housing and job  training—provinces may be slow or simply unable to respond to women's needs.  NAC beheves that granting the provinces  greater power in immigration could lead to  even more restrictive and racist immigration pohcies, especially if right-wing parties  are in power. Says NAC: "These pohcies  would be justified by the 'high' economic  cost of social services and language training; protecting the cultural identity of their  province by ... selecting a population with  western values (namely European)..."  The proposal to restrict federal spending power would force Ottawa to first get  majority approval from a CouncU of the  Federation—a body composed of provincial  appointees—before embarking on any new  programs.  Ottawa's current spending power affects  welfare, health care and education programs, among others. A restriction on federal spending power, says NAC, "would  prevent for aU time the introduction of  a Canada-wide system of chUd care and  severely restrict the initiation of any other  major social programs." NAC is further  concerned that Ottawa would be unable to  either set or impose national standards on  programs, thus deepening the regional disparities already existing across the country.  To safeguard the rights of Canadians  against provincial abuses of power, progressive organizations have proposed that a Social Charter be entrenched in the constitution. Briefly, a Social Charter would give citizens a constitutional guarantee to a certain  standard of hving, just as the current Charter guarantees legal and civU rights). At  present, basic social programs such as education, health care and housing are enforced  through statutes that can be repealed or  amended. A Social Charter would guarantee a basic and equal right to such services.  (Another approach would define social programs such as health care, education, employment, housing, income and chUd welfare  in The Charter of Rights and Freedoms. A  more radical approach would be to define  poverty as a disabihty in the Charter. However there is of yet no clear idea on enforcement. The labour movement is against the  courts ruhng on the definition of a Social  Charter given the overwhelming conservative nature of the judiciary.)  But as NAC's Judy Rebick says, "We  don't want to trade federal spending power  "Federal spending  power...stops the  erosion of social services  such as health and education.'  -NAC  and national standards for some vague  wording in the constitution on social rights.  Federal spending power and national standards stop the erosion of social services such  as health and education."  However, University of British Columbia  pohtical scientist AvigaU Eisenberg says  that provincial governments may set up far  better social programs than the federal government. Currently, social programs must  meet a federal minimal standard which may  not meet a provincial need. With more progressive governments at the provincial level,  social programs could receive more attention.  For example, Quebec opted out of the  Canada Pension Plan and replaced it with a  far better program of its own. (If a provincial government does opt-out of a federal  government program, it stiU receives federal  funding.) The Federation des Femmes du  Quebec firmly beheves more autonomy for  Quebec wiU have a positive effect on social  projects, and wUl eUminate the inefficient  dupUcation of bureaucracies.  NAC's alternative to these constitutional  proposals seeks to strengthen federal spending power and to entrench federal responsibilities (outside of Quebec) to ensure acces-  sibUity and universality of social programs.  Aboriginal Self-Government  The Meech Lake Accord was roundly  condemned by First Nations peoples for  its faUure to address their right to self-  government. Since September, the Assembly of First Nations has conducted an extensive consultation with Native communities on the matter of self-government. Gloria Nicolson of the BC Professional Native  Women's Association says that Native people must be aUowed "to determine our needs  and prioritize them, and provide services to  our people by our people. In order for us to  be a strong component of this country, we  must be able to govern ourselves."  Ottawa has proposed that the concept  of self-government be studied/developed for  10 years before being constitutionally entrenched. Some Native leaders oppose that  delay, but the National Native Women's Association of Canada (NWAC) welcomes it.  Nicolson agrees: "Once the agreements have  been formed, it needs to be set up over  time so that it wiU serve the purpose it was  meant to." Nicolson uses the analogy of the  medicine wheel—everything must be looked  at in a holistic manner. She says that Native  leaders must go back and regain the value  system of their ancestors and share in the  "inherent wholeness of hfe."  Other differences have emerged as weU.  WhUe the AFN beheves Aboriginal government should not be bound by the Euro-  Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,  the NWAC opposes that view. The NWAC  is concerned that existing Native councils—  largely male-dominated—wUl not necessarUy respect women's rights.  Senate Reform  The proposals set forth in the institutions  section are straightforward, dealing mostly  with a triple E Senate (elected, effective and  equal are the buzzwords), with the Supreme  Court of Canada appointments and the  Constitutional amending formula.  Strong differences exist among provincial  leaders regarding what "equal" means (the  same number of Senate seats per province  vs. representation by population). For many  feminists, however, "equal" has come to  mean 50 percent of the Senate and Supreme  Court of Canada seats must be held by  women.  NAC beheves the overaU direction of the  Tory proposals is to safeguard the interest of  the economicaUy privUeged at the expense  of women, people of colour and other disadvantaged groups—and has advocated that  "mechanisms should be put in place to ensure that women are represented pohticaUy  in proportion to our presence in the population. We make the same argument for visible minorities and people with disabihties."  NAC's response to the Tory's proposals  also include a rewording of the equahty section of the Charter (sec. 15). Rebick says  that section 15 is based on the old notion of  equahty. A new definition is being worked  on by the West Manitoba Women's Group.  On February 6, Constitutional Affairs  Minister Joe Clark wiU host a round-table  discussion on his proposals with women's  groups from across the country.  The Special Joint Committee (Dobbie-  Beaudoin) must report back by February  28th. The proposals wiU then be reshaped  and passed on to provincial governments  to approve. Some provinces have discussed  putting these proposals to a referendum before going to their legislatures for approval  NAC continues to caU for a Constituent  Assembly to hammer out the various options which are emerging from the committee's consultations. AU this must be accomplished before Quebec's referendum on  sovereignty which must, by law, occur before the end of October, 1992.  Catherine Burke is a freelance writer  who dabbles in poetry.  KINESIS f <s*ss****s^s**ss*s^^^  Oft repeated:  Tale of campus violence  by Jesse Sutherland  A college student has been forced to leave  school and Vancouver because of the systematic harassment and abuse she experienced on campus throughout the faU of  1991.  Kim Anda Jarzebiak, a student at Langara college, was a collective member on the  college's student newspaper, The Gleaner.  Jarzebiak was violently raped in the summer of 1991 and, in September, an article  she wrote about her rape was published in  The Gleaner under a pseudonym.  Shortly after, two students on the newspaper collective began harassing her. Mark  Meheriuk and David Lundquist referred to  Jarzebiak as "tits" and "babe," and told  her that "rape isn't that bad." In The  Gleaner's October 3rd issue, Lundquist  and Meheriuk published a rape threat addressed to Jarzebiak, with her name speUed  backwards.  At first, other male collective members  protected the identities of the abusers. It  wasn't untU women on and off campus  mounted a strong protest that Meheriuk  and Lundquist were dismissed from The  Gleaner collective. The mainstream media  learned of the incident and, under pressure  from media questions, the college investigated and reported they were considering  expeUing Meheriuk and Lundquist.  Meanwhile, Jarzebiak was relentlessly harassed and threatened by various male students on campus, on the bus and at home.  She was called "dyke," "bitch," "slut," and  asked, "wanna be raped?" A note asking her  the same question was left on her bag in  The Gleaner office.  Women from across Canada wrote letters to David Cane, Langara's principal, demanding the men be expeUed. On November 4th, Jarzebiak was told by the college  they would neither expel nor suspend the  two abusers. Principal Cane, Jarzebiak says,  then blamed her for the harassment she experienced because she "inflamed the situation by speaking to the media."  The "punishment" set out by the coUege  administration for the offenders included  writing a letter of apology, getting counselhng and attending a seminar on harassment. The Vancouver Pohce Department  was suggested as a source for a seminar on  sexual harassment.  Ongoing harassment forced Jarzebiak  to stop attending classes. Meheriuk and  Lundquist continued as usual. Under constant strain, Jarzebiak developed ulcers, a  bladder infection and a viral infection which  led to her hospitalization.  On November 18, Jarzebiak received a  letter from Cane stating that the coUege i*  "regarded] the matter as resolved." In re- 3  sponse, seven women stormed his office de- °-  manding further action be taken. Cane's re- .2  sponse was that "the college feels there is ^  nothing else to be done," and expressed con- "£  cern that the college's reputation would be J2  harmed. °"  During the next week, both the media  and the Ministry of Education pestered the  college for information about how it was  handling the matter. Women on and off  campus postered the college with the names  of the offenders, started a petition inviting  the entire student body to add their support, and organized an information march  and demonstration on December 4th.  Sixty women marched through the halls  chanting slogans hke "David Cane we've  had enough, we don't want your hp service."  Women made their demands, presented petitions and accused the college and its principal of condoning and encouraging violence  t women on campus.  Currently the college claims nothing else  can be done because of possible "legal ramifications." Meheriuk and Lundquist have  obtained lawyers, and one is represented  by Harry Rankin, a Vancouver alderman.  (Rankin refused to talk about his involvement). In a recent open letter to the campus community, Cane writes that he is saddened that Jarzebiak "found it necessary to  leave Langara because of what she perceives  as ongoing harassment of her by a number  of men."  Jesse Sutherland is a student at Langara and was active in the protests.  Langara students confront principal David Cane (at left).  1045 COMMERCIAL DRIVE 255-2326  Tale of resistance  The women who came together to support Kim Anda Jarzebiak found ourselves  challenging the very system we thought  would protect us. We were a diverse group  of women who came together—many of us  had never met before—to fight something  that spoke to aU of us: violence against  women.  Indeed, for many women, the published  rape threat brought out their own histories of abuse. Trish Muehleback tells of how  she started to recognize sexual harassment;  before, she just "internalized it as a joke  Through the Langara experience, I rc-  experienced past sexual harassment."  For Lily Petrovic: "Once I connected her  [Kim Anda Jarzebiak's] pain and re-lived  my own, I became much more personaUy  connected." Jarzebiak herself was thrown  back into flashbacks and countless terrifying nightmares.  For survivors of chUd sexual abuse, it was  just another reminder that the war against  women and girls is not over. Other women  organized not from a place of past abuse,  but with a commitment to social justice and  a realization that the fear of violence against  women affects aU of us daily. "This experience reinforced my feehng of not being able  to go outside and feel safe," said Sherry Preston, "not being able to go to school and feel  safe—not being able to do anything."  For many, this was our first experience  organizing as women against something  that affected us as women—and we were  deeply pohticized by the process. "I thought  we could go through legitimate channels  to deal with something so clear-cut," said  Yvonne MadUl. "I found out those channels  don't really exist." Beth Hardy beheved:  AU we had to do was write letters, explain  why they have to kick them [Meheriuk and  Lundquist] out and they would."  Our organizing first focused on doing educational work on sexism, writing letters  and meetings with Langara principal David  Cane. After confronting the individual and  structural sexism that permeated Langara,  our focus shifted to protesting the system:  we took over Cane's office, demonstrated,  marched through the campus, petitioned  and postered the names of the two offend-  More women became involved when  Jarzebiak decided to leave campus, "I remember the day Kim decided to leave,"  said Petrovic. "I felt so horrified. Here is a  woman leaving school and here are two guys  attending Langara. This was a changing moment. I had to do something. I realized that  the school system was made for men."  Women became aware that everyone  knew who the rape threat was directed  at, whUe no one knew the faces or names  of the perpetrators—so we decided to  poster Lundquist's and Meheriuk's names  throughout the campus. Immediately Cane  called security to remove the posters, protecting the offenders. The system's focus on  protecting and helping the offenders was  fleeted in the fact that the college is paying  for counselhng for Lundquist and Meheriuk.  whUe none is offered to Jarzebiak.  It also became clear that it is not safe  to speak out about violence against women.  "The one thing that struck me throughout  was that it wasn't safe for us to even try to  do things about it," said Preston. "Postering was not safe. Trying to get photos was  not safe." Almost all women echoed Preston's words, and many women were afraid  to get involved. Michaela Fox recaUs: "I was  scared I would be picked out."  Our fear of speaking out was radicaUy  transformed after we marched through the  halls, chanting slogans. All women interviewed talked of the march being the mosl  powerful experience. Dega Omar said that  after the march: "I felt so powerful with  women. Together we can do anything we  want to."  Because of our activism, many women are  no longer afraid. Being witness to Jarzebiak's courage to continue to speak out  has given us the wUl to speak out for  selves and each other. Moreover, students  are starting to make the connections between the institutional racism, sexism and  heterosexism that is buUt into the school  system. While the organizing did not solve  the problem, each one of us wUl appr  the next situation with more experience,  confidence—and with a network of soUdarity.  J.S.  KINESIS, yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy^  yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy^  Commentary  Whose point of view?  South Asian women:  by Sunera Thobani  The following commentary is, in  part, a response to several articles published in the Vancouver Sun in December, 1991.  The issue of violence against women has  assumed some urgency in Canada and the  extent of this violence has become the subject of much media coverage over the last  two years. The idea that acts of violence  against women are not a series of isolated  incidents, but a reflection of the subordinate  position of women in society, is now widely  accepted.  However, for Canadian women of South  Asian origin, the manner in which sexism and violence are being addressed poses  a threat which needs to be addressed  with equal urgency. And this is the threat  of increased racism against the South  Asian Canadian community, and particularly, against South Asian women.  ...this blaming of  the South Asian  culture for the  oppression of  South Asian  women...  Sexism and violence against women exist in aU Canadian communities, crossing racial, reUgious and class boundaries.  Violence against women results from the  inequaUty of power between men and  women within patriarchal society. Women  are forced into a subjugated status and violence is a necessary means to maintain this  subjugation of women. Violence is therefore  an essential feature of patriarchal society:  ultimately it keeps women in place.  Yet in the case of women within the  South Asian community, sexism and violence are increasingly being denned as arising from a static, "backward" South Asian  culture which condones tins oppression of  women. The defining of sexism and violence in this manner is nothing other than  perpetuating and re-creating racist definitions of people of colour as being "backward, traditional," and resisting modernity  by chnging to oppressive cultural practices.  And when we have South Asian women parroting these racist "causes" of sexism and  of violence in the Vancouver Sun-as happened recently—it is a disturbing Ulustra-  tion of how serious the problem of internalized racism has become in our world.  There is a growing tendency to blame  South Asian women for the horrific violence  they are subjected to by arguing that the  women lack assertiveness or education, and  that somehow rejecting the South Asian culture and embracing a "fresh, vibrant, Canadian culture" is the answer to South Asian  women's oppression. WeU, if the problems  of South Asian women arise from a "frozen"  culture, let us look at what the experience  is of our white sisters in the mainstream of  this fresh, vibrant, Canadian culture:  • 70 percent of women lawyers have experienced "career sex discrimination," they  reported in a survey;  • 60 percent of adult Canadians hving below the poverty Une are women;  • One in four Canadian women are sexuaUy  abused at some time in their hves, half  of these women have been abused before  they reach age 17;  • One woman in ten is a victim of domestic violence;  • In the last two years over 100 women per  year were kiUed by their male partners.  These depressing statistics go on and on,  violating the hves of aU women in Canadian society. And whUe this oppression of  women and violence exists in aU cultures,  women have resisted and continue to resist  this oppression in aU cultures. Sexism and  violence have become endemic features in  the hves of aU women, and to present this as  being a problem of the clash of cultures, of  women being conditioned not to change, as  in the case of South Asian women, is cruel  and adds insult to injury.  There is no culture in Canadian society  in which women have not resisted and stood  up against the violence wreaked upon us.  South Asian Canadian women are no exception.  And whUe services to women in the South  Asian community are grossly inadequate,  tins blaming of South Asian culture for the  oppression of women works against the interests of South Asian women, for whom our  culture is a source of pride and inspiration  in our struggles to hve hves with dignity and  equahty, and yes, Uves which are free from  violence.  A Racist Justice System  We know that the justice system in Canada  suffers from a gender bias. Peoples of colour  also know the justice system suffers from a  racist bias. And this racism is encountered  at every step of the way, beginning from encounters with the pohce.  Recently, Black activists in Toronto said  the pohce have declared open season on  black youths after a Black man was shot  by the pohce in a purse-snatching incident.  A First Nations woman who was raped was  treated hke a criminal and arrested after she  faded to appear as a witness in her case. Acknowledging racism in Canadian society at  aU levels, one of the recommendations made  by the Economic CouncU was that "Pohce  need more race relations training."  Given this experience of racism, women  of colour have come to mistrust the pohce  and avoid involving them in conflicts. This  is a practical response to a racist environment, it is not any culturaUy-based love of  suffering or self-sacrifice that makes women  react in this manner.  Sentencing within the justice system also  tends to have a serious impact on the hves  of immigrants. A South Asian immigrant  jaUed in Vancouver for sexual assault was  ordered to be deported. As the majority of  South Asian women immigrants come into  Canada under the family class, this threat  of deportation impacts upon the entire famUy. The immigration process, disorienting  for aU immigrants, continues to maintain  the vulnerabUity of women.  Compare the treatment in the above case  with the case where a judge ruled that a real  estate developer was justified in assaulting  his wife when he "punched and kicked her  in the face and back, broke her glasses and  knocked her out" after she slapped him in  a fight. Or with the incident when a judge  dismissed sexual assault charges by saying  "at times 'No' may mean maybe, or 'Wait a  whUe'." Or the case where a man who was  convicted of the sexual assault of a mentally handicapped woman which led to bod-  Uy harm was given a sentence of 90 days to  be served on weekends.  When we have members of the South  Asian community remaining oblivious to  the systematic and structural racism which  people of colour face at every level in Canadian society, especially when these members  work within the legal profession, one can  only fear for the fate of the women these  members claim to represent.  Racism and sexism continue to increase  the vulnerabUity of South Asian women,  whether within the home or in the larger society. It is the systemic and structural nature of racist and sexist oppression which  needs to be addressed and changed, and  South Asian women have a culture and tradition of resistance which we wUl continue  to draw upon in our struggles for equahty.  Sunera Thobani is a founding member of SAW AN (South Asian Women's  Action Network.  new and  gently used books  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthi* Brooke  Eastside DataGraphics  1460 Commercial Drive  tel: 255-9559 fax: 253-3073  ORGANIZE!  With office supplies  from Eastside DataGraphics  aka Eastside Pencils and Paints  >-Union Shop  Call or fax and we'll send you our monthly  flyer of great office supply specials.  Free next-day delivery.  KINESIS Ups sink ships  When the government fired four members of the Royal Commission  on New Reproductive Technologies last December, women lost their  strongest advocates and the commission lost its credibility. Or did it?  by Heidi Walsh  If you axe totaUy confused about exactly how the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies proposes to affect your hfe, don't feel ignorant. Four members of the  commission don't know either and when they tried to find out, they were fired.  In December 1991, the federal government fired four of the commission's nine members  after the four initiated a lawsuit against the government and the commission (see box).  There are several issues involved in the controversy: aUegations by commissioners that  commission chairperson, geneticist Dr. Patricia Baird, controls the commission almost  single-handedly; allegations by a researcher that information in at least one of her reports  was altered by commission staff; and the long-term impUcations for future Royal Commissions regarding protection from government interference.  Louise Vandelac, a Montreal sociologist and one of the fired commissioners, says the  basic problem was that Baird had a fundamental lack of respect for basic rules of democracy. "We [the commissioners] never had an open agenda and we were not involved in  the major decisions of this commission, such as in the budget or deciding on research  projects," says Vandelac. She stresses neither she nor the other fired commissioners were  interested in the day-to-day management of the body, but they did want input into its  major orientation. "If you look at the law on Royal Commissions," she says, "commissioners have the power to establish procedures and organize work. Pat Baird hijacked the  power and the roles of the commission from the beginning, and some of us refused to be  part of a process of window-dressing."  Vandelac says the inner core of the commission was veUed in secrecy. Commissioners were not given access to the hst of titles of research projects, their budgets or the researchers hired. When they were given some projects to review, they discovered the research had already been approved in a global plan 5-6 months earlier. She says Baird  did not consult with commissioners before asking the government to extend the commission's mandate by one year, nor were they shown the short hst during the hiring of the  Research Director, a process which took 8 months, a delay which seriously affected the  commission's research mandate.  The fired commissioners—Vandelac, Ottawa lawyer Maureen McTeer, Calgary physician Bruce Hatfield, and Montreal lawyer Martin Hebert—wrote several times to Baird  and the government, asking for more involvement in the commission's decision-making  process. In August 1990, after the four had complained to the Privy CouncU—the highest level of the civU service—the government passed an Order-in-Council removing the  commissioners' power to arrange meetings and hire experts, conferring this same power  on Baird. Two extra members were appointed to the commission, thus breaking the dissidents' majority.  In a Globe and Mail interview published in late December 1991, Baird said: "We've  done more than any other commission in history to have each commissioner participate,  and stiU that's not enough for them." But Vandelac argues Baird is deft at appearing to  consult with others whUe simultaneously carrying out her own agenda. She also disagrees  that Baird was 'just doing her job'.  "We've checked with many other people in Royal Commissions," says Vandelac, "and  the majority are astonished at the way things are done in this commission. We also have  testimony from people involved in another committee she chaired. She seems to have  been the same there."  Vandelac refutes press reports stating ideological differences were responsible for splitting the commission. "This is not a battle between commissioners," she says. "It's not  between anti-science and pro-technology sides. It's normal that people on a commission  have different analyses. That's why we have Royal Commissions—to have debates. H  there is a real division in this commission, it's around the way Pat Baird is organizing it.  The other [commissioners] have a great respect for hierarchy and authority."  Margrit Eichler, a sociology professor at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, organized the coahtion which initiaUy lobbied the government for the Royal Commission. In addition to increasing pubUc awareness on issues surrounding reproductive  technologies, Eichler says, "We were hoping to get good research out of this commission  that would aUow us to come up with a careful assessment as to the effects of the various technologies, and also to let us know who is profiting from them, and the role of the  pharmaceuticals in their development."  From the information avaUable to her, Eichler says many of the research projects so  far are literature reviews rather than ground-breaking studies. "It's clear the questions  which need to be asked have not been asked," says Eichler.  Research That is Political, Cultural, Economic  Another dissatisfied member of the coalition is McGiU epidemiology professor Abby  Lippman. "One problem I have with the commission's credibihty is that I don't know  what research it's doing—it may be terrific, but I have no way of knowing, because no  one ever tells you what they're doing," Lippman says. She explains that for months, she  and several others attempted to find out the titles of research projects, the researchers'  names and the budgets assigned to the projects. "AU other granting agencies put out  hsts of the names of people they are supporting, but this commission refuses to give out  any information," she says.  (A newsletter issued by the commission in January 1992 hsts the titles and researchers' names for three projects, and titles of two others. Approximately 90 other  projects are described in very general terms.)  "This commission was an opportunity to do first-class, empirical research that none  of us who want to do research in this area can get money for," says Lippman. "[The  research needed] is pohtical, it's cultural, it's economic—it's not just science. It's the  hnks—what are we doing to animals that can be applied to humans? We seem to think  nothing of breeding plants or fish to fit our needs. Are we going to think much differently  about people? We used to say 'it can't be done' but these are non-issues now. Yet they  have to be brought out into the open."  Varda Burstyn, co-chair of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women's  Health and Reproductive Technologies Committee, has seen part of the research plan  hst—made avaUable under the Access to Information Act—and is disturbed by the quality of the research. "There is one report looking at the consequence of pharmaceutical  companies in this field," says Burstyn. "NAC suggested this was perhaps the single-most  important issue to address concerning the momentum for these technologies. The report  was done by a pubUc relations company. It is shocking that a public relations company  would be entrusted with an issue of such major economic and social importance."  Eichler and Lippman also have concerns regarding the role of Baird in the commission. "Our coahtion pressed very strongly that the chairperson be neither a medical nor  legal specialist, because these are the two professions that profit directly from the technologies," says Eichler.  Lippman adds, "A person who comes out of the biomedical community, and who has  been trained, socialized and acculturated in a biomedical context, is hkely to take a very  biomedical approach to these problems. From this point of view, these [technologies] are  seen as therapeutic, as important for dealing with health problems. My guess is that this  wUl be the direction of anything that comes out of the commission."  A Government Agenda?  Appointing Baird as commission chair "indicates the presence of an agenda on the part  of the government," says Burstyn, "even though it is automatic and unconscious. From  their point of view, the person with the most authority in this investigation would be a  person who has professionaUy invested in these technologies, one of the many constituencies [such as infertUe women] affected by the technologies."  The dissident commissioners are not the only ones taking the commission to court.  Toronto researcher and journalist Ann Pappert is suing the commission for an aUeged  breach of contract and copyright infringement. Her complaints concern the commission's  staff, rather than the commissioners.  Pappert had been doing research for the commission for a year and a half when her  contract was terminated by Research Director Sylvia Gold last June. Pappert says the  terms of the contract had been renegotiated earlier and had included the appointment of  a liaison person to her. "Before there were a number of people [on the commission staff]  giving me instructions which were often totally contradictory," Pappert says.  She is suing for copyright infringement based on a concern that the contents of two  unfinished research projects in the commission's possession, for which she has not yet  been paid, may be altered by commission staff. "That's based on the fact that they've  done this before with previous work of mine," says Pappert.  In an earlier report she had prepared for the commission, Pappert had recorded the  summaries of papers given at a World Health Organization meeting on the role of in  vitro fertiUzation in infertUity care. Part of the meeting's mandate was to produce pubhc pohcy recommendations. "[The commission staff] changed some of the factual information and some of the points of view expressed in the summaries," says Pappert.  "They also changed two of the draft recommendations that came out of the meeting."  Speaking in general terms because of limitations imposed by her court case, Pappert  says, "I was told my work was changed because the person who read it thought it might  contain points of view the commissioners didn't agree with. The commissioners hadn't  seen the document.  "I know I'm not the only person this has happened to, but I can't talk about it."  Because They Were Women  Many in the feminist and research communities feel the commission has been profoundly  compromised and that its final report, scheduled for completion by October 1992, wUl  have no credibihty.  NAC's Burstyn however, is concerned that the general public may quickly forget the  debate surrounding the commission, and wUl look to its report as the definitive statement on new reproductive technologies. She suggests there is a need for an alternative, weU-prepared report to counteract the effects of the commission's report, but notes  women's organizations wUl have difficulty raising the kind of funds aUocated to the commission. At present, NAC is preparing proposals to address the situation.  Feminists are also raising concerns about the long-term impUcations of government intervention in the commission. "Never before in the history of Canada has a government  interfered in such a heavy-handed manner in the workings of a Royal Commission," says  Margrit Eichler. "As of now, it seems to me that no Royal Commission can be sure that  it will be at arms-length from the government."  Speaking on behalf of the government, Barbara Uteck, Director of Operations in the  Privy CouncU Office, says, "The government acted reluctantly in this particular case, because it felt the commission would only be able to complete its work if the four commissioners in question were removed." She adds that whUe Royal Commissions are conducting their enquiries, they operate independently.  Burstyn beheves the government ignored the arms-length principal of Royal Commissions because "most of the commissioners were women and most of the people who are  really upset about these technologies from an oppositional point of view are women. I  don't think they would have ever done this to one of the constitutional committees roaming the country."  She feels the Tories are not worried about paying a great pohtical price for their actions because they do not expect significant opposition from the public or interested  groups. "I fear because it's happening around a 'woman's issue'," says Burstyn, "the  Bar Association and various groups of constitutional lawyers—all the people who make  it their business to care about what the government does in more formal terms—won't  look at this or act." She says NAC has talked to lawyers, doctors, research scientists and  pohticians, all of whom have privately admitted concern, but few among them are prepared to air their view pubUcly.  In the meantime, many feminists remain frustrated at the lack of pubhc debate on  new reproductive technologies. "The press is covering this because it looks hke a scandal," says Louise Vandelac, "but there's no word about the real issues." She reiterates  her concerns regarding Patricia Baird's style of leadership and says that as things stand,  she wUl not support the final report when it is issued by the commission. "It's impossible  that, for such important questions, things be left essentiaUy in the hands of one person "  Vandelac concludes.  Heidi Walsh is a member of the freelance liberation army.  'i(p  d!  &)  ^>  In the beginning, there was trouble...  • October 1989: The government establishes the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies and appoints a geneticist, Dr. Patricia Baird, as chair;  • The commission's mandate includes researching, evaluating and making recommendations about new reproductive technologies (NRTs) in terms of their social, legal, ethical, economic, research and health impUcations on individuals and society; the commission's budget is $25 miUion;  • August 1990: the government passes an order-in-councU conferring almost fuU power  on Baird, after four of the seven commissioners complain to the Privy CouncU of her excessively authoritative manner. The government also appoints two additional commissioners, a move designed to reduce the dissidents to a minority position on the commission;  • Summer 1991: Toronto researcher Ann Pappert, who has prepared reports for the  commission, files a lawsuit against the commission. She is suing them for aUeged breach  of contract copyright infringement;  • December 1991: after faUed attempts to extract information from Baird and help  from the government, the four commissioners launch lawsuits against both parties,  asking—among other things—for a reversal of the August 1990 order-in-councU;  • Ten days later, in an unprecedented move, the government fires the dissident commissioners, among them two outspoken feminists, Montreal sociologist Louise Vandelac  and Ottawa lawyer Maureen McTeer;  • Shortly after the firings, Baird announces the commission is "on track, on time and  on budget" and promises a final report by October 1992.  ;j£ZJL  ■•#*»  Z+Z  /    X  KINESIS,  KINESIS  Feb.92 13 isssssss*^**^*^****^^  ARTS  Economics:  Taking women  into accounts  IF WOMEN COUNTED:  A New Feminist Economics  by MarUyn Waring  HarperCoUins, New York, 1988  by Ellen Woodsworth  Have you ever wondered why women's  work doesn't count or why it is economically profitable to cut down trees but not  to preserve clean water? Then read this  book. If Women Counted is a passionate,  scientificaUy-based book which critiques the  exclusion of women's work and the environment from mainstream economic models.  When New Zealand economist MarUyn  Waring began studying women's work glob-  aUy, she encountered a serious lack of statistics. Searching for what was behind the  void, Waring examined how economists decide what is considered to be "of value" and  "work" and "economic activity." She concluded that mainstream economic theories  are based on a value system not only set up  by, but based on what men do.  These values are then imposed and maintained using the United Nations System of  National Accounting (UNSNA). The UN-  SNA had its origins in a report written  in the 1940's by an Enghshman, Richard  Stone, in his paper called "The National Income and Expenditure of the United Kingdom and How to Pay for the War." Stone's  document formed the basis of the accounting system adopted by the UN and by the  major industrial nations. Subsequently, the  UNSNA was forced on 'developing' nations  a condition of receiving aid.  This system of accounting (based on a  war economy) helped me understand how  the Canadian government would get involved in the Gulf War during a recession  rather than spend money on a chUd care  system which would create permanent jobs.  ChUd care work is invisible, it isn't valued  and it isn't seen as profitable. Under our  system of accounting, however, war is ah  those things. When women aren't seen, then  neither are chUdren— and chUdren are poor  if their parents are poor. I get really angry at aU the talk of chUd poverty when the  structural causes of poverty are ignored.  Waring Ulustrates how the system works.  As a wife and mother, a woman "spends  her days preparing food, setting the table,  washing dishes, dressing and diapering chUdren, discipUning her chUdren, taking the  chUdren to day-care or to school, disposing of garbage, dusting, gathering clothes  for washing, doing the laundry, going to  the gas station and the supermarket, replacing household items, ironing, keeping an  eye on or playing with the chUdren, making the beds, paying the bUls, caring for  ^custom:  * SCREEN ftiNMG  A||ftgp£ QVAUTY COTToVi;  pets and plants, putting away toys, books  and clothes, sewing or mending or knitting,  talking with door-to-door salespeople, answering the telephone, vacuuming ..." Under the UNSNA, she is considered unproductive, economically inactive, not working  and not part of the country's Gross National  Product (GNP).  A soldier who spends eight hours a day in  an underground bunker waiting for the order to push a button to fire a nuclear mis-  sUe is considered economically active, valuable and worthy of pay. His work is part of  the GNP and is calculated as contributing  to our national growth, wealth and productivity.  Writes Waring: "Nowhere is there an  account for death, poverty, homelessness,  refugee populations, ruined food sources,  the enormous waste in investments in armaments, and an increasingly fragUe and exploited environment."  Because of our invisibUity in the system,  planners don't know what women need or  even do when cities, buUdings, roads or  international 'aid' are planned. For example, farm aid sent to Africa was given only  to men whUe women—who normally did  the agricultural work—were sent to home  economic classes. The implements rusted,  women were displaced and poverty deepened. Go to Vancouver City HaU and ask for  information on women in order to set up a  benefits plan for single parents. They don't  have the information.  Mainstream economists have argued it  is impossible to gather data on women's  work and the environment since they cannot be quantified. (Rubbish. Divorce courts  have measured women's work to determine  matrimonial settlements—although rarely  fairly. Resource industries measure the environment when they want to exploit it for  hydro electric power or for logging.) Waring  thoroughly examines these arguments and  their origins and carefully discredits them.  She argues that patriarchal systems of government, big business, the church and the  law do not want this information and deliberately do not hire (or fire) femimsts who  would calculate and include it.  How do we fight back? First, Waring suggests we need an economic model and system of accounts designed to include women,  1988 W 4th & Maple  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J 1M5  733-3511  Inventory Clearance Sale  20% off  Selected books, jewellery,  calenders and cards  Mon., Feb. 3-Sat., Feb. 8  r     SECTOR     M ",entspe"dms  PUBUC     s^ede^.^dS'S    ...... -  —SECTOR.     ..-   h;usev,o^^f5n«erwor>J  chUdren and the earth. She offers several  models, including Hazel Henderson's (author of The Politics of the Solar Age)  and Kilkka Pietila's, which Waring prefers  because it is more integrated.  Secondly, she agrees with Helen Ware of  the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (IN-  STRAW) that aU official data must be accurate and therefore include women, and if  it doesn't then the data is false.  In Canada tins means we must demand  that the government implement the 1985  Nairobi resolution contained in the document Forward Looking Strategies for  the Advancement of Women, a document  the government endorsed: "The enumerated and, in particular, the unrenumerated  contributions of women to aU aspects and  sectors of development should be recognized  and appropriate efforts should be made to  measure and reflect these contributions in  national accounts and economic statistics  and in the gross national product. Concrete  steps should be taken to quantify the unrenumerated contribution of women to agriculture, food production, reproduction and  household activities." This would mean that  both federal and provincial budgets would  reflect both our work and our needs.  Finally, Waring calls us to action. She  asks us to fiU in all census and other forms  with our unpaid work. Our hves, our chUdren's, our sisters' and their chUdren's Uves  and the earth are at stake. Women and men,  whatever their level of power, must use everything within their means to implement  these measures.  Ellen   Woodsworth is  involved with  community development and research.  M   ^HE Vancouver  wjNBwi   International Writers  fA   Festival Presents  An evening with  Gloria  Steinem  Discussing Her New Book  A Revolution From Within  Thursday, February 20  8 p.m.  The Park Theatre  3440 Cambie  Tickets $12 (GST included)  atThe Arts Club Theatre Box Office,  The Park Theatre Box Office  or by phone at  687-1644  Presented with the generous support  of Little, Brown & Co. (Canada) Ltd.  KINESIS F f****v,  *w  Arts  yyyyyyyyyyy/yyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy/  Incest:  Surviving through creativity  SHE WHO WAS LOST IS  REMEMBERED:  Healing From  Incest Through Creativity  Ed. by Louise M. WisechUd  Seattle: Seal Press, 1991  by Shani Mootoo  When I was asked to review She  Who Was Lost Is Remembered: Healing From Incest Through Creativity, I  thought: "Oh oh! Another book about incest and chUd abuse. FU have to hold my  breath—contrary to aU advice that one keep  breathing—and brave myself because, weU,  remember aU those books that helped me  to get in touch with my anger and to quit  feehng guilty and aU those broken sUences  that had indeed helped me to heal. But  didn't I first have to 'go through to get  out?' Of course, I'U be challenged aU over  again to look deeply and critically at self  and family—and aU kinds of memories wUl  surface—do I really have time to devote to  any resulting depression? I'U need a support system around me, my therapist, my  friends, etc. etc. etc."  Yet I decided to go ahead and review this  book because it was about healing through  creativity, a pet subject of mine, having not  long ago completed a body of paintings and  poems on the same subject.  The book came to me by courier and  when it arrived I held it unopened for a good  minute, bracing myself toward the weeks to  foUow when I would read and, I assumed,  face up to my own chUdhood experiences aU  over again.  I opened the package with some trepidation, and out came a thick book with a sunshine yellow and sky blue cover with a de  tail of a painting by Kim NewaU that was  aU at once passionate, angry, assertive and  celebratory. I flipped through the book and  from then on I could not put it down.  The essays which told the story behind  the creativity of more than 30 women contributors were each foUowed by the art  works therm-elves: poems, paintings, drawings, music, sculpture and photography. She  Who Was Lost Is Remembered is a celebration of survival, glossing over the truths  of abuse, without pussyfooting—and definitely without whispering.  Editor Louise M. WisechUd was inspired  to create this book after a conversation with  Alice MiUer, author of The Untouched  Key: Tracing Childhood Trauma In  Creativity and Destruction, and The  Drama Of The Gifted Child. MiUer's  study of the work and hves of weU-known  artists suggests that artists are unconsciously driven to create works which speak  what was forbidden them when they were  chUdren. Influenced by MiUer's debunking  of the myth that art comes, in the words  of WisechUd, from a mysterious impersonal  place that has httle to do with the experience of the artist, WisechUd writes:  In choosing work for this anthology, I  looked for art and writing that reached  below the surface to give voice to the  complex emotions and experiences that  incest survivors face. I wanted creative  Detail from "Who, What, Where, When, Why"  Series, by Patti Levey, from She Who Was Lost  Is Remembered.  work that honestly confronted the reaUty  of chUdhood. Work that spoke to the diversity of women's experiences—both in  chUdhood and in recovery.  Our patriarchal, ehtist, exclusionist society insists that we make clear distinctions between art and art therapy. WhUe  mainstream/malestream galleries refuse to  show works about incest and other forms of  abuse, and publishers deny survivors a pubhc voice because the works are "too painful,  too personal", an herstorical survey of the  cultural production of women (indeed, of aU  people) cannot possibly be complete without the expression of this dreadful but almost integral assault on the chUdhoods of  more than one female in three.  The works in She Who Was Lost Is  Remembered go beyond being personal—  tins is the story of too many women for it  to be personal. And there is the other aspect of the story, here, too: the responsible  agent, the abuser. The reason abuse appeaxs  to be a personal issue is because only one  single person dares to stand up and teU a  story that involves many more people, none  of whom wiU talk.  The works in this book go beyond being  too painful. Certainly, and naturaUy, they  do not mince words and images about the  anger or pain, but precisely because of this  total honesty and openness they result in a  reclamation of voice and power, they give  hope, celebrate and encourage survival and  healing.  Women from diverse cultural and social  backgrounds, heterosexual women and lesbians, offer us this body of art and literature  that rightly belongs within mainstream cultural production and ought to be included  in any survey of fine arts and hterature, instead of the usual relegation to way outside, to psychology, self-help and women's  studies—as if incest and chUd abuse were  a special branch of hfe that applied only  to women and to those with personal problems.  It is this kind of relegation, by those  with power and their vested interests, that  perpetuates abuse and protects the abuser,  by refusing to acknowledge that chUdhood  abuse  is  everyone's  business  and  is,  fact, an everyday, every minute, everywhi  occurrence—right in one's own backyard. In  the preface, Margaret Randall writes:  Our society is permeated at every level  with this tolerance, this protection. Look  for a moment at our wars of aggression.  Vietnam. Nicaragua. Grenada. Panama.  The Persian Gulf. Violation is the name  of the game, aggression by the powerful  against those with less power. What we  are asked to accept, indeed be proud of  at the national level, repeats itself on a  reduced scale in the home, at school, on  the streets.  The women in the book tell stories of  abuse by famUy members, uncles, cousins,  brothers, fathers and, yes, mothers too.  Some of the survivors have no mental memory of the abuse but their stories are stored  in the trauma of their bodies. The book has  become a safe place for the writers and image makers to share their stories, to break  sUences and to metaphoricaUy cry out their  anguish. With so many voices, aU speaking out the same stories—the detaUs differ  but the scars aU look and sound the same—  there is solidarity, vaUdation, beUef and support. In a word, there is power. Strength.  By going pubUc with their stories, the  contributors empower those of us for whom  the mere act of survival is a vital act of creativity, a cause for celebration. Author Julie  Blackwomon writes:  Healing from incest is hke slowly puUing  off scabs and letting the wounds get some  sunUght, because things do not heal in  damp, dark places.  Amidst aU the other briUiant catalyst  books on dealing with and healing from incest and chUdhood sexual abuse, She Who  Was Lost Is Remembered lends balance  and breathing space. As a collection of creative works by women, it stands up weU.  In doing this review I had to restrain myself from the urge to endlessly quote huge  chunks of texts that I found inspiring, awakening. My copy has a long waiting hst.  Shani Mootoo is a Vancouver painter,  writer and video artist.  PAqiNq-WoMEN  by Gabrielle Chew  Looking for a new read? We've compiled a diverse hst of recent publications to keep you  informed and to satisfy any bookworms with healthy appetites. Paging Women is itself  a new addition to Kinesis and wUl be a regular feature. Besides giving you a brief low-  down on these titles, we are hoping to entice some budding (or established) book reviewers to contact us. The foUowing books merit further attention, so call 255-5499 if you want  to review one.  Princess Pocahontas and the Blue Spots Two plays by Monique Mojica. Also includes  Bird Woman and the Suffragettes: A Story of Sacajawea, In both plays, actor and playwright Mojica explores the histories of First Nations women in the Americas, in  particular examining the myth and legend of the 'Indian Princess.' (Women's Press,  Toronto 1991)  How Many Miles to Babylon by Doris Gercke (translated from the German by Anna  HamUton). This novel features a female police detective who travels to a remote  German town for some peace and quiet, and instead uncovers a string of unsolved  murders and a legacy of violence underneath the calm village surface. (Women in  Translation, Seattle 1991)  Midwives in Passage by CeciUa Benoit. Author/sociologist Benoit examines the practice of mid-wifery in 20th century Newfoundland as it faced the rise of bureaucra-  tized health care and increasing male-medical dominance over childbirth. (ISER, St.  John's 1991)  Inversions: Writing by Dykes, Queers and Lesbians ed. by Betsy Warland. This major collection of works by contemporary North American women writers explores  questions of sexual identity and politics, creativity, cultural community and literary theory. Includes work by Judy Grahn, Suniti Namjoshi, Jane Rule, and Gloria Anzaldua, among many others. (Press Gang, Vancouver 1991)  Looking For Livingstone: An Odyssey of Silence by Marlene Nourbese Philip. Philip's  narrative of poetry and prose explores Africa and explodes Western assumptions  about language and silence, particularly the "silence" of indigenous peoples. (The  Mercury Press, Stratford 1991)  Seasons of Ordinary Time by Robyn-Marie Butt. A collection of stories in two sections; the jirst encompassing a variety of points of view, from a little country girl  to a Trappist monk, and the second being comprised of longer stories about a young  artist named Bea Chambers. (The Mercury Press, Stratford 1991)  dark diaspora....in DUB: a dub theatre piece by ahdri zhina mandiela. Born in Jamaica and now living in Toronto, dub poet, parent and artist mandiela has produced a stage script composed entirely from dub poems. (Sister Vision, Toronto 1991)  The Body Bilingual: Translation as a Rewriting in the Feminine by Susanne de  Lotbiniere-Harwood. Translator de Lotbiniere-Harwood writes in both French and  English, examining the complex terrain of translating the work of feminist writers. (Les editions du remue-menage, Montreal/ Women's Press, Toronto 1991)  Salvage by Daphne Marlatt. Part poem, part fiction, part autobiography, Marlatt's  latest book spans 20 years of life and experience in the art of one of Canada's established feminist voices. (Red Deer CoUege Press, Alberta 1991)  WUes of Girlhood by Joanne Arnott. Moving in and out of memories, Arnott's poetry and prose trace the transition from girlhood to womanhood, and the worlds of  working-class and Native experience. (Press Gang, Vancouver, 1991)  KINESIS, :SS$$SSSS*SS$SS*5S$^^  ARTS  Shakespeare and patriarchy:  Was the Bard a feminist?  by Janette Hellmuth  Should Shakespeare be discussed in a  feminist newspaper? Where does a 16th  century white Renaissance male playwright  fit in with today's feminist concerns? Of  what relevance is Macbeth, or King Lear  to women struggling to change a male-  dominated society?  According to University of British Columbia Enghsh professor Kate Sirluck,  Shakespeare has a great deal to contribute  to contemporary feminist concerns through  his investigation and critique of patriarchy.  From Sirluck's perspective, Shakespeare is  a feminist. "He was a supreme analyst of  the malfunctioning aspects of human culture and human ideology," says Sirluck. "He  saw patriarchy as dehumanizing, not just  dehumanizing for women, but dehumanizing for men."  Not aU women would agree with the  notion that Shakespeare is a feminist.  Vancouver-based actor and director Diane  Brown beheves asking whether Shakespeare  is a femimst is "an ethnocentric question  ... asking something from your own time  period and context about another time period and context where it's not applicable.  When you judge from 1992 what somebody  wrote in 1592—that's 400 years in between,  a time difference that's important to remember."  Despite discrepancies in time and culture, Sirluck still sees affinities between  Shakespearean and feminist thought. "Patriarchy [wasn't] formulated by Shakespeare  in precisely the terms it is by contemporary  feminists," says Sirluck, "but [his formulation was] not so different." Shakespeare was  in a good position to critique his culture  because he was writing at a time of great  turmoU. Says Sirluck: "He was caught in  the centre of two conflicting ideologies: one  of them Christianity and one of them the  common sense pohtical realism of the capitalist state becoming swiftly an imperialist state." Shakespeare saw how both ideologies thrived on the "mascuhne" values of  aggression, dominance, control, linear drive  and power at the expense of compassion  and ethic responsibihty—"those very quali-  ties which humanity needs to survive," says  Sirluck.  Shakespeare obviously couldn't have labeUed himself a feminist, but his manner  of critiquing a society governed by aggressive mascuhne values is, in Sirluck's view,  similar to that of some contemporary feminists. StiU, many women view this playwright as no different from his other male  contemporaries in his demeaning view toward women. After aU, who are the women  in Shakespeare's plays? Cleopatra, Desdemona, Lady Macbeth, Kate in The Taming of the Shrew—all are victims, caught  The University of British Columbia  Centre For Research In Women's Studies And Gender Relations  "Women's Health Across The Life Span - Research Issues"  Friday, October 16 - Sunday, October 18,1992  CALL FOR PAPERS  Conference sessions will be divided into three parts, focusing on 1. Female infancy  to adolescence, 2. mature women, and 3. Seniors. Papers on any aspect of girls'  and women's health are invited from scholars in the Humanities, Social Science,  Law, Education, and Medical and Nursing Sciences. Papers on aspects of the health  of minority group women are especially encouraged. Possible contributors to the  Conference should send a title and brief description of the paper, together with a c.v.  by February 15,1992 to:  Health Conference  Centre for Research in  Women's Studies and Gender Relations  University of British Columbia  314-2206 East MaU  Vancouver, B.C. V6T 1Z3  Its that time of year again.  • Excellent rates on fixed and variable terms  • Instant tax receipts  • RRSP loans available  • No user fees  Deadline: Saturday, February 29,1992  (CCEC will be open from 10 tun. to 1 p.m. on this day)  Come in now, don't wait for the deadline!  Your RRSP investment at CCEC will help promote  economic development in your community.  CCEC Credit Union  2250 Commerc  in the stranglehold of a system which devalues any qualities traditionally associated  with the feminine. Desdemona is strangled  to death by her husband OtheUo. Lady Macbeth goes mad and commits suicide when  her attempt to deny her femaleness as a  way of surviving in Scotland's warrior society backfires on her. In Taming of the  Shrew, Kate is both physicaUy and psychologically beaten into submission by Petru-  chio, her husband and "trainer." In what  possible sense is Shakespeare's portrayal of  these tortured, oppressed women feminist?  In Sirluck's view, Shakespeare's acknowledgement of the victimization of women in  his plays is not a validation of women's inferior positions in society. The playwright,  says Sirluck, "did not intend merely to represent the institutionalized power relations  in his society, let alone to celebrate them."  Shakespeare set out to portray the unequal  relations between men and women satirically, as in The Taming of the Shrew,  and/or tragicaUy, as in King Lear, and in  such a way that we, the audience, don't  doubt where his sympathies he.  According to Sirluck, Shakespeare is concerned not only with exposing, but challenging patriarchy. He challenges primar-  Uy through his portrayal of complex female  characters. The women in his plays are victims, but not passive victims. They defy  the restraints put upon them, as Cordelia  in King Lear defies her father's wishes "to  prostitute herself to him for one third of his  kingdom," or IsabeUa in Measure for Measure refuses to prostitute herself to Angelo  to save her brother from execution. Shakespeare's female characters struggle against  the men who victimize, as Desdemona wrestles with OtheUo for her hfe. They reject the  sUent, enduring roles prescribed to them by  patriarchy.  The male figures in Shakespeare's plays  are also victims of patriarchy. The men de  stroy and even, "mutilate themselves by  denying the qualities and voices within  them which their culture has labeUed feminine, and therefore devalued," says Sirluck.  "Shakespeare shows us the tragic consequences of human beings who are divided  by an ideology so that they have to deny  one part of themselves in order to fit a social  idea of what a man is, or what a woman is."  King Lear is a prime example of the oppressive and dehumanizing nature of patriarchal decorum. Lear banishes Cordelia because she refuses to obediently play out the  role envisioned by Lear of the good daughter. Thus begins the tragedy.  "Tragedy is about waste, the waste of  the possibility which is never aUowed to be  fulfilled," says Sirluck. "We gUmpse it, we  long for it, but the seeds of its own destruction are already buried. And very often  they're buried because of patriarchal values. The devaluation of the feminine, the  commodification of love, the objectification  of the "other," the pursuit of the mascuhne identity through aggression, violence  and destruction—those are the causes of  tragedy."  Whether Shakespeare intentionaUy set  out to portray the tragic consequences of  male domination is not certain, and feminism is but one of the many approaches  from which Shakespeare's plays may be perceived. His plays are alive with a multiplicity of meanings, meanings which are there  for us to explore in whichever way is significant to our experiences and relevant to our  times.  Says Sirluck, "The playwright can't  change the world. He can portray it. He can  question it, he can make you feel how wrong  it is, but on.y the audience can change it."  Janette Hellmuth is a student at the  University of British Columbia.  ||f PRESSTM               1  J% women's printshop • worker-owned • since I970^^m  • union shop e<sSt^te~. CWA Local 226 ^^  BP             253-1224            Zj  ^^^^^         | Let our experience help you make 1       —^  | the most of your printing budget.   |       ^^i  ^B "CO-OPERATIVES AND UNIONS WORKING TOGETHER" M  ^f^r^ir^r^r^Jr^rz^r^f^Jp  ROBIN QOLDFARB rmt  Registered   Massage   Therapist  «N|  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  Black History Month  10% off Black & African titles  Annual Inventory Sale  50% off selected titles  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday- Saturday  00-5:30 pm  kTM  J  West Side Art Therapy Center  Waitraud Custer, d.v.a.t.i.  Monica Thwaites, d.v.a.t.i.  certified art therapists  arc pleased to announce the opening of  their new practice at  suite 3II * 2902 west Broadway  Vancouver, b.c. v6k 2g8  732-3220  KINESIS, Arts  ////////////////////////^^^^  Domestic workers:  Brown women, blond babies  BROWN WOMEN, BIOND BABIES  written, produced and directed  by Marie Boti & Chit Bautista  Productions Multi-Monde, 1991  28 min. (video)  as told to Cecilia Diocson  Brown   Women,   Blond   Babies   is   a  oundbreaking new video which examines the experiences of women who  ■k as live-in domestics in Canadian  homes—and the politics behind their exploitation.  The video is a collaborative effort by  white woman and a coloured woman.  Producer Marie Boti, is a long-time  supporter of the national democratic  struggle and women's movement in the  Philippines. This is her second documentary about Filipino women. Her  first video, Kababaihan, concerned the  Filipino women's movement and the  ious organizations involved in the  struggle to bring about emancipation in  the Philippines.  Director Chit Bautista—or Sister  Chit as she is popularly known—is a  Filipina nun who worked as a domestic worker in Canada in the late 80's.  Her personal experience and contacts  with Filipino domestic workers, both  in Hongkong and Canada, have given  her deep understanding of the situation  and issues confronting domestic work-  Sister Chit was also very active  in social and women's issues when she  lived in the Philippines during the Marcos period and the early days of the  Aquino government.  Cecilia Diocson is the chairperson of  the Philippine Women Centre of BC  She is also a volunteer in one of the  working collectives of the Vancouver  Status of Women. She interviewed Chit  Bautista about her video.  Cecilia Diocson: Tell us how the idea  for this video came about.  Chit Bautista: When I started the seminars on awareness-raising and leadership  training for domestic workers in 1989, I  thought the awareness-raising should not  be confined to the domestic workers alone.  Somehow their employers and the Canadian  public as a whole should be made aware  of the existence of this group of domestic workers and the difficult situation under  which some of them labour, so that the latter would be more understanding and supportive. But I did not know just how I could  reach them.  Then, a Fihpina friend of mine introduced me to Marie Boti of Productions Multi-Monde who happened to be in Toronto  for a festival of video documentaries. She  and her partner, Malcolm Guy, had done  other documentaries on Phihppine subjects.  When they learned that I was working with  the domestic workers, Marie commented  that they would make a good subject for  another documentary. That's how the ball  started rolling.  Cecilia: How did the domestic workers react when they learned you were  going to film their story ?  Chit: They were excited. They all  wanted to be in it. Yet when we started the  shooting and we needed some to talk about  the difficult situation they are in, those who  were stiU going through some real serious  problems with their employers did not hke  to come out in the open for fear of reprisals.  Cecilia: Some people who have seen  the video said that the growing number  of domestic workers in Canada is part  of the feminization of labour migration  all over the world. Will you comment  on this?  Chit: It is easier for these women to migrate and to find work in the more developed countries because they are willing to  do any kind of work, including domestic  work, which women in the more developed  countries, especially middle-class women,  would not hke to do.  Cecilia: In your talks with the domestic workers, do you see signs that  they are aware of the connection between the economic and political problems and their conditions?  Chit: Some are aware. But a good majority of them have not learned to analyze  this connection. H they have some inkling at  all, they feel hopeless at the vastness of the  problem so they would rather escape than  confront the situation. Besides, they are always afraid to do anything that might jeopardize their stay in Canada. That's why I  "...the situation of domestic workers...[is] a  micro-version of the whole struggle of  women for liberation."  In countries hke the Philippines, where  the economy has been controlled by transnational corporations, large domestic industries have not been allowed to develop. Instead it was tied down to small and relatively backward manufacturing. Also, our  main exports of coconut and sugar have  been drastically cut by the United States,  our prime importer of these commodities.  This resulted in massive dislocation of agricultural workers. Because there are not  enough industries to absorb them, unemployment and poverty increased tremendously. So the families were left with no  choice but to send their more able children  to look for work outside the country.  As poverty in the Third World countries becomes more acute, and thousands  of women look to other countries for better  opportunities, the demand for cheap labour  in the private homes of the more developed countries also increases because these  women from the Third World offer a more  attractive alternative to day care centres  and the much more expensive cleaning ser-  find that it is very important to raise their  awareness, empower them, so that someday  they will learn to stand on their own and  tackle their problems individually or collectively. This is what we are trying to achieve  in our seminars ... very slowly.  Cecilia: Do you see any connection  between the video and the women's  movement?  Chit: The video actually wants to project  the situation of the domestic workers as  but a micro-version of the whole struggle  of women for hberation. In this highly competitive system, women are always in a disadvantaged position. This is doubly true for  the domestic workers whose work is considered inferior work because it is done mostly  by women, inside the home, and so it is not  given value financially or otherwise. That  is why we have the phenomenon of rampant violation of contracts. These women  are made to work 8,10 even 12 hours a day  without over-time pay. Their contract says  they are nannies yet they also are made to  do the laundry, clean the house, and even  cook—all these at no extra compensation.  Also, there is sexual harassment. We know  there are many who fall victim but they fear  coming out in the open because they are  afraid to lose their job or worse, to be sent  home.  Cecilia: Did you have any support  from different women's organizations in  Canada, especially white women's organizations ?  Chit: Yes, we did. Several women's  organizations gave us letters of endorsement. The Confederation of Trade Unions  in Quebec—its women's committee even  helped us obtain part of the funding. In  general, I can say that it was the enthusiasm and encouragement shown by  these women's organizations—either white  or multi-racial—that's enabled us to go on.  Cecilia: Did you have any reaction  from white women and white women's  organizations about the video? If so,  what are these reactions?  Chit: Yes, and they are positive reactions. For many, the video has been an eye-  opener. So far everywhere we show the video  there is a lot of enthusiasm and positive  comments about the video as a whole.  Cecilia: How did the Filipino community in Canada react to the video?  Chit: Also very positive. They felt strong  empathy with the domestic workers and  some even offered their support to our endeavour. Others expressed interest in joining advocacy groups such as the one I have  in Toronto, so they can also give their share  iin doing whatever httle they can to make  these women feel supported.  Cecilia: How did the employers in the  video react to the story, especiaUy the  employers who appeared in the video ?  Chit: Two employers who were at the  (launching came to me after the showing  with tears in their eyes. They said the video  was so powerful, they were touched by it.  One even apologized to her former nanny  right there in front of me, for whatever pain  she might have caused the latter. I was also  touched by her gesture.  As for the employers who appeared in the  video, one saw herself the way others saw  her and she wanted all her parts taken out.  She threatened us with a lawsuit if we did  not, but we told her we couldn't do that.  Cecilia: What is your next project?  Chit: We're launching the video and distributing it in various cities where there are  many domestic workers. Future plans will  depend on reactions to the video and developments in the Immigration Office. Like  now there is a move to stop the Foreign  Domestic Movement program which allows  these women to apply for landed status after at least three years of continuous work in  Canada. Immigration now wants to go back  to the pre-1980 situation where the domestic workers were made to go home at the end  of their work contract [see story page 3.]  I think this is unfair and discriminatory. If  they are very much needed here—and they  are—then they should be treated just hke  other workers who are needed in Canada.  So this will be the focus of attention for ah  of us who are involved with the cause of the  domestic workers.  Brown Women, Blond Babies premieres  in Vancouver on Feb. 23 at Video In,  2-4 pm. (See Bulletin Board for details). Distributed by Le Videograph.  4550 Gamier, Montreal, PQ, H2Z 3S7  (Tel: 514-521-2116).  KINESIS , SSKSSKSSSXX*S*$SKKK«SSK^  Women's theatre:  ARTS  Surfaces that  need breaking  by Janisse Browning  "Breaking the Surface," a festival and  conference staged by Maenad Productions  (a Calgary-based feminist theatre company)  and The University of Calgary Drama Department, was a rare event that brought  together women performers, theatre workers and academics from around the world.  For four long days last November, about  500 women gathered to share constructive  criticism, exchange ideas, enjoy the fruits  of women's artistic labour and explore the  theme of "Women, Theatre and Social Action."  Throughout the conference, several women expressed their confusion or discomfort with what appeared to be an unpromising and unclear vision of "social action"—  especially since most of the women who or-  women's experiences (especially regarding  class, abihties, racial and sexual identities)  be more clearly and accurately represented  on stage—and what sources are available to  fund, support and recognize these works?  Women at "Breaking the Surface" could  provide some, but not all, answers to these  questions. Since we have diverse priorities,  we also have different visions for creating  social change. Privileged women's visions  must become more flexible and answerable  to our diverse needs as women. Notably,  there was an absence of differently-abled  participants.  With these and other limitations accounted for, I give the "Breaking the Surface" organizers credit for getting this event  off the ground since it was the first of its  kind and scale in Canada, and it happened  despite insecure funding sources. They ere-  '4  1*  Sistren's work is about survival,  not just fashion or commentary.  ganized or participated in the conference  were not survivors of racism. So, several  women had to challenge and revise their  understandings of what constitutes meaningful social change. Lizbeth Goodman, a  keynote speaker and literature professor  from England, suggested social change is  sometimes something less public than that  which is expressed on the stage. In her  keynote address, she said personal change  is necessary to layer the more pubhc forms  of social change. Goodman noted: "...as  women from diverse experiences we have  different relationships with words and different ways of working. Women in performance are interacting in the social sphere as  active subjects, rather than (or as well as)  the object of someone else's or some generic,  gendered gaze."  Most theatre history and plays taught in  schools represent male visions of women's  realities. These plays have been written and  primarily performed by men, reflecting male  perspectives. The headaches and burnouts  created by sexism are core to the frustrations that brought women together at  "Breaking the Surface."  Questions central to the process of exploring women's theatre echoed throughout the conference: How have education  and training institutions brushed over issues relevant to women's hves and ambitions, and how can this ambivalence be  changed? What is the relationship of critical  inquiry and cultural theory to women's theatre production? How can women be better encouraged to explore their hves and visions through theatre? What funding opportunities are available for experimental  women's theatre? How can the diversity of  ated a space for women to discuss issues relevant to our work and personal hves. We  were able to get acquainted with delegates  from various parts of the world and acknowledge how much needs to be done to  voice our varying perspectives.  I was invited to the conference as a panelist to discuss "The Pohtics of Gender and  Race" with four other women. I was disappointed to discover I was one of only two  women of colour on the panel. Other than  myself only one panelist, Rosemary Curb, a  women's studies instructor, adequately addressed the structural racism that has excluded many women of colour from fully  participating in theatre production as playwrights, performers and directors. Several  colleagues shared my opinion on the lack  of interest and critical insight displayed  by other panehsts regarding the pohtics of  race.  The panel hardly got beyond discussing  the basics of systemic racism before time  ran out. We failed to explore vital issues,  such as forging strategies and options for  women of colour and First Nations women  to gain more influence in Canadian theatre  circles (for example, as critics, educators  and cultural theorists). In fact, it was surprising that the first two women who spoke  on this panel (Canadians Christine Boyko-  Head of McMaster University and Denise  Lynde of Memorial University), did not explicitly mention the pohtics of racial privilege. They were either not concerned or experienced enough to address the topic of  racism—a grim reality that many First Nations women and women of colour encounter  in our daily hves as well as in theatre cir-  cles. Then again, this particular panel was  created as an afterthought, so these women  may have been invited to speak on their  topics of interest or specialty—unaware of  the implications of disregarding racial pohtics. The only other woman of colour panelist (Vancouver-based Indo-Canadian performer Veena Sood ) was too busy talking about her own personal success to adequately represent the difficulties that many  women of colour and First Nations women  face.  Because "Breaking the Surface"was a festival as well as a conference, we could give  debates a rest and watch some hve theatre  by and about women in the evenings. Omaha Magic Theatre's Body Leaks was a  layered multi-media event that defies any  explanation of plot. Magic Theatre combined overhead projector art, unintelligible screams and intense musical, visual and  meta-narrative anti-plots that kept audiences zooming through something hke a collective acid trip. The performers' energy  was boundless as they maintained carefully  orchestrated control over the endless, radical scene and character transitions throughout this piece. Truly experimental, this performance was a refreshing break from some  questionable comedic efforts and hberal attempts at social commentary.  Another memorable performance was  Shelter From Assault by the Toronto-  based Company of Sirens. These women  portrayed real-life situations faced by survivors of male domestic violence. The play  also portrayed the insensitivity of some social and welfare workers, and the disregard  and ignorance of many state authorities who  deal with domestic matters. Shelter From  Assault was informative and provocative.  It portrayed and confronted racism, homophobia, language oppression, and showed  the dilemma of mothers who want a better  hfe for themselves and their children. Afterwards, the performers and director spoke  about the play's production, where it has  been staged (ie. for high school students and  pohce) and answered some audience questions.  Maenad Production's performance Ap-  hra—about the prolific playwright, novelist and poet Aphra Behn—was a memorable experience. The action took place in  1689 as Behn struggled to complete her final play during a feverish illness. Aphra was  a moody, poetic portrayal of vignettes of  Behn's hfe and work. Aphra placed Behn  and her closest women friends in a complex  web of relations which integrated Behn's  commentaries on male dominance, heterosexism and slavery.  I also participated in a workshop with  Sistren Women's Theatre CoUective of Jamaica. Having heard and read about their  work for several years, it was an honour to  see workshop leaders Rebecca Knowles and  Pauline Crawford in action. They used popular theatre techniques, taught folk songs,  and talked about the immediate needs and  concerns of working class Jamaican women  hke themselves. Sistren's work is about survival, not just fashion or commentary. They  are on the cutting edge of women's theatre  with regard to social action.  Unfortunately, some events were scheduled to overlap rather than complement  each other. Some of us had to miss the second day of Sistren's workshop, since the  oidy woman of colour academic (other than  myself) was slated to speak at the same  time. Sandra Richards spoke on the panel  "Revolutionizing the Curriculum: Teaching  Women's Theatre," and located her work  on African- American playwrights in a predominantly white women's discussion.  A highlight of the conference was the  three-hour storyteUing workshop led by  Lana Skauge, a Calgary theatre worker.  With sHU and sensitivity, Skauge managed  to create a safe emotional space for about  25 people who were mostly strangers. By  emphasizing the importance of "telhng our  own stories," and by demonstrating with  some of her own stories, Skauge had people  telhng stories in pairs, with different people, and as a whole group. By focusing on  different senses and using different objects,  we embarked on a journey inside ourselves  in search of our unique, individual stories.  Despite Skauge's workshop and other redeeming features of the conference, "Breaking the Surface" had just begun to hve up  to its name. By the end, I felt as if we had  only scratched the surface.  At the closing plenary, some First Nations and Metis women suggested there be  more direction by women hke them from  the start rather than part way through,  or not at all. This point was of vital importance, since there were surprisingly few  voices which articulated the unique struggles of First Nations women.  It is an act of cultural survival, not simply a matter of pleasure-seeking, for women  who defy racist stereotypes to use artistic means of expressing our realities, desires and imaginings. Those of us who spoke  out with a critical perspective on the theme  "Women, Theatre and Social Action" did so  with conviction at every possible moment.  It was an act of resistance to the "glossing  over" of our experiences. If conference organizers expect women of colour and First  Nations women to participate in a meaningful and co-operative way, our needs and  concerns wUl have to take more priority.  Janisse Browning has studied representations of race and gender in theatre. She is a recent graduate from  Simon Fraser University's masters of  communication program.  ++++++A/+++++SS  18  KINESIS //////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^^  Letters  Dear Readery  Kinesis loves receiving mail. Please get  your letter to us by the 18th of the  month.  If you can, keep the length to about 506  words (if you go way over, we might  edit for space).  Hope to hear from you soon.  love,  Kinesis  Ecofeminists  say what?  Kinesis:  I read with interest Sarah Hutcheson's  review of Finding Our Way: Rethinking  Ecofeminism by Janet Biehl ("Humanism  or feminism?" Nov. 1991.)  The reviewer speaks of Biehl's contention  that there are "some centralizing themes in  the [ecofeminist] literature," one of which  is "women have innate and superior capacities for caring and nurturing." I have  read several magazine articles by ecofeminists and the essay collection, Healing the  Wounds, The Promise of Ecofeminism  (edited by Judith Plant). I do not recall  reading the word "inherent" in reference to  women's nurturing qualities in any writings  by ecofeminists. Yet I keep hearing those  who do not identify as ecofeminists saying that this is what ecofeminists say about  women. Has some ecofeminist actually said  that we women are inherently more nurturing? If so, who is she? What is the complete  quote?  I hear ecofeminists saying that because  women have been lumped together by the  patriarchy with animals and nature that  we've been socialized to identify with nature  and our nurturing role and that this identification could be harnessed to help save the  planet instead of being used by men and by  ourselves to keep us in a downtrodden position. In other words, let us use the potential power in women's traditional way of  being in the world to heal the planet and  ourselves! This is very different from saying  that nurturing qualities are more "natural"  to one sex than to another. Indeed, I would  think ecofeminists would welcome men's development of their own nurturing qualities.  It makes more sense than women becoming  hberated by taking on male values!  In sisterhood,  Anne MUes,  Gibsons, BC.  Another version  of what's true  Kinesis:  I am responding to a letter from Catherine Kerr in the Dec./Jan. issue of Kinesis.  The letter, a warm defense of Marsha Trew,  Director of the Women Students' Office at  the University of British Columbia, is unfortunately in error on two issues. The first  issue is the one of Trew's appointment as  director of the WSO, which appointment,  says the author, was made by choice of  "a large committee of women's representatives on the UBC campus." The statement  is incorrect. Dr. Kathryn McCanneU of the  Int'l Lesbian Week  by Karen X. Tulchinsky  Vancouver's sixth annual International Lesbian Week (ILW) runs from Saturday February 22 to Sunday March 1, 1992. For what's happening during ILW, your best bet is  to find a program (at the usual locations, the Vancouver Lesbian Connection at 876 Commercial Drive, for one) with details of time, contact phone numbers, locations, events and  particulars. MeanwhUe here is a ghmpse of what the ILW committee is serving up:  Sat. Feb. 22: "Recovery Workshops in AA & Al-Anon." A day of workshops dealing with  staying clean and sober, relationships, and family issues. Native Education Centre, 285 E.  5th. Begins at 9:30 am.  Sun. Feb. 23: "Dykes On The Drive" wUl march down Commercial Drive. Any women  or men who support lesbian rights are welcome to march. Starts at McSpadden Park on  Victoria Dr. near 5th Ave. at 1 pm.  Sun. Feb. 23: "Amazons, Dykes and Witches," a wicca ritual for lesbians who are witches.  At Josephine's, 1716 Charles St. 8 pm.  Mon. Feb. 24: "Lesbian Art Show" is a non-juried show featuring neighbourhood artists.  At Josephine's, 7-10 pm.  Tues. Feb. 25: "Women's Video Night" wiU present a selection of lesbian videos (not recommended for chUdren). At Josephine's, 7-11 pm.  Tues. Feb. 25: "We Are FamUy." An information and discussion session on same sex benefits and fighting homophobia in the workplace. Vancouver Lesbian Connection, 876 Commercial Drive. 7:30-9:30 pm.  Thurs. Feb. 27: "Is it love or is it lust?" A forum to discuss the fine art of dating with  success: the trials and tribulations of the single lesbian. Cherrytree room, The Hohday Inn,  711 W. Broadway. Advance tix advised. Doors open 7:30 pm.  Fri. Feb. 28 fe Sun. Mar. 1: "Sexpertease IV." Sensual, erotic, steamy and raunchy. This  show is too hot to touch. Treat yourself to a httle heat. The evening of entertainment your  mother warned you about. The Lotus, 455 Abbott St. Advance tix advised. Doors open  7:30 pm.  Sat. Feb. 29 k Sun. Mar. 1: VoUeyball, open to any women of aU skiU levels. Form a  team or come on your own and join a team. Spectators welcome. Location TBA. For info:  Brenda, 275-7556. 8 am-6 pm.  Admission to any event is on a shding scale basis beginning at zero. Each event committee is organizing its own free chUdcare. Advance booking is required. Better to book early  and cancel later than try to get in at the last minute. Some events are signed or wheelchair  accessible—check program for specifics.  Volunteers are stiU needed for door shifts, chUdcare, publicity, security. If you'd hke to  volunteer, please phone the info number for the event you'd hke to work on (see program).  School of Social Work was the unanimous  first choice of the Search Committee. Trew  may not have been a clear second choice of  this committee.  McCanneU's job was taken from her by  K.D. Srivastava, Vice-President, Student  and Academic Services, undoubtedly for pohtical reasons. I beheve the President's Office had an agenda for the WSO, and Srivastava felt that he had more control over a  professional appointment than an academic  one.  The second issue which Kerr raises in her  letter is the matter of Marsha Trew's leadership of the Office. The writer sees Trew  shining above "dedicated and weU-informed  feminists in Vancouver." This statement is  in contradiction to Trew's record in her  trial months on the job at UBC. She began by informing staff that she had asked  Daniel Birch, Vice-President and Provost of  the University, "What can we do to help  you?" She continued to foUow this unusual  "feminist" path by consistently telling staff  who demurred with her arbitrary dictums,  "I have to answer to my boss, too." (She  meant boss Srivastava).  Repeated attempts by seasoned staff  members of the WSO to have any dialogue  at aU with this director were met with rudeness. One by one long-time staff members—  who had held the Office through aU lands  of pohtical hassle—gave up and either took  unpaid leave or resigned positions. Trew  quickly fiUed the positions with part-time or  temporary workers—a dangerous precedent  in a male hierarchy as powerful as UBC's.  Under Trew's direction the WSO has become handmaiden to the President's Office.  The WSO was assigned this role in a December 6 event staged in the Student Union Building theatre—ostensibly to remember 14 women who were kiUed in Montreal,  but in reality an affirmation of male engineering students on campus.  I beheve Trew has been used by a powerful male bureaucracy at UBC—one in which  she has no history and no experience. Had  she been open to advice from colleagues and  staff she might have learned ways to save  the Women Students' Office.  Yours sincerely,  Nancy C. Horsman,  Former Assistant to the Director, WSO,  Vancouver, BC  A matter  of invisibility  Kinesis:  [The following letter is in response  Jeanne Mourney's letter.]  Dear Ms Mourney:  I am writing in response to your letter  in the Dec/Jan. issue of Kinesis. It seems  that the wording of my ad has caused a  strong reaction in yourself. I would hke to  clarify my reason for writing it in this way.  For me it is a matter of invisibUity. As a  lesbian I am aware of invisibUity in my hfe  on many levels and lesbians are invisible in  the term women, as are many other identities and experiences. If I advertised that I  work with women, then lesbians would not  particularly identify with me—and at the  same time I do work with all women. Where  I feel a connection with women the most is  through my own community and I want to  advertise that in particular.  To me it is obvious that lesbians are  women and as I was trying to make the  above points, it did not occur to me that  women may see me as saying that lesbians  are not women. H this is the impression,  then that concerns me a great deal. Since  your letter came out I have discussed this  with friends and all the women I know have  seen my ad in terms of the points that I  wanted to make. However, I have shghtly  changed the wording so that hopefuUy this  wUl be clearer.  I hope that this has gone some way to  clarifying my intentions at least.  Sincerely,  Delyse Ledgard,  Vancouver, BC  Understanding  ritual abuse  Kinesis:  I have read some articles about sexual  abuse in Kinesis, but have never seen the  subject of ritual abuse covered at ah. There  are many of us who consider ourselves feminists doing a lot of work in this area, work  that is rarely talked about or written about  from a survivor's point of view. I thought  this letter may help some women feel validated, recognized and honoured for what  they have been through, although I do not  speak for the community as a whole. Also,  some people may want to know more about  the subject of ritual abuse generaUy.  Ritual abuse is a systematic series of rituals which satanists use against their victims (often their own chUdren) to destroy  the minds, bodies and spirits of those they  perpetrate against. Some people call it a  rehgion, although I would certainly never  put it under that heading. Cult members  can include a variety of professionals, such  as doctors, lawyers, teachers, psychiatrists  and pohcemen as weU as non-professionals  and church leaders (usually respected members of the community). The main objective  of their rituals is to create people who, because of their history of programming, are  not equipped to deal with hfe in society at  large and who therefore wUl return to the  cult later in hfe.  ChUdren are prepared from the time  they are babies through torture, humihation  and mind control to either return to their  abusers, commit suicide or go insane. Some  of us have gotten help and have avoided  these things, but our hves have not been  easy. We are programmed to forget, or store  our abuse, and as adults we may have no  memory of it at aU. We may become addicted to drugs or alcohol, become involved  with prostitution or abusive relationships.  When memory of the abuse starts to occur, some of us are unable to cope with our  jobs, our chUdren, our relationships and our  hves. At this point, if we happen to faU into  the hands of a psychiatrist or inexperienced  therapist, he or she may label us as delusional and paranoid, prescribe drugs or disbelieve us entirely.  Our stories are not pretty but they are  real. People do not want to beheve that  these things exist and push their own denial onto us, thereby repeating the cycle of  abuse. We must begin to accept what has  happened in the past, and that which continues to happen-in the present.  It is time to bring our experiences out  into the hght where we have a chance of  dealing with them. When people begin to  understand, we can begin to put an end  to this kind of activity which has damaged  many chUdren and adults so deeply.  As survivors, our resources are limited.  Therapists are costly and heavUy booked.  We have no role models for healing and often don't do weU in groups. People can't understand why our pain is not as manageable  as their own and become afraid of us. Our  fear levels can be extreme. Newspapers sensationalize our trauma, but what we need  to know about is healing. I beheve that our  real help comes from each other, but in-  Continued on next page  KINESIS f Letters  From previous page  formation from ritual abuse survivors who  have gone through the healing process is  almost non-existent, because we have been  programmed to beheve that disclosure has  fatal consequences. And so we are caught in  a real dUemma. Some of us would hke the  opportunity to tell our stories but we are  afraid, sometimes even of each other.  I feel a sense of urgency here that as a  group of people we must be better understood. More of us are beginning to have  these kinds of memories but the support  structure is not growing to meet the demand. We cannot afford to lose any woman  through suicide because information and  support was not avaUable to her. We cannot heal in an atmosphere of isolation.  Please consider covering some aspects of  sexual abuse or ritual abuse in the future.  There are many of us who would feel a better sense of community for it. All that I can  do is hope that I have provided some information that might be useful and ask you  to give your support to one of us when the  need becomes apparent, and it wUl.  Please understand that I am unable to  sign this letter for reasons of my own safety.  [Ed. note: Kinesis will carry more information on ritual abuse in a future issue.]  Red and Black  Books respond  [The following letter is in response  to Terrie Hamazaki's letter in the  Dec./Jan. issue.]  Dear Terrie:  Thank you for taking the time to put in  writing your experience of attending the afternoon event for people of colour with beU  hooks on November 2nd. We regret that the  presence of European-American people at  this event dismayed you and we certainly  understand why you felt this way.  In anticipating tins event the collective's  intent was to have it attended only by people of colour. However, as I explained to you  on that day at Broadway Performance HaU,  there were non-coUective members on the  beU hooks production committee, and one  of these, an African-American faculty member of the community college, asked aU the  students in her classes to attend this event.  This created an awkward situation for us  and, untU we got that sorted out, some of  those European-American students coming  to purchase tickets at the store were initially  turned away.  It is because we respect the need and  right of people of colour to create their own  identity and space, that we bring people  such as beU hooks and Luisah Teish to Seattle and plan for part, of their time to be  dedicated toward that purpose. Neither beU  hooks nor the other people of colour on our  committee wanted to create a hostUe confrontation over this issue. Rather, the choice  was to ensure that the event was focused by  and for people of colour and to insist that  this be respected by the few present who  were not of colour.  In answer to your question, the coUective has never attempted to develop a formal definition of "for people of colour". Our  working principle has been that people must  define themselves. Members of the coUective  had extensive conversations with a Jewish  woman who defined herself as "of colour"  and wanted to attend the Saturday event  with beU hooks. One of the collective members who tried to dissuade this woman from  attending was herself Jewish.  These are complex issues and, given the  historic and current racism we live under,  are almost always emotionaUy and pohticaUy charged. As a collective we strive to  unlearn our racism, seek leadership from  and ally ourselves with people of colour. In  general we devote ourselves to ensuring a  place for the voices of those marginalized in  our society. Some of what we do is controversial even in our own ranks and we strive  to learn from our differences and agree to  disagree when we need to. There are also  times when we make mistakes. The evolving  unclarity that occurred with regard to decisions about aUowing European-Americans  to attend the Saturday bell hooks event is  something we regret and have made note to  try not to repeat in the future.  Thank you again for taking the time to  speak with us and to write.  Sincerely,  Margie Career,  Red and Black Books CoUective  Seattle, WA.  A New Year's  Eve bash  Kinesis:  This December 31st, my lover, a sister  dyke from Montreal, and I decided that we  would celebrate with our five-year-old chUd.  To welcome in the new year, we went to a  friend's house, where most of us were lesbians and people from diverse cultures and  backgrounds.  Our chUd's presence was not questioned,  voted for, nor did it pohticaUy or personaUy offend anyone. He was comfortable and  wanted.  When the dinner party was over, we aU  wanted to dance. Alia was not tired and he  was on his holiday from school. We had all  been taking care of him collectively, consciously, and we were aU sober. So, at this  point, we decided to phone a lesbian organized event to see if their entrance fee stiU  applied, and found out that it was free and  the party was stiU on. I hesitated because  of my chUd, but our friends assured us that  it would be alright to go with him. The  event wasn't at a bar, it was almost over  and for women only. "1992 here we come,"  we thought.  I wondered if there were any or how  many mothers and women of colour would  be there—organizing, dancing or cleaning  the tables. I don't want to think pohtics or  suspect anyone. A half hour of dancing left,  we'll hold Alia so he won't be in the way.  As we neared the York Theatre, my mind  wandered back to my chUdhood, to the  "women-only" gatherings I had attended  as one of many male and female chUdren.  Blood mothers, other mothers or a female neighbour would bring us. They would  dance, drink, laugh and tell stories, whUe  chUdren usuaUy fell asleep either held in  someone's arms or put to bed by someone. These were not mothers-only gatherings. Most of the other mothers were not  blood mothers—they were simply mothering.  However, the place of my memories is in  the heart of the city of Izmir in Turkey,  called Tepecik, Gingene Teneke Mahallesi,  a Gypsy shantytown. The words feminism,  lesbianism, separatism and mothering were  not named as they are in the white West and  debated in conferences. Here were women,  lesbians, mothers, chUdren and a few men,  hving what were "issues" in the white West.  One thing for sure, almost everyone recognized that "vesting one person with Ml responsibihty for mothering a chUd may not  be wise or possible."  In the lesbian and feminist movements I  have been involved with here, I have very  rarely encountered women and lesbians who  look to non-Western or non-Christian models of realities and ways of feminism, les  bianism, mothering and even merely being  as worthy of imitation. I am not talking  about appropriation.  I feel that it is necessary to stop comparing and measuring oppressions with the  colonizers if we are to sit together at the  same table and buUd realistic scenarios for  real change, without having to be "sub"  to anyone ... white Western femimsts, lesbians and non-mothers might even discover  that healthier models of many "ism's" are  as close as Native, African and African-  American communities. They might even  earn the right to benefit from their ways  and better their Uls themselves.  Back to the celebrations ...  I said my "BismUlaliirahmannirahim" as  we walked in. Our party was given noise  makers and party goodies at the door. We  felt welcome and reheved as we hstened to  music and looked around. I decided to dance  with Alia. That's when the beatings began.  I remember being kicked and thrown  under the cigarette machine, thrown in  the fire escape, the cold concrete aUey in  front of Alia. I remember at least four  women/lesbians who came at me with supernatural vengeance. "Get your friends,  son, and attitude outta here," "You are asking for it," "You deserve this," etc., etc. Yes,  even though the party was almost over, they  did have a hquor hcence to worry about, but  really ... there was no reason for such excessive force to remove one mother and her  three-feet-tall chUd.  After the first beating, our chUd was  taken home and I returned to the "bash" to  claim our space with my sister dyke friend  from Montreal. I simply could not go home  and sleep after this and needed to understand, or else be left alone to dance. I had a  right to be there. But, once again, we were  met with hostility and violence. I told them  our chUd was at home, and asked what the  problem was. Apparently, it was our atti  tude. They refused to seU me any kind of  a drink when I went to purchase one. I returned to stand with my friends.  Throughout the first, second, and third  beatings, I was mostly in shock, which  many people misinterpreted as drunkenness. I kept going in and out of shock in between the beatings.  While I was being assaulted, music  played on and most people continued dancing. When women (especially lesbian of  colour supporters) tried to protect me, they  received rough treatment. I say this because  my lover was gently pushed away and told to  leave when she tried to puU them off of me  the first time. She is white and big as them.  But when another friend who had been with  us tried to help, her neck was twisted and  she too was thrown onto the street violently.  The force seemed greater because she was a  woman of colour.  While the "bouncers" weren't busy  bouncing me, some other women/lesbians  continued physicaUy and verbally assaulting  me on their way in and out of this event. It  seemed that we had ruined their evening.  Another mother passionately claimed  that someone could have looked after my  chUd. She accused me of being a bad mother  along with other xenophobic comments, and  hit me. Her friend said I wasn't even worth  touching. I told her to go ahead and hit me,  that it did not matter anymore.  I want a response. How did these people sleep that night, what were their  dreams hke? Who is accountable? Do  women/lesbians of colour, mothers and lesbian mothers (especially of male chUdren)  have to continue being sUent-stifled partners  in their own oppressions? How many of us  are hving this violence in our own supposedly supportive communities? How can we  aU chart out our own territories as we see  most fit together? Please, respond.  Burcu Ozdemir  Vancouver, BC  Black History Month  Black women wUl be a focus for this year's Black History Month celebration in Vancouver. Using film, theatre, workshops and panel discussions, Black women wUl express the  diversity of their cultures and experiences as part of the African diaspora. You won't want  to miss this chance to share the richness of our cultures and visions, so mark your calenders with these events:  Sun., Feb. 2: Free film screening of Sisters in the Struggle, 7:30 pm, and Remembei  Africville, 8:30 pm at Pacific Cinematheque (PCP), 1131 Howe St.  Thurs., Feb. 6: Free public lecture with beU hooks on Race, Gender and Representation. Robson Square Conference Centre, Judge MacGUl Theatre, 7:30 pm.  Fri., Feb. 7: Free public lecture with beU hooks on Feminist Theory as Liberatory Practice. University of British Columbia, Lecture Room 6, 12 noon.  Sat., Feb. 8: Free public forum at V.C.C. King Edward Campus Auditorium, 1155 East  Broadway, 9 am-3 pm. The theme wUl be"Understanding Our Realities: Black Women's  Perspectives". Dr. Noga Gayle, moderator. Panelists wUl speak on a variety of topics:  beU hooks—"Black Women as Cultural Workers;" Janisse Browning—"Generations After the 'Freedom Train';" Sylvia HamUton—"Reflection: Uncovering Black Women's History in Nova Scotia;" Dr. Lynnette Menesah—"The Black FamUy: The Mythical Mother;"  and Sophia Nsiah Yeboah—"Recognizing Our Differences, Acknowledging Our Commonalities."  Sun., Feb. 9: Free film screening of Lady Marshall and Mary Lou Williams: Music On My Mind, 7:30 pm. Black Women of Brazil and Gotta Make This Journey:  Sweet Honey in The Rock, 9:30 pm. Both films at PCP.  Wed., Feb. 19: For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When The Rainbow Is Enuf, Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 8 pm. Phone 254-9578 for reservations.  Sat., Feb. 22: Multicultural musical concert—Black people sharing their cultural experience. Vancouver Museum, 1100 Chestnut. Phone 875-1763 for detaUs.  Sun., Feb. 23: Tribute to Martin Luther King. Dinner and gospel show at Swedish HaU,  1320 E. Hastings, $15.  Feb. 24-26: Play The Dream Continues at Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 8 pm.  Phone 254-9578 for reservations.  Sun., Feb. 23: Free screenings of Picking Tribes and Naked Spaces: Living is  Round, 7:30 pm at PCP.  Tues., Feb. 25, Wed., Feb. 26: Workshop with Black British film director Maureen  Blackwood. "Black Directors: Different Visions." Tues., 9am-lpm, Wed., l-5pm. The workshop wUl examine current media images of people of colour and explore the wide range of  representations that are now avaUable. Pre-registration required. Recommended for teachers, persons in multicultural education, journalists and filmmakers. Limited space. Vancouver Museum, 1100 Chestnut, $50. Phone 875-1763 for detaUs and registration.  KINESIS f ////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////M^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  READ THIS  AU listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wUl not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general pubhc interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (plus $0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof, $4  (plus $0.28 GST) for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadhne for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. All classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board,  #301-1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C.  V5L 2Y6. For more information caU 255-  EVENT SIE VENT  E N T S  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis'? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issues.  Come to the Writers' Meetings on Tues.  Feb. 4 (for the March issue) and Tues.  March 3 (for the April issue) at 7 pm  at our office, #301-1720 Grant St. If you  can't make the meeting, call 255-5499.  No experience necessary, all women welcome  WOMEN OF COLOUR CAUCUS  Women of Colour are organizing at Kinesis and we welcome all volunteers past,  present and future to our next meeting on  Thurs. Feb. 27 at 7:30 pm. For info on  location and to arrange childcare subsidies, please contact Agnes Huang at 736-  7895 or Janisse Browning at 255-5499  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us ... become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines and  help to connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and other exciting tasks! The next  volunteer orientation will be on Mon.  Feb. 24, 7-9 pm at VSW #301-1720  Grant Street. For more info call Jennifer  at 255-5511  VIDEO ON DOMESTIC WORKERS  Screening and panel discussion: Brown  Women, Blonde Babies. Sat. Feb. 23  2-4 pm at Video In, 1102 Homer St.  Co-sponsored by the Philippine Women's  Centre (see review page 17). Director  Chit Bausita will be present  LEGAL CLINIC  Battered Women's Support Services and  the UBC Students Legal Advice Program  are co-sponsoring a series of free legal  clinics for women on Tuesdays from 6:30-  8:30 pm; Feb. 4, 25, March 10 and 24.  For more info call 822-5791  CAREER PLANNING  The Learning Resources Society hosts a  series of noon hour career-planning seminars for women. The Segal Room, SFU  Harbourfront, 515 W. Hastings St., Feb.  5, Feb. 12, Feb. 19, Feb. 26, and  March 4. 12:10-1 pm. cost for each lecture is $5. Seating is limited to 45 women  on a first-come, first-serve basis. For more  info call 251-7476  FRESH TALK:  Youth and Sexuality, four-part documentary. Youth talk about how their sexuality  is influenced by family, gender, class, religion, and media. Join in discussion. It's  hot! It's fresh! Premiere Sat. Feb. 8, 7:30  pm, Kits Neighbourhood House, 2325 W.  7th Ave: Call 251-4923. Also, screening  Sat. Feb. 29, 7:30 pm at Video In, 1102  Homer St. Call 688-4336  CONSTITUTIONAL TALKS?  Explore the constitution from a labour/left perspective at a rally/conference.  Fri. Feb. 7, 8 pm: A free evening event  including speakers Shelagh Day, Monique  Simard, Tony Clark and Joe Mathias,  plus entertainment. King Edward campus (VCC) auditorium. On Sat. Feb. 8  workshops, strategy sessions and entertainment at the Maritime Labour Ctr.,  Ill Victoria Dr. Register at 8:30 am, $25  REPETITIVE STRAIN  Women and Work sponsors a conference on repetitive strain injuries, April  10 and 11 at the Maritime Labour Ctr.,  Ill Victoria Dr., Vancouver. Delegates  will hear from injured workers, health and  safety activists, government and WCB  reps. Workshops include: ergonomics, collective bargaining, treatment, rehabilitation and filing compensation claims. The  cost is $25, includes lunch. Call 430-0458  to register  BREAST IMPLANTS:  FACT OR MYTH?  If you are or have had any difficulties  with these devices or you are contemplating breast implant surgery and would like  more information, I Know/Je Sais support and information network is holding  a public meeting on Feb. 27 at the Hotel  Georgia, Vancouver, from 7:30 pm-9:30  pm. Support is our biggest weapon, together we can help each other through  this devastating controversy. For more  info call Linda at 594-4048 or Joanne at  462-0299  IWD ALERT  Interested in helping organize for International Women's Day in Vancouver? For  info about future meetings call Jackie at  253-5068. Also, phone in any info about  IWD events already planned  RECLAIMING PRIDE  Chrystos, Native (Menominee), lesbian,  poet, activist, will be the speaker at: "Reclaiming our pride as Native two-spirited  (lesbian, gay, bisexual) people in a world  that has forgotten us." Sat. Feb. 8 7-  10:30 pm at the Native Education Centre,  285 E. 5th. Also, Wesley Thomas, Native (Navajo) two-spirited, an anthropology student, will speak on being a member of the Nadleeh (berdache) tradition.  Date: Feb. 22 or 23. Phone 251-2635 for  details on both events  UNION WOMEN  There will be a summer institute for union  women July 12-17 at SFU in Burnaby. Open to all BC union women. Cost:  $450 plus GST (room and board included,  but since there is limited accommodation  there is a discount for women living at  home). Theme of the institute is "Political Action for Union Women". If interested contact your union or call Kate  Braid at SFU, 291-4177  VLC VALENTINE'S DANCE  The VLC is throwing its annual Valentine's Day Bash Sat. Feb. 15 at The  Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St. This dance  promises to be a VLC Valentine's adventure. Wheelchair accessible. Childcare  available off-site. Tix $4-6. Doors open at  8 pm. Call VLC, 254-8458 for info  FEMCAB  A feminist cabaret and artisans' market in  celebration of IWD Sun., March 8. Tix  go on sale Feb. 14. A co-production of  Women in View and Tamahnous Theatre.  For info call 685-6684  REALIZING LEADERSHIP  A conference for women in sport and  recreation administration and coaching  at The Arbutus Club, Vancouver, March  6-7. Keynote speaker: Margaret Fulton.  Cost: early registration prior to Feb. 14,  $75, after Feb. 14 $85. For more info  contact Promotion Plus, #305-1367 W.  Broadway, Van., V6H 4A9. Call 737-3075  or Fax 738-7175  DEIDRA McCALLA  "Inspiring, evocative performer, with a  wicked sense of humour and a rock solid  back beat" appears in concert during International Lesbian Week Sat. Feb. 29,  8 pm. From California, Deidra has won  awards for 2 of her 3 albums. Sliding scale  tix $8-$15. Info on concert location at Little Sister's, Josephine's and Ariel's. Presented by Sounds & Furies 253-7189  BENEFIT  Benefit for the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective at LaQuena Feb. 29 at  7 pm  MUSIC AT JOSEPHINE'S  Sue McGowan, Jacqui Parker-Snedker  and Carol Weaver will be joined by Andrea Kohl and Patti Powell to perform  the music from Collateral Damage: The  Tragedy of Medea as well as new material! Sun., Feb. 9, 8 pm at Josephine's,  1617 Charles St. Doors open at 7:30 pm.  Sliding scale $5-10. Proceeds go towards  a recording project  TWO SPIRITED SOCIETY  Vancouver Two Spirited Society is hosting the 1992 5th Annual Native Gay and  Lesbian Spiritual Gathering to share traditional beliefs. We welcome all Native  Two Spirited people. Call Michelle at  687-4100 (weekdays)  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING  Are you interested in leading Assertiveness Training Workshops? The Vancouver  Status of Women is offering a weekend  training session for women wanting to run  groups. Thurs. Feb. 27, 6-10 pm, and  all day Sat. Feb. 29 and Sun. March 1  There is no fee. Trainees are expected to  run two workshops for VSW. Please call  Trisha at 255-6554 to set up a meeting  before Feb. 19. Assistance with child care  costs is available.  THE FAMINE WITHIN  Benefit for the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective—the film 77»e Famine  Within, an acclaimed Canadian film on  The   Vancouver   Folk   Music   Festival   is  pleased  to  present  Judy Small & Lucie Blue Tremblay  It's a delight to present two of the most accomplished and influential  artists in women's music in the course of one evening. This show is  co-presented with Concerted Effort Productions and Random Acts.  ♦ Wednesday, March 4 8 pm $18  Rosalie Sorrels & Melanie Ray  Rosalie Sorrels, one of the most influential, respected and loved  artists on the American folk music scene teams up with Vancouver  storyteller, Melanie Ray, to swap tales of life, love and ornery cats.  ♦ Sunday, February 23 8 pm  $15  TICKETS available at Black Swan Records, Highlife Records, the Vancouver Folk Music Festival office, 3271 Main Street, 879-2931  or by calling 254-9578 to reserve. Both concerts are at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895 Venables at Victoria.  Concerted Effort Productions, Women in Music  and Random Acts present  Qcpo  CELEBRATE INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  So many talented women, we needed 2 nights to fit them  all in — Music, Stories, Poetry, Lots of Fun with Aya,  Bonnie Ferguson (with Rhodea Auriel Lancaster & Colleen  Savage), Razom Sestre, Janisse Browning, Random Acts,  Penny Singh, and Sue McGowan (with Jacqui Parker-  Snedker and Carol Weaver). For more information call  254-9578. Reservations only. $10 per evening.  ♦ Thursday, March 5 & Friday, March 6  8pm  $10/evening  Special ticket package including the Judy Small  & Lucie Blue Tremblay concert — $30 for all 3  nights. Available through the Festival office only  at 879-2931.  KINESIS, Bulletin Board  S.XXX\\XX\\XX\\\X\X\NX\\X\XX\X^^  ^X^XNX<5^^^^XNX<^^^  G R O U PLSIG ROUP S  eating disorders and body image will be  shown at 7:30 pm, Tues. Feb. 25 at Pacific Cinematheque, 1131 Howe St. Tix  $10 at the door  PROCEED WITH CAUTION  The Centre For Research in Women's  Studies and Gender Relations at the University of British Columbia presents "Proceed With Caution: Looking At Ourselves, Looking At Others", a workshop  examining issues of power, responsibility,  and expropriation in research and creative  production. Fri., Mar. 6, 1:30-5 pm. Angus 308, UBC. The workshop is free and  open to everyone. Please call 822-9171  for further info  SORROW & STRENGTH  "Sorrow & Strength: The Process", a 2nd  annual conference about childhood sexual abuse for the adult survivors, professional helpers and other support people.  April 9, 10 & 11, 1992, in Winnipeg,  Manitoba. For more info please contact:  "Sorrow & Strength: The Process," Coordinating Committee, 160 Garfield St. S.,  Winnipeg, MB, R3G 2L8  BENEFIT CONCERT  Sanctuary Foundation's benefit concert  and art show presents music by Amanda  Hughes and Oh Yeah, Art works by  Joanne Parker and Ronaye, Sun. Feb. 9,  1992, 7 pm, at the Hyatt Regency 655  Burrard St., Van. Tix $12 at Ticketmaster, or charge by phone: 280-4444. Proceeds to the Sanctuary Foundation which  intends to establish a second-stage transition house  GROUPS  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  South Surrey/White Rock Women's Place needs committed women to take on  the challenge of being volunteer Director of the Board. Previous experience in  the area of women's groups, collectives,  non-profits, and community organizations  would be ideal but not mandatory. Interested women should submit a letter of intent to the current board, outlining their  personal interests and experiences. For  more info call 536-9611, or write South  Surrey/White Rock Women's Place, #1-  1349 Johnston Rd., White Rock, BC,  V4B 3Z3  JOB SKILLS DIRECTORY  Vancouver Society on Immigrant Women  is updating their Job Skills Directory. It  is a chance for immigrant women to find  work and potential employers to advertise  at no charge to either group. For more  information about the directory call Carolina Wong at 731-9108  SUPPORT GROUP  If you wculd like to join a bisexual  women's support group Tuesday evenings  7-9 pm, please call Sandra at 299-4199  WOMEN'S HEALTH ISSUES  Learn about them and help teach others. Join us at the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective. Next volunteer training starts Feb. 24 and runs for six weeks.  Call 255-8284  DONATIONS  We are looking for free furniture/office  supplies to set up a new drop-in centre in  the Downtown Eastside area. Please call  Martine after 6 pm at 873-2260. Thank  you to all donators!  CREATIVE WRITING  "Off the Line: A Creative Writing Course  for Women" with author J.A. Hamilton begins Feb. 17 and runs 8 Mondays from 5:30-7:30 pm. $160-$80 sliding scale. Registration deadline Feb. 10.  Pre-registration required. A group to help  writers new to creative writing to develop  their voices and hone their craft. Call 254-  1617   WOMEN'S CHORUS  Do you enjoy singing with other women?  Come and rehearse with a Vancouver  Women's Chorus on Thursday evenings.  A challenging opportunity and lots of  fun. No auditions. We will perform for  the Gazebo Connection in May and plan  other performances later this year. Do  join us! Call 438-5442  WOMEN'S SUPPORT GROUP  "Women's Support Group" is based on  loving acceptance of self and others.  There is an 8-week commitment. $10-$15  sliding scale. Thursdays, 7-9 pm. "Circle  of Love" is a safe space to give and receive love and nurturance. Fridays, 7-9  pm, $5-$15 sliding scale. Also, anger work  for women. Please call Susan Elek, transformational therapist at 983-3056  ART THERAPY GROUPS  Art therapy groups for women; childhood  trauma, creativity, eating disorders and  general therapy. Ten week sessions. No  art experience necessary. All groups begin week of Feb. 10. For info and registration call Monica Thwaites at the West  Side Art Therapy Centre, 732-0390 (after  Feb. 3) or 327-0390  bell hooks in Vancouver  Thurs, Feb 6, 7:30 pm  RACE, GENDER AND REPRESENTATION  Judge MacGill Theatre  Robson Square Conference Centre  Fri, Feb 7, 12 noon  FEMINIST THEORY AS LIBERATORY PRACTICE  Lecture Room 6  Instructional Resources Centre UBC  Sat, Feb 8,  9 a.m. - 3 p.m.  UNDERSTANDING OUR REALITIES: BLACK WOMEN'S PERSPECTIVES  (with co-panelists Sylvia Hamilton, Janisse Browning,  and Julie Darboh)  Auditorium, King Edward Campus, VCC  Sponsored by the Black History Month Committee; Invisible Colours; Women's Studies and the Ruth Wynn  Woodward Endowed Chair, SFU; and the Centre for Research in Women's Studies and Gender Relations, UBC  For information call: 291-3593 or 875-1763 Admission: Free  WRITING THE HEALER  "Writing the Healer Workshop" with author J.A. Hamilton begins Feb. 17 and  runs 8 Mondays from 8-10 pm. $160-$80  sliding scale. Registration deadline Feb.  10. Pre-registration required. A group for  women only, using writing as a healing  technique. Call 254-1617  WOMYN WANTED  Wyse Womyn, Wyld Womyn Concerts, is  a monthly series featuring womyn musicians, song writers, poets, performance  artists, and speakers. Women interested  in presenting group goals, organizational  objectives, earthy experiences, body beliefs, soul sensations and artistic expressions are welcome to attend. Burn the  stage with grace or rage. If you are interested we meet the 3rd Friday of each  month at La Quena, 1111 Commercial  Dr., or call 253-1240. Alcohol free space.  SCIATIC PAIN?  Since giving birth to my daughter 6  months ago, I have been experiencing increasing pain in my hip and foot, numbness due to damage to my sciatic nerve.  I would appreciate talking to any woman  who's dealt with sciatic pain. I'm looking for mutual support and learning what  heals. Donna 322-9411  FEELING ISOLATED?  If you are lesbian and have chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS) and would like to  form a support group where sharing feelings, emotions, and knowledge are important, then please call Patty at 420-7238  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's  Shelter has a volunteer training group  beginning in January. Women who are  interested in volunteering on the crisis  line, in the transition house, in fundraising events, or in any other part of the  women's organizing centre are invited to  call us for a training interview. Volunteers  for reception, with access to Word Perfect, are also needed, Mon. to Fri. 9-5.  For further info phone 872-8212  SELF-HEALING CIRCLE  The Indian Homemakers' Assoc, is sponsoring a weekly Eagle Women's Self-  Healing Circle on Thursdays from 3:30  pm-5:30 pm, Suite 201-640 W. Broadway. Elders will share their traditional  ways. Please contact Florence Hackett at  876-0944 or 876-1468.  VLC SERVES YOU  You're not only wanted, you're needed  at  the  Vancouver   Lesbian   Connection.  Help keep the centre open, put on events  or workshops, update resources, organize  the library or clean up the filing system.  Call Ginger 11 am-4 pm, Wed. and Fri.,  at 254-8458 for details. Group meetings  at the VLC now include: a support group  for lesbians who have been involved in  psychiatry; a group for lesbians who want  casual social contact and discussion; a  women of colour support group; legal advice; free massage and counselling; a Sex,  Love and Addiction support group, and  Coming Out groups for women exploring  their sexuality and trying to accept themselves as lesbians. Call 254-8458 to sign  up for these or to find out about other  lesbian groups and events.  TM3fflJ*TC»W«  LESBIAN ART SHOW  Final call for entries for a non-juried art  show for International Lesbian Week. All  lesbians are encouraged to submit up to  three slides of their work to L.A.S., 3391  Victoria Dr., Van., BC, V5N 4M3, or  call Anne 874-2329 or Carole 253-6190.  Deadline for submissions: Feb. 10, 1992  LESBIAN RIGHTS CONF.  Vancouver is hosting the second Pan-  Canadian Conference on Lesbian and Gay  Rights in the fall, 1992. If you'd like to  organize a workshop or have ideas about  topics you'd like to see covered, we want  to hear from you. Send proposals and  ideas by March 15, 1992, to 321-1525  Robson St., Van., BC, V6G 1C3. For more  info, call barbara findlay at (604) 251-  4356  CALL FOR ENTRIES  Forbidden Subjects: Self-Portraits by Lesbian Artists. Please send self-portrait(s)  (slides or black and white photos) along  with statement (1-3 pages) discussing  the process and importance of making  a self-portrait. Include some biographical info and a SASE. Deadline: postmarked June 1, 1992. Mail only to Gallerie Publications, Box 2901 Panorama  Dr., North Vancouver, BC, Canada, V7G  2A4. Phone (604) 929-8706  Hia&HiaMi:  HOUSING AVAILABLE  A nearly "character" 3-bedroom house in  Strathcona needs someone to share for  next 6 months. $280 plus one third of  utilities and oil heat. 251-9471. Women  only. Available immediately  TAPESTRY A celebration of Women of Colour  and Immigrant Women of Colour.  TAPESTRY A major gathering of women of colour  who will come together for 2 days to celebrate our  lives and our experiences.  TAPESTRY Will take place:  March 21 at the Aboriginal Friendship Centre: 1607  East Hasting St. and  March 22 at the Sunset Community Centre: 404  East 51st Ave.  TAPESTRY Will bring together Women of Colour in  a celebration of our diversities and realities as we  enjoy skits, poetry, music and dance.  Organizers have set up committees to work on every  aspect of this ground breaking Festival. Volunteers  are needed for all committees now.  FOR MORE INFORMATION CALL: Amrit or Jazmin  at 255-6554  KINESIS, //////////////////^^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  Bulletin Board  EPCFi  SIF EDICLASSIFIED  SATISFY YOUR CURIOSITY!  Have you been curious about Shiatsu?  Wondering about Astarte's work? This  Shiatsu demo and info night is for you.  Thurs. Feb. 6, 7:30-9 pm, 1-509 Carrall  St. (at Pender). Free. 251-5409  COUNSELLOR-HYPNOTHERAPIST  Judy Forester, BPE. Certified counsellor  and hypnotherapist. Through the use of  Ericksonian hypnosis you can effectively  change behaviours that limit potential,  overcome personal blocks, and increase  self-esteem and self-confidence. Learn to  take charge of the present and build the  kind of future you really want. Call 873-  5477  JOB OPENING  At the Vancouver Women's Health Collective. Starts 1st week of March, 30  hours/week, salary $21,060. Duties include grant writing, fundraising, payroll,  office management & reorganisation, &  light bookkeeping. Qualifications should  include proven success in fundraising,  proven experience in non-profit organisations & administration, grant writing experience, computer skills, conflict resolution skills, interest in women's health,  ability to motivate others, dedication,  motivation, enthusiasm! Deadline for applications is Mon., Feb. 17, 4 pm. Send  resumes to Vancouver Women's Health  Collective, #302-1720 Grant St., Van.,  BC, V5L 2Y7. For more info, call 255-  8284  SURVIVORS OF INCEST  Share your story, learn coping skills & explore feelings safely in a 9-week group  starting Wed., Feb. 5. Reisa Stone's  therapy-counselling practice is now in the  South Granville area; new clients accepted. Sexual abuse, body image, eating  disorders, ACOA & ACDF issues. Please  call 732-9753 for an appointment.  ACUPRESSURE  Jin Shin Do Acupressure. A gentle, mindful, non-violent therapeutic touch. The  art of energy balancing. Release and  body/mind/spirit centering. Allow yourself the gift of enhancing relaxation and  continue to discover self care. 90 minute  . Sliding scale. Call Lisa 685-7714  AROMATHERAPY/MASSAGE FOR  WOMEN  I do a beautiful body, face and scalp massage using a variety of aromatic essences  from plants and flowers. These essences  specialize themselves in stress reduction, cellulite, pre-menstrual, menopause,  headaches, muscular pain, asthma and relaxation. I am Christine at 737-7233. Student rates available  BED & BREAKFAST  Rocking Horse Inn, Seattle: Unique bed  and breakfast on Capitol Hill. Great  views, hot tub, warm hospitality. (206)  322-0206  :: w  j!     Position Available ;  !!     Program Coordinator j!  J[ The Vancouver Status of Women has an , |  I k opening for a full-time Program ) (  i \ Coordinator, beginning March 18. \\  '[ The Program Coordinator: ]j  \ • organizes educational programs in the \ {  • { community; \ \  i ^ • coordinates assertiveness groups and , k  ' k trains facilitators; }k  ^ ^ • works in coalitions around various , |  \[ women's issues; , {  , \ • lobbies government and does media \ k  \1 work ' i  ,l !i  \' Qualifications: \\  ^ -an ability to plan and run public programs \ k  \, and events; ^ i  1i • familiarity with assertiveness and \ *  [ k experience training; , [  k • knowledge of women's issues and \,  ^ organizations as well as social services i k  \ k and other community groups; \ \  ~\ \ • experience with media work and j k  II lobbying; ^[  j * • an ability to work alone as well as ^ J  \[ collectively. \ i  M ^  1 { Women of colour and First Nations JI  | k women are strongly encouraged to ('  ,' apply. Affirmative action principles will ^ J  i [ be in effect for this hiring. < k  < i y\  1 k. Salary: $23,805 (under review) ^ k  ! k plus benefits , \  1 k l  \  \ { Deadline for Applications: Feb. 25th \ {  U ' k  ^ \ Send applications to: * k  J k VSW Hiring, #301 1720 Grant St., J[  , k Vancouver BC V5L 2Y6. A full job , [  \ [ description is available at our office. Drop , {  t by or call 255-5511 for more information. \ \  ;k  Position Available  Kinesis Editor  Kinesis requires an Editor beginning March  9. The Editor works with an Editorial Board  and is a full-time staff person at the  Vancouver Status of Women.  The Kinesis Editor:  • oversees the publishing of a feminist  tabloid newspaper, 10 times a year ,  • solicits, writes and edits articles;  • recruits and assists volunteer writers;  • keeps abreast of issues, debates and news  relevant to a feminist newspaper;  • maintains contact with women's and  community groups;  • works closely with production, advertising,  distribution and circulation coordinators.  Qualifications:  • editorial, writing and copy editing skills, and  familiarity with feminist journalism;  • an ability to work collectively;  • broad-based knowledge of women's issues  and organizations;  • an ability to work under deadline pressure;  • knowledge of production techniques;  • organizational skills.  Women of colour and First Nations  women are strongly encouraged to apply.  Affirmative action principles will be in  effect for this hiring.  Salary: $23,805 (under review)  plus benefits  .A full job description is available.  Drop by our office or call 255-5499.  Send applications to: Kinesis Hiring,  #301 1720 Grant St., Vane. BC V5L 2Y6  Deadline for Applications: Feb. 19  r«r-VMidin»i  SURROGACY RESEARCH  I am a female researcher interested in the  question of surrogacy. I am interested in  contacting women who have been or who  are surrogate mothers. Please contact:  Fiona Green, Women's Studies, University of Winnipeg, Winnipeg, Manitoba,  R3B 2E9. (204) 786-9295  SHARING CHILDCARE  Mother of small child (8 months) looking for another mother who is interested in trading babysitting. I love playing and interacting with children but also  need breaks! Would like to trade with  other mother holding feminist socio-political views. In Kits, UBC and Dunbar areas. Mielle Chandler 263-2383  BODY THERAPY  The Trager Approach gently encourages  relaxation, self-acceptance and respectful  change. Chris Bruels will share the theory  supporting this non-intrusive approach,  Mentastics and samples of tablework. No  charge. For women. Tues. Feb. 11, 7:30  pm at Women's Counselling Services of  Vancouver, 1662 W. 8th Ave.. 738-4298  OFFICE SPACE  For rent. Two counselling rooms available beginning March and April. Fulltime and part-time. Very reasonable rent.  Commercial Drive area. For more info,  call 253-3146 and leave a message  BUSINESS OPPORTUNITY  Apprenticeship with agricultural consultant leading to self-employment. Business  involves monitoring pests, predators and  diseases in orchards and advising farmers  on control, emphasizing least toxic methods. Must have some biological or agricultural training and own car. Please send  letter and resume to Box 2667, Station R,  Kelowna, BC, V1X 6A7  HOUSING/WORK  Small two-story post and beam house  with large yard and fruit trees in Kelowna  for rent to non-smoking single woman or  lesbian couple in exchange for part-time  help on nearby farm. Must be physically  fit and have car. References to Box 2667,  Station R, Kelowna, BC, V1X 6A7  FEMINIST FARMER  Feminist farmer with interests in music, books, natural sciences, environmental issues and social change seeks  self-employed lesbian feminist companion willing to relocate to Kelowna area.  Could become involved in farm and cottage industry if desired, or pursue separate work. Please reply to Box 2667, Station R, Kelowna, BC, V1X 6A7  PT. TIME WORK  Part-time handy-woman wanted for nonprofit women's housing in downtown  eastside. Fix-it skills, carpentry, minor  plumbing, bi-fold doors. No electrical.  Own tools would be helpful, also tenant  interaction skills. Hours and scheduling  flexible—approx. 20 hours per month (2  days) or 40 hours every two months (4  days). $14.50/hr. Call 253-9333 or write  office at 430 E. Cordova St., V5V 4R9  FABRIC BANNERS  Strong colourful long-lasting banners for  indoors and out. Made to order by well-  known Vancouver artist Sima Elizabeth  Shefrin. From the maker of the beautiful  banners for Kinesis, Angles, Ariel Books,  AIDS Vancouver, Tools for Peace & many  other organizations directly to you. Reasonable prices. 734-9395  CLASSIF ED  HOUSING WANTED  For March or April 1 ... shared  or private rental ($300 range), short  term sublet or house-sitting arrangement  by non-smoking, 100 percent vegetariai  ecofeminist coordinating "Women and  the Earth '92." A comfortable, quiet  room in well-loved Vancouver character home with garden space or simi  lar nearby country (island?) abode—also  transit accessible—is longer term vision  Open to myriad possibilities, but conscientiously practised communal living  skills are essential. Please call before mid-  February. Thank you! Dianne (935-6647  collect).  HELP WANTED  Press Gang Printers, a feminist, worker-  owned print shop is looking for a new  collective member. The position would  involve working in printing production—  press and pre-press—and eventual training in production coordination. We ar<  implementing an affirmative action policy in our collective and are looking for  women of colour to apply for this position. The job will start on or about March  1. Please send resume to: Press Gang  Printers Ltd., 603 Powell St., Van., BC,  V6A 1H2. Deadline for applications: Feb.  14, 1992  LARGE ROOM  Large room available for rent in quiet  Kits. House for mature woman to share  with two feminists. Includes ensuite bathroom, washer/dryer, dishwasher, piano,  microwave, etc. Rent is $475 a month  (negot.,) plus a third util., (approx.  $15/mo.). Non-smoker. No pets. Security deposit required. Available Feb.  15/March 1. Call 737-9840  FEMINIST COUNSELLOR  Delyse Ledgard—I work with lesbians and  other women. I offer individual and couples counselling. My interests and experience are in substance abuse, child sexual  abuse and childhood trauma, relationship  issues, violence against women and poor  self esteem. I use an experiential approach  from a Gestalt framework with use of  visualizations/imagery and dream work.  Sliding scale. For more info, tel: 873-4495  FREE THE SINGER WITHIN!  Singers of all levels can increase range,  tone and power while developing confidence to sing out and speak up! Expert  vocal coaching in a supportive, accepting environment. A holistic and effective  method for personal empowerment, joyful creative expression and a great voice!  On Commercial Drive. $30/session or 6  sessions/ $150. Penny Sidor 251-4715  VILLA DE HERMANAS  All women's Caribbean Beachfront Guesthouse: Beautiful spacious L/F owned  guesthouse on long, secluded beach in the  Dominican Republic. Tropical gardens,  pool, large, private guestrooms, sumptuous meals, massages, and crystal healings. Room rates: $330 single; $440 double per week. Call our Toronto friend, Susan, at (416) 463-6138 between 9 am-10  pm  HOUSING  How much do you need to buy your own?  What will your monthly payments be?  How much of a downpayment is necessary? Where can you afford to buy? Today interest rates are the lowest they have  been in 25 years. Variable rates are about  8 percent. If you are thinking about buying or selling, let me put 14 years experience to work for you: Linda McNeill (298-  0795); Seasons Realty Ltd., (435-8893)  KINESIS VANUUUVtK, BC V-  Really Rather Special Publication  Invest today with a Kinesis subscription  riVSW Membership (includes Kinesis subscription): $30 plus $1.40 GST  KINESIS Subscription:  Bl year: $20 plus $1.40 GST Q2 years: $36 plus $2.52 GST 'ñ°institutions/Groups: $45 plus $3.15 GST  Cheque enclosed      OBill me fjNew [~| Renewal nGift fj Donation  Please note: U you can't alTord the rull amount, send us wh  Add $8 per year for outside Canada  at you can. Kinesis Is fr  ee to prisoners.  Address  Country                               Postal Code  Phone