 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS  M  ^-iCana  -73-S305.  Serials Division  Rain Library  University of 5.0.  VAMCOUVER £, B.C.  .    JUNE       ^g-75  HAPFV   LWY'75  \fencouver Stofcue of VMorrten     SH  Q69W. Fourth A^a.    7  3B-374e->e  VblurmV   No. 45  It's no news to you that we are constantly urging women to get involved, to participate, where-  ever they can, in processes that lead to decisions.. We hope to set an example within our own  organization with a big turnout for the Annual General Meeting. This is our opportunity to  discuss any aspect we wish of the work of the VSW and, more importantly, to elect the officers  who will represent US in the coming year in setting VSW policy and direction. Ours is an  organization which has achieved considerable recognition, respect and clout. A significant  part of this is our membership strength. How about a show of strength on June the 17th?  The following women are candidates for the Vancouver Status of Women Board of Directors for  1975-76. Each candidate was asked to respond to two questions: a) what would you like to say  about yourself? b) why would you like to serve on the Vancouver Status of Women Board of  Directors? =anmmiu  PRESIDENT - one to be elected  Nancy Conrod  June, 1973, I joined VSW volunteering use of my languishing law degree  —immediately up to my ears in a  labour brief—thence to the Ombud--  service—the perfect job, perfect  people, perfect conditions for reentering the labour force after a  horrible job and two year break.  I'm now using what I learned at VSW  in a new labour relations job.  The women's movement and more specifically VSW are doing some of the  most important work in the world—  working for power to direct and form  our own lives, for our legal and  social equality and for an atmosphere  in which we can all develop our talents and skills fully.  I want to  be involved in that work and do what  I can to further it.  VICE-PRESIDENT - one to be elected  Jo Lazenby  My involvement with VSW during the  past 2% years has been of great value to me.  I have received support  in my own personal gropings and (I  hope) growth.  And there is the good  feeling of doing work that is exciting and purposeful!  I really believe that if women work  together towards common goals and  support one another we can bring  about the social and legal changes  that we need.  I want to be part of  that work.  SECRETARY - one to be elected  Judy Bourne ,  My introduction to the Women's Movement occured July 29, 1974, when I  was hired by the VSW for the position of bookkeeper.  From that time  I have seen myself slowly but surely  learning and growing and letting go  of my "I can't" attitudes.  I feel that being secretary of the.  VSW Board of Directors would give  me a positive strike against another  "I can't". Just to be in the position of having to write this blurb  is a positive feeling and I want to  contribute to VSW to ensure more of  these feelings for me and for all  women"  Pat Williams  I would like the opportunity to serve  on the VSW Board of Directors because  I feel it would be a very interesting  and challenging position and would  help to expand my knowledge of the  Women's Movement.  It would be a way  I could be useful to the VSW.  I feel my qualifications are adequate  to serve as Secretary.  I have had  several clerical-secretarial positions in various companies in Vancouver and Toronto during the past ten  years.  I am presently employed with  The Bay at Champlain Mall as Store  Secretary.  I am also Secretary-  Treasurer of the Store's Social Club.  My typing and shorthand skills are  average.  I enjoy working with people,  sports, crocheting, and dabbling in  arts and crafts.  TREASURER — 1 to be elected  Sandra Price  Thirty-three years old, married,  one daughter 11 years old.  Just  passed last CGA exam and waiting  to be accepted as a member. Presently have my own private practice in  Burnaby.  Got actively involved in  the women's movement only recently  and joined a consciousness-raising  group in Burnaby--a most positive  experience.  Feel deeply about individual freedom  and want to contribute to the organization that is working so actively  to eliminate discrimination and  stereotyped thinking. I would like  my daughter to enter a world where  she is entirely free in her own mind,  free from outside influence, free to  choose and experience anything tha£  life has to offer—not to fit into  a role limited by the rules of society.  MEMBER-AT-LARGE — 6 to be elected  Diana R. Douglas  I have been an ardent feminist for  the last three years only, can't  understand why I didn't 'click'  sooner, but I am trying to make up  for those lost years. Have been a  member-at-large for a year,served  on the B.C.F.W. Steering Committee  on behalf of the VSW and currently  belong to the Federal Action Committee.  Age 29, publisher, married, one child.  After gaining a year's experience  as a member-at-large, I feel that  I can contribute much more on a second term and I am very eager to  serve the feminist movement and grow  with the VSW.  Nancy Denofreo  I want to give the same answer to  both questions.  I'm married, three  children, one and seven-eights full-  time jobs (but that's progress—it  used to be two full-time jobs.) I  have 34 years experience as a female,  a special empathy with housewives  and a belief that the VSW is an organization that is open, hard-working  and committed to represent all women.  Lee Grills  Dorothy Holme  Who am I? I have been a member of  VSW for one year and am presently  coordinating the Letter Lobby Committee. This has been a most satisfying experience.  I also attend Douglas  College on a part-time basis—Political Science, Women's Stiiidies, Journ-  alism-y-and these courses have helped  me tremendously when dealing with  wily politicians.  A major problem faced by women today  is their inability to come to grips  with authoritarian figures. Why?  Our "conditioning" has told us that  we are never quite as capable, or as  knowledgeable as those in power.  I  know this to be a myth and believe  as a member of the VSW Board of Directors,* I can help other women to  realize their full potential.  Viviane Hotz  Born 1947, Swiss, MS in Architecture.  Came to Canada two years ago, joined  VSW as soon as I came across a poster. Have been member of Newsletter  Committee for over a year.  Main interests: education of women,  promoting non-traditional occupations, re-evaluation of architecture  and city planning—both playing a  vital part in our daily life—under  women's point of view.  Why I am running—to learn, and because as a feminist architect I can  contribute from a point of view that  may be new to the VSW be bringing  attention and information to problems that we feel but are hard to  .define and are often rooted in the  wrong handling of "space" (privacy  in the family, public use of space,  working conditions,etc).  Lee Masters  The personal experiences of my life,  joys and sorrows, are not very different from those of the general membership.  I am a feminist because  these experiences raised my level of  consciousness to the point of seeking more active involvement.  My long association with women's  rights includes:  National Organization for Women  (NOW) —credit and "community  property" law changes  Women In Community Service (WICS)  —assisting "disadvantaged" people  to acquire decent employment.  These plus my expertise in the business world would enable me to be  an excellent representative for the  membership.  I wrote these words to welcome Dr,  Morgentaler to the Unitarian Church  in 1974.  They are me, and you, and  people who care.  That which I believe in I must do.  That which I cannot believe in,  I cannot do.  What price will I pay for being  true to myself?  If I lose me, I have nothing.  I was invited to run, and I believe  in the goals of the VSW.  Karen Richardson  It was like coming home when I started work a year ago with VSW and WCWN,  after being a secretary. Now I'm a  feminist writer!  I do more typing  than ever, but at least itjs my own  shitwork!  So much remains to be done to raise  the status of women.  It is exhiliar-  ating to work hard with support from  female colleagues and know you are  making head way.  So long, apathy.  MORE ON PAGE THREE candidates cont'd  Susan Sanderson  I have been living in Vancouver for  five years and am presently living  with two other women.  Several years  ago I> attended V.C.C. Langara, taking the Art in Merchandising course.  This course led me into my present  job as a Display Person with a department store.  I have been a member of VSW for two  years and during the last year have  participated in several activities:  action media, communication skills  workshop, and verbal self-defense.  I am also a member of B.C.F.W.  My personal feelings concerning the  movement have become such that I  want to devote more time and energy  encouraging the increased awareness  of the changing roles of women.  Sandra Yasin  I think that my experience and training of the past two years (UBC M.A.  Counselling Psychology) has helped  prepare me to work with women.  I  feel good about my ability to make  and implement decisions and believe  also that I am able to listen to and  communicate with people"  I believe in growth and change and  intend to encourage and facilitate  this as a Board member.  I want to  help develop local women's potential as well as continue to learn  and establish myself.  Finally, I'd  be thrilled and honoured if elected  to serve.  Hanne Jensen  I have served one term as Member-at-  Large, am a past Vice-President of VSW,  and am this year's Nominating Officer.  I am employed as a Human Rights Officer  Diucd-off  Well, we haven't gotten the legislation yet that we wanted for International Women's Year. Not only that,  but women's rights generally are taking a whipping.  We've been promised a federal human  rights commission for five years. It  appears one may finally be created  this session of Parliament.  I shudder to think it may be the first, last  and only significant thing to happen  during IWY.  A bill to amend the Criminal Code to  repeal abortion laws was introduced  in Ottawa recently. However, as a  private member's bill all that will  come out of it will be futile discussion.  tally  Feminists rallied at the Vancouver  Courthouse on Mother's Day, May 11,  to protest government inaction on  women's rights legislation for International Women's Year.  Approximately 150 women, children  and men, challenged the government  to prove its concern over the oppression of women by passing laws recommended by the Royal Commission on  the Status of Women, five years ago.  Speakers represented a cross-section  of the Vancouver's women's movement—  the Women's Health Collective, Rape  Relief, Child Care Federation and  the Women's. Bookstore. Among other  things they called for:  1. affirmative action plans to secure  equal job opportunities for women.  2. establishment of a federal human  rights commission.  3. repeal of the abortion laws to  make abortion equally accessible to  all women.  4. free 24-hour day care for all fami  ilies in need.  5. amendments to rape law to make -  victim's1 sexual history inadmissible  evidence.  6. community property laws to recognize homemaker's contribution to marriage.  7. pension plans for housewives.  8. protective laws for domestic workers.  Jeannine Mitchell, a co-founder of  the Vancouver'Women's Bookstore recalled the tactics of the suffragettes  and said,"I know we have the political  savvy, imagination and guts to get  what we want."  She said that writing letters to MP's  was an activity of 'diminishing Tectums" for women and called for the  collective action of women during the  rest of IWY to, secure their rights by  political lobbying, lawsuits, corporate voting, strikes and civil disobedience if necessary.  A round of angry applause arose when  Ms. Mitchell pointed out that only  three bills were being considered in  Parliament at present, all of which  were introduced in 1974, and two of  which affected only small numbers of  Canadian women.  Photo - Karen Richardson  After an hour the rally ended with  the broadcasting of a feminist blues  song and the launching of pink balloons with the feminist symbol on  them, into the sky over the courthouse.  - Karen Richardson, WCWN  As everyone knows, Morgentaler went  to jail after a Three year battle &  initial acquittal. Diefenbaker wants  to make it illegal to overturn such  a jury verdict.  But in the meantime,  Morgentaler gets no pardon.  In the United States, a doctor who  had the approval of a hospital committee was recently prosecuted for  performing an abortion.  Doctors there  are now having serious thoughts about  doing legal abortions at all.  And I just heard contraceptives have  been banned in Saudi Arabia.  In England a new act has just made  it almost impossible to convict a  rapist. Women are talking frantically about the rape problem in Canada but how many rape relief centres  do we have in this country? Even  fewer than the number of abortion  approval panels.  While the pregnant stewardesses were  at first optimistic about the outcome  of their battle with PWA, at the time  of printing Kinesis, it doesn't look  so good anymore. Will the rights of  all pregnant working women be called  into question?  Five months into IWY the provincial  government is including "she" with  all references to "he" in laws.  While this is needed, surely there  are more pressing women's issues to  be dealt with.  I am tempted to comment as Diana says,"Ah come off it  you guys."  I just had word that a prominent feminist press in America is in serious  financial difficulty. Will we all  eventually have to go back to the  kitchen during this recession like  we did in the depression?  IWY started out with questionable  promise. It has not only fizzled,  so far, it has dropped dead and the  undertow is taking us all with it.  Now for the pollyanna review...  - Karen Richardson Qmbuds-  An nual Deport-  The Ombuds Service, throughout this  year, has continued to assist approximately 100 women per month with problems in family law (50%), labour(20%),  children (15%), Immigration, Consumer and miscellaneous affairs (15%).  Utilizing this information we have  presented numerous briefs on legislative change. We have been participants  in five working groups of the Family  and Children's Law Commission, and  several other boards and committees.  We feel that our increased representation is indicative of important recognition in the community.  However,  a major element of our progress has  been the opportunity to enter into  decision making situations.  When Gene Errington left our staff in  January, I was elected Ombudswoman.  In repeating my acceptance words —  I -have been so fortunate to have worked with such teachers — Gene, Nancy  Conrod and earlier Roberta Schlosberg  and Kathleen Sopko.  Their spirits  are with me constantly as, day to  day, I continue this work, and the  responsibilities of this position.  In February, we found a new Ombuds  worker—Miriam Gropper.' Together we  began completely revamping the Om-'  buds case filing system and now have  orderly catalogues for each year.  Over the past four months we have  focused our energies upon publicity  and support for Community Property,  Labour issues—Affirmative Action,  flight attendants, farm and domestic  workers, and Provincial Human Rights.  We have continued to produce "Women  Alive" programmes, and have appeared  on both major television stations.  Finally, we are presently represents-  ed on the following (boards:  B.C. Bar Association Family Law  Subsection  Family Law Foundation  Women's Employment Boutique  Vancouver Community Legal  Assistance  B.C. Delegates Group of the National Conference on Women in  Sport  B.C. Police Commission Task Force  on Women and the Police  In June, Libby Holtzman will join  our staff. With this assistance,  we shall be able to increase our  case voulme and set our special  projects for 1975-1976.  - Glinda Sutherland  CLICK!  This has been a good month for 'CLICKS'  —or a bad month, depending on how  you look at it. Anyway, readers of  Kinesis have sent in the following  assortment.  MESSY JOB  Coquitlam Grade 9 students touring  the stockmarket were told by their  guide(female) that there were "obviously no women board markers."  Asked why, she replied that it was  a "messy job with all the chalk."  The two accompanying teachers laughed and she quickly added,"The traders are very rude, even to the boys.'  The job of board marker is to write  the stock prices on the board, as  bids and offers are called up by  traders on the floor below. The  job requires Grade 12, mental and  physical agility, and good hearing.  Good board markers are quickly picks  ed up to train as traders by the  local brokerage firms.  -Karen Loder  TENNIS ANYONE?  Ann M. Davis writes that she picked  up an entry form for the Great Vancouver Open Tennis Championship which  is sponsored by Labatt's Brewery.  1st—$400 -  2nd—$200  1st—$250!'.  2nd—$125  The prize money is:  Men's "A" Singles  Women's "A"  Men's Doubles  $100  Women's       $60  Ann says she has informed Labatt's  that she will be passing by their  brew from now on.  A SHOW FOR WOMEN?  Nancy Conrod reports that the Jean  Cannem Show on Channel 8 TV May 15  was devoted to "Nursing Today".  Well the part that wasn't devoted  to chopping onions for gazpacho was  devoted to "Nursing Today".  Ms. Cannem interviewed a female nurse  Nadine Carlson, and a male nurse,  Bob Piaggo. Her remark to Ms. Carlson was "I guess all little girls  want to grow up to be stewardesses,  secretaries or nurses."  Mr. Piaggo, who has worked as a  nurse in pediatric wards, was told  that this was an excellent idea "as  children look to a man as an authority figure."  CREDIT DUE  On May 14, the Vancouver Province  ran an article on Credit Unions and  the following appeared in reference  to the South Burnaby Credit Union:  "Robinson and a staff of 10 (all  women) run the operation from an  office in a building owned by the  credit union on Kingsway.  Robinson, who will be 75 in December,  is looking forward to retirement.  The problem is to find a successor.  Ayounger man who served as loan officer and was being groomed for the  manager's job, left last year, and  said Robinson, "I'm in the market  right now for another loan officer."  Gee — I guess it wouldn't do to  consider one of the 10 women who  are running the operation.  MAN'S RIGHTS  Vancouver People's Law School has  announced a course on Civil Liberties for May 26th.  It will include  a look at Protective Legislation  such as the Universal Declaration  of Man's Rights0  Hey—what about the rest of us?.'  employment  bureau  The Women's Employment Bureau of the  B.C. Department of Labour has moved  to 4211 Kingsway  Suite 613  Burnaby  Phone - 434-5761, local 298,326 &  327.  Chris Waddell, Director of the  Bureau, would like to hear from women interested in carpentry, paper  hanging, sign painting, etc. as it  has now been established that the  wages paid apprentices must be the  minimum wage or 50% of the journeyman's wage, whichever is greater.  Cooking is a designated trade and  cooks who can verify that they have  been in the trade for at least three  years should make application for  the trades qualification exam -  having a certificate can make a difference in obtaining higher wages.  (No - all the years we spend cooking  for a family doesn't count,.  Remember  'real work' is work you get paid for -  the other is 'woman's work'.)  The Women's Employment Bureau also  presents the following statistics::  Women made up more than half the  total employment in the finance, insurance and real estate industrial  classification in 1973 but averaged  earnings of $113.31 a week compared  with $207.88 a week for men.  A Statistics Canada survey, carried  out in October 1973, showed total  employment in this industry division  was 349,239 made up of 55.1% females.  Only 5,6% of the females were in the  category of executive managerial and  22o7% in supervisory (including operating manager) out of the 80.9% employed in the clerical category. WHY AREN'T WOMEN FUNNY?  - HA, HA,  THAT IS, AND NOT PECULIAR '_  William Davis, the editor of Punch,'  asks the question, in his introduction to a book about women. He makes  an attempt to answer it by asking,  he says, women.  'One woman journalist  put it like this:  "We think - perhaps misguidedly - we ought to set  the world right instead of, as a man  can, frittering the space away."'  Or, a woman reader (of Punch) '"women  are hilariously funny when they feel  comfortably free to be so, knowing  that no man is within earshot,'".  Well, quite honestly, I don't know  which explanation I distrust more.  But the fact remains that in Britain  there are only three or fourv good  cartoonists and according to Mr.  Davis this is true in the United  States and also in Russia. His  remarks also cover comedey writing in  all its various forms.  The challenge then, can you think of  any funny women? After some thought,  I came up with Dorothy Parker although  I suspect she was more bitchy than  genuinely funny. Then there is Ruth  Draper, Bea Lillie, Joyce Grenfell  perhaps, and Lucille Ball, Phyllis  Diller and more lately, Valerie Harper  and Mary Tyler Moore.  But, and a big  but, how many of them write their own  material, those who are still on this  mortal coil that is, and how many are  performers, interpreters of others  words. Joan Rivers is one very funny  woman (to me at least, and I realize  humour is subjective to the    degree)  but her role is that of a hopelessly  inefficient housewife whose jokes  reflect her lowly position and lack  of status.  Samuel Janus, a New York  psychologist asserts that "comediennes  are simply reflecting cultural expectations: women are supposed to whine  and nag, but they've never been taken  seriously, or comically, as social  critics. Moreover, most female comics  believe that if they bruced up their  acts they would be not only "unfeminine'  comedy  but too threatening to club owners and  patrons."  (Newsweek Magazine, April  21/75)  Now for a real challenge - funny  Canadian women. There must be an  enormous market out there since it is  only thinly peopled with men. . There's  Eric Nieol, Max Ferguson and Farley  Mowat perhaps, and I suppose you could  throw in Wayne and Shuster if you are  willing to stretch a point, but who  else?  I am only referring to intentional comedians and not those public  figures who are very often hilarious  without even noticing.  What about Margaret Atwood and her  book 'The Edible Woman' (available  New Canadian Library paperback, $2.75)  which merited a further reading after  her interview in Kinesis (April edition) .  Certainly some of the situations are funny but the subject of  human relationships between men and  women, and women's role in that relationship is taken seriously, almost  tenderly as if we are afraid to laugh  at such a delicate burgeoning creature,  that has yet to grow its third skin.  'Laughter is nothing else but  sudden glory arising from some  sudden conception of some emin-  ency in ourselves, by comparison  with the infirmity of others, or  with our own formerly.'  - Thomas Hobbes on Human  Nature (1588-1679)  'Happiness is no laughing  matter.'  - Richard Whately,  Archbishop of Dublin  (1787-1863)  And a final word from Mr. Davis,  discussing American women as a political force and the fact not all 'are  ardent feminists.'  'Three dozen wives  of Cabinet members and White House  officials will soon begin a six week  trip around America to tell their  sisters how marvellous - and sadly  misunderstood - the President is.  He's just like an uncle," says one  of them reassuringly. And that, I  suspect,, is just what most American  women want.' The President referred  to is Richard Nixon and the date of  publication, October, 1973.  - Margaret Nicholls  Where do you get your information?  What makes you so sure you are right?  What do women want anyway? Most women are happy being mothers and housewives .  I am a woman and I am not  oppressedo  These are some of the comments and  reactions we often find ourselves  faced with when speaking on issues  of women's oppression. Pressure to  conform to the norms of society  affects all of us.  Some of us are  more aware of our common oppression  as women than others. The more this  awareness deepens, the more determined we become to resist and whenever  ~ possible fight this oppression.  The question "where do you get your  information?" can be answered in the  following way.  First of all, we seldom find information that we are not  looking for, or, if we are exposed to  information on subjects which do not  particularly interest us at the time,  this information does not imprint itself on our minds in any significant  way. Secondly, one can too easily  dismiss information of an unpleasant  nature as not being 'valid'.  Our  culture demands that we be 'nice' to  one another and and not discuss issues  which might be controversial, as for  example politics and religion.  The  systematic oppression of women is_  political. Politics means the struggle of control over our own lives.  If I am prevented from expressing my  creative ability in the way most suitable and desirable to my temperment  without inflicting harm on others,  by laws and socially accepted standards, then I am politically and socially oppressedo  To answer the question " what makes  you so sure that you are right?" I  would say that if I feel oppressed,  then I am oppressed. • Feelings do  not orginate in a vacuum. One way  that society deals with oppression  is by giving it another name, and  that name is depression. Now depression is a clinical term, and who are  we ordinary,'ignorant' citizens to  argue with scientific expertise? But,  one does not change a thing simply  recognizing  oppression  by giving it another name. True,  first we have to recognize what a  thing is, before we can change it.  Leon Trotsky, one of the co-leaders  of the Russian revolution of 1917,  wrote'in his biography'Stalin : "to  call a spade a spade is~a revolutionary thing to do"" The goal of the  women's movement is nothing less than  to revolutionize womens' lives; to  enable women to freely express their  creative drive.  "What do women want anyway?" Quite  simply we want to be able to choose  for ourselves how we live. We do  not want to have to fit into a predetermined role. We want to be  accepted as we are. Nobody has the  moral right to say what we should be.  The freedom to live the way we want-  to live cannot be taken from us,  neither can it be given to us.  Freedom does not and cannot involve giving and taking.  Freedom is absolute  in as much as anything can be absolute: Freedom is without condition.  "Most women are happy being mothers  and housewives." This is not true.  Recent studies of neuroses and severe  depression indicate that the overwhelming majority of psychiatric patients are women; most of whom are  married and have children.  Social  pressure is heavy on women to play  their domestic role of wife and mother.  Feminists are not opposed to women who enjoy the traditional female  roles. However, an increasing number  of women object to the lack of any  real choice on the part of women who  wish to live a more independent lifestyle, without the social stigmatiz-  ation that now exists against women  who refuse to accept stereotyping.  "I am a woman and I am not oppressed."  It is common for people who are oppressed to identify with the interests  of the oppressor. Once people are  aware of their oppression, they will  fight their oppressors in open conflict if this is at all possible.  The way North American society maintain slavery, for example, was by  convincing blacks that they were born  inferior to whites.  Brutal, overt  oppression can only be effective for  a certain period of time. An ideology is needed to convince the oppressed that they deserve the kind of  treatment that they are getting and  that it is 'good' for them0 As women, we are taught to believe that  it is in our 'nature', in our'biology'  and in our 'best self-interest' to  be subservient to men. Only when we  realize that we are being hoodwinked  into this trickery do we become angry  and ready to fight oppression.  - Gisela Filion ^0f§  Flora  <F\|gg:  The following statements were made by  Flora MacDonald during the courses of  speeches and interviews.  WHY THERE AREN'T MORE WOMEN IN POLITICS  & WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT.  Although she hasn't committed herself,  Flora MacDonald is being mentioned as  a contender for the national Conservative leadership when Robert Stanfield  steps down.  So far all that she is  saying is that discussion of her possible candidacy is an indication that  women are making some advances in the  Canadian political scene.  Flora MacDonald was born in Cape Breton and her first involvement in politics was in 1956 when Stanfield became  Premier of Nova Scotia. Diefenbaker  had just been elected national Conservative leader and"MacDonald was hired  to work on the 1958 federal electionc  Ten years later she was fired by Diefenbaker for allegedly conspiring to  overthrow him, and took an administrative job at Queens University in Kingston. Tn 1967 she was elected National  Secretary of the Conservative Party  and in 1972 she was elected to the  House of Commons as MP for Kingston  and the Islands" By this time she  was a backroom veteran of 29 Tory  campaigns in federal and provincial  elections and byelections*  The sole female Conservative MP in  the House, she has served as Conservative critic for Indian affairs—she  supports aboriginal rights and Indian  claims to compensation—and is currently Conservative spokesperson for housing and urban affairs.  Before her election she served a term  as executive director of the Committee  for an Independent Canada.  Her interest in the participation of  women in Canadian politics has resulted in a background paper for the Royal  Commission on the Status of Women in  Canada, and a paper on electoral reform to the Parliamentary committee  on election expenses which helped  bring about changes in the Canada Election Act limiting campaign spending. This makes it more financially  feasible for a woman to seek election*.  Flora MacDonald has been described  as a Red Tory. In the collection  entitled Party Politics in Canada,,  Gad Horowitz offered this definition;  "At the simpliest level a Red Tory  is a Conservative who prefers the NDP-  CCF to the Liberals or a socialist  who prefers the Conservatives to the  Liberals, without really knowing why.  At a higher level, he is a conscious  ideological Conservative with some  "odd" socialist notions"..or a conscious ideological socialist with  some "odd" Tory notions."  "The negative response to women in  politics comes from the political  organizations, not the public. The  first political hurdle any candidate  has to get over is the nomination  convention...I simply brought in new  members who supported my views."  "Most people have no very strong feelings one way or another and would vote  as readily for a woman as a man."  "The problem for many women is that  they do not take the time to look at  a strange political organization and  figure out how to participate in it."  Three major obstacles prevent more  women from entering federal politics:  "It is still not the social norm for  husbands to follow their wives to  Ottawa for 10 months,.visiting their  constituencies on the weekends.  And it is far more difficult for women to raise money for campaign funds  than men. Women candidates don't  have the same access to financial  markets.  Another obstacle for women is a lack  of confidence in themselves.  It's  not easy to stand up in Parliament  for the first time, but it can be  done."  "Confidence then surely is the key.  Confidence to take on responsibility.  Confidence to challenge men on equal  grounds. Confidence to handle any  job covering the whole political gambit from making sandwiches and coffee,  participating in policy-making and  organizational positions, to running  ias candidates. In this later role women must recognize that politics is  a profession. Like other professions  political office requires training,  disciplined study and a period of active apprenticeship. Election to office does not happen accidently.  It  entails involvement in and mastery of  an increasingly complex and scientific process. Women must have the confidence and determination to follow this  route through to its logical conclusion  —election to office."  WHAT WOMEN CAN DO—IN AND OUT OF THE  GOVERNMENT «  It is imperative in order to achieve  eal equality that women prove their  credibility to handle any issue—resource development, finance, urban  growth, dominion-provincial relations,  economic affairs. Women in the political area are no longer a novelty—  neither should be the subjects they  are expected to tackle."  "I don't see myself as a member of a  woman's caucus.  I can be more effective as an opposition member pressing  for women's rights."  "Canada's 300 million member female  work force must fight to cid the country of 'one-woman tokenism' and discrimination in work and pay status."  "As more women decide to make politics  their profession and as the women's  movement grows in strength and visibility there is a danger that because  of super-sensitivity to existing sex-  typing, women MPs will be pressured  to direct their attention primarily  to issues relating to women's rights.  But the realization of equal rights  and equal responsibilities cannot be  met by responding only to pressures  that would limit the scope of women's  interests rather than expand them.  Sex-typing in parliamentary eesponsib-  ilities could be the Achilles heel of  women MPs unless they show themselves  capable of handling all areas and  roles."Just as Work opportunity for  the majority of women were traditionally limitied to nurse, secretary and  teacher, responsibilities centering  around education, health and social  services could become the political  issues with which women are constantly identified."  "We need immediate legislation in the  areas of women's rights such as housewives having the opportunity to contribute to the Canadian Pansion Plan,  a national day care centre program  for working mothers, changes in the  Citizenship Act, and an end to discrimination in granting credit to women."  "There is no doubt that the rights  of women are very low in priority.  But no federal cabinet is going to  direct its attention to this area unless a far greater number of women  are elected to the House of Commons."  "But women need not be members of  parliament, senior executives or  leading public figures to take the  lead. Too often we underrate the role  a woman can play if it is not accompanied by an impressive title. Women  are responsibile for the daily running  of virtually every country in the  world."  "Today more than ever it is time women  translated their practical experience  of the day-to-day running of a nation  into active involvement in the processes  by which decisions affecting us are  made.  In the words of Francoise Giroud  Minister <fior the condition of women in  France"The present evolution of women  and the way it will turn out—is to my  mind the most profound revolution that  highly developed societies will have  to contend with—that and the highly  charged question of sharing the power  of decision." Sharing the power of  decision. That is the real change  that will take place as mpre and more  women assume roles of responsibility  in areas of society whether they be  professional, financial or political."  "We live in a democratic society. To  talk about women in politics does not  mean to talk only of those women who  have been elected to the House of Commons or other offices. .Policy formation in our country begins with ideas  expressed by groups like yours.  Ideas  and concerns that are expressed public-  ally, that are. brought to or forced upon the attention of the legislative  policy makers. Women must participate  more and more at this level. They must  be vocal about their concerns. They  must become a force in the society. A  pressure. A group whose concerns go  far beyond those immediately related  to women. Again as Francoise Giroud  said "If you have something to say,  and you are a woman, say it. Just say  it." MEN  TOO?!-  Dr. Helmut J. Ruebsaat submitted  the following notes on a book he  co-authored with Raymond Hull. The  book, entitled The Male Climacteric,  and published by Prentice-Hall, will  be available in Canada in June.  THE MALE-CLIMACTERIC by Dr. Helmut  J. Ruebsaat,MD and Raymond Hull.  'Many men pass fairly smoothly from  adolescence to maturity, to middle  age, and on to old age.  Some men do  not pass smoothly through these stages,  but in some cases the man's physical,  mental and emotional equilibrium is  suddenly deranged. He cannot help  noticing the change; it frightens him.  In other cases there is no such sudden  change: the man himself does not perceive that anything is happening to  him, although his family, friends  and fellow workers notice he has  changed.  The word that aptly describes this  condition is "Climacteric" (an anglicized form of the medical term climacterium, which is derived from the  Greek KLIMAKTER, which means the rung  of a ladder), meaning a major change,  a turning point in human life.  Only recently has discussion of a  "male change of life" been removed -  from the mass media's list of taboo  subjects.  So many men between the  ages of forty-five and sixty are  undergoing major physical and emotional  changes, which produce severe disruptions in their health, careers, and  private lives - as well as in their  societal behaviour - that the subject  can no longer be ignored.  It is not simply a question of sudden  chills or memory lapses - although  these can be humiliating if they occur  at inconvenient times.  Climacteric  symptoms, whether cyclical or indefinitely persistent, can have far-  reaching effects: An executive decision may be based on emotional reactions; a politician may be forced to  make policy judgements at a time of  temporary loss of mental acuity; a  father may disrupt his family's home-  life in pursuit of Illusive and  unrealistic dreams of youth.  It is  time that we openly acknowledge the  existence of the male climacteric,  in order to deal realistically with  the very serious problems it can  cause.  I have to describe separately the  various symptoms and causes of the  male change of life; but they are  not really separate, and cannot be  treated separately. The physical,  mental and emotional are all delicately  intertwined; for best results they  must be diagnosed and treated together.  The following is a summary of the  symptoms most commonly associated with  the male menopause:  1) PHYSICAL  Urinary irregularities (Prostate problems)  Fluid retention (Swelling)  Hot flushes  Chest pains  Heart irregularities  Stomachache and peptic ulcer  Itching and ant crawling sensations  (formication)  Air hunger  Headaches  Dizziness  Backache  High blood pressure  Loss of muscle power and co-ordination  Skin changes, loss or graying of hair  Joint degeneration  Sexual Changes:  Decline of potency  Loss of libido or new sexual urges  (changed sex life)  Mental and Emotional Changes:  Irritability  Fatiguability  Moodiness  Depression  •Insomnia  Weakened mental ability  Loss of self-confidence  Behaviour changes  Age of Onset:  Between 41 and 50: 75% of cases  Between 51 and 60: 25% of cases  The Male Climacteric and the Menopause  The male climacteric results from a  physiological and hormonal aging  process, usually complicated by various psychological and social problems.  The same general terms could be used  to describe the menopause.  It may be  helpful to mention some of the differences between the two conditions and  the different ways in which women and  men react to them:  1. The menopause is inevitable: the  male climacteric is uncertain and  many men never experience it at  all.  2. The woman expects the menopause,  is emotionally prepared for it,  and can get advice from friends,  books, or physicians on how to  cope with it. The typical man  is not prepared for the climacteric; when it comes, he does not  know what is happening to him and  may not get any useful advice.  3. For some men the climacteric  severely curtails their sexual  ability; the menopause does not  have the same effect on women,  although their libido may be  reduced.  It is fair to say, then, that  even for a man who is prepared  for it, the climacteric is at  least as emotionally disturbing  as the menopause for a woman:  for the many men who are not prepared for it, it may be more so.  - Helmut J. Ruebsaat, M.D.  the avid articles  Several Kinesis readers have phoned  or written to tell us about articles  they have come aeross and think other  women would like to know about...  WOMEN AND PSYCHOSURGERY,RAPE BY  SCALPEL, bry Amanda Spake — Viva,  May,1975 — a startling preview of  1984 and the status of women in  psychiatric care. There is presently  an upswing in the use of brain surgery for behaviorial control, in  medical terms, psychosurgery. Approximately 80% of the patients undergoing this treatment are women, discontented with their roles as housewives, mothers, secretaries, teenagers.  Studies have shown the surgery is more effective on women.  OUT FROM UNDER'. A MAJOR REPORT ON  WOMEN TODAY by Susan Edmiston —  Redbook, May/75 — A good 10 page  report on the Women's Movement!  Redbook will send reprints of this  article for 50c each.  Send a self-  adressed, stamped, business-size  envelope to Department B-91, Redbook  Magazine, 230 Park Ave, New York,  New York 10017.  THE REVERENruNANCY HATCH WHITTIG:  THE FEMALE PRIEST WHO LEFT HER CHURCH  RATHER THAN BOW TO SEXIST PRESSURE  by Kathryn Burkhart — Viva, May,1975  — Reverend Whittig is one of the  first eleven women Episcopalina  priests in America although the  church law still does not allow  them.  In 1974, she and ten other  female deacons were authorized by  four progressive bishops to function  as priests. They risked trial, censure," excommunication.  YOU'VE COME A SHORT WAY,BABY by  Walter Stewart — Macleans May/75  — a one page look at the status of  women in Canadian politics.  Word has it that the May issue of  Ladies Home Journal has a good art*-  icle on the TV Women Of The Year  Awards plus one by Erica Jong (Fear  of Flying author) on working and  writing.  And we have heard that the dune  issue of MS. has a section on  women and aging and some new information about the effects of The Pill.  peeps  In a letter to the editors of Ms.  (May issue), Shelley Mintter of California, suggests an alternative to  'person' in such words as 'chairperson'. She objecgs to''person' on  the grounds that it goes against the  modern trends to simplify our lang»-  uage, and furthermore the word ends  in 'son' which is every bit as gender-  ridden as 'man'.  She suggests the  auffix.. *peep'. Try it, it sort of  grows on you—chairpeep, postpeep,  firepeep, policepeeep, hupeepity?,  everypeep, peepkind.... FILM  'Black Holes in Time and Space is  the current production on at the  Vancouver Planetarium.  Forme, there  is always a feeling of excitement  waiting under that domed roof while  the sky slowly darkens and the stars  appear overhead.  This time the atmosphere was heightened by a recording  that had been made of typical sounds  that one might hear around Vancouver  on a spring evening - the splash of  waves on the beach, the cries of birds,  the roar of a jet plane fading away  into the oncoming darkness.  Then abruptly, the audience is pulled  into the centre of a violent and  changing universe.  Thunder rolls and  light flashes across the sky, a star  is formed and a star dies.  By the  effective use of sound and light a  scene is set without the use of a human  voice.  One wonders why this technique  has been so little used in past productions.  Scientific explanations  follow of course, but only after an  atmosphere of wonder, almost of mystery  has been well established. We learn  about the colour and size of stars  and how they die.  Near the end of the show we are propelled towards a black hole that is  hanging above us in space.  Suddenly  the streaks of light flashing into  this black whirlpool slow down and  come to a complete stop.  We have  reached eternity, so to speak. A  voice echoes across to us as if from  another universe beyond the black  hole; suggesting that very possibility  and the fact that our neatly ordered,  scientific explanations may now be  inadequate.  What a disappointment then that this  innovative and exciting show should  be marred by three or four "dramatic  interludes" where two people are  heard talking beside the seashore.  The voices sound strained, but it is  the conversation that really'grates.  The man is obviously wondering at the  vastness of the night sky spread out  before them.  The woman appears to  feel no curiosity or anything else for  that matter.  The best she can manage *  is, "Oh I don't really think about  it." She does ask some inane questions  which the man answers in a grandfatherly  fashion.  She sounds mildly surprised  to learn that the sun is a star. We  hear during one of the interludes that  the woman does not like the dark and  as the voices fade away into the sunrise the man makes the observation  that the dark wasn't really so bad  after all now was it?  At several points the audience groaned,  so I was obviously not alone in my  feelings of impatience.  "Get on with  the show!" one felt tempted to scream.  But why these interruptions? Contrast  perhaps or the need to underline what  was to follow? For laughs even? The  remarks were so corny and the male-  female roles so stereotyped that this  barely seems feasible.  Anyhow, go and see an otherwise  imaginative show and laugh, grit your  teeth, shriek - whatever you do best,  during these several, fortunately  brief, "dramatic interludes".  - Heather Kellerhals  women's magazines  WOMEN'S MAGAZINE  To mark International Women's Year,  Canadian Dimension are publishing a  special edition of their magazine.  The special edition, entitled WOMEN  will be available by mid-May and  will bring together a collection of  original articles — all written by  women.  The articles will provide a  diverse outlook on a broadl range of  topics important to the women's  movement.  Authors include Margaret  Benston, Pat Davitt, Marlene Dixon,  Kay MacPherson, Claire Culhane, Joan  Kuyek, Z. Farid, Anita Shilton Martin,  Dorothy Livesay, Margaret Randall,  Gwen Matheson, Sandra Henneman, Margi  Gordon, Deborah Gorman, Roberta Buchanan and Shelley Gavigan.  This special issue will have a cover  price of $1.00.  For orders of ten  or more the price is 70c each. /  Canadian Dimension, Box 1413, Winnipeg  Manitoba.  THE PEDESTAL  The Pedestal will be publishing again  soon. A new collective has formed  and will be producing the paper as  a lesbian-feminist newspaper focusing on women creating alternatives  to the patriarchy.  Subscriptions will be $3 per year -  the paper will be bi-monthly.  For  information write: The Pedestal  6854 Inverness  Vancouver, B.C.  (324-2421)  Radio  CO-OP  RADIO  Co-op Radio has a weekly program  called Women Unlimited on which  announcements are carried of meetings, conferences etc. plus interviews and reports. Also women's  music—written or performed by  women.  The program is put together and taped  about ten days ahead of broadcasting  (with a repeat 4 or 5 days later).  Information can be submitted ahead  of the 10 day deadline—they'll keep  it on file. They will be glad to  accept suggestions for their programs,  Wbmen Unlimited - 684-8494.  TO  ORDER  FILMS  Two films relating to International  Women's Year are available through  local U.N. information centres or  from the Office of Public Information, United Nations, New York.  The  first film, Fear Women, is a 28 min.  coloured film on the independent business women of Guyana. The second,  Woman Up In Arms,is a 28 min. black  and white film showing 3 generations  of women in an Arabian family and  the context of attitude change. Both  these films could be used for seminars or group discussions.  play  Redlight Theatre, Canada's professional women's theatre, is celebrating IWY with a national tour of the  play "What Glorious Times They Had"  about Nellie McClung and the Canadian suffragists. They will perform  in western cities in June. For information, write: Redlight Theatre,  24 Ryerston Ave, Toronto, Ontario.  -IWY Newsletter  Art  Gallery  THE VANCOUVER ART- GALLERY  SPECIAL EVENTS  Wednesday, June 4 - Solo Recital  Charmian Valentine - Soprano  Noon. Admission free.  Highlights include the Tonadillas  and arias from Giulio Cesare.  Wednesday, June 18 - Young People's  Concert  Donna Hossack - Harpist  Noon. Admission free.  One of a series of concerts Ms.  Hossack has designed for children  featuring the harp in all its      s  aspects.  EMILY CARR BALLET  Ten free performances of a ballet  celebrating the life and work of  Emily Carr will be offered by the  Vancouver Art Gallery in mid-July.  Dates will be announced as soon as  the Gallery's summer installation  schedule has been finalized.  The work, composed by Ann Mortifee  and choreographed by Anna Wyman will  be performed by the Anna Wyman Dance  Theatre in the Gallery's concert  gallery in recognition of International Women's Year.  The production was made possible by  a $25,000 from the Office of the  Secretary of State to conceive,  develop and produce the ballet.  Although the performances are free,  advance tickets will be made available at the Gallery for those wishr  ing to see the ballet.  book  In The Battered Child In Canada, Mary  Van Stolk traces attitudes toward  children back through history to show  the origins of modern misinfanist  attitudes. ( misinfany - hatred of  children) poco  A workshop on Women and Stress is  being planned by the Port Coquitlam  Recreational Centre in cooperation  with the Centennial School for June —  19th. Pre-registration will be  essential!  The Port Coquitlam Women's Centre  Letter Lobby Committee is inviting  interested women to join them in  putting pressure on M.L.A.s and M.P.  to bring about the changes needed  concerning abortion, income tax, day  care, education, affirmative action,  rape, divorce,etc, etc.  The P.Q.  Women's Centre is % P.O. Box 243,  Port Coquitlam, B.C. V3C 3V7  duncan  Duncan's Women's Place is a cosy  little house at the end of Tyee St.  in downtown Duncan.  It certainly  was cosy when I dropped in one recent rainy afternoon. About a dozen  other people had dropped in for the  hot lunch served every Wednesday.  Wall to wall men, women and children.  After a bowl of homemade soup»and  apple crisp, the Place cleared a bit  and I was able to have a long talk  with the co-ordinator Mari Lea, full-  time staff member Faye Griffith,  part-time workers Jacki Jones and  Jori Seitz and Sue Reynoldson who  holds a free expression painting  class at the Place Monday mornings.  Women's Place is funded by a 6 month  L.I.P. grant which expires at the  end of June. (It had a 6 month L.I.P.  grant from Jan.'74 to June'74 as well).  The Place operates mainly as a drop-  in centre as men also have access to  the facilities. C-R groups have be^n  tried, troubled .women are feferred to  Legal Aid, and single mothers meetings are being held. Some of the  women who come to the Place are try*  ing to arrange day care facilities  in Duncan.  feetings of the Focus on Women group  are held at the Place every Tuesday  noon. This group emerged from the  Conference that was held March 22  in Duncan.  Funded by the Secretary  of State IWY program, the Conference  was staged by the Women's Place in  conjunction with women from other    ,.  local groups such as Family Life and  Mental Health.  One hundred and fifty  romen attended a variety of workshops  —women and law, labour, health, home,  finances, continuing education, etc.  The Focus on Women group which emerged from the Conference is trying to  continue with a series of programs.  The next one will be held June 3, at  3owichan Senior Secondary, and will  be a panel of local men and women  discussing changing relationships  in their lives.  Women's Place is hoping to find funds  to carry on but at times they feel  discouraged by the lack of interest  *~  displayed by the community towards  what they are trying to accomplish.  If you live in the Duncan area, drop  by the Women's Place, 447 Tyee St.,  You'll meet some very nice people.  The'11 give you a cup of coffee and  you can exchange thoughts and feelin  ings. Who knows—it could be the  start of something great!  - J,o Lazenby  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  armstrong  A new feminist group is organizing  in Armstrong, B.C. Their first new  project, a conference on breast cancer,was attended by several hundred  women from Salmon Arm, Faulkland,  Vernon and Lumby0 The group is now  looking for resources on the status  of women and a new project to undertake for International Women's Year.  Contact: Carolyn Bethune, General  Delivery, Armstrong, B.C.  —festival—  WESTERN CANADIAN WOMEN'S FESTIVAL,  CASTLEGAR  A cross cultural form of fine arts,  music and crafts to be held in Castle-  gar June 13-14-15-16.  Craft displays, square-dancing in the  grass, superb women musicians, workshops on natural child birth, witchcraft, dance, etc., sunshine and baseball — all in the company of some  fine feminist ^friends'.  ywca  ubc  UBC - THE WOMEN'S- OFFICE  The 'Women in Focus *" series has received funding from the 'Cultural-  Grant' of International Women's Year  resource money"  This money originates from the Women's Programme Dept  of the Secretary of State, Ottawa.  The money is for the production of  video tapes that will contribute  towards social, political and economic change of the position of women  within the society.  The tapes will  make up a new series of 'Women in  Focus' that will be shown in the fall.  They will also be put into a tape  library in the Women's Office, in  -order that all groups and individr  uals may have access to them.  Marion Barling will be working on  the various video tapes and is interested in talking to anybody that  has ideas for these tapes, or resource  people who have special, knowledge of  a particular area. Call: The Women's  Office 228-2082 or 228-6228. Evenings  224-7745.  YWCA is looking for feminists with  special skills to instruct in programs offerred through Women's Information Centre this fall.  If there  is a course you would be interested  in offering please phone Kathy Sopko  683-2531, loc 247, or Alison Boulter-,  local 238, before June 6.  L.I.F.E.—LIVING IS FOR EVERYONE  L.I.F.E. is a group of widowed, separated and divorced women who have  learned from personal experience the  many problems both practical and emotional that a woman may face when she  is on her own.  The L.I.F.E. group meets at the YWCA  every Wednesday at 1p.m.  Membership: $5 per year for members,  $9 for non-members.  Phone:683-2531, local 248 or 238  Group leader: Elsie Palmer.  WOMEN'S INFORMATION CENTRE  The Women's Information Centre is  located on the third floor of the  rVancouver YWCA. The Centre offers:  —information, counselling and encouragement to any woman who wants  to expand or alter her life style,  return to work, retrain or continue  her education, or is going through  major changes in her life  ■—referrals to women-oriented community services for women with personal  or family problems  —resources and assistance for women  interested in consciousness raising  or rap group formations  —involvement in current issues and  actions affecting all women.  nape   rap  For women who have been raped recently  or long ago, and want to talk. Led  by an experienced staff member who is  also a rape victim.  Talk about what  happened as a result of being raped  and how to better deal with it.  One evening a week at Rape Relief,  1027 W. Broadway at Oak.  For further  information contact Mary Laraby at  732-1716.  nanaimo  The Nanaimo Status of Women Study  Group is producing an audio-visual  ..kit dealing with the contriJNitions  of women to the history of B.C.  penticton  A group of women in Penticton have  received OFY funding to open a wo-  en's office in Penticton September 1.  For more information contact: Chris  Dreveny, Co-ordinator, Penticton  Women's Centre, 311 Main St. Penticton  maple ridge   prjnceton  PWTh"7—NOTTS   V,aa   a    r>arA    file    <->f   namoa  CHEZ-NOUS has a card file of names,  addresses and phone numbers of local  "resources such as childbirth education classes, day care centres, diabetic association, Women's Grievance Committee concerned with issues related  to all aspects of discrimination,  Volunteer Grandparents, nutrition information, post partum blues counselling, addresses of women's publications  and single parent clubs, etc.  If you want information call Joyce  at 467-2513 or drop by CHEZ-NOUS.  _Pat Mullin is an elementary school  teacher in Princeton where she is  the B.C. Teachers* Federation Status  of Women representative.  She and  13 other women are meeting weekly  at night school to discuss the socialization of children and hold consciousness-raising sessions.  The  group wants to hear more from other  women's groups in the province.  Contact them at Box 334, Princeton,  B.C. or phone 295-6425. When I was nine years old, I used to  make regular pilgrimages to a park  near our house and watch the boys  flay baseball. When I finally got  jp the nerve to ask if I could join  in, one of the boys replied,"You  gotta have your own mitt before you  can play, those are the rules." This  response was accompanied by a smug  grin: all boys know that girls don't  have their own baseball mitts.- Making one a prerequisite was a clever  way of insuring all male participation.  Not being one who is easily dismayed,  I asked my father to buy me a mitt  as a present for passing Grade 4.  (A short aside: due probably to the  fact that I had no brothers, my father didn't repress any 'male' characteristics that I chanced to exhibit.  Consquently I was sort of slotted into the role of eldest son.) With  this ever-so-necessary object carefully concealed, I gleefully bolted  off to the baseball field.  I repeated my request, which was met with the  anticipated response. To their utter astonishment I was able to produce  the aforementioned piece of equipment.  This was the precise moment of my  induction into the predominantly  male kingdom of sports. "  To say that I was a poor baseball  player would be an understatement:  I was the shits. As it is usually  put, I couldn't walk and chew gum  at the same time.  But I had my mitt  and the boys were stuck with me.  Itbecame painfully obvious to all concerned that something had to be done  about this pushy blond dame who insisted on playing even though she  was atrocious.  So one of the guys,  Clyde Merritt by name, took it upon  himself to tutor me.  Every morning  for the entire summer I would meet  Clyde in the park for my lesson in  how to be a baseball star. He showed me how to run, hit, catch, and  associated phenomena.  In effect,  Clyde taught me how to be co-ordinated.  I emphasize that co-ord-*  ination was something that I learned, not something that exuded naturally from my every pore. For  Clyde, teaching me to play baseball  was a way of ensuring that the skill  level of the game would not drop.  For me, it was one of the luckiest  breaks in my life.  That fall, I joined a Saturday morning bowling league. Of the forty or  so members, I was the only girl. This  time, however, I had the confidence  that bowling, like baseball, was  something I could learn: all it needed was concentration and practice.  Within a few months I was among the  top five bowlers in the league, and  by virtue of my skill had been  acclaimed "one of the boys."  Throughout Junior High and the earlier part of High School, I played  on every team and indulged in every  sport the school had to offer.  In  the morning I ran cross-country, did  wind sprints and jumped hurdles. Noon  hours were devoted to whatever intramural sport was in season, and after  four I would practice with the school  volleyball or basketball team. Evenings were spent doing gymnastics or  modern dance. When track season rolled around, I'd be out there throwing  discus and shotput.  The only flaw in this Eden I had  created for myself was the fact that  I had to play with other girls. From  my personal experience of girls in  Junior High, to say that they are  cruel is like saying that water is  wet. One entails the other by definition. Pour out your feelings to one  of them and you reap double your  weight in excess backstabbing. Little  girls love to know a secret:it is an  effective tool for coercion.  "If you  don't let me go first, I'll tell Johnny that you like him." Oh horrors.  But then these judgements were made  from the outside looking in.  I- had  early been ostrasized from female  society for committing the unforgive-  able sin of loyalty in the face of  group pressure to the contrary.  The  girls in my class had for some reason  decided that my neighbour,Carol, was  a slut, and were conferring about it  whilst the health teacher was out of  the room. When asked to take part in  the denial ceremony I could see no evidence against Carol and hence replied  that I thought she was O.K.  ZAPPO.  "Well, that's because you're a slut  too." So Carol and I were simultaneously thrown out of the gang, and If  you touched either one of us you got  the cootey-bugs.  Carol proved to have  a temporary case of the disease, and  after a few weeks of 'quarentine' was  admitted back into the fold.  For some  reason or other, I was not.  Anyway, these girls were the other  members of the school teams. Their  ring-leader, who throughout Junior  High was the best sprinter in the  city, hated me with a passion.  I  didn't realize exactly how deep her  feeling was until one' morning when as  usual, I went to school early for  cross-country practice.  The changing room was utterly deserted, which  was odd because I was a little late  and everyone else should have been  there.  I wondered for a moment,  shrugged my shoulders, and proceeded  to change my clothes. Because I was  alone, I didn't have to bother turning  my front to the wall as is the normal custom amongst developing girls.  When I had finished, no less than ten  girls jumped out from behind the shower curtains where they had been watching me change. You see, it had been  rumoured as part of the anti-me campaign (another understatement: it was  written over all the stop signs and  community club walls) that I wore  falsies, and the girls had decided to  verify it once and for all.  It was  a pity that they had chosen the changing room as their courtroom.  I did  on occasion stuff Kleenex down my bra  but I had learned that tissues tend  to become soggy and uncomfortable  when; one runs about. Anyways, this  episode was the proverbial last straw.  I was both furious and hurt.  I challenged Bonnie to a fist fight. Fortunately the would-be match was broken up in the initial stages by one of  the teachers.  I would definitely have  lost.  I did manage to get ample revenge on  Bonnie. Later that year a baseball  field was named after her father In  honour of this contribution to the  sport. The night, before the official  christening of the field, I snuck out  of the house and painted in huge block  letters on a billboard at the back of  - the field BONNIE MOFFATT WEARS FALSIES  Not terribly creative, I know, but it  produced the desired effect.  Blow #2  happened when I was named athlete of  the year and Bonnie was runner-up.  Bonnie decided to give up sports because it made her thighs ugly.  I'M STILL AT IT!  High school was sort of the lull before the storm.  By the end of it, I  had decided to specialize in a single  sport, volleyball, which I continue  to play to this dayQ  It is through  my contact with this sport that I can  speak about the politics of athletics  at the national level.  .I cannot write about my experiences  as a national team aspirant without  a negative bias.  I ask you to keep  in mind that what I am about to relate may not be representative of  other sports, and could possibly be  mere fabrications of a person who  failed to accomplish what she had set  out to do and therefore created reasons to keep her ego intact in spite  of that failure.  I would also like  to point out that the organizational  structure which I am going to describe is defunct as of last spring.  First of all, one had to be nominated  to try out for the National Team. Of  course, those coaches who had personal connections with the national coach  or who held executive positions in the  Canadian Volleyball Association placed  more of their players in the try-out  camps than those without pull. And  since the tryouts were always held in  Vancouver, local athletes had a better  chance of being asked to tryout than  players who would have to be transported from the" east, housed and fed.  For instance, the coach of the World  Student Games team had 4 of her own  team members at the tryouts, 3 of whom  made the team. Her team had placed  2ndto UBC in the University Championships, but for some reason only 1  UBC player made the team. The manager of the team had 3 of his players  at the tryouts, which was definitely  out of proportion to the team's performance record.  Players from out of town were housed  together in student dormatories. The  atmosphere was one of subtle hostility: every person was a possible  threat to every other person, because  there were verv few openings on the  printed in Urban Reader,May/75.  team left for the out of province  players. During the years when I  was involved, of the 12 national  team players only 2 or 3 did not play  for B.C. teams.  I am not saying that  the players should have been chosen  on a more equal geographical basis.  The fact is that the level of volleyball in B.C.and of the club team in  particular, is far above the Canadian  standard.  However, it made conditions in the  out-of-town dormitory tense, to say  the least. We didn't relate to each  other as human beings, but as potential obstacles.  If someone got injured condolences were expressed, but  inside, each person was glad that one  of the possible barriers to their own  success had been removed. And the  backstabbing! Everyone was everyone  else's watchdog.  If someone came in  a little late at night, it was cas-  .ually discussed when the appropriate  people (ie. coaches) were within hearing range.  In short, there was no  warmth, no feeling of emotional support.  It was a callous, hostile en*  vironment 24 hours a day.  Only the super stars made the National Team on the basis of skill alone.  After the top 6 or 8 players, skill  level was pretty equal and other factors came into play. One of the most  prominent considerations is the image which one projects.  For instance: in order to play for  the best team in the country, I was  ordered to shave my legs.  It was explained to me that the team must be  careful to come across as feminine,  since funding required public support.  On another occasion, the team was being interviewed for a magazine article. The coach asked two of the  girls to come early, when the writers  would be arriving. They were to wear  dresses, make-up, etc, and generally  chit-chat before changing into their  sweatsuits. The whole thing was staged in order to convince the writers  that women in athletics are really  feminine at heart, in spite of their  interests in sports.  The most crucial event which affected  me personally was during the 1973 tryouts. For an entire year I had dedicated myself totally to training.  I  won't bore you with the details, but  rest assured I gave it everything I  had. On the day that the selection  was to be announced, I was confident  that I would be named to the team.  Each person was told separately, and  when my turn came I was told that I  hadn't made the team, I was the alternate.  I couldn't understand it.  I  asked why. The coach rattled off a  list of reasons, all connected with  my skill level. Yet I felt that I  was a better player than the person  who had been chosen.  (She by the wayr  was so sure that she wouldn't make  the team that she had phoned home  and told them that she'd be back the  next day.) After a few days had passed and I had regained enough composure  to talk about it, I asked the assistant coach the same question. He told  me that yes, I was the better player.  However, the coach had felt that I  was too .much of an individual, that  my personality was not harmonious with  the others, and that I didn't project  an appropriate image. In short, he  didn't like me.  I can accept that  personality is a valid criteria of  selection.  I object to the fact that  the coach didn't have the guts to tell  me the . real reason.  Even after this experience, I decided to give it one more try. By being  named the alternate I had been rated  as #13 player, and the team selected  :for the next competition was to have  18 players.  In the intervening peri:  iod 2 of the top players had quit,  which in theory placed me as #11.  Sounds like I'm a sure bet, doesn't  it? Wrong again. Not only was I not  named to the team^I was not even an  alternate.  I finally got the hint  and gave up trying.  As I said, I still play competitive  volleyball. I play for pure love of  the sport rather than trying to make  it into the upper echelon. Now that  I've told you the shit, I'd like to  tell you what keeps me in the busir.  ness.  I think that the quality that I initially valued was the game structure itself. When you are playing a  game, you are actually participating  in another reality. Physically, the  boundaries of that reality are marked  off by gymnasium walls, lines on a  court', special clothing,etc. etc.  You operate according to game rules  and attitudes which have credence  only within the physical boundaries.  Whatever is happening in my life,  good or bad, is forgotten as soon  as the practice or the game begins:  it has no place in the validity  structure of this other world. I ass  sume this is the quality which at^  tracts some people to meditation or  makes others avid movie goers.  It  is a parenthetical period of time  which contains its own beginning,  evolution, climax and end.  It is  something which totally absorbs the  participants.  In everyday life, one is rarely willing to put oneself in a vulnerable  gain everything, lose everything position. The stakes are too high.  Within the game structure, it happens  all the time." Of course, the intensity of experience is directly proportional to the belief you invest in the  particular game. That is, you have  to take the game seriously, be absorbed by it;,to feel the urgency of the'  situation.".you're playing basketball,  your team is one point behind with 5  seconds on the clock, and you have  the ball. Your decision (perhaps  gut instinct is a more apt term) will  determine the outcome of the game.  You are in a position where you can  either fail entirely or succeed entirely. There's no in between and no  excuses. You just do. It is situations like this which keep me in competitive sport as opposed to physical  activity in general. The depth of  feeling, whatever the outcome, lets  me know I'm alive.  Sport requires total involvement,  physically and mentally. One must  be completely in the present tense,  not lamenting the past or contemplating the future. How often are one's  energies so focused that all else is  involuntarily forgotten?  I think  that this total concentration and  joy of accomplishment which is usually the end product are extremely  valuable experiences0  In one of my classes at school, a  person was talking about what it  meant to him to be a musician. He  said that up to a certain point, he  is in control0 That is he is the  one who sits down and practices, who  acquires proficiency in the technical skills.  Gradually, the techni-r  ques become so well learned that his  mind does not have to think about  them in order to perform them. This  leaves his mind free to operate on  another level. He will start to make  up a song, and eventually he is so  involved that he doesn't know whether  he's actually in control of the notes  he is playing or whether he is a vech-  icle and the entire thing is happening  through him but not by him.  I have had the same experience in  volleyball.  I have practiced the  skills to the point where I don't  have to think about them—that goes  through some kind of automatic processing system. Consequently, it  sometimes happens that during a game  that I, free from technical worries,  transcend to a level where I am not  sure of the source of my decisions.  I just get so caught up in the flow  of the game that the right thing happens through me.  It's not even that  I have a conscious inkling that a  certain play is the right one to  make.  I am more surprised than anyone else at what I've done.  It was  n't a decision, and a conscious reasoning process had nothing to do with  it.  It just happened. I am totally  involved in the game and qhe game  tells me what to do.  In a religious context, I suppose  this would be labelled as a mystical  experience. At least, if I were ever  to have a religious experience, I expect it would happen along these  lines.  I am telling you all this  to illustrate the depth of meaning  which sports has for me,and the intensity of experience I have felt  through it. These are the reasons _  I play, in spite of the more disagreeable characters and situations I  have met along the way.  - Peggy Day 12  The following is an excerpt from a  letter by Linda Forsythe, friend of  a VSW member, describing her overview on the situation of women in  Ireland as she travels in that country.  April 14,1975.  "Well, I've been in Ireland for just  over a week now. The situation for  women is incredible. Women either  get married and have an average of  five kids,or they go into the convent.  The Church's presence is shown in  every institution in the society.  Birth control is unacceptable(i.e.  condoms).  It was defeated by the  government vote. About half the women are on the pill under the pretense of regulating periods. People  are allowed to have condoms but it  is illegal to sell them!  So most  people get theirs through the mailorder from England, or smuggle them  over the border from the north.  Letter  trom Ireland  Abortion is illegal, even if the  mother's life is in danger. If  there has to be a choice of who .  lives, mother or child, then it is —  the child.  If a person wants an  abortion, they have to go to England,  which means that only those who can  afford it, go. I've been told women  IVmSH are Spiit 50/50 on the abortion issue,  SEA a8e roakes no difference. Apparently  young men are generally anti-abortion. Had a long talk with a young  man about 25 and he generally expressed the whole 'right-to-life'  sentiment.  Women who get pregnant either get  married or give the child up for  adoption. It is quite unusual for  a woman to raise a child by herself.  It seems that both she and the child  would be at a. disadvantage, the child  because it would be a "bastard" and  the mother because it is doubtful  that anyone would marry her.  There is no divorce in Ireland. The  Church says so and the laws enforce  it.  So again, those who can afford  it go to England to divorce. But  the more common case is that the husband deserts and is never heard from  again. The woman is left to raise  the family alone and usually goes  on some form of welfare. There are  approximately 20,000 women in this  situation. The Church refuses to  acknowledge it as a problem, and  therefore doesn't offer any support.  There was a women's conference at L  the University of Dublin.' last week.  I talked to a woman who went to most  of the talks. They were on equal  pay, birth control, homosexuality,  male/female issues.  The typical Irish marriage is incredible. The men spend their spare  time at the pubs. The women either  stay home with the kids, or,more  recently, go to bingo. The men and  women rarely seem to communicate.  All the people I've talked to say  this is usually the norm. Men and  women don't really know much about  each other.  When I arrived here, I hitched from  Shannon down along the south west  coast to Tralee, Killarney and Cork  and then cut up to Dublin.  Got rides  mostly from travelling salesmen.  For two days running both men who  gave me and another woman a ride,  invited me to spend the night with  them.  I was really pissed off since  I was told the most agressive an  Irish man would be is to invite me  for a beer.  I talked with a few  people about it and. they seem to  think it has more to do with the  Irish notion of what North American  women and feminists are all about,  especially those travelling alone."  IWY'75  PRE-EMPLOYMENT TRAINING FOR WOMEN OF  0AKALLA  On the recommendation of Gene Errington,  provincial co-ordinator for Status of  Women Program, Provincial Secretary  Ernest Hall has provided a $4,475  grant to provide pre-employment training for the women of Oakalla. This  training will be in addition to the  academic upgrading now available to  inmates.  In outlining the need for such training Jenny Deering, the Oakalla Education Co-ordinator for BCIT industrial service, stated that male inmates have traditionally had a wider  range of job opportunities to turn  to when they get out. Many have experience in skilled trades and highly paid labouring jobs. Women inmates do laundry, hairdressing, sewing and cooking and have little hope  of finding rewarding jobs when they  get out.  Ten or twelve women in oakalla will  be involved in a seven-week pre-  employment training 'pilot project'.  Because of the time limit this will  be an orientation program that will  introduce the women to such wide-  ranging subjects as crafts, human  relations, problem solving, personal  development, basic office routine,  switchboard operation, veterinarian  aide, child care, forestry work and  career study. The hope is that the  program might point some women in a  direction that could hold promise  for their future. The last phase  of the course will be instruction  on how women can go about finding  the jobs of their choice.  Considerable interest has been shown  in veterinarian aide and child care  aide as well as outside jobs such as  forestry field work.  Gene Errington is hopeful that interest in individual grants(up to $5000)  will begin to fan out from the Lower  Mainland to women's groups throughout the province. Priority will be  given to proposals from outside the  Lower Mianland and to proposals that  would have a Drovince-wide effect.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S YEAR PROJECT  The Women's Auxiliary of the United  Fishermen and Allied Workers Union  has initiated a project to research  and write a booklet on the part played by women in the building of the  trade union movement: in B.C. This  important aspect of our history has  long been neglected.  Effort will be concentrated on the  role of women in the trade union movement, whether actual members or not.  The Women's History Project will be  dependent for information from trade  union files, personal recollections  and data, and public archives. They  will be travelling around the prov-,  ince seeking information and using  the archives of various cities.  They are requesting aid from trade _  unionists and interested people. If  you, your organization or your union  can supply information please contact: Women's History Project  United Fishermen & Allied  Worker's Union  138 East Cordova Street  Vancouver, B.C.  Phone: 684-1744 or 684-3254 Wnmen  and Wnrrls  I believe in" the use of words.  I  believe that if I am left free to  listen long enough to your words, I  will begin to understand the oneness  in us, that oneness which once perceived makes me feel pain when you  are hurt.  I believe that words can  make me feel your acceptance, where  before I felt only the threat of  your presence. Words can take knowledge and understanding in you and  place that same knowledge and understanding in me. Words are to me the  means by which you and I come to feel  contentment with each other, and  because with each other, with our  environment.  But I also believe that we live in a  world where words are being used to  destroy us.  They are being used to  tell us that we aren't what we are,  that we like what we dislike, that  we can't when we know we can. Words  are being used to take from us our  autonomy, our oneness with the universe  in which we live, our greatness and  our infinitesimal minuteness. Words  are being used to destroy our faith  in ourselves, our innate knowledge  that truth is truth as we perceive it,  subject to change upon a change in our  perception.  Perhaps in no area have we done ourselves greater harm than in our abdication of responsibility for our collective actions for and against one  another. We have let words lull us  into accepting government by people  we do not trust, and allowed that  government to impose upon us rules  we cannot understand. We have allowed  another group in our society to persuade us that they can understand  the rules which we cannot, and allowed  ourselves to believe that understanding would protect us from our  own ignorance and apathy. We have  allowed that group to impose their  priorities upon us, and persuade us  that their priorities represent some  objective, external concept called  right. We are merciless to fight  them, because we can fight only with  our words in our political lives,  our legislatures, and ultimately in  our courtrooms. Ultimately we must  lose, for the ultimate forum is theirs -  the court room.  Regardless of our  political victory, we have reserved to  lawyers the final victory, the right  to interpret what we have said in the  laws we wrote.  And when we strike out at them, they  wave before us a degree from one of  our universities, a paper which says  they understand what we do not.  They  need only learn that which others like  them have required them to learn, and  we submissively bow to their superior  knowledge.  I have been to law school, and I have  sat through classes convinced that if  that is reality, I am insane.  I have  read judgments telling me that there  is no opening in a three-sided garage,  that no reasonable man would act In  the best interests of his neighbour,  that our laws do not discriminate if  they discriminate against every member  of a particular class.  I have seen  the Supreme Court of Canada determine  that a woman is not included within  the meaning of the word "person", and  known the court to read "enacted before  or after the coming into force of this  Act" as meaning enacted before this  Act.  I have s<ien the judgments which  must always be made, according to this  group of people, upon the premise that  the Parliamentarians knew the law when  they set out to change the law. And I  have read the Parliamentary debates in  which the Parliamentarians who knew  the law, knew a different law than  the Supreme Court of Canada.  I have been in the classroom in which  those persons are taught the difference  between telling part of the truth and  being heard, and telling all the  truth and being held in contempt of  court. And I have been in the classrooms in which those lawyers learned  that justice and right are not "relevant considerations" for law classes.  And now I realize why we fight as  women to enter that arena. We fight  to enter because as oppressed members  of our society, we are best able to  view the oppression of others. We  fight to enter because we hear the  lack of meaning in the words they use,  and want our words heard. We demand  representation on the bench because  we ask that our reality have a part  in the reality we are told is this  objective standard called truth. We  ask to be heard because we have learned  that prejudice is the word we attach  to a refusal to recognize all truth  as subjective reality; bigotry to my  belief that my subjective reality is  everyone's objective reality God's  reality, for lack of a better definition.  I wonder if we can win.  Can we win  if we prepare our women with nothing  better than the men had to prepare  them? Can we win anything ultimately  of value if we simply send our women  into courtrooms to play the roles men  have played, adopt their modes of  behaviour, and speak their words?  Man's way has been to make war.  Women's way has been to love, to wait,  to make learning possible.  If we are  sending our women into the public  arena, do we do enough if we send  them there trained in man's way   trained to fight rather than teach,  trained to sell out rather than stand  judged upon their ideals, trained to  speak rather than to listen?  When will we learn that our best  defense against our accusers is not  a lawyer speaking, but a court understanding? That a better world comes  not from the talking, but from the  listening? From caring, rather than  condemning?  - Lee Masters  people's   law  school  All courses and materials free.  June 2,3,4,5.  CRIMINAL PROCEDURES  Place : Kitsilano Library  Time:  7:30 - 9:30 p.m.  Instructor: Leo McGrady  Outline: What to do in your first  contact with police; getting a lawyer;  dealing with your lawyer; the court  appearance and trial; appeal  June 16,17,18.   IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES  Place: Vancouver Public Library  Time:  7:30 - 9:30  Instructor: Don Rosenbloom,lawyer  Outline: Nominating and sponsoring  immigrants, acquiring landed immigrant  status, deportation and bail, inquiry  and appeal procedures.  Vancouver People's Law School is now  making their booklet "Women and the  Law" available to independent women's  groups for 25c per copy, plus cost  of postage.  This booklet presents  an overall view of the legal position  of women in B.C. as wives, mothers,  employees, consumers, offenders and  victims.  Vancouver People's Law School has  produced video and audio tapes as  part of their community legal education project. The tapes cover a variety of subject areas with experts  from various fields of law acting as  resource persons. These tapes may be  borrowed and anyone wishing to do so  should obtain the VIDEO/AUDIO CATALOGUE  from the Vancouver People's Law School.  Vancouver People's Law School Legal  Information Booklets  Contact the Vancouver People's Law  School for a list of their booklets.  The booklets cost 50c each and cover  a wide range of topics.  Contact:  Vancouver People's Law School, Ste.  610, 207 West Hastings, Vancouver  Phone: 681-7532  directory  WOMEN TOGETHER  Women Together has received funding  from Gene Errington, Provincial Coordinator of Status of Women, to carry  out their IWY project. They will compile a Women's Directory of B.C. which  will list businesses owned and operated by women, professional women,  craftswomen, artists and women working full Or part time on projects  through their homes. The purpose of  this directory is to attempt to break  down the stereotype image of women in  business, thus expanding the public's  and the business community's awareness of the variety of businesses  and services controlled by women.  Also, the directory will offer free  publicity that will help to promote  women in business.  There is no charge for the listing.  Written consent is required. Contact:  Women Together, %Carol Norman, #205-  6750 Balmoral St, Burnaby, B.C. Phone:  524-0885. IWY PROJECT  Our Sect'y of State funded  IWY project entitled "Vancouver  Status of Women in the community"  is rolling along well. Nadine  Allen and Diana Bissell have  sent out introductory letters to  24 local community and neighbourhood centres and so far the response  is terrific.  For your info, our  project involves presenting a "Status  of Women Learning Program" at all  these centres. The program is  being tailor-made for each centre,  could run from 2-6 weeks and  will include an introduction of  VSW and IWY, Women & Employment,  Daycare, Women & the Law, Chang-~  ing Roles of Men & Women, Sexism  in Education and the Media, etc.  We have lots of resource material  to share with the participants  and will have large display units  made up to take with us. We are  very excited about going out  into the community helping women  understand what the women's  movement is all about. Our  experiences at the 50 odd  speaking engagements completed  in the last months have convinced  us that the women are "ready" to  hear what we have to say. If  there are any members who would  like to help in this project,  either in putting info kits  together or assisting in the  actual presentations - we welcome  you! Call the office to  volunteer. 736-3746.  WE GO PLACES  Our Vice-President, Nancy Conrod,  represented VSW at the National  Action Committee on the Status of  Women annual convention in Winnipeg  in early May. May 23-24 Nadine  Jo and Diana attended a leadership  seminar presented by the University  Women's Club. On June 8-11 Glinda  will be doing a seminar at the  Child Welfare League of America  convention in Vancouver.  From  June 13-16 several staffers will  be taking part in the Western  Canadian Women's Festival being  held in the Kootenays. On that  same weekend, Nadine flies to  Trail to assist in a non-sexist  workshop for teachers.  ■CHILEAN WOMEN  You know, this office is just about  the most interesting melting pot of  happenings. A few weeks ago two  women walked in, with assorted  children in tow, and identified  themselves as Carmen and Anna-Marie,  refugees from Chile. They and other  Chilean women had formed a group  in Vancouver and wanted to reach out  at this time to other women in the  community - how could they do this?  -where could they do it? - could'  we help them? Well, see page 17  for their article, and come to  the Chilean Women's Night at  the VSW offices, Thursday, June  19 beginning at 7:30. The group  is putting on the whole evening  there will be singing, handcrafts,  conversation, food and hopefully  it will mark the formation of a  support group for these women  who have left their homeland under  duress.  KITS DAY  Kits Day is a community celebration  of the Kitsilano area of Vancouver.  On Sunday, June 22, the 1975 Kits  Day will happen and we will be there  in full force, seeing as how our  offices are located in the middle  of Kits! At present we are inform*  ing other local women's groups  about the day as it presents a  terrific chance to be visible,  sell publications etc. Besides,  it's fun - see you there!  HOTLINE ON WOMEN  Bonnie Kreps of Chatelaine is a  regular subscriber of KINESIS  and has included a number of  mentions/articles on VSW in  her "Hotline on Women" column  over the past few months.  Thank-you Bonnie - it has  brought in a flood of new members  and requests for more info  from all across the country.  • ' '     II  31, !  V4^  88ft?  Diana Bissell  WRITER'S WORKSHOP  Four graduates of the UBC  Writing Workshops, one male  and three females, are missing  the stimulus and creative  criticism of a live audience  and would like to assemble a  larger group to continue through  the summer. They have space in  which to meet and can work out  methods of duplicating material.  They range from undergrads to  mature students and if any VSW  members are interested in  seriously and consistently  writing throughout the summer  please call Joyce Meyer or Misty  Hasmann at 731-0966.  VERBAL SELF-DEFENCE  Well folks, its coming.  Our  book that is - our "Ultimate  Guide for Handling Put-Downs"!  The verbal self-defence group  has met 4 times and so far we  have 35 put-downs with our  responses. A few more meetings  and we should have it all  together.  So be patient, the  bestseller of IWY is coming.  Or even better, why not be a  help and share your knowledge  with the verbal self-defence  group, Monday, June 9 at 8 A.M.  C.A.R.A.L.  Those initials stand for the  Canadian Ass'n for Repeal of  the Abortion Laws. The organization is based in eastern  Canada and a Vancouver chapter  has just been formed. The  group here intends to co-ordinate  a province-wide petition calling  for abortion law repeal and the  pardoning of Dr. Morgentaler.  There is a massive job in front  of us, and we need your help.  A core group has been meeting  at the VSW offices, please  join us at our next meeting  on June 11, at 7:30 pm.  C.A.R.A.L. pamphlets and  membership forms are available  at the office for interested  members and groups, drop by or  write for them.  (Late flash - we just found an  empty space in the paper before  taking it to the printers, so  turn to page 18,,read the petition,  sign your name to it and send it  in to the C.A.R.A.L. address today.  The Committee of One Million are  presenting their petition to  Trudeau this week - and they are  making it seem as if the majority  of Canadians want abortion  outlawed, whereas polls show that  62% of Canadians wish abortion law  repealed. You must speak up for  yourself., turn to page 18 and  we'll help. )  C.R. GROUP  Urgent - new consciousness  raising group forming here on  Monday, June 9 at 7:30 p.m.  Give yourself a present for IWY,  join our C.R. group and make  things happen for yourself.  For more info - 736-3746.  SUMMER STAFF  We have 3 women students working  with us all summer on a Sect'y  of State Student Community Service  Program. They are Leslie Dixon,  who is putting together our much-  needed audio-visual library, Sheera  Wiseman, resident "art person",  already frantic with plans for  more t-shirts, posters, display  units etc., and Leslie MacDonald  who is in charge of co-ordinating  a High School Women's program for  the summer.  If there's anything  there you'd like to help with,  give them a call.  SETTER LOBBY  The Letter Lobby Committee sent a  mailing to all MPs and Cabinet on  May 12 protesting the delays in  passage of Bills C-16, C-20 and  C-52, as well as pressing for  establishment of a Federal Human  Rights Code, improvement of rape  laws, more capital support for  daycare, repeal of abortion laws,  and more funding/advertising for  birth control. A personal letter  was enclosed for each Cabinet  Minister and so far they have  all responded fairly positively,  although the bills are apparently  still in committee.  See page 15  for this month's Letter Lobby  action request. letter  lobby  The Letter Lobby issue this month is  a very serious one, so bear with us  as we try to explain it in less than  three pages! Here goes. Air  Canada .and the Canadian Air Lines  Flight Attendants Ass'n (C.A.L.F.A.A.)  are presently negotiating a contract  that would discriminate against  female flight attendants.  BACKGROUND - Prior to 1974, women  (stewardesses) were not allowed  to become pursers, only males could  serve as pursers.  In 1974, two  seniority lists were established.  One was for persons in the "in-  charge" (formerly purser) category, and the other for flight  attendants (formerly stewardesses).  Women could now qualify for "in-  charge' positions and seniority  on these lists was based on time  served with the company.  PROBLEM = the new proposed contract  is discriminatory in that it states  all people who served as pursers  prior to 1974 (remember, females  were not allowed to become pursers  prior to 1974) would automatically  have seniority today over any woman  qualified for "in charge" service,  even if she had already served the  company as a flight attendant for  28 years!  What has happened* very simply, is  that seniority on the "in charge"  list under this new contract would  no longer be based on the amount  of time any person had spent with  Air Canada, but rather, would  be based on the amount of time  that person had spent in the  purser position.  Since prior  to 1974 women were not allowed  to become pursers, how on earth  can they qualify for this new  "definition" of seniority? The  answer is - they can't and you  have the ridiculous, insulting  and discriminating position of  a regular flight attendant with  perhaps 10 years service,,  qualifying herselr for an "in-  charge" position but her years  as a regular flight attendant  would make no difference to her  seniority placement on that  "in-charge" list because she  had never been a purserJ  She  would lose her company seniority  to a man who may have served for  only 2 or 3 years.  This may seem long and involved,  (it's taken about 6 re-writes  to capsule it this far!) but  please stick with it and write  a letter. Air Canada is a  crown corporation and should  be an example to private  enterprise. Please write out  the following letter in your  own hand and send to the  Hon. Jean Marchand, Minister  of Transport, Hon. Marc Lalonde,  Minister Resp. for Status of  Women, and to your own M.Pl  All of those can be addressed  "House of Commons, Ottawa,  Ontario" - no stamp needed,  just write ft0HMS" in the  upper right hand corner.  While you're at it, send a copy  to Mr. Yves Pratt, President of  Air Canada,place Ville Marie,  Montreal, 113 Quebec.  Dear Sir:  Air Canada and the Canadian  Air Lines Flight Attendants  Association are presently  negotiating a contract that  would discriminate against  female flight attendants.  Very simply, it states that a  person's seniority on the "in-  charge" list will be based  upon the time that person has  spent within an "in-charge"  position rather than the  overall time that person has  spent with the company. Since  prior to 1974 women were not  allowed to be in an "in-charge"  (formerly purser) position, all  males who served as pursers prior  to 1974 would automatically  have seniority over any woman  qualified for an "in-charge"  position, even if she had  served the company for 28  years.  W urge you to pressure Air  Canada to refuse to negotiate  such a discriminatory contract.  I also point out that this is a  clear example of women having  no recourse to adequate federal  human rights legislation and  again urge you to press for  immediate enactment of such  legislation.  responses  Dorothy Holme, Co-ordinator of the  Letter Lobby Committee recently sent  a lengthy questionnaire to Dr.  Katie Cooke of the Advisory Council  on the Status of Women and we thought  you might be interested in reading some of Dr. Cooke's responses.  Q. "We are concerned with our income;  tax system that is still so strongly biased in favour of married women  remaining in the home...as long as  women are looked at in this manner,  the first principle of the Royal  Commission Report (Women should be  free to choose whether or not to  take employment outside of their  homes) is being violated.  Can  you visualize any real progress  in this area in the ,fprseeable  future?"  A; "It is really too premature  to make any statement about  what ACSW will be recommending  to the government vis-a-vis  taxation as we simply do not  yet have the basic facts from  which to formulate recommendations.  We will be examining RCSW recommendations 130-2 and will .  certainly be going beyond them  in our assessment of their  validity, and of discriminatory  provisions in the income tax act  in general."  Q. "Our group is very concerned  with Rec. #28 of RCSW which asked  that the federal gov't undertake  a study of the feasibility of  making greater use of part time  work in the Canadian Economy...  however I don't think any progress  can or should be made in this  field until we make part time  work more attractive from a  taxation point of view."  A. "As far as our mandate is  concerned, ACSW at the federal  level is now looking into the  question of part-time work in  the Public Service with Treasury  Board officials.  I definitely  feel that part-time employment  holds one of the very real'  possibilities for remedying the  employment problems that all  employers must soon start  grappling with if the situation  is not to get out of hand in  the future. You may be interested  to know that Labour Canada Officials  have- contracted a study of part-  time employment in Canada.  By  Fall a preliminary review will  hopefully be completed."  Q. "We have heard very few details about the inclusion of housewives into the Canada Pension  Plan lately, except that progress  is being made. In view of the  troubles that many private  pension plans are facing, how  optimistic can women be that  housewives will be included in  the near future.  A. Dr. Cooke sent us a background paper prepared by ACSW  on the inclusion of housewives  into CPP and we quote from it  here - "The ACSW and CPP Advisory  Committee have been requested _  by the Minister of Health and  Welfare to reach an agreement  on a plan for introducing housewives into the CPP. The ACSW  has presented 5 alternative  proposals to the CPP Board and  they have advised that they  reject and accept two.  It  considers both the general  splitting of pension credits  and the splitting pension  credits on marriage breakdown to be acceptable alternatives  for government consideration.  However, because of the social  implications of any such amendments to the law, it has  declined to endorse either of  the two acceptable approaches to  the exclusion of the other. The  ACSW presses for the acceptance  of the general splitting proposal,  with a provision for the splitting  of past accumulated credits on the  breakdown of marriage."  If you are interested in the work  the Advisory Council on the Status  of Women is doing, write to their  Ottawa office (63 Sparks St.,  Box 1541, Station B, Ottawa, Ont.)  for free copies of their background  papers on "Rape", "Housewives and  the C.P.P.", "Family Planning,  Conception & Birth Control",  "Matrimonial Property", and more.  See May KINESIS for a complete  listing. Women in engineering  cont'd  The first part of the article on  Women and Engineering appeared in  the May issue of Kinesis. This  second part deals with some of the  things that are being done and some  of the things that we think should  be done to help women enter and  participate equally in male-dominated professions such as Engineering.  After talking to these women, I felt  I could see a pattern emerging. The  women who had received their training  in Europe had not any time in their  school careers or their professional  life in Europe been treated as if  their choice of a career was strange  or unsuitable. Although they had had  to make their choice at an early age  — about 12 years old — they hadn't  seemed to need the influence of an  encouraging role model. There was  nothing unusual about them making  use of their interest and ability in  Math and Science in a concrete practical way.— and Engineering was such  a way. The women who had trained in  North America had usually had the  good fortune at some time in their  school-life in attracting the interest of a teacher who encouraged them  to make use of their proficiency in  Science and who bolstered their courage to enter a 'male field.' Mildred  S. Dresselhaus, writing in,Women and  Success — The Anatomy of Achievement  remembers her freshman physics professor who "suggested a career in  science would be more suitable than  elementary school teaching and she  maintained an interest in me throughout my undergraduate days at Hunter  College and broadened my horizons by  many orders of magnitude." Or some  women are turning to Engineering the  way Sanrda Haslin did — they find  the courses they are taking or the  degree they have received is not exactly what they want and they enter  Engineering.  Some transfer from one  faculty to another, others with a  degree in Math, Physics, Computer  Science, etc., return to take a Masters in Engineering to give themselves  more choices in their chosen field.  In fact, Dr. Moore reports that there  are more women in the graduate program of Engineering than in the fourth year graduating class.  In any case it is obvious that more  needs to be done to make women aware  of the opportunities for careers in  Engineering — and this is true of  the other male-dominated fields. As  the Hon. Graham Lea, Minister of  Highways stated at the Women in Engineering Seminar,"It is fundamentally wrong that any group of citizens,  who are otherwise capable of pursuing  meaningful careers, should be barred  from that pursuit because of accidents  of birth, such as sex, or persuasion."  So what is being done? Well, there  are the attemps by the Engineering  Faculty to recruit students.  In Sept.  there will be a Storefront Vocational Information Centre set up by the __  Dept. of Manpower and Immigration  and the Vancouver School Board, where  Vancouver students will be able to  receive more information about possible career choices. And hopefully  cousellors will take more iniative  in encouraging female students with  interests in previously-designated  male fields to pursue these interests.  The Dept. of Highways has set up a  Task Force on Opportunities for Women  in Engineering Professions. Tha Chairperson of the Commission is Linda  Shuto, Executive Assistant for the  Status of Women Program, B.C.T.F.,  and other members are: Dan C. Lambert,  of Association of Professional En*  gineers in B.C., Robyn Smith who has  worked as a draftsperson in Engineering offices, and Virginia Holtby,  a teacher who has been active in the  womenfs movement.  The task force  will investigate the effects of elementary and secondary education on  the number of girls who choose to  go into engineering; the effect of  parental guidance on career choices;  the effect of community attitudes  on career choices; and the financial  restraints on women who might enter  engineering; attitudes of teachers  and fellow students within the university on women, training to be engineers; opportunities for employment  upon graduation; and circumstances  of on-the-job training.  Mr. Lea acknowledged that the reason  why so few women enter engineering  is "linked to the reason why women  have traditionally been at an economic disadvantage within our society  and cannot be separated from the  issue of equal-pay-for-eqaal-work  as it affects all working women. We  cannot," he said, "separate the ability of middle class families to assist  their female children to become engineers from the ability of poor  Native families to assist their female students in completing Grade 8"  In a telephone conversation, Linda  Shuto expressed the hope that the  task force will point out kinds of  obstacles and problems that prevent  women from entering male oriented  jobs and the economic reasons behind  many of these obstacles. These  reasons would also apply to other  male oriented fields. One reason  why there are so few women in engineering,Ms. Shuto feels, is because  engineers are employed mainly by  privateindustry and government —  there are no service angencies, etc.  — and private industry "is notoriously slow in entering the 20th Century  of human rights." This was illustrated by Mr^ George Taylor, Personnel  Manager of H.A. Simons(international)  Ltd., and a member of the Seminar  panel, who revealed that of the 170  engineers employed by his firm not  one was a woman. A woman engineer,  he explained, would face a lot of  problems of acceptance if his firm  had to send her to a foreign country.  More than here in Canada? The mind  boggles!  Now — what needs to be done? At  the Seminar Hr. Lea admitted that  it is one thing to "set a policy at  the top, but it doesn't always go  all the way to the bottom.  It's O.K.  to talk liberal here, but its a lot  different when the men are together  and the women aren't around." Well,  maybe it is time for "the top" to  take the responsiblity of making sure  the policy does go all the way to  the bottom, that their"liberal policies" are carried out. And its  time the government made a committment to Affirmative Action.  In answer to a question from the' floor,  Dr. Pedan said that Affirmative Action  in the USA has made a great difference in the awareness and acceptance  of women in fields such as engineering. We could use that here — and  this is a good place to start. The  government should be exemplary in  providing women equal opportunity  in their choice of career and lifestyle. This would place the onus  where it belongs — on the employer.  Women's Studies courses should be  introduced into all High Schools.  They would broaden the horizons for  male and female students. Hip.h School  women should be encouraged to develop and use their talents and abilities. Parents should encourage their  daughters to prepare themselves to  be independent by planning for careers  that they will find fulfilling. To  help parnnts do this, the schools  should make real efforts to keep  parents informed and involved in  their children's education and the  change in attitudes about females  and careers.  Women who are returning to work or  who are considering a new type of  work should consider some of the  former male preserves and investigate some of the mature student programs available.  And to end with a word of advice from  Mildred S. Dresselhaus, of the Electrical Engineering Dept. and Centre  for Material Science and Engineering  Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  Cambridge.. (again from Women and Success) "My advice to women starting;  careers and women in careers is: relax, enjoy every moment of life, act  and be yourself, exploit every opportunity that comes your way, stick up  for yourself, arrange your personal  affairs so that you can succeed in  your professional activities. My  advice to men associated with profess-  tionalwomen is to act supportively  and encouragingly to your women coll-  egues; invite them to share in the  action and the social life of the  group; do not assign a woman a job  that is so difficult few men would  succeed at it; nor should she be  assigned a job that she is not qualified to do. Men should consult with  women directly about women's affairs,  and not assume to know all the answers  prior to such consultation."  -Jo Lazenby GHILEAN WOMEN  On September 11, 1973, the decocrati-  cally elected Popular Unity government  of socialist Salvador Allende was  overthrown by a brutal military coup.  Thousands of people were killed in  the following weeks, and repression  and violence continue today.  Thousands  more are in prison facing military  trials, torture and summary executions.  The Constitution has been suspended  and basic rights have been abolished.  THE CHILEAN WOMAN  This is the testimony that a 23 year  old Chilean woman gave to the six members of the Women's International  League for Peace and Freedom who went  to Chile at the beginning of 1974 to  investigate the crimes of the Chilean  Military Junta:  "They arrested me in my house and  beat me in front of my mother. The  next day they took me to the Air Force  communications centre.  I found that  out later because they took me from  my house with a hood over my head.  They took me in a truck along with  some other prisoners. Right there in  the truck they beat us with clubs and  rifles.  Soon we arrived in a big room  and then they took me into a little  room.  There were several men there,  I don't know how many, who formed a  circle around me, then raped me, then  beat me senseless. Later, I don't  know how long after, they took me to  another room where they burned me with  cigarettes, asking constantly for names  and for the hiding place of the arms.  Later they let me rest because I  fainted; they let me rest several hours  or it might have been until the next  day because I lost track of time.  Then  they took me back into that room full  of men, and when they saw that I wasn't  saying what they wanted me to say,  they took me to a place called 'Picana'  where they applied electric current  to my most sensitive places, especially  the genitals. Later they put me in  cold water and gave me more electric  shocks.  Then they let me rest again.  There is just enough medical supervision so that you recuperate and not  die. They took me into a room and  threw me a blanket. A few hours later  a man came in and kicked me all over  my body for half an hour. Later they  took me out for a regular interrogation without torture, and I said that  I had no connection with anybody. They  took me back to the 'Picana', and then  I said that I did know some people  but that I didn't know where they  were. Later they let me out for lack  of energy.  Fifteen days later I was  fired from my job.  It will be impossible for me to work in Chile for as  long as the military government lasts.  Later I was arrested again by the  Carabineros. A reasonably friendly  man interviewed me without torturing  me. He asked me if I had any connection with a lieutenant of the Carabineros who I didn't know. He also  tried to implicate me with the wife of  one of the men who had been arrested  with me and who has not appeared again.  From there I went secretly to a certain  place. One thing which I forgot to  tell you is that they keep you naked  from the moment you enter the base and  they don't give you anything back.  I am in danger coming to speak to you.  I have only left the place where I am  hiding twice.  The first time I was  nearly arrested."  She is one of the thousands of women  who have suffered the most brutal  repression in the history of our country. Their "crime" was to give support to a democratically elected  government that achieved major changes  in the society and gave special attention, like never before, to the problems  of women and children.  One of the laws  put into practice during the P.U.  (Popular Unity) Government and which  meant a tremendous advance in the status of Chilean women, was the law of  "Jardines Infantiles" (nurseries and  Day Care Centres) which stated that  if there were twenty women or more  working at a given place, the employer  had to supply a free day care.  Supervisors for these nurseries had been  started to be prepared by the Chilean  universities which created a special,  .three year long career to form preschool supervisors. Nurses also had  a chance to specialize in children  nutrition and health in order to supply these day care centres and nurseries  with well prepared personnel.  Another law approved during the Allende  government allowed.the nursing mother  one free hour that she could distribute during the day to leave her work  and feed her child in the nursery.  A third law that favoured the young  mother had to do with pre and post  birth rest: a pregnant mother  received a full salary without having  to work for a month before delivery  and three months,after. After that,  she was able to take her child to  the correspondent nursery, and continue working.  A research done during the P.U.  government discovered that illegal  abortion constituted the main cause  of mortality among women. With a  great deal of opposition from the "  conservative sectors in the country,  several experimental clinics opened  up throughout the country to perform  abortion to women who had got pregnant in spite of the fact that they  had been using some kind of contraceptive. A mass campaign was started  to provide women with contraceptive  methods and teach all the people in  Chile the importance of family planning.  This step meant a great advance, given the fact that Catholicism,  the prevailing religion, had opposed  and still opposes family planning.  Since the coup, abortion is completely illegal again; women in "El Buen  Pastor" jail who asked for abortion  because they were pregnant as a consequence of the rapes suffered while  imprisoned, were told that they  should be proud of giving birth to  children of the "fatherland", that  is to say of military men.  Malnutrition is the cause of mortality and retardation of many third  world children; aware of this fact  in Chile, Allende started a programme  in which all children under 14 years  received half a liter of milk per  day, free. Through that programme  it was assured that all children in  Chile were getting their minimum of  milk a day.  In addition to this, a  programme of free lunches was started  in all Chilean elementary schools.  Unfortunately, all these programmes  have ended under the Junta regime.  Women were active in community organizations and in all levels of political life throughout the country.  They played a special role in the  JAPs, neighbourhood organizations  that took care of the food distribution, seriously damaged by the truck-  owners and shopkeepers strikes that  helped so much to create the climate  for the overthrow of Allende in  September, 1973.  The new regime has a Secretariat of  Women, under the Civil Affairs Department, the staff of which staunchly  supports the junta.  But many women  in "poblaciones" and rural areas have  lost their jobs. Of those working,  many do not make enough to supply  their families with protein. Women  are being forced by the economic  :situation into prostitution. Abortion  clinics opened by the P.U. have been  closed and doctors accused of performing abortions are now jailed. One  example is Dr. Anibal Faundez who  started the abortion plan in the  iBarros Luco Hospital in Santiago during  the Allende government and who is now  in jail.  -Once detained or fired, because suspected of leftist tendencies, a woman  finds it impossible to get work.  Women, like men, may be picked up any  day by the police because of denunciation by a neighbour or fellow worker.  This climate of terror existing in  Chile has resulted in the emigration  of thousands of people to countries  which have opened their borders to  offer them a new life.  In Canada,  the main concentration of Chileans is  in Toronto and Montreal but in Vancouver there are around fifty families.  At present, a year and a half after  the coup, refugees and immigrants are  still arriving in Canada. The government helps them the first few months  but later they have to stand on their  own. Many of the people who have  arrived in Vancouver are professionals  but very few of them are working in  their own field. The first problem  they face is the barrier of the language and then, even after they learn  the language, they cannot find a job  in their profession.  The reason is  that many of the degrees obtained in  Chile are not valid in Canada and  even when they are, people are required  to have "Canadian experience" in order  to be hired. The situation of the  Chilean woman is more dramatic still,  because usually, the head of the  family does get some kind of a job  but the woman has to stay home or,  in the best cases, gets a job as a  cleaning lady, a kitchen helper or  a waitress. Many are the women  lawyers staying at home, the teachers  serving coffee, tea and pizza in  restaurants, the university students  cleaning houses, etc  The Chilean woman has a lot to share  with the Canadian woman. The high  degree of active participation in  social affairs achieved by the woman  in Chile has given her an experience  that she could very well share  with all women in Canada to reach a  status according with their capacity.  But first, let us get her out of her  house!  - - Carmen Rodriguez  Show your feelings of sisterhood  for the Chilean women living here.  And learn more about the Chilean  women who are being held in Chile  and how you can help them. Come  to the Chilean Women's Night —  see the Office Page — page 14 for  details. -Sexism, Schools & Society  North Vancouver has been chosen as one  of two communities for a provincial  pilot project called Sexism, Schools  and Society. This project is made  possible by a grant from the Department of Education to the Provincial  Advisory Committee on Sex Discrimination, and will run from April through  to the end of August.  The North Vanouver Project Director  and Advisory Committee would like to  invite you to participate in our first  working session Thursday, June 12, 7-  10 p.m. and Friday, June 13, 9 a.m.-  4 p.m.  Our aim in these sessions is to bring  together those parents, teachers, students and community members in North  Vancouver who are concerned about phe  problem of sexism in our schools and  society, and together to develop an  understanding of the nature of sexism  in our schools and society and how it  has kept women and girls from participating fully in the decision making  structure in our community. We are  designing the sessions so that, as a  group, we can identify the major issri3  ues regarding sexism in North Vancouver  er schools and community and, most  importantly, develop a co-ordinated  program to deal with these issues.  Dr.. Dorothy Smith, one of the founders  of the UBC Women's Studies credit program, and Linda Shuto, BCTF Status of  Women Co-ordinator, will be addressing  the work sessions on Thursday evening.  Members of the UBC Faculty of Education, BCTF Task Force on the Status of  Women, Provincial Advisory Committee  On Sex Discrimination and Capilano  College will be acting as resource  people.  If you are interested and want detailed information, please contact Project Director Rita Chud at 987-8141,  Local 235.  Admission is free and child care will  be provided but space is limited so  please call soon.  -Abortion Petition-  The petition below is being sent by  the newly formed Vancouver branch of  C.A.R.A.L. (Canadian Association for  Repeal of the Abortion Laws) to an  unions, large organizations who employ  many women, all women's groups and  associations in the province.  It is hoped that response will be  substantial. We urge all of you  who feel that abortion should be .  removed from the criminal code  to sign your name to this-initial  petition and send it to the address  given below.  We realize that most of you have  probably signed oodles of petitions  already , many of you were active  with Dr. Morgentaler's Defense  Committee and are feeling very  tired right now. O.K., there's  some new blood to carry things  on now, we're willing to share  the workload with others who may  not have participated before.  Just sign and send the petition  please, right away.  If you are an individual who feels  that abortion should be removed  from the Criminal Code of Canada  to become a private matter between  a woman and her doctor, don't sit  waiting for Canada to catch up with  the rest of the world.  Act Now!  Abortions performed by qualified  medical practitioners should be  permitted in the same way as other  medical operations. Under the  present law, abortions performed  by a "legal medical practitioner"  can be either legal, or illegal.  The abortion is illegal if it is not  first approved by a therapeutic  abortion committee of an accredited  hsopital. The fact that only 19%  of hospitals in Canada have established these committees means that  many women mu?t seek the help of  qualified doctors who operate  without committees, or the services  of unqualified "quacks" when they  need abortions. Unequal access  to medical services is clearly  unjust.  Democracy implies that the majorities  wishes shall become the governing  rule. The present government does  not choose to believe that the  majority of Canadians want freedom of choice on abortion.  It  has imprisoned Dr. Morgentaler  (who performed abortions to help  women in need), despite a "not  guilty" verdict given by a jury  of ordinary people.  Act now. Make your voice heard in  Ottawa! Return this appeal today.  We will make sure it reaches the  government in Ottawa.  I(we) the undersigned cannot support  a government which:  i) makes abortion a criminal offense.  ii) imprisons qualified medical  practitioners who perform abortions  without hospital committee approval  NAME  We would like to help further by:  canvassing phoning organizing   donation   Return to C.A.R.A.L., 1310 Greenbriar  Way, North Vancouver, B.C. V7R 1M2.  (C.A.R.A.L. stands for the initials  of the national organization of  Canadian Assoc, for Repeal of the  Abortion Laws. Pamphlets and  membership forms available on  request from the above address or  VSW offices.)    ■    TmHgp whitafce^  - focus, .t  This month let's look at two of the  recommendations of the Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women in  Canada that have to do with one of  the most august of Canadian institutions: the Senate.  Rec.138: We recommend that two  qualified women from each province be summoned to the Senate  as seats become vacant, and that  women continue to be summoned  until a more equitable membership is achieved.  Rec.139: We recommend that financial qualifications for eligibility for membership in the  Senate be abolished.  Implementation of these recommendations falls within the jurisdiction  of the Prime Minister's office.  Fire off those letters then to the  Hon. Pierre Elliot Trudeau, House  if Commons, Ottawa, Ontario. >.  -Roberta Schlosberg  Workshop  On May 23rd and 24th, approximately  200 women attended an IWY Leadership  and Community Service Workshop spons  sored by the University Women's Club  of Vancouver and partially funded by  the Department of the Secretary of  State,  Friday evening after small group discussions, Nancy Morrison, Provincial  Court Judge on leave, Labour Relations  Board, spoke on "Why do we not have  more women leaders?" In her speech  Nancy reminded the audience that the  Vancouver Status of Women had developed out of a meeting in the same room  four years earlier.  Looking around the room she said it  was"like being a convict and having  a seminar on how to stay out of jail  and asking the other prisoners to  speak."  She also pointed out that if you were  interested in leadership and power,  the University Women's Club was the  wrong club to belong to.  "The real  University Club where the power is  is,is downtown." The exclusively  male clubs are areas where important  powerful people engage in social intercourse—where decision• making  goes on. Women are physically eg-  cluded from these places. "If these  people don't take us seriously on a  country club level, why would they  take us seriously on a leadership  level?"  Saturday morning featured a talk by  Senator Nancy Heath, a panel discussion involving Darlene,Marzari, Doris  Ronnenberg, Isabel Kimmitt, Jean Gordon, Maggie Ip and Pat Carney. The  morning ended with group discussions  and reports.  It was felt by some that many of the  women present were not aware of the  many and various forms of discrimination faced by women in our society and  the implications of these discriminatory practices, and so were not very  deeply committed to change in the  present power structure. subscribe!  PHONE (home)_  (worlO_  OCCUPATION  DONATION $_  CORPORATE MEMBERSHIP  RENEWAL     Nl  I wish to become a member  I wish only to receive KINESIS_  in determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per person  oer year to print and Mil.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its ob-*  jectlve is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  VSW.  SUBSCRIPTIONS:KINESIS is provided as  a service to members of VSW in good  standing. Membership is acquired by  an annual donation. In determining  your donation We ask you to balance  your own financial position and the  fact that KINESIS costs approximately  $3.00 per year per person to print  and mall.  PUBLICATION DATE: The third week of  each month*.  COPT DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month.  SUBMISSIONS: KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to the  thw editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be used where requested. Where necessary,  the editorial committee will edit  for brevity, clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE: Send to : KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Ave  Vancouver 9, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE:  Jo Lazenby,  Diane Ryals, Bobbie Patrick, Monica  Mui, Viviane Hotz, Margie Colclough,  Diana Bissell  CONTRIBUTORS:  Glinda Sutherland,  Diana Bissell, Linda Forsythe, Lee  Masters, Heather Kellerhals, Margaret  Nicholls, Gisela Filion, Carmen Rodriguez, Helmut J. Ruebsaat, Karen  Richardson, Peggy Day, Jo Lazenby.  LAYOUT: Jo Lazenby, Diana Bissell,.  Leslie McDonald, Mavis Byrne  TYPING: Margie Colclough, Diana Bissell  Jo Lazenby  GRAPHICS: Kathy Sopko, Kathy Horrocks  Letters  Kinesis:  Those of us who are practitioners of  the world's oldest profession, which  has got to be motherhood, take exception to statements like the following:  "Ms. Korbely is not working  full-time at the present...as she  has twin babies." If caring for twin  babies isn't full-time work, I'd like  to know what is.  Motherhood may not be fashionable,  salaried or celebrated as all traditionally male-dominated professions  seem to be these days; but believe  me it is real work nonetheless.  Conventional English has always differentiated between work done inside  and work done outside the home ("Are  you working? No, I'm at home."),but  conventional English has been guilty  of a lot of faux pas, many of which  feminists have laboured long and hard  to change, with some success.  The  fact that feminism hasn't focused  much attention on a linguistic dichotomy which robs women who work at  •home of recognition and dignity suggests to me that feminism has yet to  be fully convinced of the value of  women's traditional role, and the  women who choose to embrace it.  Sincerely,  Roberta Schlosberg  Kinesis note:' The statement referred  to above read:"Ms. Korbely is not working fulltime at present—she does some  consulting—as she has twin babies."  The statement directly followed a paragraph outlining the difficulties Ms.  Korbely experienced in Canada when trying to persue a career as a Mechanical  Engineer.  It was not in anyway intended to slight the role of motherhood.  Perhaps if the writer had included the  words "as an Engineer" after "fulltime"  this misunderstanding could have been  avoided.  Kinesis:  Thank you for the copy of Kinesis,  and for your kind remarks regarding  women and engineering and the special  seminar on women in engineering last  month at UBC.  It was a very special  pleasure for me to be present and to  have the opportunity to learn more  than I had known before about the  status of women in Canada, and about  Canadian women engineers in particular.  I found it enormously heartwarming to realize that my colleagues on  the engineering faculty"* at UBC are so  supportive and interested in doing  what they can to attract more women  students into the engineering school  there.  I feel sure that they will  follow through.  Thank you for your offer to send me  a copy of the June issue of Kinesis  so that I can finish your article. I  enjoyed the first half very much.  Sincerly,  Irene C. Pedan  Associate Dean, Electrical Engineering  University of Washington  Kinesis:  I enjoyed reading Kinesis and am taking the liberty of forwarding this  material to the Task Force on Opportunities for Women in Engineering.  Yours Truly,  Graham R. Lea, Minister of Highways  f/  International  Women's Year  1975  CANADIAN PREPARATORY COMMITTEE FOR  THE WORLD CONGRESS FOR INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S YEAR  Ten Canadian women have a unique  opportunity to share with women of  every continent their actions for  equality, development and peace during this International Women's Year.  •The high point of 1975 for 2000 women from 100 countries will be the  World Congress for International Women's Year,.planned for October 20 -  24 in Berlin.  This is a non-governmental gathering of interest to women  around the world.  The Canadian Preparatory Committee is  inviting applicants from women who  may represent groups active on issues  of equality, child care, health and  education, women from industrial work  force and from agriculture, from the  arts and the media, women in public  life or in legal and political activities, or in work for peace and international friendship.  The Canadian  delegation will be a representative  group of all ages, and from French  and English-speaking parts of the  country.  To back the ten-woman Canadian d<1-  egation, the Canadian Preparator:  Committee is inviting messages,  es-  olutions, research materials fro l  women's groups or seminars, labour  councils, or colleges, to provide  Resource Papers on Canadian conditions and actions.  As a mark of sisterhood, an International Solidarity Fund to aid sisters  to travel to the World Congress has  been set up. Contributions are invited.  Applications or enquiries may be directed to the Canadian Preparatory  Committee, IWY Box 524, Port Credit  Postal Station, Mississauga, Ontario.  Deadline for receipt of application  for the Canadian delegation is July  31, 1975.  WHOOPS!  Readers have complained that listing  the address for copies of the Report  of the National Conference on Women  and Sport simply as 11th Floor, Ottawa  was too vague.  So te remove the element of challenge from yet one more  area of daily living here is the complete address: Health and Welfare Canada, Fitness and Amateur Sport Branch,  11th Floor, Journal Building, 365 Laur-  ier Ave.West, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0X6 important  The important business meeting held  May 28th to vote on the proposed  amendments to the constitution, was  attended by approximately 50 members.  The amendments were passed as written  i.in the May issue of Kinesis, with the  exception of 9) Delete Article III,  Section ii - Signing Officers and  substitute the following new Article  III, Section II - Signing Officers  therefor:  "Signing officers shall be the  President, Vice-President, Treasurer,  Secretary, and officers designated by  the Board of Directors.  The signatures of two signing officers shall be  necessary to authorize disbursements."  The existing Article ill, Section II -  Signing Officers : "Signing officers  shall be the Treasurerrwith the President or Vice-President or Secretary  or elected officer designated by the  Board of Directors" will be amended  as follows—the word"elected" preceed-  ing the word "officer" shall be elected*  A nomination for the position of Memb-  er-at-Large was made from the floor.  Mary Barretto was nominated by Carole  Anne Soong, seconded by Diana Bissell.  COMING IN  June  DON'T FORGET THE IMPORTANT VANCOUVER  STATUS OF WOMEN GENERAL MEETING TO  iBE HELD JUNE 17, AT 7:30 p.m. IN THE  BOARDROOM OF THE DOWNTOWN YWCA.  WE WILL ELECT THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS  FOR 1975-76.  WE WILL ALSO CELEBRATE OUR FOURTH  BIRTHDAY WITH CHAMPAGNE AND OTHER  GOODIES.  SEE YOU THERE!  summer  AND WHAT ARE YOUR PLANS FOR THE LONG  HOT SUMMER?  Are you planning something wonderful  this year? Are you going to make the  most of every summer day? How about  sharing your holiday plans with us?  Phone in and tell us about the picnics, the hikes, the weekends, the  globe-trotting, the camping, the cycling, the sunning, the playing uou are  looking forward to over the next few  months. Let's share some ideas on  summer fun.  We'd like to hear especially from women who are on their own, perhaps  with children. Perhaps money is  tight, perhaps there's no one to go  on holiday with. Perhaps all that  is needed are a few ideas to stimulate us into making darn sure we get  a break this summer.  Phone Marjorie % VSW Office 736-3746.  We'll let you know in the next issue  of Kinesis how much fun we're all going to have this summer.  'I know all about sex, but I don't want any part  of it... it leads to housework."  jun  "I'Vtell you what I want. 1 want self-actualization as a woman in a  soc/etal modality in which a viable life-style is divorced from preconceived ideas of sexual role-conditioning, and I want it now!"  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  JUNE 4 - High School Women's  Workshop, 7 pm office.  - C.A.R.A.L. Abortion  group, 7:30 pm, office.  - WOMAN ALIVE, CABLE 10  TV, 10:30 PM.  JUNE 6 - 10:30 am LETTER LOBBY,  office.  JUNE 9 - 1st meeting of new  consciousness-raising  group, 7:30 pm, office.  - Verbal self-defence  group meeting, 8 pm,  office.  JUNE 10 - KINESISnnewspaper  meeting, 7:30 pm.  JUNE 11 - C.A.R.A.L. Abortion  group, 7:30 pm, office.  JUNE 12 - ORIENTATION MEETING,  for all those new members  and other interested  people who want to know  what VSW does and how  they can help—etc.  8 pm, office.  JUNE 13 - WESTERN CANADIAN WOMEN's  4-u       ic4.u  FESTIVAL, PASS CREEK  thru 16th.pAEK> CASTLEGARj B.c<  ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING,  of Van. Status of Women.  7:30 pm, YWCA downtown, i  3rd floor boardroom.  Election of 1975/76  officers, annual report  from staff, wine & gg  goodies to celebrate  our 4th birthday!  cornel  - WOMAN ALIVE, CABLE 10,  TV, 10:30 pm.  JUNE 19 - CHILEAN WOMEN'S NIGHT,  festival for all, 7:30 pm  until ? all thru the office.  Films, Handcrafts, talk,  singing - with women  refugees from Chile.  JUNE 25 - WOMAN ALIVE, CABLE 10  TV, 10:30 pm.  JUNE 26 - OPEN EVENING, 8pm until  10:30, office. Our  office is open to you -  drop by to read, talk:,  -enjoy.