 Special Collections Serial  CPPA $1.75  In grief, in rage, hookers say "No More."  • Turkish Feminists • Naturopathy • Jane Siberry Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on all aspects of the paper. Call  us at 255-5499. Our next  News Group Is Thurs. May  5 at 3 pm at Kinesis, 301-  1720 Grant St. All women  welcome even If you don't  have experience.  PRODUCTION   THIS   ISSUE: Marsha Arbour, GIs-  ele Carrier, Patty Gibson,  Andrea   Lowe,  Alllsa   McDonald,   Lucy   Morelra,  Nancy    Pollak,    Noreen  Shanahan,   Esther   Shannon,   Elizabeth   Shefrin,  Sarah  Orlowskl,   Sandra  Jensen,   Shelley   Ashbury,  Val Speldel,   Emma  Kivisild,  Joni Miller,  Gwen Bird.  FRONT COVER: Photo  by Noreen Shanahan.  EDITORIAL BOARD: Esther Shannon, Patty Gibson, Marsha Arbour, Alllsa  McDonald, Nancy Pollak,  Pat Feindel, Noreen Shanahan.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Val Barone,  Cat L'Hirondelle, Nancy  Pollak.  ADVERTISING:   Marsha  Arbour.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle.  Kinesis Is published 10  times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be  a non-sectarian feminist  voice for women and to  work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and Imperialism.  Views expressed In Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned material Is the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $17.50 per year or  what you can afford. Membership In the Vancouver  Status of Women Is $25.50  or what you can afford, Includes subscription to Ki-  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We  reserve the right to edit  and submission does not  guarantee publication. All  submissions should be  typed double spaced and  must be signed and Include an address and phone  number. Please note Kinesis does not accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be returned, a SASE must be Included. Editorial guidelines  are available on request.  ADVERTISING: For Information about display advertising rates, please contact Kinesis. For Information about classifieds,  please see the classified  page In this Issue.  DEADLINE: For features  and reviews the 10th of  the month preceding publication; news copy, 15th;  letters and Bulletin Board  listings 18th. Display advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  00  w^n'^j a. ipj Bf'ji1 .itLjm.^A jprwryipjm c  mr&sssmGffiEs&e&xsa&mi^^  Vera, The film about lesbianism and identity  you either love or hate  17  Feminists in Turkey have a young movement which faces intense  state repression and strong religious and cultural challenges .. .12  INSIDE  William Vander Zalm brings fantasy back to the  family   5  fispeM  ?  NEm  No agreement on reproductive technology     3  Prostitutes protest murders     4  Challenging racism      4  Movement Matters    2  Socreds bless compulsory pregnancy      5  Palestinian speaker reports on uprising     8  fFATURES  What's News    6  ifcfw wu  by Pat Feindel  Employment equity undermined by review     7  by Nancy Pollak  Privatization in Britain and B.C     11  by Paula Stromberg  Beans    ..  10  Turkish feminists: confronting power     12  by Nora D. Randall  by Jill Bend  Naturopathy:the healing power of nature     14  by Heather Herington  MT*  In Other Worlds    ..  19  by Melanie Conn  Jane Siberry listening... listening     15  by Domino  Barbara Wilson: novels, translations, twins     16  by Patricia Maika  Letters   .. 21  Blossoming out of concrete: Vera     17  by Alison Sawyer  Autobiography of a trailblazer      18  by Maureen Eason  Bulletin Board   . 22  Compiled by Lucy Mo  reira L  I  Kinesis Is a member of the CORRESPONDENCE: Ki-  Canadlan Periodicals Pub- nesis, Vancouver Status of  Ushers Association and  Is Women,   301-1720   Grant  Indexed In the Alternative St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L  Press Index. 2Y6  by Northwest Graphics and Baseline  Type ii. Graphics Cooperative. Laser printing by Vancouver Desktop Publishing  and Eastside Data Graphics. Printing by Web Press  Graphics.  Second class mall #6426  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement Matters is designed, to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  ICall for  papers  Resources  for  Feminist  Research  \(RFR/DFR), a long time academic feminist journal, publishes two issues of each  jvolmne on New Feminist Research.  RFR/DFR is looking for contributions  [from a variety of fields addressing any of  the current issues and debates within feminist scholarship and politics. They welcome short articles, commentaries, reports  on work in progress, bibliographies, conference reports in either French or English, not  exceeding 3,000 words.  The deadlines for RFR/DFR's interdisciplinary issues are June 1st and Decem-  per 1st of each year. For further information write RFR/DFR c/o OISE, 252 Bloor  St. W., Toronto, Ont. M5S 1V6 or call (416)  023-6641, local 2277, 2278.  Lesbian  (Week  It's time to start organizing Vancouver's  third International Lesbian Week celebrations which, as in years past, will take place  during the first week in October.  Vancouver's I.L.W. herstory began three  years ago when Dykes for Dykedom raised  funds to send one of its members to the ILIS  Conference in Geneva. In 1986, the Vancouver Lesbian Network organized a week  of events which attracted over 900 dykes to  dances, workshops, film nights and more.  In 1987 the I.L.W. planning committee organized the week's events which drew over  1200 lesbians.  Lesbian groups, lesbian caucuses and  individual lesbians are welcome to participate in this year's organizing. Bring proposals, ideas and dykes to the first planning  meeting on June 6, 7:30 p.m. at Vancouver  Lesbian Connection, 876 Commercial Drive.  For further information call 254-8458.  International  Resources  The following publications will be of special interest to Canadian women working in  support of third world women's groups but  wUl also be of interest to feminists seeking  information on activities of women's groups  around the world.  Lanka Mahila Samiti, a Sri Lankan  women's group, has published a manual  which describes the objectives and activities  of the Sri Lankan women's movement, ways  of organizing grassroots associations and relations between women's organizations and  government ministries. For a copy contact:  The Central Board of the Lanka Mahila  Samiti, 65/2, Sir Chittampala A, Gardner  Mawatha, Colombo 2, Sri Lanka.  Women in the Third World—A Directory of Resources, edited by Mary Hef-  fron and Thomas Fenton, contains names  and addresses of women's organizations  worldwide, as well as annotated listings  of printed and audio-visual materials by  and about women in Africa, Asia, the Pacific, Latin America, the Caribbean and the  Middle East. (Available for US $9.95 plus  postage) from Third World Resources, 464  19th St., Oakland, California, 94612, USA.  The Latin American Women's Health  Journal is now available in both Spanish and English. Contact ISIS International, Casilla 2067, Correo Central, Santiago, Chile.  African Women is a new quarterly  journal published by the London-based  African women's organization, Akina Mama  Wa Afrika (Solidarity Among African  Women). The journal is a forum for African  women to articulate their needs, achievements and ^aspirations. Contact: Akina  Mama Wa Afrika, London Women's Centre, Wesley House, 4 Wild Court, London,  WC2B 5AU, England.  CN  scholarships  CN is offering 68 CN Scholarships for  women, worth $600 each across Canada for  the 1988 Fall semester.  The scholarships are designed to encourage women to seek careers in non-  traditional fields and to increase the number of women available in such fields.  CN defines a non-traditional field for  women as "a technical and/or skilled trade  occupation in which the participation of  women has, to date, been limited or nonexistent." (eg. welding, heavy duty diesel mechanics, precision machining, etc.)  Any woman, whether continuing her education or re-entering the school system as  a mature student, may qualify for one of  the scholarships if she has been accepted for  the fall 1988 semester in a specified program  of study at most community and vocational  colleges across Canada.  Applicants are required to complete an  application available from the school or college. Applications must be submitted to the  appropriate office at a participating educational institution no later than closing time  on Friday, July 29, 1988.  Special  issue  Breaking the Silence, an Ottawa based  feminist quarterly which covers a wide  range of social, political and cultural topics, has recently published the first of two  issues on The Changing Family. The issues  attempt to examine the myth of the traditional nuclear family and explore alternatives to this form of family.  To obtain copies or to subscribe write:  Breaking the Silence, P.O. Box 4857, Station E, Ottawa, Ontario, KlS 5J1. Single  copies are $2 per issue, subscriptions are $12  per year.  Goodbyes...  and hellos  Current Kinesis editor Esther Shannon  will be taking a five month leave commencing May 1. Her replacement, Kinesis writer  and Editorial Board member, Nancy Pollak is looking forward to building an intimate relationship with the pleasures and  panics feminist journalism provides. Good  luck, Nancy.  Kinesis has hired a new wordprocessor,  Gwen Bird. Welcome to the paper, Gwen.  BjIHHHHHHHIHHHlW  SUPPORT  WOMEN  IN DU 5INESS  HHimillHHHMHiHHHU  Shiatsu  A Japanese massage  which encourages  balance.  Astarte 251-5409  ,imiimnminimifflm  HM»MHMHHmW»HU  A.G.Graphics & illustration  »»»»»»»«»»»«»»«»»  "You gotta have art!"  Quality visual communications and art  services at reasonable rates.  Debbie Bryant    872-3570  Nancy Steele  Res. (604) 254-0941     ^i^l^idw      nes. (604) 255 5027 |  REALTY WORLD-  We'll help you make a good move.  nnnmmmmmmmiw  »«»mmmmMHHi»»  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  JANET M. LICHTY, B.A., M.Ed.  COUNSELLING PSYCHOLOGY  cfMACPHEIfSON ^MOTORS  885 E 8th Ave., Van.  876-6038  BYAPPOINTMENT  cAliceoJtfacpherson  iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiiiiiniiiiiiiiiiiii  Crossland Consulting  Personal Management Services for Artists  Individuals, Non-Profits Groups, Small Companies  . Grant and Proposal Writing  • Bookkeeping Services, Taxes  • Resumes, Career Counselling  * FIRST CONSULTATION - FREE *  By Appointment Only Jackie Crossland 682-3109J  »KINESIS     May8 /////////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  News  Reproductive technology  No agreement on strategy  by Noreen Shanahan  Women's health activists are  presently facing a tactical dilemma: whether to support a call for  a Royal Commission to investigate reproductive technology, or  whether to concentrate on grassroots feminist organizing around  the issues instead.  The newly formed Coalition for  a Royal Commission on Reproductive Technologies, based in Toronto, is asking for endorsement  from women's groups and individuals across the country and hope  a commission will be called by fall.  The coalition's statement reads:  "What we are seeing in nothing  less than a revolution in reproduction ... We beheve it is imperative  that we begin to explore the social  issues surrounding these new technologies and initiate a public debate over what limits we want to  place on them; and that the best  way to achieve public education,  debate and resolution of these issues is through a Royal Commission."  Diana Majury and Connie Clement, members of Women Health-  sharing Collective, share the  same concerns but strongly disagree with the commission call.  Their collective refused to join  the coalition and in a recent issue of Healthsharing the women  spoke against the Royal Commission strategy. (It should be noted  that Majury and Clement speak as  individuals and don't represent the  collective.)  "To use a commission successfully requires an incredible amount  of energy and 10316," says Majury,  "We need clear positions to articulate and we need to sustain the energy long enough to influence not  just the commission but the legislation coming out of it."  According to Clement, it's too  soon to challenge the federal government on reproductive technology issues. Instead feminists must  first do popular education and develop an analysis.  "We haven't had the  grassroots discussions  needed to mobilize  feminist response."  "The best thing about the coalition's call for a commission is  that it's become a catalyst to create feminist discussion ... We  haven't had the grassroots discussions needed to mobilize feminist  response and create feminist positions."  Coalition spokesperson Doctor  Margrit Eichler, however, considers a commission to be the best vehicle for public education as well  as an opportunity to research reproductive technology concerns.  "(A Royal Commission) is  where you get the big bucks, that's  where you have the millions, so  publicity is assured." The federal government has been looking at the issues for the last four  years, she added, "So we better  get ready and respond and make it  clear that this is a woman's issue  and something that will be talked  abut in consultation with women's  groups."  According to Majury, feminists  will   only   be   a   small   voice   in  this debate and so it's extremely  important to be thoroughly prepared. "Right now most of the  pressure is coming from the industry itself. The experimenters don't  want to get shut down. If a commission is called, they're going to  mobilize money and research to  justify new techniques.  "The people selling in vitro fertilization, sex selection, embryo  transfer—you name it—they're all  white, male doctors. They command social respect simply because of that, never mind what  they do and don't worry about the  health and safety of the women  they do it to."  The Vancouver Women's Health  Collective sees the need for a discussion about reproductive technology at a national level and is  a coalition member, but they have  serious doubts as to whether a  Royal Commission is the best forum for this debate.  "We're skeptical that (a Royal  Commission) can get us what we  want in terms of feminist content,"  said Joy Thompson.  Majury and Clement also criticize the coalition's statement of  principle as being "very problematic ... they're not adequately thought-out and the wording seems to be deliberately ambiguous. It's very dangerous to  be put in a position where our  own principles can easily be turned  against us."  In particular, Clement doesn't  agree with the coalition's acceptance of reproductive technology  as a given, and their failure to address prohibiting the technologies.  piease see Strategy  page 10  Strolling for Peace: babies, banners and—yippie—Whores Against War all took to the streets for the annual End the Arms Race  march on April 23rd. The Vancouver crowd numbered 75,000.  Tackling neglect,  violence against  our communities  by Lea Dawson  Six men with sticks chase  a gay man from Stanley Park  into West End streets yelling  "kill the fags."  A Native women's organization struggles for minimal  funding while fighting to undo  years of oppression.  GAIN cuts reversed  Protest meets with success  by Esther.Shannon  The Social Credit government  backed down from their plans to  cut single mother's GAIN entitlement late this month after protests  from a wide cross section of the  community.  The cut to single mothers was  the most controversial aspect of a  series of sweeping changes to the  administration and funding of social services in the province. The  plan called for a change in the  definition of an employable person which would have seen a single parent of one child lose $50  a month from their cheque after  Chalk up another victory for speaking-out: ELP spokesperson  Jean Swanson (left). Cheryl Freisan and children at the April  25th rally in Vancouver.  their child was 15 weeks.  The Socred's also promised that  social services would resume paying the $50 to single parents with  two children under the age of six,  however, single parents with two  children between six and 12 will  not receive the $50 allowance on  their welfare cheques.  Social Services Minister Claude  Richmond said the change in the  definition of an employable person was shelved after intense opposition from Socred supporters as  well as "those not necessarily in  support of the government."  At a rally called to protest the  province's actions End Legislative  Poverty spokesperson, Jean Swan-  ' son, told demonstrators that the  11   government's reversal, while im-  |3   portant, "... does not change the  |   fact that there are 85,000 children  3   in B.C. living 50 to 55 percent below the poverty line because of inadequate welfare rates."  Other changes which have not  received as much public attention  will go forward. Included in the  re-organization plans are Premier  William Vander Zalm's funding  for strengthening the family programs (see article page 5) at a  cost of at least $16 million. Included in this amount are provisions for expanding homemakers  services, counselling for new mothers and a new teen support program to help young mothers finish  school.  In other changes the province is  re-organizing the manner in which  the social services ministry operates by creating specialized offices  which deal with separate services  like income assistance, or family  and children's programs.  These changes have raised intense concerns among social workers and anti poverty activists who  fear that welfare recipients will  have to troop from office to office to have their needs met. Many  believe the creation of specialized services will make it easier to  privatize some ministry programs  (see Kinesis March/88).  While Swanson sees the government's reversal as a partial victory  for poor people she notes that "...  it still leaves thousands of children  9 (ages six to 12) in worse shape  than they were before."  The B.C. government budgets $20 million for a flashy  family enhancement project that  promotes sexual abstinence.  A young woman, jailed fc  breaking an area restriction one  block from her home, is kept in  isolation because she tests positive for the AIDS virus.  On April 20th, the Coalition  for Responsible Health Legislation  (CRHL) sponsored a forum to discuss events hke these—the violence, neglect and self-right*  morality built on AIDS hysteria, homophobia, racism, misogyny and "whorophobia" (hatred of  prostitutes).  Fred Gilbertson of the Gay  and Lesbian Centre, and Amanda  White of AWARE (Alliance of  Women Against Racism, Etc.)  opened the discussion by encouraging the audience to seek alliances and develop strategies to  combat hatred and violence.  The forum speakers were Tim  Shireman of the CRHL, Celeste  George of AWARE and Lesbians  of Colour, Joy Thompson of the  B.C. Coalition for Abortion Clinics, Marie Arrington of Prostitutes and Other Women for Equal  Rights, and Tom Patterson of the  Front for Active Gay Socialism.  Their speeches recounted personal attacks, threats to gays  and lesbians, bombings and bomb  threats, assaults on prostitutes,  compulsory AIDS testing for Native people returning to reserves,  and fears of violence at the future  Vancouver abortion clinic.  Joy Thompson described a  provincial government that was  willing to "work outside the law"  Please see Neglect  page 4  KINESIS Mays ACROSS  B.C  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxv^^  N^nxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^^  C-49 blamed  Prostitutes organize against murders  by Claire Stannard  The killings of Rose Peters and  Margaret Bedan in a single week  this April have brought the count  to twenty-one B.C. women murdered since 1985. The murders began that year with the February  death of eighteen-year-old Nicky  Tatrai.  The women have died by knives,  beating and strangulation. "One  thing they (the murders) all have  in common," says Marie Arrington of POWER (Prostitutes and  Other Women for Equal Rights),  "is woman-hat ing."  The fact that almost all the  women were sex-trade workers  seems to have had a strong effect  on the lack of public outcry about  the killings. The five who recently  died were women of colour.  The murders have directly coincided with the introduction of Bill  C-49, the anti-soliciting law. Before its inception in 1985, advocates for prostitutes rights loudly  warned the result would be that  women would die. The bill—  designed to get women off the  streets—has not done so, Arrington states, but has directly endangered them instead.  "Women are getting more violent customers and the police are  getting more uncaring, harassing  the women when they can't get  them off the streets any other  way," she said.  Many of the murdered women,  including Rose Peters, had received court injunctions restricting  them from their working territories where they had some methods  of safety. As well, police harassment has forced women to work  alone rather than in pairs, and has  pushed them from lit streets into  dark alleys.  Ina Roelants, a volunteer at  the First United Church drop-in  centre for prostitutes, says police  are busting the managers of hotels such as the Golden Crown, on  bawdy house charges. These are  places where women can work in a  clean, safe environment, she says,  and can call out to people they  know if they are in trouble. "The  girls end up way off somewhere  having sex in the back of a car,"  says Roelants.  "Prostitutes have been blamed  for every social ill in this city,"  says Arrington, "from house fires  to AIDS." Violence to prostitutes  has increased more than 100 percent in the last year alone.  "There are now sixty cases of  rape reported to us per month,"  she says, "compared to twenty per  month a year ago."  Jan Brown of POWER says,  "On average, a prostitute is raped  ten times a year." Police will not  follow up reports, she says, and often won't even take the information from the women. "They advise them, 'li you don't like it, go  home'." One woman reporting a  rape was asked when she left if she  was going home. When she said no,  the officer commented, "Maybe he  didn't do a good enough job."  "Usually the men who beat and  rape them also rob them," says Arrington, "so they may have to go  back out."  At a recent POWER demonstration protesting the murders,  a speaker from the Seattle-based  Women's Coalition to Stop the  Green River Murders said, "The  murder of women is one of the foremost political issues right now and  a lot of people don't realize it. We  need to organize now."  However, according to Jan  Brown,   "sex-trade  workers  can  Given the political climate in B.C., the violence against sex trade workers can only be countered by  the activism of concerned members of the community.  only organize so much" because  they fear reprisals. Immediately  after the POWER rally an exotic  dancer at the Nelson Hotel was  fired when the owner, John Pel-  leck, learned she had attended.  "He told me, 'Those women  got what they deserved and if  you're with them, you must be one  too'," she said Two of the murdered women, Darlinda Ritchie  and Karen Baker, murdered in  1986, were working as dancer at  Pelleck's Hotel when they died.  POWER is picketing and boycotting the hotel until Pelleck honours the dancer's contract and  pays her the money owed to her,  about $600.  Neglect  from page 3  to restrict abortion and to "create new laws [like the Quarantine  Bill] that discriminate, and are inhuman."  While much of the evening  was spent talking about violence  and right-wing agendas, everyone  spoke of the need for a clear, collective response.  Celeste George emphasized that  racism as an oppression fits well  into violence, health issues and  the quarantine. However, social  change organizations responding  to these issues must address their  own racism in order to be successful allies (see box).  Strategy suggestions came from  both the speakers and the audience. They included a "Take Back  the Park" gay march modelled on  "Take Back the Night"; financial  support for groups like POWER  and the Native Indian Home-  makers; support for an abortion  clinic that would include a patient-  directed reproductive health centre; and a concerted effort to monitor politicians and political parties  to see which ones (if any) publicly  support our concerns.  Although no mandate was ad  opted at this meeting, and suggestions for yet another coalition were  met with reservations, the committment to organize was firm.  The Coalition for Responsi  ble Health Legislation meets the  third Thursday of every month  at 7:S0 pm. Call 254-8458 or  684-6869 if you want to attend  or volunteer.  Media reports on the killings often focus on the women's lifestyle,  colluding with widespread public  attitudes which blame the victim,  an attitude sex-trade workers are  well acquainted with.  "It's not the paid work I have a  problem with," says Brown. "It's  being treated as disposable women  that I won't accept. The same  men who beat their wives and girlfriends at home, men from all segments of society, think they can  get away with a lot more with  prostitutes."  Joy Thompson of the Women's  Health Collective says the provincial government has a "moral  agenda which says that sex-trade  workers have no human rights,  that those who assault and murder them will not be prosecuted."  Given the political climate in  B.C. and the repressive legislation  of C-49, the violence against sex-  trade workers can only be countered by concerned members of the  community.  POWER encourages people to:  • Write the Attorney General demanding the repeal of Bill C-49  • Call the Major Crimes department of the local police to ask  what is happening with the investigations  • Write to the papers protesting  sensationalist media coverage.  Arrington adds that groups or  individuals can observe and document police harassment of street  workers, and take licence plate  numbers of tricks.  Sparky, a sex-trade worker from  the downtown eastside, says "we're  out there to work...(not) to be  raped or murdered We are loving,  intelligent mothers/sisters/lovers,  and—just like every other woman  —human."  by Celeste George  Challenging racism  I expect that we are mainly the "converted" here. People who know  and want to do something about the issues of the targeted groups i.e.  Native people, women, lesbians and gays, prostitutes.  I could give a barnburning speech about this racist society. However,  we know that already. I wonder whether this changes anything. We all  go home self-satisfied, we've done our bit fighting racism by listening to  a woman of colour spill her guts one more time about the violence.  I work in the Alliance for Women Against Racism Etc. because I want  to stop the lipserviee about anti-racism. I think it is important that white  people, no matter who they are, from rednecks to the Left unlearn then-  racism.  We can't fight and make changes in blatant actions of racism such as  where Native people get targeted for policies like the quarantine bill if  you ignore your own racism.  At an anti-racism workshop I helped organize this weekend, Gloria  Yamato, the leader, outlined different types of racism: overt, covert, unaware and self-righteous. She said we as people of colour find it somehow  easier to deal with the overt. The other kinds drive us "crazy." This is  true.  Vander Zalm and his policies are overt. Covert racism is when white  feminists write about women of colour's issues rather than finding out  how to support them to write about their own issues. White people take  jobs in Native and people of colour organizations rather than not buying into the internalized racism of those people. It's important for whites  to be clear about where our internalized racism hooks into your racism.  Educate yourselves about where you as white people keep power by perpetuating divide and conquer tactics.  Self-righteous racism happens when do-gooders decide they know  what's good for the targets. They decide they wiU protect" us by not  being the allies we want them to be. We know how we want you to be  allies. Just ask us.  What kind of real economic and educational support do Native people get in Vancouver and on reserves? Native organizations scramble for  funds to try to educate about services that are available but are usually  in white-dominated institutions. So, Native people and people of colour  remain targets for the do- gooders who decide, on the basis of stereotypes, who we are and what we need.  Does your political group, institution, workplace remain white dominated? What do you do about it? If you get criticism do you help kill  the messenger?  Racism is always about who has the power and we're not just talking  overt. Racism makes us bone-weary. Most of the time we, as people of  colour, deal with the non-overt forms. The mistakes of our allies keep us  busy fighting you and the racist power structure. When you get rid of  your racism then we can spend all our energy liberating ourselves.  KINESIS May 88 across B.C.  Babies-for-adoption the goal  Gov't blesses compulsory pregnancy  by Noreen Shanahan  There is sex happening in this province,  William Vander Zalm has learned, sometimes even among unmarried people. But—  where have all the babies gone?  Critics of the Socred's recent "Strengthening the Family Initiative" say the $20 million is paying for yet another round of 'Vander Zalm versus abortion,' and suspect the  end goal is more babies for the adoption  market.  According to Barbara Mintzes of the  Vancouver Women's Health Collective, the  government is seriously misinforming  women on birth control in the glossy new  brochures.  "The contraception information could  lead a woman to use a method ineffectively  therefore lead her to an unplanned pregnancy, sometimes quite quickly."  For instance it suggests the diaphragm  and cervical cap can be used effectively  without spermicide; it promotes fertility  awareness ("acceptable to religious groups  that do not approve of other methods")  without describing the method in any detail  or stressing its high failure rate.  Barb Hestrin of Planned Parenthood abo  finds the contraceptive information misinforming and out of date. "As a professional  I consider it of limited use, very general, and  it doesn't get into specifics of the options..."  particularly concerning the IUD and the  Pill.  "Some of this information is so wrong it  absolutely shouldn't go out," said Mintzes,  "(the brochures) are promoting a certain  form of morality and it's clear their purpose  is preventing abortions, also the suggestion  that the best way of preventing pregnancy  is to abstain from sex."  The three 'pregnancy prevention' brochures repeatedly stress abstinence as "the  surest way to prevent pregnancy."  According to the Social Credit government "An unexpected pregnancy need  not be an unwanted pregnancy if the  mother knows that assistance is available."  Presto—two more new brochures, one called  "Facing an Unexpected Pregnancy: Making  a Decision"; the other a Pregnancy Support  Service Resource Guide.  The word 'abortion' does not appear in  either of these publications—nor is the option mentioned elsewhere in the strengthening the family program. The words 'mother'  and 'father'—referring to people facing an  unexpected pregnancy—do find their way  into these brochures.  It's clear the pregnant woman is "making  a decision" not about terminating the preg-  Five years old  nancy, but about what to do once she gives  birth.  "The questions she's asking are related to  carrying a pregnancy to term...if she were  going to have an abortion she'd ask other  questions," said Mintzes. "It's amazing having a pamphlet on deciding what to do with  an unexpected pregnancy but not knowing  what your options are."  There's also no specific information on  the other two options, said Mintzes, of having a baby or having it adopted. "There's  nothing in there about caring for it economically, getting time off work...and with  adoption it doesn't give her any information on what a woman might experience going through an adoption, or what her rights  Pregnancy Services Resource Guide. "There  is specific antagonism toward us from the  Premier," said Barb Hestrin. " Our stance is  we're a pro-choice agency, we give all the or  tions and support women in their decisir  We don't condemn abortion as an option  therefore according to anti-choice groups,  we're pro-abortion."  According to Andrew Hume, Ministry of  Health, Planned Parenthood has been directly involved in political lobbying and "for  whatever reason" the decision to omit them  from the guide was made by the Ministry.  "(The Ministry of Health) made a specific attempt to insure that neither recognized pro-choice or pro-life groups are  there...people facing a decision like this  shouldn't get counselling from a group with  Planned Parenthood has written to  BCPHA and the Ministry of Health requesting that the birth control misinformation in  he pamphlets be corrected.  The BCPHA is presenting negotiating  with the provincial government to substantially widen distribution of these pamphlets.  "By July 1st you'll likely find them in 7-  11 and Mac's Milk stores. We've bandied  around all other options...bars, bathrooms,  but we haven't made a decision to approach  their associations yet. We also want to get  the message through the electronic media,  like LG73 radio station."  The target audience, he says, are young  males and females after leaving nigh school.  According to the Social Credit government's media backgrounder on this program, "In the past 15 years, the number  of adoptions in B.C. has decreased dramatically. In the 1960'8, it was not possible  to find enough homes for children—in the  1980's there is a waiting list of families wishing to adopt."  Asked to comment on this, Lisa Pedrini  of the B.C. Teacher's Federation said the  program "Makes the situation where there  are more children for adoption, and it's  poor, young women who are going to provide them."  Vicki Robinson, Women's Rights Organizer for the NDP, says she's "Passed the  point of being outraged," about the family  program. "I don't know what word to use  anymore to express anger at this attack on  Instead "Making a Decision"—both in  pamphlet form and a twenty minute video—  outline the psychological steps required in  making a decision, and remind the 'mother'  (and the 'child's father') to "listen to  your conscience", access the 'consequences'  or 'risks' and to make a 'responsible' decision.  The video interviews a psychologist (an  "expert in decision-making") and a family  doctor about unexpected pregnancy while  a pregnant woman appears in silhouette for  a few seconds here and there, sitting at a  kitchen table looking worried. She is given  no voice.  Planned Parenthood is absent from the  a vested interest. It's not a good thing for a  person."  Material used in the pregnancy prevention brochures came from Planned Parenthood materials, said Hestrin. "But they  didn't come to us to see about changes,  or anything new that should have been  added—and they didn't acknowledge the  source."  According to Dr. Rick Mathias, President of the B.C. Public Health Association (BCPHA) (who produced the pregnancy prevention brochures for the Ministry  of Health) Planned Parenthood resources  were used, as well as information gathered  through their own association.  "What they're doing is ordering these  young women to carry their babies to term  and then place the babies for adoption. But  what's going to happen to the women? The  focus is on the baby and not on the young  women. There are no resources into making  sure she continues her schooling after she  leaves the shelter home (another initiative-  homes for unwed mothers costing $3 million) and if she decides to keep her child  what is available to her? Fifteen after she's  given birth she's considered employable and  has to take the first poverty level job that  comes along." An estimated $1.9 million has  been spent on public awareness brochures.  Another $1.5 million has been spent on advertising the family program and $1.9 million is slotted for future ads.  According to William Vander Zalm's government, the "Initiatives For Strengthening  the Family" program focuses on two key  messages: "Our Future Needs Responsible  Decisions" and "Families are the Strength  of our Future."  Whose family? Whose future? And what  about responsible government?  Lesbian, gay conference promises eclectic fare  by Kinesis Staff Writer  This year, the 5th Annual B.C. Regional  Gay and Lesbian Conference is happening  from May 21st to the 23rd, at Britannia  Community Centre, in Vancouver.  Svend Robinson, federal MP and gay  man, Marie Arrington representing POWER (Prostitutes and Other Women for  Equal Rights), and speakers from the  Women of Colour Group and PWA (People  With AIDS) will address the opening session on Saturday morning.  The Conference is structured around a  series of workshops, panels, and forums  which deal with issues of relevance to lesbians and gay men such as: sex; AIDS; political and human rights; racism and classism; sexism among gay men; our histories;  relationships; self-awareness; rural organizing; parenting; videos, and much more.  The theme of this year;s conference is  "Building Bridges" as more and more lesbians and gay men work together to challenge sexism and heterosexism in our communities and on a broader level.  The Conference Committee is also committed to making the Conference accessible  to lesbians and gays who have less privilege by insuring wheelchair access, by providing free, quality childcare, sliding-scale  registration fee, by insuring representation  by women of colour on our opening panel  and in our workshops, by providing space  for caucuses, by finding signers for the hearing impaired, by offering different types of  entertainment to reach all tastes.  Saturday night, the participants are invited to join together for an evening of music and fun at The Dance, starting at 8:00  at a site to be announced. Sunday night, the  Out On Stage Variety Show will host local  talents: musicians, readers, dancers, choir  singers, theatre performers and many more  will offer humour and fun in a relaxed atmosphere at the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre, 1895 Venables, 8 o'clock.  Last year's attendance was close to 300.  We are expecting over 350 participants to  this year's conference from all over B.C..  Billeting is available by registering in ad-  For  more   information,   pre-registration, or volunteering, phone 251-SS97.  KINESIS      m"b Across Canada  xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx\xxx\^^^xxxx\^^*^^^^^  ^Jxx^X^x^^  by Pat Feindel  Male Mounties  don't get their man  RCMP Commissioner Norman  Inkster has triggered opposition  from mounties across Canada with  an affirmative action plan to ensure female instructors are hired  at the RCMP training centre in  Regina. Advertisements for seven  instructors' positions (at the rank  of corporal) specified that only  female applicants would be considered. Protesting mounties have  raised $17,000 and plan to seek a  court injunction to prevent implementation of the plan.  "We are not challenging the  right of the force to have female  members in depot for training,"  |said Sgt. Ron Thruston from B.C.  "We are challenging the Commissioner's decision that our current  promotional system...is improper.  Our promotion system is nondiscriminatory. It is based on service and performance and merit."  There are now over 90 instructors in Regina. None are female.  Deputy Commissioner Roy Mof-  fatt said the move is necessary  because about 30 percent of recruits are women. There are now  852 female constables across the  country. "We feel it's time we  had women in there as instructors... We're talking about 11 out  of 96 instructors, which is not a  lot, really."  Alberta women  poorly served  One of the prime movers behind  the formation of Alberta's Advisory Council on Women's Issues  has delivered a stinging criticism  of the council's track record. In  a recent report on the council's  performance the Calgary YWCA  states the advisory group "Is not  well-informed on women's issues,  is not communicating effectively  with Alberta women's groups and  is not exerting any influence on  government policy."  Sharon Osterling, a spokeswoman for the YWCA, said, "This  is not the council Alberta women  worked for and it's not a council we're prepared to accept." She  said the current council of 15  government-appointed members is  passive and acts as an information-  gathering body for government,  avoiding contentious issues.  The YWCA criticized the council for refusing to disclose their  response to the government's removal of sterilization from the  health insurance plan, and slammed them for not taking stronger  stands on major issues like free  trade, the Meech Lake Accord and  day care.  Women's Issues Minister Elane  McCoy defended the council members and said she did not agree  that the council should make more  specific recommendations, since  policy is always drafted in general  terms and turned it into specifics  later.  Racial, sexual  harassment case  finally heard  A human rights complaint will  finally be heard by the Canadian  Human Rights Commission after  three years of legal dispute over  where it should be heard.  Mary Pitawanakwat, an Ojib-  way, worked as a federal employee  for 6| years for Saskatchewan's  Secretary of State office. During  the last years of her employment,  she was subjected to racial and  sexual harassment, and then dismissed from the job. She took a  grievance to a hearing under the  Public Service Employment Act  and lost. The Human Rights Commission then refused to hear her  case. Pitawanakwat's lawyer appealed this decision to the Federal  Court of Appeal and finally won  her client's right to be heard before the Commission.  Undaunted, the Commission  filed an appeal with the Supreme  Court of Canada, but had to withdraw that appeal when the Court  ruled against the Commission in a  case similar to Pitawanakwat's.  Both the National Action Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC) and the Legal Education and Action Fund (LEAF)  are supporting Pitawanakwat's  case. Donations can be made out  to The Mary Pitawanakwat De-.  fence Fund, Regina University, and  mailed to 2054 Argyle St., Regina,  Sask., S4T 3S7.  Rights of disabled  strengthened in  Ontario  Ontario's disabled people will  soon have much greater access to  public buildings and services. A  new section of the Ontario Human Rights Code requires employers, landlords and people providing goods and services to the  public to make their buildings  and services accessible to those  with mental and physical disabilities. The rules specify construction of ramps, wheelchair-  accessible washrooms and other  facilities to ensure equal access.  Special needs of disabled people  must be accommodated unless doing so would impose undue hardship on the provider of the service  or goods. The new rules will allow  a person with a disability to bring  a complaint to the Human Rights  Commission, but government inspectors will not check independently to see if access is being provided.  Nannies push for  labour code  improvements  Filipino nannies working in Edmonton want to be included in Alberta's new labour code. Leonita  Gutierrez, president of the Alberta Household Workers Association, says about 1000 Filipino  women work in the Edmonton area  as nannies under federal contract  and many have serious problems  with their employers. "Some work  too much, have no privacy, and the  accommodation is no good. Some  have been threatened by their employers."  Under a contract set by Employment and Immigration Canada, the women earn a minimum  of $860 a month from which they  pay up to $300 for room and board  to their employers. After two years  the nannies may apply for immigrant status.  Opposition House leader Pam  Barrett agreed to lobby on the  Association's behalf during the  second reading of Alberta's new  labour bill. "They should get an  additional 10 percent for a third  child and five percent for every  child thereafter," she said.  Paternal/parental  rights clarified  by adoption ruling  "Casual fornicators" who get  women pregnant and then ignore  their responsibility to the child do  not qualify as parents for the purpose of adoption in Ontario. The  Ontario Supreme Court ruled in  March that adoption agencies are  under no obligation to inform the  biological father or get his consent  when his child is put up for adoption.  The case overturned a Family Court decision to delay an  adoption because the judge said  the adoption law could be violating the Charter by discriminating against biological fathers. The  law excludes from the definition of  "parent" a natural father whose  only connection to the child is conception.  Heather Katarynych, lawyer for  Metro Toronto Children's Aid Society said, "The higher court  is clearly saying there are no  parental rights without responsibilities."  Judges attack gov't  child-support  collection agency  An Ontario government agency  that collects child support from  delinquent fathers is under fire  from family court judges for being  too stringent. Set up by the Attorney General's Ministry last July,  the agency has applied the letter  of the law and deducted the max  imum allowable half of net wages  from men owing support.  Some men have disputed the  agency in court and criticized it for  refusing to negotiate a lower rate  of wage deduction. Judges have reduced payments in some cases and  chastised the agency for its zeal-  ousness and for wasting court time  when negotiation appeared possible.  Gail Taylor, director of the enforcement program, defended its  actions. "If we were to begin to  make deals with individuals, that  wouldn't be consistent or fair."  Since the program began, says  Taylor, the agency has collected  $4.7 million of the $50 million  owed in support. Most arrears involve child support. "Ultimately,  our goal is to change public attitude so that these (support) orders  are honoured as a social norm,"  said Taylor.  Birth control  services may be  funded again  The Alberta government may  reverse its August 1987 decision  to cancel health insurance coverage of sterilization and some  birth control procedures. Minister of Community and Occupational Health Jim Dinning said he  has received many calls protesting  the decision to drop tubal ligation,  vasectomies, IUD insertions, and  contraceptive counselling from the  province's health care plan.  Women's groups have called the  move a direct attack on women's  reproductive health. "I am sympathetic to what they say,"said Dinning. He did not say when the government would announce its' decision, however.  Estrogen offers  hope against  osteoporosis  Estrogen therapy appears to do  more than calcium for menopausal  women who are prone to osteoporosis (loss of bone tissue). Dr.  Michael Parfitt, a researcher at  Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit,  cited studies in which estrogen replacement therapy reduced deformities in the vertebrae of postmenopausal women by 90 percent.  Other studies have shown that calcium may be effective in slowing  bone loss at a later age, but not  significantly in early menopause.  A University of Toronto professor, Dr. Joan Harrison, said research has shown that weight bearing exercise can both prevent osteoporosis and strengthen bones  already affected by it. She emphasized the exercise must involve weight-bearing—such as doing pushups or lifting weights—not  just aerobic exercise. Improvement  in bone mass requires "greater  force on bone".  Homophobia  strikes ad land  Despite promises to release  more money for AIDS education,  the federal government failed to  provide funds for a public-service  announcement that shows a gay  man warning people to protect  themselves form the virus. The  $40,000 ad was produced by Ottawa's CJOH-TV in cooperation  with the Canadian Association  of Broadcasters and the Canadian Public Health Association  (CPHA). Although the CPHA  has received $3.7 million over  five years by Health and Welfare  Canada, it did not help finance the  announcement.  CPHA last year spent $300,000  on TV ads that were hardly seen  by the public because three out of  four were perceived to be condoning casual sex. Private broadcasters have donated over $4 million  in air time for the new ad and the  CBC will also be running it.  Man seeks  paternity rights  under UI Act  A Toronto man has challenged  an unemployment insurance regulation that he says discriminates  against biological fathers. Shalom  Schacter says the UI Act gives insured leave to either parent in the  case of adoption but only to mothers in the case of birth. Schacter  told a federal court hearing that he  and his wife share household and  child care duties. When his second  son was born, Schacter was denied  parental leave by his employer.  He took an unpaid leave and was  denied unemployment insurance.  Schacter's lawyer proposed three  possible remedies: give all fathers  the paid leave adoptive fathers get;  end the special treatment of adoptive fathers; or allow mothers to  split their 15 weeks of paid leave  with fathers.  Affirmative  Action?  Nova Scotia is launching an  affirmative action plan to get  women into administrative positions in the school system. The  plan was developed jointly with  the N.S. School Boards Association. Education Minister Ron Gif-  fin announced the province will  instruct school boards to review  their hiring practices to ensure  equitable distribution of jobs between women and men. They will  be asked to keep track of progress  and submit a report annually.  Giffin said the program won't  discriminate against men. It will  "include qualified women in the  competitive process," not exclude  KINESIS May 88 Across Canada  Employment equity  Program undermined by inadequate review  by Nancy Pollak  Armed with a toothless law and  inaccurate statistics, the Canadian Human Rights Commission  (CHRC) will attempt this summer  to determine whether federally  regulated employers are playing  fair with disadvantaged groups.  The groups—women, aboriginal people, people of colour, and  the physically disabled—are the  subject of mandatory statistical  reports due for the first time  this June as required by the tories' 1986 Employment Equity Act  (EEA).  The CHRC hopes its analysis  of those reports—comparing workplace realities to labour market fig-  i supplied by Canada Employment and Immigration (CEIC)—  will help it sniff out discriminatory  employers.  "We're interested in actively  monitoring what federal agencies  are up to and trying to stop discrimination before we get a complaint," said Max Yalden, new  head of the CHRC in Winnipeg recently. The CHRC typically deals  in a reactive manner to complaints  filed by individuals.  There are, however, already serious complaints about the effectiveness of the EEA itself and the  statistical methods used to deter-  ne who is available for work.  Compared to American affirmative action laws—born of the civil  rights movement—the EEA is a  pallid law indeed. Opting for a voluntary approach based on 'targets'  rather than mandatory quotas, the  EEA is rooted in the premise that  equality of opportunity, not results, is the significant, measurable factor.  This approach is worrisome to  precisely those groups the law is  designed to benefit. Says Gerry  Williams of the Native Youth Job  Corps, "Native people are encouraged to apply for jobs, and are always told, 'Of course you'll have to  compete on a fair basis.'  "There is no such thing as a fan-  basis. [These] are people with a  poor education and background."  Williams views widespread unemployment and lack of skills as the  major stumbling blocks for native youth. "Employment equity is  made for people with really good  skills: that's its weakness," says  Williams.  Neither the CHRC nor the EEA  are likely to allay Williams' concerns. The commission intends  to investigate the personnel policies of businesses and agencies  with poor demographic showings  (e.g. unreasonably low numbers of  women or Indo-Canadian people  in technical trades). Ii it is determined that those policies are  fair—lacking any overtly sexist or  racist criteria—then there likely  will be no further action. Employers may rest easy with the excuse  of 'no qualified applicants.'  While the government threatens to fine employers who fail  to file EEA reports, the act provides for no penalties whatsoever  for failure to employ the 'target'  groups. Judging from statements  made when the bill was intro  duced, the tories are hoping that  public scrutiny will compel employers to voluntarily pull up their  socks.  Few pulled socks are likely to result from the statistics the CHRC  will use in its analysis. Bill Ra-  panos, Chief of Employment Equity for CEIC's B.C.-Yukon region, says, "Fd be the first one to  agree [the figures] aren't tremendously accurate."  CEIC   uses   information  from  Abortion  New bill ready in May  by Esther Shannon  While the federal government  is promising to introduce a new  abortion law by mid-May, a recent  poll indicates that, by a large mar  jority, Canadians support the pro-  choice position on abortion.  According to Tory Health Minister Jake Epp, the federal cabinet  is still seriously divided over what  approach to take with respect to  abortion legislation. Despite this  lack of cabinet solidarity, Epp told  reporters in late April that he expected a bill would be tabled in  May.  Meanwhile a recent Gallop poll,  commissioned by the Canadian  Abortion Rights Action League  (CARAL), reported that 69 percent of the 1,064 respondents  agreed with the statement "The  decision whether to have an abortion should rest with the woman in  consultation with her physician."  Twenty-six percent disagreed and  the remainder said they did not  know.  Ontario had the highest percentage of respondents who agreed  with the statement at 73.7 per  cent, followed by British Columbia  (72.8 percent), Quebec (68.6), the  Prairie Provinces (66.1) and the  Atlantic Provinces (51.1).  CARAL, along with a wide  range of other groups, has called  on the government to impose no  restrictions on abortion access, arguing that a new law is not necessary and would be enforced inequitably. Recent press reports indicate that the government is considering imposing no restrictions  up to 12 weeks and then instituting some controlling measures.  In other abortion related news  a Canadian Advisory Council on  the Status of Women (CACSW)  vice president has said that a free  standing abortion clinic will probably be set up in Calgary within  the next year.  Pat Cooper, CACSW western  vice-president, says the recent  Supreme Court decision legalizing  abortion, followed by the Alberta  government's recent backtracking  on its deinsurance of sterilization  operations, have given new impetus to the women's movement in  the province. The next step, she  says, will be an abortion clinic in  Alberta.  Doctor Henry Morgentaler is reported to be considering two sites,  Saint John and Frederiction, as  possible locations for an abortion  clinic that will serve women in the  Atlantic provinces.  According to an abortion rights  spokesperson, organizations in  Halifax are getting calls from New  Brunswick women unable to find a  physician who will refer them for  an abortion.  The New Brunswick government opposes abortion "on demand" and recently elected Liberal Premier, Frank McKenna, has  pledged to give Morgentaler the  fight of his life if he operates in  the province. McKenna is purportedly a strong supporter of women's  rights, citing one of the reasons  for his continued opposition to the  Meech Lake Accord as its failure  to protect women's equality.  In British Columbia a petition of over 17,000 names of  pro-choice supporters was tabled  in the provincial legislature by  New Democrat women's issues  spokesperson, Joan Smallwood.  The petition campaign, sponsored  by the Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion, demanded  that the B.C. government set up  community health clinics throughout the province which would provide abortion services and that  the province fully fund all abortion services. The petition, which  steadily gains more signatures, will  also be forwarded to Ottawa.  StatsCanada (census, etc) and its  own regional economists to construct "availability packages"—  the employed, the unemployed and  those in training for any given  area. These are further broken  down into the target groups; according to Rapanos, between 5 and  5.5 percent of the B.C. labour market are physically disabled people.  Eunice Brooks of the Disabled  Women's Network (DAWN) would  be skeptical of anyone's estimate  of the number of disabled people  who want paid work. She notes  that it wasn't until the last census .  that households were even asked  how many disabled members they  had, and "that was on the long  form only, which we don't believe  to be representative of the population." (Most households file the  short form which lacks that question.)  "Nobody knows how many disabled people there are in Canada,"  says Brooks, "and they can't give  us equity until they know how  many we are."  Pat Marchak, a teacher at the  University of British Columbia, is  well aware of the deficiencies of  labour statistics. "We all know  that statistics underrepresent the  unemployed, and since [the target  groups] tend to have high unemployment, they are even more un-  derrepresented," says Marchak.  Women are particularly prone  to 'fading out' of the picture.  "Women become unemployed, go  into the home and become invisible. [We] are absorbed into the  non-labour force ...  "No one has any illusions about  this," says Marchak. "Even at  StatsCanada they know the model  is a bad one, but no one can come  up with a better one."  Between a bad model and a  weak law, Canadians who face  workplace discrimination would be  ill-advised to expect exciting results from this summer's number  crunching.  A special strategy meeting with  representatives from pro-choice  groups across the country will  meet in Toronto in late April to  develop a unified approach to getting the pro-choice message across  to politicians. The meeting is also  intending to focus on ways of directly aiding the British Columbia pro-choice movement in its' efforts to open an abortion clinic.  A nation-wide day of action will  be called for sometime in June as  a rallying point for the pro-choice  movement and its supporters.  Nationally anti-abortion organizations are stepping up their  lobbying of federal politicians in  hopes of re-criminalizing abortion. The Campaign Life Coalition  has launched a massive Canada-  wide campaign which will see anti-  abortion brochures delivered to every household.  As well, the Coalition is working  to identify pro-choice members of  Parliament and will work actively  to defeat them in the next federal election, widely expected to be  called this fall.  Well known feminist singer/  songwriter Holly Near has agreed to donate one half of the  proceeeds from her upcoming  Vancouver opening night concert to the fund to establish an  abortion clinic in the city. Pro-  choice supporters are urged to  take in the Near concert, scheduled for June 14 at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre,  so they can support abortion  rights and spend an evening  with one of their favourite performers. Tickets are $10. For  reservations call 254-9578.  The need for funds to open a  clinic continues to be the most  pressing need for the British  Columbia Coalition for Abortion Clinic. Please send donations to the B.C. Coalition  for Abortion Clinics, P.O. Box  66171, Station F, Vancouver,  B.C. V5N 5L4 or call 876-  9920.  KINESIS International  VXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  by Maureen Eason  With the recent cross-Canada tour of  West Bank teacher Najwa Jardeli, Canadians were afforded an inside view of life in the  Israeli occupied territories. Jardeli spoke to  a near full house at the Vancouver Planetarium in late March which coincided with  "The Day of The Land"—an annual day of  Palestinian protest against Israeli land confiscation. Her visit was sponsored by the  United Nations Association of Canada, Vancouver Status of Women, Canadian Jewish  Outlook, Near East Cultural and Educational Foundation of Canada and the Committee to Support Palestinian Rights.  Vancouver city alderman Libby Davies  chaired the evening and began by reminding the audience that the originally scheduled speaker, Zuhaira Kamal could not attend, "which tells us something about the  Israeli occupation." In early March, Israeli  police refused Kamal permission to attend  a U.N. non-governmental organization conference on Palestine, held in Geneva; she remains confined to the West Bank. For this  reason, Najwa Jardeli, an executive member of the same union, the Palestine Union  of Women's Work Committees, came to  Canada in her place. She proved to be an articulate and eloquent spokesperson for her  people's right to self-determination.  Jardeli was born in Acre (now part of Israel proper), later immigrated to the United  Palestinian speaker reports  on West Bank uprising  States with her parents and received her  university education in Santa Barbara. For  the past seven years she has taught English  at Bir Zeit University in the West Bank and  is presently teaching high-school English in  the city of Ramallah, also in the West Bank.  The theme of Jardeli's talk was how  the Palestinian uprising— now in its fifth  month—has been able to maintain such  momentum. She began with an historical  context. "According to international understanding, a military occupation is supposed  to be temporary. However, the military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza has  become permanent for us. This permanence  has taken on many different aspects—all of  which contravene international conventions  which govern the behaviour and policy of an  occupation power."  She explained that the Palestinian people are largely a peasant population who  for generations have tilled the soil and  lived off the land But in the twenty years  since the occupation began, over 52 percent of the land has been confiscated—much  of it for "military purposes" or reasons  of "security." She said that 25 percent of  the land seized for "security purposes" has  been awarded to Jewish settlements in the  West Bank and Gaza. Citing some alarming statistics, which corroborate with those  in scholarly journals, she added that, for example, "In the Gaza Strip—one of the most  densely populated areas in the world, 14 Is-  Israel's policy of using beatings and forced deportations to quell the West Bank  uprising has only resulted in worldwide condemnation and mounting Palestinian  resistance.  raeli settlements have been built on 40 percent of the land...as a result of this policy  of land confiscation, we have one quarter  of the Palestinian population that has been  partially or totally dispossessed."  In addition, from the beginning of the  occupation, Israeli authorities have forbidden Palestinians from drilling for water, a  most precious resource in the Middle East.  "Instead, an Israeli water company was allowed to come into the occupied territories and drill deep water wells. The water  is diverted for settlements—but also water  is channeled into the 1948 borders of Israel  for industrial and agricultural use. The water that is extracted by the Israeli company  exceeds by 50 percent the total consumption by Palestinians." Such revealing information provides insight as to perhaps how  Israel "made the desert bloom."  Since, in many cases, the drilling of deep  wells has taken place next to natural springs  Palestinians were using, the result has been  the drying up of the springs and a once fertile land gone barren. Once dispossessed of  their land, Palestinians became an army of  cheap labour for Israeli industry. On a daily  basis 120,000 lined the streets each morning, offering their labour for "very, very low  wages." With Israeli authorities making it  "almost impossible for Palestinians to establish an industry, the result has been very,  lucrative for the state of Israel."  Jardeli elaborates: "The occupied territories have become the second largest market for Israeli products. (The U.S. is the  largest). Ninety percent of what we buy is  made in Israel. I think that is one reason  why the Israelis do not want to leave the  occupied West Bank and Gaza. They can-  Najwa Jardeli  not afford to lose the market or the cheap  labour."  While the western world only seemed to  notice the West Bank and Gaza on December 9, 1987, the Palestinian people of  these occupied lands have been organizing  themselves at a grassroots level for many  years, especeally so in the last decade. It was  this mass organization Jardeli says, that  provided the uprising with its momentum,  as "the whole population has been mobilized...men, women, children—all sections of  society."  For example, academic institutions have  provided services that a government would  normally provide. Bir Zeit University developed a community health program—a mobile clinic supplying health education and  preventive medical care to villages with  other access to medical facilities.  And in spite of the restrictions placed on  unions and union membership, unions have  managed to educate workers about then-  rights and have had to provide workers with  Please see Palestine  page 20  KINESIS Mays International  Honduras  Organizing rural women  by Lee Saxell  The National Farmworkers Central (CN  TC) of Honduras was formed in 1985 to  fight for land reform. In a country where as  many as 150,000 families are landless, the  CNTC joined with other peasant organizations to force the government's Agrarian  Reform Institute to accelerate the land distribution process. Seventy percent of Hon-  durans hve in the countryside; sixty-nine  percent are malnourished.  Shortly after its formation the CNTC began a program to organize rural women's  groups. Women meet to discuss issues that  affect them as women and to initiate small  income-generating projects such as vegetable gardens. Over 150 women's groups  with an average of 15 members each have  been formed, and the CNTC has a person responsible for the program at the national executive level. OXFAM has funded  this project for the last two years with approximately $20,000 per year, including a  match form the Canadian International Development Agency.  The CNTC also works with other popular organizations, such as trade unions,  women's groups, and teacher and student  groups, to organize protests against the  presence of Nicaraguan contras on Hon-  duran territory.  Sandra Bonilla is a founding member of  the CNTC and on its national executive.  A single mother, she has worked in urban  and rural unions for most of her adult life  and is active in Central American Labour  Coalitions. Bonilla is presently on a tour of  Canada sponsored by OXFAM, and spoke  in Vancouver April 9th on the effects of militarism in Honduras.  The following transcript of Sandra  Bonilla's interview was translated by  Katherine Pearson  The historical roots of the National  Farmworkers Central began with a coalition of 14 peasant groups originally under  one umbrella—the United Peasant Front  "I had the  right to own  land under  Honduran law/  of Honduras. This alliance was formed in  1978 because of the government's negligence  around land reform. The Honduran government has always been intelligent in dealing with the peasant union—they gave each  group their legal status and one by one the  groups went off and became independent.  Sandra Bonilla, a founding member of  CNTC.  "The government  sees CNTC as  trying to destabilize  the social order..."  But five of these peasant groups joined  forces to become the CNTC, and we try to  get involved in joint coalitions in ending the  class system.  I come from a very poor family, and witnessed deep poverty—this had a very profound impact on me.  As a widowed single mother, I had the  right to own land under Honduran law and  I have the right to press the government  to provide land. I was finally given a small  piece of land that was not enough even to  feed my family, but having this land was a  way for me to join the peasant organization.  I joined when I was 24 and became very  active. I was sent to take different courses  on trade unions and organizing. When our  union joined forces with the CNTC in 1985,  it was my job to explain to my members why  we were forming one union—a lot of work. I  became a member of the regional board and  was secretary for two terms and from there  I went to the national board. I am now the  internal auditor of the CNTC, the first time  a woman has been elected to this position.  This meant a move to Tegucicalpa which  was hard because my ten-year-old son  stayed in Uares to hve with my mother.  Even though one loves one's family, the  most important thing is working for the  poor.  The government sees CNTC as an organization trying to destabilize the social order by pushing for land reform. We are tolerated but they are not happy with us. This  is why working in a coalition is important  both for protection and credibility. The very  "In the three years  we have been in  existence, seven  members have been  killed..:9  first day the CNTC was formed, one of our  regional leaders was killed.  In the three years we have been in existence, seven of our members have been  killed by goons hired by the land owners.  Another one of our members has been permanently disabled. Hundreds of our members have been detained in prison, particularly after land invasions* ["Land invasions"  are squatting actions by peasants.] The local land owner or the military comes in to  arrest us. Last October (1987) five of our  members were picked up and tortured. Margarita from the executive board disappeared  for six days and was badly tortured and  raped. She is still recovering from this experience. This was the worst we had ever experienced.  The CNTC was accused of being members of the guerilla movement. We quickly  called a national press conference—we did  not hide—and came out in full view to  say we were not involved in any terror  ist actions, that what we are doing is perfectly legal. This was a frightening time but  there was a big public outcry in the country  against our repression and the attacks have  stopped for now.  The women's program was organized as  soon as the CNTC was founded because  women had special needs. There is much  debate in CNTC whether women's groups  should be independent or be a mix of men  and women. There are differing opinions on  what is more effective.  Women have been incredibly marginalized in Honduras—high illiteracy, poverty—  and it is the men who have encouraged the  women to organize. But once women do become organized, they play a very key role  in the CNTC. For example, they are in the  forefront of land invasions.  The CNTC has abo taken a public position protesting the presence of Nicaraguan  contras in Honduras. We should not be hosting contras in our territory for a war that  has nothing to do with us. The people who  live near the Nicaraguan/Honduran border  have been deeply affected by the contras'  presence. They have been displaced from  their land which the contras have cleared to  make room for their manuevers. This also  contributed greatly to the drought because  deforestation prevents the rain from being  absorbed. Many organizations are protest-  ... we were not  involved in any  terrorist actions...  What we are doing  is perfectly legal."  ing the contras—even members of congress-  but to speak out against the contras is to be  accused of being subversive or communist.  The CNTC is dedicated to returning the  land to the people—land which is rightfully  by law, theirs. This way there will not be  such a widespread discrepancy between the  rich and the poor.  KINESIS      May£ LIFE STORIES  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXNNXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX^  NSSmxxxSSSxxxx^^  n^nvxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx^^  A night in  the streets  by Nora D. Randall  A friend asked me if I wanted to go to  a memorial service for two prostitutes who  were recently found murdered in the downtown eastside. I said sure. When we got  down to Pigeon Park, and I saw all the other  people who were there, I have to admit I got  a little scared.  The first group I noticed were a bunch of  leather dykes wearing black leather jackets  with radical amounts of chains and zippers.  Many of them were also wearing pointy-toed  cowboy boots with silver caps on the points  and silver chains around the ankle. A few of  them even sported spurs. And even though  most of them had very short hair they were  using more hair gel than a beauty school.  The next group to make a visual impression were the sex trade workers who had  dressed to be identified. The more outrageous among them were dressed in various  combinations of tight mini-skirts, four inch  stiletto heels and ratted hair.  These were the women who had organized this demonstration and march in  memory of 21 murdered prostitutes, especially the two who were just murdered.  Assembled to march with them were  about two hundred people with banners  from gay right's and women's groups—and  the press—and the police.  The boys with toys put in a strong appearance.  The guys from the press had their porta-  pac cameras with the blinding flood lights  and their microphones. Every time they  wanted a little piece of this or a little piece  of that action, they'd go up and turn on  their lights and stick out their microphones  and cut off the view for all of us who were  there in support and wanted to listen to everything the women had to say and think  about it.  The police put in a strong appearance  with paddy wagons and motorcycles. They  started things off with ticketing people for  jaywalking where the march was assembling  because the sex trade workers had not gotten a parade permit. This was an illegal  march. The street belonged to the people  and we were going to take it. We were not  going to mourn for the murdered women, we  were going to rage for them. And with that,  the march poured on to the street and swallowed up all lanes of traffic in one direction.  We surged up Hastings Street (a major  Vancouver through street) chanting "Get  your laws off our bodies!" "Incest! Rape!  Battered Women! We have had enough!"  "We are not disposable women." The only  barrier between us and the traffic was the  safety committee, which appeared to have  many black-leather-jacketed women on it,  and the police when they could get into position, which wasn't always, because they  had no idea where we were going to go next.  I was near the back of the march because I was walking with a disabled friend.  At one point all that stood between us and  two lanes of traffic were three women on  the safety committee. Anybody could have  been in those cars, and in this area of town  those drivers could easily have been drunks  or Johns or both. But there were three elements the march used to protect itself from  the traffic—surprise, the stunning visual impact of the sex trade workers and the leather  dykes and the rage coming from the march.  Those costumes that had scared me at Pigeon Park were my protection.  I remembered the Sheila-na-gig. The  Sheila-na-gigis a Celtic symbol of women's  power. The legend is that when a village was  about to be invaded, all the menstruating  women would go out to meet the invading  army. They would squat on the road and expose their genitals and the sight would drive  off the invaders.  By the time the march reached the gym  at the First United Church, I had not only  marched through the downtown eastside, I  had marched through thinking "freak show"  to feeling proud to know that these are my  people.  In the church gym the first speaker was  from the Vancouver Leather Association.  She said, among other things, that we are  the people who embarass the "nice" people. That "nice" people want us stuck where  they can't see us, where it's easy for us  to get murdered. She said, "We are not a  pretty sight."  She and the other speakers went on to  say that poverty was not pretty, murder was  not pretty, and hate was not pretty. She  said, men shout at her "dykewhore," the  two worst things you can call a woman. She  said they are not insults, she was one before  she became the other. She said the last man  who shouted that at her had a broken beer  bottle in his hand. She said it was okay because she was holding one too.  A sex trade worker spoke. As soon as  she got up to the mike, all the cameramen  rushed forward and surrounded her, turning their powerful spot-lights on her, cutting  her off from her audience. Her paper shook  and the tears ran down her cheeks but her  voice never cracked and she kept on talking.  She talked about the sexual abuse that  starts in the home, about the poverty  and welfare rates that trap women on the  streets, and about the violence that this so-  Strategy from page 3  "I think that a costly technique, such as  in vitro fertilization, with only a 5-10 percent effectiveness rate should be prohibited  from general use."  Thompson is also concerned with the  coalition's acceptance of reproductive technology. "It's underlying assumption is that  the technology is fine as long as there are  regulations, laws, whatever might come out  of a Royal Commission."  According to Eichler, issues around reproductive technology must be put into the  larger social context rather than "narrowly  medical implications ... There's no question that artificial insemination, for example, has been around for 400 years," she  said. "We're not going to get rid of it."  Eichler also said that these principles  were developed as a starting point to gain  membership to the coalition but that once  a commission is called, it will likely disband allowing feminists to form more radical groups to speak before the commission.  But,      according      to      Majury,  "these principles will be held up as the feminist position and used to discount more radical responses."  Popular education on reproductive technology is what's needed, Clement adds,  "Whether or not the call is successful, government action about reproduction technology is going to step up in the near future.  We need to be ready or we'll find ourselves  being entirely reactive.  "We'll gain more by putting our energy  into defining our issues and specific strategies, instead of putting energy into a broad  request to government over which we will  have little overall control."  ciety accepts as part of their lives.  She told stories about prostitutes who'd  tried to report men who'd raped them to  the police, and how sometimes the police  simply refused to take their statement. And  how very few of the men who rape and murder prostitutes are ever found because the  police don't ever look very hard  She said, "Just because we're sex trade  workers doesn't mean we deserve to be  raped and murdered." The crowd burst into  applause and the cameramen all pivoted to  pan the audience.  A native woman spoke about racism. She  said it was hard to talk about. She said  racism and sexism go together because it's  how society makes losers. She made the people in the room feel the pain of it.  Two women from Seattle spoke about  their five-year fight to get the police to find  the Green River murderer. They said whenever a woman is murdered, the papers publish a description of her dress, or her apartment, or her lifestyle, but they never publish a description of the kind of man who  would do this to a woman.  The women who started POWER (Prostitutes and Other Women for Equal Rights)  spoke at the end and said that POWER was  going to be monitoring police harassment  and they needed help. Then number is 875-  0150.  Kinesis  retreat  and  benefit  by Noreen Shanahan  Imagine crossing the Strait of Georgia with a double issue of Kinesis in one hand,  maybe a deck of cards in the other, saying goodbye to Vancouver for a few days this July.  Do it. Come along to Kinesis' third annual Saturna Island retreat.  Here's some of what it's all about: lots of smells—of country and cooking and sheep.  Then there's the great opportunities to climb hills, walk beaches and cross endless fields  sinrounding Breezy Bay Inn which, for that weekend, will house only Kinesis retreaters.  Between nature, card games and great food (provided we're all great cooks), we promise  challenging, informative workshops on newspaper design, writing, editorial content and financing.  Proposed workshops are: An historical look at feminist journalism; What is a 'women's  issue', and how is it a feminist issue; editing by design; writing to eliminate biases; editorial policy; survey of contemporary feminist newspapers; a closer look at Kinesis financing, and more.  It's an invaluable opportunity to take a look at the paper's recent past, and get excited  about and involved in directing it's future. All women with fresh ideas are welcome—all  for under twenty dollars, or what you can afford.  If you've been thinking about getting involved in Kinesis, it's a great way to get to  know the paper and meet the regulars.  But first ... "Monday Madness" at Vancouver's La Quena Coffeehouse for a Kinesis  retreat benefit. Come hear writers Cynthia Flood, Pam Tramfield and Claire Stannard  read from their latest work.  Listen to music by 'No Frills' bluegrass band, Sylvi, Claire Kujundzic, Baylah Green-  spoon, Jazz and others. And a special performance of Japanese fan dancing by Helga.  And now to your calendar—circle May 30th at La Quena (see Kinesis back cover for  details) and July 8, 9and 10 for the Kinesis retreat. Call 254-5499 to reserve your space  at the retreat.  , KINESIS ////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////M^^^^  Economics  Privatization in Britain and B.C  by Paula Stromberg  Anne Harvey, President of the Office and  Technical Employees Union Local 378 and  a Vice-President of the B.C. Federation of  Labour, has been spearheading a joint union  task force on the impact of privatization in  British Columbia. Part of the group's efforts includes research on how privatization  is working in other countries such as Great  Britain, particularly because the B.C. government is trying to use the supposed success in Britain to justify their grand plan to  sell off a variety of government agencies.  H the B.C. government follows the example of the Thatcher government, they will  sell public assets at far below then market  value as a short-term solution to lowering  the accumulated provincial deficit which is  currently $5 billion.  Whether privatization will reduce the  deficit or lower costs to the taxpayers of  B.C. is another matter entirely. The British results show we could well end up paying more for less.  A massive privatization campaign was  announced by British Tory Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher when she swept into  power in 1979. More than £20 billion in  public assets have been sold to private interests, accompanied by huge stock commissions for the banks and quick share premiums for the investors. However, unemployment has skyrocketed and service is in many  cases worse than before.  In an in-depth interview for Kinesis,  Harvey, who heads the OTEU which represents 7000 members at B.C. Hydro, Insurance Corporation of B.C., Sky Train, B.C.  Transit and about 17 other groups, talked  about the Iron Lady's results nine years after privatization began in Britain and the  conclusions to be drawn for British Columbia.  Kinesis: Why are you concerned  about privatization?  Many British Columbians are concerned  about government plans to sell crown corporations like B.C. Hydro Gas, Rail and  Research and Development operations as  well as contract out highway maintenance,  health care and ambulance services.  All of us use B.C. Hydro services, so every consumer in the province will be adversely affected by privatization. Publicly-  owned companies have a mandate to break  even. In order to make a profit, private companies buying these operations will have to  either reduce service and maintenance, increase consumer prices, decrease workers'  wages or get a government subsidy. There  is no other way to make a profit.  We are also concerned about privatization because our union members are at the  forefront of the sell-offs proposed by the  government—it will have a terrible effect on  their wages, benefits and the very existence  of their jobs.  Kinesis: What prompted Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to introduce  privatization in Great Britain?  Margaret Thatcher is a monetarist, that  is, she believes governments should control  inflation by increasing unemployment. She  sees privatization of public enterprises as  the fastest way to reduce the number of  public employees and, in some cases, de-  unionize all at the same time.  Monetarists beheve unemployment will  bring down peoples' expectations and lower  their wage demands, thus leaving more  profit for the business owners.  Thatcher's strategy is also to increase  share ownership because she believes people who own shares are more likely to hold,  the same political views as she does.  Her argument for privatization was that -  it would reduce the government deficit by  selling off public enterprises. There was a  chance it would work because of the number  and size of public enterprises in Britain and  the way their financial system is set up—  money from the sales goes directly to the  Exchequer.  In British Columbia, however, if you sell  B.C. Hydro Gas, for example, the money  does not go directly to the provincial government. Debts to bond holders have to be  satisfied and the sale money has to be returned to B.C. Hydro.  By selling the companies at fire sale  prices, Thatcher did reduce the British  deficit in the short term. The cost to the  British public was enormous. For example, consultants' commissions for individual  stock exchange flotations came to £ 284  million, and then while helping sell off companies for the government, the consultants  made duplicate transaction fees from the  companies who were buying the assets.  Kinesis: How has privatization affected the general public in Britain?  If income taxes are lower and inflation  has been held in check in Britain, it is  also true that the Thatcher government has  presided over a steady increase in unemployment from five percent in 1979 to about  11.2 percent today.  Unemployment has increased 200 percent  since Thatcher was elected in 1979. Inspired  by neo-conservatist Milton Friedman, she  has a deliberate monetarist policy and believes that to reduce inflation she has to increase unemployment. Based on her philosophy, Thatcher has been a roaring "success"  with 1.9 million jobs lost since she came to  power.  Kinesis: How did Thatcher sell the  idea of privatization to the British vot-  \   ers?  Thatcher was able to promote privatization because there was a growing sense of  frustration with the telephone system (now  known as British Telecom), for example,  and the long delays to install telephones.  •The lack of investment in new technology  made British Telecom inefficient and gave  all public enterprise a bad name.  Thatcher capitalized on this frustration  when she started privatization and it had  an effect on public opinion even for enterprises that operated efficiently, such as the  National Bus Company (NBC). The NBC  operated public transit in many major British cities outside London and although bus  frequency and route convenience was marvelous by B.C. standards, the service was  split up into 72 different companies for privatization, of which about three-quarters  have been sold.  I would say the real problem at the  bottom of it all was bad management.  Good management is what makes a company efficient. You can have good management in the public sector. For example, a little-publicized fact about the Insurance Corporation of B.C. is that they  have the lowest administrative expense ratios of any automobile insurance company  in North America. Their administration expenses run about 17 percent of their budget, whereas comparable insurance companies in the private sector are 25-30 percent.  Kinesis: Could you outline in a general way the effect of privatization on  women in Britain?  In Britain, women have lost jobs in areas  like the school food service and health care.  Women are the ones who ride the buses and  use the social services, so they are hardest  hit. Britain is a country where nearly one in  three people live in poverty.  Kinesis: What were some of the techniques Thatcher used to popularize the  privatization scheme?  The rhetoric was the same as it is in British Columbia: that privatization is taking  companies out of the inefficient grip of the  OTEU President Anne Harvey speaking at Vancouver's 1987 International Women's Day Rally. Harvey's union, comprised mainly of women, is directly threatened by Social Credit privatization plans.  public sector and putting them into private  hands where the market can operate unfettered; the taxpayers are shedding companies which are a drain on the public purse;  and the people are getting an opportunity'  to own a piece of the country.  This last piece of rhetoric ignore the fact  that the people already own these profitable  enterprises with extensive assets.  And now we're hearing it from Vander  Zalm. Britain's so-called success story is being presented as a model for B.C.  And incidentally, much of the early success Thatcher boasted about with privatization was with industries which aren't nationalized in Canada, such as the car industry.  One technique Thatcher used was to offer  Employee Share Ownership Plans (ESOP)  at reduced prices. She told workers that if  they owned shares, they'd have control of  their work lives. But even with Thatcher's  starring example, British Freightways, a  trucking company, the employees own less  than 15 percent of the shares.  Kinesis: Could you expand on the  employee share ownership experience in  Britain? It seemed to be immensely popular with the public when it was introduced.  A report released by the National Audit  Office, the British equivalent to Canada's  Auditor General, criticized the Thatcher  government for the excessive cost of priva  tizing British Airways and British Gas. In  the case of British Airways, the report said  the actual transfer of shares cost the pub-  he £48-6 million which represented almost  five percent of the total proceeds of the sale.  The government abo set the price too low  and as a result, lost £ 317 million on the  first day of the sale.  It has been widely reported that the end  result of the ESOP programs is that the  government offers shares very cheaply, people buy them and then sell at the first opportunity. Despite the initial government  hoopla, there is a very low percentage of  workers who actually own shares in their  own companies. And the stock market crash  last October has reduced the value of that  small percentage of employee-owned shares.  Kinesis: How is Vander Zalm trying  to mold public perceptions in B.C.?  Vander Zalm's style is to propose the  toughest legislation, then give the citizens  a false sense of democracy by backing off  slightly and thereby pacifying the majority.  In B.C., we see this happening frequently  with issues such as abortion legislation and  Bill 19 and 20 anti-labour legislation.  Despite the immensely different situations in Britain and B.C., Vander Zalm is  using the same message and sales techniques  as Thatcher did They both try to persuade  people that by selling off public assets, it  Please see Britain page 20  KINESIS May  88 11 Turkish feminists  Confronting questions of power  by Jill Bend  In February 1988, I visited Istanbul and  was fortunate to be able to interview three  Turkish radical feminists about their views  on everything from violence against women,  pornography, prostitution, to Islamic politics. Their perspectives are controversial  and unique, an outgrowth of their particular political experiences and the repressive  political climate in Turkey.  That there are still 15-20,000 political  prisoners speaks loudly of the abuse of human rights in this Near East country that,  at this very moment, is trying to clean up  its image for acceptance into the European  Economic Community.  Within the last year student, worker and  ecologist rallies have been broken up with  many demonstrators arrested and tortured.  A state of emergency still exists in five eastern provinces as the large Kurdish ethnic  minority continues to fight for its survival.  Some seven members, mostly women, of the  Prisoners' Families Mutual Aid Society are  in court charged with organizing a demonstration last November demanding the freedom of political prisoners. Last summer, a  physicians' group set up to educate of the  dangers of nuclear war was banned on the  grounds that its activities would sow panic  in the population. Passports continue to  be denied to torture victims seeking to go  abroad for treatment of their physical and  psychological injuries. The list goes on...  In the interview the women's memories  of their imprisonment and torture coloured  the topics we discussed and brought into  focus the one common denominator—the  question of power. Power, especially as it relates to state censorship, police and military  force, prison, and the systematic use of torture. The women in Turkish society suffer  doubly under this weight of pohtical rule by  the military and social rule by the Islamics.  The conclusion they appear to draw is that  women are fighting against power and, that  as women fighting, this translates into a battle against patriarchy—the ultimate power  over and against all women and life.  Because of the need for anonymity, the  women's names have been changed to protect their identity.  Kinesis: How did Turkish women begin thinking and talking about women's  liberation?  Aysel: After the coup d'Stat in 1980,  there were some women from left-wing  groups that started talking about their experiences in these groups. They were feeling  frustrated about questions of power. The socialist movement wouldn't end their problems as women. Kadin Cevresi (Women's  Circle) began about that time. We were one  of the few pohtical groups that were allowed  to operate legally during the period of martial law.  Kinesis: Have repressive measures  been taken against Kadin Cevresi?  Seviye: No, because they never really  take women seriously. Yet, I still don't feel  myself very free to say what I really think  about State and Power. Being a feminist is  not a softer place than being a socialist. Perhaps it is a more radical perspective even.  When I speak in any meeting of women, I  always have that auto-censorship because I  can't really state what I think about social  organizations. If I even try to write about  these things, it will be very dangerous for  me. We have a law that you cannot say anything against the state.  Didar: The repression is not going to  come just from the state, you know. I am  very much afraid of the Islamic movement  that is getting quite strong in Turkey. In  our first women's protest, in March 1987,  we spoke against wife-battering and about  the comments of a judge hearing the trial  of a man charged with a violent assault  on his wife. It was during the holy month  of Ramadan and a woman speaker was  reading some extracts from the Koran—  Mohammed's words on wife-battering. It is  quite obvious that he said you could beat  your wife. We were hundreds of women  shouting out against Mohammed.  For one moment I thought what is happening in Turkey? This is quite dangerous. After that, they became quite sensitive  about us and began writing against us in  the Islamic and fascist newspapers.  Kinesis: When the women in Istanbul talk about feminism or, for example, organize this protest against wife-  battering, do you consider how to reach  out to women in the villages or East  Turkey where society is more traditional?  Aysel: Politically, we don't believe in  representation. I don't want to talk for the  women in the villages, women that I haven't  seen in my life. This is a political point  of view. Yet I know these struggles. If my  "We were  hundreds of  women shouting  out against  Mohammed"  father can batter me, he can batter my  mother. They get battered in villages, too.  If I do something about it here, it may help  them in the villages also.  Kinesis: What about violence against  women on the street?  Seviye: I don't think it's as bad a problem here as it is in Europe or the States because men here can do whatever they want  to their women waiting at home, so they  don't need women on the streets. There  are some women waiting in the houses for  that oppression, for that violence, and those  rapes.  Seviye: It is a common experience that if  I walk on the streets at night, three or four  times a man may try to touch me or say  something to me. I am very familiar with  verbal abuse. Even if you are a 60-year-old  woman walking in the street, you will get  verbal abuse. It is the daily routine. I ignore  it because I have to hve with it.  Kinesis: Pornography is a controversial issue in the west. Does it even exist  here and what is the feeling about it?  Seviye: Pornography is illegal but it is  very official. Hard-core, cheap pornography  can be found everywhere but they will take  you to court for writing about human sexuality or erotica. Most of the Turkish weekly  papers, even with an article against pollu  tion, they will use a slightly naked woman  as the cover page. What is the difference between this and pornography? If you yield to  this, what is the point in being against pornography?  Aysel: I am not against pornography because I don't know any criteria for knowing the difference between pornography and  eroticism. It is not bad to talk about the human body. Anyway, I am against banning  anything. Pornography is a very open and  irritating expression of what we must live  sexually from men. It is saying it loud. The  problem is with the subject and object of  the sexual relationship. There is a power relationship within sexual relations between  men and women and it stems form the social relationship.  Kinesis: Brothels are legal and state-  run, an incongruous situation because  the population is 99 percent Moslem although the Turkish government is secular. What is the reality of this paradox?  Aysel: Prostitution is legal and transsex-  uality is legal. But you get illegal suppression if you are gay, transvestite, or transsexual. It is the same as torture...it is not legal,  but the state does it.  Seviye: Li Turkey, you can't find a  woman on the streets looking for a client.  You find only the transsexuals in the streets.  I don't know one single woman who works  without a pimp but transsexuals do because  they are still strong like men. It is very dangerous for them, though. They are arrested,  beaten up, and their hair cut off. There is  lots of abuse, from the police but also from  the clients.  Aysel: I am not against prostitution. I  mean, if we are talking against the family  then we should not talk against prostitution. You don't get paid for it in the family,  married to a man. If you sleep with a man  as a prostitute, then you get paid for it and  I don't think there is much difference about  the pleasure.  Kinesis: Are there prostitutes  (Much laughter follows this question.)  Seviye: Are you joking? It is a lovely  idea, but back to the reality of Turkey.  Aysel: First you must ask if there are  any unions in Turkey!  Kinesis: Are there lesbians in your  group? Or are there lesbian groups? Or  are there lesbians...?  Aysel: There should be lesbians in this  group but there are none. There are bisexual women among us but it is not a political  choice. It is just a sexual choice. And there  are no lesbian groups because I would know  if there were one.  Didar: It is less taboo for lesbians than  gay men. It isn't taken very seriously,  women making love to each other. We've always had the harem, so it is okay. But after  feminism, it is different because now they  use such words against us ... thinking they  are insulting us by calling us lesbians. Everyone knows it is going on, but when you  organize around lesbianism and speak out  about it, then it becomes a pohtical action.  Aysel: It is easy being a lesbian in  Turkey because people don't expect a  woman to sleep around with women. If you  are a woman who is not married and you  go to bed with other women, no one would  know and they wouldn't trouble. As long as  there are no men around, there is no problem morally.  Didar: We are used to living in women's  communities in this country. Some women  friends from Europe told me that after living in Turkey for a time, they understand  that we have something we could teach  them about women living together. They  said European feminists must spend time  learning how to live together, be friends,  and not be competitive with other women.  Kinesis: I heard there is a radical Islamic feminist group that protested at  the University of Istanbul for the right  to wear the veil to classes.  Aysel: Yes, that happened but they do  not call themselves feminist. There are some  Moslem women who are sensitive about  male domination and they are talking about  it. They don't carry their husband's name.  But it doesn't affect Islamic politics. They  can't organize Islamic politics. It is organized by men and they are very against us.  Kinesis: Turkey had a military coup  in September of 1980 and only lifted  martial law in 1986. There are still a  few hundred women political prisoners,  some facing the death penalty. Two of  you were subjected to torture and prison  during that period. Why were women  arrested?  Aysel: It is very difficult to be someone politically important, as a woman, in  Turkey. They put that sort of woman in  prison. Most of them are in for being a member of an illegal organization. I was inside  for that reason.  Didar: Me too. The arrests weren't always for being a member of a guerilla group,  but it also could be simply for being a member of a communist group. These groups  were banned and became illegal political  groups.  Seviye: The thing is that, before 1980,  those groups were legal but after the coup  you could spend five years or more in jail  for working in such a group. When the military takes over, there is only the military  regime.  Didar: We had this queer legal/illegal-  ism. We were illegal according to the laws  but we were still selling our newspapers on  the street. It was a very bloody freedom. It  is hard to explain to Western people.  Seviye: They don't need justifications.  The workers' unions were very legal before  1980 but after the coup the unions, that  were formed of the majority of the working-  class, were suddenly illegal.  Aysel: Talking about communism, being  a communist, organizing for communism,  and propaganda about communism is all  forbidden in Turkey. It is forbidden to be  against the state. It is forbidden to say that  one social class is oppressing the other one.  Seviye: Legally, it is like that. If you say  one social class is under oppression from another one, you can be condemned to death.  Kinesis: So, you were arrested for being members of these now illegal organizations. What treatment did you have  to endure in the detention centres and  prisons?  Didar: I was tortured right away. It was  in the police station, right in the middle of  the city. For various reasons, they were very  rapid. They use force on you to get information so they can reach other people. We take  This illustration is based on a 17th century miniature by Turkish painter Kalender. The original work depicted  'Adam and Eve.'  precautions against this. They were looking  for my husband. They got information from  some people who spoke under torture that  he was living with me. They were very fierce  on it. For four days, I was not brought down  to the cell. The cell is a nice place after the  detention centre because you get some caring from the other women there.  Aysel: I was detained for one month.  The first days are worse. After ten days, everyone would know where you were. I was  pregnant at the time and there were some  women in our cell who weren't left-wing or  anything. They were often just a neighbour  of someone they were looking for. There  were some old women also. You get very  close to the other women and they take care  of you.  I was pregnant and vomiting a lot under  the torture. The battering inside the prison  had just started while I was there. So there  was always the battering, and very little  food. We were always hungry. There is some  mineral they put in the water and it gives  us a moustache and gets us very hairy. All  of us, we had moustaches and it was very  funny, really. It was a nice felling of solidarity in the prison.  After getting arrested, I was very nervous because I wanted to get an abortion  because, after torture, you can have an abnormal baby. But when I left the prison, I  lost the pregnancy anyway.  Aysel: I felt that, at the time, I would  prefer to die instead of being tortured but  now I am glad that I didn't die. If you  talked, you wouldn't get tortured. But that  is something worse than getting tortured.  Kinesis: You have learned a different  outlook on the relation between life and  death, and between freedom and struggle, because of these experiences.  Aysel: One thing I have noticed is that  it is easier for a woman to talk about torture than a man. We used to joke about  torture a lot in prison. Things like coming  up to each other and saying, "Okay, tell me  your name." When I talked with my husband about this, he said they never talked  about being tortured themselves. It was different for us women because it was always  a man torturing us and it is normal for a  woman to get violence from a man. For the  men prisoners, it is something that makes  their male pride break down because it is a  man torturing them.  Kinesis: They are not used to the  powerlessness...  Aysel: The men talk, especially if they  torture their own wives or rape their wives.  The wife who gets raped, she doesn't talk. It  is not a problem of getting physically hurt,  it is a problem of getting powerless.  Women are not used to power, especially  physical power. It is very difficult for a  woman to torture another woman. It happened in history, there were Nazi women.  But it is very rare. Women are more alienated by violence. It is easier for a man to  torture because they are more used to violence. I feel very distant and alien to torturing. Not being tortured, but torturing.  For example, I could kill a torturer but I  couldn't torture him.  Under torture, women and men are very  different. Men feel very bad about saying  they are frightened. More men spoke under torture than women. More women are  strong against torture, that is what I have  seen. Between torturer and victim, there is  a power relationship anyway. But if the victim is a woman, then there is another power  relationship. All these power relationships  just come together. Torture is not a sex-  blind thing.  Kinesis: Are the feminists supportive  of these women still in prison, trying to  keep in touch and act in defense of their  cases?  Aysel: Unless you are a very close relative, carrying the same surname for example, you cannot visit in prison. We all went  to the march for pohtical prisoners but the  politics of the human-rights movement is  sex-blind. This is understandable because it  is so new, only a few years. There are the  wives and families of prisoners who have formed an active organization here in Turkey.  But other than that, there is very little that  can be done.  Seviye: If you look from the woman's  point of view, it is not so important the  number of women in the jails, but the  women in the jail of the home. This is a  more important subject for us because there  are not really that many women being tortured and kept in prison, but there is a majority of women being tortured and imprisoned in the home.  Kinesis: Do women in Turkey debate  the political positioning of patriarchy  versus capitalism as the "enemy"?  Aysel: In Turkey, you get the industry  and nightlife and proletariat and marginal  sexual groups and the villages...everything.  But it is getting very fast to urban and  capitalist. To think that in underdeveloped,  or Eastern, or Third World countries, that  there should be any different approach to  political organizing is what I call "orientalism"...meaning, to think that less is good  for the East, or that in the East we can demand less.  There can be a unique approach in every country, of course, but we don't want  to demand less than you. Because there is  torture going around, and because people  are poor, doesn't mean we shouldn't think  about wife-battering.  Housework is a very important political  issue for women. It puts you to the point of  deciding whether women are oppressed only,  or are they also being exploited? These are  two different points. There are French feminists saying there are two different kinds of  classes...economic classes and sexual classes.  In Turkey, we are discussing whether we  are oppressed by men, or by capitalism. I  feel we are oppressed by men, and exploited  by men. Our political group wants to analyse power relationships. I am against power.  That is all I know. I am against all kinds of  power.  For anyone wishing to give support to the Turkish women's movement,  there is one concrete way you can help  against the widespread censorship and  repression. Send feminist and political  books (English or French language) to  KADIN CEVRESI, Klodfarer Caddesi  41/6, Servet Han, Cagaloglu, Istanbul,  Turkey. They publish and distribute a  Turkish-language magazine, Feministe,  from that address.  .KINESIS  KINESIS Health  XVVVVNXXXXXXNXXNXXXXVXXXXXXV^XXNXXNXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX  Naturopathy  The healing power of nature  by Heather Herington M.D.  In 1980, there were no women naturopathic physicians practicing in British Columbia. Eight years later there are ten. The  Association of Naturopathic Physicians of  British Columbia (ANPBC) has grown dramatically in the last ten years with 52 doctors in 1988. Last October at the convention of the American Association of Naturopathic Physicians the group WIN (Women  in Naturopathic Medicine) for the first time  presented a seminar on gynecology and a  panel discussion titled "Liberating the Feminine Principle." Both were extremely well  attended and both were inspirational and  very informative.  What is naturopathic medicine, what is  its relevance to women as a system of health  care and why are so many feminists choosing to train as naturopathic physicians?  As a feminist naturopathic physician  practicing in Vancouver, I find it exciting  to watch the growth of a profession that  promotes the patient-client taking an active  role in their health care. This is not an article to perpetuate the polarities between conventional (allopathic) medicine and naturopathic medicine. Rather, I believe it is important to use the best of all systems and  allow for an integration of health and healing services.  It is true that conventional medicine is a  monopoly at this time in North America.  Other systems of medicine, naturopathic,  homeopathic, herbalism, etc., declined in  the early part of the century because of lack  of funds.  In the U.S., the Rockefeller Foundation,  via the Flexnor Report, would only support medical schools with research labs attached, so that homeopathic medical schools  or those for blacks or women declined  Also, of course, the interest in technology  ical advances pushed natural medicine into  the background. I beheve there is a continuum of health care services that we should  all have easily obtained information on and  equal access to.  Naturopathic medicine is the art and science of health care based on principles of  natural law derived from centuries of research and observations of the processes of  healing and disease. It has been alive as  long as people have used food, plants, water, thought, air and light—the forces of  nature—to heal.  The word "naturopathy" was coined in  the late 19th century to describe the grow  ing coalition of physicians and healers who  believed treating the whole person and promoting health were more important than  simply alleviating the symptoms of disease.  Naturopathy was originally based on hygiene and hydrotherapy and its evolution  has grown to naturopathic medicine which  uses various ancient and modern therapies.  Naturopathic medicine is based on the  principle 'vis medicatrix naturae'—the healing power of nature. This is an extremely  empowering concept. The belief is that it  is the nature of the organism to heal itself  and naturopathic medicine strives to create  an environment in which this innate intelligence can act to restore health. Simply put,  the organism is doing its best in order to  survive.  Often it is working in an environment  (externally and internally) which is not optimal. Pollution, junk food, oppression, etc.,  all wreak havoc and make it difficult for the  organism to do more than merely survive.  Natural therapies that support and encourage the intrinsic healing process to work  more effectively are used in the least invasive and most fundamentally curative manner possible.  Naturopathic medicine avoids the use of  medicines and procedures which interfere  with natural functions or have harmful side  effects. It affords us the opportunity to work  gently (using natural medicines and therapies) in cooperation with our bodies, mind  and emotions in a way that is almost foreign to most North Americans.  The individual is seen as an integral  whole and symptoms are seen as a sign of  the organism (we treat animals too) trying  to heal. It veers decidedly from the patriarchal viewpoint of seeing the doctor as akin  to a god, and seeing the illness or condition as something that needs to be attacked  from without. It places the greatest power  in the hands of the patient—who is truly the  (real) healer. The doctor and patient-client  can then work as a team.  Also, the patient is not seen as an isolated  organism but is viewed in the interrelationship with the environment, both physical  and cultural. The whole person has interdependent physical, mental, emotional, spiritual and cultural aspects hving within a system or community that is also a hving structure, one which affects how we function on  various levels.  And so we see new paradigm emerging  with the focus on healing our selves in relation to our different aspects and also to each  other and the community we are a part of.  The concept of naturopathic medicine  which include the prevention of disease, the  encouragement of the body's inherent abilities and education of patients in health-  promoting lifestyles are all reflected in the  various treatment approaches.  Methods of naturopathic practice include: counselling on diet, lifestyles, addictions, exercise, occupation and environmental hazards, therapeutic nutrition, allergy  testing, botanical (plant) medicine, physical therapy, hydrotherapy, psychotherapies,  bodywork and natural childbirth, colon  therapy, homeopathy and oriental medicine.  Naturopathic medical training is taught  by naturopathic physicians, medical doctors, chiropractors, osteopathic physicians,  acupuncturists, herbalists, homeopaths,  yoga teacher and others. This allows for a  broad interplay of the various disciplines  and encourages the growth of a practice  that is able to combine well-trained physicians who have been exposed to many treatment modalities with their own unique healing abilities.  Many naturopathic doctors practice general naturopathic medicine while others spe-  The principles of naturopathy  Vis medicatrix naturae (The healing power of nature): Healing is an inherent power  of the life process. It is the nature of the organism to heal itself. We strive to create an  environment in which this innate intelligence can act to restore homeostasis and health.  Tolle causam (Find the cause): Illness has causes which must be sought and removed  before recovery can take place. Chief among these on the physical level is toxemia.  Primum non nocere (First do no harm): Our primary proscription is to do no harm  to our patients in our therapeutic and diagnostic actions. The physician must act in harmony with the intelligence of the vis medicatrix naturae, and in acting to facilitate the  restoration of health do nothing to harm the organism.  Integration: Disease is multifactorial and the patient must be evaluated from that  standpoint. We not only recognize, but acknowledge and work with the body-mind-spirit  continuum in the assessment and treatment of our patients.  Prevention: Our first principle of treatment is prevention. In this regard we advise  our patients how to live in harmony with natural law to maximize their genetic potential.  Healthy habits produce health.  cialize in acupuncture, classical homeopathy  or natural childbirth (illegal in B.C.) and  some stay with the founding disciplines of  hydrotherapy and detoxification.  Many people are unclear about the difference between naturopathic medicine and  homeopathy. Homeopathy (homeo = similar) is a highly systemic, scientific method  of therapy based on the law of similars:  whatever substance produces symptoms in  healthy person will cure those symptoms in  a sick person. The substance is a minute  dose which has been prepared according to  homeopathic principles. The remedies are  prepared from 2000 mineral, plant and animal sources. Prescriptions are based on the  uniqueness of the person and the totality of  symptoms, not on the type of disease. Simply put, there is a resonance between each  person at any given moment and some mineral, plant or animal substance.  The task of the homeopath (doctor or  lay) is to match the total picture of symptoms provided by the patient with a homeopathic remedy which will most effectively  resonate with their energy (vital force) as  a whole. It is this powerfully stimulated vital force which then cures whatever disease  may be present.  This then would be considered a vital-  istic system of medicine whereas conventional (allopathic—alio = other) medicine  is a mechanistic or materialistic system of  medicine. Naturopathic medicine is primarily a vitalist system but also uses mechanistic therapies.  Homeopathy is practiced by naturopathic  physicians, medical doctors, nurse practitioners and lay people. Some dentists use it  for acute conditions. Homeopathy is always  part of a naturopathic physicians repertoire, at least in acute conditions. Constitutional (or chronic) homeopathic prescribing  however, is a specialty just as acupuncture  might be.  So how can we use naturopathic medicine  to further empower ourselves? The word  doctor means teacher, and each naturopathic physician is taught the importance  of teaching patient-clients about their own  individual healing process from a physical,  emotional, or spiritual perspective.  There is much we can do to increase our  awareness of our condition. The more we  learn about ourselves in terms of the food  we eat, the foods we are allergic to, the  processes of pathology and detoxification,  cleansing, the use of water in healing (hydrotherapy), the better we are able to decrease the physical stresses of living in a polluted environment.  On a mental-emotional level I know of no  naturopath (doesn't mean they don't exist)  who would say it's all in your head. We tend  to believe there may not be the diagnostic  devices to detect various bodily imbalances  and it is the symptoms that lead to an understanding of a condition.  It is important to remember that the  body does things for a reason. For example, a runny nose is the body's attempt to  get rid of toxic substances and should never  be suppressed Rather we should encourage  the drainage. Our bodies and minds are not  our enemies and should never be treated as  such. We can learn from the illnesses and  conditions that affect us.  There is tremendous healing that needs  to occur within ourselves, within our  community—cultural and geographical, and  throughout the world. The more we learn of  our bodies, minds and emotions the closer  we get to greater energy and deepened clarity that will allow us the freedom to live  fully with boundless creativity. We deserve  to know the choices in terms of complete  health care and healing on all levels, using  a continuum of services and methods.  Naturopathic physicians do have treatments for conditions such as abnormal Pap  smears, PID, addictions, etc. Unfortunately  the medical services coverage for naturopathic medicine is so much less than conventional medicine that it is difficult for many  women to afford the choice between natural therapies and surgery. Hopefully in time  this will change. /////////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////^^^^  Arts  Jane Siberry listening... listening...  by Donimo  At first, I was drawn to Jane Siberry's  music because of her use of sound to create aural landscapes and sculptures. Her  music is pleasing, is entertaining. Now, after studying her lyrics, I am captivated  by her clarity of perception and uniqueness of vision. Her lyrics are sparse and poetic and imagistic, exploring both personal  and pandemic issues. As a communicator-  storyteller-musician she is fascinating, original and often unusual. In a recent interview, I asked Jane about one of her unusual  references:  Kinesis: In all four of your albums  there have been cows...  Jane: Ever since I was young I've always been fascinated by them, and there  is something very grounded about them  ... grounded and of the moment—different  than goats or horses or pigs, or any other  animal—there's something about cows ...  very beautiful and solid.  I used to play guitar for them at a farm.  They were so calm and they just listened I  built up my confidence that way. And I love  the way their heads, no matter which position their bodies are in, their heads always  turn to face me. It just tickles me when I go  past cows.  In the same manner, Jane's music turns  to face you. Her latest album, "The Walking," is her most listener-demanding album  to date: poetic fragments, slices of life and  metaphors require attention and openness.  Kinesis: How do you feel about the  criticism you've received regarding the  albums inaccessibility? I found that  it took me time and careful listening  to understand...and that's something I  prefer as a listener, but some people  have been critical...  Jane: Fm glad you said that, I feel that  way, too. I think it's a weird thing to criticize something like that. I think the record  is very accessible. I mean, personally, I felt  I was writing a really warm, more melodic  record than the last two, maybe, and that  even though the songs were dense that there  were so many things that I felt were hooks  through everything it made it a really solid  piece of work. And that's my criteria.  I feel good about it, and it's for people like yourself. When you say that sort of  thing I think, "Ya, okay it works," because  you have to trust yourself or you just get  lost.  Kinesis: I think some people just  want pop candy.  Jane: There's lots of candy out there.  Why look to me for that? During the making of this album I lost and found myself by  walking, and walking...unwinding the songs  from their hidden states, unrolling other  thoughts that occupied me into a better understanding ... (laughs) that's not candy.  Sometimes, her eclectic sounds can be  sweet and easy to swallow, but often lurking  behind her music are satirical social commentaries. Her song, "Mimi On the Beach,"  is an example of one of her melodic tunes  underscored with head-shaking questioning  of social mores:  Someone else points out a queer  they're all jocks—both guys and girls  press the button—take your cue ...  Mimi On the Beach  .Kinesis: You do question social morals  and mores. How do you feel about the  recent upsurge of hatred and violence directed at the lesbian and gay communities worldwide?  Jane: Well, it's despicable, it really  is...but it's something that will balance itself out, I believe...somehow...through the  Jane Siberry built up her confidence as a performer by playing her guitar to cows - creatures which she believes  are more grounded in the moment than most other animals. As a communicator-storyteller-musician Siberry is  fascinating, original and often unusual.  energies that better us, like yourselves [myself, the photographer]. You need the energy  to work these things out, but I sort of feel  there's a reason for everything...and that  doesn't mean that it's right to direct hatred at anybody, but the extra energy that  it stimulates from people who have a sense  of outrage is a great thing. Things will bal-  Kinesis: Do you consider yourself  a spiritual person? I sense that you  believe in a spiritual working out of  things.  Jane: Well, I wouldn't use the word  'God' ever, but I have a sense of stepping  back a lot...that there's a real sense of balance. And things aren't hopeless and random. I don't believe things are guided, that  implies a single director. A balance comes  from all parts, no one outside controller.  Spiritually as well as musically, the  womyn in Jane's band, back-up singers Rebecca Campbell and Rebecca Jenkins and  keyboard player Anne Bourne, are joined in  a women-centered creative effort.  Rebecca C: The womyn are socially,  emotionally and intimately connected.  There are a lot of spiritual connections happening and a lot of tuning into that kind of  energy. Lots of nurturing and maintaining  communal health...and that comes through  in the music; it's a real womyn's thing. Jane  has a really strong feeling about womyn's  energy. The womyn she chooses to keep  around her are strong. One of the mam requirements for working in the band is personal strength and a vision of who you are.  The womyn in the band are an integral  part of the overall sound on the albums as  well as being very important to the stage  production. Like Jane, they too are communicators.  Rebecca C: I'm a vehicle for her ideas,  but she gives me a lot of room for input. I  have an intimate connection with the audience, too. Her stuff is so imagistic and the  pictures are so strong and the ideas come  out so laterally, it's really interesting to be a  supplementary vehicle for that information.  They're not my words, but I can speak them  through myself. I'm adding to her ideas by  them coming through me.  Anne: She wants to hear your sound...  there are always places in songs where you  have to come up with something...how you  feel about this idea or that sensation, and  just make a sound. We're a collective of  strong individuals.  Jane: It's my direction, but everybody  adds their brilliance.  The music business is male-dominated  and difficult. The womyn have encountered  sexism and are determined to remain strong  and self-defined.  Rebecca C: Bar owners want to buy me  drinks and put their arms around me while  doing business. I tell them I won't do business with them, I won't take that. On stage,  I like being a sensual sexy person...that gets  pushed and misconstrued. As a performer,  I get confused about how to use that or  what to do with it. It does screw up your  head; and you have to keep thinking, "Fm  an artist, I'm a communicator."  Anne: A fellow was trying to sell us in  the States...Tina Turner was big then. He  actually went out and bought an outfit for  Jane to wear, telling her she had to dance  more! I think there's more than one kind  of role a woman can play on stage, and it  doesn't have to be weak or cliche. You just  speak for yourself strongly.  Jane: I don't like the idea of any kind  of exclusivity, that's why I do try to go for  what I want, no matter who I'm working  with...which is why I have a strong arm in  everything that I do because I don't want  any kind of sexism. I work with people with  particular sensibilities, both male and female, that I can relate to.  Jane, as well as the rest of the womyn  in the band, plan to continue pouring all of  their creative energy into their music, each  having a project of her own.  Jane: Yes, this is what I do full time, but  to dispel a common myth, I don't have time  to take other work, but I should. Fve been in  debt for a long time...but, just as a person,  I see so many people that don't like what  they do...I feel really, really lucky to put every ounce of my energy into something that  Fm inspired by and get energy from.  I love to do what I love to do  the pleasure is in the peace of mind  the pleasure is mine  mein bitte  mein bitte  With a lifetime of writing down words,  and several albums behind her, Jane Siberry  will begin, in June, sifting through her  "rough shapes of songs" and in the listening  and waiting, she will give us her next album.  The walking and constantly  an endless stream of endless dreams  that wheel and roll just past my shoulder  the waiting and constantly  an endless shift of sifting through  the facts the fey  you never know for sure  The walking (and constantly)  Jane  Siberry has  released three albums: No Borders Here, Speckless Sky,  and the walking.  KINESIS  May 88 15 Barbara Wilson  Novels,  translation  and twin  detectives  by Patricia Maika  Something happened to Barbara Wilson in 1984. She was forced to consider a  new identity. From being an "average short  story writer" she became, with the publication of her novel Murder in the Collective, a "mystery writer." In the tradition of  mystery writers from Agatha Christie and  Dorothy L. Sayers to Amanda Cross and  Ruth Rendell, Wilson had created a popular fictional sleuth. Even better, she had  doubled the power and perspicacity of her  amateur detective by making her two in  one. Readers clamoured for more of Wilson's twin feminists Pam and Penny Nilsen.  Well, readers got more in Sisters of the  Road, a second mystery, and will be able  to follow further adventures of the skeptical twins in the third and what Wilson considers her last detective novel, The Dog  Collar Murders, coming out soon. Barbara  Wilson can predict this with some certainty  because, in addition to writing novels and  short stories for twenty years, she has been  publishing her own works and those of other  writers for twelve.  In 1976 Wilson and friend Rachel DaSilva  founded Seal Press of Seattle and ran it  as a collective, working at all aspects of  the business and publishing a variety of fiction and non-fiction of interest to women.  Today DaSilva is an associate, and Wilson and partner Faith Conlon run the press  with eight people who work in a successful  business which exists, says Wilson, to "help  women to get published" Non-fiction works  about women's issues are the mainstay of  the press financially.  She has published Phyllis Chesler's  Mothers on Trial and several books on  domestic violence, notably Getting Free,  about battered women, a subject which has  made it a top seller for eight years. Fiction  brings in less money as, once an author becomes known, she may be offered a lucrative  contract from a larger publishing house. In  contrast, Wilson herself has just published  her new novel, Cows and Horses, with  Eighth Mountain Press of Portland run by  a former member of the Seal collective, "to  help her out."  Another, relatively unusual venture for a  feminist press is a series of literary works  in translation. To date Seal has ten titles  translated from Japanese, Arabic, Norwegian, Danish, Catalan (a language of Spain)  and Korean and is adding more including  Wilson's own translation, from the Norwegian, of turn-of-the-century writer Cora  Sandel's trilogy about the experience of becoming a writer. A measure of the versatility and scope of Barbara Wilson's work is  that in addition to mystery novels, "serious"  fiction, and her work as a publisher, she has  already translated a collection of Sandel's  stories written between the 1920's and the  1960's.  The publication of a new volume of short  stories, Miss Venezuela,, has brought Barbara Wilson to Vancouver and a cafe on  Broadway for coffee. She has five interviews  and a reading scheduled today and flies to  Seattle tomorrow. It seems you can't just be  a writer, to some degree you become public  property, open for perusal like your books.  Wilson is 38, articulate, friendly yet  guarded, doing what she has to, namely talk  to me. I know from her fiction that she has  a strong sense of irony. As usual I am intimidated but as usual pretend I'm not. Definitely I need to read women's fiction to  straighten me out.  Now I have some facts I decide, with the  next cup of coffee, to make my questions  more personal. Just back from four months  in London, Barbara Wilson spends a good  deal of time in Europe, speaks French, German, Spanish and Norwegian: distance gives  needed perspective on her own country. I remind myself that she is an American writer  and cautiously ask about nationalism. I am  thinking of Virginia Woolf's grandiose view  of women as global citizens:  "Everyone needs a place in the world,"  says Wilson. "Being an American is okay in  many ways."  We discuss the dangers of a parliamentary system which allows one woman to  dismantle local government authorities and  centralise power in herself. How quickly  Margaret Thatcher's opinion that homosexuals should not teach in Britain's public  schools became law.  "The American system has checks and  balances that might prevent that," says  Wilson. Well, I took American history and I  guess that's true. Wilson is critical of American feminists.  "The feminist movement in the States is  star-oriented. The problem is with the culture. In Canada there is more class consciousness. Canadian feminists have their  feet on the ground."  Irrationally, I am relieved, feel more like a  patriot as I question Barbara Wilson about  Southern California where she grew up. She  warms to the subject, affectionately recalls  her own part of the country. After attempting to play the British version of Trivial  Pursuit, Wilson knows for sure that Southern California, TV worship and all, is her  place.  She is emphatic about her acceptance of  the culture, the use, in her literature, of  the laconic speech that leaves much unexpressed, much for the reader to infer. Useful,  I think, in detective fiction as in women's  lives, with all those undercurrents and false  leads.  Wilson admires Chekhov, Katherine  Mansfield and, her favourite, Jane Austen  and suggests her early use of literary conventions, such as characters drinking a lot,  may owe something to the writers she grew  up with such as Hemingway and Lawrence.  She insists, however, that her authentic  voice, changing and refining as she grows  older, owes more to her own experience than  to literary influences. Older women, silent  for years and beginning to write, may not  chronicle their growth in early books but  what they write now may be the fruit of  that growth and more valuable.  In addition to fictional detective twins,  recurrent characters in Wilson's fiction are  Kate, an independent, lesbian feminist and  her brother Kevin. Wilson has a good relationship with her own brother and their upbringing is the autobiographical underpinning to many of her stories. In real life she  has fun being the aunt of two nieces and a  nephew who adequately satisfy any desire  she has for continuity with the next generation. So far, writing, publishing and travelling make a full life.  Although Barbara Wilson characterises  her detective fiction as non-serious, she uses  the genre to express her political ideas in an  entertaining fashion. Murder in the Collective, which Wilson began as a satire on  the pretensions of contemporary ideologies,  became a vehicle for discussing the Marcos  regime in the Philippines and for putting  into perspective women's decisions about  their sexual preferences at various times in  their hves.  Her identical twins Pam and Penny make  different choices: one decides she is gay  and wears long hair, the other sleeps with  men, cuts, colours and spikes her locks. The  twins, identical yet unlike, remain sane, perfectly "normal" sisters and friends. Murder  in the Collective (popular world-wide and  translated into several languages) has done  much to discredit the myths leading to discrimination against gay women.  In Miss Venezuela, Barbara Wilson's  twenty-two stories cover an amazing variety of subjects and situations in several  cultures. She writes of separation and loss  through death, surrogate motherhood, mental illness, growing up and growing old,  marriage, and the partings of friends. Always Wilson writes with compassion and a  painterly eye for setting and description.  "Pity," framed by William Blake's illustration of lines from Macbeth and told by  the voices of a pregnant woman and one who  cannot bear children, explores, as though on  the artist's canvas, the grief and emotional  complexities of surrogate motherhood in a  dehumanized world.  Each story in the collection shows a distinctive style from "Earthquake Baroque,"  a brief gem, set in Mexico, about women's  isolation in the universe, to "Walking on the  Moon," a long story probing one woman's  conception of episodes from her past in Germany.  Wilson's writing is polished (she does  endless revisions, ruthlessly pruning clidbis  and superfluous words to give her prose immediacy); she writes of serious matters with  gentle humour and accurate insights. She  tells us in "Phantom Limb Pain," a touching  story of a Russian language teacher whose  memories hold him back emotionally, that  you cannot bring back the past, but you  can be healed, and you have to go on. "Miss  Venezuela" (the title story is about a beauty  queen who wants to be a lawyer) is  cessible fiction, truthfully showing the way  things are, but never closing the door  the way they might be. In "How to Fix a  Roof," a little girl decides early to resolve  the conflict of emotion versus reason: "Already I saw myself a famous artist. With a  roofing business on the side."  "I have nothing much to call my own."  said Barbara Wilson at the end of our talk,  "but I'm happy." What she does have is the  respect of her readers.  Cows and Horses, a novel with only  female characters, will be available locally in a week or so. Murder in the Collective, Sisters of the Road, and Miss  Venezuela are in bookstores now.  The anthology is accessible fiction,  truthfully showing the way things are, but  never closing the door on the way they  might be.  In "How to Fix a Roof", a little girl  resolves the conflict of emotion versus  reason: "Already I saw myself a famous  artist with a roofing business on the side."  16  K'NESIS        May 88 Arts  /////////////////////^^^^^  VERA  Written, directed and produced by Sergio  Toledo  Starring Ana Beatriz Noqueira  Released by Kinko International  The movie is about Vera, but she de-  Imands to be called by her surname, Bauer.  This excellent first film concerns a young  woman growing into maturity. Viewing it  will be an evocative experience for anyone  who has ever questioned their gender identity. And I think that everyone has, at whatever subterranean level of their being.  Being known by her surname adds to  Vera's macho image. (Vera, by the way,  means "truth".) She very much wants to appear, as well as be, masculine. At the beginning, she leaves an orphanage dressing  butch in jeans and vests. Once she's working, in a university library, she acquires the  Brazilian film  Blossoming  out of concrete  by Alison Sawyer  Plans afoot  for women's  music fest  by Margaret Boyes  The Vancouver Women in Music Network  (Society (VWIMS) is planning a one day music festival in New Brighton Park on the  weekend of August 27. Events will include  women's poetry, theatre, dance and music  and there will be information tables and displays. Childcare and refreshments will be  available.  This first festival will focus on local musicians although some may come from as far  away as Seattle. It is not known who the  performers will be at present.  VWIMS is a collective group of women  which was formed two years ago. Its aim is  to provide a networking service for women  in music throughout Canada and the western United States. One of its projects is to  compile an accessible directory of women  musicians, arrangers, producers, and technicians etc. for this area.  Past events organized by the VWIMS include Women's Voices, in the Fringe Festival; a panel workshop for women songwriters at the Vancouver Lesbian Connection,  and a local women's music coffeehouse at  La Quena. On April 25, it presented June  Millington at Graceland.  The festival committee welcomes sponsorships. Co-op Radio will be supporting  the festival. Some tentative fundraisers include a cabaret at Women in Focus in late  June and a Latin reggae performance by Bo  Conlan, later this summer.  If you are interested in volunteering to  work at the festival or in helping with  fundraising, please contact the VWIMS.  More performance artists are also needed as  well as carpenters, music technicians, peacekeepers and people for public relations. Donations of equipment such as tarps, banners,  balloons, trucks, printing, food and money  will be welcomed.  VWIMS can be contacted at #1-1325  Barclay St., Vancouver, B.C. (604)  681-8617.  male whitecollar uniform—suit, white shirt,  dark tie. In her desperation to be a man, she'  hates exposing anything about herself that's  womanly— except for the big contradiction  of her life and the film. She lets people read  her emotionally deep and resonant poetry.  As well as the outstanding direction, the  film is finely acted. Ana Beatriz Nogueria  was awarded Best Actress at the Brazil National Festival and the prestigious Berlin  Festival in 1987. In fact everything about  the film is very good Numerous flashbacks  expand our understanding of why Bauer, at  age 18, wants so badly to be a man. We  learn that Bauer's plight is not a question  of biological error or hormones.  The story unfolds with Vera Bauer being  taken to a job placement interview by her  sponsor, a male professor. She's 18 and it's  time for her to leave the closed world of the  orphanage she's been in for four years. She  gets a job in the library of the very futuristic university the professor works in. He  also finds her a room by herself in a board-  inghouse.  From there we have the first flashback of  the orphanage. We quickly see why Bauer  looks tough but is overwhelmed by the professor and his high-tech world. The orphanage is really a jail, with high, unrelieved  concrete walls, inside and out, and an almost totally male staff who are heavily authoritarian and abusive. The young women  can only hope to find emotional warmth and  tenderness from each other.  Intercut with the story of Bauer's first  encounters with independent, adult life are  the orphanage flashbacks. There, the young  women organize their horridly-confined life  into clans with everyone having, or being,  a child, a father or a grandfather. Depth is  given to Bauer's gender-identity problems  in the work- world when we see her assigned  a male role upon arriving at the orphanage;  ultimately, she becomes the grandfather of  her clan.  There is a very moving scene where  Paizao, the grandfather who turns 18 and  must leave, comes to Bauer to pass on the  role. (A fellow critic pointed out that Paizao  can be translated as "relation".) She says to  Bauer that someone has to stand up to the  staff (the men) and not be afraid. Someone  has to protect the girls. For example, when  one of them is found to be having intimate  encounters with a male staff, Bauer has to  threaten and shake her up a bit because clan  rules forbid sexual contact with staff.  Ana Beatriz Noqueira. award-winning in her role as Vera.  At the university, Bauer falls in love with  a woman more experienced and worldly  than she. The scenes with Clara are among  the most poignant in this very touching film.  Bauer attempts to control Clara. She sees  Clara being friendly with a man, and then  demands of Clara, in macho tones, that she  "not see" anyone Bauer hasn't been introduced to. To Bauer's astonishment, Clara  turns on her and says she cannot tell her  how to behave. She and Bauer are the  same—both are women.  The next scene is the climax of the movie.  Clara, very tenderly, tries to make love with  Bauer as an equal by taking off the garments  Bauer always wears to hide her breasts—the  undeniable sign of her femininity. The scene  is charged with Clara's love and Bauer's  pain. As soon as her breasts are exposed  she grabs her suit, shirt and tie and leaves.  In the final scenes, she at last comes face-  to-face with her inner being—the beautiful  poet, Vera.  Imagery and symbolism abound in this  complexly edited film. Beautiful colours,  particularly the blues, reflect the mystery of  the first of Vera's poems that we are privileged to hear. Scene after scene speaks to  YYou've Always Delivered  «  Now, help deliver Kinesis. We need a  woman to distribute the paper, by car  to local bookstores and by mail to our  national distributor and foreign  outlets.  [     You will be paid for the  approximately eight hours/month this  job entails. A driver's license and an  ability to maintain records required.  The Goods  Please call 255-5499.  F  me, to us as a community of people who  want to develop ourselves into more whole  human beings in a world of TV's, concrete  walls, cold high-tech and grimness. That is  the environment Toledo gives us for Bauer's  story. We can also see on the TV's the rockets, bombs and high-tech wars of the patriarchy as Clara reviews video documentation  for her job at the university.  Some reviewers of Vera have been sensationalist: for example, "She is faced with  the dilemma of being a man trapped in  a woman's body—alone." I do not think  Vera is about a transsexual at all, and comments by the director support this view. As  Toledo says, "I wanted to find a theme that  would "allow me to express my own anxieties  and uneasiness ... I am fascinated in what  makes her feel the need to negate her own  body and build a masculine personality."  Vera is about the problems of gender-  identity in the context of patriarchal power.  As Joel Weinberg, in an excellent review  in an American gay magazine New York  Native (Issue 236) puts it, "In Vera's extremely limited world view, the equation is  simple. Men dance with women, men are attracted to women; therefore, since she is attracted to women, she is a man."  At the end when Vera cries for herself  for the first time in recognition of the true  complexity of her lesbianism, I wanted to  hand her some radical feminist writings to  show her that she is not alone. The book I  am currently reading, Sonia Johnson's Going Out of Our Minds: The Metaphysics  of Liberation talks about women knowing  more about oppression than freedom. Johnson writes, "As slaves, we have so completely identified with those in power, so  sided with them against ourselves, so thoroughly internalized their values, that we  have come to fear our freedom as our masters fear it... .We try to win [men's] acceptance and respect by repudiating that about  ourselves—about women—which is different from them, emulating them, becoming  more like them ... we have no knowledge  of the vast power within ourselves."  You will be touched by Vero. Go and see  it.  Vera appears at the Vancouver East  Cinema until May 5th.  KINESIS :S**5a**S*SS**SSS**SSS5^^  ARTS  Palestinian journalist  Autobiography of  a trailblazer  KWfSOth  by Maureen Eason  MY HOME, MY PRISON  by Raymonda Hawa Tawil  261 pages. London: Zed Press, 1983  'Her forthrightness and single-mind-  edness are exceptional, her bravery  and independence admirable...In the  midst of terror and animosity, she  has championed the national rights of  the Palestinians without questioning Israel's right to exist."  —Jerusalem Post  "A powerful and moving account, offering much insight into Arab and Jewish societies and their conflicts and  also, much more broadly, into the resources of the human spirit."  —Noam Chomsky  Such are but a few of the endorsements  for Palestinian journalist Raymonda Tawil's  autobiography, written while she was under  house arrest in 1976. She is a founding member of the Palestine Press Service (PPS),  which was—until its recent forced six-  month closure—the principal news source  to the western media on lite in the Israeli  occupied territories.  Tawil was born in 1940 to Christian Arab  parents living in Palestine. Her book spans  a period encompassing memories of Palestine before the partition, right through the  wars of 1948,1956,1967 and 1973. Although  the early separation of her American-born  mother and Palestinian father contributed  to a somewhat unusual childhood by Middle East standards, where separation and  divorce are a rarity, her book does offer a  personal glimpse into the long struggle for  self-determination, a struggle shared by all  Palestinian people.  Readers will learn what it means to be a  stateless person with no security, no passport and no future, and how very little has  changed for Palestinians since 1948. It is  an ominous reminder that beatings, torture,  deportations, collective punishment, arrest  without trial, etc. go back a long way.  As if Israeli oppression isn't enough to  contend with, Tawil abo fights against playing a subservient role in a traditional patriarchal culture. Indeed, one of the most interesting aspects of the book turns out to  be the discord between her and her husband  over Tawil's non-traditional behaviour. On  a few occasions she demonstrates how the  views of both her husband and the Israeli authorities converge (but do not collude). Neither of them liked her involvement  in politics. Furthermore, other Palestinians  were often suspicious of her fierce determination to engage in dialogue with Israeli  Jews, believing "What's the use?"  But let's face it—the woman seems a bit  of a trail-blazer and could probably teach  our women's movement something about  chutzpah. Even when the Israeli military  government tried to 'gag her' by placing  her under house arrest and unhooking her  telephone, they couldn't shut her up. She  merely tinned her home into a pohtical salon where Israeli politicians and other Arabs  and Jews gathered to debate serious pohtical questions of the day.  Still, the Israeli reaction to Raymonda  Tawil's bravado should not be trivialized.  She was threatened, eventually arrested in  1978 on charges of 'terrorist activity,' placed  in solitary confinement and beaten. During  the period of her detention, there was worldwide interest in her case. Dr. Nahum Goldman, Jean Paul Sartre, I.F. Stone and Noam  Chomsky published protests or intervened  on her behalf. A number of Israeli journalists and pohtical figures also protested her  detention. After six weeks imprisonment,  Raymonda Tawil was released on May 7,  1978.  After the recent closure of the PPS,  Tawil's fate is uncertain, but reports indicate that more than 40 percent of all Palestinian journalists in the occupied territories have been arrested—some without being charged.  My Home, My Prison provides a  timely historical perspective for today's  events. It is available at the Women's Bookstore in Vancouver.  The second annual Give Peace A Dance fundraising dance marathon will be held  May 14 at the Plaza of Nations, B.C. Enterprise Centre. From noon to midnight  people of all ages will be dancing to the very best Vancouver's live music scene  has to offer in support of peace and humanitarian projects at home and abroad.  (A very special guest this year will be Ferron.)  You can participate by buying a ticket ($15 at all VTC/CBO outlets) or by collecting sponsorships. For more information — including how you can attend for  free for just $20  worth of sponsorships — call 321-6626.  From Ireland  Dealing with dragons and lust and lost love  by Isis  Sinead O'Connors's first album, The  Lion and the Cobra, is great. Borrow it,  buy it, whatever, but give it a hsten. Quite  simply, she has an incredible voice, textured, expressive and dare I say it, haunting. She soars and changes through the music, deftly executing beautiful vocal twists  reminiscent of her native Ireland. But her  album is first and foremost rock; danceable,  melodic, and ranging from lust to tenderness and vengeful anger.  Speaking with Sinead (pronounced Shindy) at a press conference preceding her  April performance in Vancouver,  I was  struck  by  how  intense  this  woman  is.  ", Flanked by her manager, she seemed a little  § ill-at-ease but answered questions carefully.  ■8 Asa woman in the music industry, she has  I had to be strong to avoid being typecast as  | a sexy body that also sings. But she feels  o .comfortable with where she is now.  t      "I haven't played on myself as a woman  and I haven't let anyone ebe play on that,  and I haven't used my sexuality to sell my  records, and the songs aren't girlie songs,  so I don't get messed around There are always morons who think you should do certain things because you are a woman and  you just have to tell them where to get off.  It gets easier."  Sinead has a baby son whom she brings  on the road with her. She has been enjoying travelling with him although she admits  that having a nanny is indbpensible. "I love  it."  The concert was not as impressive as her  album. Where the album was smooth and  well-produced, the concert was raw and felt  unrehearsed. The sound, as b usual at 86th  Street, was strange at best, and unbalanced.  Her band was less impressive than I'd been  led to expect and they were different from  the men she had worked on the album with.  But Sinead still sounded amazing especially  when she appeared solo, playing only a  guitar for accompaniment on "Troy." She  writes and sings like she has been through a  lot, although she insists she is just an ordinary 21 year old with a baby, a shaved head,  a hot album and a North American tour to  her credit.  So maybe you've noticed that I have  avoided the subject matter of her songs. It's  not that they aren't interesting or good, but  to be honest, even if they were horrible, I  would probably forgive her and listen anyways. Mostly she deals with personal experiences, and believes that, since she writes  for herself, there are no big messages to the  world in her music. And so many of her  songs are love songs, some of the lyrics are  obscure, and all come from a personal perspective; a mind that deals with dragons  and lust and lost love.  I hope to hear a lot more from Sinead  O'Connor as she grows. I am interested to  see how her perspectives changes, if she will  widen the range of subject material, and if  she will keep her keen edge. And her voice  ... I hope she retains her powerful, unusual  voice.  KINESIS Arts  ///////////////////////^^^^^  /N^O>V\££  WO* LI*  Classic SF and  promising starts  by Melanie Conn  This month's books include two by relatively new authors and a collection of stories  by a veteran science fiction writer. These  particular books span forty years and reading them is one way to see what changes  there have been in the way women write science fiction.  DAUGHTERS OF EARTH  by Judith Merril  Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1985  $5.95  Judith Merril has been writing SF since  the forties, back when few other women  writers revealed their gender by using then  first name instead of their initial. Set in the  near and distant future in cities or space  ships or on alien planets, her stories are almost all about women.  I had read most of the stories in this collection before. "Only a Mother,"publbhed  originally in 1948, has appeared in many anthologies. Following on the heels of the first  use of atomic power against human beings,  it's an unforgettable story that manages to  be intimate and political at the same time.  As it drew to its chilling—and prophetic—  conclusion, I had the same sick feeling in the  pit of my stomach as when I read it years  ago.  I noticed something new this time,  though, that the power of the writing  doesn't completely obscure. Merril's women  are astronauts, spaceship engineers and scientists, they talk theoretical and technical  language with the best of their colleagues  and they explore new worlds in space. But  it's their roles as mothers, daughters, lovers  and wives that are the real topic of every  story.  In 1958, when the title story was first  published, it was precbely that focus on a  woman character's emotional responses that  humanized science fiction. But today I find  it frustrating to read about women whose  domestic lives are as traditionally bound  as Merril's. That's the biggest contrast be  tween her work and contemporary women's  SF: the swashbuckling types produced by  Jo Anna Russ and Jo Clayton have feelings,  too, but they are presented much more autonomously.  Thb b not enough of a reason to dbmiss  the book, though. Merril is a spellbinding  story-teller. No one can beat her ability to  persuade her readers to suspend their disbelief, even when she writes about bug-eyed  aliens. Like in "Homecalling," another powerful story about maternal nurturing, only  this time, the child is human and the mother  b not...  A SPACESHIP BUILT OF STONE  by Lba Tuttle  London: The Women's Press, 1987  $11.95  / sit here day after day, turning my  life into language. The typewriter hums  as I test words against each other, listening to their click, piling them up, a  swaying tower of sentences, paragraphs,  pages. The air of the room is thick and  murky with words.  This b how "Cure" begins, an alternately  funny and tragic story about the multiple  impact of language on life and relationships.  Several of Tuttle's stories concern either the  involuntary loss of speech or the substitution of other modes of communication for  speaking. In "Cure," two women are hving  together as lovers. Over a period of time,  one of the women gradually stops speaking. Not surprisingly, thb leaves her lover,  a writer, in a state of frustration and confusion.  The plot distills around a thought-  provoking concept: Is language a trap and  an affliction, something alien, something  wrong coming between people and life?  The most unnerving story is "Wives," a  supreme send-up of male arrogance and ignorance. It is abo a very painful examination of the subjections of women. The story  b about the androgynous aliens on a planet  conquered by earthmen. Forced to disguise  themselves as women, the aliens stuff their  SPEAK OUT ON VIOLENCE  AGAINST LESBIANS  Just Because of  Who We Are  A new film on violence against lesbians  A speak out on violence towards our  community  Thursday, May 19th  7:30 pm  Britannia Elementary School  Music Room (Commercial & Napier)  Wheelchair accessible For childcare subsidy and information call 255-5511  Sponsored by Vancouver Status of Women and the Vancouver Lesbian Connection  bodies into "skin tights," inject their limbs  with silicone, wear wigs and make-up. Look-  alikes, with names like "Susie" and "Doris,"  they easily replace one another if the necessity arises; the men never know the difference.  Sometimes biological need overpowers  fear, and the "women" escape for some delicious stolen time together. But the reunions  seem to release the undercurrent of rebellion, endangering everyone. The struggle to  decide between revolution and submission is  never easy, on earth or off.  Tuttle's imagination soars in thb collection, creating scenarios that range from  bizarre to mundane. But in the best SF tradition, each turns out to reflect a piece of  contemporary experience.  PROMISE OF THE ROSE STONE  by Claudia McKay  Vermont: New Victoria Publbhers, 1986  $12.95  This novel starts out as a classic story  about the resistance of a simple, rustic people to their domination by a ruthless, highly  sophisticated culture. The ingredients are  there: Isa and her grandmother, villagers in  some future civilization, make their way to  the gates of the Federation where they challenge the Agents:  Our people no longer have the will  to care for themselves.   We don't grow  enough grain to feed ourselves. To satisfy the need of your Agent traders for  furs, the forests are being emptied of\  the animals we have always hunted for  food. And now more and more people  hunger for the luxuries they can't afford  to barter for.  The Agents are about as responsive to  thb analysis as Agents anywhere and Isa  soon finds herself a hostage in the glittering Federation. Without quite realizing  it, she falls under the spell of the city  and its wonders. The houses are marvels  of indoor-outdoor architecture. Streams run  through the pantry to keep cream and butter cool, vegetables grow under skylights, inner courtyards are filled with flowers.  On the verge of forgetting her mission,  Isa is galvanized into an action which catapults her off-planet. Imprisoned on a hving  asteroid with other captured women, ba b  almost seduced away again from her resolve  to rescue her people.  Thb b Claudia McKay's first publbhed  novel and although the dialogue tends to be  somewhat stilted, her descriptions are vivid  and colourful. The latter part of the book,  as ba discovers the nature of the asteroid,  b particularly absorbing.  AU three of these books are available at  Ariel where there b an excellent selection of  new and classic SF by women.       ^H  Scott show at VLC  by Sage La Belle  Artwork by Stella S. Scott will be showing from June 4th to June 30th at the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection (VLC), 876  Commercial Drive. The opening reception  will be on Saturday, June 4th, from 7pm to  10pm. It is wheelchair accessible; in order to  provide access to womyn with environmental illness, please no perfumes/scents.  Although she b currently hving in southern Utah, Stella hved in the Vancouver area  for a number of years and has shown her  work at the VLC, in the 1982 Women in Focus Lesbian Art Show, and at several other  locations. Her work has been exhibited in  several areas in the U.S., most recently at  WomanKraft Gallery in Tuscon, Arizona. In  addition, it will be appearing in the Gallerie  Annual, a Vancouver based publication of  womyn's art due to come out in June.  Stella's artwork includes both sensitive  and strong images of womyn, and free-  flowing forms, using pencil, coloured pencil  and pastels in drawings that show a great  variation in colour and intensity. For more  information, contact: Sage 254-8458.  KINESIS May 88 Britain from page 11  will reduce then taxes.  It is more important to remember that  these tax gains benefit only the upper  classes and big business, or as Thatcher calb  them, the "Entrepreneurial Classes".  Vander Zalm is really trying to put one  over on the B.C. public. The promised tax  reduction b not achievable in B.C. because  we don't have the same scale of public enterprise here. If a car plant is sold, we don't  have to replace it. But when government  services are contracted-out under the guise  of privatization— then all the government  is doing is paying private contractors to do  the work of public employees. You won't get  tax decreases that way.  Kinesis: The latest B.C. government  announcements on privatization suggest the plan won't raise nearly as much  money as they hoped.  Why?  When privatbation was announced last  fall, the premier's staff forecast $3 billion  in revenue. But they forgot to take into account that crown corporations have debts  as well as assets, and before a sale turns a  profit, the debts have to be paid.  Energy Minister Jack Davis has said that  the planned sale of four divbions of B.C.  Hydro would, at best, fetch $1 billion. However, because those divbions have offsetting  debts of $600 million, the provincial treasury would reap only $400 million.  Last fall, Vander Zalm's $3 billion  estimate for privatization meant debt-  elimination was possible. However, today we  are seeing that the real, achievable returns  would shrink the debt only partially.  Kinesis: Besides high unemployment  figures, what other concrete examples  do we have that privatization is not  profiting the British public?  Thatcher told everyone that the private  sector was more efficient because they had  to make a profit. This turned out to be not  true.  British Telecom (BT) was sold in 1984  and today it takes longer to get a phone  installed and 25 percent of the pay phones  do not work. After the company was sold,  consumer groups had been pointing out the  job losses, faulty telephone boxes, poor directory assistance service and unobtainable  repair service caused by staff cuts. But it  wasn't until Scotland Yard had its phone  links with the outside world inadvertently  cut, and later was overcharged for its calls,  that the problems with Britain's newly-  privatized telephone company got attention.  If BT has become a visible stain on  Thatcher's privatization record, it certainly  isn't the only one. Britbh Gas, privatized  in 1986 is maintaining high rates despite  falling world gas prices and has a worse service record than ever before.  The Britbh government has privatized  the bus systems in major cities. Now some  routes don't even have buses while other  routes have several companies vying for the  same passengers. In addition, you can't get  a bus transfer from one route to another and  the schedules between the different companies aren't coordinated so if you want to  go across town using different companies'  routes, you end up with long waits.  Workers' wages in bus companies, especially in the North where unemployment b  high, have been cut by 50 percent. In London, bus crews have been reduced to half-  staff.  Studies show that at British Telecom,  which was the worst example in the public  service, customer relations are worse now  than when the company was privatized in  1984.  The record of private contractors is  damning. Between 1983-87, more than one  in five of the 300-odd private contracts was  in default of contract conditions. Those defaults resulted in dismissal of the contractor, fines or abandonment of the contract,  but in many cases, contractors were allowed  repeated violations without penalty.  Kinesis: Since you disagree with Vander Zalm copying the failed British example, what solutions do you propose to  streamline publicly-owned operations?  If we do a review of a public enterprise  and find they are not effective or not delivering the services people want, the answer is  to get rid of the bureaucracy. Cut the middle management staff and push the decisionmaking downwards in the organization so  the workers on the front lines have the authority to make real decisions.  Make public enterprise customer-driven  by putting consumers on the board of directors, right there beside the big business  people and government minbters.  Kinesis: Well, what if the publicly-  owned organizations are poorly run and  aren't performing?  H a review is done and shows that a  corporation isn't working efficiently, the  management performance should be examined. Making operational changes is the way  to improve things, not by privatizing or  contracting-out.  Bloated management ranks is certainly a  problem at B.C. Hydro. Our union has done  organizational structure studies and an employee morale survey that showed workers  are being over-supervbed at Hydro. The ratio of managers and supervisors to workers b an average of 1:5:8 and many Hydro  departments have fewer than two or three  workers for each manager. By comparison,  ICBC has a sensible ration of one manager  for every eight workers. The Socreds themselves have acknowledged in the legislature  that ICBC is a well-run corporation.  Kinesis: Many people from divergent backgrounds have acknowledged  that privatization is a futile exercise.  Now, aside from the fact that Vander  Zalm has his own "bulldozer" personality and hasn't demonstrated that he listens to what the public wants, why is  privatization still underway? Why isn't  there more public uproar?  Vander Zalm is able to push privatization because some people are still drawn  into the web, taking faith that "someone is  doing something." There are crises all over  the world and people can get the impression  no one is taking care of business, so they're  thankful something appears to be getting  done.  What we've seen in Britain though, is  that people are not better off with privatization and, the truth is, they are getting less.  If a crown corporation like ICBC can be  well managed, there's no reason other public companies' management couldn't be improved. The government could make some  lasting improvements instead of scapegoat-  ing workers, increasing unemployment, lowering all our wages, and forcing people to  lower their expectations. That isn't what  Canada is about.  Paula Stromberg is the Communications Director of OTEU, Local 878.  Palestine  from page 8  health insurance plans. For although Palestinians pay for such services in the form of  taxes "and very high taxes" they do not receive the benefits.  But crucial to the longevity of the Palestinian revolt, and the area of which Jardeli  seems most proud, is the role played by  women. "Women have been very instrumental during the uprising. In addition to the  regular work that these grassroots movements have been carrying out, they have  been very active in providing for emergency  care and emergency needs. In areas where  curfews are imposed sometimes for up to  three weeks at a time, with only a lifting for  a half hour a day, where food is not allowed  to be taken in—women have taken the risk  of smuggling food on their backs into these  areas."  The "grassroots movements" were apparently established in 1978, when it was decided that women needed a new strategy.  Until then, women had been active in charitable societies throughout the territories,  but those same societies were registered  with the military government and therefore  under their direct control. The new strategy sought to reach women who had never  been active before, many who were illiterate and living in remote areas of the territories. The objective was to help women  gain skills so they could become active participants in the development of their society. The Women's Work Committee was the  first grassroots organization to be established. Within ten years, membership has  grown to 6000 and there are 180 centres located throughout the territories. Together  these women have organbed literacy campaigns, health programs and so on.  They have also kept kindergartens open  for very long hours, seven days a week to  provide care for children of their active sisters. Apparently thb has not gone unnoticed by the braeli military. In consequence,  "many women are being pursued. They are  unable to sleep in their own homes or to see  their children or husbands. Some have been  given restriction orders; some have been imprisoned."  What Can Canadians Do?  In the question period after Najwa Jardeli's  talk, audience members expressed their concern about what we in Canada can do to  stop the violence. Many prominent Canadians have already signed their names to petitions and newspaper ads with the following three demands as the minimum basb for  peace:  • The convening of an international conference under United Nations auspices in  which all involved parties will participate,  including the Palestine Liberation Organization, which has the support of the  overwhelming majority of the Palestinian  people as their representative organization;  • Recognition of the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination;  • An end to Israeli occupation of the West  Bank and Gaza.  These signatories urge other Canadians  to notify their Members of Parliament and  the Canadian government to support these  demands.  Jardeli said that politicians such as Joe  Clark should be supported their condemnation of braeli human rights violations of  the Palestinian people. She added that "It's  very important that the Canadian government, as a signatory to the Fourth Geneva  Convention, take up its responsibility and  demand that brael stop its repressive mea  sure in the occupied territories."  Due to the multiplicity of severe beatings  and bullet wounds inflicted on Palestinians,  there b an urgent need for physiotherapbts  in the occupied territories.  Jardeli abo said that many of the beatings and injuries require sophisticated plastic surgery techniques not presently available in the occupied territories. Doctors,  hospitals and groups willing to sponsor the  transportation and necessary operations are  also required. (More than a few people in  the audience noted the eerie parallel here  with a Chilean woman, burned by Chilean  soldiers, who also came to Canada for plastic surgery.)  Financial assistance is desperately needed  by the mobile health units which are used  more than ever before, since many people,  once shot or beaten, are reluctant to go to  the hospital, for fear of being taken to jail.  As Herb George, Vice President of the  Gitskan Wet'suet'en Tribal Council said  in his welcome speech introducing Najwa  Jardeli: "No government has the right to do  what is happening in the Palestinian homeland...we have to take responsibility as individuals to see that something is in fact  done about a situation which should not be  existing in the world as we know it today.  I challenge you as individuals to take that  responsibility—to do what you can to bring  support to the struggle for freedom of the  Palestinian people."  Anyone wishing to contribute funds,  support or services to the Palestinian  people can contact 298-9688 for more  information.  Save  Time,  Energy  & Money  255-9559  J^O FFICE   SUPPLIES  'wjgL    STATIONERY  St ART   SUPPLIES  PHOTOCOPI ES  PAPER  TYPESETTING  ...AND   MORE  1460 Commercial  ©  Press Gang  Printers  603 Powell Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6A 1H2  253-1224  SUPPORT YOUR LOCAL WOMEN'S PRESS  THANK  YOU  To all the women who supported  the February 22nd Benefit at Graceland,  to Key Change  for wonderful  music,  and to the benefit organizers.  It was a great success!  Thank you all from the Women's Health Fund  , KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  Letters  The challenge  of disability  Kinesis:  Thank you for your article on invbible  disabilities (April 1988). It appears at a  point in my own illness where I am begin- '  ning to understand and accept that I am  dbabled, even though that is not vbibly so.  I have rheumatoid arthritis. But I have  often been told, even at my worst, by  strangers and friends alike, that I look just  fine- -even healthy. Thb always pleases me,  as I struggle to return to my former state  of athletic, pain-free mobility, strength and  grace. I need to believe that I am the same  as I always was—to most I look it. But I am  not. And I always feel physically vulnerable.  Meanwhile, I move (or do not move)  about in the world as an apparently able-  bodied woman. Yet I sit in the seats for the  disabled at the front of the bus while an  older person with a cane stands; I am aware,  with some embarrassment, that I am young  and look the picture of health. I am slow  with my groceries at the cashier counter, or  I drop my change on the floor. I do not usually carry a cane or have a wheelchair—I am  therefore simply clumsy or inconsiderate. I  am abo rude for not holding the door open  for someone else, when in fact I can at times  barely hold it open for myself. How do I explain? I look just fine.  We must have awareness for all dbabled  women. Those of us with invbible disabilities have a particular chaUenge to face—  perhaps within ourselves as well.  Andrea Lowe, Vancouver, B.C.  Resources  requested  Kinesis:  With this letter receive greetings on  behalf of the Association of Nicaraguan  Women "Luisa Amanda Espinoza."  OPEN SEVEN DAYS A WEEK  10am to 7:30pm  • KIDS play space  • FRESH produce —incl. organic  NEW convenient location  • 10% OFF for seniors, Wed. & Thurs.  1034 COMMERCIAL  254-5044  A  G  M  nnual  eneral  ► Joy Thompson  B.C. Coalition of Abortion Clinics  Why do we need a clinic? Why don't we need a criminal law?  What is the B.C. "Strengthen the Family" package, better known  as the "Alternative to Abortion" package?  Come hear Joy Thompson put the Social Credit abortion policy  into the broader perspective of control over women's  reproductive choices. For more information, call 255-5511.  VSW  ►Wed. June 8  7:30 ■ 9:30 pm  Britannnia Community Ctr.  Family Activity Rm.  1661 Napier St.  In midst of the war of aggression and  economic privation imposed on our suffering country by the Reagan administration,  Nicaraguan women continue taking great  strides towards liberation and the construction of a more just society for both women  and men. We have made gains, incorporating our experiences, contributing to the  struggle in the distinct sectors of working  women in the city and the countryside, and  advancing in the constitution of a strong,  popular and revolutionary women's movement.  Our mass-based women's organization  will open a new stage in its development this  month, with the proclamation of a series  of feminist demands in our Struggle Platform. Mobilization around this platform will  transform the reality of Nicaraguan Women,  towards the elimination of all forms of subordination and discrimination in the home,  at work, and in society.  We in the National Office of AMNLAE  offer new support to this struggle for dignity  with the opening of an Information Center  about and for women. It will serve the information and reference needs of Nicaraguan  Women, and we hope to inaugurate the  Center in salute to International Workers'  Day, the first of May, 1988.  Our movement has advanced, taking  lifebreath from the experiences of women in  all the countries of the world, as well as from  our own hbtory and revolutionary process.  Once again we wbh to solicit your solidarity and support for our struggle.  At present we receive some periodical  publications from women's centers and or-  ganbations. We would like to establish exchange agreements with you and other feminist periodicab or receive donations of subscriptions with the goal of providing our  base with the rich accumulation of lessons  of our international sbters.  With best wishes in your diverse activities, we thank you for your kind attention  to thb request.  In solidarity and sisterhood,  Silvya McEwans, Secretaria Nacional  Relaciones Internacionales, AMNLAE NACIONAL  HANDMADE STRAP SANDALS  by  Janet Bristeir  Made with ...  • Genuine leather  strap and insole  • Natural crepe  sole  • Padded insole  • Adjustable strap  $45  plus B.C. PST  Colours!!  Brown, Brown  and Brown  Phone 876-4256 for more information,  and free Handmade Shoe Catalogue  CCEC CREDIT UNION  "Keeping our money  working in our  community."  When you bank at CCEC,  you are investing in a neighbourhood  business, in the co-op down the street,  and in the whole community's growth.  CCEC CREDIT UNION  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  MON. & WED. 11 am-5pm  FRIDAY 1pm-7 pm  876-2123  CMfr $ 2f*A**^ts Ln, IjJerUudanJb''-  KINESIS Bulletin Board  Read this  All listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 |  by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general public interest and will appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $4 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $1 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. All classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Att'n Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information call 255-5499.  LINDA ALLEN/GEOF MORGAN  In concert at VECC  May   15. 8  pm.  Tix $8 available at Black Swan Records.  Highlife Records, the Van Folk Music Festival office or reserve by calling 254-9578.  EVENT SIE VENT SIRESOURCES  BASEBALL TOURNAMENT  Women's Groups Baseball Tournament  will be held June 3, 4, 5 (if it rains.  June 10, 11, 12) at Britannia Playing  fields. For more info call Kate. 732-0786  or VLC. 254-8458.  VLC FUNDRAISER  For a pool table for the centre. May 7, 8  pm. at Talk of the Town, 23 W. Cordova.  Off site childcare is available. Please contact VLC at 254-8458 for more info on  childcare. Sliding scale $4-$6.  ROUNDTABLE ON FEMINISM  Will take place May 11 7:30 pm at the  Vancouver Art Gallery, meeting room #3  in the Gallery Annex. Free and open to  the public.  MAYWORKS  Women an work celebration features a  video premiere of Sara Diamond's "We  Were Strong" and "Keep the Home Fires  Burning" as well as readings by women  writers and women's music. May 8. 8 pm  at Women in Focus. 204-456 W. Broadway. Everyone welcome.  BUILDING BRIDGES  The 5th Annual B.C. Gay and Lesbian Conference will be held May 21-  23 at Britannia Community Centre. 1661  Napier St. Three days of workshops,  videos, panels, forums, plus The Dance.  May 21, 8 pm (site to be announced)  and a variety show May 22, 8 pm at the  VECC. 1895 Venables.  Free childcare. wheelchair accessibility,  signing for hearing impaired. For info,  pre-registration. volunteering phone 251-  2397. (See Across B.C. for more details)  VLC CAPRI HALL DANCE  Will be held May 27 8 pm - 1 am. 3925  Fraser St. Sliding scale $4-$6. Childcare  provided off-site. Wheelchair accessible.  Call the VLC for more info and advance  tickets.  COMING OUT PARTY  Launching of Diversity: The Lesbian Rag  at Graceland, 1250 Richards St., (alley  entrance) May 16. 8:30 pm. Cake cutting and door prizes. Formal attire optional. $2-$10 sliding scale, tix at door.  Childcare subsidy available upon request.  Women only. For more info: 254-8458.  WOMEN'S ECONOMIC AGENDA  Will present Free Trade. Meech Lake and  Privatization as it effects women in B.C.  May 20 7:30 pm at Britannia Community Centre.  WOMEN AND WORDS  West Coast Women and Words will be  having a series of public discussions at  the Unitarian Centre. 949 W. 49th Ave  at Oak, 7:30 pm. May 3. Women and  Words and Science; May 17, Feminist  Writing and the Question of Audience;  May 24, Women Changing the Language.  "A CROP OF POISON"  The farmworkers' experience with the insidious effects of pesticides is the subject of this play. May 6 at the VECC,  1895 Venables. 8 pm. $8 general. $6 students/seniors/unemployed.  WOMEN AND HOUSING FORUM  This forum is designed to help women  of all ages to identify their housing concerns and look together for solutions.  May 7 at the Maritime Labour Centre.  1880 Triumph St. $15 regular. $5 low  income/student. Subsidy and childcare  available. For more info contact Georgina  at 681-8365 or Karen at 873-1313.  NEf?J>  fvficE:  ANARCHIST UNCONVENTION  The anarchist Survival Gathering will be  held in Toronto July 1-4 at the 519  Church St. Community Centre. For more  info write to: The Anarchist Unconven-  tion, P.O. Box 435 Stn P, Toronto Ont..  M5S 2S9. (Van. regional contact: 291-  2314)  ABORIGINAL ISSUES  Conference focusing on aboriginal issues  May 27-28, Robson Square Media Centre. For more info call 738-2724.  "A STRUGGLE FOR CHOICE"  A 2\ hour video on the history of the  abortion rights struggle in Canada over  the last 20 years will be shown at Women  in Focus June 10 7:30 pm. $3.50 em-  ployed, $2.50 un/deremployed.   WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL  The 14th Annual Women's Music Festival will be held on the Indiana University campus June 2-5. Emphasis is on  the broad spectrum of women's culture  through music, workshops, special conferences, networking, and seminars. For  more info write to NWMF, P.O. Box  5217. Bloomington. In. 47407-5217.  GROUPS  SINGLE MOTHERS  The YWCA Single Mothers meet weekly  on Monday's 6:30-8 pm at Kiwassas  Neighborhood House. 600 Vernon St.  Discussion, activities and childcare are  part of the program. New members welcome. For more info call 683-2531 local  316.   PSYCHIC/SPIRITUAL GROUP  Bi-weekly meeting, starting April 28,  7:30 pm at the VLC. Facilitated by Stari  Nari.  INTERNATIONAL LESBIAN WEEK  Lesbian groups, lesbian caucuses and individual lesbians are invited to participate  in this year's organizing. Bring proposals  and ideas to the first planning meeting  June 6, 7:30 pm at the VLC. 876 Commercial Dr. (see Movement Matters for  details)  SINGLE MOTHER'S SERVICES  Weekly support groups in 14 locations,  childcare available. Bi-annual newsletter  written by and for single mothers (contributions welcome), annual conference—  organized by single mothers, seasonal  events throughout the year. For more information call Single Mother's Services  683-2531 ext. 316.  FREE LAW CLASSES  The Public Legal Education Society is offering free law classes to the public. For  their spring calendar phone 688-2565.  WOMEN'S STUDIES  "Issues in Women's Health and Health  Care." This course looks at western  medicine and our modern health care system. May 11-Aug. 1 SFU campus. For  more info call 291-3593..  GAY AND LESBIAN GROUP  The Fraser Valley Gay and Lesbian support and social group hold meetings and  events throughout the Fraser Valley. For  dates and more info call 852-9613.  WORKSHOPS  SINGLE PARENTING  Little Mountain Neighborhood House  and the YWCA Single Mother's Support  Network is presenting a series of workshops for women who are single parents.  May 4, Welfare Rights and Appeals;  May 11, Divorce and Custody Issues;  May 18. Legal Issues in Child Abuse.  The workshops will be held at Little Mountain Neighborhood House from  12:45-1:45 pm. For pre-registration phone  Beverly Bond at 897-7104 or Claudia  MacDonald at 874-1968. A registration  fee of $1.50 is requested. Space is limited.  CRABTREE CORNER  We are hosting two series of women's  workshops at 101 E. Cordova St. May  5, 12, 19, 26. 6-8 pm. topics to  be covered: sexually transmitted diseases, AIDS, birth control, welfare rights,  stress, relationships. May 3, 10, 17, 24  12-2 pm assertiveness training. For more  info and pre-registration call 689-2808.  Pre-book for children.  CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE  A symposium on child sexual abuse will  be held at UVIC May 13-15. Fee $125.  For program information please contact:  Tom Lietaer, Conference Services, University of Victoria, P.O. Box 1700, Victoria. V8W 2Y2 or call 721-8475.  SUBMISSIONS  LESBIAN WRITERS  Women's Press is looking for manuscripts for a second anthology of writing by Lesbians about lesbian experience.  Send to: Women's Press. Lesbian Manuscript Group. 229 College St.. Toronto  M5T 1R4.  WHAT WOMEN  NEED TO KNOW  ABOUT AIDS  A Workshop for Women  sponsored by:  Vancouver Status of Women  and AIDS Vancouver  June 16th  7 - 10pm  Call 255-5511  Preregistration required  Site wheelchair accessible  "What is safe sex?"  "If I sleep with someone I don't  \know, should I get tested?"  "How can I get my partner  to use a condom?"  Limited to 20 women  Childcare subsidized  AINESIS //////////////S///////////S////////////S//S///////////S/////////SS/////S//////S///////////////////S/'  //////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  CONSIDERING        ARTIFICIAL  INSEMINATION?  Persons looking for support group, information, references, call New Reproductive Alternatives Society. Vancouver representative: Kim 576-9720.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  Single Lesbian Mother of 3 yr. old twins  wishes to share her large house with nonsmoking, social-drinking woman. (Clover-  dale). $300/month incl. util. Kim 576-  9720 after 5:30.  SEEKING ACCOMMODATION  32 year old woman seeks to share with  other women in East End (preferred  area.) I am 32. tidy, quiet, non-smoker.  Must move no later than June 1. Would  also consider house and/or pet sitting for  a few months. If interested please call  251-3872. Thanks.  FOR SALE  1981 CM HONDA 400 T  16000 miles and  in good condition.  I  will include the helmet, gloves, tools and  manuals. I'd like $800 but will accept a  reasonable offer. Call Monica at either  731-4724 (leave message) or 736-7014  (studio).  HOUSEMATES WANTED  Three womyn to complete a 5 womyn coop home near Jericho Beach, in a large,  five bedroom house. House includes fireplace, washer/dryer. 2 bathrooms, yard  and garden. Non-smoking and no pets.  Rent is $280/month plus utilities. Rooms  available May or June. Call 737-0910.  TO SUBLET  Upper floor 1 bdrm suite in Kits. June 15  to Aug. 31. $360/month incl. util. Call  Andrea 737-7393 evenings or 872-7141  days.  SHIATSU MASSAGE  Amazing! That is the word most often  used to describe my Shiatsu treatments.  And it's an appropriate word. Our bodies get knotted and twisted by the many  stresses we undergo. Shiatsu works to  unravel those knots and to restore a  sense of harmony to the body. Which in  turn stills the mind. Truly A-mazing! As-  tarte 251-5409.  URGENTLY NEEDED  Distributors for Images International Hair  St Skin Products. There are still not  enough distributors to meet the public  demand for our products. For more information please call: Sally Bankiner at  261-7460. (Small investment required)  1146 Commercial * 253-0913  Women's Recreational Land  on Vancouver Island  Private parkland: 15 acres provide two  separate creekside cabins; and camping.  Easy mainland ferry access.  EMILY'S PLACE  Box 220, Coombs, B.C. VOR 1MO  (604) 248-5410  Bulletin Board  CLASS IFIEDICLASSIFIED  WHAT YOU'VE BEEN WAITING  FOR!  Vancouver's new Lesbian newspaper. DIVERSITY: THE LESBIAN RAG is now  selling subscriptions. Order now so you  won't miss our first issue, coming out  Friday the 13th of May.  For six issues, sent to you in a plain envelope, send: your name and full address,  plus (sliding scale) $12-$15 in Canada;  $15-$18 for U.S.A.; $18-$20 for overseas,  to DIVERSITY: THE LESBIAN RAG.  P.O. Box 66106. Station F, Vancouver,  B.C., V5W 5L4. Cheque or money order in Canadian funds payable to DIVERSITY.  SUCCESSFUL FUNDRAISING  Getting money in tough times. Harvey MacKinnon Associates presents one  day of practical instruction. You'll learn  highly successful step-by-step strategies  to increase your income dramatically.  Harvey MacKinnon is Senior Development officer with OXFAM Canada. He is  involved in Fundraising development and  trains people from a wide variety of nonprofit organizations.  Vancouver Workshop: May 10 Sheraton  Plaza 500. 500 W. 12th Ave. Info: 732-  4351  Victoria Workshop: May 12 Victoria  Central Library. 735 Broughton St.. Victoria. Info: 727-0220. Cost: Sliding scale  $75-$125.  ROOM FOR RENT  In womyn's house, available June 1st.  $170 plus hydro, phone, damage deposit.  Non-smoking. We are 3 women with large  yard and garden. Call 251-7652.  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads. P.O. Box 2416, Quincy,  MA 002269.    NATIONAL WOMEN'S MUSIC FESTIVAL  June 2-5. Lucie Blue Tremblay. Deirdre  McCalla, Teresa Trull, Rhiannon, Connie Kaldor, Casselberry and DuPree,  Kay Gardner, MUSE, Jasmine, Diana  Mariechild, Shuli Goodman, Diane Stein,  Nurudafina Pili Abena, Sonia Johnson, Anne Wilson Schaef, Becky Birtha.  Leslea Newman. Karen Lee Osborne.  Barbara Wilson. For brochure write to  NWMF, P.O. 5217. Bloomington, IN.  47407.  For the third year in a row the Vancouver Lesbian Connection sponsored Women's  Groups Softball Tournament promises to be a high point of the summer. A perfect  mix of socializing in the sun and relaxed competition has marked previous tournaments and this year's June 3-5 event is sure to carry on the tradition. Pictured  at top are last year's tournament winners, the Steppers. For more information on  how to get involved call Kate at 732-0786 or the VLC at 254-8458.  CLASSIFIEDiCLASSIFIED  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  My specializations include depression,  sexuality, sexual and emotional abuse,  adult women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness,  relationship issues, decision-making and  career explorations. I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and  guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet  Lichty. B.A. M. Ed. Counselling Psychology. 874-6982.  WOMANSPACE ON SALTSPRING  Newly built, fully equipped, self-contained cabin on 5 \ seculuded acres. Close to  Ruckle Provincial Park, hiking trails and  sea. Saltspring is accessible by ferry from  Swartz Bay and Tsawwassen. $50/night  double. $35/night single. Wheelchair accessible. Children welcome. No pets. No  smoking indoors. Call Gillian 653-9475 or  write Box C85. King R.. R.R. 1. Fulford  Harbour. B.C. VOS ICO  WICCAN SUMMER INTENSIVE  The 2nd B.C. Wiccan Summer Intensivel  will be held near Vancouver in a beautifu  and secluded setting. July 24-31. 1988  with Starhawk and other members of Reclaiming Collective. Beginners and Advanced Tracts will cover aspects of Feminist Spirituality and Politics, empowerment through ritual, creating a circle  community building, power of the pen-  tacle. and more. $275-$375 sliding scale  includes food, lodging and training. Fori  inforrrlation call (604) 732-5153 or write  to P. Hogan. 1937 W. 2nd Avenue. Vancouver V6J 1J2. Women only and men)  only space provided.  VANCOUVER EAST HOUSING  CO-OP  The Vancouver East Housing Co-op, with  38 units in 6 different locations in the  lively East End, is now accepting people for its waiting list. Market rents are  very reasonable: single units from $260-  $374 (share purchase $1000), 2 bedrooms $397-$577, 3 and 4 bedrooms  $482-$601 (share purchase $2000). If you  are interested in working cooperatively  with others and living in stable, affordable housing, send SASE to: Membership  Committee. #3 -1220 Salsbury Dr.. Van.  V5L 4B2.  CRAFTSWOMEN NEEDED  Seeking craftswomen who are making feminist jewelry, altar/ritual instruments, ceramics, clothing, etc.—  goddess/witch/Wiccon theme—and who  would like to merchandise their products-through a mail-order business. Prefer women living in B.C. but open to  other Canadian women. Leave message  for Patricia at (604) 732-5153 or write:  P. Hogan. 1937 W. 2nd Ave.. Van. B.C.  V6J 1J2.  KINESIS ^w**3  Published 10 times a year                                                  ^^     J  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  ID  □ VSW Membership -  $25.50 (  or what you can afford)'-includes Kinesis subscriptionj  *  □ Kinesis subscriptio  n only  - $17.50  □ Sustainers - $75  D Institutions - $45  DNew  E  □ Here's my cheque  □ Renewal  □ BUI me  □ Gift subscription for a friend  o  «  N  Postal ToHe  Phone                                                                         |