 Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  INSIDE  Anita Bryant didn't show up but hundreds of protestors did   1  A prison guard says Betsy Wood is "subversive" because she  sympathizes with the prisoners   2  Black men and women take on city council   4  The new Grace Hospital: BYOB-Bring your own bed   5  Community organizing pull out feature  «. 13  Bill 22 - equality for who? ?  22  Local woman recalls the horrors of a Lower Mainland mental  institution   23  Naomi Lis talks about her Caesarian birth   428  Day of reckoning: Day and the city's equal opportunities  program is axed  31  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  Subscriber Only .  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support! Kinesis,   February   '79  Action Organized by the Coalition Against Discrimination  Born-Again  Bigotr  More than 400 peaceful protestors  paraded outside the Orpheum Theatre  one clear and chilly night last month.  The major attraction was a religious  rumor that Anita Bryant, the orange-  juice-maid-turned-crusader was in town  to co-host a bible thumping  Evangelical meeting.  Her failure to appear didn't sour the  evening for hundreds of demonstrators  including feminists, lesbians, gay men,  trade unionists and sympathizers who  gathered around the front and back  entrance of the theatre, waving  placards, singing and handing out  leaflets to the predominately  middle-aged, middle-class meeting  goers.  Bernice Gerard, Vancouver's aider-  woman, was on hand to speak to media  people.  She was overheard to have  said that someone should call in  the police squads to put a stop to  the protest.  Demonstrators, while  blocking the main entrances, were  not hassling the theatre goers,  merely handing out phamplets and  talking to those who would stop to  listen.  January 11,  outside the Orpheum Theatre,  we protested born-again hate.  Inside the plush theatre, the congregation chanted and repeated  the words of slick host David  Manse, who looked more like a  politican looking for votes  than a religious man looking  for God.  Manse cried out to  the Lord to save the poor  sinners outside.  He said he  was quite surprised to see the  protestors. (Despite the fact  that Bryant's appearance has  attracted major demonstrations  in every city she's visited.)  Manse said when he stepped out  of his car he saw the throng  and immediately called upon  the Lord.  I wondered what to do and say.  The word of God spoke to me of  love.     So I told the group standing  in my way that I loved them.     They  immediately parted and made way for  me,"    Manse said.  The audience loved that one and  broke into a frenzy of clapping,  stretching their arms in a gesture  of  adulation and adoration-.  Manse  beamed.  Bryant, once a singer now a pusher  of right-wing morals, has spoken  out against gays, women's rights  and everv other group that doesn't  fit snugly into her Christian scenario.  "Protect our children from all these  evils," is her motto.  The B.C.Federation of Women and the  Coalition Against Discrimination (CAD)  said: the demonstration was called to  draw attention to the fact that some  organizations,   under the guise of  "born-again Christianity",  are advocating the denial of basic human  rights to  large segments of the  community.  Lesbians and gay men have been singled  out for particularly vicious attacks;  the end result of these  "religious"  campaigns is dangerous to us all.  The gains women have made  toward  equality are threatened by  their insistence  that the only role for women  in the world is in service  to men  and children.  If today these people presume  to deny  homosexuals their right to shelter,  employment and freedom of association,  who is stopping them tomorrow from  denying you your rights?  The rights you defend are your own. Q  We Support AUCE 2  strike action  Simon Fraser University clerical  workers held a round-the-clock strike  action Monday, January 29 in an all-  out attempt to gain support from  university faculty, students and  staff for their attempt to win a decent contract.  Joan Wood, union coordinator for  local 2 of the Association of University and College Employees (AUCE) said  prior to Monday's stepped-up action,  union members were picketing only  during business hours.  But the partial strike action failed  to bring administration around to  offering any more than a 6 per cent  wage increase over two years.  The union is seeking 4 per cent in  the first year and 6 per cent in the  second.  Administration originally  refused an across-the-board increase  and offered clerical workers a token  couple of hundred dollars bonus.  Strikers have pledges from the other  unions on campus that they would  honour an AUCE picket line set up at  the university entrance and have indications of support from faculty and  students,  /.bout 50 professors wrote  a letter to the university's administration demanding that they resume  negotiations and offer a wage increase  more in line with soaring inflation.  According to AUCE, clerical workers are  currently earning between $155.50 and  $364.01 per week.  The majority of  workers are earning no more than  $237.88 per week, a salary far below  that of workers in most other industries.  The average B.C. weekly salary  is $305.  AUCE's stand is that the service people  are underpaid.  Most service workers,  like most AUCE workers, are women and  therefore are traditionally underpaid.  "The. university wants our wages to fall  in the middle of the  lowest paid sector of workers; we insist on being compared with all workers. "  Wood said the workers have not received  a wage increase since November 1977.  And that was a whopping 4 per cent.  "We'll assess the support we receive  and re-assess our position.     We are  asking all groups,   teaching support  staff,  faculty and students to honour  the  line, "    she said.q KINESIS,  February   '79  Wood, Hoon Trial Is Under Way  When their trial opened January 22,  prison activists Betsy Wood and Gay  Hoon faced only two of the original  eleven charges in connection with  a January 1978 escape attempt at  the B.C.pen.  As we go to press, prosecution is  calling the last of its witnesses.  Wood is due to open her own defense  within the week.  Hoon, charged now with  prison break and public  have had their charges  even times within ten  Barely two weeks before  opened, they received  ictment, in which the  murder charge had been  Wood and  aiding a  mischief  changed s  months  the trial  a new ind  attempted  dropped.  On June 22, 1978, Judge Clare  ruled at a preliminary hearing  that there was "no sufficient case  ...to put either of the accused on  trial." Despite that, prosecution  asked B.C.Attorney General to proceed to a direct indictment, which  he did.  In the opening days of the trial,  Justice Harry Hutcheons rejected  defense motions to quash the charges because of irregularities in  how the indictments were delivered.  Wood requested an adjournment on  the grounds that defense had been  put at a disadvantage because they  had barely two weeks to prepare  their actual defense, whereas the  Crown had many months to prepare  its case.  The judge ordered the trial to  proceed, and a jury was selected.  Admires Wood  So far, the Crown has called one  witness which they did not use at  the preliminary: Alet McLeod. She  described Wood as a "humanitarian",  and said she thought of Wood as  a person who would never advocate  violence.  In the week before the prison  break, McLeod said, Wood approached and said that there was a plan  to move some prisoners from solitary confinement in the pen. When  cross-examined by Hoon's lawyer,  Vilvang, McLeod admitted that she  had no means of knowing whether or  not Wood had been referring to a  lawful or an unlawful move.She  responded that there is "a distinct possibility" that Wood had  been referring to a legal plan.  In addition, the Crown has produced  much evidence regarding items found  in Wood's rented car, including  clothing, pills, bullets, money  and even cheese. It has not produced  an explanation as to how such items  are connected with the escape at-  temp t.  Guns Packed In  The court has been told that guards  smuggle drugs and weapons into prison, if the price is right. Dave  Gowler, an officer in charge of  Visiting and Correspondence, admitted:  Guns could be packed in by unscrup-  lous staff for monetary gain.  Guard Clayton tells us:  It's quite common to find weapons  on prisoners or in the vicinity  of the pen yards.  The pen was in fact closed for  four days in October '77 for a weapons search: 40 knives, a ladder and  a grappling hook turned up. Prison  rumour had it that guns located inside had not been found.  Since the  pen had not had open visiting since  the Sept.'76 riots, those weapons  must have been coming in over the  walls, or with guards.  Sympathy  Dave Gowler, the officer in charge  of Visiting and Correspondence at  the pen, admitted to Wood under  cross examination that he considers her "subversive" because:  You're critical of practically  everything the prison does. . .   and  when an inmate has problems you  sympathize with their problems  like you never look at the way we  see things.  = Subversive  Guards' Code  Wood read aloud to the court  from the Report to Parliament of  the Sub-Committee on the Penitentiary System in Canada. An excerpt  from that report says that guards  are under  intolerable pressure not  to break the rule of silence that  the custodial staff,  in their insecure and embattled isolation  have imposed on and tolerate among  themselves.   If they report such  breaches of discipline,   they are  likely to find little support  from their colleagues,  given, that  all are familiar with the stories  of slashed tires,   scraped automobile  fenders and doors,   telephoned threats  and other forms of reprisals against  those who dare place duty above  silence.  Then Wood asked Guard Clayton if  he was familiar with the "guards'  code." He said that he wasn't.  Guard Clayton told Wood that a prison guard would never lie to protect  another officer, when asked if prisoners would lie, he responded;  Of course prisoners would lie.  When asked if prison rights activists would lie, Clayton commented:  Prison activists might lie to protect each other or inmates.  Wood's point in introducing this  information about the "guard's  code"  seemed clear enough. Obviously, guards could be under pressure  not to reveal anything about any  guards' smuggling in of contraband  weapons, since silence is demanded  by the "guard's code."  Security Guard Clayton told the  court that he knew Wright and Saumer  were planning to escape. He said he  knew this several months in advance,  but he didn't know when the exact  date would be.  Clayton claimed to have filed a report on the suspicious behaviour of  the two prisoners. B.C.Pen Director  Herbert Reynett said he received no  such report, although normal procedure would have been for Security  to forward it to him.  What Guards Saw  Listening to the testimony of the  guards, the following pattern of  the escape break seems to emerge;  On the day of the escape, Guard Clayton tells us that he saw Wright and  Saumer approaching the visiting area  from an unusual direction. He says  that his suspicions were further aroused when Wright bent down, as if  to tie a shoelace. Prisoners can transfer weapons from the ground into  shoes in this way.  Wright and Saumer enter the visiting  area. Wright immediately goes into  the toilet, while Saumer walks down  and speaks briefly with Bruce, and  for a longer time with Hall.  Bruce, Hall and Bennett are all  in the visiting area at the time.  Bennett is Hoon's visitor. Hall  is Wood's.  Shortly after Saumer has spoken  with Hall, Hall signals to a  guard that he wants to use the  toilet, out in the hallway.  In the later escape attempt, Hall  has a knife. He stabs Guard Yasuda while trying to get the keys  to free Bruce.  Wright runs into the visiting  room, smashes the window with a  sledgehammer and is the first to  jump through.  Wood's visitor Hall was wearing  prison uniform, unlike Wright and  Saumer, who were in "street" clothes.  In cross-examination, the director  of the pen agreed that anyone who  was planning to escape would be  wearing street clothing.  Crown witnesses do not appear to  be linking Hall and Bennett with  Wright and Saumer's escape plans.  The vital question is this:  If Hall and Bennett were not in  on the escape at its planning  stages, how could Wood and Hoon  have been involved? Kinesis,   February   '79  Theme for March 8, 1979:  Women In Isolation  and Solidarity  The idea of March 8 as a special day  of protest for women originated among  working women and socialist women in  1907.  Since then, the tradition has spread  and been carried on throughout the  world.  Ten years ago on March 8,  Uruguayan women political prisoners  led a daring prison break.  In Quebec  since 1976, International Women's Day  has been a day of mass celebration  with large demonstrations led by  union women.  Last year, women in  Spain demonstrated for equal pay,  contraception, and amnesty for political prisoners; British working  women occupied their factories; and  7,000 marched in Belgium.  In keeping with this long-standing  tradition, Vancouver women have also  for several years organized marches,  rallies and educational campaigns  to commemorate International Women's  Day.  This year, individual women and members of various groups have formed  the IWD Committee to organize activities around March 8, 1979.  We have  chosen as our theme, women's isolation in society and how it can be  overcome by solidarity in struggle.  We will emphasize how isolation and  solidarity relate to our lives at  home, on the job, in the streets and  locked away.  At Home, At Work...  At Home: We are separated not only  physically from each other but also  by our competition for the dubious  privilege of providing free and unrecognized household labour and  child care.  On the Job: We compete to get or keep  jobs that provide poor working conditions and minimal wages, while our  government and our employers refuse to  recognize that we work, not for "pin"  money, but so we and our families can  be clothed, sheltered and fed.  In the Streets: We are told to stay  home after dark because our presence  ^ORGANIZE  for  ^ MARCH 8!  in the streets invites rape and violence.  But to walk in safety anywhere, anytime is a fundamental human  right and we will claim it for ourselves.  Locked Away: Women who react against  the limited possibilities offered to  us are often locked up in prisons and  mental institutions.  We offer our  solidarity and support to these sisters.  March 8 Events  During the week of March 3 - March 11  the following activities will take  place:  March 3 - KAY GARDNER CONCERT  March 8 - PARADE & RALLY  March 9 - BENEFIT DANCE  March 11 - INFORMATION DAY  Watch for posters giving details of  these events, but don't wait until  March.  We need your help now to organize these events. "Come to a meeting, join a work committee or do both.  The IWD Committee meets every Tuesday  at 7:30pm in the Senior Citizens'  Lounge at Britannia Community Centre,  1661 Napier Street, and any woman is  welcome to attend.  Specific work committees are:  Parade: contact Gail (327-2935)  Research & Public Education: contact  Penny (255-4871)  Information Day: contact Rachel  (879-1219)  Publicity: contact Pat S. (253-1224,  Press Gang)  Kay Gardner Concert: contact Dorrie  (872-1940)  Benefit Dance: contact Louise (876-4677)  Women in the Home: contact Prabha  (253-7926)  Women's Chorus: contact Pat S. (253-1224  Press Gang)  We invite all those who share our concerns and faith in the future to work  with us, and to protest our isolation  and celebrate our solidarity during the  week of March 3-11. O  Lesbian Mother  Wins^ustody  An Ontario lesbian mother won a partial victory recently when an Ontario  judge awarded her custody of her two  children.  The catch is that the judge, Joseph  Mahon, made it a condition of custody that the mother could not live  with anyone without prior court  approval.  In other words, she has  to ask for "permission" to live with  a friend, boarder, lover or whoever.  In handing down the judgment, Mahon  said, "Homosexuality was a negative  factor in the custody application  but did not itself require removal  of the children from the mother. "  He said he could not find any valid  reason for taking the children away  from the mother, who has had custody in the four years since the  separation in August 1974.  The judge said it might be emotionally harmful the children if they were  taken away from their mother.  Both  were doing well in school and reports  by the Children's Aid Society and  the official guardian were favourable to the mother.  And a child and  family therapist with training in  sexual counselling at the Madame  Vanier Institute in London, Ontario  was a key witness for the mother.  The therapist said the children  "had a strong bond with the mother  and the home she provided showed a  lot of warmth and cohesiveness."  It would be emotionally destructive  to take the children from their  mother, she said.  Asked about the "effects" on a child  raised in a lesbian or homosexual  home, she replied that the sexual  preference of a parent was "unimportant if the parent recognized his or  her preference and was comfortable  with it. "  She agreed that the- child eventually  would learn of the parent's preference but said the effect would "not  necessarily" be negative.  The Third Time  It is said to be only the third case  in Canadian family law where custody  was sought by a lesbian.  In one  case, custody was granted and in  the other it was turned down.  Vancouver's Coalition Against Discrimination says there have been no successful custody cases among lesbian,  mothers here. Spokesperson Silva  Tenebein said some parents have lost  their children because they are lesbians. And lawyers have warned them  not to take the matter to court, she  said.  "Others make a pretty good show of  not being lesbians so they can keep  their children.    A lot of people are  very nervous that someday someone  will arrive at the door with a court  order. "O Kinesis,  February   '79  Blacks Act Against Harassment  Scores of black men and women thronged Committee Room 1 at City Hall recently to drive home a message to the  community services committee: either  city council takes stringest measures  to stop racial harassment at 10 city  discos or the black community will  have to take the matter into their  own hands.  The Black Solidarity Association told  Aid. Harry Rankin, Don Bellamy, Doug  Little and Bernice Gerard that dozens  of black members have been denied  access to several downtown discotheques and in some cases have been forcibly removed from the premises.  Blacks recounted horror stories of  racial discrimination, bigotry and  harassment at the hands of night  club owners and managers who insist  that they produce at least three  pieces of identification with pictures or a club membership card.  They also said that the police were  aiding and abetting the owners,  encouraging them to discriminate  against specific minority groups  and coming to their aid when a scuffle or altercation broke out.  They  said police officers never hassle  the owners, yet are quick to arrest  customers, calling them names and  roughing them up.  'treated like dogs.'  "We are treated just like dogs, "  said one black woman. "Not once  did anybody ask us our story. "  Violence erupted one evening at  Sugar Daddy's and resulted in one  man being kicked unconscious and  five black women being thrown into  the paddy wagon and charged with  creating a disturbance.  Association president Delicia Crump  made an impassioned plea urging  council to cancel the licences of  the offending discos.  "My people are outraged.     I don't  know if you have ever been humiliated before.     It is quite obvious  some of you haven't,  otherwise  you wouldn't be so insensitive to  the    situation,"  Crump told a stunned committee.  "Whatever happens from here on in  you can't say you haven't been  warned. "  Other members attacked the aldermen  for their lack of action and apparent disbelief of the complaints  aired at the meeting.  Luke Warrington shocked committee  members by pounding his fist on the  table and shouting: "I am fed up.  I have had it up to here with the  discrimination in this city. This  is democracy?"  Rankin, committee chairman, appeared  sympathetic to the pleas for justice.  But Aid. Bellamy, Little and Gerard  said they felt "uncomfortable and  uneasy" because the disco owners  were not present to defend themselves  against "these serious accusations".  .Gerard called for a motion to postpone the meeting until such time as  By Joey Thompson  the police and disco managers could  attend.  She later withdrew the motion.  Bellamy then asked if council had  the power to cancel the licences in  view of the fact that the B.C. Human  Rights Code usually handled complaints  of discrimination.  He received a  reluctant "yes" from city hall officials.  Crump said the complaints have been  brought to the Human Rights Branch  but little has been done.  Branch  director Kathleen Ruff has urged  the provincial Minister of Labour,  Alan Williams, to investigate complaints and establish a board of  inquiry 'Ģ  Ruff said she has received 16 formal  complaints from blacks alleging that  they were denied entrance or were  harassed at the entrance of Misty's  Cabaret.  A Sikh also has laid a  complaint that he was turned away  because he was wearing a turban.  "We have not had good co-operation  from discos,   consequently,  we have  not been able to get a settlement,"  Ruff said.  "I'm concerned that strong feelings  of anger and humiliation are being  Credit: LNS Graphics  built up  (in the black community),"  she added.  The committee deferred a decision  until they had talked to the disco  owners.  Rankin said a meeting will  be called by mid-February to hear  the owners' side of the story.  FLASH - Labor Minister Alan Williams  has agreed to appoint a board of  inquiry.  Feb. 22 has been set as  a tentative date for the inquiry  which will be held in Vancouver.  GAIN up by one cent.  The Social Credit government and its  new Minister of Human Resources,  Grace McCarthy, has generously increased the total income available  for children on GAIN by one cent per  month (no, that isn't a typographical error!).  In a news release dated December 22,  McCarthy announced that the province  would be adding $8 per month per  child to the cheques of families on  welfare.  The increase is to make up  for the reduction in family allowances which began January 1.  At that time, family allowances went  to $20 per month per child.  If the  regular cost of living increase had  been added to the monthly grant,  families with children would have  received $27.99 per child per month  from the federal government.  As a result, the net benefit of the  federal reduction and the provincial  increase will be lc per month per  child*  "There is no better time of year than  this for British Columbia citizens to  count our many blessings, "    said  McCarthy after announcing the one cent  increase. "We are one of the two most  affluent provinces in Canada."  McCarthy's announcement followed a report released by the United Way, which  stated that income assistance rates in  B.C. are between 35-70% too low to meet  minimum basic needs!  B.C.'s rates are so low that the United  Way concluded that "The threat of protracted malnutrition remains a reality  for larger families."  The provincial government plans to provide the $8 increase only for 3 months,  at which time they expect that families  on income assistance will have received  their federal tax credit of $200 per  child. McCarthy did not say whether or  not the $8 payments would be deducted  from the tax credit.  (Downtown East,  DERA, January 1979) Kinesis,  February   '79-  Grace : Will We Have to Bring Our Own Beds?  Doctors, lay persons and para-medics  are becoming increasingly concerned  about an apparent lack of adequate  obstetrical and gynecological facilities in the proposed plans for the  new Grace Hospital.  The Grace, scheduled for completion  in about two years, will see the  closure of the present Grace Hospital as well as the Willow Pavilion  at Vancouver General Hospital.  Professionals charge that the Minister of Health has either neglected  to consider the needs of B.C. women  or that he is, for some political  tactic, reluctant to release information concerning the extent of the  facilities designed to replace existing ones.  Underhanded  The Maternal Health Committee has  been eyeballing the development of  the new hospital with much interest  and some anxiety.  Members say the  hospital, as proposed, will not  have enough beds for new mothers.  They fear that the provincial government is underhandedly about to  force women to deliver their babies in  community hospitals where facilities  are limited and rules governing  birthing are more restrictive than  those at Vancouver's major hospitals.  Dr. James King, a Vancouver obstetrician, shares these concerns.  He  said the number of babies born at  VGH and Grace has not decreased significantly over the past 10 years.  In fact, 5,998 babies were born in  the two hospitals in 1968, compared  to 5,679 last year.  Yet the 90-bed  facility planned for Grace is a  reduction from the combined bed  capacity at Willow and the present  Grace.  "We could be wrong,"  he said in an  interview at the old Grace on Heather  Street. "We may be overestimating  the potential need for hospital beds  but I don't think so.     Our statistics back us up. "  Twenty-six of the 90 beds will be  used by sick post-partum women. King  estimates this will not be enough.  The demand for specialized or tert-  iarty care is increasing, he said.  The hospital's original designs included two additional post-partum  modules with 16 beds each, but  these plans have been shelved; lack  of funds claim government officials.  To make matters worse the new Grace  will not house women with gynecolo  gical problems, says King.  The  present Grace sees about 2,000 women  a year.  He said he finds it hard to believe  that the government has overlooked  the needs of thousands of women who  require such surgery and care, yet  the new Grace is strictly for new  mothers and newborns.  "There are no gynecological beds in  the new Grace. Not one. Where are  these women going to go?  A Right To Know...  "The problem has been pointed out to  them  (Ministry of Health officials)  hundreds of times.     They have steadfastly declined to give us any assurance that these women will be looked  after.     We have a right to know."  King speculates that the provincial  government may: a) insist that women  seek and secure medical help within  their communities; b) at the zero  hour decide to keep Willow open;  c) build a big surprise like a new  sleeping-in facility for new mothers;  or d) any or all of the above.  Bureaucratic  Constipation,  "We are dealing with bureaucratic  constipation rather than idiocy on  the part of the government," King  said. "There is no way they can't  see the obvious shortage created by  the closing of these two hospitals  and the opening of the Grace Children's Hospital.    The government has  got to see the light.  If they don't,   then the women of Vancouver,  the Lower Mainland and B. C.  are being ripped off,  badly.  Valentine Promenade  magazine  MAKARA magazine is having a benefit.  Join the Makara Valentine promenade,  February 10 from 8pm-lam at the Russian Community Centre, 2114 West 4th  Avenue.  Ad Hoc and Contagious will be playing.  Comic entertainment with David  Schendlinger, food by Theodora's.  Advance tickets are $4.00.  CCCA  CCCA spokeswoman Nancy Wiggs said the  group is planning to participate in an  international abortion day by holding  a demonstration in Vancouver on  March 31.  The day of demonstration  is being organized in European as  well as North American cities by the  National Abortion Council.  CCCA benefit organizers say they made  about $1,500 in tickets, pledges and  bar sales. Kinesis,   February   '79  S&.  Something Fishy  A Vancouver official of the Employment and Immigration department told  Kinesis that at least 8 women are  fighting an unemployment insurance  commission regulation which denies  benefits to fisherwomen who work on  the boats with their husbands.  Leo Sonnenberg said the controversial  piece of legislation has been in the  UIC regulations since 1957, the year  that fishermen were permitted to collect UIC benefits.  Section 195 of  the UIC Act states in part that,  "where the wife shares as a member  of the crew her shares shall be added  to her husband's earnings".  The regulation effectively prohibits  wives of fishermen from collecting  UIC benefits if they choose to work  on the same boat as their husbands.  Thus, although she is required to pay  her own union dues, income tax and  fishing licence, she is denied insurance against unemployment.  Sonnenberg said historically a spouse  who works for another spouse is not  insurable,  regardless of sex.  He  said this ruling is based on the fact  that, "It is difficult to establish  a master-servant relationship in a  marital settlement.  In order to collect unemployment insurance there has  to be a boss and a worker."  Obviously, government officials feel  comfortable assuming that the husband  is the master and the wife the servant.  ".. traditionally,  HE has been the  breadwinner."  "Historically fishing has been a man's  industry," Sonnenberg said when asked  about the blatant discrimination  against women.  "Traditionally he has  been the breadwinner." When told  these misconceptions are no excuse  for denying women benefits, Sonnenberg replied, "Well, you're not going  to re-write society overnight."  Sonnenberg said he has been told that  there are eight B.C. suits before the  court.  He said he has been in touch  with Ottawa officials who say there  are no changes pending and no current  plans to review the Act.  "There is no point in commenting on  proposed changes because of the pending litigation.  But the outcome in  S the courts will certainly have an in-  q fluence on what changes are made in  ¬ß" the future," he added.  0) Keith Henders, regional director for  ?h the federal Human Rights Act, agreed  o that the regulations are "restrictive".  PQ  0) He said his office is investigating  ?h several complaints from women living  +i on Vancouver Island and the West Coast.  Full Circle Coffeehouse Closes  To all former Collective members,  performers and those of you who  have supported the Full Circle  Coffeehouse over the years:  It is with a deep sense of regret  that the present Collective has  found it necessary to close the  Coffeehouse for the time being.  We are faced with the problem of  an excessive rental fee and a  space that is often too small for  the Coffeehouse's needs.  Over  the past six months, the Collective has had the energy to put  into the running of the Coffeehouse, but somehow we haven't  been attracting enough women  to keep it operating viably.  We hope that those of vou in the  women's community who are int  erested will evaluate what the  Coffeehouse has meant to you,  and if you have new ideas, new  energy and a desire to re-open  in a different space, please  either write to Women in Focus  #6-45 Kingsway, Vancouver V5T  3H7, or phone them at 872-2250.  The decision to close was a difficult one for us to have to  make, since the Coffeehouse has  served such a useful purpose for  so many years, and we sincerely  hope that you will understand  the reasons that made this  decision inevitable.  The Full Circle Coffeehouse  Collective  Triden  Canadian and American anti-Trident  demonstrators walked out of a Seattle  courtroom late last month relieved  that the legal battle was over.  But the 176 sentenced protestors were  acutely aware that the struggle to  prevent the development of a Trident  nuclear submarine and missile system  had just begun.  All but five of the demonstrators were  slapped with a 45-day suspended sentence and three years probation, at  about which time the first $2 billion  submarine is expected to be completed.  The other protestors, second and  third-time offenders, were sentenced  to 45 days in jail beginning February  9.  Many people say they are appealing the sentence.  The long and bitter struggle began  last May 22 when about 4,500 people  gathered at the Trident base to  protest construction.  Nearly 300  people climbed the barbed wire fence  and occupied part of the base in a  non-violent action.  They were apprehended, transported  from the base, and issued letters  barring them from entering the base  in the future.  The following day, hundreds of people  climbed the fence a second time and  were charged with illegal re-entry.  Defendants told the judge that their  actions are the only effective nonviolent means of protest available.  The actions, they said, are justified  because the threat they are attempting  to stop is greater than any harm  caused by the protest.  Pacific Life Community representatives  say if the system is completed, the  base at Bangor, Washington, 100 miles  from Vancouver, will be a primary target in any nuclear exchange.  The  American government is planning to  build 29 submarines with a total of  11,832 warheads, 10 times the destructive power of the bomb dropped on  Hiroshima. Kinesis,  February,   '79  Uphol  Collective  Bargaining  Rights  Rallies across the province to protest  the recent amendments to the Essential  Services Disputes Act are being planned  by the trade union movement.  The amendments to the Act were tacked  on to Bill 46, and introduced by the  government to end the Kootenay School  dispute.  Known as Section II, they  were proclaimed January 5, 1979.  With their proclamation, the Essential  Services Disputes Act removes free  collective bargaining rights from  34,000 public employees in B.C.  Members of unions from the public sectors will be turning out in force at  the rallies.  They will be joined by  private sector unions and community  members who support union principles.  It now appears clear that the provincial government intends to extend  anti-labour legislation to its limits in B.C.  Proposed rally dates include:  Prince George: Saturday, February 17  Victoria: week of February 26, on  the exact date of opening of legislature  Vancouver: Wednesday, March 7, 8pm  at the Orpheum Theatre  Women Fight Inco  Toronto - On December 8 a solidarity  benefit was held for the United  Steelworkers strikers of Local 6500  in Sudbury.  Five hundred people, many of them  women from local women's organizations, attended the rally which was  sponsored by Organized Working Women,  the International Women's Day Committee, the Ontario Federation of Labour  and the NDP Women's Committee.  Speaking at the rally were women strikers  and women strike supporters from  Sudbury.  Linda Obansawin of the Wives Strike  Support Committee explained that the  committee was formed to pool together  the resources of the striking families  and to keep up morale during what promised to be a long strike.  The committee did not want a recurrence of  what happened during the 1958 strike  when "the company got to the women"  and used them to put pressure on the  strikers to end the strike.  Inco striker Kathy Duhaime, one of  30 women of the 100 hired by Inco who  are left after 2,200 layoffs, talked  about how Local 6500's fight was" not  just important for workers in Sudbury  but for all of Canada and all of the  world.  You have to take a stand, she  said, "you can't let these corporations battle you down."  Joan Kuyek, president of Women Helping  Women, told of her committee and the  Citizen's Strike Support Committee,  which publishes a paper to get out  the truth about the strike to the  Sudbury community.  She thought it  was particularly important that working people realize that the company  uses the differences between men and  women, races and religions to weaken  their struggle.  She said that the  strike support committees were counter-acting this tactic.(Socialist Voice)  SORWUC Supports  Postal Workers  Support for the future struggles of  members of CUPW (Canadian Union of  Postal Workers) to exercise the right  to full collective bargaining was expressed unanimously at the Annual  Genearl Meeting January 7, of Local  I of SORWUC.  The meeting condemned the high-handed  actions of the Trudeau cabinet, which  legislated postal workers back to  work during their recent strike.  The Liberal government was also attacked for Bill C-14, the federal  legislation which will effectively  deny unemployment insurance benefits  to more than 250,000.  Attacks on collective bargaining at  the provincial government level were  also condemned.  The union will participate in any action to defy Section  II of Bill 46, the Socred legislation  which forced striking CUPE workers  in the Kootenays back to work.  Other resolutions included an expression of solidarity and support for  AUCE Local 2 in their current job  action at Simon Fraser University;  and a condemnation of the Attorney  General of B.C. for political harassment of prison activists Wood and  Hoon.  UBW  Assesses Campaign  When SORWUC called a public meeting  December 3.to discuss the United Bank-  workers' organizing campaign of 1976-.  1978, the questions came up: "Why  didn't the UBW break away from SORWUC  and join the CLC?"  and "Why didn't  the UBW hand over their 24 certifications to another union?"  Members representing SORWUC on the  panel responded to the first question  in the following way:  The bank workers had decided that they did not want  to have their organizing efforts directed from Ottawa.  Further, the CLC's  proposal that the UBW join the CLC  bankworkers organizing committee and  split from SORWUC was not acceptable  because the bank workers did not want  to 'carve up1 their union.  In response to the question of handing  over certifications, the SORWUC panel  commented: To 'hand over' branches  without members having a say would be  very undemocratic - especially so in  view of the fact that members join  SORWUC precisely because it is a small  independent union.  Members in certified branches were free to join any  other union they wished.  In fact,  only one of the UBW certifications  chose to go with another union - the  CLC's union of bank employees.  In terms of future strategy for their  second organizing drive, UBW panel members pointed out that the next step  is to build up a dues base of bank  employees in Vancouver.  Throughout  the first drive, the majority of the  membership was scattered all over the  province, with relatively few bank  workers signed up in Vancouver.  UBW is now preparing a booklet about  their first campaign, to be published  by Press Gang.  From the spring of  1976 to the fall of 1978, UBW made some  major gains towards their goal of a  union in the banking industry.  They  established the legal right of bank-  workers to organize, and many bank-  workers gained experience organizing  negotiating, and dealing with the  Labour Board.  The booklet will contain not only history but an assessment of tactics.  Muckamuck  SORWUC is now entering its eighth  month on the picket line at the Muckamuck restaurant.  They have maintained the picket through  the restaurant closing down during the  summer months, through the opening of  the Chilcotin Bar 7 in the upstairs  area, and finally through the re-opening of the main downstairs area, the  original Muckamuck.  Management has applied to the LRB  for de-certification. Update in next  month's issue! 'Kinesis,  February   '79  Daycare Parents  Make Views Known  Daycare parents at three daycare centres affected by the recent change in  administration from the Ministry of  Human Resources to the YMCA made their  views known to a Labour Relations  Board hearing on December 22.  The hearing is dealing with the status of the B.C. Government Employees  Union, which represented the previous  employees under MHR.  When the six  daycares (four group daycare and two  after-school daycares) changed in  status, parents received little information on the fate of their centres.  Many expected their centres to close  down; some even received letters telling them to find alternative daycare  for their children.  Staff were offered the option of jobs  within the Ministry as file clerks or  the chance to compete for their old  (present) jobs but without union  status.  Most of the staff left the  daycares and children had to adjust  to an entirely new staff.  The BCGEU, YMCA and MHR are now meeting at a Labour Relations Board hearing to decide the status of the Union,  its contract and that of the previous  employees.  According to an LRB spokesman, the  outcome of the hearing could result  in no change to the daycares and  present staff, the old employees  having claim to   their jobs, or the  previous union contract being honoured but with the old employees  having no claim to their jobs.  One group is not being represented  at the hearing - the daycare parents  and their children.  Parents feel  strongly about the outcome of this  hearing because they are dependent  on on-going daycare and because  they are concerned about the effect  of another staff change on their  children.  The Coalition for Improved Daycare  Services (CIDS) was able to contact  most of the parents at Beach, Pen-  drell and Burrard Daycares.  Over  three-quarters signed a petition  making the following points:  1. We are worried that the results  of this hearing may cause some disruption in the operation of our Daycare Centre.     We rely on our Centre  for the daily care of our children.  2. We are concerned that there  may be further staff changes at our  Daycare Centre.     We feel that any  Bourget/Update  more staff changes would be harmful to our children.  3. We and our children are directly  affected by any changes at our Centre.  Yet we have not been informed about  any of the staff and administrative  changes which have taken place over  the last six months until the changes  have occurred.  4. Daycare staff are doing essential  and difficult work.     We feel that the  present staff at our Daycare Centre  are entitled to the same wages,  working conditions and benefits as the  former staff under the Ministry of  Human Resources.  The parents do not have criticisms of  the previous staff, but feel another  staff change is undesirable.  Janet Currie, spokesperson for the  Coalition for Improved Daycare Services , commented:  "This issue demonstrates the  low regard the Provincial Government has  for daycare parents,  staff and children.    It has  long been the government' s intention to get out of daycare and it was aware in doing so,  that workers would probably be displaced.    Parents were not consulted  about the changes.     Workers abruptly  lost their jobs and the Union its  status.  "It bespeaks the low value placed  on daycare workers that they were  offered jobs as file clerks,  in most  cases,  at higher pay than they received as childcare workers.    And,  of course,   the children are  the  greatest Victims of all.    Relationships they have built up over many  months with significant adults in  their lives don't seem to be very  important. "  For" more information, call Janet  Currie at 738-1863.  Lord of The Flies  Ex-Minister of Human Resources,  Bill Vander Zalm, has labelled the  federal government sponsored Inter  national Year of the Child a waste of  money. "In our province, we celebrate  childhood every day," he commented.  Year of Child  In 1976, the General Assembly of the  United Nations declared that 1979  would be the International Year of  the Child.  1979 celebrates the  20th anniversary of the Declaration  of the Rights of the Child.  The UN Declaration of the Rights of  the Child states that the child has  the right to:  *affection, love and understanding  *adequate nutrition and medical  care  *free education  *full opportunity for play and  recreation  *a name and a nationality  *special care, if handicapped  *to be among the first to receive  relief in times of disaster  *to learn to be a useful member  of society and to develop individual  abilities  *to be brought up in the spirit  of peace and universal brotherhood  (sic)  *to enjoy these rights, regardless of race, colour, sex, religion,  national or social origin.  MEANWHILE, here in Canada:  Accidents and acts of violence today  claim the lives of more Canadian  children than do congenital and  acquired diseases.  There are 631,360 children living  in 300,000 single parent families.  About 60% of single parent women  live in poverty compared to 14%  for single parent men and 12% for  families.  Of the 631,360 children of single  parent families, 143,000 are preschoolers.  In 1974, only.50,303 day care spaces  were available in Canada.  For  school-aged children, in need of  lunch-hour and after-school supervision, there were less than 5,000  spaces.  Canada has an infant mortality rate  of 15 per 1000 births, ranking 7th  in 16 developed countries.  In 1974, 38,314 babies were born  to teenagers (5,504 between ages  12 and 16).  Suicide is increasing.  In 1975,  almost 10% of all suicides in  Canada were younger than 19.  Last year, 80,000 children in  Canada were victimized by family  breakdown and abuse and required  official protection.  AND in B.C.:  More than 40 day care centres have  closed their doors in B.C. in 1978^  Why? Where are the children whose  parents were forced to make alternate arrangements?  There is 1 centre for baby day care  in the whole of B.C., and homes  willing to offer day care full-time  for the nominal fee available are  rare.  Where are the babies of  parents who must work?  Note: The statistics were taken  from Admittance Restricted: The  Child as a Citizen in Canada. Kinesis,  February   '79  SEXUAL OFFENCES report issued  Recommendations for changes in the  rape laws in Canada are an improvement over Bill C-52, but are fraught  with many problems of application.  On November 30, 1978, the Law Reform  Commission of Canada released its  report, Sexual Offences.  The report  proposes two new categories: sexual  interference and sexual aggression.  Here, in brief, is a summary of the  two new definitions and a list of  the Commission's major recommendations in point form.  This summary is followed by a critique of their report by Megan Ellis  of Vancouver Rape Relief.  Sexual Interference,  Aggression  Definition of Terms: "Sexual Interference" would be charged against anyone  who, "for a sexual purpose, directly  or indirectly touches another person  without the consent of that person."  Sexual interference could be treated  as a summary offence or incur a maximum of five years imprisonment.  "Sexual Aggression" would involve the use or threat of violence  "for the purpose of sexual interference." The maximum penalty for sexual aggression would be ten years.  Recommendations:  1. That the offences of rape, attempted rape, indecent assault and  gross indecency be replaced in the  Criminal Code by new offences of  "sexual aggression" and "sexual interference".  2. That the "spousal immunity"  clause, which prevents a wife from  charging her husband with rape or  similar offences, be repealed.  3. That the law prohibit intercourse with boys and girls under  age fourteen.  4. That males and females between  the ages of 14 and 17 be protected  against sexual interference by adults upon whom they are dependent  - parents, relatives, employers,  teachers, and so on - through a  law providing a penalty of up to  five years for "sexual interference" even with consent.  5. That family rather than criminal law deal with cases of sexual  intercourse involving juveniles  between 14 and 17 by other juveniles between 14 and 17.  6. That the mentally handicapped  have a right to sexuality that  should not be interfered with  unless they have been taken advantage of and consent to intercourse is in question.  7. That incest between consenting adults no longer be an offence; that incest should be a  matter for criminal law only when  dependent children or adolescents  are involved.  8. That the offences of buggery,  bestiality and gross indecency be  repealed.  9. That nudity be considered an  offence only where it offends  "public decency".  The consent of  an attorney-general would be needed  before a charge could be placed.  (From Toronto Rape Crisis Centre  Newsletter, Vol. Ill, No. 3.)  Feminist Critique  The report of the Law Reform Commission of Canada on Sexual Offences,  released in November 1978, is an  improvement over both the LRC  Working Paper #22 released six months  previous, and Bill C-52, which was  introduced into the House of Commons  in May 1978.  However, despite the fact that it is  a more comprehensive approach to  this area of the law, the implementation of these proposals would  leave certain problems of definition,  evidence and procedure unchanged.  The most important of these are:  1. DOES NOT COVER NON-PHYSICAL  COERCION...The proposed new section  entitled 'Sexual Aggression', which  assault section will not sufficiently  improve the situation for the victim,  nor reduce the disparity between assault and sexual assault provisions  unless they are accompanied by an  additional section which would state  that the threat or use of physical  coercion invalidates any presumption  as to consent on the part of the  complainant, and that this is a  rebuttable presumption.  In other  words, if it is shown that the assailant used violence, the onus  would be on the defence to prove  that the complainant consented.  A comparable section is attached to  the definition of forcible confinement (Section 247(3)) which reads  "In proceedings under this section  the fact that the person in relation to whom the offence is alleged  to have been committed did not resist is not a defence unless the  accused proves that the failure to  resist was not caused by threats,  duress, force or exhibition of force.  4. A section should be included to  make explicit that the common law  requirement that the jury be warned  of the danger of convicting the  accused if the complainant's testi-  Rape Laws:  Recommended Changes  Do Not Go Far Enough  deals with the threat or use of  violence in the course of or for  the purpose of Sexual Interference,  is limited to any act of Sexual  Interference accompanied by bodily  injury or threat of bodily injury.  This would not cover threats or  injury to a third person (for example the victim's children) nor  would it cover non-physical coercion or duress.  2. SPECIAL PROGRAMS MUST BE  GUARANTEED...The maximum penalty  for sexual assaults would be reduced from life imprisonment to  ten years imprisonment and would  thus offer women even less protection from sexual offenders, even  the small percentage of those who  end up in prison. Without accompanying guarantees that special  programs would be set up designed  to assist those convicted of sexual  offences to change their patterns  of violence against women, this  reduction in the maximum sentence  is non acceptable.  3. WE STILL HAVE TO PROVE WE  WEREN'T 'ASKING FOR IT'. ..The present  requirement for preof by the prosecution that the complainant did not  consent is still retained. The redefinitions of the present sexual  mony is not corroborated is deleted.  This requirement was deleted from  the Criminal Code in 1976, but since  that time some judges interpreted  this to mean that they are under an  obligation by common law to continue  to give this warning.  5. Section 142 should be amended to  state that no question shall be asked  by or on behalf of the accused as to  the sexual conduct of the complainant  with any person.  6. Section 442(2), which deals with  provisions for exclusion of the public  in cases of sexual assault, should be  amended to state that where an application is made by or on behalf of the  complainant for an order to exclude  the public, the presiding judge, magistrate or justice shall make such an  order.  Problems  While the Law Reform Commission's proposals go a long way in realizing their  primary objective of 'protecting the  integrity of the person', and their  recommendations would serve to protect  members of both sexes from sexual violence (irrespective of their marital  status), they fail to deal with many  of the problems of the application  of this area of the law.* Kinesis,   February   '79  10  Pornography: Developing Our Definition  The feminist perspective on pornography was the focus of two major  conferences held recently in the U.S.  On November 17-19, 350 women came  together in San Francisco for a  national conference, "Feminist Perspectives on Pornography", organized  by Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media (WAVPM).  Several Vancouver feminists attended,  including two members of BCFW's subcommittee on Women Against Violence,  Megan Ellis from Rape Relief and  Jillian Ridington of the VSW executive; Rape Relief's Yvette Perrault;  and representatives from Women in  Focus, Marion Barling and Michelle  Nichol.  Both definitions of pornography developed in workshops integrated aspects  of the definition developed by VSW's  Debra Lewis and brought to the conference by Vancouver women.  Two Definitions  One of the definitions was: "material  which represents or describes sexual  behavior degrading and abusive to  women in such a way as to endorse and/  or recommend the behavior described.  This endorsement/recommendation is  communicated by contextual features  which are intrinsic to the material."  A similar definition was: "sexual  material depicting or supporting  violent or coercive or non-consensual  acts where an imbalance of power is  implied or explicit in such as way as  to endorse/recommend the behavior."  In both cases, it is the non-sexual  elements of the material that makes  it pornography.  However, neither of these definitions  were accepted by the plenary, which  refused to consider the issues of  "kiddie porn" or pornography directed  to male homosexuals.  The plenary  resolved only to "work to abolish  material degrading to women".  One appraisal of the conference, by  Deb Friedman of Off Our Backs, gave  the following overview:  "The conference was 'long on' information and strategies but, unfortunately,  'short on' analysis.  This was due in  part to the conference format which  didn't allow enough time in open  sessions (and in most of the workshops)  for women to discuss their assumptions,  concerns and disagreements on the issues.  The conference was dominated  by the perspectives of the workshop  leaders and speakers, most of whom  were stimulating and informative. However, listening to the speakers could  not be a substitute for discussing  and analyzing the issues with the  other conference participants."  Lacking Analysis  Ellis, Ridington and Perrault also  noted this lack of analysis, and the  relatively high cost of the conference, considering that the partici  pants received nothing for that  amount but the right to attend and  a kit including a thick, glossy and  obviously expensive program featuring  photographs and biographies of "star"  speakers.  This was among the evidence leading these Vancouver feminists to conclude that the conference  was not an opportunity for exchange  of information, debate on issues,  and development of a thoughtful feminist analysis of pornography.  Rather, it provided a few "name"  feminists with a forum; out of their  opinions, pre-digested (and rather  amorphous) resolutions seem to have  been developed. These were presented  with no time allowed for discussion.  In such a forum, there was no room  for dealing with important issues,  such as making clear distinctions  between erotica and pornography, and  between feminist and civil libertarian perspectives on pornography.  The problem of controlling pornography without limiting access to  educational material ("Our Bodies,  Ourselves") and women-oriented  sexually explicit material ("Women  Loving") was ignored.  Porn. vs. Free Speech  "At the New York conference, held on  December 2nd, the question of pornography versus free speech was not ignored; it was the topic.  This colloquium was held at the NYU School of  Law and entitled "Obscenity: Degradation of Women Versus Right to Free  Speech".  Lisa Lerman, the colloquium's coordinator, in her introductory remarks, said, "The object  of the colloquium is to provide a  forum in which feminists and civil  libertarians can discuss pornography."  The debate, according to an Off  Our Backs report, was clearly divided along sex lines: feminists  forcefully argued that pornography  contributes to the degradation of  women and actively encourages woman  abuse.  Male speakers supported a  civil libertarian perspective.  Among the strong arguments presented by feminists were the following statistics, used in arguing  the correlation of pornography to  woman abuse;  1 out of every 3 women in the U.S.  is raped in her lifetime...New York  Women Against Rape  50% of rape victims are under 18  ...NARAL  25% of rape victims are under 12  ...NARAL  Prosecutors are reluctant to prosecute rape cases because they are  "frustrating" and "emotional",  and  the  low conviction rate is  "not  good for one's career".     Only 1  rape case in 60~results in conviction in the U.S.     This is higher  than some other countries.. .LEAA  study  1 out of every 2 wives has been  beaten by her husband...WEAL  50% of wives who are killed by  their husbands made 5 or more  calls to the police during prior  episodes of violence in which  the police refused to intervene.  ...Ann Arbor, MI N.O.W. study  85% of wives killed by their husbands made at least 1 call to the  police without receiving protection. ..Ann Arbor, MI N.O.W. study  At least 1 out of every 4 female  children is sexually abused in  childhood, primarily by close  family members or family friends.  ...NARAL  As many as  70% of young prostitutes  have had sexual relations with  their father, brother, or uncle  forced upon them. . . NARAL  (00B info)  Conference  Debra Lewis and other members of  the BCFW Women Against Violence  Sub-committee have researched and  discussed the issues involved in  understanding pornography and are  attempting to develop a coherent  and comprehensive feminist perspective. (See Debra Lewis:  "Pornography", Kinesis, October  1978.)  They invite interested, concerned  women to join them for a day-long  discussion of pornography on Feb-  rurary 17, at Britannia, Commercial Dr. and Napier. There  will be a panel, including Gene  Errington, Debra Lewis, and a  representative of Rape Relief,  small discussion groups, and lots  of time for feedback and ideas for  strategy.   £ Kinesis,   February   '79  NAC Notes  by Lee Grills  During the past few months, NAC has  been very busy trying to deal with  federal level issues affecting women.  1. Unemployment Insurance Changes -  NAC immediately protested the erroneous notion that women are not serious  participants in the labour force.  A  brief was presented Monday, November  27, 1978 to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Labour, Man(sic)power,  and Immigration.  The text is available from your Member of Parliament.  NAC will attend a meeting with the  Minister in early February.  Any woman  who has been adversely affected by  the new regulations is requested to  contact the writer c/o Kinesis.  2. Human Rights Act - NAC feels the  guidelines regarding equal pay for  work of equal value will negate the  intention of this portion of the Act.  We will be represented at a meeting  with the Canadian Human Rights Commission in early February to discuss  inequities in pension and insurance  regulations: money purchase schemes,  provisions for survivors, special  provisions re the discernibly handicapped .  3. Family Allowance - While NAC welcomes the principle of refundable tax  credits and the increases in the  guaranteed income supplement, we are  •opposed to the decrease in the monthly payments for family allowance. We  would welcome comments from parents  adversely affected by this decrease.  4. Canadian Radio-Television & Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) -  Last fall a brief was presented by  NAC to the CRTC re the CBC license  renewal.  CBC president Al Johnson  has convened a 2-day seminar in February of CBC officials and women's  groups to discuss "the reflection of  women in CBC programming".  NAC and  VSW will be represented.  In February  NAC will be presenting a brief on the  portrayal of women in CTV programming  on the occasion of their license  renewal.  5. Federal Cabinet Meeting - NAC  anticipates a meeting with the Prime  ister and members of the Cabinet  in Toronto late in February.  Our  brief will deal with the economic  situation and its effects on women.  Job creation; the Human Rights Act;  the Constitution; family allowance;  tax credits; parental leave; and  Criminal Code changes re rape,  prostitution, and pornography will  be discussed.  6. Women as Persons - To honour the  50th anniversary of the October 18,  1929 British Privy Council decision  that Canadian women are "persons",  NAC is consulting with Alberta Status  of Women Action Committee (ASWAC)  about a meeting to be held in Edmonton this October.  NAC will soon be  distributing a decorative seal (like  an "Easter seal") commemorating the  anniversary.  7. Annual Meeting - Our annual meeting  will take place in Ottawa from March  23 to 26.  Discrimination—  Traditional  Canadian  Sport?  It doesn't matter how good you are  at "curling, you'll never make a skip  at the "national championships.  If you're a woman that is.  According to the Curling Rule Book  of the Canadian Curling Association,  men must play skip and second, while  women must play third and lead during the championship.  Women who have been playing skip in  their own mixed leagues cannot compete on a national level in the Seagram Mixed Curling Championship of  Canada.  Get those regulations changed by  writing to: The President, Canadian  Curling Association, 406 Moorgate  Street, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3J 2L7.  Segregated Into  Low Paying Jobs  "Problems of Immigrant Women in the  Canadian Labour Force", a report  written by Sheila Arnopoulos for the  Canadian Advisory Council on the  Status of Women was released during  the Council's quarterly meeting in  mid-January.  This study examines the range of  problems experienced by immigrant  women segregated into low-paying  jobs.  Its puts emphasis on two  areas where abuses are common,  the garment industry and general  domestic work.  The paper points out specific difficulties encountered by unskilled  immigrant women.  It also fills in  some of the information gaps relating to their role and experience  in the labour market.  The report concludes by making suggestions for policy changes at both  the federal and provincial levels,  which would improve in many ways  the working conditions of immigrant  women.  Copies of the document are available  upon request at the Canadian Advisory Council on the Status of Women,  63 Sparks Street, PO Box 1541, Stn.  B, Ottawa KIP 5R5.  In Winnipeg  Women's Building Opens  The Women's Building, a beautiful 3-  story brick building with a stage and  hall, offices, social and recreational  space, was purchased in October 1978  by Winnipeg Women's Cultural & Education Centre, Inc., in response to the  needs of the women's community.  Our  very own space - a place to organize  from, socialize in, share resources,  exchange information and carry on our  businesses.  Winnipeg Women's Building makes a  radical departure from the general  practice of renting old houses, garages or office space for women's  groups.  "We wanted a large building that we  owned ourselves,"  explains Joan Campbell, of Winnipeg Women's Cultural &  Education Centre, Inc., "where we  would have room to have social functions and businesses and other fund-  raising activities.    This way we hope  to generate enough revenue to make us  permanently self-sufficient,  so we  won't have to depend on short-term  funding."  Already, a second-hand store, Hedy  La Wood's Thrift Boutique, has opened  in the Women's Building.  Plans are  afoot for a bookstore, a graphics  collective, a women's coffeehouse and  lounge, and a women's theatre company.  Many women's organizations are in the  process of moving in or are already  renting office space, including Women  in Trades, Wages Due Lesbians,  Wages  for Housework, Lesbian Counselling  Group, and Winnipeg Women's Liberation.  A single mother's group, a group producing women's programs on public TV,  and a native women's organization are  among the other groups planning to use  the Women's Building.  The Women's Building is located at  730 Alexander Avenue, Winnipeg R3E 1H9. Kinesis,  February   '79  INTERNATIONAL  Bodies Found In Mine  Chile  An undetermined number of bodies of  what are feared to be disappeared  prisoners were found December 1978  in a limestone mine just south of  Santiago, Chile.  The "grave" was covered by 12 feet  of earth and stone and then a layer  of cement.  So far, 25 bodies have been dug out.  They are clothed and bullet-ridden;  some are gagged.  None have been  identified yet.  They may have been  there for two to four years.  The discovery of the mass grave was  made after a secret police agent  went to confession.  This could be  the first hard evidence of execution  of the officially unacknowledged  disappeared prisoners.  The Vancouver Committee for the Defense of Human Rights in Chile asks  us to write letters to:  Kurt Waldheim, General Secretary,  U.N., New York, N.Y., USA  ...asking him to demand from the  Chilean government an explanation  for the bodies found. (The United  Nations is planning to dissolve  the human rights commission for  Chile.  These findings are further  proof of the need for this commission to continue operating. Please  ask the UN not to dissolve the  commission.  *Pierre Trudeau, Office of the Prime  Minister, Ottawa K1A 0A2  ...asking him to pressure the Chilean  government for an answer as to the  whereabouts of the disappeared prisoners and for an explanation of the  findings at the mine.  *Israel Borques, Presidente de la  Corte Suptema, Plaza Montt Santiago  de Chile, Chile  ...pressuring him for an answer as  to what has become of the disappeared  prisoners and an explanation for the  bodies found in the mine.  For more details, contact: Committee  for the Defense of Human Rights in  Chile, PO Box 80593, South Burnaby,  B.C. V5H 3X9 Canada.#  Lesbian Mothers  Retain Custody  In a 6-3 decision, the Washington State  Supreme Court has upheld the right of  two lesbian mothers to retain custody  of their six children.  Sandra Lee Schuster and Madeleine  Cecil Isaacson had been challenged  by the fathers of the children, both  of whom have remarried.  The fathers  objected to the openly gay lifestyle  of the mothers and the rearing of the  children as a single family.  Schuster and Isaacson had waged a  public campaign to retain their custody rights.  The women and their  children also have been the subject of  a film distributed in several states.  Superior Court Judge Norman Ackley had  earlier ruled against changing the  custody arrangement, and in addition,  removed the prohibitions against the  two women living in the same household  that were included in their divorce decrees.  Four justices of the Supreme  Court favoured overturning Judge Ackley 's order - one short of the five  needed for a trial-court decision to  be changed.  (Reprinted from Gay Tide)%  Bank Strike  One Year Old  New York (LNS) - Carrying signs reading  "We protest slave labor", "We'll fight  'em to the end", and "Equal work, equal  pay", seven women in Willmar, Minnesota  are still picketing the Citizens National Bank of Willmar, one year after they  went on strike over "sex discrimination'  The women tellers and bookkeepers began  the first strike against a Minnesota  bank on December 16, 1977, charging  that male bank officer trainees were  hired at $700 a month, while women  were hired at only $400.  In addition,  women with 10 years of experience received less than incoming men, and the  women were expected to train men, often  for better-paying positions than their  own.  Commenting on the strike, bank president Leo Pirsch said, "We don't pay  any attention to the pickets. There  are no negotiations going on - nothing.  We don't discriminate against female  employees." And about their salary,  which the women charge is below the  poverty line, Pirsch said that it was  "fair and competitive for the kind of  work being done".#  Harassment  Targets Women  Under the guise of a renewed search  for fugitive Katherine Ann Power,  the FBI has been harassing lesbians  and feminists in a number of cities  over the past four months.  One of  the most powerful weapons the FBI has  against reluctant witnesses is the  threat of a grand jury subpeona.  "It's often too  late to  learn about  a grand jury once one has started, "  Jill Raymond told more than 70 people  at a December 4 Washington DC forum.  The meeting was called by the Coalition to End Grand Jury Abuse, the  National Lawyers Guild and local feminist and gay groups in an effort to  encourage non-cooperation with the  FBI or grand jury subpeonas.  Similar  meetings are scheduled for a number  of cities.  Raymond was imprisoned in 1975 for  refusing to give information about  Susan Saxe, a radical lesbian convicted of a 1970 bank robbery in  Brighton, Mass. Tower, accused of  taking part in the same robbery,  has never been caught.  The original, search for Saxe and  Power led to extensive harassment  of feminists and gays in Boston,  New York, Lexington and New Haven.  In 1974-5, Raymond explained, "the  women's and gay communities were  essentially under siege.     We were  all very frightened. .. in short,  we were totally confused.    As a  result,  a few people were able to  be singled out and picked off. "  The new round of harassment has  targeted many of the same people  subpeonaed in 1975.  In Massachusetts, Delaware, Connecticut, New  York and Kentucky, activists are  mounting campaigns to publicize  FBI activities, inform potential  witnesses of their right to remain silent and urge the feminist  and gay communities to close ranks.  (Guardian)^  __-,fn&'   HAS 6££N (**«-  S  it 6fl,N PtflSOMAL NFoR-  WWEAfcNT   TXRSUSHOVT -^ £j"  LNS  RAPIER, For Men *  a potent new weapon for men",  is one of the latest magazines to hit  the British newsstands.  Rapier's  publicity material says:  "Women's Liberation seems to be taking  a nasty turn lately.  Anyone who monitors magazines for 'thinking' women,  or has seen the 'sexist shit' nonsense  and other grafitti in public places,  knows how aggressive, devisive and  militant this campaign has become..."  And in the first issue: "Rapier's  hunt for the world's ugliest woman;  women at their very worst; are you  treating your wife too well?" # (00B) Kinesis,   February   '79  13  How to Organize Your  Own Community  Much of the material in this feature  was developed with a grant from Secretary of State by Community Alternatives, in consultation with Susan  Hoeppner, VSW's community organizer.  Time, money and energy ran out before  the material could be printed and  distributed.  Some changes have had  to be made to facilitate reproduction  for Kinesis.  The Start Chart in its original form  is a flow chart or map that can be  tacked up on a wall to help keep  group discussion on target and to  flag all of the factors that must be  kept in mind when working on an issue.  Copyright for the wallchart is held  by IDERA.  This article requires commitment. Remember that the Start Chart is designed to go with an organizer as a tool.  Refer back to the chart throughout.  We hope that Kinesis readers will be  able to make use of this insert feature to organize around feminist  issues in their own community.  Any  feedback on this approach to community  organizing would be welcomed by us.  Define  Is your issue readily understandable  by the public?  Is your issue dynamic enough to catch  the concern or interest of the public?  From the history of this issue in  your community and other similar communities, is the issue defined in  such a way that it has the best chance  of succeeding?  Is the issue broad enough to attract  the support of necessary or valuable  allies?  (Focus on the emotions in  your issue rather than philosophical/  political positions.)  Do you have control over this issue?  Are you initiating action or are you  reacting to an action?  Can you change your definition so you  are initiating the action and have  more control?  Is it achievable within the amount of  effort and time your group can be  expected to expend?  What criterion/criteria will you use  to determine whether your issue is  satisfactorily resolved?  For the purpose of communication with  the press and public, write down your  issue in a sentence or two.  What are your goals  secondary)  (Primary and  OPPONENTS  Who is doing it to you?  Analyze their best strategies!  Try  to think like the enemy.  What motivates them? What are their alternatives? Who are their movers and  shakers? Where do they get their  power? Who do they influence/control? Who are their allies? Where  are they vulnerable?  Make a complete list showing names,  addresses, phone numbers, key people.  Look for inter-locking relationships  and other clues that might help you  discover the exact centre of their  energy.  Are they a branch plant or  a main office? Are they private? 'Ģ  Government? An alliance of both?  Do you have any friends inside their  organization?  Are they fronting for  someone else?  Get all the information you can on them.  8 page feature  AUTHORITIES  Who makes decisions on this issue?  Who can say stop/go?  Do you have access to them?  How?  Do they recognize your right to  participate in the decision? Who  influences them? Do you have an  inside agent? No connections?  Make a complete list and arrange  it according to who has first level  of decision-making, ranking all  bodies up to top level.  Don't  forget to include the courts if  appropriate.  Are decision makers  local or remote?  Do they have  real power or do they only recommend/advise? Are you expected to  go through all required steps?  Do you have friends among authorities?  YOURSELF  You and anybody who might be affected  How important is this issue to your  group? Highly motivated, or not a  gut issue?  List all those people and organizations likely to be affected.  Have  any of them worked together in the  past? Who has experience in fighting for community issues?  PUBLIC  Everybody within reach of the issue.  List your supporters, if your support  is strong and/or widespread.  List  the uncommitted.  Can you convert  them?  Should you try to polarize  public opinion? Would you be wise  to let sleeping dogs lie?  Who is likely to be sympathetic to  your plight?  Find organizations with  clout who might be on your side.  Are there other groups who might be  affected in the long run but don't ^  THE START CHART: a five-step organizing guide for community action.  2. ASSESS  Opponents  Authorities  Yourself  Public  Scope  Timing  PREDICT STRATEGY OUTCOMES...  3. CHOOSE  4. CHECK  Negotiation    Membership - Organization -  Lobbying      Alliances - Information -  Demonstrating  Publicity - Facilities - Money  Economic Action  Tricks  ISSUE RESOLVED!:  MONITOR ACTION  5. TAKE ACTION  ISSUE NOT RESOLVED Kinesis,  February   '79  14  know it yet? Are there other groups  in the community who are likely to  oppose you because they stand to gain  something or just because they don't  like you? Are they awake to what's  happening?  If not, can you keep  them asleep or divert them in some  way?  Choose  SCOPE  How widespread is this issue?  Draw the boundaries as clearlv as  possible.  Is it a local or neighbourhood issue? Might it spread to  your neighbours?  Does it fit within  a political jurisdiction, ie. ward,  city, district, electoral district?  Do you have access to your various  elected people?  Is the issue regional or provincial in its scope? Does  it affect a special interest group  regardless of where they are?  NEGOTIATION  IF YOU CHOOSE NEGOTIATION (where  affected parties are not competing or  issue arises out of misunderstanding):  Conciliation (reaching agreement by  repairing bad feelings, making friends  out of adversaries), Mediation (third  party attempts to solve issue), or  Compromise (each side gives something  up), check these things:  *The larger your MEMBERSHIP,  ORGANIZATION or ALLIANCE, the greater  the credibility you bring to the negotiating table; the response of those  you are negotiating with  tends to be  more professional and hard-nosed.  INFORMATION is essential. Know  what your minimum acceptable demands  are, and know as much as possible about  the other side's position and disposition.  Information is your most impor-  Petitions (a brief statement of principle or position which the affected peof  pie are willing to sign), or Proposals  (an alternative, more acceptable, solution to the one being proposed), then  check these things:  , ^MEMBERSHIP is not required. It  can be an asset if it is large or  influential. For petitioning, a membership can better facilitate the  circulation of the petition.  *No ORGANIZATION required beyond  a return address.  ^ALLIANCES not essential but can  add considerable strength to proposal  or brief if endorsed by other organizations or associations.  ^INFORMATION requirements are  limited to the subject matter of the  brief, proposal or petition.  *In almost all lobbying activities,  PUBLICITY will be useful. Avoid publicity if it will tend to confront the  target that you suspect will be receptive to your pleading.  *For FACILITIES, a typewriter and  access to duplicating equipment are  usually all you need. An office generally lends credibility if you wish to  establish an ongoing organizational  image.  ^Generally little MONEY is required  unless you are anticipating a long-term  struggle.  March 1976:  Women Rally for Action - a large  lobbying action by B.C.   feminists.  TIMING  Timetable and sequence of events.  Is timing critical to this issue?  How much time do you have? Who is  setting this timetable? (It should  be you.) If the perpetrator is  setting the timetable, can you  weaken their case by seizing control  of sequence and timetable?  If the  authorities are setting timing, ie.  hearings, committee meetings etc.,  can you make a case for delay in the  name of democracy?  If you can get  control of timing, plan your entire  campaign, including possible setbacks, before you fire your first  shot.  Predict  List the three most likely outcomes  of your action. How will you react  to each?  Strategy Outcomes:  1.         tant requirement.  *PUBLICITY is not necessary.  Can  be desirable to keep issue before members and public, but shouldn't be used  in a manner that would aggravate negotiations.  *FACILITIES include phone contact  with researchers that can check on  "facts" given by the other side, and  a meeting place that is neutral ground  for both sides.  *MONEY is sometimes needed to pay  the mediator or make up negotiator's  pay loss.  LOBBYING  IF YOU CHOOSE LOBBYING (activities  arising when official and semi-official  bodies are open to persuasion; procedures are usually formal, lobbying  strategies are acceptable to all segments of society): Briefs (a formal,  reasoned argument, usually presented  in writing; should demonstrate a logical argument and/or widespread support),  DEMONSTRATE  IF YOU CHOOSE DEMONSTRATING (either to  make people and organizations aware of  ^}£ the issues or to show strength; the  " activity always seeks wide publicity,  need to feel rather strongly about the  issue to participate):  Pickets (for  information and display, not to be  S confused with picket lines in support  S of strikes), Theatre (to dramatize the  ^ issue or ridicule opposition), Blockades (a temporary tactic designed to  draw public attention, not be be confused with obstruction), or Marches  (to show widespread support and carry  message to several areas at once),  then check these things:  *A small and dedicated MEMBERSHIP  is essential for coordination. Numbers Kinesis,   February   '79  15  Citizen's Lobby for Jobs,  organized by the B. C.Federation of Labour,   spring  are  important, but most participants  do not need to be members.  ORGANIZATION is essential to  coordinate larger demonstrations designed to show strength; less important where the demonstration is not  controversial or will not tend to  generate conflict in the streets.  *ALLIANCES are important when the  purpose of the demonstration is to  show strength.  *INFORMATION: In order to mobilize  your supporters and anticipate the  activities of the target group, set  up good people records, including a  fast membership contact system (a  telephone tree?).  *A11 demonstrations are PUBLICITY  events.  Keep the press informed;  stage visual media events; appoint  someone exclusively to handle publicity.  *FACILITIES include some information storage; a telephone number  for instant media contact; ability to  reproduce promotional material and  instructions to demonstration coordinators.  *MONEY: Being able to subsidize  the movement of people to site of  demonstration will ensure good turnout.  ECONOMIC  ACTION  IF YOU CHOOSE ECONOMIC ACTION (you  are in a position to effect economic  damage to your opponents or you are  trying to establish your right to  negotiate; requires discipline and  is often longer duration strategy):  Strikes (withholding labour, fees,  rents, etc. from someone who is  largely dependent on your work/money),  Boycotts (withholding trade from someone who is largely dependent on your  trade), Obstruction (passive resistance, disruption of traffic or trade,  occupying places of business, getting  court orders to back you up, occupying places of work), Intervention  (petitioning courts or official hearings on hehalf of a class of people,  in our case women), then check these  things:  ^Require  .^ghly committed MEMBERSHIP willing to risk loss of wages  (strike), expend considerable time  (boycott), or risk legal action and  bodily harm (obstruction). The larger  the membership, the more effective the  strategy.  ORGANIZATION is essential to  coordinate strategies of a longer term  nature and ones that require member  education, financial compensation or  legal protection.  *ALLIANCES can multiply the effect  of economic actions considerably. They  are essential where other organizations  have dealing with the target group.  INFORMATION: Legal, financial,  market research, organizational and  other complex data is required. Need  access to corporate and economic  research skills.  *PUBLICITY: Generally, if public  support (boycotts, legislative change,  etc.) is required, prepare ongoing  situation reports to media. Requires  media representation.  *F ACUITIES almost always include  an office to coordinate your media work,  *If you are fighting an economic  or legal battle, you should count on  having some money.  See budgeting guide,  Keep your books clean and above suspicion.  demand full and immediate service  for all entitled), then check these  things:  *MEMBERSHIP: Requires a few  highly dedicated and creative members  who are willing to risk the consequences of the tricks they devise.  ORGANIZATION is not essential  and in some cases is detrimental; if  tricks are designed for publicity,  some organization is desirable; in  some cases, front organizations should  be set up to cover for you.  *ALLIANCES can be helpful when  tricks are employed but more often  are not required, and difficult to  form. Security is more difficult in  extensive alliances.  *This is likely to be an underground INFORMATION war.  Generally,  you will need to know everything there  is to know about the target (especially anything they are trying to  keep secret).  *Control PUBLICITY so that you  do not tip your hand before the  event. Tricks get their own publicity if they are creative/ingenious  responses, particularly against bureaucracies.  *FACILITIES: Should you go underground or create a front group? If  yes, keep it away from existing organization; you may need separate  facility.  *Be sure that MONEY used to  finance guerilla tactics is clean. ^  TRICKS  IF YOU CHOOSE TRICKS (your purpose is  to put your opponents on the defensive by disrupting, embarassing or  ridiculing them; requires extensive  knowledge of your opponents and high  creativity; your supporters must be  highly committed; play your cards  close to your chest): Discrediting  (exposing information that will cast  doubt on motives, reveal associations  or past activities that make target  group look silly or corrupt), Bluffing  (threat to use tactics that in fact  are not available to you), Detection  (acquiring information the target  wants to keep secret or planting  false information), Overload (impair  target's ability to function, ie.  J.P.Stevens products are being boycotted across North America.  It is  the second largest textile corporation in the U.S.  and is infamous for  anti-unionism,  racism and sexism.  Products include the following labels:  Utica,  Tastemaker,  Fine Arts,  Meadow-  brook,  Yves St.Laurent,  Hardy Aimes,  Snoopy...  95 rallies last November 30 marked  Justice Day for J.P.Stevens workers. 16 Kinesis,  February   '79  17  Don't fudge the books or otherwise  leave yourself open to diversionary  tactics by the target (their tricks).  Check  ALLIANCES  Alliances are ideally a formalizing  of an ongoing history of cooperation.  Your organization should maintain  contact with other community groups  so you know whether their style and  aim are going to allow you to work  with them productively.  Advantages include:  *sharing of facilities, information,  human and financial resources  *demonstrating a widespread concern  with attendant publicity value  *strengthening your advocacy by  broadening the base of support  *elimination of duplication or the  appearance of competition between  like-minded groups  *consolidation of fund-raising,  particularly from government agencies.  For planning, advocacy or direct action  purposes, there are three ways of  collaborating with other groups. They  are:  1. Information Sharing: an informal  and unstructured relationship intended  to facilitate a flow of information  between groups which sometimes can result in a common action.  2. Ad Hoc Alliances: when several  groups have defined a common concern  and are willing to cooperate openly  and in a more structured manner around  one specific issue.  By the openness  of their collaboration they demonstrate the strength of support for  the issue.  3. Coalition: when a number of organ  izations decide to set up a formal  body to make ongoing decisions on  goals and action.  It is a long-term  collaborative planning device.  Some forms of collaboration possible  in both formal and informal alliances  are:  a) joint programming - meetings,  workshops to discuss issues of common  concern;  b) parallel programming by sev  eral groups - particularly effective  if taking place in different geographic  areas of city, province of country;  c) direct action - demonstrations,  marches, picketing, boycotts, etc.;  d) mobilizing for lobbying -  letter writing and other pressure  tactics;  e) endorsement, sponsorship and  financial support by several organizations of a specific campaign.  How to  Mobilize Alliances  In initiating any program it is always  important for an action group to know  its friends - to know what kind of  support it can expect from whom.  A place to find information is needed  to analyze probable support groups:  printed records, such as newspaper  articles, organizational periodicals,  community surveys - mostly found in  your library.  Often more up-to-date and specific  information is available from your  own members who have been involved  with or know of other groups.  A chart of organizational potential to  assess the type of support other organizations are likely to provide, and to  help you make decisions about building  alliances with them, would include  such headings as:  *name of organization  *probably relation to project  - why would they be interested  *what they can be expected to  do - who do they represent.  Before entering any alliance with  "AN ATTACK ON ONE WILL BE  ANSWERED BY ALL"  WORKERS CONFERENCE  AGAINST BRIGGS/PROPOSITION 6  other groups be clear within your  own group about the extent of collaboration you are prepared to undertake.  Will it be information sharing, an open  coalition such as an ad hoc committee,  or a formal or legal coalition?  Prepare a statement of purpose to  describe:  *the roles of participating  groups  *the specific issue on which  they agree to focus  *the degree of consensus necessary for a common action  *the methods/tactics the coalition will use.  Beware of groups who may be riding  one solution so hard that they will  not consider other possibilities *  of groups with other axes to grind  which your group does not share, who  will try to restate the goals * of  groups who hog the limelight: CHALL-  LENGE THEIR RIGHT of power plays and  INSIST that decisions made are made  democratically * of methods that  your groups cannot endorse (everything from co-option, ie. the coalition is committed to preserving the  status quo and not change, to  terrorism tactics) * KNOW WHEN TO  GET OUT quietly when it is useful to  others but not your priority, publicly  if it's destructive.  Be prepared to  defend those decisions.  ie. censorship of gay rights ads or  deletion of key portions of a press  release or interview. You should  carefully investigate ownership and  control of local media.  A well-organized major community campaign will employ both types of publicity. Here is a brief checklist of  options, not arranged in any kind of  priority:  Hoarding Posters:  They may be artistic silk screens or simple mimeo  sheets.  However, keep the message  brief and simple. Hoardings are only  useful as display areas because people  are moving past them; ergo, they  won't stop to read a long essay.  of town - the farther away, the better.  Talk shows are hungry for stuff, but  often pander to red-neck audiences;  be careful.  Once on the program, it  is hard to avoid the heat.  Paid Advertising: Don't bother unless  you can afford a highly visible ad in  a publication that is read by your  intended target.  Special-interest  and local newspaper weeklies are your  best bet.  Newsletter:  If you can build up a  good-sized mailing list and if you  can meet a regular deadline with  reasonable copy, these are worth  doing.  Throw pictures, cartoons and  little pieces of humour or satire or  local human interest to break up  the copy.  Billboards: At $900/month, each  location, commercial boards are out.  up  $10 each - if you  PUBLICITY  Basically, publicity is of two kinds:  that which you produce and distribute  yourself and that which the press and  others process and handle for you.  The first kind allows you total freedom in what you say and how you say  it, providing you are willing to pay  and work for it.  The second requires you to present  yourself in a manner acceptable to the  people who control the outlet you are  using.  Total freedom in producing and distributing your own publicity also exposes  you to the risk of appearing to be a  propagandist for your own interests,  ie. political party pamphlets or religious tracts.  Expecting other people to carry your  message means that they can limit  your argument or comment adversely;  -Lui^ctLJLUii,   cuuuaerciai   Duarua   are   i  All You Ever Wanted to Know ** ^ plywood SignS can be put  * a. * *    —. v w —-* r <—■ jor as kittle as $10 each - if y<  have help and sign locations. Some-  #    ^^^       .  .    where in the middle are bus boards  About Community Organizing (°* «* outside of buses) which  *^ on a medium sized bus line could  cost as little as $400 for an  intensive week-long campaign on  selected routes.  Flyers:  If you can get the use of  a mimeograph machine you can effectively cover a neighbourhood by  hand delivery or ask your post  office about a "letter carrier's  walk".  Hand out at meetings and  rallies.  Keep your message short  and simple.  Canvassing:  Door-to-door visits  in the neighbourhood by informed  supporters.  Don't argue at the  door and keep it brief.  Can be  effectively combined with flyer  delivery.  Stuffing Pieces:  Flyers added to  some other group's material.  Watch  out who you associate with.  News Release:  If your activity and  events are newsworthy (in the  opinion of the editor) the local  press will provide you with free  coverage.  Public Service Announcement (PSA):  Radio stations and some TV outlets  will run short (30-60 seconds)  free announcements of events. They  will not run them during prime  time.  Radio will also take studio  tapes if they are produced to  boradcast quality.  Give them lots  of lead time.  Press Kits:  Assemble a package of  background material and send to key  reporters and commentators and  distribute at press conferences.  News Conference:  Invite all local  media people.  Make sure you have  something worth covering or they  won't come back a second time.  Feature Story:  Use for background  and less timely news.  Must be  well written and feature human  interest or other attractive stuff.  (Some papers will pay for these.)  Letter to the Editor:  Will serve  to demonstrate widespread support  if lots of people write.  Keep them  short and stick to one or two points.  Interviews:  Radio, TV and newspaper  reporters and commentators will be  interested in doing their own stories  based on an interview with some notable person associated with your  issue.  Best bet is anyone from out  MEMBERSHIP  Power in Numbers  As individuals, we have very little  power.  As a group, we have considerably more.  The fundamental element  of community action is that it involves the community.  With the exception of those with influence or  money, change rarely takes place when  advocated by an individual, and significant change never occurs unless  it is truly supported by the community.  The key to success for most  strategies is numbers.  Functions of Membership  Before recruiting membership, determine what function you want that mem  bership to perform.  Members can  provide the financial support the  action requires by paying membership  dues and/or making contributions.  These monies are usually only sufficient to pay for operating expenses  such as stationery, telephone, brochures, and perhaps office rent.  Unless the membership is extensive,  it is unlikely a part-time or full-  time salary can be provided by this  source.  Of course there are exceptions .  An involved and knowledgeable membership is the best means of attain  ing communication with the public,  and visibility in the community.  Members well-versed in the philosophy and goals of the organization  can effectively spread the word with  the public and thereby enable the  organization to cash in on positive  public attitudes when the need  arises.  A sympathetic public permits the use of a wide range of  action strategies.  An active membership gives the organization  vitality, visibility, respectabilit-  and credibility in the community.  A membership is required to take  action.  Whether it is a very few  putting their names to a brief,  thousands turning out for a demonstration, or a few blockading a  bulldozer, the members are required  to give the strategy support.  In  the authority's eyes, the greater  the economic or physical risk taken  by members, the greater their commitment to the cause, and the more  powerful the organization.  Similarly  the greater the number of members  participating, the more powerful  the organization.  ► ► Kinesis,   February   '79  18  the form of supporting information.  Next approach those who may be uncertain or uncommitted, and may need that  extra information to make their decision.  Count votes before the event.  Avoid those who can say only NO.  Learn to speak the language of those  you approach, unless it undermines  your cause.  Base your case on factual  argument.  Show where your objectives  would benefit a wider community.  Use  emotional and value argument with  caution; but come on strong if you  do use emotion.  Know more about your issue than your  "target" does.  Often politicians  rely on community groups to provide  them with information and "ammunition" for their positions.  Feed  wrong information to the enemy if you  can.  Study the political climate of the  time. If possible quote their own  speeches or party guidelines.  Letter writing campaigns are often  used by organizations as a lobbying  strategy.  For maximum effectiveness  letters should be personally written  by your members and constituents.  When initiating a letter writing  campaign, send information explaining  the issue and enumerating points  which the writers should make. Then  ask people to write in their own  words.  Give names and addresses of  authorities to whom letters are to  be sent.  Form letters and petitions have a very  limited effect on authorities, unless  they support other lobbying initiatives, such as delegations or briefs.  Publicity is important to bring the  issue to the attention of the authorities and reinforce letter writers'  interest.  Letters to the editor,  special reports, and if the issue  is timely, a press conference should  be part of the campaign.  Delegations can vary in size and  purpose between a small lobby group  and a mass rally.  A delegation of a few representatives  may be sent to meet with authorities,  who may or may not be already sympathetic to the cause.  They could  present a brief, or lobby in a low-  key manner, laying the groundwork for  future negotiations and establishing  favourable conditions for on-going  discussions of the issue.  As a  rule publicity is avoided in such a  Occupying nuclear sites has proven an extremely effective tactic  TACTICS  TACTICS means doing what you can with  what you have.  1. Always remember the first rule of  power tactics: Power is not only what  you have but what the enemy thinks you  have.  2. The second rule is: Never go outside the experience of your group.  When an action or tactic is outside  the experience of the group, the  result is confusion, fear and retreat.  3. The third rule is: Wherever possible go outside of the experiences of  the enemy.  Here you want to cause  confusion, fear and retreat.  4. The fourth rule is: Make the enenry  live up to their own book of rules.  You can kill them with this, for they  can no more obey their own rules than  the Christian church can live up to  Christianity.  5. The fourth rule carries within it  the fifth rule: Ridicule is a most  potent weapon.  It is almost impossible to counterattack ridicule.  6. The sixth rule is: A good tactic  is one that your people enjoy.  If  your group, is not having a ball doing  it, there is something very wrong with  the tactic.  7. The sevanth rule is: A tactic that  drags on too long becomes a drag.  8. The eighth rule: Keep the pressure  on, with different tactics and actions,  and utilize all events of the period  for your purpose.  9. The ninth rule: The threat is usually more terrifying than the thing  itself.  10. The tenth rule: The major premise  for tactics is the development of  operations that will maintain a constant pressure upon the opposition.  It is the unceasing pressure that re  sults in the reactions from the opposition that are essential for the  success of the campaign.  (from Rules for Radicals  by Saul Alinsky)  LOBBYING  When your group decides that in order  to achieve your objectives you have to  influence decisions made by a power  structure by lobbying, the strategies  that you might choose would be: presenting a brief, sending a delegation  or initiating a letter writing campaign, or any combination of the three.  When lobbying for an issue, timing,  organization and publicity are important factors to consider.  Your first task is to analyze your  target.  Learn who has power - your elected  politician usually makes the best  "target".  Seek out those who can say yes. Lobby  those who are most favourable to your  cause - give them reinforcement in Kinesis,   February   '79  19  case, unless the delegation proves  unsuccessful, and the lobby tactics  are escalated.  Mass delegations, sometimes busloads  of people, converging on the authorities when they have proved hostile .  and unreceptive to the issue, are a  show of strength.  Such a rally becomes a demonstration and requires the  high profile publicity, planning and  organization of a demonstration.  LNS  Native People marched upon Washington  last summer to defend their land rights.  A brief is a position paper presented  to the authorities, stating the problem and sometimes proposing a solution.  This should be in capsule form  so that it can be grasped by the  reader without too much brain work  or research on his/her part.  Your presentation should touch basically on the highlights of the brief,  emphasizing or clarifying points.  Make sure that your delegation is  cohesive, and have practised their  roles.  Varying spokespersons is  good strategy.  Your presentation should leave time  for questions and dialogue.  Practise or role-play in advance who  and how to respond to questions.  It is good tactics to have each  member undertake to be "expert"  in one specific area.  Publicity is important - make sure  the media have copies of your brief,  but do not release it prior to its  presentation.  It is good tactics  to have a copy of the brief for  each member of the group you are  addressing.  Presenting Your Case  1. Introduce yourselves - give the  purpose, philosophy and constituency  of your organization. Keep it very  brief.  2. Outline the problem - give a brief  background. Try to describe it in  terms most likely to be understood  by your audience.  3. Propose a solution if you can  describe what action you wish to be  taken - if possible give a timetable  and means necessary to achieve results.  4. Outline expected results - stress  benefits to larger community, long  term outlook, etc. Be convincing.  5. Budget - if you are asking for  funds, include itemized budget  showing expected revenue and expenditures.  Give other sources of  funds and in-kind contributions.  Make your request for funds with  suitable guarantee of accountability.  NEGOTIATION  Negotiation is a formal mechanism to  resolve differences between two  parties.  It works best when both  parties have equal power in the  particular situation; you are looking for a win/win situation.  Most  examples of negotiation are seen in  labour disputes; the union is in a  strong position to negotiate better  wages if the company has lots of  buyers for its products and very  few products on hand.  Similarly,  a community group is in a strong  position to negotiate with an agency  if that agency has a mandate to do  something which it is not doing and  there has been a lot of publicity  about the agency's  failure to act.  Questions about control and accountability in the delivery of certain  services can often be the subject  of negotiation.  1. Preparing for Negotiation  Basic ground work should include:  identifying your disagreement with  the other side, clarifying your objectives, gathering facts to support  your position, and assessing your  opponent's strengths and weaknesses  versus your own resources. Practicing your negotiations with role play  has proved very valuable with groups.  Establishing basic ground rules should  be arranged after both parties have  agreed to negotiate.  Establish what  will be on the agenda, the length of  the meeting, and where the meeting  is to take place.  If it is to take  place on your home ground it gives  you some psychological advantage, and  may save travel and money.  If the  meeting is held on the opponent's  ground you can withhold information  on the grounds that it is not readily  available.  Neutral territory may  reduce tensions between groups.  It should also be established who is  coming to the negotiation.  Community  groups are increasingly using team  negotiations in contrast to one  person or third party bargaining.  When selecting your negotiating team  make sure each team member has some  function.  Team solidarity is essential for successful bargaining.  It  is advisable to have signals to cue  each other if the negotiation is  important.  Be sure to keep communications open between the team and  the absent members.  There are definite advantages to  using a team approach.  It not only  provides negotiation experience for  more members, but also presents the  opponents with a larger opposition.  Most importantly, a team approach  ensures reinforcement in stating  your position.  2. Negotiating Techniques  Strategy is concerned with long-range  goals and values. The basic elements  of negotiation strategy are:  * Making demands clearly, and making  sure that your threats are believable.  By making initially higher demands,  your team can often manoeuvre itself  into an advantageous position of final  compromise.  * Observing demands or studying demands  can be requested when things are going  Strong,   stark:  gay rights poster    jjjs  badly.  It allows you to retire to  consider the implications of the opponent's demands and your response.  * Knowing when to stop is a useful  technique.  When you have scored a  major point, or given an ultimatum, let  the ball rest in the opponent's court.  You may lose your advantage by talking  too much.  * Disclosing final position.  Your  team should not reveal the minimum  acceptable position early in the  negotiations as this could result in  manipulation by your opponent.  * Outlining solutions demonstrates  your group's concern with future needs  of the community.  These should be  made in the latter stages of negotiations.  * In making concessions, the timing  is most important.  Major concessions  ► ► Kinesis,  February   '79  20  usually occur in the middle phase of  negotiations, smaller ones towards  the end.  * Limit your demands to a very few  fundamental issues so as not to give  opponents opportunities to confuse  the issue.  Go back later if more  demands must be made.  3. Settlement  In the final stage of negotiations,  the two parties search for goal convergence.  Your group should be prepared to help your opponents rationalize their change in position. The  win/lose confrontation which may have  prevailed in the earlier part of the  negotiations will need to be abandoned  in favour of creative alternatives.  Concessions made in the process of  negotiation by either side must be  finally seen as being in the best  interest of all.  The end of formal  negotiation may be only a beginning  in the changing power structure of a  community.  Issue Resolved  ISSUE RESOLVED.*.'  Congratulations.' Consider  keeping records & contacts  for future actions.  But first:  MONITOR ACTION:  What effect has your  action had on the target? the authorities? your group? the public? the  media? your allies?  ISSUE NOT RESOLVED  Do you need new strategies? If yes,',  CHOOSE again (Step 3)  Have the conditions changed? If yes,  then re-ASSESS (Step 2)  Has the issue changed? If yes, then  re-DEFINE (Step 1).  CHECK LIST FOR EVALUATING  COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES  1. How well was the issue defined?  2. Do you know what the objectives are  3. Who is the community or group that  they are working with or for?  4. What research was necessary?  5. Was the assessment of groups'  strengths and weaknesses completed?  6. Can you see who the friends/supporters and detractors are?  'Ģ7. What problems occurred? Could you  foresee others occurring?  8. What were the results?  9. Where would one go from here?  10. What records were kept?  11. How was the program evaluated?  12. Did members of the group learn  new skills?  After You've Been Sexually Assaulted  By Judi  For over a year and a half I have  lived with the fact that I was  sexually assaulted and unable to  deal with the total reality of it.  On Sept. 8 of last year the  gruelling courtroom procedures  culminated in conviction for my  attacker.  Then I began trying to  forget it ever happened.  Once in  awhile it would sneak back into  my consciousness as I continually  tried to bury it.  From that process  alone I should have realized that  I had a long way to go in dealing  with this part of me.  I have been living in a small  community 800 miles north of  Vancouver.  There is very little  awareness there of what constitutes  rape and what the consequences are.  I was initially helped by a group of  women who were organized through a  local drop-in centre.  They took  care of me for three days and went  to court with me.  But after the  preliminary proceedings, funding  for the program was cut off and  these women had to find other work  to support themselves and/or their  families.  It was a drastic loss  for the community and for me.  Four days after I was assaulted,  I was hospitalized and operated  on because I was haemorrhaging.  I missed seven weeks of work and  was so traumatized that I lost my  job.  So I put an application  into Workers' Compensation Board-  Criminal Injuries Section for lost  Just after Christmas I was requested  to come down to Vancouver for an  interview.  Again I was- faced with  trying to communicate my emotional,  physical distress to a person with  an uncaring, unfeeling attitude.  This time it was a doctor and a  claims adjuster.  It was not that I didn't want to  talk about it but these people didn't  want to hear what I had to say.  Secure and blindly immersed in their  own familiar environment, they  obviously already knew how to intimidate me and generally bully  me emotionally even to the point  of accusing me of being unable to  control or overcome my negativity in  connection with the rape.  I had no  physical injuries their computers  could calculate.  Besides, as I was  told, 'it' happens to a lot of women.  It was like saying that if enough  women are raped then it becomes the  norm.  It didn't matter that I was so  traumatized that I lost my job, my  stability, my security. After all,  what did rape have to do with it?  Don't they know that emotions are only  expressions of the physical self? I  can't believe they sent me $200 as  compensation for wages lost.  I continue  to shake my head in angry disbelief.  I left there feeling a mixture of wanting  to get. drunk to forget it all and of  determination to do_ something about  this oppressive society and its inherent condescending attitudes.  We sisters have many similar problems  but often lack the means to do anything, to focus in any direction.  Sometimes all we lack is support.  People are so concerned with maintaining  their survival, there is little energy  left to put into constructive action.  Sometimes it just takes the initiative  to write it down and communicate it to  begin to see that there is a way.  We need temporary shelter for children  of rape victims, shelter and counselling  for battered women, victims of rape,  single young mothers, and helpless women  who are for the moment at a loss.  We  need to raise public consciousness by  demonstrating against ineffective laws,  inadequate medical care, incorrect  educational facilities, racism etc.  No  longer are we forced to tolerate attacks  on ourselves by brutes in human form.  We have realized the oppressive situation of women in society.  Now it is  our duty (brothers too) to restore  the respect and dignity to the mothers,  sisters and daughters of the world.  As  long as we remain involved in the  struggle victory is assured. Kinesis,  February   '79  21  Dinner For Us All  A three-day extravaganza is being planned to begin on International Women's  Day, March 8, in Victoria.  The event  will include films, a sit-down dinner  to coincide with the International  Dinner Party to Celebrate Women's Culture, a dance, art show, benefit, concerts and theatre.  Featured are local and B.C. area women  in our past and present.  Sponsored  by the planners of the future Women's  Building of Victoria.  Information  available from the Women's Building of  Victoria, Box 4211, Depot D, Victoria  B.C. V9B 4Z3.  And from the originators of the "International Dinner Party" idea . (a group  of women in California):  "Women have never had a Last Supper,  but they have had dinner parties -  lots and lots of dinner parties when  they facilitated and nourished people."    - Judy Chicago  Dear Sisters,  We would like to ask you to participate with us in a worldwide celebration  of ourselves.'  We are asking women in  many countries to host dinner parties  honouring women important to their own  culture.  These dinner parties, held  simultaneously in March, 1979, will  create a network of women-acknowledging  -women which will extend around the  world.  The occasion is the opening of "The  Dinner Party", a celebration of women  history and a work of art of tremendous  beauty and scope.  For hh  years artist  and writer Judy Chicago, aided by over  250 artists, designers, historians and  craftspeople, has been creating this  work which pays homage to 39 women who  have been major contributors to Western  Civilization, and lists 999 others who  have left their mark.  The Dinner Party  is a large triangular table with 39  place settings resting on a porcelain  floor, which symbolically tells the  story of women throughout Western History.  The exhibition opens in March  in San Francisco, California and is  scheduled to travel for a year to several other institutions.  If you would like to join us, please  do the following:  1. Pass this information on to women  in other cities and countries so our  network can continue to expand. We  particularly need to know of women in  the Middle and Far East, Africa and  South America.  2. Write to us, telling us who you (or  your group) are, and we will send you  more detailed information about the  event.  3. Gather together women in your area  to plan your dinner party for March.  To contact the artists, write:  "International Dinner Party",  c/o Suzanne  Lacy,   28 Avenue 27,   Venice CA 90291.  Join in these Celebrations  THE 1979 INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY COMMITTEE  AND  BONANZA JELLYBEAN PRODUCTIONS  BRING YOU  KAY GARDNER!  You probably first knew her with Alix  Dobkin on Lavender Jane - Then came  her own Mooncircles, and later you  heard her with Margie Adam on Songwriter.  She has a new record out now: Emerging  - a glory of baroque, classical and  Renaissance music.  But most importantly, she'll be here in  Vancouver on March 3rd to begin our  International Women's Day celebrations.  She be playing original contemporary  music and jazz for flute, piano, guitar  and vocals, accompanied by Mojo.  When Kay isn't touring she's the prin  cipal conductor of the New England  Women's Symphony, and she teaches a  graduate course in Women & Music at  Goddard/Cambridge.  Mark your calendar!  *Saturday, March 3rd  *Russian Community Centre  *Time: 8:30 p.m.  *Price: $4.00  *Beer & Wine Served  - A Concert for Women Only -  Tickets on sale soon at Ariel Books,  2766 W. 4th Avenue, and Women's Book-  store, 804 Richards Street.   "A woman,  a dog,  or a walnut tree  The more you beat   'em  The better they be!"  The last time I quoted this ancient  English couplet I speculated at considerable length as to why anybody  would want to beat a walnut tree.  The dog and the woman I can understand.  Garden Notes,  by M. V.   Chestnut  Vancouver Province  us JbJ&iSL&B Kinesis,   February   '79  22  Bill Who? 22 What?  by Kay Matusek  The Socreds are still doing it to us.  And for women one of the biggest  guessing games in the province today  is "When will Bill 22 be proclaimed?"  Bill 22, for those of you who are  not trying to marry, separate or  divorce so don't know, is the Socred  gift to the women of the province.  It is the bill which is to give  women some rights in marriage (the  Socreds say equality) and maybe a  small bit of the action should the  marriage be terminated.  Bill 22 was given third reading last  June.  Ever since that time Family  Court, the B.C. Supreme Court,  lawyers and a lot of women have  been waiting for the proclamation.  The rumours have been hot and heavy  but have had to be revised every  two or three months as to when  this bill will finally become law.  No one knows when that will be but  we now know for sure it wasn't  last August or September or December.  The latest rumour is it may be in  April, or not until June.  Don't  hold your breath, it could be never.  There is some speculation it won't  happen until Rafe Mair's divorce is  final!  Maybe I would be upset about this  bill not being proclaimed if I  thought it was the piece of legislation we need.  However, it really  doesn't give women equality in marriage.  It totally ignores women  in common law marriages which are  breaking up.  It gives a few concessions to try and appease us, to  keep us quiet, or rather to keep  us busy in the courts trying to  untangle the jargon so we can really  see what we are, or are not, getting.  The Background  There are some serious problems  which are hard to overcome in trying  to come up with a decent Family  Relations Act.  The first goes back  to 1867 and the British North America Act.  Unfortunately this act set  up a separation of power between  the Federal and Provincial Governments within the institution of  marriage.  The Federal Government has jurisdiction over the rules pertaining  to status and capacity of the people  wishing to marry, with certain  prohibitions such as you can't  marry your grandmother's ex, and  jurisdiction over the grounds for  divorce and determining custody and  maintenance.  Meanwhile, the Provincial Government  has jurisdiction over the formal  requirements of marriage, such as  where, when, with what licenses  and who is officiating.  The Province can also make and enforce any  regulations it so desires as long  as these are not regulations specifically delegated to the Feds.  I The Federal Government tries the  I criminal offences of a familial  I nature but it's the Provincial  Government, mostly in Family Court,  who is in charge of adoption (cases  heard in the B.C. Supreme Court),  change of name, custody and access  (if it's not ancillary to divorce),  child neglect, division of property,  separation agreements, maintenance,  and alimony orders (these last four  are also if it's not ancillary to  divorce).  Altogether, at this moment, there  are at least 20 separate Acts and  Codes, not counting Common Law,  on the Federal and Provincial  levels which could directly affect  a woman who has a child and who is  in or ending some type of marriage.  In 1972, the Provincial Government  came up with the first Family Relations Act and it set out new regulations concerning custody and  access and made some provisions,  primarily judicial discretion,  for the redistribution of property  upon marriage breakdown.  After the B.C. Royal Commission of  Family and Children's Law made its  recommendations the Unified Family  Court Act was proclaimed.  This has  been a pilot project and not available everywhere in the province.  It has made for greater access of  information between the B.C. Supreme  Court and the Family Court with  Court Counsellors making recommendations which are sent to both  courts so the courts will act in  conjunction with each other, thus  minimizing red tape and confusion.  There are also Advocates hired to  directly represent the best interest  of the children.  The Family and Children's Law Reform  Commission made suggestions about  ownership of property within a marriage.  It based its recommendations  on the belief that all people should  be equal under the law, marriage is  a partnership of shared responsibilities, the roles of provider and  homemaker are of equal value to the  relationship and married women are  economically competent.  To date,  these recommendations have been  successfully ignored by the law  makers.  Finally, in 1977, the Ministry of  the Attorney-General came up with  the Family Relations Amendment Act  (Bill 69).  This bill was tabled for  discussion and generated heated debate throughout the province (see  Kinesis, December 1977).  By June 27,  1978, the Ministry had taken that  bill and revised it, supposedly taking into consideration the comments  and criticisms received from the  people of the province, and the latest Family Relations Act, Bill 22,  was given third reading.  Bill 22, or,  THE GIFT  MO?U!U69 I \m.  am ou me m  > liUoRk- r HAm  The general purpose of the Bill is  to consolidate and update the provisions of the Equal Guardianship  of Infants Act, Extra-provincial  Custody Orders Enforcement Act,  Unified Family Court Act, and the  Family Relations Act.  The Bill is  divided into six parts.  The first part defines the terms,  provides for the appointment of  family advocates and court counsellors, clarifies the legal capacity of a woman or young person, and  ensures proper jurisdiction between  the B.C. Supreme Court and the Family  Courts.  The second part consolidates, updates  and streamlines the provisions concerning children now under the Equal  Guardianship of Infants Act, Extra-  provincial Custody Orders Enforcement  Act, and the Family Relations Act.  The third part states that when a  marriage breakdown occurs, the property owned by either spouse and  used by the family for family purposes shall be divided between the  spouses on a fair basis.  This is the  concept of deferred sharing and is for  those couples who have not made provisions for the property through a  marriage or separation agreement.  This does not cover any business  assets for which one spouse made no  contribution.  This does not cover  any woman in a common-law marriage.  The fourth part deals with mainte-^.  W3Rkr i me. oowiusiDtf&FpOM Kinesis,  February   '79  23  more on BILL WHO?  nance and support obligations.  The  maintenance provisions are to be made  on the basis of need, and not that of  fault.  It is also with the recognition that the spouse receiving support  should become self-supporting as soon  as possible.  This part incorporates  automatic enforcement of maintenance  orders or so they claim.  Part five establishes new and special  procedures for the Family Court and  makes provisions for necessary changes  in the future.  Part six sets out miscellaneous and  transitional provisions.  So What? And When?  So what does this mean to you and me?  Well, no one really knows until it  is proclaimed and real cases are  brought before real judges who will  try and interpret the statutes. Some  of the concerns were expressed by  Rosemary Brown during debate in the .  Legislature on that day in June.  She thinks -"that it's really a lawyer's bill...there's going to be  utter chaos in this province in  terms of really working out this  piece of legislation."  She also pointed out "...that we  cannot talk about equality after  the marriage is over, that what we  should be talking about is equality  during the life of the marriage."  She was also concerned about the  idea that the spouse must try and  become self-supporting as soon as  possible after the marriage breaks  up.  This could be very difficult  for a 50-year-old woman who has not  been employed outside the home in  years, if ever.  Finally, she is concerned because  one section gives a judge power to  vary a marriage agreement.  She said,  "I don't know any other Act under  which it's possible for the courts  to vary a contract agreement that way.  The provisions guarding the best interests of the children are good. The  fact that the separation of property  can be settled before the divorce  becomes final is also good.  The  fact that this bill updates and  clarifies statutes, making them more  easily understood and more relevant  to our present needs, is beneficial.  But good or bad, this bill is not law  until it is proclaimed.  There is  speculation about why this bill is  not being proclaimed.  Some people  think it's to give all the backbenchers time to convert all their  assets to business property. Others  think Cabinet is waiting until after  election as this bill may embarass  the Socred party.  There is speculation about when this  bill will be proclaimed; in April  or never.  But we do have the answer  the Honourable Garde Gardom gave "o  the question posed by Rosemary Bjoyn.  She said, "This is a proclamation  bill. . When is it going to be proclaimed?" After a bit of discussion  the Honourable Mr. Gardom answered,  "In due course. "#  THE PEOPLE'S FOOD COMMISSION IS HAVING A CANADA-WIDE  FOOD INQUIRY. YOU ARE INVITED TO  PARTAKE  "Well,  for one thing,  we really need  some good questions.     Of course,  We  would also  like facts,  well-documented  answers. "    Mary Rawson, a long-time  VSW member and a member of the People's  Food Commission, is talking here  about the Commission. "I am also very  interested in getting information reflecting a feminist viewpoint. "  Mary Rawson, one of the commissioners  from B.C., is quite concerned about  getting information about women and  any aspect of the food chain such as:  what packaged foods contain, nutrition,  processing, distribution, growing,  alternatives.like co-ops and farmers'  markets, land trusts and land use,  fishing and/or fast food services.  What Is It?  First Mary spoke about what it is NOT.  It is NOT a Government Inquiry.  The  food issue is too important and too  large to be left to the government.  In the past, the government has collected information about the 'food  problem' and yet their reports and  recommendations have gone unheeded.  Then she said it is NOT just for experts, but rather for people like you  and me.  She is interested in hearing  from the people who rarely get heard  and this is one reason she hopes  someone will submit information with  a feminist perspective.  The People's Food Commission is an  independent inquiry.  It was originally sponsored '-.  by an inter-denominational church committee in Winnipeg.  It began when some people began  to realize the government food policy  and giveaway programs actually help  no one in the third world countries  and leave many injustices and inadequacies here at home.  What Are Some Issues?  Mary said some of the questions might  be: Are women who work in canneries  paid less than the men and if so, why?  What happens to a lone woman on an all-  male fishing boat? How are all-women  crews doing? How do you move up  the MacDonald ladder of success and  could this happen to a woman? (Would  you want it done for you?)  But the problems which affect everyone  are the rising food prices and their  effect on the poor, increasing rural  depopulation and poverty among the  primary producers, food imports and  the effect on Canadian producers  and Third World producers,  marketing  boards, the fishing industry, the role  of corporations in food production  and distribution, wages and working  conditions  of those working in the  food industries, here and abroad, and  of course, nutrition and the quality  of our food.  What Happens To  The Information?  After we hear the evidence from the  people across Canada, on their experience with, and research into,  the food system, we'll identify the  common interests among the food  producers, consumers, workers and  Third World peoples and write a  popular report, synthesizing the  information to make recommendations  for a People's Food Policy.  This will be returned to the participants so they can see how their experience relates to that of others.  The report will also be forwarded to  all relevant government departments,  both federally and provincially, but  it is be be written primarily for the  participants.  The Commission will then facilitate  follow-up meetings for the participants to discuss the report and ways  to implement the policy suggestions.  A lot will depend on the participants.  Can I Get Involved?  You could make a presentation to the  Commission. You could also get help  with materials from them just by asking. You could make a donation. You  could help organize hearings in your  area.  Where and When are the Hearings?  The Commissioners have been chosen  from across Canada.  They are travelling to 65 communities across the  country.  The hearings are being held  now, but submissions will be accepted  through April.  Where Can I Get More Information?  In the Vancouver area, contact:  The People's Food Commission  2524 Cypress Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6J 3N5  (736-9515)  * Kinesis,  February  '79  24  On Being Angry, Not Mad by Maria  In 1955 Marie spent about six months  in Crease Clinic.  Ostensibly she was  committed and treated for schizophrenia  and anorexia nervosa, a mental and  physical abnormality which causes  women to starve themselves.  For her so-called schizophrenia, Marie  was given daily insulin shock treatments.  Her insulin-riddle body convulsed and strained against the bindings.  She watched as other women in  the 60-patient ward pulled, tugged  and unsuccessfully fought against the  horrific effects of the drug.  Hospital conditions were oppressive:  no doors on shower and toilet stalls,  rubber sheets and pillows on hospital  beds and the persistent presence of  the vigilant nurses.  "It's worse than jail," Marie says.  "There is no parole." Marie considers the hospital life, the doctors'  and nurses' patronizing and chauvinistic attitudes as, "a rape of the  mind...sanctioned by the powers that  be in society."  Doctors don't administer insulin  shock treatments anymore - they use  electric shocks.  During a recent Women's Studies  class at Langara, Marie talked  about her past and the events that  led to her committal.  Here is an  edited version of her talk:  I Did Not Conform.  "I've always been considered different from my peer group.  I did not  conform to the stereotype of a little  girl who is supposed to play with  dolls.  I always thought that play  was something you like to do, that  you could pretend to do, so that  when you grew up you could be  allowed to do it properly, thus  spreading happiness around.  Even  to this day, having a mind of your  own as a woman seems to be regarded  as insane by some authorities.  I'm the product of first cousins,  whose marriage was cursed from the  beginning by relations and society.  It's been quite a life - from one  nightmare, to another.  I only  mention this because it's true and  to give myself credit that although  I have ploughed through such a  Russian roulette environment under  such a reign of terror, and in such  bindings, I still have a song in  my heart, though it sometimes has  a too angry beat.  Anger:  Oh, that phrase, 'I'm not  mad, I'm angry' is true.  Oh, why  don't people take time to listen  to people? A little girl has  womanly wisdom, you know.  Mummy  used to beat me out of frustration,  though I knew she loved me and she  was sorry.  To my father I was a  toy, never a person, and one could  never level with him.  I used to lick the white walls  when I was able to stretch far  enough out of my crib. My mother  would beat me for it, but I craved  the taste on the walls.  Eventually  I had to be taken to the infirmary  by a neighbour, who used to interrupt the beatings.  The doctors  discovered I had rickets from whatever chemical was on the walls.  The government sent me to a sani-  torium but I went on "strike"  against my parents.  I was so mad,  so angry, that I refused to eat.  At four years of age, it was my  way of getting back at my ignorant parents. However, the doctors  psyched in on this, refusing my  parents visiting privileges, and I  eventually got fat and sassy.  I was never listened to.  At high  school two bullies tormented me.  They even made fun of my smile.  I was pushed around a lot.  And  never being listened to, having to  put up with uncalled for sexist  oppression outside the home, I grew  up angry.  By the time I was 21, I was ill,  had a heavy dull pain in one side.  I wouldn't let physicians examine  me pelvically.  One, a fat pompous  twit said I thought too much of  myself.  He told me to "git married"  and said that having kids would be  the "making of me".  So I went to  a naturopath who put me on a cleansing diet for two years.  (Two young  matrons from the Lower Mainland died  from this diet and he had to move  to California.)  Hell, I didn't want to be ill, but  he was the only one that listened.  I bore the consequence of disbelief  and being told to shut up.  Grandma  went into St. Paul's one Friday,  mommv the next, hemorrhaging from  one of her abortions, and I was the  third to go in.  I weighed about 80  pounds before surgery.  I was fed  intravenously at first after surgery.  But you see, I was angry at all  those smug people who hadn't walked  in my shoes.  I thought, "Oh, so  at last you do_ give a damn, do you?  Well, I'll let you revel in your  misery a little longer."  I didn't  even try to eat.  I thought I was  going crazy, but didn't tell anyone.  No one would have listened anyway.  6 Copies  I received at least six copies of  Power of Positive Thinking by N.V.  Peale, by well-meaning visitors, but  they'd never opened the book themselves.  The hospital thought perhaps I could  learn to eat again at home.  By that  time I had confirmed anorexia nervosa  (vomiting., starving).  I went to a ^ 25  Women In Isolation and Solidarity  psychiatrist but oh, he was strange.  It was most unfortunate that I happened to go to that society-climbing  doctor of all people.  My mother refused to sign the committal paper to  Riverview so he did.  (Incidentally,  he sent a bill for $50 for that committal.  He was very supercilious with  my mother - she was obviously under-  educated - but when she phoned the  Medical Association about it, he  personally phoned her back, stuttering away, saying it was his secretary's error.)  So you see, I became absolutely powerless then.  I was signed away by a  strange man to a fortress that was  years behind its time.  A surgeon from  St. Paul's came to visit me at home  just before I was driven to Riverview.  He was weeping, as he said it would  be a punitive experience, but no  matter what would happen there, he  instructed me to try to eat.  I Felt Bizarre.  After being admitted, two huge nurses  took me by each arm, looking at me in  horror.  (I weighed 69 pounds.) They  bathed me but were watching me closely; I felt bizarre.  I was given a  needle to stop the vomiting and had  to help one nurse sew my number on  all my underwear.  But my handbag and  outerwear were taken away.  Then I  was put in a cell-like room with just  a bed and table.  The barred window  was too high to show the outdoors.  The door was closed on me and locked.  It had a peep hole in it, also barred,  with a little door for them to open  from the outside to see me.  There was a chamber pot but no bell  to call for help.  I had become so  sick and run down that I could feel  the impact of certain colours on  the retinas of my eyes and I'd throw  up.  (That cell was all grey, though.)  Each time a nurse came in with food  I'd plead with her to stay or just  talk to me.  "Not until you start,  eating," she would say, as to a  naughty child.  Many meals were offered but I could only vomit. Then  I started to get frantic.  I pounded  the door, even after being told to  stop it.  I screamed for sedation,  or to be permitted to go to a proper  toilet.  (It was many weeks later I  learned those cells were used for  ward punishment, for incoming attempted suicides so they couldn't  feel coddled.  They are always tough  with suicidal people of dangerous  patients.)  At last a doctor came to  see me.  However, one nurse sat at  the foot of the bed, and one at the  head.  My, I felt like a criminal.  To Receive Insulin  Shock Therapy.  The doctor was so nice - a young,  dedicated Scottish person.  He said I  was going to be moved to a dormitory  in the 60-woman ward to receive insulin shock therapy.  He said not to  be frightened or surprised, that  there were mostly fat women, not  aware of their surroundings.  He  said to remain impartial and not  "try to figure things out".  He said  it was an acute ward but to be assured that the staff were acting in  the patients' best interest.  I was lucky to have a bed near the  window.  Most of the women had postnatal psychoses.  They were all  young, like me.  Insulin shock?  It was so dreadful that those who  had lost touch with reality were  lucky not to remember their treatments.  We were awakened at 5 am  to wash, etc.  Then we had to strip  our own beds.  I washed it every  morning, legs and all, with strong  antiseptic solution, then I made it  as taught - thick rubber sheet under  the bottom sheet, top sheet, open  weave blanket, a rubber pillow. Then  I was taught to place long cotton  strips crossways over the body, with  crossing ties pinning down arms and  chest, also ones that would be pulled  tight, binding the feet down.  We  all worked silently, someone would  occasionally sob, knowing what was  in store.  Nurses would watch, carefully testing the bindings.  Their  patients were allowed to be together  for half an hour either lying on the  linoleum of the hallways or on the  cold marble floor of the lavatory.  The day room was locked.  The nurses  would light cigarettes, ever watchful.  What Was The Use?  No one talked much and never about the  treatment.  What was the use? We could  hear carts being wheeled around in the  dormitory, with the inevitable long red  tubes attached to glass pitchers, the  oxygen tanks, the assorted hypodermic  needles, bottles full of glucose and  adrenaline or camphor to increase the  severity of convulsions.  Then we were  herded into the dormitory, to get into  bed and then wait for the insulin injection to induce shock, convulsions  and coma.  The nurses would erect the  iron railings on each bed.  My, you  should have seen the nurses dashing  around and the team of doctors bringing us all to unconsciousness.  It  would be close to noon when we had all  been helped up with many injections  in the thighs and glucose pumped down  our throats.  Two nurses would help me wade across  all the tubes and wailing women, to  be shoved (if I managed not to vomit)  into a communal shower with all sorts  and sizes of women, with terror in  their eyes.  I remember there'd be  a radio program on the loud speaker  called 'Fiesta'.  I once made a pun  that it should be called 'Fiasco'  to one of the nurses helping me  stagger to the showers, but she  gave me a strange look which made  me go into uncontrollable laughter  necessitating another needle.  I  never again risked joking with a  so-called sane person during my incarceration.  I was wheeled out on my cot sometimes when resuscitated from coma  and I just couldn't stop vomiting.  I'd be rushed in for electric shock.  They didn't anaesthetize you in  those days and I managed to ask  them once before they had me bite  on a muzzle before affixing the  electric clamps on my temples:  "Am I depressed and don't know it?  Is that why I'm having.electric  shock too?" But they didn't speak  to me as if I had a mind.  I am mentioning this because, you  see, I was utterly powerless and  that is one of the tenets of the  social reform aimed for in Women's  Studies.  And I claim now, as I  secretly knew then, that I was more  angry than mad.  No Privacy  Oh, the things I saw.  We had no  basic privacy, stripped of every  semblance of dignity.  It was necessary to have no doors on lavatory  cubicles as some tried to kill themselves to escape the treatment.  Sometimes I'd be taken in there and  put to bed with needles to stop the  vomiting.  I just couldn't eat for  a long time though I tried.  I'd be  locked in the dormitory and not free  to go into the corridor.  Oh, there were many experiences.  Some women just disappeared.  The  grapevine knew when jokes came true  like, "She's gone up the hill" to a  chronic building,  East Lawn, or  "around the bend" to West Lawn. But  I didn't realize that quite a few  died under insulin shock coma until  recently.  I made a special friend  there called Joanie who had never  had any severe emotional problems,  but childbirth had apparently changed  her body chemistry so she went to  Riverview after giving a normal birth  Joanie and I communicated well, but  I could see her slipping away.  Her  young husband would visit, holding  up the baby, but as time went by she  grew less and less interested.  At  first she'd come up to me and press  a candy in my hand, with her sweet  smile.  And she had a sense of humour  too, at one time, before she went "up  the hill".  One Sunday, the day of rest from  treatments, we were allowed, accompanied by several nurses toting bottles of glucose and endless keys  jingling from their belts, to go  downstairs to the basement tunnel  and march over to the hospital cafeteria.  The food was being dished  out by heavily drugged inmates from  "up the hill".  On Sunday, with  Joanie behind me, I was in the lineup and I noticed these sleepy-looking  people were dishing out carrots gar-^. Kinesis,  February   '79  26  nished with raisins.  As Joanie  always followed me like a devoted  shadow, I said something to the effect that the chronic patients looked  like they were vegetating.  "And  look, Joanie, they're even raisin'  carrots." Well, she started to laugh,  'ñ†especially when I said, "But we're  not acute, can't you hear the men  from their side of the cafeteria  whistle as we go by?"  She got hysterical with infectious laughter and  we all started to laugh.  I further  said (with us acute women now smiling and listening to me for another  joke): "Furthermore, no matter how  much my memory is getting dimmed  from the treatment, I'll always remember my number because of my purpose here - to eat again.  See how  easy it is?  I was the third Marie  (grandmother, mother, daughter) and  my number here when they're raisin  hell or carrots will always be 33312.  Well, let's get to the dinner -  three ate, (I'll) ate one too."  Well, we all went into gales of  laughter, and even the chronic ones  smiled faintly.  One of the nurses  shouted, "That's enough.  Ward East  3 back upstairs."  So we were herded upstairs, without  a meal.  It had been my fault.  Gee,  I felt badly, but I was angry at this  punishment and I tried to tell the  nurses that they had no sense of humour.  I started to retch so was undressed, the dormitory was opened  and I was put to bed with the endless  needles and slept until it was time  for me to get up and have the treatment on Monday morning.  (By the way,  Joanie never got better.  She's out  there now, with purple skin from all  the drugs.  She was sent "up the hill"  as a chronic long before I left.  Now  she's fat and wears a kerchief all  the time.  She doesn't recognize anyone and doesn't respond to her name."  What's my point?  I feel that if the  so-called authorities had only listened in those days and not judged.  We were only laughing at genuinely  funny things.  We felt so powerless  and we strained at our literal and  figurative bindings.  I met some  wonderful people out there and I became quite a leader.  "Queen of the  Nuts", that's what I was.  But fellow  patients looked up to me.  I'M HOT /IAD  171      -*  ahgM  There were many psycho-dynamics among  the patients - bonding, rivalry,  cruelty, support.  There was manipulation, pretense, dependence, all  sorts of relationships between staff  and patients.  Though conditions have  since been revolutionized, thank God,  I still do very much understand the  powerlessness of the female patient.  Now, the treatments even for acutes  are less dangerous and there's hardly  any physical damage done.  Some  limbs were broken when I was out there  back in the '50s and cranial damage -  teeth knocked out, etc.  I have an  inoperable injury in my neck from  straining and convulsing.  My memory  is kaput.  I've been hospitalized  since, under my own admission, but  I've had a violent life and lived  under a double bind - absolute classic  background to engender terrific frustrations and anger - especially when  surrounded by humourless people who  really are too mentally ill themselves  to consider getting help.  I have been through a lot, not just  by being incarcerated those many  months 22 years ago, but by being  black-balled by an ex-employer when  I was released from hospital because  he was vindictive that I had not  responded to him sexually.  He actually succeeded in stopping my getting employment, until he was found  out.  In my opinion, that man is much more  insane and sick than any of those  powerless angry women whose twilight  time I was privileged to share when  we were all locked up and locked out.  Ed.note: Maria's doctor says she  shouldn't take Women's Studies any  more,  because it makes her angry.  VSW on the Move  It's Goodbye  2029 West 4th Ave  Here we go again. Our funding runs out March 31.  Our lease at 2029 West 4th Ave. runs out Feb.28.  We have not yet located another, suitable space.  VSW has applied to the provincial secretary for  funding for the next fiscal year. The new minister, Hugh Curtis, has acknowledged our application with the1 following remarks:  Funds allocated for grant purposes have been restricted by Treasury Board and if funding responsibility for your organization remains with my  Ministry or is continued,   the grant increase  would not exceed 5% over that amount allocated  during the  1978/9 period.  Your request to meet with me is noted;  however,  my itinery for the next two months is completely  scheduled...  PLEASE SEND US YOUR SUPPORT LETTERS NOW, AND WE  WILL SEND THEM ALONG TO CURTIS.  If you want Kinesis to continue, please send us a  letter of support.  In the past year, we have continued our priority of community development, sponsoring assertiveness training workshops and advocacy workshops, both free.  Although we don't know where we're going, nor  how we're going to pay the rent (much less produce Kinesis) we do have to move. If you could  help us pack our stuff, let us know at 736 1313. Kinesis,   February   ' 79  27  What  Do  \You Do'  With  1000  Lesbians?!  We are a group of women from the  Lesbian Organization of Toronto  (LOOT), who volunteered to organize  a bi-national lesbian conference in  the spring.  At the Ontario lesbian conference  last May in Ottawa, LOOT committed  itself to sponsoring the next bi-  national lesbian conference.  The  last time we all came together was  two years ago this fall and we are  long overdue for another experience  of sharing.  In the last two years, our lesbian  communities have been growing and  changing; our diversity is our  strength.  We are active in lesbian  groups, mixed gay groups, and women's  groups.  Some of us are too isolated  to be active and out; some of us  experience different problems through  our activity with gay men or feminists.  It is this growth and diversity that  we can share and discuss at the conference.  We can figure, out in what  direction we want to go, in building  our communities, our culture, and our  ability to fight against constant  attacks on our right to exist, to love  and be proud.  Any- change in our movement happens on the local level, so  we hope this conference will further  strengthen us regionally and locally  by taking back home new and improved  ideas.  MAKE THIS YOUR CONFERENCE!  The organizers in Toronto cannot hope tc  please everyone but we want to make  this process as easy as possible.  This  is your conference; what happens will  be determined by your response and  practical input.  Let's make it a collective effort -  help each other to be there.  Invent,  create, bring your banners, come!  For info,   contact:  the LCC for LOOT,  342 Jarvis Street,  Toronto,  Ontario.  WATCH THOSE WHEELS TURN  A Schools Department Circular went  out recently from the Ministry of  Education calling attention to the  fact that B.C. schools cannot restrict Industrial Education and Home  Economics courses to boys and girls  respectively.  "Restriction or limitation on enrolment,  where sex is a factor, "  the  circular went on, "contravenes the  B.C.  Human Rights Code and must,  therefore,  stop. "  This is of interest to us at VSW because it's an issue around which we  organized last summer, when our attention was drawn to the fact that a  female student at John Oliver High  School had been unable to enrol in  a Grade 8 Industrial Education course.  Deputations at the high school were  told that the student in question  had not been denied access to I.E.  on the basis of sex.  "A major problem,"  the circular continues, "is in courses  "+ the Grade  8 level, where study of these subjects has been made compulsory.     To  assist in the resolution of this  problem,   the Ministry is considering  a new course for Grade 8,   tentatively  entitled Life Skills,  which will combine content from both I.E.   8 and  Home Ec.   8."  This is precisely the course which  the VSW deputation advised the principal to take.  An investigation by  a Human Rights Officer at the same  high school might just have prompted  this closing piece of good advice in  the circular:  "To the greatest extent possible  schools should,  in the remainder of  this 1978-79 school year,  make all  I.E.   and Home Ec.   courses available  on an equal basis to students of  either sex and,  in the 1979-80 and  subsequent years,  be able to demonstrate clearly that there is no  enrolment discrimination based on  the sex of the pupil. "  BANNING THE BOOKS  Halifax - A bookstore here has been  told that lesbian books cannot be  imported into Canada.  Red Herring  Co-operative Books, an alternative  bookstore specializing in socialist,  feminist, gay and minority publications, ordered a number of books  from Diana Press, a California  lesbian feminist publishing house.  On October 4th, Denise Roberge, a  member of the co-operative, went to  Canada ^Customs to collect the parcel  and was told by the official on duty  that the books were banned.  Barry Mitchell, Superintendent of  International Mail for Revenue Canada - Customs in Halifax, has denied  any knowledge of a ban against the  books.  According to him, all incoming books are examined to determine whether their importation violates Customs Tariff Item 99201-1  which prohibits the importation of  "immoral, indecent, treasonable or  seditious" material.  Suspect titles  are referred to Ottawa for a ruling.  If a book is banned, the importer is  supposed to be notified in writing  of the right to appeal the decision.  (Robin Metcalfe, Body Politic)  "Les Fees Ont Soif"  (The Fairies Are  Thirsty), by Quebec feminist playwright Denis Boucher, is "filthy,  sacreligious and blasphemous".  Or  so says the city of Quebec, which has  issued a temporary injunction against  stocking the play in the city's bookshops.  The play denounced the Church's influence on education and intellectual  life, and its role in the subjugation  of women.  The three fairies - the  Virgin Mary ("I am the mirror of injustice") , a housewife and a prostitute - represent the bedrock of the  oppression of women.   THE RISE   OF THE RIGHT  "OUR BODIES, OURSELVES" BANNED  The Boston Women's Health Collective  reports that the widely-used guide  to women's health and sexuality,  Our Bodies, Ourselves, is coming  under increasing attack in some  school districts and communities  where right-wing groups and individuals are trying to have it removed  from school and library bookshelves.  In at least one location, the campaign has already been successful.  The Helena, Montana school district  banned the book after what representatives from the American Civil  Liberties Union called "an emotional  attack by a right-wing, anti-ERA  group." Kinesis,   February   '79  28  Give Birth by Caesarian, and Enjoy It.  by Naomi Lis  from the Maternal Health News  Wherever I go, I always seem to be  surrounded by a milling mass of  children.  People associate my very  name with children...not surprising  really, in this day and age of small  families, for I have four.  One of  these is adopted.  The other three  I conceived, carried to term within  my body and gave birth to.  I like to pride myself that I bore  these three children by a totally  free act of choice, aided by my  strong belief that parenting (social  attitudes notwithstanding) IS one of  the most fundamental and vital tasks  and roles.  Yet when I compare these  three experiences, I can see ONLY  TOO CLEARLY that I was not fully in  control.  My first daughter weighed 10 lb,  3 oz at birth, lay transverse, and  after almost a full 3 days (72 hours)  of unsuccessful labour, I had finally  to reling'uish my strong desire to  give birth naturally.  I was whipped  into an operating theatre, rendered  unconscious, and my first child was  delivered.  Thirty-six hours later I was permitted to see her briefly while I lay  traumatized from my first experience  of major surgery and feeling a deep  sense of personal failure.  How she  survived I often really wonder.  I  never really expected her to, having  no faith in my capabilities as a  parent, absolutely zero experience  with babies and no prior training  whatsoever.  I did not ENJOY her  babyhood and rejoiced when months  of feeding problems, bouts of incessant screaming, etc. were gradually replaced by a toddler I couid  almost relate to.  She is now seven  too scared for years  I was too scared to get pregnant  again for four- years, and when I  finally did I was thoroughly a mess.  I DREADED the birth experience and  spent much of the 9 months lying on  my bed feeling physically ill.  It  got to the point I could not and would  not leave the house without my husband  ...often not even if he would come.  While I had not enjoyed being preg-  nent the first time, and it had taken  me a couple of months to come to grips  with deep down feelings I had that  "pregnancy=sick, weak", this time  this idea took full control of me  physically and mentally.  I vowed  "never again".  I had heard in passing,someone mention that she knew of someone who  knew someone, etc. who had given  birth by cesarean under a local  anesthetic.  She had not been "put  out" at all during the surgery.  I asked for this and while my own  doctor tentatively agreed, it was  only with the final consent of the  anesthetist.  The evening before  the surgery the anesthetist who  came to see me did not wish to  comply with my request for a local  anesthetic.  I spent that night  awake in a nightmare of fear and  resentment. WHY was I not to be  allowed to be 'there' while my own  child was born? Yet in a way I  felt relief, for I was not sure it  would-feel so good to be fully  awake while someone is cutting  into my innards!  The next morning, after a totally  sleepless night, I vas wheeled  to the operating theatre and to  omit details, the anesthetist on  duty was quite another guy.  He  did agree to the local anesthetic  and this was the procedure carried  out.  I was fully conscious, yet  numb from the chest down.  I saw M.Reece  my baby girl lifted from my body and  brought over to me.  She looked  scrawny and all tacky, yet I was  moved to the depth of my being and  I will never forget.  I was high.  I was lying awake afterwards in the  recovery room chatting with the nurses,  feeling starved and having to tell  everyone who entered the room that I  now had a new daughter.  stroked his tiny hand  I went through a very similar experience six and a half months ago, and  after the doctor performing the cesarean cried out almost as excitedly as I,  "Well, you have your boy." A most  sensitive obstetrics nurse brought  the little figure over to me, still  strapped as I was to the table, and  stroked his tiny hand on my cheek.  Sentimental?  Sure, but the bonding  was already taking place powerfully.  Why am I writing all this?  Because  my third pregnancy proved something  very definite to me.  It was a great  time.  I travelled across Canada and  recrossed the continent via the U.S.  I maintained all my pre-pregnant  activities - swimming, biking,  camping and working at the Richmond  Women's Resource Centre.  I did not  feel sick or weak or even afraid.  I  felt great.  I knew what was happening to me and understood the physical  changes.  I participated in my sensations and chose to participate in  my son's birth as much as possible,  allowing to circumstances.  I was  prepared and my choice was this time  accepted as valid by the medical professionals involved with my cesarean.  They respected my feelings and pref-  No small degree of this positive ex- .  perience can be ascribed to my involvement with the women's movement  and its philosophy of personal integrity, right to choose, and personal  strength - male or female, pregnant  or not.  With a new self-confidence  and a feeling of the informed right  to assert my own wishes, especially  with regard to my own body, I was  able to find a way to experience  something hitherto very negative, as  really positive.  So many women to whom I have related  my experience have responded with  "I didn't know you could have a cesarean and be awake" and usually they  would add with a shudder, "Wasn't it  ghastly?" No, it was beautiful.  The first time the sensations were  a bit weird and I kept waiting for  the terrible ,feelings and horrors  to begin.  The second time I knew  what it was like so there was no fear,  The horrors never did begin and I  know that now.  Oh, for preparation!  I saw my husband and children shortly  afterwards and we were all happy  together.  I suffered a minimum of  postoperative pain and nursed and  cared for my newborn myself.  women taking control  Women are taking control of their own  lives and are beginning to assume  more control (and it seems only logical that they would do so for all  things) in childbearing.  A pre-requisite of some basic information, and  no longer a passive consumer of the  medical system, women - and I refer  back to myself - can ENJOY being an  active participant.^  CESARIAN  BIRTH GROUP  The Cesarean Birth Group was formed  in the fall of 1977 and is a task  group of the Maternal Health Committee.  It is made up of parents who  have experienced cesarean childbirth.  They have joined together to improve  communication between cesarean childbirth parents and health professionals  and hospitals in'Greater Vancouver.  The CBG has worked and continues to  work for changes in hospital policy  and to increase awareness of hospital  staff to the emotional needs of  cesarean parents.  The CBG has books, articles, pamphlets and the Maternal Health News  available to help members and concerned individuals become better  educated in issues in health care  confronting the consumer.  Contact: Maternal Health Committee  at 736-4367.+ Kinesis,  February   '79  29  Women In Isolation And Solidarity  i am sitting here by the ocean savouring the earth's rhythms, gentle  voices. It is grey and raining and  the last winter quiet clings to the  shoreline.  i taste each breath  deeply; in 6 days i shall be in  prison...  prison,  who gives a damn? everyone  knows that only bad people get locked  up; only those who break the law, who  are dangerous to the rest of us, who  are "criminals", only those people  All imprisonment is a violation of  the body.     The acts for which  people are incarcerated are at  their roots outcries for liberation from unbearable restrictions  ...Today the feminist awakening  shows us how prison is the terminal station of the patriarchal  rigidity.  judith malina  get thrown in jail - and to their  just deserts,  we all know this,  we're told it from the time we can  crawl by every means at the disposal  of the state: bad guys go to priso:  good ones are fine-outstanding-  citizens, the mounties always get  their man...so how come so many of  us are still being raped and beaten  and murdered? and why are most of  those in prison people of colour?  (ahah! only non-white persons are  evil.'??)  prison, there's 2 big institutions  right near here: the b.c. penitentiary, a federal maximum security  unit for men; and oakalla, a provincial medium security unit for women  and men.  and did you ever stop to  think about what happens to all  those bodies once they disappear  into that totalitarian nightmare,  all those warm, breathing, human  bodies in cages, behind barred windows .. .  oh well, probably don't concern you,  right?  out of sight, out of mind?  it just happens that most of those  imprisoned in Canada are poor and  their "crimes" are directly related  to their poverty (crimes against  property like robbery; crimes without victims like prostitution, drugs),  about 65% of those in b*c. prisons  are native indian, victims of white  man's genocidal tendencies, and of  A government which perpetuates the  crimes of war and repression has  NO right to prescribe punishment  for those who resist the continuation of worldwide death and misery  ...Prisons promote terrorism by  making the denial of human and  democratic rights a respectable  and common thing.  rita d. brown  course there's a growing number whose  only crime is "politics" oh, but if  you're nice white and middle class,  and heterosexual, chances are you  won't ever have to bother yourself  about this whole issue,  unless, you  happen to want to object to something  the state is doing (like those of us  who committed civil disobedience at  the trident base) or unless the capitalists get more uptight about poten  tial revolution or anita's crowd gets  more friendly with the boys at the top.  let's face it: the law is made by  rich white men to protect their interests from the rest of us. don't believe that? sounds too polemical?  well how many rapists or wife-beaters  or child abusers ever get convicted,  how many multi-national corporations  ever pay fines for polluting this  planet,  how many working people died  in the struggle for a decent standard  of living, according to the Fifth  United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and Treatment of  Offenders, Canada in 1974 had 20,712  persons incarcerated or 95 per 100,000  population, 11th highest in the world  of our "justice" system and you're  not the head of Reed International/  Domtar/etc. or your daddy isn't rich.  now it's been obvious for a long  time that the penal system as we  currently experience it just doesn't  work; unless the goal is the total  destruction of a human life, an  exercise in sadism, yet in spite of  public protests, parliamentary inquiries, civil suits brought by  prisoners against various prison  administrations, and the innumerable  "incidents", both violent and nonviolent, the Canadian state continues to build bigger, better (more  expensive) concrete vaults. - there's  Thoughts While  Awaiting  Sentencing  by Merlyn  (Columbia, Venezuela, israel lead the  list, the usa was 30th).  the law is an amazing tangle of esoteric phrases which seem especially  aimed at keeping most of us dependent  on the services of professionals, the  ; After the murderburgers  and the goon  squads and the tear gas  What is left? ■  I mean,  after you know  that God  can't be trusted  After you know that the  shrink is a  pusher  That the word is a whip  and the  badge is a bullet  That outside and inside  are just an  illusion  What is left? .  assata  shakur  It may be that none of us can  from the solitary confinement we've  condemned ourselves to  (out of fear,  out of pride,  out of the dying of  the heart) until we find ourselves  in actual prisons of iron and  stone...when everything else we  have put our hands to is gone,   the  granite and steel cemented by our  pitiless morality will remain as.  monument and gravestone to our time.  kay boyle  defendant is merely a pawn necessary  for the courtroom ceremonies to begin  motion, the other actors hang out in  fancy clothes and talk in real fine  language to each other with much pomp  and importance, the accused doesn't  usually get a script, and the technicians of justice find it inefficient to speak from the heart and in  common words, and the prosecutors,  the judges, and often the defense  lawyers are paid by the same "boss",  and tend to have many other things  in common too, like class and racial  backgrounds.  this hypocrisy might  seem somewhat hysterically ludicrous  when your life hangs in the balance  profit in them there prisons! - so  there'll be 5 new federal institutions with additions and improvements  to 10 existing units...not that the  ones we have created are overflowing,  they're about 1/5 empty in b.c. one  might be led to wonder just whose  bodies will sweat inside those walls.  the roots of prison injustice are  capitalism and do not easily lend  themselves to "reform", the courts  serve to punish the poor and the non-  white, to avoid dealing with the  real criminals, and we continue to  believe in the myth of justice, avoiding our responsibility for the status  quo.  as george jackson said: "we  must come to understand the reality of  our situation, understand that fascism  is already here, that people are already dying who could be saved, that  generations will die or live butchered  half-lives if we fail to act." • From Us  Kinesis frequently receives letters  from subscribers complaining about  news coverage.  For the most part,  the letters are well thought out, and  we appreciate that readers have taken  the time to approach us with their  concerns.  However, it appears that only a few  issues are involved, and perhaps a  response from us is necessary.  The most common complaint involves  our coverage of lesbian news and  issues.  Readers have suggested that  our coverage of lesbianism is "inappropriate" and "out of proportion",  that lesbian rights is a human rights  issue but not a very important women's  issue, and that lesbians are a "small,  non-productive group" anyway.  Some  readers fear that including lesbians  visibly in the paper will reduce support from other women's groups, and/or  alienate potential readers of Kinesis.  The other major complaint stems from  coverage of the abortion issue.  One  reader ties abortion to lesbianism  and finds our "pre-occupation" with  both these subjects unacceptable.  Yet another reader, in a more general  letter, feels "the theme of some recent articles (does not) represent the  views of tlte majority of women working  in the movement...we are all entitled  to be feminists, regardless of lifestyle and personal philosophy." She  suggests we get back to "basic" issues  as outlined by the Royal Commission on  the Status of Women.  Should we 'soft-pedal'  lesbianism or abortion?  These comments raise some questions.  Is there really a perceived need to  "soft-pedal" lesbianism or abortion  among feminists? When is a feminist  issue appropriate or inappropriate?  Who decides? When does attention to  a particular issue become "out of  proportion"? Is discomfort over an  issue a valid indicator for censorship or avoidance of that issue?  We attempt in Kinesis to maintain a  balance in coverage of issues.  In  surveying past issues of Kinesis  to evaluate complaints about coverage, we found that in fact, lesbianism and abortion have received  about the same amount of coverage  as other issues, not more.  If any  one issue has received more attention than others in the paper,  that issue is unionism (something  we have had no complaints about).  So the question is, is lesbianism  an appropriate feminist issue?  Certainly lesbian rights is a  human rights issue, but that does  not relieve us of the responsibility to deal with its feminist  implications.  Lesbianism is more  than a sexual preference, it is  - it must be - an available option  for every woman.  When we present  the case for feminist support of  the lesbian cause, we are talking  about the freedom of women to  choose this particular lifestyle  to You  without retribution and the incredible societal resistance lesbians now face.  Feminism is about  self-determination for women.  The  very same case exists in our  coverage of the abortion issue -  freedom to choose.  Whether or not some feminists feel  uncomfortable with the issues of  lesbianism or abortion, we will  continue to give these issues the  same kind of attention that other  feminist issues receive in Kinesis.  As for getting back to "basic" issues, we should remember that the  Royal Commission on the Status of  Women researched their report  between 1967-70, in the early days  of the current feminist movement.  Women continue to read this report  today partly because it was a substantial and well-documented expose  of sex discrimination, but also  because until recently, no comprehensive update of the Royal Commission's report had been done.  This  static situation may have led some  to feel that issues documented by  the Royal Commission were somehow  more "basic" than others later  activated by feminists - issues  such as lesbianism.  But though the  Royal Commission did provide damning  evidence of discrimination against  women by governmental institutions,  it did not touch private enterprise,  or our private lives.  It would be  selling ourselves slightly short  as women to look only, or primarily,  at the issues the Royal Commission  dealt with.  One particular problem we at Kinesis  face in connection with news coverage  is access to Canadian news, even provincial news from outside the lower  mainland.  Currently, there are few  major feminist journals we can look  to for news from the prairies and  eastern provinces. We maintain what  contact we can with Upstream in  Ottawa, and with many smaller journals within B.C. and across Canada,  and look forward to a new feminist  paper in Toronto.  Given that we always have access to more American  news sources than we do Canadian,  we can only try to keep our national  news coverage in proportion to international news.  We hope that readers who feel uncomfortable with some of Kinesis' coverage will consider these points.  At the same time, feel welcome to  continue to give us feedback when  you feel so inclined.  ^=  From You  to Us  I am finally renewing my membership/  subscription to VSW and Kinesis. I've  really missed Kinesis. After borrowing a friend's November issue, I have  to say, it's great! Better than ever  Congratulations on an informative,  well-structured magazine.   We have been wondering for many months  where our copies of Kinesis were  going - finally a rather timid lady  came in saying her husband had been  throwing 'this garbage' where it belongs.  She confiscated it, read it,  and brought it to us, thinking wt^  might be able to use it!  Thanks for the many stimulating and  aggressive articles and good luck  with your numerous projects at VSW.  to improve the status of women.  KINESIS:  We were pleased to see your December-  January edition carry a report on the  position statement on midwifery adopted by the Registered Nurses' Association of B.C. in February 1978.  Because of the apparent interest in  birthing at home, Kinesis readers may  also want to know about one part of  the RNABC position statement that  wasn't covered in your report:  The RNABC also endorses the  following statement on home deliveries approved by the Western Nurse  Midwives Association in 1977:  'We as an association are aware of  a growing consumer interest in  home confinements,  but recognize  that the Canadian health care delivery system is not presently  developed to support this type of  maternity care,  ie.   back-up support  services for emergencies. '  May you and your readers have a  happy, healthy new year.  Jerry Miller  Communications Officer  Registered Nurses'  Association of B.C. last minute news / e eop  Vancouver city hall's controversial  Equal Employment Opportunity Program  headed by Shelagh Day was squashed  by a seven to four vote at a city  council meeting Feb. 6.  The majority of council members  voted to abandon the $58,000  program despite pleas from about 18  community organizations and private  individuals including the B.C.  Human Rights Commission, Vancouver  Status of Women, B.C. Federation of  Labor, the Canadian Council of  Christians and Jews, Inc., B.C.  Assocation of Social Workers, Canadian National Institute for the  Blind, the Society for Education  Action Research and Counselling on  Homosexuality, Asian Canadian Assoc,  for Cultural Co-operation, School  of Social Work, UBC., Vancouver  Municipal and Regional Employees'  Union and the Society for Political  Action for Gay People.  Tim Walker, a representative from  the society for gay people won a  loud round of applause from the  standing-room only crowd when he  told council: EEOP has had barely  12 months to try and reverse decades  of questionable hiring and promotional activity.     More  time is  needed to continue  this work.  'ĢGeorge Puil pointing to the..' scores  of program supporters crowding the  council chambers: A.H  these   T^ft-  wingers here,   they are the cces who  fan the flames of discrimination.  I am Romanian so I know what discrimination is all about.  Warnett Kennedy: This program is  nothing but a make work program.  Doug Little: We must consider ~he  cost of facilities for females if  we hire women fire fighters.  Aid. Mazari objected adamantly to  the suggestion that the personnel  department handle the mammoth task  taken on by Day's office.  She said:  The personnel department has neither  the people,   the competence nor the mone:  to handle  this job.     She blasted  council members for their uncaring  attitudes and said that to get a job  through a city hall department, you  have  to have the -right father.     It's  not what you know,   it's who you know.  Mazari pointed out that when Day  investigated the hiring practices of  the fire department she found that  of a waiting list of 40 applicants  26 were friends or relatives of fire  fighters already employed at city hall.  She said council should be ashamed  of the hypocritical and deceitful  manner in which members sought to  DAY AXED!  Ms.   Day and her staff has been doing  an admirable job of confronting  discrimination considering the  limitations they must work within.  We applaud her work and agree with  the city manager  (Fritz Bowers)  in his endorsement of the continuation of the program.  The foundation of fair employment  practices has just been started.  Inevitably this has angered those  who find it more advantageous to  maintain the status quo.     We are  not just talking about a few thousand dollars here or there,  we are  talking about real people whose  potential for a better life is in  jeopardy.  Your action is going to affect  those  lives; please  think carefully  about the responsibility of helping  women and minorities fight a battle  they cannot win without your help.  But Walker failed to sway the seven  NPA council members.  They argued  that city hall's personnel office  could handle any incidences of  alleged discrimination and they  actually disbelieved that discrimination against minorities, women and  the handicapped is a problem in the  hiring practices of city hall.  The EEOP, a program introduced  through the efforts of Aid. Darlene  Mazari, the former Equal Opportunity  Committee of the Vancouver city  council and the Vancouver Status of  Women, went down in defeat.  Here are some choice one-liners from  council members:  abandon the office and Day's position. This is a bigotry court,   she  said.  Vancouver Status of Women president  Lee Grills was rudely interrupted  by Mayor Volrich when she mentioned  the millions of dollars council is  pouring into the multi-complex  sports and convention centre.  He  told Grills to stick to the issue at  hand.  Other aldermen who supported  the program brought the matter up  again and again.  Mike Harcourt said the well-publicized belief that this council is a  fiscal restraint council is a myth.  Mazari also said in her six years as  alderwoman she has never seen a  council spend so much money so  freely.  City council is spending more than  one billion dollars this year yet  they couldn't see fit to spend  $58,000 to arrest discrimination  against women, minorities and handicapped people.  As one community  representative astutely pointed out,  the programs costs about 15c per  Vancouver citizen, or .034 per  cent of the total budget.  A cheap  price to pay to restore some dignity  and self-respect to thousands of  oppressed groups.  For the record those who voted to  dismantle the one-year-old program  are: Warnett Kennedy, Bernice Gerard,  George Puil, Don Bellamy, Doug Little,  Helen Boyce and Jack Volrich.  Those who voted to continue the program are: Mike Harcourt, Harry Rankin,  Darlene Mazari and Marguerite Ford.  activist, foam shot in  tbe back st^tzxiecL  Iticee.  KINESIS  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving social change.  Views expressed in KINESIS are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of  the KINESIS editorial and production  crew.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V6J IN3.  Membership in Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation. KINESIS is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to KINESIS  are $8.00 per year. We ask members  to base their donations on this and  their own individual financial  position.  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions to KINESIS from the feminist  community and in particular from VSW  members. We reserve the right to  edit. Submission does not guarantee  publication. Include a SASE if you  want your work returned.  DEADLINE: The 15th of each month.  CHARITABLE STATUS: As we now have the  status of a charitable organization  and as we are unable to pay for KINESIS  from these funds due to government regulations, we will be issuing  tax-deductible receipts for the balance of all donations over $8.00/  WORKING HARD on this issue were:Janet Beebe, Jean Faguy, Kay Matusek,  Joey Thompson and Gayla Reid.  RENAISSANCE RESUMES...I offer a customized resume service for the woman  in transition.  If you are setting  your sights higher than your present  position or changing your direction  entirely, a good resume can be just  the impetus you need to move on UP.  For personal interview and skills  evaluation, call Margo at 689-9376  from 10am to noon weekdays, anytime  weekends.