 NOVEMBER 1988  Special Collections Serial  $1.75 STAFF BOX  Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next News Group is Tues.  Nov. 8 at 3:00pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Louise Allen, Marsha Arbour,  Astarte, Gwen Bird, Lea Dawson, Sonia Marino, Honey  Maser, Allisa McDonald, Joni  Miller, Lucy Moreira, Sarah  Orlowski, Nancy Pollak, Morgan Rea, Ann Sarazin, Noreen  Shanahan, Elizabeth Shefrin,  Yvonne Van Ruskenveld.  FRONT COVER: Graphics by  Debbie Bryant  EDITORIAL BOARD: Marsha Arbour, Pat Feindel, Allisa  McDonald, Nancy Pollak, Noreen Shanahan, Esther Shannon, Michele Valiquette.  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Gwen Bird, Cat  L'Hirondelle.  ADVERTISING: Marsha Arbour.  OFFICE: Cat L'Hirondelle.  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and Imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $17.50 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $25.50 or what you can afford, includes subscription to  Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: All submissions are welcome. We reserve  the right to edit and submission does not guarantee publication. All submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews the 10th of the month  preceding publication; news  copy, 15th; letters and Bulletin  Board listings 18th. Display  advertising: camera ready,  18th; design required, 12th.  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Periodical Publishers Association and is indexed  in the Alternative Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Camera work by Northwest  Graphics. Laser printing by  Each Time and Eastside Data  Graphics. Printing by Web  Press Graphics.  News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  0$  1 Womgn ana m\mw nave Beeflwe iubiuwh! irum a mmi-mm mp '  system 10  Artist Sonia Boyce joins others in exploring art  and racism 17  INSIDE  tiEqw/WS  'ñ†mis  ' Exciting developments in clinic movement    3  Mentally disabled people can now vote    3  Sue Harris is moving away    6  Movement Matters 2  Trades & Technology conference a smash    7  Feminists active in Pakistan's election   FEATURES   9  What's News? 8  by Gwen Bird  Who says you can't fight City Hall    4  Do Socreds prefer foster parents?   by Pam Galloway  Fleeing the fathers and the fathers' court   by Kim Irving   7   10  Beans 14  by Nora D. Randall  The election issues as we see them    12  by Nancy Pollak & Yvonne Van Ruskenfeld  Letters 20  ARTS  Playing for the love of the game   by Jackie Brown   15  Periodicals in Review... 21  by Michele Valiquette  Auschwitz survivor raises her voice    17  by Maura Volante  (F.)lip is in for a dangerous ride   by Jeannie Lochrie  Scenes from Nicaragua's daily life   by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin   18   19  Bulletin Board 22  compiled by Lucy Moreira  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movent   t  mo  i..  ,.ufl  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, npdates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Policies to end  child poverty  The Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG)  has produced a free booklet they hope will  stimulate discussion of child poverty and  support for families with children as election issues. Entitled The National Income  Program for Children: Policies to End  Child Poverty, the booklet describes a  number of wide-ranging social programs designed to provide adequate, guaranteed financial support for any family in need.  CPAG is a public interest advocacy and  research group based in Toronto. This booklet, and its companion pamphlet Investing In Families With Children are targeted for use in the current election, supplying data and suggesting questions for use  at all candidates' meetings. CPAG has also  produced a 22-page document entitled A  Fair Chance for All Children, available  for $3/copy. Contact CPAG at 950 Yonge  St., Suite 1000. Toronto ONT M4W 2J4  Step-by-step  account of  feminist research  Matrix: The Story of Women in Dialogue is a step-by-step account of how  Nanaimo women organized to research,  publicize and propose improvements to the  status of women in their community.  Women in Dialogue was a research and  communications project which grew out  of the UN Decade for Women in 1985.  WID worked to raise public awareness on  women's issues, including lobbying the local  hospital board to change pohcies regarding  childbirth and maternity ward procedures.  Their goal in publishing Matrix is to inform  other individuals and groups about their organizing techniques, in particular, their consensus decision-making process.  Matrix is available for $7 from The Spider Press Collective, Women's Resources  Society, 285 Prideaux St., Nanaimo, B.C.  V9R 2N2  Law Ass'n  publishes briefs  on many issues  The National Association of Women and  the Law (NAWL) is a Canadian feminist organization devoted to research and public  education in areas in which the law has a  specific impact on women. NAWL's bilingual briefs and research papers are written  in clear, concise language, useful to both legal practioners and laypersons.  NAWL's publication hst reveals papers  on midwifery, unemployment insurance, divorce, pension reform, prostitution, sexual  assault and affirmative action, to name a  few. To obtain a NAWL publication hst,  write to Suite 400, 1 Nicholas St., Ottawa,  ONT KIN 7B7  Farmworkers  seek ESL tutors  The Farmworkers English as a Second  Language (ESL) program is gearing up  for its seventh season with students registering in unprecedented numbers in Vancouver and surrounding communities. Volunteer tutors are now being recruited to  work with the Punjabi-speaking students.  The majority of students are women at  home who have never learned EngUsh because of their dual responsibihties: long seasons of fannwork followed by long hours of  domestic work. Other students are predominantly older women and men, left at home  and lacking the means to get around in an  EngUsh-speaking world.  \ox women  monday  november  7  7:30   -   9:00  pm  RITA MAE  BROWN  Tutors will be trained by professionals in  current ESL and popular education techniques. In addition, orientation sessions will  famiharize tutors with farmworkers' issues,  and the ethnic communities and languages  they will have contact with.  Orientation sessions begin mid-November  for teaching that will commence the last  week of November (another group will begin in January). Ongoing support is offered  to tutors, along with valuable training.  For more details, or to sign up, please  contact Cheryl Howrigan or Bhavana Bhan-  gu at 430-6055 or 430-6648.  Video, manual  on pornography  Who Says It Doesn't Hurt is a resource  package consisting of a 20-minute video and  manual designed for use in workshops on  pornography. The video explores the social  harms of porn and examines the distortions  porn perpetuates about women.  Video topics include sex-role stereotyping in advertising, racism and child abuse,  positive alternatives to porn, and strategies  for action. The accompanying manual is described as a comprehensive guide for planning workshops on porn including agendas,  exercises and discussion topics. There are  also strategies for working with groups of  women or men, and with mixed groups.  Produced by the YWCA of Toronto and  funded by the Ontario Women's Directorate, the video with manual sells for $35  plus $3 handhng (per copy); the manual  alone costs $10.95 plus $1.50 handling (per  copy). Order from YWCA, 80 Woodlawn  Ave. E., Toronto, ONT M4T 1C1  Workshops,  newsletter for  clerical workers  The Clerical Workers' Health and Safety  Project (CWHSP) have just published their  first issue of a bi-montlily newsletter, The  Clerical Voice. The project's purposes are  to dispel the myth that clerical workers  work in a clean, safe environment, to provide information about the causes of office  health hazards and their possible solutions,  and to draw public attention to the health  and safety issues facing clerical workers today.  The project has organized an ambitious  series of workshops for November, at Vancouver's Robson Square Media Centre, 800  Robson Street. Nov. 9: Clerical Work:  The Illusion of a Hazard-Free Environment;  Nov. 16: The Invisible Issue: Office Air:  Nov. 23: Designing a Healthy Workplace;  and Nov. 30: Stress, Strategies and Visions  for Change.  All workshops run from 5:30 pm to 7:30  pm. The fee is $3/workshop or $10/series  and $2/workshop or $8/series for unemployed, underemployed or students. Registration is limited, so reserve a space by sending payment to CWHSP, 4340 Carson St.,  Burnaby B.C. V5J 2X9 or call (604) 430-  0458.  Display  Advertising:  Ask us about discounts.  Phone 255-5499  Women  TALK   ABOUT  FREE   TRADE  AND     ITS     EFFECT    ON  NATIVE LAND CLAIMS • MILITARISM  SOCIAL SERVICES • JOBS • UIC  THE ENVIRONMENT*  MINIMUM WAGE  political speakers       community speakers  Kim Campbell  Conservative candidate,  Vancouver Centre  Mae Cabott  Liberal candidate, Mission-Coquitlam  Kathryn Cholette  BC Green Party incoming president  Margaret Mitchell  NDP MP, Vancouver East  Rosalie Tizya  United Native Nations  Kathryn Zeron  Wages For Housework  Patsy George  BC Organization of Immigrant  & Minority Women  Chaired by Ellen Woodsworth  Women's Economic Agenda  MONDAY NOVEMBER 7, 7:30 PM  AT THE INDIAN CENTRE  1607 EAST HASTINGS ST.  $2 donation at the door  PRESENTED  BY  VANCOUVER  STATUS  OF  WOMEN  &  WOMEN'S   ECONOMIC  AGENDA  KINESIS ///////////////////^^^  //////////////////////^^^^  News  ////////////////////////////////^^^  Hi  Exciting developments  in clinic movement  by Noreen Shanahan  Almost a year since the Supreme  Court decision struck down the  abortion law, Canada's pro-choice  movement is working with a raised  Take a break from painting the Everywoman's Health Centre  to march and rally for it. Celebrate B.C.'s first abortion clinic,  noon, November 5th, Vancouver Art Gallery. For more information (volunteers needed) call 873-5455.  Voting rights, at last  by Jean Bennett  and Sand Northrup  As a result of an action  launched by the Canadian Disability Rights Council (CDRC), thousands of Canadian citizens now  have the right to vote in federal  elections.  In mid-October, Federal Court  Justice Barbara Reed struck down  a provision of the election law  which denied the vote to Canadians institutionalized because of  mental disability. The ruling affects people with mental handicaps and/or mental illness.  In B.C., individuals hving in institutions such as Woodlands and  Glendale will be voting federally  for the first time. For many, it will  also be the first time they are acknowledged as Canadian citizens.  The CDRC was formed recently  to fight legislation that discriminates on the basis of disability.  Their successful Charter challenge  is being hailed as a victory by activists in B.C. and across the country.  Comparing tins decision to the  precedent-setting "Eve" case of  two years ago (in which forced  sterilization of women and men  with mental disabilities was outlawed), self-advocate Barb Goode  said, "Now that we all have the  vote, everyone will see that people in institutions have the right  to make decisions for themselves.  They will help us get out of institutions."  Although none of the federal  parties oppose tins extension of  voting rights, they have yet to  indicate how they will respond  to the specific issues facing people with mental disabilities. These  issues include poverty, increasing real employment opportunities  and reparations for people returning to the community from institutions.  While getting the vote is clearly  a victory, exercising the right  may be problematic. Enumeration  has taken place but, in the case  of Woodlands—the largest of the  province's facilities for people with  mental handicaps—not all residents were included.  Enumerators unskilled in dealing with people with mental disabilities may be undermining the  impact of the courts' decision by  arbitrarily determining who is able  or unable to vote.  Activists' are also concerned  with how much support institutional management will provide in  helping residents get information  to make informed choices, and in  getting people to the polls.  According to Goode, mentally  handicapped activists will continue organising to bring election  materials to people inside institutions and to insure that they are  able to vote. They also plan to  hold all-candidates forums inside  the institutions.  Sask. nurses triumph  by Anna Blume  Nurses in Saskatchewan scored  a big victory in a mid-October  labour dispute that was as much  about health care standards as  wages.  After a seven day walkout, the  Saskatchewan Union of Nurses negotiated a contract bringing them  wage parity with their counterparts in other prairie provinces.  They also succeeded in strengthening the powers of their nursing advisory committee—an independent, public body of nurses  which investigates nurses' concerns about the delivery of health  It was a bitter strike, with the  Conservative government accusing  nurses of neglecting patients. In  fact, patient neglect and a scandalous erosion of the public health  system were major items on the '■  nurses' agenda.  "Short staffing, with one nurse  attending to up to thirty-six patients in intensive care" is how a  union spokesperson described conditions in the province's hospitals.  "Putting more teeth into the  so-called advisory committee was  the number one priority of this  strike ... it's been a victory,"  said the spokeperson. "Previously,  management would refuse to meet  with us."  "We're moving into the next  phase now," said Joy Thompson of  Vancouver's Everywoman's Health  Centre, "where people are beginning to consider other aspects  such as feminist structure, worker-  control, and a greater responsibility to the [women's] community."  A month before the Vancouver  clinic's November opening, Toronto's Women's Choice Health  Clinic silently slipped onto the  pro-choice stage, becoming Ontario's third free-standing abortion clinic but one with a very different flavour and philosophy.  As a feminist worker's collective, the six women at this clinic  (all of whom once worked at Toronto's Morgentaler Chnic) operate on the principle of non-profit  and with the dual goals of increasing abortion access and lobbying  both federal and provincial governments for full funding.  The chnic serves 16 women  a day, charging $125 for abortions (the Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHD?) pays the physician $100), which is less than half  the amount charged at other clinics. The budget also allows four  women a day (two without OHIP  coverage and two without money)  to have the procedure done for  free.  "Once we pay back the initial outlay of expenses for equip  ment, we can decrease fees and  also increase the number of patients we can see with no money  or OHIP," said Nikki Colodny, the  chnic physician.  "It's very unfortunate we have  to charge patients at all," she said,  adding that while the Supreme  Court decision frees women seeking chnic abortions from being  tagged criminals, they continue to  be economically penalized.  Unlike the Vancouver chnic,  which has always had significant  community involvement and was  never far from media scrutiny, Toronto's chnic took a look at the Ontario pohtical scene and decided to  spring their opening on a totally  unsuspecting public.  "The government didn't know  until we put the letter on Elinor  Caplan's [Ontario's health minister] desk that morning ... the media was amazed we pulled it off,"  said Colodny.  One reason for not going pub-  he earlier was the Ontario government's Independent Health Facilities Act, proposed in June. If this  legislation passes, medical agencies will be hcensed to perform  some services usually done in hospitals, including abortions.  A 'grandfather' clause would allow existing clinics to apply for  licenses but new chnics couldn't  open without first receiving government approval.  "We had to go quickly, before this legislation passed," said  Colodny. "Ideally we would have  spent another six months working  with the community but instead  we gave ourselves a month's notice  and opened."  The Act would mean limiting the number of faculties  and restricting a clinic's privacy,  said Colodny. Furthermore, since  there's no commitment for government funding, it would simply be  a form of privatized medicine.  "Instead of addressing responsible health care for women, this legislation makes it harder to establish centres."  Another change in the pro-  choice movement is its emphasis  on broader reproductive issues, a  stated goal of both the Toronto  and Vancouver chnics.  "Central to our vision is a feminist health care centre that builds  on the experience of the women's  health care movement of the last  two decades," said Colodny.  The Morgentaler clinic furthered women's rights but wasn't  intentionally feminist in structure  or provision of health care, she  added.  While admitting 'placing the  cart before the horse' in the rush  to open, Colodny says community  involvement is now being urged  and support is coming from all  directions. The chnic intends to  introduce programs and services  in conjunction with a Community  Advisory Board.  "It's important to send the message to women across the country that (opening a chnic) is doable," said Colodny. "There's a lot  of mysticism about it, and it's a  tremendous challenge, but it's doable. Take heart and go for it."  Until The Prisoners Are Free  Amnesty International's vigil in Vancouver on October 21 remembered, among others, the political  prisoners and "disappeared" of Chile. Says Carmen Rodriquez of the local Chilean community, "The  October 5 plebiscite [defeating Pinochet] was a moral victory ... but not by any means the end of  the dictatorship or beginning of democracy. Political prisoners, the missing are still not discussed  openly—only human rights organizations keep this alive."  KINESIS ACROSS B.C.  Vancouver votes Nov. 19  >,v Who says you can't  w   fight City Hall  In this year's municipal election, Vancouver voters will be  choosing candidates from the  following slates:  • The Committee of Progressive Electors (COPE) and  the Civic New Democratic  Party (NDP) are running  what they call a "Unity"  campaign, together putting  forward a full component of  candidates. The Civic NDP,  as such, are new players on  the Vancouver scene.  • The Non-Partisan Association (NPA)  • The Green Party (a partial  slate)  • Various Independents  by Sue Harris  and Colleen Tillmyn  The present mayor of Vancouver, Gordon Campbell (NPA),  nominated Bill Vander Zalm to  run for mayor in 1984.  Campbell used to work for  Marathon Realty which sold the  land for the Expo site.  He's also the man who put a  $9,000 shower in his city offices at  the same time massive cutbacks in  city services were implemented at  city hall.  Campbell and his colleagues  voted to cut back services in the  planning department, the health  department (including the loss of  public health nurse and social  worker positions) while at the  same time giving themselves a  healthy wage hike. Other cutbacks  affected garbage service and the  loss of the city fire boat.  In the midst of these cutbacks,  they have made themselves less accessible and less open to the public  by restricting the number of delegations permitted to speak at city  hall.  One way of comparing the actions of the NPA and COPE is  to look at the issue of Expo lands  (now Concord Pacific):  • NPA-dominated council was silent around the sale of the Expo  lands.  COPE  advocated that  city hall buy the land for Vancouver, instead of the province  selling it to an offshore millionaire, as was done.  > NPA councillors are hke the  puppets of developers because  they encourage profits over and  above the needs of Vancou-  verites. COPE's Expo housing  pohcy is built on the input of  community organizations such  as the B.C. Housing Coalition  and the Tenants' Rights Coalition. COPE would insist that 50  percent of all housing on site be  social housing.  » NPA voted about $400,000 for  city staff to work with Concord Pacific, using city money  to help the private developer before having any public input.  COPE advocated more community input and wanted the  developer to pay these costs.  In addition, COPE continually  advocates for a full, comprehensive planning process, one  that would include environmental concerns.  How does this kind of politicking translate into the hves of Van-  couverites?  The Expo land deal will effect  the overall price of real estate in  other parts of Vancouver. In other  words, prices go up. This will increase the cost of rental units and  the price of land to be bought for  social housing.  There have been no impact  studies on this 20-year development process, and httle community dialogue.  Hunger, language  school board issues  by Barbara Wilde  Paradise saved  or paradise paved?  by Oonalda Viaud  There are three major issues in  the upcoming election at the Parks  Board level in Vancouver:  • the giving away of park land,  • pro-development, and  • lack of access to recreational facilities.  These problems stem from the  current NPA Parks Board, and  find themselves manifested in a  number of examples.  In the past two years, we have  seen seven acres of park land at  37th and Oak go "up for sale."  This is designated park land and  should remain in the public do-  We have seen a proposal to pave  Granville Park, and turn it into a  parking lot. Luckily, the cry of local citizens to "Stop" saved this  green space for the future enjoyment of Vancouverites.  Stanley Park constantly faces  proposals which would reduce its  natural beauty in favour of expansion to private interests. For instance, the Aquarium wants three-  quarters of an acre to expand  its displays, while the upper zoo  wants to expand into precious forest lands. The natural forest-like  beauty of Stanley Park is being  undermined while expensive cruel  endeavors are being considered.  Systematic, yearly fee increases  to the city's recreational faculties  have limited accessibihty of children, families and the poor to important resources such as parks  and ice rinks.  For 1988 the issues are clear. To  improve accessibihty, to maintain  and improve services and to protect the environment, the Parks  Board must be turned around.  Hungry kids is a key issue in  the COPE campaign for the Vancouver School Board (VSB) according to COPE candidate Sadie  Kuehn.  "It's not a vote-getter," added  the former trustee. "These days,  talk is about lowering taxes. But  it's something required of us if we  are going to be advocates of quality education for all students irrespective of social position, race, religion, cultural difference, or gender."  The current board, nine of  whose ten members are of the  NPA, has voted $50,000 to each  of four elementary schools to subsidize meal programs as a pilot  project. But the hot lunch program should be extended to cover  thirteen inner-city schools, according to Kuehn.  Carol McRae, NPA trustee running for reelection, says it is not  the responsibility of the VSB to  implement a universal food program.  "We shouldn't use educational  funds for social welfare programs,"  said McRae. The board, according to McRae, is dealing with the  problem through its pilot project,  by "help-shelves" (children put  food they don't need on a shelf  where others can get it), and  through the Hungry Children's  Committee which works at bringing food from the community into  the school.  Both the provincial government and the NPA-dominated  City Council refused, throughout  the year, to provide money for a  meals program.  Another important election issue is how the NPA board handled the recent increase to Vancouver schools of new immigrant  students, requiring English as a  Second Language instruction.  According to critics, the board  responded to the arrival in September of 400 new, non-English-  speaking students first, by raising  public alarm ("crying wolf," said  Pauline Weinstein, COPE candidate and former chair of the  board) and second, by calling it an  "immigration problem."  As a result, a growing racist  This is not an isolated incident,  but in fact sets the framework  for the entire focus of NPA council pohcy. What we have to look  forward to is more of the same,  with increasingly devastating effects for the ordinary person—  increased costs of hving, reduced  services and higher costs for services that do exist.  And finally, thanks to the NPA,  85,000 Vancouverites are not on  the civic voter's hst. The reason?  The NPA council eliminated door-  to-door enumeration. Why? Interestingly enough, the majority are  eastsiders, low-income people, tenants, seniors and new Canadians  ... people who traditionally vote  COPE. (See Box for information on how to vote in the upcoming civic election in Vancouver.)  backlash has occurred (and continues to occur, according to Kuehn)  on the playground, in the classroom and among parents, some  of whom phoned The Vancouver  Sun and The Province to complain about supporting the education of immigrant kids with their  tax dollars.  "In a diverse culture we don't  need someone in charge of education creating that kind of hysteria by blaming a certain group  of people for a general problem,"  said Kuehn. McRae felt "hysteria"  to be an extreme word. "I have  not seen hysteria in the Vancouver  school system," she said.  Finally, there is the question  of whether School Consultative  Committees (SCC) should maintain their autonomy. Each Vancouver school has a parent group  which works in conjunction with  staff. There is also a district-wide  group made up of eight elected  representatives from the individual SCC's. The job of the district  parent group is to increase support  for public schooling and to be in  close contact with the community  the schools serve.  According to Kuehn, this system has worked effectively. However, she has a concern that  some members of the current  NPA board are questioning the  SCC's right to autonomy. They  feel the board should have more  control over what the committees can and cannot do. (These  committees have very httle actual power, to begin with.) Kuehn  says this makes the parent committee simply another arm of the  board. "They need an independent  voice," Kuehn said. "When parent reps bring suggestions and recommendations to the board, they  should be listened to."  A KINESIS Across B.C.  ////////////////a  In the tidal wave of media  hoopla about the federal election,  Vancouver's upcoming civic election has been virtually ignored by  press and public alike. High profile national issues and their impact on women—Free Trade, the  Meech Lake accord, national day  care—have tended to eclipse more  homey concerns regarding affordable housing and the quality of hfe  in our city.  Four women running for mayor  and alderman (sic) on the various civic slates highhght the issues they feel will convince Kinesis readers not to overlook our  "httle" local election on November  19th.  LIBBY DAVIES, Council  (COPE/Unity Campaign)  Davies has served on both the  Parks Board (1980-82) and City  Council (1982- ). She worked with  DERA for 10 years, helping to  set up a low-cost food store and  a health chnic in the Downtown Eastside. In addition, Davies  served as President of DERA for  some time. She hves in Grand view-  Woodlands, and is a member of  both the NDP and COPE.  Four women in the running  by Pat Davitt  LINDA ERWIN, Council  (Civic NDP/Unity Campaign)  Erwin has long been active in  women's pohtics and the Downtown Eastside. She was a minister at First United Church for 11  years, as well as a community advocate. While at First United, she  founded and chaired their Housing Society. Erwin has worked in  Women Against the Budget, the  B.C. Coalition for Abortion Chnics, Big Sisters, Women's Economic Agenda and ELP. She sits  on the YWCA's Board of Directors and is a member of the B.C.  Coalition on Human Rights in the  Philippines as well.  ISf  ical Association Auxiliary (physicians' spouses), and was a founding member of a women's investment group. Kent was also one of  four women who applied for, and  received, a grant of $250,000 to  start up a clothing factory. In ad-  ditioiij she has been involved in  daycare, pre-school and elementary school support activities.  Libby Davies  LYNNE KENT, Council  (NPA)  Kent has served on the South  Cariboo School Board, and was  an alderman in Mackenzie for four  years. In Vancouver, she organized the Kits Point Residents'  Association and was its president for five years. She is also  Past President of the B.C. Med-  Lynn Kent  JEAN SWANSON, Mayor  (Unity Campaign)  Swanson has been an activist  and advocate in Vancouver for  more than 14 years. She worked  first with the Downtown Eastside  Residents' Association (DERA)  and then with the Hospital Employees Union (where she did a  study of long-term care). Currently she is working with End  Legislated Poverty (ELP), a coalition of community groups to eliminate or ease the impact of poverty  in our society. ELP's latest project  is t«e Hot Lunch Program in city  schools.  Why vote for them?  How we live where we live  These four women are consistent in identifying key election issues of particular interest to women, although their approaches to dealing with them differ. Among their priorities are: accessible government; housing; the  environment; and the city as a  model employer, or the Just City.  Accessible Government  According to Davies, civic government is the closest level of government to ordinary people and  we should all be able to take advantage of that by becoming more  involved in planning and decision  making. Swanson agrees and sees  the current mayor and council  making too many decisions behind  closed doors.  Erwin wants more people to  have a say on whether we become  "The Executive City" beloved of  developers, or a city in which low  and moderate income families can  still afford to hve. Kent says there  are big changes coming: Concord  Pacific on False Creek will be  a massive development requiring  care to make it a hvable neighbourhood.  The Environment  Erwin wants Council to clean  up the mess—such as the PCB's  stored in Stanley Park and various schools around the city. Kent  advocates the development of bicycle routes (for example, the old  Arbutus rail hne) so people could  pedal to work—a good environmental option. Davies points out  that civic government can make a  huge difference in the quality of hfe  in our neighbourhoods, whether  it's how often the garbage is collected, or levels of pollution in English Bay.  Swanson asks, do we want a  Council that votes against recycling when they first get in, and  then passes motherhood motions  on the issue with httle substance  when the election draws near?  Housing  Housing in one form or another,  is clearly an important issue for  women. Kent wants to see innovative planning for seniors. After  all, she quips, we're in the yuppie  bulge now and soon we'll all need  better seniors homes.  Davies, Swanson and Erwin ah  targeted social and/or affordable  housing as a prime objective for  women. Massive developments hke  Concord Pacific should have up  to 50 percent of the buildings follow and moderate income families,  rather than the measly 20 percent  Mayor Campbell favours.  Furthermore, the NPA Council's actions on illegal suites, Swanson points out, affect women profoundly, since many women home  buyers need the extra suite revenue to swing the deal, and many  other poor women simply need  those less expensive places to hve.  The Model City  Three of the candidates had an  overall concept of the direction  Vancouver should take in the next  few years. Swanson wants the city  to be a model employer, showing leadership in affirmative action, equal pay, fair wages, preserving and expanding social services and retaining jobs.  Erwin wants a "Just City" with  a Charter of Rights (hke San Francisco and Santa Cruz) to eliminate  discrimination and work towards  same-sex health benefits, access  to public transit by disabled people, protections for minorities and  equahty in wages.  Davies speaks of the hvable city,  where citizens are empowered to  participate in government. To her,  the Livable City concept includes  working towards equahty and in-  clusiveness, rather than exclusive-  Kent feels she has the experience and the right attributes to  do a good job: she's a good listener and a good team worker. She  didn't mention her running mates  in the NPA.  According to Davies, working-  class women, working women, progressive women, lesbian women  should vote for the Unity Campaign (Swanson for Mayor/  COPE/Civic New Democrats) because they're willing to tackle  some of the issues most important  to women.  Erwin beheves there should be  more feminists on Council, and  more representatives from the east  side. Swanson sums it up: we've  fought for women's issues for  years. We'll continue to work for  them and get things done because  we're all committed to the advancement of women.  The Unity Campaign is  throwing a "Meet the Women  Candidates Brunch" on Sun.  Nov. 6, 11:30 am-1:30 pm in  Gym D of Britannia School.  This event is free, but reservations are required. Please call  251-2963.  KINESIS Sue Harris  Longtime activist bids us adieu  Sue Harris in Action  by Terrie Hamazaki  Sue Harris has always been active in community affairs, first as  a member of the Lesbian Information Line, and then as a trained  community worker with the Downtown Eastside Residents Association (DERA).  As a candidate for the Committee of Progressive Electors  (COPE), Harris was elected to the  Parks Board Commission, serving from 1984-86. She was Vancouver's first "out" lesbian to gain  public office.  This fall, Harris was nominated  by the COPE executive to stand  as an aldermanic (sic) candidate,  but was narrowly rejected by the  membership in a vote that saw an  unexpected candidate enter at the  last moment.  A contributor to Kinesis, Sue  Harris is moving to England in  November where she will continue  the work around sexual abuse she  started in Vancouver. We asked  her to reflect on her experiences in  municipal pohtics.  Terrie: Why did you choose  to work with COPE?  Sue: COPE represents the interests of ordinary citizens; working people, women, gays and lesbians, the average homeowner  who's under attack these days and  they're an excellent advocate for  children.  Also, COPE people are generally involved in other organizations, unhke the people of the  NPA. A lot of COPE women are  involved in the pro-choice movement, with the abortion chnic.  Terrie: While you were on  the Parks Board, what we the  overall attitude towards women  at City Hall?  Sue: The higher up you get  with management, which is mainly  all men, the more misogynist. Because I am a lesbian, sometimes  the past Chairman of the Parks  Board wouldn't even acknowledge  my presence when I wanted to  speak—he'd ignore me. One time  I even wore my boots and was going to jump up and down on the  table to get his attention.  I think assertive women are still  looked on by conservative management as not 'feminine;' real women  are supposed to be subordinate  and quiet and not rock the boat.  But with three women on Parks  Board then, I thought we were  the 'dynamic trio.' We certainly  proved that we can take on the  NPA.  Terrie: In 1986, when you  were seeking re-election, you  were quoted as "urging voters  to get rid of the right-wing,  male, patriarchal NPA majority." Do you really think the  voters care?  Sue: WeU, I think it enhghtened  people. When more and more people see the NPA now—with the  zoo controversy all over again—  they may see that it basically  Waxing Moon seeks acreage  by Gitta Felina  The Waxing Moon symbohzes  growth, on the way to completion, wholeness. Healing symbolizes transforming yesterday's disappointments into support, trust  and strength today. Village meaning a neighborhood of women on  a spiritual path with a similar focus in hfe. A special village with  women of all ages, backgrounds  and colours.  We envision an economically  self sufficient community providing products as well as training  programs. We'll encourage physical, emotional and spiritual well  being of women. The village will  provide a space to learn hfe skills,  rural and healing skills, ecological  awareness and energy conserving  hfestyles.  Compared with other parts of  the world, B.C. has an unpolluted environment. Let's take advantage of this beauty and abundance. We're committed to making this village a reality, but more  help is required. We're a non-profit  society with an interesting land  trust system which allows hving  in the Village to become increasingly less expensive and ensures  the long term vision of an accessible women's village.  If you'd hke the Waxing Moon  Healing Village to become a reality, you can help in many ways. We  need to make it known, raise the  money to acquire the land and/  or connect with a woman who'd  hke to see her property being used  this way. We're seeking land which  could serve as the Healing Centre. We want a body of water and  represents male patriarchy with  its agenda of big projects and  its "ehte-executive-trendy-city-of-  the-90's."  The zoo fits into that kind of patriarchal mentality with its focus  on the show 'n tell of monolithic  projects, and not on what people need hke food, clothing, housing, education. Also, the disdain  for the community and the secrecy,  around the Expo land sale, for example: that's all part of patriarchy.  Terrie: Was your lesbianism  an issue in your political career?  Sue: The nature of homophobia is that it's not usuaUy an issue  because it's not talked about, and  that's what discrimination is.  And when [your involvement in  lesbian groups] doesn't show up  on campaign hterature—and other  groups' names do—then I know  that's homophobia. Although I  was nominated by the executive  the second time, I didn't actually  win the nomination, and I do think  homophobia was at work a httle  bit.  Terrie: But should sexual  orientation even matter? One  wouldn't see "Mr./Miss Smith  is running and he/she is a heterosexual. "  Sue: No, but you would see  "Joe Smith is married and has  two chUdren," which really irritates me. I mean, if we're going to  do that, then put down that I have  a partner, and her name is such-  and-such. But I never thought of  saying that at the time.  ActuaUy, there've been many  campaign workers at COPE over  the past few years that've been gay  and lesbian, and I really think a lot  of it's attributed to myself.  Terrie: What advice would  you give to any woman planning to enter municipal politics?  Sue: Get involved in the community, get integrated, and work  coUectively, that's really important. Don't be an opportunist, but  go in it for the multitudes.  Sue Harris is suing her father  and brother-in-law for sexuaUy  abusing her when she was a chUd.  She sees sexual abuse as one of the  key pohtical issues of our time and  plans to write a book on her experiences as a survivor.  enough acreage for each woman to  have enough space. The size of this  vUlage depends on the number of  interested women.  Your memberships supports are  a great help. We produce a  newsletter, and provide and an information packet which explains  the different memberships, the  land trust concept, constitution  and decision-making body. You're  also welcome to our monthly get-  togethers. A benefit dance and a  Healing Fair are being planned for  this winter and your help would be  greatly appreciated. It's also possible for one of us to come and speak  to your circle of women friends.  For information write: Waxing Moon Healing Village Society, c/o 3541 W. 14th Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. V6R 2W3.  Bringing News, Seeking Support  Judith Silva, a longstanding union organizer in Nicaragua, received numerous messages of solidarity this October when she  visited sixteen B.C. communities, a guest of the Trade Union  Group/B.C. Nicaragua Solidarity Committee.  Silva, whose activism started in student groups in 1975 and  led to organizing in textile and food processing plants, is the  North and Central American representative from the Sandinista  Worker's Central (CST). She is the sixth CST rep to visit the  province on tours designed to raise awareness of the issues facing  Nicaraguan trade unionists.  KINESIS S//////////S//S/SS///////////////S////////SS/S/S/SS///////////S//////////S  ////////////////M^^^  ///////////////////////////^^^^  Across Canada  Special needs kids  Do Socreds prefer foster parents?  by Pam Galloway  ChUdren with physical or mental handicaps are described as chUdren with special needs, and nobody understands the full  meaning of this better than those responsible for their 24-hour care. Parents.  ChUdren. Parents. The B.C. Social Credit  government has made almost a religion of  extolling the family as the strength of our  society. Yet, as the foUowing stories reveal, families with special needs chUdren  face extraordinary demands—financial and  emotional—and the government offers httle  help.  Sometimes, so httle is offered the famUy is forced to give up their chUd. At that  point, the Socreds wUl kick in a httle more,  causing one to wonder if they favour foster  families over natural families.  (In these accounts, the privacy of the  families has been respected by the use of  pseudonyms. The stories are true.)  MicheUe is a seven-year old chUd with  cerebral palsy. She is intelligent, unable to  walk and communicates non-verbally with  the use of a computer. She is integrated  in a regular classroom—which she thoroughly enjoys—and receives physiotherapy  and speech therapy three times a week at a  centre in Vancouver. MicheUe is working to  overcome the handicaps she has to hve with.  Her parents work hard too, in an effort to  obtain the best possible care for their chUd.  Sometimes that isn't easy.  MicheUe's mother, Jennifer, described  some of the financial demands they face in  providing for their chUd. Wheelchairs can  cost between $1,500 and $4,000 and then  there are the modifications necessary because of MicheUe's growth. Casts, needed at  times in conjunction with her physiotherapy, are $200 a pair.  The family's extended medical benefits  cover 80 percent of these costs, but Jennifer  pointed out there is a limit to how much can  be reimbursed in a hfetime.  It's possible they wUl reach their limit before MicheUe is ten.  Then there are the day-to-day difficulties  hke transportation. Last year, Jennifer and  her husband incurred a $35,000 expense to  obtain an appropriate vehicle with custom  modifications to provide easier and safer  transportation for MicheUe.  This was a major expense for a famUy of  modest income, but they just didn't qualify  for assistance from the service clubs which  help some families.  Financial Hardships Pale  But financial hardships pale beside the need  Jennifer and her husband feel for trustworthy "respite care," to aUow them a brief  breathing-space one weekend. There is a  respite care home in Jennifer's neighbourhood, but it's not wheelchair accessible and  therefore excludes MicheUe.  Respite care and assistance in purchasing equipment are what Jennifer wants. She  said, "We're not putting these chUdren into  an institution which would cost the government more."  Marie is a young single parent who fostered a baby with special needs. He came to  her six weeks old in poor physical condition,  but was not identified as a handicapped  chUd. Marie sensed something wrong when  the baby cried constantly, was stiff and  tense and could not be consoled.  He needed special care from the start.  He was malnourished and required virtuaUy 24-hour attention. The first six weeks  were hard as Marie struggled to meet his  needs whUe waiting for the first maintenance cheque to arrive. She was on social  assistance at the time.  Three months later, after Marie insisted  on an assessment for the chUd, he was diagnosed with fetal alcohol syndrome. Support  payments were increased to cover his special  needs but what Marie wanted more than  anything was a break—just two or three  hours off a week.  She was refused help with respite care.  Her liaison worker advised her to hire a  homemaker with the money she received for  the baby's basic support.  This was a financial impossibihty. Marie  says, "If I hadn't had good friends to help  me, I don't know what I'd have done."  How Hard Are You  Prepared To Fight?  Then there is the parent's story which remains, for the most part, untold: too difficult to tell of how she finally relinquished  care of her severely handicapped teenaged  son because she could not afford, on her limited welfare income, to provide for his needs.  He is now in a foster home where foster parents get some financial help to support him.  Julia Downs of the FamUy Support Institute, which provides information to families with handicapped chUdren, deals with a  constant flow of enquiries, the overwhelming  number of which relate to financial needs  and the need for respite care.  There are sources of financial help avaU-  able, such as service clubs and sometimes  the government, but there is usuaUy a  rigourous means test.  Decisions, particularly government decisions, seem to be arbitrary, "... depending  on where you hve, who your social worker  is and how hard you're prepared to fight,"  said Downs.  Downs is aware of difficulties faced by  both natural and foster parents, and knew  of situations where foster parents were told  to use basic maintenance payments for  respite care.  She also emphasized there are many communities across B.C. where respite care facilities just don't exist, and others where  severely handicapped chUdren are not accepted into established facilities.  A new respite care centre in Terrace must  also serve Prince Rupert, Smithers, Houston and Kitimat. Long drives in the summer and weather-related inaccessibility in  the winter are what families wUl face with  this service.  Doug WooUard, Area Manager for Services to the Mentally Handicapped (MSSH),  confirmed there is no pohcy for subsidising natural parents for expenses incurred in  providing for a handicapped chUd's needs,  though "exceptions have been made around  medical expenses" worked out between famUy and social worker.  WooUard said, "The ministry has only  recently been reorganised to pay attention  specifically to the needs of handicapped  chUdren, the pohcy and procedures are  there and we're engaged in the process of  determining where service gaps are and trying to rectify that situation."  Natural parents who are poor, or who  simply cannot keep up with the financial  burden of providing for their chUd's needs,  stress the need for financial support for all  handicapped chUdren as a means of preventing the heart-wrenching separation when a  chUd is forced into care.  If the Social Credit government is serious  about "strengthening the family," these are  issues which need addressing.  Sensational trades, technology conference  by Suzy Hamilton  For years Marcia Braundy heard Canada  Employment say women weren't interested  in training for Trades and Technology. Employers told her they couldn't find women  to hire.  "But women were complaining they just  weren't getting hired," says Braundy, a  journey-woman with twelve years experience budding maUs and coal sUos in the  Kootenays.  So she organized Surviving and Thriving: A Canadian Conference for Women in  Trades and Technology, and invited trades  women, technologists, government educators and industry to participate. Airplane  phots, boUer makers, welders, scientists—  120 women in aU—came from across  Canada for the October 1-4 conference in  Naramata. Government and industry provided another 120 participants.  Women were given a chance to get in  touch with each other and do some skiU  buUding the first two days. They worked on  analysis and strategy sessions, how to enhance experience and increase female numbers in the work force. During the last two  days, government and educators thrashed  out ways with the women to accomplish  their goals through education and legislation.  Braundy says one of the biggest problems  tackled at Naramata was how to overcome  isolation on the job. "It's not just 'no one to  talk to.' You stand out aU the time because  you're different. Even after you've worked  long enough with the crew that they accept  you, when a new man comes along, you stiU  stand out hke a sore thumb.  "UntU women's numbers reach a critical  mass, women wUl be ahenated and isolated.  Coming to the conference was an opportunity to view ourselves as that critical mass."  While progress is being made for women  in trades and technology, changes are slow  to show. The federal government has cut  funding for their training programs in community colleges by 40 percent in the last  two years. Women in trades and technology "WITT" orientation programs were the  first to go.  And employers are stiU unwUhng to see  women as qualified employees.  "Tradition, sexual stereotypes are getting in the way of change," says Braundy.  "Men are threatened. And frankly, men  have something to be threatened about. The  women who overcome the incredible obsta  cles to succeed in trade and technology are  the cream of the crop."  Nonetheless, Braundy is optimistic. A national network of trades women and technologists emerged from the conference. This  organization wUl pressure government to reinstate WITT programs.  Work has begun on developing a national  women's trades and technical training institution. And a national data bank inventory  of female workers wiU aid employers having  difficulty finding qualified women.  "People really worked together at the  conference to find interesting and innovative solutions," Braundy says, "but work  has just begun."  Have you got information for the  data bank? Write to WITT, RR #1,  Winlaw, B.C. VOG 2JO or telephone  1-604-226-7624.  KINESIS Across Canada  WHAT' S NEWS?  by Gwen Bird  Don't buy their  products, again  Action for Corporate Accountability  (ACA), the group which organized a boycott of Nestle products between 1977 and  1984, has called for renewed boycotts.  The original action was undertaken to  oppose the promotion of powdered baby  formula in Third World countries where  poverty and sanitary conditions make it  an impractical—and often unnecessary—  substitute for breast milk. Although Nestle  igiied agreements in 1984 stating it would  not promote the products, ACA says both  the spirit and the letter of the agreement  have been violated.  The boycott hst now also targets American Home Products (AHP), the second-  largest infant formula distributor. Protest  leaders ask supporters to focus on specific products: Nestle's Taster's Choice Instant Coffee and Carnation Coffee-mate  Non-dairy Creamer, and AHP's Anacin and  AdvU pain rehevers.  R.E.A.L. Women  make trouble  A meeting last year between a Supreme  Court judge and three women from the  Canadian Advisory CouncU on the Status of  Women (CACSW) has been cited by members of R.E.A.L. Women as an example of  the undue pressure "radical feminists" exert on the Supreme Court.  Lettie Morse, leader of R.E.A.L. Women,  describes "radical feminists" as those in  favour of day care, sexual orientation legislation and abortion on demand.  The anti-choice group is particularly concerned that one of the CACSW delegates  involved in the meeting with Chief Justice Brian Dickson is also a member of  the women's Legal Education and Action  Fund (LEAF). Both R.E.A.L. Women and  LEAF have been granted intervenor status  in the case of Joseph Borowski who is arguing in the Supreme Court that the Charter  of Rights and Freedoms protects the fetus.  Members of R.E.A.L. Women stated they  had "been disadvantaged" by the meeting. Gwendolyn Landolt, a spokesperson for  R.E.A.L. Women said, "It seems unheard of  for a judge to meet with a special-interest  group."  A spokesperson for the Supreme Court  stated that the meeting, which involved discussions about the newly formed Canadian  Judicial Centre, was not at aU irregular.  Court challenge  to Meech Lake  thrown out  The Federal Court of Canada's rejection  in September of a case challenging the constitutionality of the Meech Lake Accord  marks the second time this year the issue  has been thrown out of court.  The group responsible for the challenge,  the Canadian Coalition on the Constitution, is made up of organizations including the women's Legal Education and Action Fund, Canadian Day Care Advocacy  Association, National Anti-Poverty Organization and the Canadian Institute for ChUd  Mental Health. They argue that the Meech  Lake Accord's proposed amendment to the  constitution wUl erode the federal system by  handing greater power to the provinces.  Of particular concern to feminists is the  effect the amendment wUl have on the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, which prohibits  discrimination on the basis of sex, disability and age. The groups' court challenge,  which began last May, questions the constitutionality of the accord, stating the overriding authority of the Charter must be protected. Otherwise, in cases where the rights  of specific groups mentioned in the amendment are in conflict with those not mentioned there, the Charter rights wUl not be  protected.  DIVA  A QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF SOUTH ASIAN WOMEN.  INFORMATIVE  ANALYTICAL  FEMINIST  FIRST ISSUE: APRIL 1988  INDIVIDUALS SUBSCRIPTION: $18.00  SUPPORTIVE SUBSCRIPTION: S3S.00  INSTITUTIONS SUBCRIPT10N: S40.00  >E CANADA, ADD $6-00 and CONVERT TO $ EQU1VELANT.  SEND MONEY ORDER/CHEQUE TO;  DTVA   253 COLLEGE ST. UNIT 194  TORONTO, ONT M5T 1R5  CANADA  (416)750-4007  The Federal Court judge rejected the  challenge on the grounds that untU the pact  is'ratified—deadline June 1990—"we do not  have an accord at aU." Coalition members  say they wUl appeal the decision.  Women testify at  Manitoba Native  Justice inquiry  Four women who testified before Manitoba's aboriginal justice inquiry described  the RCMP's faUure to conduct proper investigations into the deaths of six Natives  from The Pas.  The women, representing the Opasquiak  Native Women's Group, said the substandard investigations were examples of racism  in the province's justice system. Maria Flett  told judges, "We feel they were not fully investigated because the people involved were  Native." The cases include deaths between  19C8 and 1987, including at least one case  called suicide without a complete investigation.  Provincial court judges conducting the  12-month inquiry also toured a northern  Manitoba prison at which 85 percent of prisoners are Native or Metis. They heard of  beatings and harassment by police, denial  of information about rights, and of people  awaiting trial in prison for periods up to 13  months.  Council rules  people with AIDS  have "disability"  In the first ruhng of its kind in Canada,  the B.C. CouncU of Human Rights has established that people with AIDS (PWA)  are protected from discrimination under the  B.C. Human Rights Act.  The precedent provides protection by  identifying PWA as having a disabihty,  rather than with clauses written specificaUy  for HIV-infected people, as some activists  would hke. It covers access to public facilities, employment and buying or renting  Same sex spouses  seek security  Two gay men in Courtenay, B.C. who  have been denied spousal benefits under  Canada's Old Age Security Act wUl take  their case to court. Jim Egan and John Nes-  bit wUl challenge the constitutionality of the  act under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  The Old Age Security Act provides payments to spouses of those over 65 (including common law) if the couple's income is  $16,000 or less (the spouse must be aged 60  IPTO  homes. The ruhng comes as a result of a discrimination complaint brought by two Vancouver men who were evicted from their  rental unit. One of the men is an HIV carrier.  The B.C. Human Rights Act provides  protection from discrimination on a variety of grounds, including sex, age, race, religion and disabihty but—notably for many  PWA—not on grounds of sexual orientation.  to 64). The act defines "spouse" as "a member of the opposite sex." Egan and Nesbit  have been together for 40 years.  The court challenge is of crucial importance as one of the first to question the  strength of the Charter in cases of sexual  orientation discrimination. The Court Challenges Program of the Canadian CouncU on  Social Development wUl finance the case.  The Charter does not specificaUy name  sexual orientation as prohibited grounds for  discrimination, but the federal government  has stated it beheves the Charter does apply in such cases.  Black women  decry racism  in Nova Scotia  Some welfare recipients and low-income  workers in Nova Scotia had a chance to tell  their stories at a recent conference in Halifax. They described the inadequacy of the  current social assistance system which fads  to provide payments sufficient for people to  buy food and clothing for themselves and  their children.  Women told of being forced to borrow  clothes, forge checks, work as prostitutes,  and of being jaded and having their chUdren  taken away due to the lack of even survival-  level payments.  Speakers also addressed the racism toward Blacks in Nova Scotia. Single mother  Linda Randolph described the lack of Black  role models as one aspect of the problem.  She said Black chUdren "look at the labour  force and there is httle visibUity of Blacks.  Those that they see are working as cleaners  ... racism is ahve and weU in Nova Scotia."  Another speaker pointed out that whUe the  unemployment rate in Hahfax is 7 percent,  among the Black communities it is as high  as 75-80 percent.  The conference was sponsored by the federal Department of Health and Welfare and  the City of Hahfax.  KINESIS //////////////////S//////////////S/////////////////S//////S////////////S///////////////S/////////////////!  ///////////////////^^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  International  Nov. 16th  Pakistan's feminists  active in election  by Kinesis Staff Writer  The death in August of Pakistan's dictator, General Zia-ul-Haq, has provided the  country with an opportunity to reverse the  Islamic fundamentalist trend which characterized Zia's rule.  On November 16, Pakistan goes to the  poUs to elect a new parliament. Heading the opposition Pakistan People's Party  (PPP) is Benazir Bhutto, an Oxford-  educated, upper class woman whose father  was deposed—and later executed—by Zia  in 1977.  (Zia and his top military supporters were  kUled in a plane crash in which sabotage was  suspected.)  Like Bhutto, many of the country's outspoken feminists are of the upper class, a  fact the fundamentalists have used to denounce them. Even supporters of the progressive PPP have cited Bhutto's class background as grounds to doubt her commit  ment to the poor of Pakistan, noting she  has yet to make her pohcies clear.  Maleeha Lodhi, editor of the newspaper The Muslim and a Bhutto supporter,  doesn't deny their class privUege. "Educated women are the greatest force for moderation in this country, " said Lodhi in an  interview last July.  "We're not going to be put behind the  veU," she said.  Women's rights activists are counting on  a PPP victory to undo the drastic effects  Benazir Bhutto  Canadian arms sales  fan crisis in Peru  by Catherine Stonehouse  Conditions in Peru have reached a crisis  point, with the ruhng regime of Alan Garcia coming under increasing pressure from  the ultra-right, the Peruvian military and a  powerful social elite.  Recent measures introduced by Garcia  include a ban against membership in "subversive organizations." This, combined with  a deepening economic crisis marked by a  near 400 percent inflation rate has inspired  growing resistance from workers, unions and  movements such as Shining Path—Sendero  Luminoso.  Last summer Garcia announced further  legislation against so-called subversion, effectively sUencing the opposition press.  Death squads, similar to those in operation  in Argentina have emerged, working outside  the law with tacit government approval. A  death squad is considered responsible for  the recent murder of the lawyer defending Osman Morote, the imprisoned deputy  leader of Sendero Luminoso.  These events have directly effected Peruvian women in their struggle against the  increased cost of hving and as pohtical activists. Teresa Garcia Bautista, a peasant  woman, was recently imprisoned together  with others in the military headquarters in  Ayacucho.  "I was kept on a cold cement floor,  with no water or food for many days,"  Bautista has written. "At one point... several women were raped. If the women were  'good,' they got to have water."  EventuaUy returning home, Bautista discovered her house had been ransacked by  the military. Her husband forbade her to  publicize her experiences, but instead she  contacted the National Committee for the  Defense of Human Rights.  Canadian defense industries—and the  Canadian government—are contributing to  the Peruvian crisis. Canadian arms sales  to Latin America (including Peru) have  sweUed to an average $137 million per year  in the last five years. The federal government assists Canadian defense industries  with on-location representatives hnked with  the Department of External Affairs. Resistance groups in Peru have written an open  letter urging their Canadian supporters to  voice our protest at this, and exert pressure on our government to denounce Garcia, believing his intemaUy-divided party to  be vulnerable to such external pressure.  The Peruvian Peasant's Association  warns that without intervention, Peru may  soon experience the bloodbaths suffered by  Argentinians and ChUeans in recent years,  and the sort of human rights abuses common in Honduras and Guatemala today.  Send protest letters to Joe Clark, Minister of External Affairs, House of Commons,  Ottawa, Ont., KlA 0A6.  - 6jPfiJ8rll  -L ^EtljreSiiEfi               rl  IHL...'.:..  " LUttit .\              •»,' ■•  4 * •• L' "V  HSBttP  of some of Zia's legislation, notably the  Shariah Ordinance issued in late spring.  The ordinance established the Koran and  other Islamic texts as the foundation of Pakistani law.  Different sects are permitted, under the  ordinance, to interpret the Koran—and  hence issue legal opinions—as they choose.  One scholar has declared Bhutto could not  seek votes from namahram— men unrelated  to her by blood—in effect, saying she could  not campaign in public.  Islamization of Pakistan has been underway for some time. The Hadood Ordinance  of 1979 set up religious courts to impose traditional 'justice': stoning for adultery, pub-  he flogging and the cutting off of thieves'  hands. For the most part, public pressures  have kept such gruesome sentences to a minimum, but activists report that many more  women are now jaUed for zina— adultery.  War in Eritrea  claims women, children  by Trisha Joel  Shanty-town dwellers, Peru  Mebrat HaUe recently visited Vancouver  in a cross-Canada tour after spending five  months in Eritrea. We spoke with her about  the current situation for women in her coun-  try.  Eritrea is a smaU country situated on the  east coast of Ethiopia. It has a population of  3.5 million made up of nine nationalities and  two major religious groups—Christians and  Moslems. The area was colonized by Italy in  the 19th century and later invaded by the  Enghsh in the Second World War. In 1952,  the UN federated Eritrea to Ethiopia, intending it to be an autonomous region with  its own constitution and government.  However, Emperor HaUe Selassie of  Ethiopia began systematic repression of the  area, culminating in dissolving their federation and declaring Eritrea a province of  Ethiopia.  Eritreans foUowed a peaceful process of  demonstrations, strikes and appeals to the  UN. When everything was ignored, they began an armed struggle in 1961 to gain their  independence. The Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) has vast popular support through representative organizations  of peasants, workers, women, students and  professionals.  Forty percent of  the EPLF fighters  are women  Mebrat HaUe is a member- of the National Union of Eritrean Women. She says  what is now most important to women in  the resistance is the devastating effects of  the war. Nomadic and semi-nomadic people  make up 60 percent of the population. They  have suffered greatly through the drought  and famine of 1984-1986.  The EPLF agricultural wing had tried to  help through donations of seeds and tools.  However, constant bombardments by the  Ethiopian army of cluster bombs during the  day and napalm at night have forced thousands of people to flee, leaving everything  behind. Approximately 1.5 million people  are displaced within Eritrea and 900,000  are refugees outside the country. Some, including women and chUdren, have walked  100 km to reach the safety of the EPLF  camps where they are fed and cared for in  underground shelters and hospitals. These  resources are overcrowded now as more  refugees arrive. Medical supphes are very  hard to get through.  This war consumes half the Ethiopian  national budget, with most military aid  coming from the USSR and economic help  from western countries. With the recent  state of emergency, Eritrean civilians aU  over Ethiopia are at risk. Four hundred  were arrested in the capital Addis Ababa in  September alone.  HaUe talked about the work of the  women's union. The traditional role of  women excluded them from owning land,  doing certain occupations such as sewing  or being involved in pohtics. Through the  women's union, great strides have been  made—40 percent of the EPLF fighters are  now women and there are six women sitting  on the central committee.  New family and marriage codes have  been brought in promoting equal rights for  men and women. Cooperatives have been  set up for women's businesses. Last year,  women trained in agriculture and dressmaking went out to teach others new skiUs.  They have continued their work with barefoot doctors, midwives and literacy campaigns despite the disruptive nature of the  war around them.  Mebrat Haile  Most impressive, 40 percent of chUd  care workers are men. The EPLF and the  women's union are committed to work together for national independence paraUel  with the struggle for equality.  The prospects for Eritrea and aU Ethiopia  continue to look bleak as long as the war  continues. The EPLF has tried peaceful negotiations with the Ethiopian government  to no avaU. According to HaUe a bitter war  is being fought beyond international view—  and chUdren and women are the victims.  Economic help is not the solution—the war  must stop.  Anyone wishing further information  or to make a donation, please contact the Eritrean Relief Association at  737-0041, #202-2524 Cypress St., Van-  KINESIS S5k International  On the run: fleeing the fathers  and the fathers'court  by Kim Irving  In November, 1984, 23-year old Dorrie  Lynn Singley of Bay St Louis, Mississippi  walked out of her marriage of three years.  Her second marriage, to Tim Foxworth, had  given her a second chUd, Chrystal (Chrissy)  Marie. Dorrie moved to Texas, remarried,  divorced and returned to Mississippi in  1986. Upon her return, Foxworth filed for  custody of Chrissy. Dorrie was slapped with  a contempt order and jaUed for eight days  for obstruction of parental visitation.  At the same time in the next county,  27-year old Karen Newsom, a BUoxi school  teacher, was leaving her husband Eugene for  the last time. She took her two chUdren, 3-  year old Katy and 2-year old Adam and filed  a restraining order against Eugene who had  recently threatened her with a gun. In turn,  he filed for custody.  What Dorrie and Karen didn't know was  that their custody battles would become an  entangled web of controversy that would  haunt Mississippi newspapers for the next  several years. As part of their custody suits,  both women aUeged the fathers had sexu-  aUy abused the children. Both fathers denied the allegations and accused the mothers of fabricating the stories.  So Clear It Was Wrong  Both women were required to return to the  counties where their marriages were registered in order to pursue the hearings. This,  unfortunately, brought them under the jurisdiction of Chancery Judge Sebe Dale Jr.,  a weU-known and influential, conservative  judge.  What Dorrie and Karen had in their  favour was their attorney. Garnett Harrison  was best known as a civil rights activist and  founder of a Mississippi rape crisis centre  and transition house. More relevant to Dor-  rie's and Karen's cases, Harrison was a survivor of child sexual abuse and had only recently fought and won her own custody battle to keep her daughter.  For the next year Harrison would become  obsessed with these two cases, to the point  that she wouldn't take on any other work.  And these two cases would be her last.  As the custody battles dragged on, Gale  Martin, Harrison's office manager, formed  a support group for mothers and survivors.  The group's focus was to educate women  on the court's function and to provide peer  support. Karen joined the group almost immediately; Dorrie joined later that summer.  At the final hearing for custody in August 1987, Karen attended to Judge Dale's  court, armed with psychological and medical reports vahdating the sexual abuse. The  next day, Dorrie walked into the same court  room, faced the same judge with an equal  number of reports indicating Chrissy had  been sexuaUy abused. In both cases the  judge dismissed the aUegations of sexual  abuse as unsubstantial and both women lost  custody of their chUdren.  (Judge Dale was later quoted as saying  he never even read the sexual abuse reports  .nor did he ever intend to.)  Dorrie and Karen were given dates to  hand over the chUdren.  At the next support meeting after the  court hearing, Martin noticed a change in  the group of women. "When the decisions  came down on Dorrie and Karen," commented Martin in a recent interview, "it was  so clear that it was blatantly wrong. The  women in the group were hteraUy outraged.  Our meeting night was spent planning what  to do."  That evening the group split into two;  those who would remain as a support group  and those who would form the pohtical action group called: "Mothers Against Raping  ChUdren" (MARC).  Throughout the year-long trial proceedings, Judge Dale blasted Dorrie and Karen  with threats of contempt and charged they  were responsible in the chUdren's abuse. He  reportedly cried out "Shades of old Salem"  and accused the women of trying to convict  innocent fathers without any factual basis.  Lesbian-baiting became a main focus of  the fathers' defense. At one point the defense lawyer asked Karen if she had had a  lesbian relationship. As weU, Harrison was  accused of having affairs with the doctors  in hopes that if one were discovered, the  other would have time to flee. Dorrie telephoned her chUdren regularly, in particular Chrissy, who was staying with Martin  ("Right under their noses," said Martin).  "Dorrie felt guilty that she was not in jaU  supporting Karen," said Martin. "It took a  lot of energy to make her understand that  her being in jaU would not help Karen."  After 43 days in jaU Karen broke down.  Quoting the bible she had been given to  read in her cell, Karen had become convinced that she must obey authority. She  explained where her chUdren were and identified those involved in hiding them. Defeated and desperately wanting to see her  JUSTICE FOR CHRISSY  SANCTUARY BULLETIN  MARCH 21,1988  No child deserves to be raped.  And no child should be forced to live with her rapist.  —Dorrie Lynn Singley  and psychologists involved in the sexual  abuse investigations.  Dorrie's ex-husband, Foxworth, handed  out court transcripts of Harrison's own  custody hearing emphasizing the sections  where she had to defend her lesbian sexuality. Foxworth's attorney, who originaUy referred to their case as a "standard garden-  variety type," was now spitting out threats  such as, "Harrison should be hanged."  During his dehberations, Judge Dale accused Dorrie of being of immoral character because of her several marriages and the  fact that her most recent chUd was born  "out of wedlock." Karen was accused of  abusing her chUdren because she had subjected them to "so many doctors" (to provide validation of the sexual abuse for the  courts).  In mid-August Karen was required to  hand over her chUdren to their father.  Instead, she sent them "underground"  through connections with the women of  MARC. Then in late August, she walked  into the Marion county courtroom—much  to the objection of her attorney and the  women in MARC—and was jaUed for contempt of court. She was put in a cell with  20 other women and told she would not be  released untU she confessed to the whereabouts of her children.  After 43 Days In Jail  Later that month, Dorrie and her children faded to appear for their scheduled  court hearing. Instead, Dorrie sent Judge  Dale a letter from her underground sanctuary house in New Orleans, explaining why  she was unable to give her chUd, Chrissy, to  the man who raped her. A week earlier she  had hidden her chUdren in separate homes  chUdren, Karen told reporters, "At least  when they are older, I can say 'I did aU that  I could'."  The very day Karen broke her sUence,  Dorrie lost her voice. While in hiding she  had suffered from extreme headaches. She  refused to seek medical help, despite pleas  from friends and family, fearing her identity would be exposed. In mid-October, in  the middle of the night, Dorrie awoke with  a scream. As she was rushed to the hospital  emergency room, she shpped into a coma.  Later that day she died of a brain aneurysm,  under the ahas Marcie Smith. Her body was  returned to Mississippi. She is buried in the  Mississippi Choctaw Indian Burial ground.  "I used to beheve that it would have been  Dorrie, rather than Karen, who would have  broken first," reflected Martin who felt that  no one in the MARC blamed Karen for talking. "Of course the brain aneurysm could  make some people beheve that Dorrie did  break."  That evening the women with Chrissy  gently broke the news. Chrissy, understanding  the  situation  quite  weU, responded:  "now you'U have to hide me from Tim."  Chrissy assured the women that she did not  want to return to her father. With an intense FBI 'manhunt' underway for Chrissy  and with Dorrie's death, the women harbouring the girl could now be seen as kidnappers.  Despite the 24-hour surveUlance on her  house, Martin was able to shp Chrissy out  of the state. The destination was California where Martin beheved a more hberal  court system would protect Chrissy. Martin had been in contact with Legal Services for ChUdren of San Francisco, a nonprofit chnic that represents chUdren oidy,  but only within the state of California. A  few weeks later Martin, with Chrissy, surfaced in San Francisco. She called the chnic  and announced: "I'm here and I've got the  kid."  Attorney Sheila Brogna immediately  filed for protective custody and ad litem  (guardianship) for Chrissy. "Chrissy was  very clear that she did not want to go home  and that she did not miss her father," said  Brogna. The California court, the last hope  for Chrissy, eventually denied responsibility  for providing protection for the girl. She was  ordered back to Mississippi, but under the  condition that she be placed in a neutral  and safe home whUe an investigation into  the sexual abuse charges was completed.  "The judge said they don't hang people in Mississippi anymore," commented  Brogna to reporters after the hearing, "but  they do, they just lynch five year- old girls  instead."  On her first night back in Mississippi,  Chrissy was placed in the home of her paternal grandmother where her father had  unlimited access. Over the next few days,  Chrissy would be interviewed and videotaped by authorities and would recant the  sexual abuse by her father. However, it  is Brogna's belief that Chrissy has oidy  recanted that her father was the abuser;  she has not recanted that she was sexuaUy  abused.  graphic by Ann Saraz/n  KINESIS INTERNATIONAL  Brogna has received disturbing reports  that her father is aUowed to sleep with his  daughter, bathes her and has installed locks  on the bathroom door. It was no surprise to  Martin that Chrissy would retract her story,  after aU: "Chrissy knew what was safe and  what wasn't."  At the end of December 1987, Foxworth  was awarded legal custody.  At this date, Karen has gained visitation rights to her two chUdren—90 minutes  a week, supervised by her ex-husband, Eugene. Many women have speculated she wUl  remarry him, as there seems to be no other  recourse in protecting her chUdren, Katy  and Adam. Chrissy has been isolated on a  farm and is not aUowed to go to school or  have contact with any of her family.  In August 1988 her father filed a $1 iml-  Uon law suit, charging 19 women—including  Harrison, Martin and Brogna—with conspiracy to hide, aid and abet Chrissy.  A Grand Jury probe has been opened to  investigate the women's underground raU-  road. MARC has been ordered to hand over  their maUing hst, financial statements plus  medical and psychiatric records of group  members.  Harrison has fled to Florida. She no  longer practices law, has lost a 15-year relationship, and is wanted for contempt in  Mississippi. "I promised Chrissy she'd never  have to hve with him again," said Harrison  (to a friend). "What else could I have done  that I didn't do ?"  In San Francisco, Brogna has exhausted  aU legal avenues of appeal in her effort to  protect Chrissy. At tins time, aU she is able  to do is prepare a defense for the Foxworth lawsuit. "The bizarre thing about this  case," she recently commented, "is the sexual abuse aUegations have never been addressed."  Martin is also hving in San Francisco,  and assumes she is wanted for kidnapping in  Mississippi. Asked if she would do it again,  she quickly rephed, "You betcha, only this  time I wouldn't turn the kid over."  "There is  no north..."  One would think custody hearings would  be the safest place to raise aUegations of incest.  It is often a time when the father has limited access to the chUd and the "bond of secrecy" he has established with them may  have dissolved. Yet U.S. surveys have reported that incest aUegations are raised in  only two percent of aU contested custody  cases. Moreover, recent studies at Harvard  General Hospital indicate that, in 75 percent of these cases,the court has dismissed  the aUegations.  In most incest-related custody cases, chUdren are not believed.  Once aUegations have been raised, the  usual defense is to attack the credibility of  the chUd's testimony or disclosure, and to  broadside the mother's "moral character"  as a parent. It is not unusual for the mother  to be punished for raising the aUegations, as  in the Mississippi cases.  Such court action is not unique to  the state of Mississippi and is happening  throughout the U.S. and Canada.  Due to the unresponsive famUy court system, mothers are running. They are hiding themselves and their chUdren from the  rapist-father and the dead-end legal system.  This "underground raUroad" is appropriately named after the Underground RaUroad of the American civU war in which  Blacks formed a covert network to 'freedom'  in the north.  But as author Louise Armstrong has  written, for these mothers "there is no  north."  Communists, Terrorists, Lesbians  The decision to go underground is often  a last resort but certainly seen as necessary. There are many personal losses for the  mother, such as losing contact with famUy and friends, and giving up her home  and perhaps career. ChUdren must be taken  from school and they may lose valuable famUy and peer support.  Once underground, the mother may be  charged with contempt or abduction, and  therefore pursued as a fugitive.  American media reports state there may  be up to ten undergrounds operating in that  country. Some have both female and male  members and are affiliated with churches or  chUdren's rights advocacy groups. Most underground movements are capable of providing short-term shelter, food, some money  and in some situations new identification.  Many are capable of filtering women and  chUdren throughout the U.S., Canada and  Europe.  However, not aU of the undergrounds operate on feminist principles and some do not  view mothers as victims of the court.  The formation of the "women's underground raUroad," of which MARC is a part,  has been largely organized by women incest  survivors. "I only wish someone had been  there for me," is the reason given for this  activism. Due to recent mass media attention, MARC-like women's groups have surfaced in some 30 U.S. states.  Judges have a difficult  time believing incest  occurs in middle and  upper class families  Because they are viewed as highly threatening, the women's underground has been  severly criticized. American judges and  lawyers have alternately labeUed the groups  as "communists," "terrorists"and as a "lesbian cult." Therapists and psychiatrists  warn that chUdren in this underground may  be subjected to further abuse, citing statistics that most chUd-rapists were themselves  sexuaUy abused as chUdren. (Since female  sexual abusers are less than three percent  of aU reported cases, the chUdren in the  women's underground can be considered as  safe as possible.)  Missing chUdren agencies refer to MARC  as "false prophets." Some agencies have indicated they may be looking for the same  chUdren being hidden by the undergrounds.  (According to statistics, the parent most  likely to abduct a chUd and therefore be on  the run, is the father).  Although no organized women's undergrounds have been exposed in Canada,  Canadian mothers are known to have gone  underground. They have found assistance  through transition houses and women's centres, but more likely relied on famUy and  friends. MARC has reported receiving nu-  requests for help from Canadian  In Canada, women receive custody in 85  percent of the hearings, usuaUy by mutual  agreement of the parents. (However, in contested cases, fathers win custody 50 percent  of the time.) As weU, the Canadian divorce  act can reject joint custody on grounds it  might interfere with "the best interests of  the chUd."  While it can be hoped the "chUd's best  interests" criterion would provide protection for mothers and chUdren should incest charges be raised, a growing opposition  movement, largely of father's right's groups  (see Kinesis '88) are chaUenging Canadian  law.  As weU, traditional attitudes towards incest exist in Canadian family courts. Judges  have a difficult time believing incest occurs in middle and upper class families, as  the prevailing myth says it only happens in  poor, non-Anglo-Saxon or uneducated families. As a result, there is a strong tendancy  to apprehend the chUdren of lower class parents when incest becomes an issue, whereas  in other cases, the rights of the parents are  protected, even if that means ignoring the  incest charge.  When a stranger is caught sexuaUy abusing a chUd, we expect a certain amount of  public outcry and protection for the chUd.  When a father is caught sexuaUy abusing  his chUd, the rape is often seen as a "famUy problem," and the father, in the court's  eye, is just one of the players.  As one mother active in the American underground commented, "Unless you have 8  x 10 photographs of the abuse, your chances  of proving it are slim."  For more information about Dorrie Lynn Singley's situation, contact:  Sanctuary, PO Box 50476, New Orleans, Louisiana 70150  KINESIS by Nancy Pollak and  Yvonne Van Ruskenveld  Women's Issues—come election time, politicians have learned to at least hum a few  bars, if not actuaUy belt out a chorus now and again. Thanks to the women's movement,  the parties have been forced to develop platforms, issue pohcy statements, make promises  (swelling crescendo)—and pack their leaders off to a veritable "Him Sing" before the nation's TV audience.  Kinesis decided, for election '88, to forego a roundup of party statements and ask ourselves, what are our issues—as activists, as women of a particular grouping. What do we  want our next federal government to do? How do we frame the social/political questions?  Our hope is that, from this article, women wUl not only hear each others concerns, but  develop new questions to put to the candidates.  A note: two high profile issues—free trade and the Meech Lake Accord—are dealt with  throughout the sections (a remarkable number of women expressed concern over both matters). See page 16 for a more information.  Another Note: Evidently, there are"issues" missing from this survey—the environment,  defence and foreign pohcies, for instance. Space considerations made us select a few to "do"  in some depth. Also, the division of categories is arbitrary: obviously, disabled women may  also be immigrant women, and lesbian women have chUd care issues, etc.  The Issues—  While health care is a provincial jurisdiction, the federal government provides  a large part of the funding and therefore  can exert considerable influence to change  provincial pohcies it does not agree with.  The proposed free trade agreement with the  U.S., however, finds federal pohcy supporting B.C. provincial pohcy on privatization.  The B.C. Nurses Union has come out  strongly against the agreement, which  would undermine the quality of publicly  funded health care by aUowing the dramatic  expansion of privately owned and managed  health care facilities.  Pat Van Home of the B.C. Nurses  Union also sees a dangerous trend in ever-  increasing user fees, which are contrary to  federal pohcy. "Medical Services fees in B.C.  have chmbed this year by an average of 40  percent. In addition, fees for people in extended care facilities and other areas have  increased significantly," she says. The federal government should be taking a stronger  position in discouraging this erosion of the  health system.  The Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion (CCCA) are also worried about  user fees. Nora Hutchison of CCCA notes  that in the free vote held by the conservatives in the House of Commons, 45 percent  of the Conservative MP's (all men) voted for  an outright ban on abortion. The Liberals  do not offer much hope either. "Their leadership has an ambiguous position at best."  The NDP is the only party with a clear pro-  choice position.  CCCA is advocating action by the federal government to ensure that individual  provinces do not succeed in limiting access. "There could be a clause inserted in  the Canada Health Act to declare abortion an essential medical service. This would  allow the federal government to penalize  those provinces who did not provide access  by withholding the federal contribution to  medicare," Hutchison says.  "Above aU, there must be no recriminal-  ization of abortion."  Brian Mulroney promised during the  1984 election to establish pensions for  homemakers. In 1988, no such pension exists. Says Sharon CosteUo of the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC), the poverty of older women is "a  national disgrace."  Besides calling for the promised home-  maker's pension, NAC wants to see a  hefty increase in pension benefits under the  Canada/Quebec Pension Plans (at present,  benefits are only 25 percent of earnings).  Only a tlurd of women in the paid workforce have company pension plans; factor in  low wages and part time work, and many  women are virtuaUy doomed to an impoverished old age.  NAC also wants to see an automatic,  mandatory splitting of pension credits and  RRSPs in aU cases of separation or divorce. As weU, the federal Guaranteed Income Supplement should be raised to bring  the minimum income of aU seniors at least  up to the poverty hne.  Employment equity and training are two  major issues that need stronger action at  the federal level.  According to Marcy Cohen of Wom-  enSkUls, the Tories decimated the public  training system with their Canadian Job  Strategies (CJS). "AU avenues for training  women in non-traditional work have vanished," says Cohen, and the training for traditional occupations tends to be for short  periods, with a focus on low-level clerical  jobs.  Those clerical jobs are decreasing in number, says WomenSkUls. Since most women  stiU enter the labour market at that level,  fewer jobs and more applicants means  greater competition—and depressed wages.  Marcia Braundy of Women in Trades and  Technology reports the CJS faUs to direct  women towards programs designed to fiU  worker shortages in high-skiU occupations.  Furthermore, under the Tories, the number of "women in trades and technologies"  courses in B.C. have shrunk from thirteen  to two.  Braundy is also critical of the 1985 Employment Equity Act, designed to eliminate  employment barriers faced by women, Natives, people of colour and the physicaUy  disabled. The act applies to federally regulated employers, and requires statistical  reporting to the Canadian Human Rights  Commission (CHRC). There are no penalties for fading to meet statistical targets,  and according to Braundy, the CHRC was  not given any additional resources to deal  with the act.  Employers set themselves voluntary hiring targets, based on the number of poten-  tiaUy quaUfied individuals from each group.  Says Braundy, it wUl be impossible to get  qualified people unless special measures are  taken to actually recruit individuals from  the under-represented groups.  In 1986, the "no-fault" divorce system  came into effect. Among other things, it  eliminated the court appearance requirement for uncontested divorces.  However, if there is any contest for custody or maintenance, there is stiU a hearing  unless mediation has been s  The new act encourages mediation. Jessie  Gossen of the Vancouver Association of  Women and the Law (VAWL) would hke  to see more funding from the federal government to improve the process—"Better  trained mediators are needed." Both she  and Nerys Blown of the Society for ChU-  dren's Rights to Adequate Parental Support (SCRAPS) acknowledge that mediation oidy works weU between "equal" partners. Mediators need to be sensitized to the  power imbalances between women and men  in this society, and made aware of how those  imbalances impact on custody/maintenance  negotiations.  Before a divorce goes through, the law requires that the judge be satisfied that adequate support is avaUable for the chUdren.  Blown says the amount of financial information supphed to the judge is often insufficient to enable them to determine if enough  support has been sought.  SCRAPS beheves the federal government  should amend the Divorce Act to require  that detaUed financial information, including up-to-date tax returns, be submitted to  Inclusion of sexual orientation as a prohibited ground of discrimination in the  Canadian Human Rights Act is an issue for  lesbians in this election, says spokeswoman  Yvonne Johnson of the Vancouver Lesbian  Connection (VLC).  Lesbians and gay men are vulnerable to discrimination around housing, employment, access to services and parenting rights. The VLC is not alone in demanding protection: in 1985, the aU-party  Parliamentary Subcommittee on Equahty  Rights unanimously recommended the act  be amended to include sexual orientation.  Despite an apparent acceptance of the report, the Tories have done nothing.  Lesbians are also concerned about state  censorship and, according to VLC, would  be happy to see no further censorship bUls  tabled. (The Tories' last effort was roundly  criticized as "overkiU" by most feminists,  and died on the order table.) Says Johnson,  lesbians take an anti-censorship stand because censorship is likely to suppress anything that doesn't support the status quo,  including lesbian sexual representation.  In the same vein, VLC wants changes  made to federal customs regulations to end  the "censoring" of lesbian and gay materials at the border. At present, lesbian fiction,  non-fiction and sex magazines are routinely  stopped at the Canadian/U.S. border.  The B.C. Day Care Action Coalition  would hke to see cluld care being treated as  the genuine social issue it is—not as a short-  term vote-getter, or a four-year big bucks  scenario.  Spokesperson Mab Oloman says the Conservative's Canada ChUd Care Act, which  mercifuUy didn't clear the Senate before the  election caU, was a "last minute" act, writ-  as we see them  the court. As weU, the Department of Justice should be funding research on average  chUd support awards across Canada and relating these to the cost of raising chUdren  in each region.  Gossen would also hke to see the federal  government take action on the enforcement  of provincial Supreme Court supervised access orders. The B.C. provincial government  has refused to provide supervisors (usually  social workers), so parents must call on freelance supervisors (who are experienced but  expensive) or use unqualified people.  "There are very real chUd protection concerns here," Gossen says. "A chUd may be  put in jeopardy."  ten in such haste the Enghsh and French  versions didn't agree.  The act was slammed by feminist, labour  and poverty groups for fading to embody  a vision—or the practical means—to create  affordable, accessible, quality service across  the country.  What is needed, says Oloman, is a federal approach that won't let a province hke  B.C. get away with doing next to nothing. For example, the Socreds are pohticaUy  opposed to operating grants for chUd care  centres. "Services to chUdren, hke education, require operating grants," says Oloman. Under the Tories' proposal, operating  grants were avaUable only if the province  matched funds. Besides its lack of national  objectives, the act was criticized for its meager refundable tax credit.  The Meech Lake Accord is a source of  worry to chUd care activists who fear a  province hke B.C. would choose, under the  deal's proposed terms, to "opt out" of a federal chUd care program. And the free trade  agreement with the U.S. is also a concern,  especially since the Tories have endorsed a  for-profit model of cluld care service.  "Already, U.S. cluld care corporations  have quietly registered on the Vancouver  stock exchange," says Oloman, "enticed by  the knowledge they could receive subsidies [under a Tory-style chUd care program]." These major corporations, widespread throughout the U.S., are low-wage  employers providing what Oloman calls "an  homogenized chUd care model—Kentucky  Fried ChUdren."  The Conservative government is responsible for turning prostitutes into criminals,  according to Marie Arrington of Prostitutes and Other Women for Equal Rights  (POWER).  "BiU C-49 has stigmatized these women  and prevents them from being treated as  productive members of society," she said.  The 1985 bUl made any form of communication for the purposes of soliciting grounds  for arrest.  Increased harassment by pohce has  forced prostitutes to work in greater isolation, thereby endangering their hves.  POWER blames BiU C-49 for the murders  of more than 20 B.C. women—many of  them prostitutes—since 1985.  Arrington wants to see aU laws related  to prostitution abolished. Decriminalization and legalization—regulating prostitution through civU, rather than criminal  law—are not enough. She emphasizes, however, that the problems of prostitution cannot be treated in isolation.  "Women are forced into prostitution  by economic pressures—poverty, unemployment and the cost of chUd care. These  same pressures make it almost impossible  for them to get off the street and stay off,"  she says.  Arrington notes that, whUe some individual MP's have supported prostitutes  rights—in particular, Lucie Pepin of the  Liberals and Svend Robinson of the NDP—  neither opposition party has made any official pohcy statements on this issue.  According to Joan Meister of the DisAbled Women's Network (DAWN), the concerns of women with disabihties are the  same as women everywhere—with added dimensions.  For instance, she asks of the Conservative's program of new shelter units for battered women, "How many wUl be accessible  to disabled mothers or disabled chUdren?"  Of housing in general, Meister wants to  know how many co-op units funded by the  Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation wUl be accessible, and how many wUl be  avaUable to single moms who are disabled,  or whose chUdren are.  Disabled people are one of the groups the  federal Employment Equity Act of 1985 was  designed to help in overcoming employment  barriers (see also At Work. Judging from  statistics compiled in a recent DAWN survey, the barriers are formidable, which is  more than could be said of the EEA: 1987  reports from federally-regulated employers  indicate a plainly insignificant number of  disabled workers (Canada Post, for example, boasts 1.9 percent).  DAWN's B.C. survey found that fully  half of respondents were unemployed, despite being wUhng and able to work. Discriminatory attitudes on the part of employers, and lack of transportation and training were the reasons cited. The unwUling-  ness, or inability of employers to adapt to  women's needs—to rest periodicaUy, or be  able to use a washroom—speUs unemployment for disabled women.  And unemployment speUs poverty. Sixty-  eight percent of the women surveyed were  hving far below the poverty hne. That's one  of the reasons Meister is concerned about  free trade.  "How wUl social services be affected? The  health needs of disabled women wUl, I suspect, suffer under free trade," says Meister,  who also pointed to privatization of care facilities as a source of "insecurity" to disabled women.  Khatun Siddiqi, speaking for the Vancouver Society on Immigrant Women, says  their most important emerging issue is child  care. "It's linked to employment," she says.  "So much of the work immigrant women do  is temporary, insecure," and lack of appropriate chUd care is part of the problem.  Siddiqi says that, at present, "the image of chUd care is very middle class ...  we need multicultural day care structures,  where there is a sensitivity to cultural issues  so kids wiU not be alienated."  As for the Tories' Multiculturalism Act,  Siddiqi welcomes it as a "document to faU  back on," but is concerned it entrenches the  idea that multiculturalism "has something  to do with minorities." She suspects "mainstream" institutions and services wUl feel let  off the hook by the emergence of services  specificaUy for "non-mainstream communities," rather than striving to be sensitive to  the needs of aU people.  The free trade agreement is a direct  threat to the jobs of immigrant women,  say Siddiqi and Darshin Mann of the India  MahUa Association. Mann is also concerned  the Meech Lake accord wiU affect access to  social and health programs.  In general, she says, "We're really disappointed with the Tories ... they're not doing any work with the grassroots" but throw  smaU grants to immigrant women without  surveying their actual needs. She cites ESL  pUot projects as an example: nothing ever  gets off the ground, but the Tories "look  good."  Nora Patrich is active in the Latin American refugee community. She says free trade  and immigration pohcies are the big issues:  "If free trade becomes law, we're going to  be hving in a country with the same characteristics as the ones we fled ... dependent on the U.S." As for immigration legislation, "these pohcies are pohtical. The  same people who don't want us here have  taken the lands from the Native people and  don't want to give it back."  Patrich also stresses pohticians should  stop being afraid to say what they really think about abortion and "give us our  rights."  Typically, when the Conservatives got  around to "doing something" about violence  against women, they did it shortly before  calling the election, and they did it with  a big dollar announcement: last May's $40  million-over-four-years offering from Health  and Welfare.  Valerie Atyeo, executive director of EmUy  Murphy Transition House in North Vancouver, calls it the $40 million "fiasco,  an absolute joke to women now running  shelters and providing direct services."  Like Vancouver's Battered Women's Support Services (BWSS), Atyeo and other  transition house/rape crisis centre workers  haven't heard a peep out of the government  since May.  "Not a cent has come to any women's  organization, excepting the promise of a  first transition house national conference for  June 1989," says Atyeo, charging the government with bypassing the existing feminist network. She points to their "shelter"  plans as the fearsome shape of things to  come.  Under the new program, the Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation  (CMHC) wiU receive $22.2 to create 500  short-term shelter units for women and chUdren in crisis. "What is a unit?" asks Atyeo.  "It's a room. Room and food only. No ser  vices." Project Haven—CMHC's name— is,  in fact, a hostel: "an absolutely disgusting,  institutional model... where a woman with  two chUdren wUl share a 200 square foot  room."  Furthermore, says Atyeo, the whole  premise of Project Haven is based on  provincial support—matching funds—and,  in B.C., "we know MSSH is slated to get rid  of transition houses." The Meech Lake Accord is a threat to such a system. Atyeo says  the federal government should be assuming  a leadership role by "coercing" provinces to  take responsibility for family violence.  Atyeo describes as "staggering" the number of women seeking help, and the number  being turned away. "We need a new transition house in Vancouver, we need money  for education and support groups," says  Tamara AdUman of BWSS. "We would also  hke to see the federal government putting  pressure on the pohce to lay charges against  men who are assaulting women."  The Indian Homemakers need the funds  to maintain their province-wide activities  which include advocating around housing  and fishing issues. The Homemakers' Rose  Charlie is "still very concerned about the  high unemployment rate of our people ...  we need affirmative action. It's always being discussed, but [the government] is not  hearing us."  Charlie's other priority is the apprehension of Native chUdren. "The federal government is passing the [chUd welfare] responsi-  bUity to the province, but it is only when  the chUdren are wards that the province  does anything. They should be working with  us, not making pohcies and talking with us  later."  Both Nicholson and Richard have been  personaUy affected by the government's approach to restoring "Indian status" to Native women who lost it under the Indian  Act. The administration of BiU C-31, the  restoring act, is "a mess," says Nicholson,  who described how one of her daughter's application has been twice lost. At any rate,  she says, "they're doing it backwards. We  know who our people are." Says Richards,  "The government should do it again. There  are too many rules and regulations. They  should hear from the people again."  Richards is also concerned about the  amount of violence against Native women—  and pohce inaction. Referring to a recent  Vancouver manslaughter trial (concerning  the murders of nine women), Richards said  the Native community was weU aware that  women were being kUled "right and left,"  and questioned why the pohce did so httle.  Gloria Nicholson of the Professional Native Women's Association says it aU comes  back to social services, and lack of funding  for "so many needs that have not been met."  Irene Richards of the Indian Homemakers  Association of B.C. echoes Nicholson's concern, and is particularly angry the government continues to deny core funding to Native women's groups. "It's discrimination,"  says Richard "and it's so unfair ... We are  the backbone of the people." In Canada, no  Native women's group receives core-funding  from Department of Indian Affairs.  The money is needed for counselling and  training programs. "Not just employment  counselling," says Nicholson, "but counselling around chUd abuse, sexual abuse,  physical abuse, violence against women.  And in aU these areas we need proper job  creation programs to use the counseUors we  already have."  2 KINESIS  KINESIS  Nov. 88 13 Life Stories  nSxxxx^^^^^^nSn^^n^^  Making the most  of time left over  A couple of months ago I received the letter I'd been expecting for years. Tona wrote  to say Jennie had died. She was one hundred and five.  Toiia is Jennie's daughter. She's eighty-  four.  For the first 12 years of my hfe, Tona and  Tommy rented the apartment on the second  floor of our house. Jennie sometimes came  and stayed with them. They'd been hving  there for seven years before I was born.  I grew up with Tommy and Tona and  Jennie. At night when my parents sent me  up to bed after watching "Lawrence Welk"  on TV, I would go to Tommy and Tona's  apartment and hsten to "Our Miss Brooks"  on their radio. Jennie would sit in the big  chair next to the radiator and knit. Tona  would sit on the couch and I would he on  the floor in front of the big console radio.  Tommy would come home from work at  the garage, Tona would help him take off  his overalls and boots, then he would wash  up and she would make him dinner. When  "Our Miss Brooks" was over, Tommy would  tuck me in bed.  Then, when I was ten, Tommy died  and Tona and Jennie moved away, first to  the city and then to California. Tona had  worked for years as the switchboard operator at the hospital, so she got a job as a  receptionist untU she retired. Then she had  some kind of job where she was a hostess  by Nora D. Randall  on tour buses for retired people. She went  to Reno and Mexico a lot.  She got an apartment in one of those high  rises for retired people and she found a nursing home nearby for Jennie, who was bhnd  and becoming too weak to walk. She went  several times a week to have lunch with Jennie. I really didn't write very often and it is  most of what I know about 30 years of their  hves.  About two years ago, Tona wrote and  said she was moving from the apartment  at Mt. Rubidoux into a bungalow in a retirement place called Rose Garden vUlage.  She'd had enough of being up in the air  and she wanted to hve on the ground for a  change.  When she wrote to say Jennie had passed  away, I phoned. She was thriUed to hear  from me. I told her how sorry I was to hear  about Jennie. She said she missed Jennie  but that Jennie had been ready to go when  she was 90.  "But you know, Nora, aU that time of  waiting Jennie was quiet and her mind was  clear right up untU just before her last birthday," Tona said. This was the first year Jennie didn't sing along when the nurses sang  Happy Birthday. This year Tona had taken  the balloon, the cake and the flowers, and  gone up to sit with Jennie by herself because she figured this was the last time.  "You know," she said with a laugh, "the  last couple of years I've been getting kind  <2^<|j8fe*W^ in, l^^UJ^W^j,  presents  FAITH NOLAN  and  LUCIE BLUE  TREMBLAY  'Feminist, blues singer, guitarist, lyricist, composer  . and Black activist, Faith Nolan, who stole many  ^ hearts at this summer's Festival, returns in concert  with "le petit oiseau", the spirited and talented  Lucie Blue Tremblay from Montreal.  sun NOVEMBER 13 8 p.m.  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  1895 Venables at Victoria  'PUP 1   you'RE fJopp,N£ J^etI  ^ET  OFF   OF   MY CLE AH f/j  i Rug  Tms Instant:!!  of worried I'd go before her and there'd be  nobody left to watch out for her. But now  I'm all relaxed because Jennie is at rest and  I did my best. I wasn't perfect, but I did  my best. Sometimes I can't beheve I had  the strength to get through the whole thing  and neither can my friends, but, honestly,  the longer it went on the stronger I got, no  kidding."  She was so glad to be able to give Jennie  a nice funeral with pink carnations. Lots of  people came. Every Friday she went to the  same florist on Margaret street for pink carnations for Momma.  "When Jennie died, the nurse called  the florist and said 'Pink carnations for  Momma.' He said, 'What happened?' He  waited 'tU I went to the funeral and he  went over to my house and left a big yeUow  mum plant so it was waiting for me when  I came home. People have been wonderful.  Honestly, Jennie died a month ago tomorrow and I haven't eaten at home once. People call up and ask me out."  Tona has one friend with a real dry sense  of humour. Sometimes they laugh so hard  they wet their pants. "This friend came over  last night and said, 'Let's go for a root beer  float'," said Tona. "So off we went for a float  and my friend is limping along and she says,  'You know, I've been young and I've been  old. Young's better.' The other day when I  was complaining about some ache or pain or  other she said, 'You know, there's one way  to avoid aU that.' 'How's that?' I said. She  said, 'Die young.' And I said, 'Where were  you when I needed you. It's late now'."  Tona says Rose Garden-ViUage is full of  mostly women, retired nurses and teachers. They have a few laughs and they go  on tours. Just recently a bachelor moved in  next door and told her friend he thought  Tona was a lot of fun.  Tona said, "Fun, his grandmother! I took  care of my husband, I took care of my father, I took care of my mother and any  time left over is going to the old girl." Tona  hooted, "Once when I hved at Mt. Rubidoux, a bachelor moved in next door to  me. The next morning there was a hammering on my door. Nobody does that. I went  to see who it was: the guy next door. He  said, 'Can you cook?"'  "'To boU water,' I says. 'There's a restaurant right across the street. You take yourself over there and get yourself fed.' I gotta  picture of me getting up in the morning to  make pancakes. Not me kiddo.  "Keep in touch," she said to me before  we hung up. I had called to cheer her up  and that's what she had done for me.  CCEC CREDIT UNION  "Keeping our money  working in our  community."  When you bank at CCEC,  you are investing in a neighbourhood  business, in the co-op down the street,  and in the whole community's growth.  CCEC CREDIT UNION  33 EAST BROADWAY  VANCOUVER, B.C. VST 1V4  MON. & WED. 11 am-5pm  FRIDAY 1pm-7 pm  876-2123  KINESIS •S///S////SS//////SSSSS/SSSSS/SS/SSS/S//SSSSSSSSS//////  ///////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////////////////////////^^^^  Arts  Playing lor the  love of  the game  by Jackie Brown  Unlike so many of today's "amateurs"  who train and tour with the help of corporate sponsors or government aid, the Grads  worked full-time and held practices and  games at night. Tours coincided with vacations, and the team rehed on ticket sales to  pay traveUing and other expenses.  Not that there weren't any perks. After winning the first Underwood Challenge  in 1923, for example, ecstatic Edmonton  merchants gave the team medals and gifts  (coach Page got a brand new Chevy) and  the women did travel first-class most of the  time. They were also the darlings of Edmonton society and barely a day went by without a mention in the social pages.  But for the Grads, fame and fortune were  secondary. Playing the game they loved was  enough. That, and forging friendships which  have endured for decades, have been their  greatest rewards.  The Edmonton Grads in action, and in the locker room (at left)  In 1940, the team played its last game  in front of a standing-room-only crowd  of G,000 appreciative Ediuoiitonians. They  won, of course. In 1973 and 1974 respectively, the team was inducted into the Edmonton and Alberta HaUs of Fame. Coach  Page made it to the Canadian HaU of Fame  in 1971.  For 25 years they were the team to beat.  In Canada, they won every western and  national basketbaU championship and lost  only once at the provincial level. Against  U.S. competitors, they won the Canada/  U.S. Underwood Championship so many  times, they were permanently awarded the  series trophy in 1940. And they went undefeated at four.Olympics—winning aU 27 exhibition contests against the best players in  the world.  They even won seven out of nine exhibition matches played against mens' teams.  They were the Edmonton Grads, a  women's amateur basketbaU team that lost  oidy 20 out of 522 games for an incredible ,  96.2 percent average. From 1915 to 1940,  38 players—aU graduates from Edmonton  Commercial High School—made up the various teams, setting records that remain unbroken today.  Under the guidance of Percy Page, the  team's only coach and a rather stuffy sort  who preached the virtues of being ladyhke  both on and off the court, the Grads were  models of consistency and fair play. There  were no fancy maneuvers, trick shots or  spectacular slam dunks; just half a dozen  plays practiced to perfection.  Opposing teams were treated with respect. So much so, that during a particularly close game against arch rivals the  Tulsa Stenos, a Grad sUenced a rambunctious crowd trying to rattle a Steno player  about to attempt a foul shot.  The Grads were, indeed, amazing. But  their accomplishments become aU the more  phenomenal considering they did everything on their own.  A Woman's Eye View of Poverty  Two films in the NFB's "Feminization of Poverty" series are showcased Tuesday,  Nov. 8 as part of a community forum. For Richer, For Poorer (pictured above)  premieres—a documentary about a woman leaving a violent marriage, then dealing with the single-parent poverty treadmill; No Way! Not Me features Rosemary  Brown urging high school students to take charge of their futures. After the  screening, a panel will discuss local services for women. (Free, at Robson Square  Media Centre, 7:30 pm)  Today, the Grads are enjoying a resurgence in popularity thanks to a new NFB  film called Shooting Stars which chronicles  the team's rise to international fame. Hopefully, it wUl help set the record straight in  a few areas. Great though they were, the  Grads' achievements drifted into obscurity.  After aU, who pays much attention to Canadian athletes, let alone a women's basketball team that played in Edmonton over 40  years ago?  Consequently, some members of the  sporting world are making false claims. Case  in point: a U.S. university basketbaU team  was recently labeUed a record-breaker for  winning 61 games in a row. The Grads, however, won 147 consecutive games.  One record book also states that a professional male player's 56 foul shots in a row  is the aU time high. But Grad forward Margaret McBurney sunk 61 in a row during a  1931 exhibition game.  The lack of recognition doesn't surprise  McBurney (now Margaret Vasheresse) who  says the attitude is typical of the States.  "They even claimed they invented basketbaU but it was Dr. James Naismith, a  Canadian, who invented it," said Vasheresse  in a recent interview.  Now 79 and hving in New Westminster  (she came to Vancouver in 1929), Vasheresse is one of several ex-Grads featured  in Shooting Stars. Although she modestly tries to play down the current publicity, with a httle encouragement, her obvious pride in the team's achievements comes  through.  Says Vasheresse: "They were some of my  best memories. It was good times and wonderful fellowship."  Asked to compare the sports scene then  and now, Vasheresse says today's athletes  are under too much pressure to win at aU  costs. Money, she adds, is the culprit. "We  wanted to win but Mr. Page always said  we were ladies first and basketbaU players  second. There wasn't that urgency to beat  someone badly or be rough. We played for  the love of the game ..."  Shooting Stars can be rented through  the National Film Board. Video copies  are also available. CaU your local NFB  for more information.  KINESIS v^^^^^N^^^^J^^  ARTS  Deal us out  Altering constitutional chromosomes  by Nancy Hannum  THREE DEALS, ONE GAME:  B.C. Women Look at Free Trade,  Meech Lake and Privatization  by Ivy Scott, Heather WeUs, Kathryn  Zeron, EUen Woodsworth  and Margaret Coates  Burnaby: Women's Economic Agenda, 1988  $3.00  Radical change is happening in this country, change that wUl alter the 'constitutional chromosomes' of Canada. And these  changes wUl be a direct hit on the hves of  women.  'This is a sUent war, and it is being  waged on us, our chUdren, our families and  futures." So argues the Women's Economic  Agenda (WEA) in their booklet on free  trade, the Meech Lake Accord and Privatization.  The apt title of this booklet, Three  Deals, One Game conveys the nature  of the game: a unified attempt by right-  wing, conservative leadership to pattern the  Canadian economy after those of Britain  and the U.S.  All three deals are meant to change the  role of government in Canada. Federal powers not bargained away to the U.S. in the  free trade deal would be shifted to the  provinces by the Meech Lake Accord. Many  of the services or crown corporations remaining in federal hands would then be sold  off or contracted out through privatization.  The language used by advocates of these  deals—often government itself—is slick and  misleading. Privatization, which in fact includes the selling of public property ("the  people's property") to private owners, is often touted as returning power and property  from the government to the people. Winch  people? we should ask.  For those people trying to find the truth  about these issues, there are pUes of documents to read—interim agreements, background papers, final agreements ... This  summer a group of women from WEA did  their own pouring over documents. Much  of their work was to find, read and digest  the information avaUable, and to look at  it from the perspective of women. Three  Deals calmly lays out the history, explains  basic concepts and describes the major components of free trade, Meech Lake and Pri  vatization. It then highlights the elements  of these deals which wUl affect women.  The result is a very useful, concise primer  and resource guide. The book is weU-  researched and weU-footnoted. It gives contact names for resource groups and talks  about strategies for response. The language  is straightforward. Three Deals helped me  to find words for my sometimes speechless  anxiety about these issues.  WhUe the book does a fine job of including the perspective of women, I would have  hked more analysis of the potential impact  on women's hves. Sometimes, Three Deals  does this weU.  ...women s economic  realities are  invisible...  For example, the book describes research  by the B.C. Federation of Labour showing  how, under free trade, 6,000 jobs wUl be lost  in the B.C. fish processing industry because  Canadian plants wUl be unable to compete  with American plants. Canadian companies  could relocate in the U.S.—but what wUl  happen to the 6,000 Canadian jobs?  These 6,000 jobs are mainly held by  women: "Relocation wUl have effects on  many immigrant and Native women who  are employed in the industry. The Native  women are often the sole support for families because the communities have no other  work. Whole communities wUl be affected  as people move to try to find other jobs."  The next question is, what wUl happen  to these women, these communities? This is  no minor disruption.  This scenario also raises the question of  how women fit into the economic hfe of a  community. When the big companies leave  town, what's left behind? To have a full picture of the Canadian economy, we need to  include the household economy, the informal economy and, in some communities, the  Indian economy of hunting and fishing.  Economic hfe is far more comprehensive  than the market place and the perspective  of the women who work in these other economic spheres is required.  NAC Campaign During the Federal Election  The following material* are amilnble for th» federal  •lection. When ordering, please specify whether you  went the material! in English or French. '  WOMEN VOTE! BUTTONS i  order* of 10.   $L0O each plu» i  re available in  109 handling charge.  I WOMEN VOTEI T-SHIRTS wilt use the some logo ea the buttons.  I $7.00 each for NAC member group order*.   $10.00 each for individual*.  ELECTION ISSUES KIT.   Extra copies of thla Special Election Issue ofFemi  •  Action have been printed for wider distribution.  $2.50 / I hub (bo Handling  charges).  LEAFLETS focusing on Free Trade, Child Care, Violence Against  Women and Reproductive Choice.  Free.  5 "WHAT EVERY WOMEN NEEDS TO KNOW  ABOUT FREE TRADE" BOOKLET.  These new 12-  page booklets include summaries in Spanish, Creek,  Chinese, Portuguese, and Italian.   Indicate in your  order which languages) rou will need.  Free.  National Action Committee on the Status of Women,  344 Bloor St. W., #505, Toronto H5S 3A7  But when women's economic realities are  invisible and much of women's work is considered irrelevant to the market economy,  then a direct hit can be made without even  a press conference.  Another example from the book, addressing the impact of free trade on social services: "Of all the developed nations, Canada  THREE DEALS  ONE GAME  BC Women Look At  Free Trade  Meech Lake  & Privatization  Women's Economic Agenda  has the highest number of workers in the  service sector. The service sector accounts  for 70 percent of aU jobs ... Moreover,  83 percent of the total jobs in this sector  are held by women. Almost 90 percent of  women who work both inside and outside  the home are employed in the service sector.  In addition, women are the major benefactors of the service sector because they are  the primary customers."  Despite the fact the government acknowledges there wUl be some free trade "dislocations," and despite the fact that monies  have been set aside for compensation and  government studies have been done to compensate certain industries, "it is unhkely  that adjustment programs wUl be instituted  in the service sector since studies of the  impact of free trade in this area were neglected."  Seventy percent of Canadian jobs have  not been studied, 83 percent of these jobs  are held by women. Invisible?  The impact for women is not only potential unemployment, but the whole quality  of hfe whether we work outside the home  or not. As the WEA booklet says, "Women  wUl be left to pick up the pieces."  Economic plans which leave out major  variables (in tins case, half the population  and aU economic activity outside the "market place") are doomed to faUure. Perhaps  the whole country needs the perspective of  women on the economy—at tins very moment!  As a member of the women and the economy committee of the Women's Research  Centre I recommend Three Deals, One  Game as an essential basic handbook for  women who want to look at those three  major economic, constitutional and social  policy initiatives. Take this book and begin asking questions. Build the information  base now—we have a long struggle ahead.  What are the economic activities of  women in your community—paid and unpaid? How do women in your community  participate in the economic hfe of that community? What is our economic agenda?  WEA i3 also doing workshops on  these issues. To arrange a workshop,  or order the booklet, contact WEA, c/o  B.C. PIRG, TC304, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, B.C. V5Z 1S6. Telephone 291-4360.  Richly detailed novel  of Second World War  by Joni Miller  GONE TO SOLDIERS  by Marge Piercy  New York: Fawcett Crest, 1987  $4.95  / conceived of this novel soon after  finishing Woman on the Edge of Time in  1976. At that time I began accumulating books, clippings, bibliographical references and queries and began slowly to  evolve the characters. The magnitude of  the task was apparent early and daunting to me ...  I read so many memoirs, biographies  and histories of government officials,  of OSS and SOE personnel, of camp  survivors, of American generals and  would-be generals, of marines and those  who covered their war, of the French  Resistance, of the race riots in Detroit,  of the decoding operations in Washington, Hawaii and England, that acknowledgement even of the finest is pointless.  —Marge Piercy, Afterword  Gone To Soldiers is Marge Piercy's  ninth and most ambitious novel. I was personally lost inside it for several days. In paperback, it runs to 770 pages of densely  packed story, detailing the hves of ten fictional women and men caught up in the tur-  moU of the Second World War.  The characters include people working in  the Office of Strategic Services (OSS—U.S.  Intelligence), young Jewish American men  on the fronthnes, an emerging lesbian flying with the WASP, young women working factory jobs whUe waiting for the war  to end and their men to come home, a  'women's' fiction writer turned war correspondent, and a young woman working with  the French underground.  Relationships between family members,  lovers and co-workers are richly detaUed, as  are the psychological changes each character  goes through whUe pitted against new and  deadly obstacles. Piercy brings you close  to the people she is inventing and writing  about. Anti-Semitism and prejudice on both  sides of the war are painfuUy detaUed. A  young woman is captured by the Gestapo  and brutalized in a concentration camp,  whUe across the ocean a Jewish American  soldier is taunted and threatened by his  anti-semitic commanding officer.  The book is sometimes marred by awkward passages of writing, but because I continued to be intrigued by the story, I found  this forgivable. Gone To Soldiers marks a  new maturity and growth for Marge Piercy  as an author. I beheve this book wUl find  a much wider audience than her previous  works. It's an impressive achievement, heav-  Uy researched, and weU worth checking out.  KINESIS Arts  ,<^^^*2^^m**2%2%**m?.  Panel at W.I.F.  Breaking barriers of racism, art  by Antoinette Zanda  Vancouver was treated to a unique event  at Women in Focus in September. Entitled  "Making Ourselves Visible: Breaking Barriers of Racism and Art," the program was  organized by Sadie Kuehn, whose foresight  gave the feminist community an opportunity to meet Sonia Boyce.  Boyce is a Black British woman who  was artist-in-residence at the Vancouver Art  GaUery that month. Some of her work was  exhibited in VAG's show "The Impossible  Self."  Boyce and three women of colour artists  formed a panel, moderated by Yasmin Ji-  wani, to discuss how racism affects their art  and its reception in public.  The panelists aU drew from their countries of origin in creating their art. Eva Yuen  is from Hong Kong. Her art career includes  studying in the U.S., working in art education, and exhibiting in Hong Kong, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore. Even  with these major shows, Yuen has oidy exhibited at the University of B.C. (UBC) in  the three years she has been in Canada. She  is presently in Hong Kong with an exhibit.  Susan John was nine years old when her  family emigrated from Korea. When she re  turned to Korea in 198G for eight months of  study and visits, she gathered material for  her work which deals in part, with the assumptions of racism.  John is studying education at UBC. She  beheves it would be unrealistic to assume  she can support herself through her art  work.  "I've coped by using my art as a way of  bridging two cultures" is the way Sherida  "Racism is a threat to the delicate...  framework of what holds humanity  together"  Levy explained the integration of her hfe  in Jamaica and Canada. In the work Levy  shared with the audience through shdes, Jamaican images were combined with images  from other cultures. She has studied at UBC  and the Banff Centre School of Fine Art in  Alberta.  In Banff, Levy thought her work was valued and appreciated—and that she received  special attention based on her race. She  didn't appreciate the tokenism.  This latter view, together with concerns about being marginalized as women  of colour, was also expressed by the other  artists.  Auschwitz survivor raises  voice against neo-facism  by Maura Volante  For Esther Bejarano, the lessons of what  it means to be a woman in a fascist patriarchy were meted out in a particularly harsh  fashion.  The 62-year old singer and accordion  player who brought her pohtical folksongs  to the Vancouver Folk Festival this summer  is a survivor of the infamous Nazi death  camp, Auschwitz.  "In the concentration camp it was something terrible to be a woman," she recaUed,  sitting under a shady tree at Jericho Park.  "You had to do what the SS said, and there  were so many SS men who could teU you,  'You take your shirt off!' or 'You have to be  naked now, I want to see you!'  "Or we had to stand in a row, naked, and  the SS came and they were laughing at our  bodies. I don't know why they were laughing, but it was shaming and degrading. It  was specially hard for women, especially if  you were a young person. At tins time there  was no nude bathing and that sort of thing.  We were aU very shy and this was something  terrible. I was very much afraid."  She had good reason to be afraid, as  she played her accordion in the Auschwitz'  Girls' Orchestra whUe trainloads of newcomers arrived at the camp, most bound  for the crematoria. "They didn't know what  Danger of Tokenism  People of colour face the problem of wanting their art work exhibited in a competitive market, in a society where their work  does not appear to be valued. This behef  stems from the observation that few people  of colour have been approached to exhibit  in major art galleries in Vancouver. There  is also no promoter of Chinese art in Vancouver.  When people of colour are asked to exhibit, there is the danger of tokenism. As  weU, curators are often unfamiliar with  mediums used by artists, in terms of  space and conservation. For example, Yuen  sculpts with bamboo and paper, an art  form that is rarely validated in mainstream  Canada.  The other manner artists may obtain  support for their work is through grants.  The panel discussed problems that arise  when applying for money from hinders who  are unfamiliar with certain art forms, or  who won't support work challenging the status quo on issues such as racism.  Yuen and Boyce mentioned the value of  people of colour exhibiting work collectively  as a solution to the isolation artists experience. In Britain, this was done by Black  artists who curated collective works. According to Boyce, this supported artists  "... who are trying to make work about  issues that don't faU into the ethno-euro-  centric art history format."  Initially the idea of artists taking an active role in promoting their work stemmed  Please see Breaking page 18  awaited them," she said, "but we did. Yet  we had to play as they arrived." They also  had to play every morning as the prisoners  went out to work and every evening as they  returned.  Terrible as tins was, Bejarano's musical  ability was what saved her from the fate of  so many millions in the holocaust of Nazi  Germany.  Now Bejarano uses her abihties, not only  musical, but organizational and oratorial, to  work against fascism in Germany and other  parts of Europe.  Working with a group of young people in  a group called Siebenschdn (Martin Jacob-  sen and Holger Marsen on guitars and vocals, and Cornelia Gottberg on cello and vocals), this fiery httle woman sings with passion and conviction, mostly in Yiddish but  also in Spanish, Italian and Russian.  ...in West Germany, they didn't learn  anything about that time until a few  years ago  ■0im»  She translates parts of the lyrics in her  introductions (enough to make the audience aware that these are songs with important messages) and aUows the energy of the  voices and instruments to communicate the  rest.  "But I am not oidy a singer," Bejarano reminded us. "I am president of the  Auschwitz Committee in the Federal Republic of Germany and so I have much to  do. I go to the schools and tell the students  stories about myself and about other people  who have suffered in that time. Because in  West Germany, they didn't learn anything  about that time, untU a few years ago, and  even now they don't tell them exactly what  happened during the years from '33-'45."  Fragment from Sonia Boyce's "She ain't  Holding them Up, She's Holding On  (Some English Rose)"  Neo-Fascism On The Rise  It seems hke additional punishment for survivors hke Bejarano to be expected to educate the young people. But, as is often the  case with survivors of many horrors (incest,  sexual assault, nuclear testing, torture, to  name a few) these are the very people most  committed to this educational process.  It is not only education about past atrocities that Bejarano sees a need for, but about  the unpunished war criminals stiU at large,  and the rise of neo-fascism among present-  day youth.  "There are so many old German fascists  running around, who did not go to jaU,"  said Bejarano. In fact, many of the ex-SS  are getting big pensions! They teach the  young people what they have to do ... in  France, in Belgium, in HoUand and in Germany there are so many smaU groups. They  are camouflaged with other names so you  don't know if it is really a neo-fascist organization. Our government does not do anything against them."  Like many holocaust survivors, Bejarano  has not always been able to talk so freely  about those horrific years. After the war she  hved in Israel for 15 years, escaping the issue as weU as the place where she endured  so much. But she eventually had to move  back to Germany.  "It was the climate in Israel I couldn't  stand," she said. "But it was also the pohtical chmate I couldn't stand," referring  to the Israeh government's treatment of  Please see Survivor page 18  KINESIS  Nov. 88 17 CJ^^^^^^^S^^^^^^^  ARTS  a  Learning to ride something dangerous..."  by Jeannie Lochrie  Pubhshed in Vancouver since March  1987, (f)Lip defines itself as "a newsletter  of feminist innovative writing." (f.)Lip certainly does not resemble any other hterary  journal in his-tory!  For one thing, the reader must flip the  pages, clipboard-style, which effectively undermines the authoritative book format of  most hterary journals. And the use of high  quality paper in vibrant colours gives sensuality to the reading experience: volume 1  is in shades of pink; volume 2 in gorgeous  greens.  (f.)Lip is published by Betsy Warland,  Angela Hryniuk and, until recently, Frances  (Sandy)  Duncan.  Their  goal is  to give  is common practice in new writing. Words  hke gynecology become gyn/ecology, moving meaning from the dictionary definition  of woman's disease to woman's ecology.  This deconstruction of language is what  theorists call speaking in the mother-  tongue. As readers, we can discover not oidy  the sexism behind man-made language, but  work that reflects the diverse theoretical approach to new writing.  Writers hke Marlene Nourbese Phihp deconstruct the inherent sexist and misogynist etymology (he-temology?) of language.  For instance, her "DISCOURSE ON THE  LOGIC OF LANGUAGE": "language/1/  anguish/ang uish/english/is /a foreign anguish."  a space to play  ...to give lip  women writers a space to play with innovative language—to give lip to the language  of the patriarchy, so to speak. The brackets  around the "f" are dictionary slang denoting the feminine gender; "lip" is defined as  a metaphor for 'ecriture feminine'—writing  in and from the place of the feminine, as opposed to mascuhne gender-biased writing.  Ecriture feminine is a theory that originated with French feminist thinkers. At  best, the theory is an attempt by women  to re-claim the "lost feminine," to write  about ourselves as subjects. Barbara Godard describes tins as what "has remained  always on the other side of (male) language, in the realm of bodUy experience—  menstruation, chUdbirth and lovemaking,  especially between two women" (From Go-  dard's introduction to Lesbian Triptych  by Que'becoise writer Jovette Marchessault).  Deconstructing the sexist language of  the Fathers through a variety of methods  (hke bracketing words and using slashes  and dashes to break up sexist meaning)  are then able to construct new female words  from the old. (New words hke chtorivage!—  clitoris/vagina).  This kind of thinking is behind—and  in—the writings published in (f.)Lip. Four  writers are showcased in each issue. Although mainly Canadian writers, international writers are now represented. In every issue to date—and there have been six  so far—the editors have carefully chosen  Mind you, this is not to everyone's liking. One very irate reader's reaction was to  call deconstruction "mental diarrhea." It is  much to (f.)Lip's credit that disparaging  critiques are published along with the good.  (f.)Lip also publishes wonderful prose  works more experimental with form than  with language. Charlotte Watson Sherman's "Thorns," a piece about female muti-  Breaking from page 17  from a conference attended by 200 Black  artists who discussed commonalities and  shared art information.  A possible drawback to people of colour  taking over exhibition space and curating  their own work is that it reheves the gallery  curators of the responsibility of finding out  what is avaUable in their communities.  History Within Contemporary Art  Panelists spoke of creating contemporary  art in an historical context. Boyce observed  that British libraries have very httle art by  Black artists other than so-called "primitive art." Today, Black artists in Britain are  working with themes such as the history of  colonialism and racism; themes reflected in  Boyce's work.  Levy specificaUy chooses to work in  mixed media to reflect the contemporary  nature of her work.  Regarding Chinese art, Yuen spoke about  artists being tied to traditional formats  which don't allow contemporary images—  her example was an airplane in the background of a bird on a bamboo painting.  "The problem today that Chinese artists  are facing is how to be contemporary with  the traditional media," said Yuen.  John uses photographic images to reflect  both traditional and modern hfe. Through  her compositions, she raises issues of sexual and racial pohtics, and "... challenges  complacencies of cultural pohtics."  In this article, it is not possible to reflect  the scope of the panel of artists and audience participants. It is also not possible to  convey the importance of an event that gave  women of colour and other artists an opportunity to connect and support each other as  artists.  The hope is that curators in this community wUl take the challenge to learn the sMUs  of exhibiting work unfamiliar to them, as  weU as work that questions the status quo.  Encouraging those in the art world, John  said, "The assumptions of cultural superiority have to be exorcised by aU those of  good intention. Racism is not an issue that  concerns those of immediate threat or those  who are racist. Racism is a threat to the delicate ... framework of what holds humanity together—patience and respect of difference and change."  Survivor from page 17  the Palestinians as an example. Though she  supports the existence of the state of Israel,  she asserts that "the Palestinians must also  have their own country."  The transition to her home country was  not easy. "When I first came to Germany,"  she said, "and I saw people walking in the  streets, I always looked at the older people and thought, 'I can't trust them. Maybe  they killed my parents, or my sister'."  "But I got in touch with people who had  fought the Nazis, and this is the only way I  could hve in Germany. I have my anti- fascist friends, and tins is very important. It  took me a long time before I could feel weU."  She spoke of an incident which compeUed  her to go public with her stories. "In 1978  I was confronted with neo-Nazis, standing  next to me, with an information table for  their junk. I was so angry, and it was something I could not understand. This was the  first time I said, 'I have to go to the schools;  I have to teach the chUdren; I have to tell  them about my hfe,' and so on. My own chUdren didn't know anything. I didn't want  them to get involved in aU this, but afterwards, when they were aU grown up, I told  them and now they are big anti-fascists."  Her daughter, Edna, is not only an antifascist but also "a very good singer," said  Bejarano. "Sometimes she sings with me  and I'm very sorry that she didn't come  here."  The support from her chUdren and the  other young people she works with gives Bejarano a great optimism. She says, "We are  getting more and more and more. We are  going to the churches, and they are helping us. The anti-fascist movement is growing. So many of the young people want to  know what happened."  Another important connection in the  anti-fascist work is the feminist movement.  "In Hamburg," she said, "we have a  very big feminist organization and I know  they are aU anti-fascist." She spoke of  singing at feminist rallies and calling for  women's movement support for the antifascist events.  "We work together with them, and it's  very good," said Bejarano.  lation; and "BaUs" by Chris Wind, a satire  on men and sports, for example. Both works  generated a fair share of debate over the  subject matter's pohtical correctness.  Radical Literary Theory  Subversive best describes the content/  context of (f.)Lip. The work is passionate, fiercely feminist, often poignant, and  always thought-provoking. A strong point  in the magazine is the "Working Notes"  where the writer describes her process, effectively deconstructing the myth of mystery behind writing. These inspiring words  read hke journal excerpts—a very female  form of writing—and here we get to the  heart of the writer: Heather Prince writes  of being a woman writing: "It's learning to  ride something dangerous. It's a lot of not  being afraid. Now what could be safer than  words?—bears, perhaps. Perhaps."  A quibble I have with (f.)Lip is the lack  of French translation. For example, in Susan Knutson's essay about ecriture feminine, the editors did not provide an Enghsh  translation of French quotes. Consequently,  meaning is totally lost for readers who, hke  me, don't read French. A feminist publication must always safeguard against such  elitism.  The issue of accessibihty seems to be  thorny for (f.)Lip contributors. For a magazine that defines itself as pohtical, it is a  question that must be addressed. How do  we put radical hterary theory into pohtical  practice—from the realm of the imaginary  into the realm of the everyday?  Simply put: how do the hterary sisters  network with their working-class sisters?  Language is power. Who gets to wield that  power—to write—has always been a major  issue for feminism, as indeed for any revolutionary movement.  How do we put  radical literary theory  into political practice?  The question seems to be: how do we  share our discoveries with each other? How  does the work of the writing community  spiral out into the larger women's community? Perhaps in the not too distant future (f.)Lip wUl stimulate debate by calling from its readership papers on such important issues as: Where does the practice  of innovative writing fit with everyday pohtical struggle? Is it the role of the feminist  writer to educate?  And most importantly, how do we translate ecriture feminine into a language of revolution?  KINESIS Arts  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^  Nicaragua pictured  Scenes with the rhythm of daily life  by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  When Claire Kujundzic returned in 1986  from her year as a stamp designer in  Nicaragua, she carried in her head and her  heart and her photo album many images of  Nicaraguan daily hfe. But it was not untU  Tools for Peace asked her to design their  1988 fund-raising calendar that she produced the series of 13 images entitled "An  Affectionate View of Nicaragua."  So successful was the first calendar that  Tools for Peace asked for a repeat performance. The result is "Bread with Dignity,"  containing 12 more depictions of the daily  hves of Kujundzic's Nicaraguan friends.  All 25 paintings, prints and collages—  along with Kujundzic's photos, travel journals and stamp designs—are on display at  Women in Focus GaUery, Nov. 7-25. A number of Latin American cultural events sponsored by Tools for Peace and the Support  Committee for the Women of El Salvador,  and partially funded by CUSO, are taking place in the gallery throughout November, and nicely complement the work on the  walls.  "We would have hked to show the work  some place hke La Quena coffee house," Kujundzic says, "but the space was too smaU.  So instead we decided to bring more community activity into the gallery—theatre,  film, music and shde shows."  The pieces in the exhibit portray scenes  from the rhythm of daily hfe: food preparation, laundry, coffee picking, weddings, cluld  care, companionship. They are, in fact, settings the artist passed in the course of her  day. The title piece, "Bread with Dignity,"  takes its name from a song by Nicaraguan,  Luis E. Mejia Godoy: "Queremos pan con  dinidad" or "We want bread with dignity."  Many of the pieces are tributes to the  women of Nicaragua. Kujundzic hked the  confidence women had in their bodies. She  found them proud of their appearance, but  with a pride that was largely uninfluenced  by the advertising propaganda which bombards North American women.  Her images of the Nicaraguan men are  also very positive.  "I found the campesino (country) men  very gentle and shy and respectful," says  Kujundzic. "Even the men in the military  were often comfortable for me to be around.  It's the first time I haven't been scared of  guys in uniform. I had a hard time with the  sexism on the street, much less subtle than  what we have here, but I could walk home  alone, late at night in Managua, and not be  scared."  "Mother and ChUd" is one of Kujundzic's  favourite pieces and she has reproduced it  as a sUkscreen.  "Motherhood has always been central to  women's identity in Nicaragua," the calendar notes tell us. "This is stiU true, yet  women are also now branching out into activities and occupations that were never  open to them before the revolution."  Throughout her work, Kujundzic has  conveyed with respect a portrait of the  people of Nicaragua. She hopes the Bread  with Dignity exhibit and its accompanying  evening programming wUl attract a wide  range of visitors who may see the struggle  in Nicaragua is not just an abstract pohtical  struggle. Rather it is a community of people much hke ourselves, who are simply trying to lead their hves and earn their bread  with dignity.  Evening Events  Nov. 7: Exhibit opening with hve music/  art auction, 8 pm.  Nov. 10: Sarah Murphy reading from her  novel, The Measure of Miranda, the story  of a Canadian woman's growing awareness  of the struggle for peace in Central America. 8 pm.  Nov. 15: Claire Kujundzic's slide-show on  stamp production, and the art and murals  of Nicaragua. 8 pm.  Nov. 18: Shde show on women in El Salvador. 8 pm.  Nov. 23: Powerplay (Headhnes Theatre)  performed  by people  in  the  Vancouver  refugee community. 8 pm.  Nov. 26: FUm night. 8 pm.  For more information contact Janet Lake-  man at 872-2250.  "Bread with Dignity" is on display  at Women in Focus Gallery, #204-456  W. Broadway, November 7-27, 1988.  Gallery hours are Monday to Saturday, noon to 5 pm. Please see Bulletin Board, page 22 for the calendar of  evening events.  Confusion, shock...then  taking charge of their lives  by Valentina Cambiazo  I WASN'T BORN HERE/  HISTORIAS DE VIAJES  INESPERADOS  Stories of Latin American  Immigrant Women  A collective creation  directed by Lina de Guevara  From the first scene of / Wasn't Born  Here, it is clear this play wUl not only be  a profoundly moving experience but also a  very unusual one. Because, in fact, the actors are not professional actors, their first  language is not Enghsh, and as they explain  when they introduce themselves to the audience, they were not born here.  So, from the very beginning several theatre conventions are broken. There is no  need to create an Ulusion of reality because  these women are immigrants and their stories are true, and therefore very personal.  They come from El Salvador, Nicaragua  and ChUe, and in their countries they were  factory workers, dressmakers and teachers.  They have had to abandon their homes to  save their hves and now find themselves in  Canada as immigrants.  On stage they have ceased to be statistics. We learn their names and the impact  of their personal stories is powerful.  The six women move on the stage creating images with very simple props: chairs,  shawls, coloured scarves, aprons, masks and  "Bread with Dignity" by Claire Kujundzic  signs. We see them washing clothes by the  river, their chUdren playing around them,  untU suddenly the sound of a military helicopter frightens them away.  This single image of violence leaves us  with a sharp vision of what they have left  behind. In the next scenes, we see their confusion on arrival in Canada, the shock of the  cold chmate, the homesickness and frustration of not being able to communicate.  v*.   M  \&®S?%/L&  .._.;;/  I     *  ^p^^jJM  2*    .        * ;L  In the first act fear, sorrow and despair  are expressed in scenes where the women  remember and mourn the loss of their famUy and country. In one scene a woman paces  her apartment in winter, contemplating suicide. But in the second act there is a sense of  hope. The women realize that, in their new  country, they have rights not only at work  but also at home: in one scene a woman who  has been beaten by her husband seeks help  in a Woman's Shelter. There is a sense of  freedom and of taking charge of their own  hves.  There is also humour in these women's  stories as they laugh at their difficulties with  the bewUdering Enghsh language. In fact,  the play is acted in both Enghsh and Spanish to remind us of the two cultures they  must somehow hnk. The most positive message of the play is the wUhngness on their  part to understand their new culture and to  create a bridges between the two. And the  proof their play is a success is the reaction  of the audience: a standing ovation and an  immediate acceptance of the actors' invitation to join them in a meal and celebration,  which they prepare on stage.  A documentary video has been made  of the play I Wasn't Born Here, which  originated at the Belfry Theatre in Victoria and was presented at both the  Vancouver and Victoria Fringe Festivals. Called Creating Bridges (producers  Penny Joy and Robin Hood), the video  is 28 minutes and is available through  the Media Network Society at 666 Herald St., Studio A, Victoria, B.C. V8W  1S7 (telephone 381-SU4).  KINESIS  Nov. 88 19 Letters  Rest home  operator asks  for answers  Kinesis:  Kathie Sommer's "Severe crisis in B.C.'s  Long Term Care" {Kinesis, Sept. 1988) is  an issue close to my own heart as I am a rest  home operator. WhUe I sympathize with the  phght of Martha and aU those hke her, I  would hke to ask whether Kathie Sommer is  informed that Long Term Care is no longer  wait-listing Personal Care patients for rest  homes but are instead sending out home-  makers to these people. (A httle odd if they  are understaffed.)[ "Personal Care" is one  of several levels of care designated by  the provincial government.]  This must be wonderful news for aU those  lonely people who are too fraU to keep up  with the housework, laundry and, most importantly, food purchase and preparation.  For those who won't turn the heating on  for fear the bUls wUl be too high and, as  the dark evenings draw in, the fear to answer the door to a stranger. How assuring  it wUl be for them to know a homemaker  wUl be there to give them 15 minutes to one  hour's attention, when they could be hving  in one of the many smaU homey rest homes  and have 24-hour care and attention and security of knowing there is always someone  there for them?  Not ah rest homes are large institutions  with staff which leave their job and caring  behind at the end of the day. We have been  told by LTC that it is due to cutbacks. I  would be interested to know where the savings are coming from as we oidy get $3.46  per day for each PC patient. Are the home-  makers and administration staff working for  less than tins sum per hour? Unlikely.  I'm not suggesting aU elderly people  should be put into a home, but those who  would prefer the security should be more  informed. In your article you mention how  httle money is left. Has anyone bothered to  work out how much is left of the pension  cheque of aU those people alone at home  paying rent, heating, TV and grocery bUls.  You may also be interested to know of the  foUowing rules and regulations. We as rest  home owners under the LTC program are  not aUowed to take a private resident unless  LTC is unable to fiU the bed. H we do manage to find a private resident, they have to  be assessed by LTC to confirm they are PC  chents.  We are not aUowed to advertise. I know  of an operator who was told to take her vacancy sign down. We are not aUowed to admit any person assessed higher than PC.  Yet we may have a patient re-assessed and if  we feel we are capable of the care-giving this  person needs, the resident may stay in our  facility. At present five out of seven of our  residents are Intermediate Care One (IC1).  We have a part-time registered nurse but we  stiU can't fiU our beds with IC1 residents.  We have also been informed that after  March 31, 1989 we wUl be unable to seU  our business as a rest home unless it reaches  certain standards, one of which is wide corridors for wheelchairs. PC residents don't  have wheelchairs.  I was under the Ulusion this government  is for free enterprise. Yet it seems to be trying to put smaU PC rest home operators  out of business whUe they are buUding more  government-run facilities. Free enterprise is  fine as long as you're not in competition  with the government.  Perhaps Kathie Sommer would hke to  delve a httle deeper into the phght of the  elderly and PC homes. Maybe she wUl get  more straight forward answers than we seem  to get.  Yours faithfuUy,  Maria Watson,  Victoria, B.C.  Placing children at further risk  Collaborative artwork  is unacknowledged  Kinesis:  In your October '88 issue, the article on  Gallerie referred to the "jaU series" and  also the sculpture "Solitary" as if they had  been done by Persimmon Blackbridge alone.  The series "Doing Time" is a combination  of sculpture by Persimmon Blackbridge and  writing by MicheUe Kanashiro-Christensen,  Geri Ferguson, Lyn MacDonald and Bea  Walkus. "Solitary," one of the pieces from  the series, is by Persimmon and Lyn.  Neither the sculptures or the writings are  meant to stand alone—the power of the  work is in the combination of both elements.  What's disturbing is that this is the fourth  letter we've written to a publication which  has either ignored or marginalized the work  of Bea, Geri, Lyn and MicheUe.  Why does this keep happening? Part of  the reason is that collaborative artwork is  unusual in this society. We're used to artists  working alone and we don't quite know  what to do with anything outside of that.  Another part of it is the fact that Persimmon calls herself a sculptor, but the others  don't call themselves writers. Even people  who are committed to fighting classism may  unconsciously give "professionals" more importance.  Finally, Bea, Geri, Lyn and MicheUe are  writing  about  their  hves in  prison and  on  the street.  As  ex-prisoners they are  marginalized in aU of society, as weU as in  feminist and art magazines.  Lyn MacDonald  Persimmon Blackbridge  Vancouver, B.C.  Naturopathic Physician  216-2760 W. BROADWAY  VANCOUVER. B.C.   V6K 2G4  (604)  732-4325  WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE  HOMEOPATHY  COLON THERAPY  Kinesis:  Re: "Court faUs to protect abused chUdren" (Kinesis, Sept. 1988). It is indeed  dangerous that abused mothers are branded  vengeful and manipulative whUe chUdren  speaking out on abuse are similarly called  bars in the court system. This system and  those using it should be protecting chUdren  from further Violence—not placing them at  risk. That this occurs, however, is at least  partly due to the misuse of abuse aUegations  by parents and their agents during custody  disputes.  In one local dispute, a lawyer and client  delayed filing an abuse complaint untU the  last moments of a scheduled appearance before a Supreme Court Justice—while a custody trial was underway and a few hours  before the chUd was to be exchanged for  her time with the father. The substance of  the complaint—a reddened labial area. The  diaper-aged chUd had a vaginal infection  which the mother had been treating without informing the other parent. The antibiotic treatment was not completed and the  infection had rebounded.  There was no evidence of abuse and the  complaint was disproved. The lawyer had  endeavored to make use of the court's wish  to protect a chUd to further the chent's case.  This particular trail lasted 23 days and the  parties emerged from it with a shared custody arrangement very close to that in place  when they entered.  In another case, the mother made more  specific aUegations of cluld sexual abuse after leavmg the father and then later abducting the chUd, in violation of a court order.  Parent and chUd were later apprehended  and the father "won" temporary custody.  During the trial, the sexual abuse aUegations were determined to be unfounded, yet  there was evidence he had physicaUy abused  the mother. Despite his violence, he was  awarded sole custody, further upheld upon  appeal. The false aUegation and the abduction were key factors in the eventual determination.  A woman faced with the possible loss of  control over her chUdren, as women are in  custody disputes, is also facing a good deal  of cultural criticism should she lose. That  some women are wUling to make false abuse  aUegations to retain this role should come  as no surprise—she has been directed for  most of her hfe toward her function as reproducer/primary caregiver to her chUdren.  To lose her chUdren is to lose her principal and patriarchally proscribed identity as  a mother. Her actions, in this context, are  understandable. Understanding her reasons  does not, however, moderate their effect.  There is evidence, according to your article, that the courts are fading to protect  abused chUdren. Such a faUure is due as weU  to unsubstantiated abuse complaints. While  some may be legitimate, despite the courts  findings, many are clearly self-serving and  false. Those who aid in filing such accu  sations, knowing their true nature, themselves become abusers because the net effect is to trivialize real complaints, as outlined by Noreen Shanahan, placing chUdren  at further risk.  I am neither a father's rights advocate  nor do I pretend to speak for men fighting for their parental rights—whatever they  may be. I'm not writing Kinesis to minimize or deny the severity and frequency of  chUd abuse. It is a real and underreported  problem of overwhelming proportions. It  should be noted, however, that neither of  the two examples of false aUegations I've  described were sensationalized in the popular media nor are they the only instances  of false abuse complaints in custody actions  with which I am familiar.  Neither are aUegations of abuse the  oidy type of action taken by parents in  order to "win" custody. Allegations of  homosexuality, wrongly viewed as affecting parenting abihty by the courts, and  parental kidnapping are similarly used. This  is a confrontation—with each side choosing their tactical weapons with a view  to a strategic victory, often ignoring the  long-range consequences to the "spoils"—  chUdren.  WhUe anger, fear and moral outrage may  explain actions, they do not justify them.  In this light, the responsibihty for women  and chUdren who speak out on abuse being ignored by the courts hes both within  the patriarchal legal system as weU as  with those—parents, lawyers, and "advocates," who knowingly or dogmaticaUy support even a minuscule number of false aUegations in order to fulfill their own agendas.  David Roy  Vancouver, B.C.  Noreen Shanahan responds:  Just because the courts decide there  was no sexual abuse it doesn't mean there  was no sexual abuse. In both your examples, you believe the judge and not the  woman, giving this person total authority.  In the first case you cite, the little  girl's vaginal infection could very well  have resulted from sexual abuse. And  in the second case, evidence of physical abuse on the mother (ruled admiss-  able) leads one to suspect sexual abuse  could also have occurred, as argued by  the woman and denied by the court.  Concerning the maimer in which sexual abuse allegations are dismissed or  undermined in family court, I based  much of my findings on research from:  VIS AC (Vancouver Incest and Sexual Assault Centre); WAVAW (Women  Against Violence Against Women); and  the Vancouver Status of Women. These  are all well-qualified organizations who  expressed tremendous concern with this  trend.  Although you don't intend it, your  letter further convinces me of the validity of these findings.  Saying women 'cry rape' in custody  disputes not to protect their children  but to protect their identities as mothers is a misinformed and sexist attitude  not only insulting women but adding to  the already insidious misogyny of the  courts.  Finally, I give the last word to child  psychologist Paula Caplan: "Considering the pervasiveness of child sexual  abuse and its traumatic, often life-long  effects, it is worrying that people concern themselves with blaming women  when the crimes are committed almost  exclusively by men."  KINESIS Arts  //////////////////////^^^^^  Recipes and  revolution  in Manitoba  by Michele Valiquette  This spring, just in time for the International Feminist Book Fair in Montreal,  Virago Publishers added a new title to its  Modern Classics series and an important  chapter to Canadian journalism herstory.  In the years immediately preceding the  First World War, Francis Bey non was  a familiar name in many households in  English-speaking Canada. Beynon edited  the "women's page" of the Grain Grower's  Guide and there she earned a reputation for outspoken commitment to women's  rights. Her column "The Country Home-  makers" was a key element in the success of  the smaU but influential prairie newspaper.  Today, Beynon is virtuaUy unknown,  even to her "hterary granddaughters" carrying on her work in the field of feminist  communications. Virago's re-publication of  Aleta Dey, the novel which Beynon patterned closely after events in her own hfe,  should help turn that situation around.  I found Anne Hicks' (1987) introduction  to Aleta Dey, a brief look at Beynon's activism and her newspaper career, almost as  intriguing as the novel itself.  Beynon was born in 1884, says Hicks,  and spent most of her early hfe on an isolated Manitoba homestead. She trained as  a teacher but in her early twenties foUowed  her older sister (LUhan Beynon Thomas) to  Winnipeg.  Like LiUian, she quickly became immersed in reform pohtics and took an  increasingly active part in the struggle  for women's suffrage. Her sister had been  women's editor at the powerful Manitoba  Free Press since 1906 and in 1912 Francis  also entered newspaper work. She was the  first full-time women's editor at The Grain  Growers' Guide.  That same year the sisters, along with  NeUie McClung, helped found the Manitoba Pohtical Equahty League, a group dedicated to securing "civic, legal and economic  power for women."  THE VOTE   G1R-L  1WANT THE VOTE,AND 1 MEAN TO HAVE THE  VOTE .ThATS    THE SORT OF GIRL 1  /VM _~  From The Grain Growers' Guide, July 8, 1914  The League counted ten journalists  among its members. Over the next three  years these women used their considerable  skiUs to bring the issue of women's suffrage  before the public and to keep it there. Their  highly organized campaign turned sympathetic papers throughout the west into forums for discussion of women's rights.  Alongside the usual recipes, fashion and  hght entertainment, Francis Beynon's popular page in The Guide took up matters  ranging from social gospel reform pohtics  and married women's property rights to  Ohve Schreiner's new book Women and  Labour.  By the time suffrage was won in Manitoba, in 1916, Beynon's column had gained  a wide and enthusiastic readership, and  control of the "women's content" in The  Guide, was almost completely in Francis'  hands.  Under Threat of Censorship  But Beynon seems to have had httle time  to savour this success. For her, as for many  other women's rights activists of this period,  feminism and pacificism went hand in hand.  Although Canada's involvement in the  First World War and mounting pressure  from patriots prompted some of these  women, NeUie McClung for example, to  modify their positions, Beynon refused to  do so. And from her column in The Guide  she undertook a persistent critique of the  effects of militarism.  The consequences of her protest were severe: she was forced to make a public break  with her former aUy, NeUie McClung. And  by 1917, her open opposition to the war and  to conscription had attracted the attention  of the state, which had recently conferred  upon itself wide-ranging powers for stopping such activity.  Crossland Consulting  Personal Management Services for Artists  Individuals, Non-Profits Groups,  Small Companies  * FIRST CONSULTATION - FREE *  Grant and Proposal Writing  Bookkeeping Services, Taxes  Resumes, Career Counselling  \; By Appointment Only  Jackie Crossland 682-3109 '(  ;.•**.-*•*•**.**.•*<*-**.•**•**•*•*•**.•**.■**.•**.•**.•**•**•**.•**•*•'  That summer, under threat of censorship—even imprisonment—she resigned  from her job at The Grain Growers'  Guide and left the country. Aleta Dey, the  book Hicks calls "fictionalized autobiography," was published two years later, in New  York.  Like Francis Beynon, the novel's heroine Aleta is a weU-known Winnipeg newspaper woman, a feminist, and a determined  pacifist. But contemporary readers may find  some aspects of the narrative puzzling, if  not annoying: parts of it positively drip with  sentimentality, whUe others strain creduhty  beyond reasonable limits.  These problems converge in the novel's  love interest, McNair, Aleta's polar opposite  in every imaginable respect: he's a Tory opposed to suffrage, he's a militarist, he even  drinks and turns out to have a wife. Aleta  won't give up her pohtics; nor wiU she give  up her man.  Beynon works her way out of this corner,  and saves Aleta from having to make a compromising choice, by resorting to a pair of  devices readers of Victorian novels wiU recognize instantly: sudden death (I won't teU  you whose) and a posthumous letter.  Despite these hterary flaws, in some  senses even because of them, Aleta Dey is  a fascinating book. Beynon's heroine is trying to fashion a new understanding of womanhood and of humanity out of the insights  of feminism and pacifism. And she's doing  so in a world not yet free of the previous  century's constraining ideologies about femininity and family.  Beynon reconstructs for us both the intellectual and the emotional contexts in which  early twentieth century feminists hke Aleta  worked. She suggests the high personal toll  activism can exact, the isolation it can impose.  Virago has done Canadian herstory a service in reprinting this book. Now I want  more. I wonder if anyone has plans for  a biography of Beynon? Or for a collection of columns from The Grain Growers'  Guide"!  KINESIS  Nov. 88 21 Bulletin Board  Read this  AU hstings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 75 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 i  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wUl be items  of general public interest and wiU appear at  the discretion of Kinesis.  Classified are $6 for the first 75 words or  portion thereof, $2 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  DEBBIE   BRYANT:   DRAWINGS   &  PAINTINGS  Showing until  Nov.  6th at  Fettucini's  Cafe, 1179 Commercial.  E V E N T SB E V E N T SIG ROUPS  POETRY READING  Diana Hartog and Jan Horner reading  Nov. 4 at 8 pm at R2B2 Books, 2742  W. 4th Ave., 732-5087. A free event  sponsored by Women and Words and the  Canada Council.  AFRICA DAY  "Women in Developing Africa" conference will be held at the YWCA Nov. 6, 9  am-5 pm. Focusing on agriculture, food  production, education, politics, forestry,  polygamy and monogamy as they affect  African women. All women welcome. By  donation. Coffee and lunch provided.  READING  Nicole Brossard reads from The Ariel Letter (Women's Press), Nov. 29, 8 pm at  R2B2 Books, 2742 W. 4th Ave. $2 for the  reader.  FABULOUS YARD SALE  Proceeds to support Unlearning Racism  workshops. Sun. Nov. 6 10 am-4 pm at  1003 E. 11th (at Windsor).  WOMEN AND FREE TRADE  A thrilling political forum Mon. Nov. 7.  See ad pg. 2 for details.  INTERNATIONAL LESBIAN WEEK  Workshops, a dance, an erotica show and  steambath, and alcohol-free bar night,  storytelling and a parade down Commercial Drive (Nov. 6) are all features of  Vancouver's third ILW, Oct. 31-Nov. 6.  For details about workshops, the parade  and other events, call 254-8458.  RAPE OF GAIA  Photo-etchings, photographs and mono-  prints by Lynda Laushway. Showing until Nov. 18 at Malaspina Printmakers  Gallery, Granville Island.  TOUCHSTONE THEATRE  5 special daytime performances of Jewel  by playwright Joan MacLeod Nov. 16,  17, 20, 23, 24 at 2 pm at the Firehall Arts Centre, 280 E. Cordova. This  one-woman show is a sensitive, humour-  tinged exploration of a woman's memories and emotions after the tragic death  of her husband. Tix $6 at door.  LESBIAN SEX/LESBIAN PASSION  An evening of provocative comedy and  lesbian sex education with JoAnn Loulan  Nov. 18, 8 pm at Robson Square Media Centre. $10 before Nov. 1, $12 after  Nov. 1. Also: a day long workshop offering strategies for increasing lesbian sexual  and emotional satisfaction Nov. 19, 10  am-5 pm at Robson Square Media Centre, $60 before Nov. 1, $75 after Nov.  1. Proceeds to benefit Celebration '90.  Women only.  WOMEN'S MUSIC  The Van. Women's Music Festival Society presents the 2nd fundraising evening  at the Talk of the Town Nov. 27. Doors  open at 7 pm, live music at 930 pm. Sliding scale at door $2- $4.  A WINTER DANCE  Come and enjoy the last VLC Dance of  1988, Dec. 2 at Capri Hall, 3925 Fraser  St., 8 pm. Tix $4-$6 at door. Wheelchair  accessible. Childcare off-site.  CAN. FARMWORKERS UNION  Is pleased to invite you to the annual Benefit Dinner and Dance, Nov. 4 from 6  pm on, at the Scottish Cultural Centre,  8886 Hudson St. This year's theme "Our  Common Food: Our Common Struggle."  Tix $15 ($8 students, un/deremployed)  at CFU office, 430-6055.  n  Champlain Realty Ltd.  Bus. (604)438-7117  Nancy Steele  Res. (604) 254-0941  REALTY WORLD.  Marlene Holt  Res. (604) 255-5027  We'll help you make a good move.  Press Gang  r fffl «     Printers  f  603 Powell Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6A 1H2  253-1224  SUPPORT YOUR LOCAL WOMEN'S PRESS  BREAD WITH DIGNITY  A visual arts exhibition of works by  Claire Kujundzic, depicting daily life in  Nicaragua will be shown at Women in  Focus Nov. 7-27. Accompanying the exhibit will be a program of evening events  focussing on Central and South American  issues. See pg. 19 for details.  MARCH/RALLY  The B.C. Coalition of Abortion Clinics  march will be followed by a rally and  workshops for women who are interested  in volunteering for the clinic Nov. 5, noon  at Robson Square/Courthouse. Location  of rally and workshops not yet confirmed.  Call 873-5455 for more info.  TELLING  IT: WOMEN  AND  LANGUAGE ACROSS CULTURES  A conference sponsored by the Ruth  Wynn Woodward Endowed Chair in  Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University will be held Nov. 25th and 26th  at the Downtown Centre, 549 Howe St.  Featuring Native, Asian Canadian, and  lesbian women writers and story tellers,  this conference offers a unique opportunity to hear women speaking from a variety of cultures and experiences. Readings, panel discussions and workshops will  examine the following issues: PANELS:  "Across the Cultural Gap" (Friday); "The  Writer's Role in the Community" (Saturday); WORKSHOPS: "Getting Published: Mainstream vs. Alternative Views  of the Market," "Interfacing the Oral and  Writing," "Living a Great Novel vs. Writing One," and "What Do They Mean by  'Too Political'?" (Saturday).  Conference participants are: Jeanette  Armstrong, Barbara Herringer, Surjeet  Kalsey, Joy Kogawa, Louise Profeit  LeBlanc, Sky Lee, Lee Maracle and Betsy  Warland. The Friday evening reading will  also feature a performance piece by Vancouver Sath. Registration fees: $3 unemployed, $5 employed. Travel subsidies  may be possible. For further information  and how to register, please contact the  Women's Studies Program at SFU, 291-  3593.  RITA MAE BROWN  Everyone is invited to an autographing  party for Rita Mae Brown at Ariel Books.  Celebrate her new novel Bingo, the reissue of In Her Day and bring all those  old tattered copies for her to sign. Nov.  7, 7:30-9 pm. 733-3511.  CRABTREE CORNER  Is offering a weekly Single Mother's Support group on Tuesdays 1-3 pm. Also, a  monthly women and children's Preventative Clinic staffed by three public health  nurses. The next clinics are Nov. 2 and  Dec. 7, 2-4 pm. For further info call Mary  Ellen at 689-2808.  BI-FOCUS  A support group for women and men  meets every Tuesday at 7 pm. For more  info or just to talk call the Bisexual Network Hotline at 737-0513, your call will  be returned.  SUPPORT SERVICES  Battered Women's Support Services will  be holding a winter training of peer counsellors and support group facilitators from  Jan. 28- Mar 30. Training sessions will  consist of 9 Thursday evenings, 1 Sunday and 1 Saturday. Call 734-1574 for  more information and application forms.  Deadline for completed application forms  is Dec. 18 and space is limited.  OUR BODIES  Everything you wanted to know about  sex: your bodies; sexuality; how to talk to  children about their bodies; abuse; how to  enjoy a happy health sex life will be presented at Crabtree Corner, 101 E. Cordova, 689-2808, starting Nov. 9 at 1-3  pm.  FILMS  NFB STUDIO D  Every Thursday, 8 pm, throughout the  fall,   until   Dec.  8,  award  winning films  will be telecast on The Cutting Edge, a  15 week series of provocative NFB social  documentaries.  MiJsJfllWMflE  LESBIAN PHOTOGRAPHERS  Are invited to submit photos of lesbians  for possible inclusion in a revised edition  of "Our Right to Love: A Lesbian Resource Book." Photos may be, submitted  to G. Vida, 45 Plaza St. #1-G Brooklyn,  N.Y. 11217.  WESTCOAST WOMEN ARTISTS  SOCIETY  Westcoast Women Artists is calling for  submissions of art and crafts for a Christmas Fair in New Westminster. For more  info, please call 520-3078. Deadline for  submissions Nov. 16.  PMira mm Bed© mmmummL %%% wm®  KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////M^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  WORKSHOPS  THE CLERICAL VOICE  A workshop series that looks at the health  hazards particular to women in office  work, and focuses on practical solutions  for a healthier office environment. All sessions will be held at Robson Square Media Centre. See Movement Matters for  details.  MISC.  BREAST SELF EXAMINATION  Learn to examine your breasts for early  detection of breast cancer with the confidential private guidance of trained registered nurses at The Breast Self Exam-  tion Clinic Dec. 6, at Ray Cam, 920  E. Hastings. Drop in from 2-8 pm (plan  to be there about an hour). A van will be  provided to transport those women interested from Crabtree Corner, 101 E. Cordova, leaving at 2 pm. Contact person:  Birgit Arnstein. 254-1354, 321-5564.  SWIM COACHES NEEDED  The English Bay Swim Club has a vacancy open for swim coaches. Anyone  interested should contact the Club c/o  2568 W. 6 Ave., Van. V6K 1W5.  CLASS FIED  GOLDEN THREADS  A contact publication for lesbians over  50 and women who love older women.  Canada and U.S. Confidential, warm, reliable. For free info send self-addressed envelope (U.S. residents please stamp it).  Sample copy mailed discreetly. $5 (U.S.)  Golden Threads, PO Box 3177, Burlington VT, 05401.  WOMEN'S COUNSELLING  My specializations include depression,  sexuality, sexual and emotional abuse,  adult women survivors of childhood sexual abuse, identity issues, self-awareness,  relationship issues, decision-making and  career explorations. I work using verbal and expressive therapies, gestalt and  guided imagery. Sliding fee scale. Janet  Lichty. B.A., M.Ed. Counselling Psychology. 874-2593.  SHIATSU  Do you know how to put relaxation, peace  of mind, and a little T.L.C. in an envelope? Shiatsu gift certificates. Give someone the attention they deserve. Astarte  251-5409.  Woman . . .  Let the Healing  £%         Begin . . .  Shirlayne's Personalized  Service Includes:  - Retreats for Women Only  ■ Therapeutic Body & Mind  Techniques  - Home Cooked Meals  ■ Comfortable, Safe. Loving Setting  ■ Cozy Fireside & Bedroom  ■ Nature & Ocean Nearby  LAYNE HEALING  CENTRE  133 Spinnaker Drive  C 14, RJR1 Mariner's  Way  Mayne Island, B.C.  VON 2J0  1-604-539-5888  Ines Murillo is a Honduran human rights worker who has survived torture in that country. She comes to Vancouver  Sunday Nov. 6th to "Testify to Torture," as part of a cross-Canada tour sponsored by the Canada-Honduras  Information and Support Association. Hear Murillo speak at La Quena, 7:30 pm.  CLASS IFIED1CLASSIFIEDICLASSIFIE  OCEANFRONT RETREAT  On Gabriola Island. $330 per week or  $50 per night. Sleeps six. Available year  round. Lots of space and privacy. Phone  248-5742 evenings for reservations and  information.  HOUSE MATE(S) WANTED  Share spacious, bright 4-bed. house near  Commercial & 12th with 2 women who  are out-of-town occasional users. Prefer  non- smoking, feminist. Fireplace, 2-story  sunny back yard. $200. Call 1-886-4584  collect, or 1-886-3695 message.  BAREFOOT BROWSERS WITH  KIDS WELCOME  R2B2 Books Books, 2742 W. 4th Ave  (next to Naam) at Macdonald, carries  mostly used and some new books of all  kinds. Stock includes literature, art, children's, philosophy, French and foreign  language. Good deal$. Also regular poetry readings, book launches, etc. Call  732-5087 for more info or drop by and  browse. Open 7 days a week, Mon.-Sat.  11-6, Sun. 1-6, and some evenings.  ALCHERINGA  This unique housekeeping accommodation for women on Salt Spring Island is  the perfect place for that romantic weekend and/or for that retreat week you hav  been promising yourself. Winter rates ai  $25 single, $35 double, and a flat $125  per week. Treat yourself to the stillness  of the country. Call Phyllis at 537-4315  for info.  VANCOUVER WOMENS  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B2N4  684-0523  Hours: Monday - Saturday  11:00- 5:30 pm  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  732-3227  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  LESBIAN HOUSEMATE WANTED  To complete a 5-bedroom co-op house  near Jericho Beach. Fireplace, washer/  dryer, 2 bathrooms, yard, garden. Smoke  and pet free space. Rent $285 plus utilities. Room available Nov. 1st. Call 737-  0910.  joan  macleod  TORONTO  MISSISSIPPI  «**&m  1146Commercial* 253-0913  KINESIS - CENTRE-SERIALS  [ HALL, U.B.C  VANCOUVER , " "  IMV-E 8904  For a limited time, Kinesis  subscriptions are going "2-for-l"—  any new or renewed sub will  get you a second, absolutely free.  So, if you've been thinking  about thrilling a sister or a friend  (or two sisters, or two ... ), act now.  Offer good Nov.l-Dec 31, 1988.  «-V,  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership-$25.50 (or what you can afford)-includes Kinesis subscription!  D Kinesis subscription only - $17.50       □ Sustainers - $75  □ Institutions - $45  □ Here's my cheque  D Bill me  □ New  D Renewal  D Gift subscription for a friend  Name    Postal Code  . ■ ml