 *KV  K^"  *&><*  VSW  1090 West 7th Ave  Vancouver  V6H 1D0  INSIDC  The Goldsberry report is out: civil servants learn about rape in B.C.  We visit an oasis for women in the downtown eastside  AUCE presents its case to the board of industrial inquiry: keep your fingers crossed  but don't hold your breath  White Rock women celebrate the opening of their new centre  Prison Justice Day—August 10 fast and vigil at the B.C. Pen  More on the Feminist Birthday Party  Family violence is in the news because the United Way has discovered it  Centre feature on child abuse  Broadside wants to be read outside  Another sitting of The Dinner Party  Debate on the women's building proposal  Reviews, international news, women in sports, bulletin board and more  ft> cr  if  >-i tz>  s      Hi (D  M l-J  w *<: h-  .      v. 03  0  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  Subscriber Only _  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions.  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates on  inadequate funding — we need member support! Kinesis    August   '79    1  The Goldsberry report: "Rape in British Columbia "  Report will be excellent consciousness-raiser for civil servants  Rape Relief services are an appropriate  priority for government funding. What's  more, staffing for Rape Relief centres  should be increased.  These are two major recommendations made  in a report prepared for the ministry of  the attorney general, and released in July.  The report, Rape in British Columbia, was  commissioned in the fall of '77 by the  provincial government so that it could  assess funding requests being made by the  Coalition of British Columbia Rape Centres.  What they got from researcher Nancy Goldsberry was an excellent analysis of rape  and a series of coherent recommendations  for changes in the medical, legal and  social services response to rape in B.C.  Probably one of the best consciousness-  raisers to have crept across the desks of  provincial civil servants, the report provides a feminist perspective on what rape  is, who rapes, and who gets raped.  The subjective understanding of the meaning of rape is far from a shared understanding,   observes Goldsberry.  The Canadian Criminal Code defines rape  as sexual penetration of a (woman's)  vagina with a (man's) penis without the  woman's consent outside of marriage.  She proposes a more realistic working definition: any sexual intimacy forced by  one person on another. This definition  attempts to describe not only those rapes  which are reported (and rape is one of  the most under-reported crimes) but all  rapes.  Who rapes? As Goldsberry reports, there  is no distinct difference between the  rapist and other men. Rape can be viewed  not as an act of deviance, but one of over-  conforming, acting out qualities regarded as super-masculine: aggression, strength,  dominance and competitiveness,  ness, and so on.  Rape is prompted not by sexual passion  (many rapists have difficulties in getting  an erection and having an orgasm), but by  anger, power and sadism, in varying degrees.  Rape is an offence one man commits against  another man's property - husband's or the  father's. It's an offence which flourishes  in a society where sexuality is a commodity  to be bought and sold. For men,   Goldsberry  points out, it is difficult to realize  that rapists have no special ugly characteristics.  It is a rare man who will admit  that he, . too,  given the right circumstances,  could be a potential rapist.  Who gets labelled, "rapist"? Goldsberry  cites Lewis and Clark: generally,   suspects  from lower social-economic groups are more  likely to be perceived by a jury and officers of the court as the sort of men  likely to have committed rape,  and therefore they are more likely to be convicted  and labelled as   'rapist. '  The majority of rapes that are reported  to police and which proceed to court are  those involving complete strangers. This  despite the fact that the vast majority  of rape assailants are men already known  to the women as acquaintances.  Fine feminist stuff, suitable reading  All fine feminist stuff and beyond doubt  highly suitable reading for the readership at whom the report is aimed.  The report stresses that rape is simply  the extreme point in a continuum of exploitive relations: many men believe that  heterosexual conquest is a means to status  and self-worth. Many women believe that  submission is a means to status and self-  worth.   Coercion in normal sexual relationships is all too common.   Very few of us  wish to be rapists or victims,  but until  we are all frank with our individual use  of sexuality as a power-wielding tool,  we will continue to have rape in all its  variations.  Who gets raped? Goldsberry alludes to a  famous anecdote: Twenty years ago,   Zero  Mostel used to do a sketch in which he  impersonated a Dixiecrat Senator conducting an investigation of the origins  of World War II. At the climax of the  sketch,   the senator boomed out,   in an  excruciating mixture of triumph and suspicion,   "What was Pearl Harbor doing in  the Pacific?"  The opportunity to rape, rather than any  conscious or unconscious desire to be  raped is demonstrably the operative  factor. The report refers to Geller's  study, done during a 23 day Toronto  Transit Strike in 1974. Sexual offences  against female hitchikers increased by  8 times compared to pre-and post-strike  period.  Nearly one-third of rapes takes place in  the woman's own home, rapists attack old  as well as young, and are relatively more  frequent in rural rather than urban environments .  When a person is sexually attacked, that  person is in need of immediate sympathetic and effective medical and psychological care. What are your chances of  getting that in this province?  Nurses, in several B.C. hospitals told  Goldsberry that directives specifically  forbid them to talk with a woman awaiting a rape examination. This is because  times already by others,  which is a problem in itself.  She recommends:  * Women officers to be offered to the  assault victim if possible.  'ñ†: * If no female officer is available, then  the victim should have access to a "victim  advocate." Victim advocates (from rape relief centres, for example) would be on-  call for the investigating procedures, for  follow-up counselling and for providing  support during the courtroom appearance.  * All cases should be dealt with as "founded" unless there is real evidence the case  is "unfounded." Some police departments  use the "unfounded" category as a means of  getting rid of difficult cases or of reducing their case workload.  * Police departments should provide resource materials and support service referrals for victims of sexual assault.  Rape laws protect our "owners"  In reviewing the legal response to rape,  Goldsberry points out that historically,  rape   laws were designed to protect men of  noble class from trespass of their women.  Rape  laws still protect,   not women,  but  their  "owners. " Any changes in rape  laws  must,   she asserts, increase reporting and  redefine sexual assault in such a manner  as  to prohibit  the inherent sexism in the  judicial system.  In a special chapter on the sexual abuse,  the report points out that the intent of  the nurses would legally be required to  appear in court, should she be the first  to hear a rape "complaint."  Moreover, it's universal procedure in B.C.  to locate the woman's own doctor, to request her .or his attendance. Many doctors  decline, because they don't want to spend  work time in court.  The report recommends that the ministry  of health urge the inclusion of these procedures in B.C. hospitals:  * A standard medical exam.  * A salaried physician in a large hospital  to eliminate doctors' reluctance to appear  in court due to the financial loss of a  day's work.  * Police to be called in only with the patient 's full understanding and consent.  * Sexual assualt cases to be given priority treatment.  * A female doctor to be provided if the  raped woman wants one. ,  * The hospital to allow a friend to be  present at the examination and treatment,  and transportation arrangements to be made  for the woman to get home safely.  Speaking of police involvement in rape cases, Goldsberry states, I would like  to  make it very clear that I am not "pointing  a finger" of condemnation at the police in  British Columbia.   That has been done many  Sylvie Beauregard  the Criminal Code, which defines sexual  abuse of children as a crime, is to punish  violators - it does not protect the child  victim from the consequences of the crime.  Goldsberry recommends that a child sexual  abuse response unit be developed in B.C.,  and that the child be supplied with an  outside advocate, who can act as a buffer  between the family and the law. Further,  the focus of reporting must be on getting  help for the child rather than punishing  the offender.  Specific recommendations for the Ministry  of Education request that the ministry develop a rape prevention resource package  aimed at high school students; and that  materials and symposia for counsellors and  teachers be encouraged and, if need be,  developed in conjunction with the BCTF.  One immediate remedy which I would suggest  is an improvement in physical training for  young women in high schools., a generation  of young women who are stronger, more  self-assured and assertive would be less  vulnerable not only to rape, but to other  kinds of abuse.  Copies of this report are available to all  (free - you've already paid in taxes) from  800 Hornby St.,Vancouver. Of special interest is an appendix to the report entitled  "How Not To Get Raped." 2   Kinesis    August  '79  LOCAL MOVEMENT NEWS  Finding an oasis for women in the downtown eastside  Janice Pentland-Smith  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre at  412 East Hasting St. is different from  other women's centres.  In this part of town women are concerned  with the basic aspects of survival: food,  shelter and safety. There can be a multitude of social service agencies in this  area, but men, the primary users of services, outnumber women 4 to 1 - it can be  overwhelming for a woman.  In a word, the Women's Centre is busy.  About 30 women use the centre every day.  They drop in for a visit with staff and  friends, to meet for a weekly outing, to  ask advice, to learn a craft or attend an  English class. The majority of women are  .middle aged, or In the case of Chinese  women who make up 40$ of women visiting  the Centre, older women. Very few women  in their 20s or 30s drop in.  The Women's Centre has been around for  almost 5 years. They are open.every weekday except Wednesday from 10 a.m. - 7  p.m. and on Saturday from 10-5 p.m. In the  past they were open until 9 p.m. but  found that few women stayed out past the  supper hours.  The downtown eastside is like a small  town, say centre workers. Many of the  residents have lived there most of their  lives, and know each other. The community  consists of one third each Chinese, Native Indian, and Caucasian. In 1978 the  Women's Centre did a survey profiling the  women in the area and at present there  are two workers on a Secretary of State  grant who are compiling life histories of  area residents. The workers say there is  a stereotype of the skid row resident-  transient, alcoholic etc, which doesn't  apply to most of the people. We found a  striking pattern of long term residency  in  the area:  a stability  resembling that  of a middle-class area in  the city.   Cheap  rents are certainly a big reason for  living in. the area but not the only one:  Convenient  location and proximity to  friends,  relatives and social life were  important to half of those interviewed.  The Women's Centre had 5 full time workers, "Outreach" workers on a Canada Works  grant. They work both in the centre and  in the community. Most of their work is  on a one-to-one basis. Unlike at other women's centres, groups are not successful.  Human Resources attempted to organize weekly rap groups for women who had been in,  or were presently involved in, abusive  realtionships. Women found it hard to  talk in a group, it was slow to get going  and not well attended. However, there has  recently been requests for an assertiveness training group and one has been  ; planned. The workers say they hope that  the women who have been asking for it will  participate.  An important service to women is the follow-up work offered to women who have  it the Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  stayed at Powell Place, a women's shelter  , in the area. (Powell Place is in many ways  similar to Transition House) The workers  give assistance in finding a place to  live, offer legal advice, and help women  understand the procedures of Family Court  and Human Resources.  The Women's Centre also gets referrals  from St. James Social Service and the  "hard to house" residents in the area.  These residences are for people who for  various reasons, e.g. alcohol or mental  health problems, would not be able to get  regular accommodation. Some of the women  who use the Women's Centre have chronic  mental health problems. They have been  worked to death and want some kind of  community connection to alleviate their  isolation, workers explained.  What do the women who use the centre think  about it?  It 's different from other women 's centres  I've been to.   They   (other centres) are  always so busy, people don't have time  for you.   Here they are busy too,but you  Lyn Buckle  always come first.   They go out of their  way to talk to you.  It's a good place  to come.   I used to come  more often but I've moved.   I don't get  down as much as I used to but when I  come shopping I try to drop in.  Here they give support to women.   Support  is what it's about.  The workers say that it's unlikely women  who come to the centre will become feminists. They hope.that small changes will  take place. Some women have been institutionalized,   it's a long time since  they  made any decision for themselves.   In an  institution,  manipulative behaviour is  reinforced.   Here we encourage personal  decision making.   You have to start where  the woman is coming from and have respect for her no matter where that  place is.  They remember a woman who said, This is  an oasis in the downtown eastside. It's  a good description of the Downtown East-  Women's Centre. ■  Women Against Violence Against Women project under way  Women Against Violence Against Women (WAVAW) is a project organized last spring to  research and produce materials in the area  of violence against women.  Initially sponsored by several groups from  BCFW, Women Against Violence Against Women  is employing 14 women under two contracts  from the Secretary of State.  The group aims to produce resources materials in areas relating to rape, sexual  harassment, pornography and violence in  the home (including the sexual abuse of  young girls).  One of the two project coordinators, Sue  Moore, commented: Research is well under  way and the production of a leaflet directed to women in Vancouver and the Lower  Mainland about violence in the home is  almost completed.  The other productions WAVAW is working on  are a leaflet on sexual harassment, a video (or slide/sound) production on pornography, and a 16mm film on sexual harassment in the workforce.  We hope to culminate the project with a  series of workshops for community groups  and educational institutions throughout  B.C.,  Moore added.  Of course, we face the age-old problem of  government funding—you either get minimal  wages and no production costs qr_ production  costs and no wages'.  WAVAW is now seeking additional funding for  production costs and workshop expenses.  In addition to this resource work WAVAW is  working towards becoming an action group.  They started by demonstrating against the  film Kathy Tippel and by making written  complaints against the "snuff" movie Bloodline.  WAVAW is located at #8 - 45 Kingsway, Vancouver. Phone 872-2250, extension 1. ■ Kinesis    August   '79    3  LABOUR  AUCE meets with board of industrial inquiry  Keep your fingers crossed.  Local .2 of the Association of University  and College Employees (AUCE) has presented its case to the board of industrial  inquiry. The decision won't be down before we go to press, and an AUCE local 2  spokesperson told Kinesis: The Contract  Committee is not any more optimistic now  about any form of arbitration than we  were months ago.  The three member board, which met at the  Bayshore July 3-5 was made up of SFU nominee, Ian Stewart, AUCE nominee Dianne  Mackenzie Baigent and chair Ed Peck.  AUCE local 2 was involved in a lengthy  contract dispute with their employer, Simon Fraser university, which led to a full  scale strike (including a bitter clash with  police) in the spring. The decision to go  to a board of industrial inquiry was made  April 20.  AUCE's brief affirmed the principle of  equal pay for equal work, and demanded retroactive pay for temporary workers. The  SFU representative stated: AUCE local 2  members have enjoyed a significant real  growth in salaries not realized by most  other employees in the province,   and  quited the offical Socred dictum: governments should not establish pay  levels  •  CORPORATE  j>R0FJJS  ^r  xl   d^*  4^m  WE   CANT G/l/E  YOU A X4/SE  /rs /A/ri/tr/ONA^y/  CUPW: equal pay but no right to strike  by Marion Pollock  Postal workers have equal pay for equal  work. They also have a national president,  Jean-Claude Parrot, who is facing a three  month prison sentence. In addition, they  have no right to strike.  The latest round in the saga of C.U.P.W.  versus the government began in early 1975.  The union had signed a new collective  agreement, but management refused to respect it. They violated every provision,  and this resulted in more than 56,000  grievances.  Even before the contract expired in June  of 1977 management gave postal workers a  clear and distinct warning they were going to try to bust the union.  The then  Postmaster-General, Giles Lamontagne,  made extraordinary efforts to characterize  postal workers, their union, and its  leadership as a bunch of irresponsible  thieving, radicals. Parliament took the  unprecedented step to pass Bill C-45,  which specifically prohibited C.U.P.W.  from striking during an election period.  The press ridiculed and belittled C.U.P.7.  demands. But in fact these demands  reflected the union's desire to fight  for the real needs of its membership.  These included paid maternity leave,  improved personal leave benefits, a  shorter work week, protection for part-  time workers (mainly women) and job  security. Technological change was also  an issue facing postal workers.  C.U.P.W. participated in an 18 month  farce called negotiations to no avail.  The centrepiece of the Liberal negotiating strategy was a formula called  average comparability of total compensation (A.C.T.C.). This was an attempt  to ensure that postal workers' wages  remained below that of the amount  needed to survive. The union had no  alternative but to strike.  On October 16, 1978, postal workers all  across Canada told the boss they wanted  a decent contract.  Postal workers were prepared to stand on  the streets until their demands were met.  But the government had other ideas and  pushed through Bill C-8, the Post Office  Continuation Act. This bill, a brutal and  obscene piece of legislation, declared  the strike retroactively illegal. It imposed compulsory arbitration and withdrew  the right to strike.  Just in case this law didn't do the trick,  the government arranged for the R.C.M.P.  to raid the union offices. The entire National Executive Board was charged. Brother  Parrot was jailed, and forced to read a  demeaning statement, in order to get out  on bail.  C.U.P.W. defied the legislation. Women,  unions, and community groups saw their  interests as identical with those of  C.U.P.W. and came to that union's defense.  Unfortunately, C.L.C. president Dennis  McDermott didn't share this perspective.  He did not encourage his affiliates to  show any kind of support for C.U.P.W.  Faced with a series of frontal attacks,  the union members reluctantly returned  to work. Management met this gesture  with firings, suspensions, and harassment.  The arbitration report was another attack  on the union. The gains made in previous  contracts disappeared into the pockets  of the employer. Electronic surveillance  and individual work measurement are now  part and parcel of the collective agree-  .ment.  C.U.P.W. is a national, public sector  union. Approximately 50$ of the membership are women. They have always played  a significant role in the union although  this has not always been recognized by  the national union. In Vancouver, women  were tough and determined picketers.  They make up a sizeable portion of the  shop steward body, and are in the process  of building a strong and viable womens'  committee. Postal women face the problems  of all women workers: inadequate maternity  leave, sexual harassment, a sexist employer, and shift schedules that ignore the  demands of childcare. If inroads are made  in any of these, all working women have  made a gain.  C.U.P.W. is preparing for a new round of  negotiations. They are more than prepared  to continue the struggle. In order to win,  your support must also continue. ■  that the private sector cannot afford.  A zero increase was warranted, said the ■  SFU representatives, but a 6%  wage increase was offered in an attempt to avoid  a full-scale strike.  In describing AUCE local 2 wages as being above average, the university team  conveniently overlooked the more than two  hundred grade zero and grade one workers  in the bargaining unit. These workers are  paid much less than workers in the same  positions at UBC and Capilano College,  where they received what would be the  equivalent of a grade two wage at SFU.  Local 2 is awaiting the outcome fully a-  ware that arbitrators have limited guidelines within which to make their decision.  Not in the business of social justice  In its brief, SFU quoted a December '75  arbitration decision: An arbitrator  should not look to notions of social justice in setting the terms and conditions  of a collective agreement.   For example,  in setting the wage scales,  an arbitrator  should not consider what is a fair wage  for certain kinds of work.   There is no indication in the  labour code that justice  is to replace the  law of supply and demand. ..  AUCE Local 2 has launched greivance proceedings against Simon Fraser University in connection with the layoffs of nine library  workers. Three of the nine currently hold  executive positions in the union.  SFU did not provide adequate reasons for the  layoffs, said an AUCE spokesperson.  AUCE Local 2 has also laid a complaint with  the B.C.Labour Relations Board against the  union-busting tacticmaimed at punishing  union executive members,  the spokesperson  concluded.■  4«jew©7Q  Feminism and trade unionism  Reserve Sunday October 14 for a working women 's conference. The Vancouver group,  Working Women Unite, are planning a conference on feminism and trade unionism.  Themes at the day-long event include health,  and safety, how feminist issues relate to  working women, the older working woman,  sexual harassment, women's committees within unions, the abc's of feminism.  All women are invited to attend. More details to come in the September issue. For  further information on Working Women Unite,  write box 65563 Station F, Vancouver, B.C.b 4    Kinesis August   '79  f       ^  White Rock women celebrate opening of their new centre  Jody Hawley  White Rock women celebrated their move  into a new storefront location with-an  open house July-19.  The new White Rock Women's Place, a former  bookstore, is centrally located at 15505  Marine Drive. In you're out in White Rock,  it's the blue building with the rainbow.  With a Secretary of State summer grant,  four students have been hired to set up  programs, operate the centre and build the  referral and information resources.  The centre is open every day: Monday to  Friday 1:00 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.: Tuesday  mornings 9:30 a.m. - 12 noon and Wednesday evenings: 7:00 p.m. - 9:00 p.m.  They offer free legal, health information,  educational and job counselling, mother  and child drop-in, clothing exchange,  resume and interview counselling...  Their phone: 536-9611 ■  Sue Lash and Linda Marcotte  VSW going for  its constitutional  The Vancouver Status of Women has had three  constitutions in the past six years. The  last one still does not reflect'the way we  operate. And (you guessed it) we have better things to do than re-write constitutions!  That's why the outgoing executive prepared  a bare-bones constitution. If you are a  member of VSW, you wjjjrl have received the  proposed constitution with Kinesis. If you're  a subscriber, but would like to read this  new proposal (you a constitution nut or  something?) we'll be happy to send you one:  The purpose of this slender constitution is  that we fulfil the requirements under the  society'.' act and leave the details (such  as how many membership meetings we have each  year) flexible.  On August 22, there will be a meeting at  VSW (1090 West 7th) to discuss this proposed  constitution. The entire new executive will  be there, and you are invited to come, too.  If you can't make that meeting, please  phone in your comments, suggestions etc.  After this discussion, we will take the constitution to a general meeting of the membership on October 24 for final ratification or rejection. Then we can devote the  year to bigger and better things.*  A gathering of women at the White Rock Women 's Centre opening  what lies ahead?  After a one-month break, Kinesis will be  back, with feisty fall issues.  Features will include:  OUR FOOD, OURSELVES: Twinkles drove a man to  murder, said the defense in a recent San  Francisco trial. Just think  twinkie-type chemicals are tr  insides!  We'll exr  tween feminism and food politic  THE NUCLEAR REACTION: There are women in Van-  iouver who have been anti-nuke aetd  since the fifties. We'll ta   \ ., and  find out how feminists are link!'  the anti-nuclear movement -  •       , >rld.  DYING FOR WORK: VSW staffer Gillian Marie  earching occupational health hazards  for women, beginning in the home wOrkf  Debra Lewis, also on VSW staff, is researching  SEXUAL HARASSMENT. We'll keep you posted.■  At Kinesis, we're taking a break during Augi  October. See you then!  II be back in the fail with a fat double issue for September- Kinesis    August   '79    5  LOCAL NEWS  Fired for bigamy in 1979  Margaret Caldwell taught commerce courses  in a Catholic school. She herself is Catholic.  But then she went and married a Protestant.  And the Protestant had been married before.  Margaret Caldwell was fired from her job  for being a bigamist.  Discrimination on the basis of religion  and marital status?  No discrimination, says a board of inquiry, ruling under the B.C. human rights  code. Any B.C.Catholic school can decide  that Catholic teachers practice what the  church preaches,  namely that one should  not marry a person who,   in the church's  eyes,   is married to someone else.  Representing the North Vancouver school, St.  Thomas Aquinas, against which the charge of  discrimination was laid, Alfred Clarke  said: Faith is assimilated through contact  with people who bear witness to it.   How  could this school in imparting its message  about the permanency and sacred nature of  marriage be expected to allow a teacher in  violation of that law to carry on teaching,   especially with the possibility that  the circumstances of her marriage might  be known?  Interesting parallel arguments could be  developed against the hiring of gay teach-  Referring to Caldwell's wedding, Clark observed: It is significant she invited only  one  teacher of the staff,  a non-catholic,  to her wedding.   I suggest her actions are  capable of the inference that she knew  others would be offended by her marriage  outside the church.  Clark also noted: The Catholic Church takes  its mission to promote family  life very  seriously...(it) goes to extensive sacrifice to operate these schools.  Add to that sacrifice thousands of dollars  of public funds, under the Independent  Schools Support Act.  I think it's rather sickening,   said president of the B.C. Teachers' Federation Al  Blakey, taxpayers are being forced to pay  for religious discrimination.   The issue  is simple: Are publicly-funded independent  schools free, to abuse human rights?  Looks like it.  Director of the human rights branch Kathleen  Ruff put the decision in perspective*: the  ruling in effect says that any employer can  decide not to hire a person on the basis of  sex,  race or marital status.  Now they can say religion is a bona fide  qualification and want only only Catholics  for the job,  or that sex is a bona fide  qualification and want only men,  or that  race is a bona fide qualification and want  only white people,  Ruff concluded.  Allan Williams, Minister of Labour and  responsible for the human rights code,  said July 20 that his ministry will appeal one part of the board of inquiry  decision. But Williams will not appeal  a controversial part of the ruling -  which says (under Section 22 of the  code) that non-profit organizations  are allowed to show their members preference in hiring.  The upshot of this is that Williams and  his ministry agree that Caldwell has  been discriminated against, right  enough, but that Catholic schools are  within their rights to discriminate. ■  lasting for a twenty-four hour period.  This August 10 has been set aside by prisoners and their friends and families to  protest the mounting number of prison suicides and deaths.  Vigil-keepers will be demanding the abolition of solitary confinement in any form  and under any name. (Euphemiems, of course,  abound: in Millhaven and Laval solitary is  called the Special Handling Unit.) .  A call is also being made for the retention  of legislation which abolished capital punishment in 1976, for a moratorium on prison  construction, for an end to excessive sentencing, and for prompt public inquests into  prison deaths.  Speakers at the Thursday night demonstration will include Svend Robinson MP. At  2 p.m. there will be a service at the  grounds in memory of those who have died  Fast for prison justice, August 10  For four years now women and men in prisons  across Canada, along with outraged citizens,  have held a one-day hunger fast on National  Prison Justice Day, August 10.  This year, a vigil-fast will take place in  front of the B.C. Penitentiary and Okalla  starting Thursday, August 9 at 7 p.m. and  Is board management-oriented?  The provincial labour minister is still  trying to decide if its board of inquiry  into the Susan Jorgensen case is too management-oriented .  Susan Jorgensen, a 25-year-old employee of  B.C. Ice and Cold Storage laid a complaint  with the B.C. human rights branch in February 1977 because the company would not  let her become a shedworker, a job performed only by men, on the grounds that the  work is too heavy.  J.J. Camp, the lawyer for the branch, representing Jorgensen, argued that the board  was too management-oriented because board  member Jack Bourne was the company representative in a 1965 arbitration case between  Nelson Brothers Fisheries and a nightwatch-  The complaint about Bourne was originally  raised by the United Fishermen and Allied  Workers Union. President of that union,  Jack Nichol, says, We should be here as an  advocate.   The outcome to this is of...importance  to people in the fishing industry  ...a major demand in collective bargaining.  He says the union supports the principle  of equal pay for the 2,500 women workers  in the fishing industry. ■  B.C. Pen a castle?  Look,  I am pro-life and I am not in favour  of the death penalty.     We should establish  factories in the Canadian north to make  these guys repay society,  in part at least,  for their crimes.  I can recall when I was a kid - had just  come over from Holland - and we used to  think B.C.Pen was some sort of castle.  Now they are.neglecting the place,   the  walls are dirty and the grass is not trimmed.   They are not making them work any more.  Bill Vander Zalm, provincial minister for  municipal affairs.a  'Uko^lUHur  in prison over the years.  Sponsors for this year's August 10 protest  include B.C. Civil Liberties, First United  Church, Canadian Memorial Church, Society  of Friends, Prisoners' Rights Group, Solitary Confinement Abolition Project and  Vancouver Status of Women.  I am sick to death of prisons.   I think we  have wasted so much of human people...to  keep women at this point in time in cells  that are only toilets is completely uncivilized, .if something drastic is not  done, in the near future we are in for far  more trouble.  (Isabel Macneill, former director of Kingston Women's Prison)■  Snatch-a-fetus, buy-a-fetus  Anti-choicer Dr.Philip Ney has come up with  a new gimmick.  Why not dash into a hospital and snatch an  aborted fetus? If it dies (l), says Ney,  you can report the doctor who performed the  abortion to the College of Physicians and  Surgeons, recommending a charge of negligence.  Ney told 100 delegates to an anti-choice  conference at UBC recently that .it is within  anyone's rights to protect another person.  This would be the legal justification for  the hospital raid.  Ney, who received a standing ovation, told  delegates that he is part of an anti-choice  group in Victoria which has bought a fetus  (for an undisclosed sum). He added that  "four or five" others have bi*en bought by  anti-choicers in the Prince George area.  He recommended the buy-a-fetus scheme to  conference participants.■  Send medical aid to Nicaragua  A Vancouver group, Medical Aid to Nica-  agua (MATN) has been formed recently to  solicit support for the purchase of medical aid. The end of the war in Nicaragua  leaves in its wake an utterly devastated  country. Recent fighting and indiscriminate bombing of major cities by Somo-  zan forces have resulted in thousands of  civilian deaths and massive destruction  of-homes and property.  A non-partisan group, MATN has the support  of clergy, lawyers, doctors and ordinary  folks like you and me.  According to Maclean's of July 23,   from  12,000 to 20,000 Nicaraguans have died  since the fighting began. Homeless refugees huddle in grossly inadequate centres  in and around the capital. Over 100,000  others have fled for their lives to nearby Costa Rica and Honduras. Maclean's estimates that.there are at least 250,000  refugees struggling to survive incredible  hardships in Nicaragua.  Nicaragua faces a disastrous economic .future. The cost of this war is even greater than that of the 1972 earthquake which  leveled downtown Managua, and which cost  772 million U.S. dollars according to United Nations estimates (Latin American Economic Review, July 6, 1979). With an inherited foreign debt of $2 billion, bombed-out cities and roads, the prospect of  no autumn harvests, a wounded and displaced population, reconstruction will be  a costly process, requiring continued assistance from foreign countries.  MATN hopes to raise $50,000 in the immediate future, said spokesperson for the  group, Rick Graig.  Send in a donation to MATN, 2524 Cypress  Street, Vancouver, V6J 3N2  Contributors wishing a tax receipt can  make a donation payable to OXFAM-Canada. ■ 6   Kinesis    August   '79  CITY POLITICS  Ward system would open doors for  women  We believe that it is essential that the  wishes of the majority of Vancouver electors in last year's plebiscite be heeded in the implementation of a ward system,  Debra Lewis told.a governmental review  commission which is looking into the issue of a ward system in Vancouver.  Last November, Vancouver electors said yes  to a ward system. They also elected a mayor, Jack Volrich, who doesn't like wards.  So Volrich hand-picked a review committee  to meditate upon the wisdom of the electors' decision. •  Those who worked to raise the pro-ward issue at election time are faced with doing  that work/'all over again—presenting brief  after brief to the review commission.  While affirming VSW's commitment to a ward  system, Lewis spoke specifically to the  issue of women's involvement in politics  at the municipal level.  . Those women who can juggle both family responsibilities and/or work outside the  home with political activity are most likely to find the  logical level of involvement  to be  that closest to home.  The accessibility of government and its  relation to the participation rate of women can be clearly demonstrated by the  proportion'of women who are successful  at various  levels of government.   For example,   only one woman is represented in  the federal cabinet  (3.3%),  four in the  B.C.   legislature   (7%) and three out of  II in city council   (27.3%),   Lewis pointed  out.  It is likely that those figures also reflect the relative cost involved in a decision to run for office. The broader the  scale of the campaign necessary (an at-  large system.demands a city-wide media  blitz), the less possible it becomes for  women (making 57$ of men's wages) to take  part.  Apart from the accessibility to the political process, which a ward system would  encourage, there is the issue of accountability to the community you are elected  to represent. The at-large system militates against accountability.  As Lewis put it, if at any given time a  choice is presented between accessibility  to a community and the actions needed to  compete in a city-wide popularity contest at a future date the councillor choosing the former would certainly be considered politically naive or worse.  It is clear to us that accessibility and  accountability can only be ensured  ecting city council on a ward,  area,   or  community basis,   Lewis concluded. ■  I-  &%*tM&&A\  mm  * i (Hi St  Bus route cuts penalize women, kids  On Tuesday, July 10, VSW and many other  community groups and individuals in Vancouver made representation to City Council in opposition to recent bus route  cuts by B.C. Hydro. More than a dozen  delegations were present to speak in support of a motion by Aid. Harry Rankin to  oppose the cuts and request a meeting  with the provincial government to discuss  long range transit plans.  In presenting VSW's position, Debra Lewis  noted, there is no doubt in our minds that  public transit is a women's issue.   We are  less likely,   in the' first place,   to have  access to our own private means of transportation.   If we are married,  any car owned  by the family is  likely to be primarily  for the use of a husband.   If we are single,  our lower salaries make the ownership and  operation of an automobile virtually impossible.  Lewis also pointed out that working mothers,  particularly single parents, are likely to  be doubly dependent on public transit.  ■ Many of us,   she noted, are in the position  of taking one bus to drop our children at  a child care centre and another to work.  An affordable efficient transit service  is doubly important to us,  and route cutbacks and rising fares hit us twice as hard.  Both Lewis and a representative of Vancouver Rape Relief pointed out that the  safety of women is an additional concern  when considering transit cuts. The spokeswoman for Rape Relief pointed out that 4-2  trip cuts mean 42 additional opportunities  DERA's solution: vote STUPID  The Downtown Eastside Residents' Association (DERA) has the solution to our political problems. Next time, vote S.T.U.P.I.D.  (Society to Unseat Political Incumbents  Democratically).  DERA unveiled its solution in a recent letter to The Courier. In that letter, DERA  president Bruce Eriksen, proposed:  ...let's abolish the ward system at all levels.  This system produces corruption and  parochialism.   Worst of all,  I suspect every  level of government elected under the ward  or constituency system in Canada is a hot  bed of closet commies.  Just look closely  at Victoria,  Edmonton,  Ottawa etc.  Let's organize the S.T.U.P.I.D. party and  elect all 282 members of parliament and all  57 members of the legislature at large,  advocates DERA. Possible S.T.U.P.I.D. candidates who could help turn this country  right-side up: Jack Volrich, Helen Boyce,  Doug Little, Bernice Gerard, Don Bellamy,  Warnett Kennedy, George Puil, Doug Collins.,  S.T.U.P.I.D. policies would include:  * abolition or all public ground transportation  * freeways, bridges, third and fourth crossings  * pay as you go user fees for police, fire,  etc.  * replace low income and family housing  with strata-title highrises. ■  Who can afford housing?  The city's Planning Department has completed a comprehensive study of housing needs  in Vancouver called Affordable Housing  Study. It will be debated in City Council  in the near future. It confirms, with statistics, what tens of thousands of Vancouver citizens are painfully aware of, namely, that our city has a serious housing  crisis and City Council is doing little  about it.  The report notes that:  * Of Vancouver's 75,545 home owners, 14,  270 or 195? are paying over 255? of their  income to finance their homes, that is,  for women to be placed in potentially dangerous situations while waiting for buses.  She noted that assaults in such circumstances are not restricted to night hours.  The current cuts, resulting in 42 fewer  trips per day, are only the latest in a  series of transit cutbacks covering the  last three years. Since the fall of 1976,  fares have doubled. The priorities of  government are clear when money spent on  roads for the use of cars is called a  "public expenditure" and funds used for  public transit are labelled "subsidied".  Efficient, affordable transit services  must be seen as a public right, in the  same way as health care, education, etc,  are considered to be a social responsibility.  Quite a different approach to public  transit can be seen in a recent decision  by the Swedish state railway to set its  domestic train fares back 12 years. The  Rirsdag (parliament) recently adopted a  new general transportation policy based  on the premise that such public transportation systems should not be expected  to pay for themselves.  Although Rankin's motion eventually passed,  it remains to be seen how vigorously Council as a. whole will pursue its intent. If  the experience of the past few years is  any" indication, a great deal more public  pressure will be necessary before all levels of government give a real committment  to efficient, safe, affordable public  transit in Vancouver and the Lower Mainland.  they are paying more than they can afford.  * Of Vancouver's 85,685 renters, 38,130  or 4552 are paying higher rents than they  can afford.  * 5,000 households are overcrowded.  * 15,000 units are in need of major repairs .  * An estimated 2,000 handicapped households and 6,000 elderly face serious house-  ing suitability problems, that is, they  do not have housing that meets their basic needs.  The overwhelming majority of those with  affordability problems are in the lowest  income groups - senior citizens, people  on social assistance, single mothers with  children, the working poor (people working  at such miserably low wages that they are  no better off than those on welfare), the  handicapped.  In all some 40,000 Vancouver households,  about 255? of the total, are experiencing  serious housing problems of one kind or  1 another. ■ Kinesis    August   '79    7  organizing"  The Chrismas connection: an artist's impression  by Persimmon Blackbridge  1. Andy Worhol, Etc.  Rumor has it Andy Worhol is coming to the  Ace Gallery (but that's not what I want  to talk about). Last time he was in town  I said, Wow,   (I said wow in those days)  the Ace sure brings a  lot of heavy artists  up here.   That was when I was young and  innocent.  2. Who Is Doug .Chrismas and Why Are So  Many People Mad At Him?  In Vancouver Doug Chrismas (along with  his side kick Jane Erikson) owns the Ace  Gallery, the perennially soon-to-open  Names restaurant, and the Muckamuck  restaurant. In Venice, California he  owns three art galleries and an apartment block.  I don't know what else he owns. I never  even heard of him till last year. I mean,  I knew the Ace Gallery. It was this  place that brought Heavy Artists (read  Americans) up here (read Lower Mainland),  and the Muckamuck is that Native restaurant (read white-owned with Native  staff). Chrismas is kind of low. profile.  The Muckamuck workers hardly knew what  he looked like until they decided to  join a union. But in Venice, California, everyone knows who Doug is.  3. Chrismas in Venice  People in Venice don't like the changes  they see happening in their town. You  might say they're standing in the way of  progress. For a long time Venice has  been a quiet sort of town. There's a  real racial mix there as well as a large  population of older people.. There's a lot  of low income housing. There's also a  large and vital artistic community. People in Venice are proud of their diversity. They don't want to change. Progress  means becoming a resort for the rich ■  refugees from L.A. It means low-income  housing bought up by developers. It means  racial minorities, the poor, and the.  elderly pushed out. It means three art  galleries which all refuse to show  Venice artists.  Owned by guess who.  When Chrismas started construction of his  third gallery, the Venice town council  explained their fears for the future of  Venice to him. He refused to take the  issues seriously. The town council got  an order to cease construction pending  an inquiry into the future of Venice,  which Chrismas ignored. Several people  from the artists' community forum asked  him to commit himself to one or two  shows of Venice artists a year, particularly featuring minority artists.  Chrismas called this "totalitarian".  He opened Rauschenberg in the illegally  constructed gallery amidst community  picketing.  Meanwhile, the senior citizens living  in the low-rent apartment block Chrismas  just bought are waiting to learn their  fate at the hands of this responsible,  public-spirited entrepreneur.  4. That Ace  At one point in a talk with angry Venice  artists, Chrismas bragged, I'm a Canadian  and the Canadians won't talk to me,   because I won't show Canadian art.  Proud of yourself, Doug?  I know there's this myth that great art  always had a Made-in-New York sticker on  it (or Made-in-Paris if before 1945).  Living elsewhere warps your chromosones  or something. Well, I'm not sure what  makes a great artist, but I know what  makes a famous artist. The media and the  kind of media manipulation it takes is  out of reach of most Canadians. It's not  a question of art, it's a question of  money. If you become a media sweetheart,  ' a Name, people will pay a lot more for  your work. And certain gallery owners  would rather sell Names than art. It's  more profitable.  5. Running Amuckamuck  The staff at Muckamuck tried to work things  out individually for a long time before  they decided to unionize. But management's  answer to complaints was to say that the  staff should be grateful for what they had  because there's plenty of other Native  people who need jobs. Patron as in patronizing.  So what are they asking for?  Regular breaks in the middle of each eight-  hour shift (management would only allow  breaks right when they got to work or just  before they left). Another demand was consistent, pre-posted scheduling. The workers were tired of being called up at the  last minute and told, Oh by  the way,  you're  on shift tonight. That plays hell with any  plans someone might have for.what they  thought was a day off, and is especially  hard for people who need childcare. People  who complained might find their hours so  cut back that they would no longer make  a living. There were other problems: the  system of $5 to $50 fines for things like  forgetting to tie up a garbage bag, etc.  Ad nauseum.  The Muckamuck workers went to the Service,  Office, and Retail Workers Union of Canada  (SORWUC) because it's a strictly democratic  union where the people involved make the  decisions,, not union bureaucrats.  After SORWUC applied for certification,  seven of the activists at Muckamuck were  fired. Their rehiring was added to the list  of demands for the first contract. There  were four attempts at negotiation. Each  time Chrismas came late, left early, and  refused to discuss union proposals. As harassment on the job was escalating, the  workers voted to strike.  The strike is now in its fourteenth month ,  and Chrismas refuses to return to the bargaining table. He has hired scab labour  and reopened the Muckamuck with part of it  redecorated as a "cowboy bar" (which the  original workers feel is a slap in the  face to Native people).  The strikers have asked customers to boycott the Muckamuck until the strike is  settled. Business has been cut by over  805?. Chrismas is losing a lot of money,  but I guess he has plenty more where that  came from. Maybe he's using the Muckamuck as a tax write-off. Or maybe his  ego is greater than his greed in this  6. Code  There's a lot of artists on the Muckamuck picket line. I guess the connection  is clear. We're tired of being put down.  That's what I want to talk about.  7. Late News  Another Chrismas Charmer  Word has just arrived from Venice that  ace buck-maker has recently purchased  a $650,000 building, the front of which  he plans to convert to the Charmer's  Tea House.  And guess who is going to staff this 111'  charmer? The senior citizens who live in  the complex!  At a closed meeting with those tenants,  father Chrismas explained that he learned all about afternoon tea in British  Columbia where people do that sort of  thing and where the people who work in  the tea houses are all over 60 years of  age.  He called for a commitment from the tenants to step forward and volunteer as  waiters and waitresses, it would give you  people something to do,   he said.  Besides, Doug has to make monthly payments on the building of $7000 and the  rents are just $2000. If he can find a  way to make up that elusive $5000, he  promised, then you people won't have to  worry about moving or your rent going up.  Fun,, fun, fun, till Douggie takes your  housing away...  It's just simply  to have fun,   concluded the  new owner of the $650,000 building, the resale value of which would be greatly enhanced if the sidewalk cafe were installed.  Now you know what an ass the ace is, call  SORWUC - 684 2834 - and reserve a spot on  the Muckamuck picket line.  Do it today! ■ Kinesis    August   '79  ACROSS CANADA  Tobique women  took the long walk to Ottawa  OTTAWA - Indian women and children from  Tobique Reserve in New Brunswick took a  long walk to Parliament Hill beginning  •July 15 to draw attention to poor housing  conditions and the Indian Act that allows  the band council to discriminate against  women.  They appealed directly to the new Prime  Minister Joseph Clark to investigate living  conditions on their reserve for mothers  who are raising children alone.  Some have retained their Indian status but  have been put out of their homes by their  husbands after family disputes. Others  are widows or women who have lost their  Indian status on marriage to a non-Indian  and have returned to the reserve following  the breakup of the marriage.  They say that in spite of a three month  occupation of the band council offices  in 1977 and a petition to the UN Human  Rights Committee in 1978, their names  are still at the bottom of the band council's list for new houses while they remain  in overcrowded buildings in need of repair.  "We've tried the Department of Indian Af^  fairs, the Federal Human Rights Commission  and the courts and got no help," said one  of the organizers of the walk in a telephone interview from Tobique.  "This isn't  a new problem* My mother brought us up  alone and she didn't get a house until  two years before she died. But it's  International Year of the Child and we're  worried about our children."  Elderly women and babies were among the  group of about 10 women and 20 children.  They travelled by car from the reserve  120 miles northwest of Fredericton to Montreal, where they began the walk on July  15.  Indian and non-Indian women from  across Canada joined them.  As well as visiting members of Parliament,  the women also plan to approach the U.S.  Embassy and the British High Commission  to seek support for their petition now  before the U.N. Human Rights Committee.  . Sandra Lovelace, who signed the petition  to the United Nations in January 1978,  said this week that she still hopes the  international body will put pressure on  the Canadian government to remove the  section from the Indian Act that forces  a woman to give up her Indian status and  treaty rights on marriage to a non-Indian.  But she said the committee is still waiting for a reply from the Canadian government to a request last September for information to help it decide whether the  issue can be admitted for discussion.  After meeting the delegation, Joe Clark  called the Indian Act a "disgrace to  Canada." Watch to see if his promise to  amend the Act is fulfilled soon.*"  Joe is  "well versed in women's issues.''  David MacDonald is the new federal minister  responsible for the Status of Women. Says  MacDonald:  I think it is important to point out that  for the first time in this country we have  a Prime Minister who is well-versed in  women 's issues and committed beyond doubt  to the principle of equality for women.  When he was leader of the Opposition, Mr.  Clark was a strong advocate of women 's  rights and spoke out on many occasions on  women's issues,  especially in relation tq_  women and work.   That's nice, isn't it? f£  Sexual harassment should be crime  Sexual harassment should be a criminal  offence, says chairperson of Alberta's  human rights commission, Max Wyman.  He says the Alberta commission is current-  . ly investigating seven complaints of sexual  harassment, but does not have power to  fight them.  Procedures of investigating complaints of  sexual harassment in Alberta do not include questioning of other people on the  work site.  The matter is discussed only  with the complainant and the accused.*  Would beat wife, cop says  If it was my house,  I would have beat my  wife for the condition it was in,   said  detective Bruce Dunne. He was referring to  the messy state of the southeast Calgary  home of a man busted for illegal possession  of ammunition. Speaking at the preliminary  hearing against the man, Dunne testified  that the accused's home .provided good  cause for wife-beating. ■  We're 50 year old persons, and celebrating  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC) commemorates the  50th Anniversary of the Persons' Case,  the decision that women were persons within the meaning of the British North America  Act and could therefore be members of the  Senate.  The case was first taken by five  Alberta women to the Supreme Court of Canada, which ruled April 24, 1928, that women  were, not persons.  The women appealed to  the Privy Council in England, which on October 18, 1929, overturned that decision.  The first woman was appointed to the Senate the following year.  The first woman appointed to the Senate  was Cairine Wilson.  The five women were: Henrietta Muir Edwards, Nellie McClung, Louise McKinney,  Emily Murphy and Irene Parlby.  To celebrate this important anniversary,  NAC commissioned a medallion, designed by  the distinguished sculptor, Dora de Pedery-  Hunt.  It is available, in silver or bronze  and is 4.4 cm in diameter.  "The subject of this medal is celebration'.  Celebration of Canadian women becoming  "persons",   of joy and delight that at  least one great step was taken.    The five  women represent but do not portray the  "Five" who helped us to achieve it.    Instead of banners,  I used the International  Women's Year logo;   the bird-like forms add  life and movement to the medal,  also their  beaks point to the future. _ I never believe  in looking back anyway!  says medal designer,  Dora de Pedery-Hunt.  NAC also held a contest for the design of  a seal to mark this occasion. The winner,  Jamie Bennett, a student at Sheridan College;  Graphic Design Department, received her $500  prize at an unveiling in Ottawa.  The award  presentation was made by Hsio-Yen Shih,  Director of the National Gallery of Canada.  Of course, the struggle for women 's rights  goes on; we may be persons, but we are not  yet equal persons,  says a NAC spokesperson.  NAC urges you to celebrate this occasion by  treating yourself and a friend to some seals  and a medallion.  The medallion comes in bronze (for $20.00)  and silver (for $40.00). Both seals and medallions, fund-raisers for NAC, are available  from NAC offices at 40 St.,Clair Ave.East,  Toronto, Ontario M4T 1M9 ■  The Albertan  On grounds of pregnancy  The first woman in Canada to work as an  airline pilot has been grounded without  benefits because she is pregnant.  Rosella Bjornson, 31, of Winnipeg, will  not be compensated by the Canadian Airline  Pilots Association (CALPA) for the 10 month;  she won't be allowed to fly.  Through CALPA's mutual aid fund pilots receive up to 705? of their salaries for anything up to a year when they are off work  because of illness.  "I cannot get the CALPA benefits," says  Bjornson, "presumably because I am not  sick, just pregnant.  Hence, I don't deserve it. "  Bjornson, who works for Transair Ltd., has  been given a compulsory leave of absence  by the company, but won't receive any benefits from them.  The International Civil Aviation Organization and the Department of Transport both  require the grounding of- commercial pilots  presumed to be pregnant until one month  after the birth.  "I feel that I could work," comments Bjornson. "It's a perfectly normal pregnancy.  If there were any complications I would like  to be grounded. "■  Stelco's sexist hiring challenged  We are challenging Stelco's refusal to hire  women.   We want to work in their main plant,  and we 're sure many people will support  our right to do so.  Two Edmonton women, Lynda Little and Sarah  Butson, have announced they are launching  a campaign to publicize and win support for  their right to be hired by the Steel Company  of Canada (Stelco).  Stelco employs about 700 workers in its  two Edmonton plants. None are women, though  women regularly apply for jobs there.  Little and Butson, both experienced industrial plant workers, first applied for production jobs at Stelco several months ago.  After much persistence they found that  Stelco, as well as many other large industrial employers, will not hire women for  plant work.  Even though Stelco has a high staff turnover and hires steadily, they were denied  interviews. They were told women could  not work in the steel mill as they did  not meet weight requirements and there  were no women's washrooms.  The Alberta human rights commission is  conducting an investigation of sexual  discrimination on their behalf.*  Socialist Voice Kinesis    August   '79  ACROSS CANADA  A myth:  abortion laws  were liberalized  An UPSTREAM article  At the annual meeting of the Canadian Association for the Repeal'of the Abortion  Law (C.A.R.A.L.), Professor Bernard Dickens of the. University of Toronto Law  School exploded many firmly held myths  about the operation of the Canadian abortion law (s. 251 of the Criminal Code).  Briefly, the current law as revised in 196°  says that abortions must be performed in  an approved or accredited hospital, and  that the hospital's Therapeutic Abortion  Committee must certify in advance that the  women's health would be endangered by continuing the pregnancy.  What happened in 1969 anyway?  First, said Dickens, it is a mistake to believe that the 1969 Criminal Code amendment  liberalized the abortion law. He explained  that in 1975, when the Supreme Court of  Canada was busy reversing a jury acquittal  so as to send Henry Morgentaler to jail for  performing abortions outside the Criminal  Code, the Court noted that the preamend-  ment Canadian law was the same as British  law in 1938.  And in 1938, in the Bourne case, the English Courts held that abortion was lawful  if the doctor in good faith decided that  abortion was necessary to preserve the  women's life or health. Evidence of "good  faith" was seen if the doctor consulted  with other physicians and if one other  physician agreed with his/her decision to  abort.  The definition of 'health', as used in the"  U.K., included mental health since the  Bourne case itself involved a young rape  victim who would have become "a mental  wreck" without the abortion.  Therefore the 1969 Criminal Code amendment in Canada simply made explicit what  had been implicit in the previous Canadian law. It introduced no additional  grounds for abortion upon the agreement  of two (private) physicians, demanded  the concurrence of a Therapeutic Abortion Committee.  The Badgely Report (February 1977), said  Dickens, showed how unevenly abortion  services are available in Canada. Access  to Committees is a matter of geographical  good fortune. There is no appeal from a  Committee's decision to refuse abortion-  -even if that decision is made for administrative reasons rather than medical  ones. In fact, the woman does not even  have the right to find out why her request has been refused.  Some of the common reasons for refusal include exhaustion of a hospital set quota  for abortions or the woman's residence being outside the area the hospital was set  up to serve.  Indeed, the so-called 'liberal' abortion  law in Canada violates the otherwise sacred  principle of doctor-patient confidentiality  How the Feminist Party was officially  launched  by Brig Anderson  On a hot July Sunday afternoon a memorable  and dramatic event took place at the Ontario Institute of Education in Toronto.  The Feminist Party of Canada was officially  launched by 350 women and a sprinkling of  men who gave a standing ovation to speakers Mary O'Brien, Sociologist at York University, and veteran women's movement  activists Angela Miles and Margaret Evans.  It was a festive and memorable occasion.  For once women were celebrating themselves  instead of elected male party officials:  they had become the focus of their own attentive efforts. The speaker table was decorated with red roses and Swedish breads  to accompany the song Bread and Roses sung  by Leo Hoicks.  Jane Carnwarth and Sally Jay of the Univ-  sity of Toronto Alumnae Dramatic Club read  excerpts from Gail Fox's poem Separation:  We are  leaving the winter of our dreams...  we are  the second sex and we are  leaving  it...  Introducing the speakers, Margaret Evans  said a feminist party was necessary because in one hundred years of political  activity with men, achieving the vote and  universal suffrage had not brought about  equal political representation with men.  The number of women seeking federal office  rose from 4 in 1921 to 137 in 1974. But  the number of women who won seats in those  53 years rose only from one to nine. The  dismal prognosis is  that,  at this rate,  we will need another 842 years to achieve  equal representation at the federal  level,  Evans said.  We cannot afford to wait that long,   Evans  continued. She called for a founding convention for a Feminist Party for the fall  or spring of 1980. As school vice-principal, and teacher who was raised a Tory,  she said there was no party that was close  to her interests, that she wanted to get  away from all those grey men and one woman in white  (the new PC cabinet) to create a party with a feminist perspective  that would make the world a better and  more humane place. She wanted her son and  his children to grow up away from the "nuclear nonsense" that enabled the government to spend millions on defense and the  construction of lethal weapons.  The only dissenting voice of the afternoon  was that of Laura Sabia who said she want-'  ed to play Devil's Advocate and warned  against dividing women in politics as they  are now divided on issues such as abortion  on demand.  She cautioned the audience to consider the  result of further isolating women's issues  instead of making them people's issues.  Her surprise speech and early departure  gave members of the New Democratic Party  fuel for attack and pessimistic comments  about ghettoizing women in politics.  But the inspiring and eloquent testimony  of the main speaker Mary O'Brien carried  the day. We want a new relationship with  our environment because the conditions of  our lives are such that if we don't work  to change them, we won't be around, she  said.  Women are intimate with violation; the  threat of violence is always with us, with  wife beatings in the home and television  surveillance in the work place following  us even to the washrooms. We are going to  change  these conditions not only because  we can,   but because we must—the politics  of integration must replace the politics  of violation.   She said it was no Utopian  or idealist dream, "/omen are practical  but know they must build a world of vision.  We have until now been in the servants'  quarters of established political  life.  When we move upstairs to the main house,  it will be not merely to fill  the same  chairs,   but to rearrange and transform  the entire establishment,   states the  Feminist Party Platform, women can change  society and reinvent life.  Feminism is an extension of socialism,  O'Brien said. It is using the energy and  spirit of the Women's Movement in Canada,  in the shape of women's collectives,  women's centres,   coalitions of women's  groups and services.   Through them,  we  maintain visibility and pressure governments to make significant changes for  ,  the majority of the poor,   the unemployed,  the unpensioned,  and the unorganized  women,   who are still the physically and  mentally battered in Canada.  WRITE & SUPPORT THE FPC, Box 322, Maple,  Ontario. Phone (416) 487-9427. ■  since it gives provincial Ministry of  health the absolute right to information  surrounding the granting (not the refusal)  of an abortion request.  Abortion and compulsory sterilization  Dickens also shot down the idea that physicians who make sterilization a condition  of abortion are acting within their rights.  If an abortion is medically justified, he  noted, it cannot be witheld because other  conditions are not met. In fact, a physician who does this is under great risk of  being charged with assault and battery  since, under the pressure of wanting an  abortion, a woman may give consent to sterilization which is not free consent. And  a doctor performing surgery without a  patient's free consent is in danger of legal liability.  Hospitals and physicians  have a responsibility  As a final point, Dickens said that physicians who object to abortion risk civil  liability if they refuse services to an  existing patient. This is because physicians have duties to supply continuous care  to patients. If they intend to withdraw  their services (over a disagreement with  a patient's choice of therapy), they must  give due warning and continue to provide  care until a patient can reasonably find  an alternative source of health care.  The Alberta Supreme. Court recently held  a doctor liable for failing to help his  patient find access to legal abortion in  Edmonton. The doctor had argued that he  only had admitting privileges to hospitals without Therapeutic Abortion Committees. But the Court said that the doctor's legal duty was to refer the patient  to physicians with admitting privileges  at hospitals where there were Committees.  Therefore a doctor who refuses to refer  a patient entitled to abortion to a physician or agency able to help could be  in violation of his/her legal duty.  Further, hospitals themselves have duties  to patients and may not be able to excuse  a violation of those duties by saying  they have decided not to set up a Therapeutic Abortion Committee. In other words,  hospitals cannot voluntarily disable themselves from meeting their patients' health  needs.  Anyone for a test case?« 10    Kinesis    August   '79  VIOLENCE  Feminists show United Way the way  was our input worth it?  A recently released report of the United  Way has made a number of recommendations  concerning services for the victims of  domestic violence. The report was the  result of a two-year task force which  grew out of the United Way sponsored symposium on Family Violence in the spring  of 1977.  Feminist input to the final report is evident. However, it was not accomplished  without considerable time and effort expended by representatives of the women's  movement, including several members of  Vancouver Status of Women. Earlier drafts  of the report provided a considerably  watered down view of the issues involved,  and it was only through constant pressure  from the feminist women involved that the  report finally reached an acceptable format.  A report to the task force by Gillian  Walker, included in the appendices, provides a set of "Grounding Assumptions" for  those who are working with women who have  been assaulted in the home.  These include the following:  * Violence is not an acceptable form of  family interaction.  * It is men who beat women, there appear  to be exceptions, but men in danger or in  abusive situations have the economic option of leaving, which is less available  to women.  * A woman does not deserve to be beaten,  no matter what she does...  * There are very real pressures, not only  on the family, but in the family as a result of what "the family" has come to mean  and is expected to do in our current society. These pressures are enforced by the  institutions which make up our system in  such a way that "the family" can become  a trap, especially for women and more especially for women with children..  * Women stay in abusive situations for a  number of reasons. So far it is apparent  that:  a) They do not percieve the situation as  avoidable or remediable.  b) They do not see any real alternatives  outside the family.  c) There are very few alternatives and the  institutions of society are not set up to  provide alternatives but to reinforce the  family as such.  The Task Force Report makes a number of  recommendations. Specifically, it recommends  that the ministry of human resources policy  manual be re-written to recognize that a  woman should in no way be pressured to remain in a violent living situation. Further,  any statement she makes with respect to  this be accepted at face value. She should  not be routinely required to initiate legal  action to obtain financial support from  her husband, nor should she have to "prove"  her case to financial aid or social workers  before obtaining the financial assistance  she needs.  The task force also recommends the continuation and expansion of support groups for  women who have been battered. To this end,  a continuing committee has been formed to  formulate proposals for such groups (and,  in addition, groups designed to help men  who batter change their behaviour). This  summer, Carol Sanders-Krause (under the  sponsorship of VSW) is carrying out an  evaluation of such programmes to date. The  committee, which includes representatives  of VSW, Transition House, Balsam House  (second stage transition house), women's  and men's group leaders and a number of  either adequately reflect what is happening or provide acceptable solutions for  the women and children involved. Women  must be given options and support to allow  them to take control over their own lives  and make their own choices.  The legal working group of the task force  clearly recognizes the total inadequacy  of the legal system in dealing with domestic assaults. The report states: The  Task Force does not advocate the use of  criminal sanctions in every case of wife  battering.   However,  it does advocate  access to the court system for victims of  family assault on a basis equal to that  for victims of assault by strangers.  Specifically, the report recommended that  the police respond to all calls from  women reporting assault by their husbands,  that the husband be arrested in all cases  where a court order has been violated and  that police decisions on arrest in domestic assault cases be based on the same  criteria as other cases in which the parties are not married to each other. Such  assaults should be heard in criminal  court in order that they be defined as  crimes rather than in family court where  they are likely to be seen as a "private  matter."  Clearly, the final task force report accepts many of the premises advanced by  feminists. But larger questions are involved. Hundreds of woman-hours were  spent with the task force and its working groups to ensure that feminist perspectives were included. The process was  frustrating and intellectually and emotionally draining for many of the women  involved. Those of us in the women's  movement will have to decide whether such  expenditure of energy is worth it, or if  our time and effort would be better spent  within a framework that is clearly fern-  The family is the most violent institution that any  average citizen will encounter in her lifetime  established agencies, will then make further recommendations concerning the range  of services which should be accessible to  women in assaultive situations.  The success of this committee will depend  on its willingness to adopt a clearly feminist perspective. Programmes provided  for abused women must be based on advocacy  and support services. Any model which assumes that wife battering is the result  of "communications breakdown" will not  inist from the outset. Issues such as  domestic violence are our issues, and it  is essential to ensure that it is  we who are defining the problems and  developing solutions.  The Report of the Task Force on Family  Violence is available through the United  Way of the Lower Mainland, 1625 West 8th  Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. (telephone 731-  7781). VSW will be monitoring the progress  of the Task Force recommendations.  B.C. children are property of guardians and law-makers  At the present time in B.C., children have  no legal rights of their own. They simply  "belong to" people who make decisions a-  bout their rights.  It's time to bring the Berger commission's  recommendations on children's rights into  effect, said MLA Lary Lauk (NDP Vancouver  Centre), introducing a private bill to  that effect into the legislature on July  13.  The B.C. Royal Commission on Family and  Children's Law - the Berger commission -  prepared a draft for "The Children's Act"  in 1976. They included a Statement of  Children's Rights:  Each child should have the right to:  * food, clothing and housing to ensure  good health and personal development  * an environment free from physical a-  buse, exploitation and degrading treatment  * health care necessary to promote physical and mental health and to remedy illness  * residence with parents and siblings except where it is in the best interests of  Sylvie Beauregard  the child and family members for the  child to reside elsewhere  * parent and adult support, guidance and  continuity in the child's life  * an education that ensures every child  the opportunity to reach and exercise her  or his full potential  * play and recreation  When decisions about guardianship and custody are being made, the child should:  * be consulted  * receive counselling and legal aid  * have a competent interpreter where language is a barrier  * have an explanation of all decisions  Finally children should have the right to  be informed of their rights.  If these rights were not being met, a parent, a child or any concerned person could  ask a judge to examine the facts and make  a "judicial declaration" - a statement of  who is entitled to a particular right and  who is responsible for meeting it. These  public statements by the court would, over  time, build up examples that could influence the standards of child care and of  services offered to families.  Lauk, describing these recommendations as  "eloquent", told the press that the Children's Rights Act would not be discussed  within the legislature this year, the Year  of the Child.  I asked the house  leader if it would be  debated and he indicated there was no intention to do so. Kinesis    August   '79    II  CHILD ABUSE  Physical abuse more damaging than childhood diseases  Joey Thompson  In Oliver Twist's day, parents were expected to control and discipline their  children by administering regular beatings  with a paddle or whip. A child who dared  question or defy a parent or teacher felt  the hot sting of a belt across the backside.  Today society is examining the continued  use of corporal punishment and more subtle  forms of child abuse-psychological, emotional and nutritional deprivation. Attitudes regarding children's and parent's  roles are changing: the strap has disappeared from the school classroom.  Child abuse, as it is now recognized,  implies intentionally or unintentionally  hurting, injuring or destroying.a child's  physical and emotional well-being. Because most of it occurs within the private  rooms of the nuclear or extended family,  experts find it impossible to report how  many children are abused. They can only  estimate.  Local research conducted by the Social  Planning and Research Department of United  Way of the Lower Mainland and evaluations  done by community workers reveal that  thousands of children are abused every year  in B.C. Dr. James Carter, paediatrician for  the Vancouver General Hospital's child  abuse team says physical abuse may be a  greater killer of children between six and  seventeen months of age than any childhood  disease. Unless hospitalization is required, a child may not come to the attention of the people who have expertise and  understanding necessary to deal with the  abuse.  Experts cite several reasons why child  abuse is either undetected or overlooked  by parents, neighbours, educators, doctors,  day care and social workers:  * Abuse of a child is a relatively new  perspective on an historically accepted  mode of discipline. The battered child is  not seen as such, thus a problem is not  identified.  * Little is known about where and how to  report incidences of child abuse. Professionals and the public also fear personal  reprisal and are not familiar with the  agency that handles such cases.  * Some people don't believe parents would  really harm their children. Others feel  physical punishment is socially acceptable.  * Professionals also find it difficult  to determine what constitutes child abuse  and how to collect 'evidence' in order to  substantiate such claims.  * The tradition still prevails that children are the property of their parents and  that parents are entitled to discipline  them by using physical force. Many people  are reluctant to invade the family's privacy.  All of us have the potential to abuse  Family violence-wife battering and child  abuse-cuts through all socio-economic  lines. Parents who beat their children are  educated or illiterate, low income or  upper class, from cities and rural regions.  Every parent is a potential abuser: All of  us have the potential to abuse but we all  don't act upon it,   says social worker  Halina Klajner of the Ministry of Human  Resources Child Abuse Team.  Many abusive parents were abused children.  The pattern of family violence can be  passed on from generation to generation;  some children who witness dad beating mum  and mum beating sister grow to accept physical violence as a natural part of life.  Effective parenting is not taught in public schools or learned by reading textbooks. Children copy their role models;  they adopt the childrearing habits of  their parents.  Elizabeth Davoren, a psychiatric social  worker, author and consultant to the Extended Family Centre in San Francisco, says  battering parents have usually been taught  some very potent lessons by their own parents. They  learn to survive by conforming  to their parents ' wishes and to perform  feats abnormal for their respective stages  of development,   she says. No matter how  well they behave, or how much love they  give their parents it is never enough, and  they learn that children must be punished  to achieve desired results.  This destructive childrearing method produces adults who have an understandable  stake in having children. They want children to provide for them what they tried to  provide for their parents. They believe  their babies will love them and make them  feel better.  Davoren says this misunderstanding of the  needs of children, coupled with a willingness to punish as severely as necessary  The distressed parent who drinks, has financial problems, or feels isolated and  inadequate is also a potential abuser. The  effects of the abuse reinforce the parents'  concept of inadequacy and worthlessness.  Professionals say aggressive or violent  parents can re-learn how to respond to  their children through community support  and training programs.  Dr. Murray Straus, researcher, professor  of sociology and speaker at the United Way  Symposium on Family Violence, cited several  ways to prevent and reduce family violence.  He said parents and society at large must  eliminate physical punishment as a mode of  childrearing.'Parents must also take steps  to reduce acts of violence between their  children. Straus also recommended that  parents and children be provided techniques  for coping with and resolving the inevitable conflicts of family life by means  other than force and coercion. Lastly, he  said government and private agencies should  to meet extremely high expections, often  leads to serious physical injury of their  children.  More recent studies emanating from the  work of professionals such as Dr. Sydney  Segal, professor of paediatrics at the  University of B.C., have found a link between the abusive parent and an absence  of bonding between mother and child at the  time of birth.  Experts say bonding is important  Says Segal: A great deal of study has shown  the importance for a baby to have access to  her or his parents at birth and for a long  time afterwards.   The initiation of this  process of bonding interaction requires  skin to skin contact between mother and  baby, a lot of privacy for them, and free  exchange of eye contact.   These opportunities are most essential,  yet our hospital  practices for the most part have not kept  up with this new knowledge.  The approach to childbirth routines has not  been humane in many hospitals...it is  changing,  but not quickly enough.  Jane Corcoran, birth counsellor and member  of CALM, (Campaign Association for the  Legalization of Midwifery), said research  shows that children born by cesarean section or forceps and babies who are placed  in intensive care immediately after birth  are at least 10 times more likely to be  abused. The mother who has a pleasant,  comfortable and relatively painless birth  develops a more positive attitude toward  her child.  Another suspected contributing factor to  child abuse is the "special" or "target"  child who may not have" been the sex that  the parents wanted. Perhaps the youngster  is "difficult", retarded or a slow learner. Or the child may unwittingly remind  the parent of her or his shortcomings.  fund research to determine the social and  psychological conditions which lead some  parents to be cold and distant rather than  warm and loving, and translate the results  into programs to assist parents.  But the responsibility does not rest solely  on the shoulders of parents. A United Way  report entitled Obstacles to the Identification and Reporting of Child Abuse found  that a majority of workers in the area did.  not feel adequately equipped to deal with  suspected cases of child battering and as  a result were often unwilling to get involved.  Clearly, workers and the community need to.  be informed of reporting procedures and to  be made aware of the remedial rather than  punitive role of reporting.  Says the report: It could be surmised that  some of the most important gate-keepers in  the system i.e.  educators,  police and social workers,  either because of ignorance  of mandatory reporting laws and reporting  procedures,  or because of other reasons  such as fear of adverse consequences to  reporter and/or to family may be ensuring  that abused children do not receive the  full protection and therapy available in  the community.  Educators, day care workers and community  health nurses spend a lot of time with  children and are thus in an appropriate  position to detect child abuse and neglect  in the early stages.  Provincial government delinquent  However, the child abuse problem does not  stop at detection. Segal says the provincial government has been delinquent in  providing and/or funding rehabilitative  services for parents.  Fund allocation has not been realistic in  serving the needs of chiId abuse... there  can be no political disagreement about the*- CHILDREN  cont.  from p.11  need of children to grow up free of preventable handicaps,  and to be protected  from being maimed as a result of parental  brutality,  he said.  Family legislation has also been slow in  responding to the more contemporary attitudes regarding children's rights.  B.C.'s Protection of Children Act has  undergone only minor revisions since it  was first passed 75 years ago.  Says.-Mish Vadasz, former member of the  Royal Commission on Family and Children's  Law and United Way Task Force participant:  We want to get away from the child as  chattel approach and operate on the principle  that children are persons with needs,  feelings and opinions,   '.ihile parents have  the primary responsibility to fulfil these  needs,   the government and its agencies  have  the secondary responsibility to help  the parents meet their obligations.   Instead of providing legislation only to  remove children from their families,  we  need legislation to support our common  goal of meeting children's needs.  Women need support services  Women's organizations are critical of the  government's failure to offer distressed  parents, particularly women, support services which they say could greatly reduce  the financial and emotional pressures that  are the cause of many outbursts of rage.  The government talks about laws and children's rights but the  trouble is not with  the child.   It is with the  lack of support  services for mother,   commented Corcoran.  Lawyer Tom Grove said the Protection of  Children Act fails to guarantee children  and families certain rights including the  right to support services. He said that  while the provincial Ministry of Human  Resources sponsors many services, none are  required by law. In other words,   such programs rest on the whim of the government  in power.   These services are not consistent  throughout the province and are subject to  an individual social worker's discretion.  Last fall a new Family and Child Services  Act was introduced in B.C.  The Coalition Task Force on Children and  the Law, a group of people involved with  family and children's law, is concerned  about the content of the proposed legislation. Some of the points raised by the  Coalition Task Force are that new legislation should:  * Encourage parents or guardians to seek  help before a complete family breakdown.  * Address the community's responsibility  for every individual, especially children.  The number of family breakdowns and the  cost in dollars will be lessened if a  preventive and supportive role to the  family is played by the government and  the community.  * Give children the protection of legal  status. Children remain possessions or  objects with no rights.  * Recognize that a child under five years  has a different sense of time.  * Make provision for special needs of  children who have physical, social and  emotional handicaps. The government and  community should provide extra support  and services to the family to enable those  children to have the same opportunities  as all other children.  * Respond to the needs of Native Indian  children, balancing the concerns of  society as a whole with a respect for  cultural traditions.  * Set out the role, function and authority of social workers to prevent the  abuse of power.  * Make provisions for a family advocate  to consult with the child and act as counsel  for the interests and welfare of that child  in decisions respecting such matters as  adoption, protection, guardianship and  alleged delinquency.  * Make provisions for children between  the ages of 17 and 19 to have protection  and financial support in their own right  where the family is no longer available  to provide these.  * Make provision for accountability and  review of services to families and children.  The government has defended the bill saying  that the provincial legislation will for  the first time spell out the requirement  that a parent having custody of a child  shall take all reasonable measures to ensure  that the child is not in need of  apprehension  by .child welfare authorities.  But it is precisely this clause which has  community groups worried. They say the  bill errs in that it focuses on the parents ' responsibility rather than on community assistance which public agencies  should make available to children. ■  Kids on the street  were abused  at home  Child prostitution begins at home. Debra  Boyer, from Seattle's survival line for  young prostitutes, estimates that up to  705? of the kids on the streets have been  sexually molested, raped or abused as  young children. That means the problem  begins in the residential areas,  right in  the homes.  Boyer was speaking at an information exchange day where representatives from  numerous community and service groups discussed the contents of an 8 month study on  the sexual exploitation of children in  Vancouver.  Commissioned by TRACY (Taking Responsible  Action for Children and Youth), a research  group linked to the United Way, the report  claims that between 200 and 300 teenage  prostitutes, both girls and boys, will be  working as prostitutes this summer in Vancouver.  These kids are true sexual victims,   says  Amy Napier-Hemy, a human sexuality consultant with the ministry of human re-  sourses. After the first negative sexual  experience as a young child,  they develop  a very low self-esteem.   They know that  what happened isn 't right,   that somehow  they have become different from other kids.  Soon they leave home to escape the web of  sexual harassment,  but where can they go?  The only place for them now is the street,  and it's there that the pattern of abuse  and exploitation is completed: some become prostitutes just in order to survive.  The girls tend to be between 14 and 15,  with the boys being a bit younger. At the  present time, says the report, there are  slightly more girls than boys, but this  can fluctuate according to the season and  customer demand. Most of them are from  anglo, Caucasian backgrounds.  Vancouver teenage prostitutes tend to work  in the Davie Street area, according to  TRACY researchers, whose local information  is based upon interviews with six teenage  prostitutes from that district. The report  also refers to the existence of teenage  prostitution in the Commercial and Broadway area, a claim which has drawn protests  of sensational media coverage of TRACY  findings from east end residents.  Children are prime sexual targets because  they are trained to do what adults tell  them to do, TRACY claims. The pattern of  exploitation starts with the child in the  home being used for sexual favours by  adults in exchange for gifts, money, attention' and affection. The message: sex is  Canadians go in for beating, strapping  for exchange, or sale.  Turning out  While some children in Vancouver are being  actively recruited for prostitution by  adults, most teenage prostitutes turn  themselves out, often with the guidance  of a friend of the same sex. By hanging  out in places where prostitution is apparent they gradually become involved. For  many, the pimp or "boyfriend" appears on  the scene sometime later.  Violence on the streets is common-from  customers, from pimps, and from other  prostitutes competing for work. In particular, young prostitutes who move into  high-class areas (such as Georgia Street,  in Vancouver) will be harassed and possibly beaten up.  Very little is known about the local off-  street exploitation of children and adolescents in prostitution and pornography,  says TRACY researchers.Rumour has it that  there is a pornography organization operating in Vancouver,  Kamloops and Prince  George...but it is unlikely that this operation is as sophisticated and widespread  as those operating in Los Angeles and  other major American cities.  Police estimate that there are probably  more than 200 Vancouver adults seducing  12 - 15 year old girls.  Role of pornography  Child molesters (who prefer young girls)  and chickenhawks (whose preference is for  boys) may make use of pornography to introduce the subject of sex into a conversation with a child. Pornography is most  frequently used to sexually stimulate  both the adult and the child as well as  to break down inhibitions a child may  have regarding the acts that he or she is  expected to commit.. .young girls may be  shown pictures of young females in erotic  nude poses and persuaded that it is perfectly alright for a girl to act similiar-  ly...In almost all cases,  the professional  photographer of such publications will himself make use of the child sexually before,  during the after the photographic process.  Two action groups were formed out of the  information exchange day. following release of the TRACY report. One group,  according to Amy Napier-Hemy, will develop a strategy for preventive education,  part of which will teach the child when it  is appropriate to say NO.'  to an adult-  The other group will come up with proposals for strengthening existing social  services to the children who are on the  streets right now.  How much is anyone's  pain diminished by this report?  Yvette Perrault, of the Coalition of British Columbia Rape Relief Centres, worked  with the TRACY group. Here she voices some  feminist concerns about this study: -  Our fear is that this report ("an exploratory study") will be used as a basis to  apply for even more money to do a  "REAL"  study on sexual exploitation of children  and we know that another study or report  won't fix it for those kids on the street.  We all know the problem exists.  Some form  of direct action needs to be developed to  meet some of the  (unmet) needs of the  children - the needs that they go to the  streets to meet.  We are also concerned about the  lack of  analysis in the report.   Why does this  form of exploitation take place? What  factors lead to children being exploited  by men? Why are they victims? Also lacking is a clear statement of who is exploiting the children - one gets the feeling that these crimes are only one sided  - or "society" is to blame -  "enviromen-  tal" factors lead to kids taking to the  streets -  "children are being abused" -  by whom? The great finger from the sky?  We 're hoping that the two action groups  will address these problems. ■  705? of Canadians are not opposed to corporal punishment of children by parents.  535? think that strapping at school is ok,  too.  The same poll reports that the substantial  opposition to corporal punishment is  found in Quebec, where 815? oppose strapping in schools and 705? are against corporal punishment in the home. (The Weekend  Poll;  July  7)  A recent study conducted by sociologist  Murray Straus revealed that 81 per cent of  American parents employed corporal punishment on their children at some time over  the past'year. More than 605? of the parents  surveyed spanked or beat their children on  an average of at least once a week. And  perhaps the most surprising of all was the  finding that 465? of all college students  had been beaten or physically assaulted by  a parent at some time during their senior  year of high school.  and other forms of cruel physical punishment as children.  Prior to 1966, according to the Swedish  Family Code, parents were entitled to  some extent to use corporal punishment  as a means of education. In 1966, however, this section was excluded. Thereby  the last parental right to intentionally  inflict bodily harm on children vanished  and the general provision about assault  came into force within the field of  Family Law. This implies that only the  slightest forms of corporal reprimands  fall outside the offence of assault.  To what extent the legal change also  changed the habits in the Swedish population is not yet clear. The general  enlightened opinion was then and is  still that all forms of corporal punishment are contrary to'good upbringing of children.  (Mary Van Stolk)  In celebration of-the International Year  * Of all the situations that are likely  to cause parents to spank their children,  the one most likely to do so is that of  observing a son beating up his brother  or sister. A parent beats the child on  the grounds that violence within the  family will not be tolerated!  * Children who are spanked at home are  more likely to be physically violent towards their peers at school.  * People who find sexual pleasure through  physical pain ("discipline lovers") virtually always have had a history of a  great deal of corporal punishment ("discipline") in their own backgrounds: they  were frequently spanked by their parents,  and they are quite moralistic in justifying the use of painful corporal punishment on their own children.  * Children who are.frequently spanked  tend to be conspicuously quieter, less  articulate and more sullen than those  who grew up under milder forms of discipline.  * Frequent use of physical punishment  is strongly associated with the development of a low self-image in children.  * Virtually every study ever made into  the background of violent adults show  them to have been subjected to beatings  of the Child, Sweden extended its protection of the child against physical  abuse.  As of July 1, it is illegal, under Swedish  law, to subject a child to "insulting  treatment." Any act,  which,  for the purpose of punishment,  causes the child physical injury or pain,  even if the disturbance is mild and passing,   is now outlawed  Mary Van Stolk, a Canadian who has studied  family violence extensively, comments:  Canada needs to implement and enforce its  existing laws.  Children will be best protected when the Magna Carta has been extended into North American homes.   One  standard of law for all members of a  community.  Protection for all citizens means removing  Section 43 from the Canadian Criminal Code,  which says:   "Every schoolteacher,  parent  or person standing in the place of a parent  is justified in using force by way of correction toward a pupil or child,  as the  case may be, who is under his care,  if the  force does not exceed what is reasonable  under the circumstances.  Corporal punishment in the home,  in the  school and in the prison is not the answer  to family violence and crime.   (RCMP Gazette/ SWAG June  79) ■ 14    Kinesis    August   '79  INTERNATIONAL  Majority favour abortion  By a majority of 60-37 percent, Americans  support the U.S. Supreme Court decision  that legalizes abortions performed during  the first three months of pregnancy.  This finding of a Lou Harris poll conducted  in March for the National Abortion Rights  Action League shows a 7 percent increase in  support for the right to choose over the 53-  40 percent majority in 1977.  By a narrow 50-48 percent, blacks and white  Catholics oppose the majority viewpoint.  The poll also showed:  * 61-32 percent agree that "most unwanted  children end up being subject to child abuse  and it's a mistake to force unwanted children to be born."  * 59-^5 percent reject the anti-abortion  argument that "to perform an abortion is the  equivalent of murder because a fetus' life  has been eliminated."  * 55-37 percent disagree with the claim  that "the life of a baby is just as important as the life of a mother, so abortions v  should be banned."  But the anti-choice minority is clearly  more determined to have its opinions felt  at the polls.  When the 60 percent of the public who favor j  legal abortions were asked: "If a candidate  for political office stood for most of the  things you believe in but took a stand on  abortion you disagreed with, would you vote  against that candidate or not?", a 63-30  percent majority said they would not.  When the 37 percent who oppose abortion  were asked the same question, 53-37 percent  said they would vote against the candidates  New Directions for Women  Anti-choicers go after legislatures  Abortion is the legal right "of all women,"  declared the U.S. Supreme Court in 1973.  5fet, since that time, abortion-rights activists have had to fight to protect their victory.  Most recently, New Jersey and Massachusetts  have surfaced with repressive anti-abortion  legislation; in the latter state the bill  was signed into law.  It's a toss-up to determine which bill is  the more burdensome.  New Jersey's bill,  which has already passed 51-17 in the state  We should do our own abortions  Women should do their own abortions, says  Marilyn V/aring, a New Zealand MP. She is a  high-profile member of the ruling National  party, which outlawed all abortions more  than eighteen months ago.  Waring stated publicly that women should  consider the menstrual extraction technique  of abortion because of the complete breakdown of abortion services throughout the  country. Her comments are causing an  uproar and are under legal scrutiny. ■  British tighten abortion law  The House of Commons voted 242 to 98 Friday  to tighten Britain's controversial abortion  laws substantially.  The lower house approved in principle a  bill, sponsored by Conservative MP John  Corrie, to cut the maximum time limit for  abortions to 20 weeks from 28  weeks of  pregnancy.  Exceptions would be to save a mother's life  or to save her from grave physical or mental  injury or in cases of fetal abnormality.■  General Assembly, is based on the issue of  "informed consent." (It is modelled after  a bill passed into law last year in Ohio. ).  But what a woman is informed of and what  she ends up consenting to will unquestionably place a real psychological tax on her.  First, her doctor or abortion counsellor must  show pictures of the human fetus at various  stages of growth, "informing" her that the  fetus is a person from the moment of conception. While the patient must be told of the  alleged hazards such as sterility, premature  births and low birth waights in the future  which follow an abortion, evidence not backed  up by scientific fact, she learns little or  nothing about the risk of carrying a child  to full term and then through labor. Armed  with this dubious information, a woman in  need of an abortion will be required to  wait 48 hours to consider the doctor's twofold advice: to carry the fetus to term or  to place the child up for adoption.  For women under 18, the whole procedure will  most likely assume nightmarish proportions,  for both parents will be informed that their  daughter is pregnant.  And woe to the minor and the poor if they  wait until the twelfth week of pregnancy  to abort. All second trimester abortions,  which are now defined to start at the  twelfth week and not the thirteenth or  fourteenth, must be performed in hospitals.  Average hospital costs for a trimester abortion is $600 instead of the abortion clinic's  $285.  Gruesome bill will pass  "What is really gruesome about this bill",  says attorney Regina Little of the National  Lawyers Guild, "is that it will probably  pass." The bill is only one step away from  effectively harassing women who chose to  have abortions if the New Jersey Senate approves it.  In Massachusetts there is no "probably".  On June 12, Governor Edward J.King signed  a prohibitive abortion bill.  The law forbids the use of state or any other public  funds for victims of rape or incest.  Public  school teachers, municipal workers, county  employees, welfare recipients and others  covered by the Massachusetts Group Insurance  Commission will all be denied abortion aid.  "The legislature's decision not to allow  victims of rape and incest to get publicly-  funded abortions is nothing short of idiotic,  said Nancy Gertner, attorney for the Massachusetts chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union.  State Senator Joseph B. Walsh  countered that pro-choice advocates want only  to destroy a "living, breathing fetus".  Massachusetts women may have a temporary reprieve: enactment of the law could be delayed  because of a pending ACLU suit in the Supreme  Court.  Massive organizing by N.O.W. led to the defeat of a similar bill in Colorado in April.  In a 10-4 vote the Colorado Senate Appropriations Committee will continue funding abortion  services and referral services. "Colorado is  one of the 16 states that continue funding all  or "medically necessary" abortions.  The legislation on which the Colorado and  Massachusetts laws were modelled was distributed nationally last year by the American  Legislative Exchange Counsel (ALEC).  There  will certainly be more battles in more states  as politicians seeking political advantage  sponser this type of anti-abortion legislation.  Abortion rights forces have also won a partial victory in North Carolina. That state's  House of Representatives voted 72-4-2 to continue full Medicaid funded abortions for  poor women. ■ LNS  Weber's defeat is affirmative action's gain  Bill to ban wife-beating attacked  Kenyan parliamentarians have defeated a  bill which would have forbidden men from  beating their wives.  MP Kimunai Soi said it is African custom  to teach women manners by beating them.  During parliamentary debate, Soi complained that if the bill had passed, "even  slapping your wife" would have been ruled  out.  The bill also would have given first wives  the right to decide whether their husbands  may take a second wife, and given wives  access to the family chequebook.  The legislature rejected the bill by an  overwhelming majority, describing it as  the work of a small, Westernized elite.a  Brian Weber's hope of squashing an affirmative action program negotiated between the  United Steel Workers and the Kaiser Aluminum  Corporation came to a dismal end June 27 when  the Supreme Court reversed two lower court  rulings in his favor and held the plan legal.  If successful, Weber's suit could have meant  the end of hundreds of affirmative action  programs throughout the country.  Weber, an employee at a Kaiser plant in  Gramercy, Louisiana, filed a suit against  both the company and the United Steelworkers  of America in 1975, charging that the affirmative action program made him, as a white  male, a victim of "reverse discrimination."  The program was similar to others negotiated  by the Union with several other major aluminum and steel companies.  It reserved for  Blacks half of the places in an on-the-job  apprenticeship program for skilled jobs  (with a five percent goal for women). Although Black and white applicants to the  program were selected from separate lists,  Weber claimed that because he had more  seniority that some of the Black admitted,  his rights were violated under Title Vll  of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.  At a press conference in New York City, a  day after the decision was handed down,  representatives of the Affirmative Action  Task Force, the National Conference of  Black Lawyers and the National Lawyers  Guild, spoke about the "narrowness" of the  ruling and the need to continue the fight  to expand and defend affirmative action  programs.  "The decision does not dispel the myth of  'reverse discrimination'," the Task Force  stated. "Facts show there is no such thing  as reverse discrimination. One has only to  look at the growing disparities between  Blacks and whites in employment, wages,  life expectancies, etc. to see the system  of discrimination against Blacks as well as  other minorities."  After pointing out these gaps, the Task  Force statement noted that the decision  was "a partial victory for those denied  access to job training, employment and/  or educational placement because of race  and sex. "A total victory," said the Task  Force, "will only be won through our long  and militant struggles such as those which  brought the civil rights laws that were  passed in the first place." ■   LNS Kinesis    August   '79    15  INTERNATIONAL  Supreme Court OK's Vets'  preference at expense of women  NEW YORK (LNS) — In a ruling widely viewed  as a blow to women's rights, the Supreme Court  on June 5 upheld the constitutionality of a  Massachusetts statute that gives preference  to veterans of the armed forces who are seeking employment in state civil service jobs.  The Massachusetts law gives any veteran who  passes the Civil Service test a right to be  hired before any non-veteran, regardless of  test scores.  The law had been challenged by Helen B. Feen-  ey, who was represented by the American Civil  Liberties Union.  In her suit, Feeney charged  that she was denied several chances for promotion because veterans always got first  crack at the jobs. A number of groups, including the National Organization for Women  and the League of Women Voters had filed  briefs on her behalf.  Considering that until 1967 Federal Law  prohibited women from making up more than  two percent of the armed forces, and that  there is still a limitation on the numbers  of women allowed, the reinstatement of the  Massachusetts statute will have a "severely  damaging impact on women in the workforce,"  says Susan Blumental from the Legal Defense  and Education Fund in New York City  While some states offer veterans some form  of preference in employment, ususally a five  or 10 point bonus on the civil service test,  the Massachusetts law gives veterans an  absolute life-time preference over all applicants seeking civil service jobs.  "This statute ensures that sex discrimination  will continue in the workforce," Blumenthal  stated.  "Traditionally, women hold the lower-  paying and less-skilled jobs — usually as  file clerks, secretaries... Veterans will  not be challenging women for these jobs." ■  Celebrating with lesbian pride  New York (LNS) Hundreds of thousands of  lesbians and gay men marched through the  streets of several U.S. cities during the  month of June to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the Stonewall Rebellion which  sparked the beginning of the present day  lesbian and gay movement.  In past years Third World and radical participants in the protests have often complained about the domination of the demonstrations by mostly white lesbians and gay  men.  But this year, organizers in Boston  and New York, in particular, worked hard  to ensure the participation of Third World  lesbians and gay men, as well as groups  and individuals with more radical perspectives.  San Francisco's gay pride march also took  place June 24th and attracted more than  LNS Women's Graphics  200,000 lesbians and gay men. After marching through downtown San Francisco, they  congregated at Civic Center plaza — the  scene of last month's clash between the  police and lesbians and gay men outraged  by the light sentence given to Dan White.  White, a former supervisor on San Francisco's city council had murdered gay  supervisor Harvey Milk, and S.F. Mayor  George Moscone last November.  A national march for lesbian and gay rights  has been planned for October 14, in Washington, D.C. According to Eric Rofes of the  steering committee for the March on Washington, "The march is important as both a celebration of 10 years of lesbian and gay pride  and as a sign for all people to see our  strength, our numbers and our outrage at the  increased violence and oppression focused on  lesbians and gay men."B  Pan Am flight attendants  win contract  After a strike lasting only four and a half  hours which grounded flights internationally,  a newly-formed union of flight attendants won  a first-time contract from Pan American Airlines.  The Independent Union of Flight Attendants,  an independent union comprised mostly of  women, was founded by a worldwide group of  flight attendants. The attendants were dissatisfied with agreements negotiated under  the Transport Workers Union which had previously represented them.  The strike was called on the heels of a 30  day "cooling off" period declared by the  National Mediation Board after 16 months of  negotiations failed_to produce a settlement.  The negotiations were marked by a condescending attitude from management who refused to take the predominately female group  of attendants seriously.  Long multi-stop flights of up to 13 hours  a day (work hours Pan Am does not demand of  its pilots and engineers), a wage scale  lagging grossly behind the rest of the industry, and no health and safety clause is  what management considered sufficient compensation for the "glamor job" of flight  attendants.  Flight attendants battle stress, fatigue,  monotony and time/space dislocation during  their workday.  Health and safety hazards  like ozone exposure are not uncommon, and  many attendants on trans-atlantic routes  have reported spitting up blood and chest  pains, both characteristic of ozone poisoning.  In addition, female attendants experience an abnormally high rate of miscarriage.  The new contract will contain wage increases  bringing them to parity with the rest of the  industry, a health and safety clause and a  greatly strengthened grievance procedure to  aid enforcement. ■  by Mary Klein info from Union WAGE  Soho 16decision: "Policelied."  All six of the defended cases in  the Night trials in London which have been  heard so far have been won, and the women  acquitted.  In Marylebone Magistrates Court, women described the celebratory walk through Soho  last October - a protest against male violence and pornography.  The walk was peaceful and happy until large numbers of police  arrived, truncheons drawn, and began hitting  out wildly, causing many severe injuries.  They also arrested 16 women.  Ethel Findlay, charged with obstructing the  police, produced a photograph of a policeman  hitting her with a truncheon while she was  on the ground.  This, and her verbal evidence, caused the magistrate, Sir Ivor Rigby,  to say that PC Donald had "not only given  untrue evidence but deliberately lied".  When Jean-Fraser was being tried, it was  pointed out that-one police officer, Sergeant Lamb, had come to court wearing a  male chauvinist pig tie.  Later the defence barrister, Marguerite Russell, asked  to see his notebook and forced him to admit  crossing out a sentence in which he described hitting women over the head.  The  magistrate stopped the case, saying he had  heard enough - and that the police evidence  was inadequate. He did the same when finding Andrea Webb and Jane Grote not guilty.  Marian Laurens was acquitted on two charges  of assaulting police.  In evidence, a policeman said she had called him a 'cunt'. Her  barrister explained that no feminist would  use this word as an insult, and the magistrate took the point.  "Since the demonstration was protesting against exploitation of the female body, I find it unbelievable that she should have used this  epithet."  Mary O'Brien, who took off her jumper in  a personal protest against the pornography  on sale, was cleared of a charge of insulting behaviour when it was pointed out that  there was no "public" around to insult.  She was fined a nominal five pounds for  assaulting a policeman, having offered no  defence.  The six women so far acquitted are considering civil action against the police for  assault, wrongful arrest and malicious prosecution. The ten still to be tried are  asking for their charges to be dropped.■  Capitalism at work  Rosemary Belson, a 22 year-old rookie cab  driver fired after she reported she was  raped by a passenger, has been reinstated,  a San Francisco cab company official says.  "I'll give her a second chance," said  Cataline Wong, the firm's personnel director. She acted after Belson had told reporters of her firing and threatened to  take her case to the U.S. Equal Employment  Opportunity Commission.  Cab owner Guey Wong fired the woman on a  Friday, saying she was careless when she  picked up the passenger on Thursday at a  bus station frequented by transients.  Belson told police she was raped at gunpoint by the man.  "I can't afford to take any chances," Mr.  Wong told her when he fired her as a reporter stood by. "I'm lucky the cab wasn't  hurt. You might endanger my insurance,  you might increase my rates."  His other two women drivers, he said, have  never been raped.  Ms.Belson said she was happy to get her  cab back.  "I'll be a lot more careful now,  she said. She said the firm gave her a  break when it hired her in the first place  because she is so young. ■ UP 16    Kinesis    August   '79  PUBLICATIONS  Broadside wants to be read outside the movement  Broadsiae, a publication produced in Toronto by a feminist collective, commences  regular monthly publication this September. One of the collective members, Eve  Zaremba,- was in Vancouver recently, and  spoke with Kinesis.  Kinesis: We've read your first issue,   in  which you say  that Broadside is not intended as a house organ.   What readership  are you trying to reach? Why do you think  Broadside is necessary?  Eve: We don't want to present the women's  movemen1 bo i! ;elf. We already have papers,  like Upstream and Kinesis, that are doing  . We aim to reach people who read, but  don't read house organs, people who are  progressive but not necessarily feminists or activists.  We want to make connections between the so-  called "women's issues" and other issues.  We do want political analyses, especially  the kind that breaks out of the mould we've  had put upon us about what is a "women's  issue" and what isn't. UIC is a women's  issue, what's happening in Iran is  Most people get their information about the  women's movement from mass media, which  tends to segregate and misrepresent us.  That mass media information is of course  full of wild generalizations: "the women's  libbers will hate this." We need a voice  of our own.  Kinesis: Will Broadside be a national paper?  If so, do you see it reaching the same audience as Upstream?  Eve: Broadside is coming out of Toronto,  and that's our prime target initially. We're  looking at making contacts across Canada,  for distribution, and we hope to have  stringers from lots of different areas. In  B.C. we'd certainly want to have someone  from the lower mainland, from Victoria,  from the Nelson area writing for Broadside.  We're just starting a building process  that's going to take years.  I don't think that it makes too much sense  to compare us with Upstream, or with Kinesis  for that matter. Our orientation and approach will be different. To give a specific example - take the -women's building  articles that have been coming out of  Kinesis. In Broadside, the way we'd approach it would be different. We might do  an article about the fact that women's  buildings are being developed across  Canada - such an article would look at  the building in Winnipeg, the building  proposals here. It would be written from  the point of view not of somebody who is  involved but of somebody who isn't.  Kinesis: Your lead story in the introductory issue of Broadside was about the nuclear issue. Were we right to see this as  a deliberate statement of intent?  Eve: Well yes. Ecology is a women's issue.  Nuclear power is a women's issue. By having that as our lead, we managed to get  the paper into outlets which would not  accept Broadside if it was just what people think of as being "feminist news."  We got it into bookstores that are into  environmental issues, and that's one of  the places we want to be.  Kinesis: Do you see Broadside as speaking to  the feminists in Toronto.   Or isn't  it a paper for them?  Eve: Feminists are hardly a homogenous  group. A lot of people are ready for  something where the issues discussed are  not all internal, not all movement stuff.  In the Broadside collective we're all  hard-edged feminists, for sure. The problems we're going to face will probably  be back-to-front to the problems being  faced by Kinesis. You get complaints  from your readership about "too much lesbian coverage." One of the complaints  Broadside's introductory issue received  from the women's community was that  there was too little coverage of lesbian  issues.  For us, lesbian issues are integral to our politics, not a separate subject. But it's not possible to please  everybody!  Kinesis: How many copies of Broadside will  you print? How did you get your introductory issue out into circulation?  Eve: We'll be looking at a press run of  between 3,000 and 5,000 copies. The introductory issue we sent to the whole  women's network. The major chore was to  get it into the non-women's outlets. By  the end of the first week we were in 70  Toronto outlets, working with a volunteer  distribution committee of 12 to 15 people.  Kinesis: Tell us  something about your collective.   How many women are involved?  Eve: We had our first meeting in January  '78 and we met once a week for the next  15 months, until our introductory issue  was completed. In September, when we go  to publishing 12 times a year, we will  have one member of the collective hired  full time to work as editor - there are  11 people in the collective. We have a  variety of backgrounds: graphic arts,  printing, design, market research, journalism... We all work shifts in the office.  There's a writing group, a photography  group, a distribution group. These include Broadside collective members and  others.  Hammering out a structure, a process and  a legal way of doing things has taken a  lot of energy. After much debate and investigation, we decided to incorporate as  a business, Broadside Communications Ltd.  The members of the collective are the  owners and directors. We put in our own  money, and we hope to attract other people  to take out shares.  Kinesis: Why did you decide to take the  business route?  Eve: We took a long look at how movement  papers in the past have started. And how  they died. Why has it been so hard? Print  media, when you think about it, is really  the only media we women can get our hands  on. Why the burn-out? We have resources -  not much money - and we decided to try a  different way of doing things.  Kinesis: What will make Broadside a success for you?  Eve: When anybody, either to our left or  right, who wants to say anything about the  women's movement will have to read us.  Subscribe to Broadside. 12 issues for $8.  "5^" Mail your sub. to Broadside, P.O. Box  494, Station P, Toronto, Ontario M5S 2T1 ■  Feminist reading for cabin and canoe  Received for summer reading: Centennial  College has just published the most immaculate, elegant and visually exciting issue of  Canadian Women's Studies yet. Their Spring/  Printemps 1979 Vol. #1 No. 3 on Creativity  contains a section on women artists such as  Jane Rule, Margaret Atwood and Anne-Claire  Poirier on their work; book reviews, poetry and fiction as well as profiles of women quilt makers, painters, and dancers.  CWS is a bilingual quarterly, and for $3.  It is available from WS/CF, 651 Warden Ave.,  Scarborough MIL 3Z6. Subscription for one  year is $10, $5 for students.  Fireweed, A women's Literary and Cultural  Journal, Issue 2, Spring 1979, contains  "Our Most Precious Resource" : A Critical  Analysis of International Year of the  Child, by Christine Bearchell; Some Perspectives on Child Abuse by Kathleen McDonnell, and Images of Children: Photographs by Annette Clough, Laura Jones,  Gail Kenney and Arlene Moscovitch. Available from Box 279, Station B, Toronto  M5T 2W2, $10 for 4 issues plus $2 for  postage.  Canadian Newsletter of Research on Women,  Spring 1979, on Women and Politics, Women  and Political Theory available from the  department of sociology, 0ISE, 252 Bloor  St. W., Toronto M5S 1V6  Next issue: Two Thirds: A Journal of Dependency and Underdevelopment; papers  accepted until Aug. 15/79.  Forthcoming: The Manitoba Women's Newspaper, Winnipeg, will publish its first  edition this September, to draw together  both urban and rural Manitoba women with  the help of a Secretary of State grant.  From: 447 Webb Place, Winnipeg R3B 2P2  A special Commemorative Issue on Women  in Body Politic will appear in the fall  to coincide with the 50th anniversary  of the declaration of Canadian women  as "persons." Box 7289, Station A, Toronto M5W 1X9  Special issue of Dorothy Livesay in Room  of One's Own, Vol. #5. #1, $4.00 October 1979. From P.O. Box 46160, Station  G, Vancouver, V6R 4G5. Subscription $7.50  for 4 issues in Canada.  Open Road, Vancouver anarchist papers, has  a women's issue just out. From Open Road,  Box 6135, Station G, Vancouver. Small donation would help meet their costs. ■ HANSARD'  Kinesis    August   '79    17  Where did the women's economic rights branch get to?  Whatever did happen to the women's economic  rights branch?  Within the ministry for economic development, it was the only branch within any  department of the B.C. government to address itself specifically to women's concerns .  Rosemary Brown (NDP Burnaby-Edmonds) raised  this issue in the legislature on July 5.  The Hon.Don Phillips (minister of economic  development) responded.  Here are some excerpts:  BROWN: I wonder what has happened to the women's economic rights branch? Does it still  exist?  PHILLIPS: The full mandate of the women's  economic rights branch is now included in  the social economic branch of the economic  analysis and research bureau in the department, performing,  basically,   the same function. .. "  BROWN...Maybe the minister will elaborate?  PHILLIPS: What we're looking at here in  this particular branch is the total impact  on people,  not just necessarily females and  children...  BROWN: I'm really pleased to hear that it's  looking at the total impact.on people, because I was under the impression that we were  people, too.... I'm asking the minister to  give me some indication of the kind of research that's being done, and the ways in  which the female people of this province are  being integrated into the economic planning  of this province.  A year ago, a task force on single industries  in the north (i.e.  Northern British Columbia  Women's Task Force Report on Single Industry  Resource Communities). ..and I'm interested  to find out what's been done in terms of  implementing some of these recommendations.  Also, at the time when there was a women's  economics branch a study was done on the appropriate child care scheme for a new town  based on a north east coal development...  some recommendations were made in terms of  introducing day care services...I would be  interested in what has has happened to that  ...now that the minister has seen fit to  wipe out that particular branch...  The federal government has been funding the  women's research centre to do some studies  in cooperation with two women's communities  in the north. They have been voicing some  concerns...one of the major concerns is the  whole business of childcare facilities.  Yukon, Fort Nelson women  preparing study on effects of pipeline  Brown then referred to a study in progress  for the Northern Pipeline Agency which is  being done by women from the Yukon Status  of Women Council and the Fort Nelson women's centre,  in cooperation with the  women's research centre in Vancouver.  That study will relate to the agency the  expected impact of the Alaska Highway gas  pipeline upon the women in communities  along the pipeline.   The Fort Nelson and  Whitehorse women describe what happens  when a small community experiences a sudden  influx of  BROWN: One of the things the women talked  about was something 'as simple as the business of shopping...small businesses take  the attitude that the influx of people is  going to be temporary. They have not been  expanding to deal with the additional workforce that is coming in, and the women are  talking about having to line up to do something as basic and as simple as their grocery shopping.  These things came out of the federal research done by the Fort Nelson women's centre and the Yukon Status of Women Council.  You're not funding any research...I have  been in touch with the Fort Nelson women  If ever there was a time when the ministry  of economic development needed a women's  economic rights branch, it is now.  PHILLIPS: The mandate of the women's economic rights branch has hot been wiped out,  and to say so is not right...  With regard to the pipeline,  we will be  assessing that...The pipeline is off one  day and on the next day.   We'll get excited  about that and take some action when we 're  sure the pipeline is going ahead.  With regards to the new townsite, the women's rights branch headed the economic  impact on that particular department. We  will certainly take into consideration  their recommendations when that development goes ahead. To say we 've wiped out  the branch is not true.  The Socred member for North Peace River  threw in a few gems:  Anthony Brummet, Social Credit member for  North Peace River, threw in a few gems:  BRUMMET: I think what you have reflected  in that material is a very small minority  view...I know quite a few women in Fort  Nelson and they simply form an integral  part of the community. Many of them don't  want special women's groups. They don't  want special women's consideration. They  have equality of opportunity. They fit into the community where they want. All you  have to do is send up a request to say,  When will B.C. implement proposals from women in  northern communities?  and they tell me there is no funding; there  is no research, there are no inquiries coming out of your ministry on this. They are  expressing some real concerns about what  is going to happen to their community once.  their workforce moves in with their families  One of the things they reminded me of was  that in their report they talked about February as their suicide month. They brought  to my attention that this year was no different ... They were talking about, the fact  that mental health remains their biggest  problem. There used to be a travelling  psychologist who used to go through Fort  Nelson. That person is no longer there;  that visiting psychologist has been removed.  Take a women's studies course this fall  Simon Fraser  W.S. 100-3 INTRODUCTION TO WOMEN'S STUDIES  An interdisiplinary study of women's roles;  the course will focus of women's work in  the home and the labour force, explanations  of women's position and the women's movement.  W.S. 200-3 WOMEN'S ROLES: A COMPARATIVE  STUDY  A cross-cultural examination of the socialization process, psychological attributes, family organization, work roles,  degree of power, and prestige of women  through a study of selected cultures.  W.S. 201-3 WOMEN IN CANADA 1600-1920  Canadian women have a history of their  own although it is not often found in the  text books.  W.S. 301-3 SPECIAL TOPICS: WOMEN AND .  UTOPIAS  This is a course about visions of a better world. In the most interesting of  these, there is a call not only for a  total reorganization of the 'public'  life of a society, but for a change in  human relationships, in sexuality and  sexual practices, in reproduction and  childbearing, and in family structure.  W.S. 400-5 ADVANCED WOMEN'S STUDIES  In the Advanced Women's Studies seminar  this term we will take up questions  about the objectivity of science by focusing on the study of women in the fam-  ily.  Course outlines and complete information  about the program are available from the  women's studies general office - 9102  CC (291-3593)  "Are any of you women in Fort Nelson unhappy?", and you will find three or four  that will get together and submit a wonderful brief to you.  You (addressing Brown)  seem to object to  the minister referring to women as "people1  but we don't make a distinction.  Dennis Cocke (NDP New Westminster) assessed Brummet's familiarity with women's  issues:  COCKE: That minister over there says,  "Oh, the women in Fort Nelson all all satisfied. . .you know...he goes up there and  talks to the wives of the chamber of commerce at a cocktail party...some of them  are quite satisfied.■  Vancouver Community College  You don't need any pre-requisities to enroll in Women's Studies from VCC. Women's  Studies 116 is offered at two locations -  at Langara campus (100 W.49th) and out of  the YWCA.  This is an inter-disciplinary course (a  mix of sociology, psychology, herstory and  literature) which will focus on women and  work. Call Rosalie Hawyrlko (461 1024) or  Gillian (736 1313) for all the details.  Non-credit VCC courses include: Wen-do,  Assertivenes Training, How to Fix Household Appliances. Ask Rosalie for details.*  Speak another language?  Various organizations providing services  to battered wives need a resource list  of women who have second languages and  who would be willing to talk with a battered woman in connection with a counsellor.  If you have a second language and are willing to help, call Dana Janssen, manager  of the battered wives programme, YWCA -  683 2531 •■ 18    Kinesis    August   '79  Sitting down to The Dinner Party again  by Helen Mintz  This article developed from the talk that  Judy Chicago gave at Langara in June. Many  people,   those who had seen the exhibit and  those who hadn't,   shared their view with  me.   I also got a  lot of help from friends,  particularly housemates.  The Dinner Party-as a work of art is impressive. Its sheer magnitude in terms of  physical size, number of people involved  and length of time in the making boggles  the mind. Much of the actual work is so  beautiful as to be moving. Each setting  has been researched in terms both of the  life of the individual woman as well as  the "craft" techniques of her time. Various techniques such as embroidery, weaving and China painting have been skillfully integrated for each setting. The  Dinner Party sees innovations in these  techniques: raised sculpting off of the  China plates as one example.  The very process of creating The Dinner  Party seeks to challenge the image of  the artist as an isolated (and usually  tormented male) person.. When she spoke  recently at Langara Campus of Vancouver  Community College, Chicago briefly described the collective process involved  in the creation of the piece. Both men  and women were encouraged to get involved  at whatever level they could, provided  they were both consistent and-responsible. For some this meant coming in to  embroider for four hours a week. For  others is meant a full time commitment  to work on the piece over a period of  years. Those who so chose became involved in the consciousness raising  groups that were set up around the  project.  Completing The Dinner Party involved  grappling with the relationship of the  interpersonal process to the seriousness of the work itself. (How do you  involve many, many people in a co-operative effort without getting so bogged down in the interpersonal dynamics  that the work ceases to be a focus?) ,  It is fantastic to see something like  The Dinner Party developing from the  efforts of so many people. No doubt there  is much that can be learned about working in groups from the experiences of  this project. Chicago said that there are  people travelling around, specifically to  pass on this knowledge and to facilitate  similar projects.  The Dinner Party challenges the traditional art world on many different levels.  The work is a recognition of the obvious  function that art serves in creating and  perpetuating values in our society. It  stands as a criticism of the recognized  cultural expressions in Western civilization which have ignored both the lived  experiences and the contributions of  women. But more than a criticism, the  work is an attempt at rectification. It  is an attempt to rewrite women into history.  Chicago and the people who worked with her  used traditional women's techniques, giving value as art to those modes of expression which have been devalued. When we  look at the history of painting we see  many inspired and brilliant men. Meanwhile,  the ruling class women who practiced the  fine arts of embroidery and needlework  were, we were told, "just learning patience  and servitude." The names, lives and works  of the male painters are part of the heritage of Western civilization; the embroiderers are forgotten, much of their work  lost.  These women's techniques have been used to  highlight the lives of women who, in the  estimation of those who worked on the project, have made a significant contribution  What is the Dinner Party?  Judy Chicago described The Dinner Party to  an overcrowed hall at Langara College in  June.   The Dinner Party is a work of art  i that represents an attempt to reinterpret  the history of Western civilization from  the point of view of women.  The work,  which involved- over 400 people and took  over five years to complete,  was started  by Judy Chicago.   After two years of working alone,   she involved other people and  the work was completed on a co-operative  basis.   The piece incorporates traditional  I women's techniques such as hand stitching,  weaving,  and China painting.  The Dinner Party consists of 39 porcelain  j plates which represent 39 mythical and  j historical figures:  the plates rest on  ornate  linen runners accompanied by porcelain chalices and flatware.   These in  turn are displayed on a 48 foot triangular table. .The  table stands upon a tile  floor.   On this   "Heritage Floor" the names  of an additional 999 women are organized.  "The women represented on the floor are  j grouped around the women on the table.  ! These groupings are based on common ex-  \ periences,   achievements,   historic periods,  i or place of origin. "  Judy Chicago  to women in history. Although I have spent  many years studying the great men of history, I have never heard of most of the  women so featured.  The'Dinner Party table sits on what has  been described as the Heritage Floor which  "bears the names of 999 women to honor the  heritage of women in history." The pamphlet distributed at the San Francisco exhibit of the work explains the criteria  used for the selection of women for the  floor:  * Did the woman make a significant contribution to society?  * Did she attempt to improve conditions  for women?  * Did her life illuminate an aspect of  women's experience to provide a mode I for  the future?  Thus we can see that both the form and the  content of the work have been guided by  an attempt to celebrate women's role, to  bring women out of the closet, both historically and culturally.  When Chicago introduced her presentation  of The Dinner Party at Langara College,  she described it as "a reinterpretation  of the last supper from the point of view  of those who've done the cooking throughout history."  However, if one thinks about it, one realizes that most of the women, both on the  table and on the floor, probably never  cooked a meal in their lives.  Never cooked a meal in their lives  Many would only have entered the kitchen  to tell the servants what to cook. For example, Isabella d'Este, an Italian noblewoman of the late fifteenth and early sixteenth century, is featured at the table.  Grouped around her on the Heritage Floor  are numerous rulers, noblewomen, as well  as some scholars and various artists of  the time. Cooking would not have been a  big part of their lives. What about the  people who really did the cooking? The  Italian peasant women who may have raised  eight children, fighting all the way against the oppression of the feudal lord.  Where is she?  So what if they didn't cook?  What, you,may well ask, is the significance of the amount of cooking each woman  did? (After all, these are not applicants  for a collective house.) It is significant  because The Dinner Party seeks to provide  us with a view of the lives and contributions of women who .can serve as a source  of both inspiration and emulation.- The  work has given many women a new sense of  pride, a new sense of what they can become. It is important that we'examine  these women. Are they really in essence  people we would seek to emulate? Is it  clear that they are on the same team as  we are?  Those who worked on The Dinner Party  fought the sexism in our society. They did  not, however, come to terms with the ruling class point of view which is presented  through our culture. So that, rather than  being told about the great male pharoahs,  The Dinner Party presents us with a female  pharoah who, we are to believe, made significant contributions to the welfare of  women.  In fact, the pharoahs, both male and female, were the rulers of Egypt. They stood  at the head of a state which was repressive to the majority of people, both men  and women. If and when women in that ruling role, "attempted to improve conditions  for women", it was only the small minority  of women sharing their class who profited  Elizabeth R., an honoured guest at The  Dinner Party, was certainly a majestic ruler. However, despite what she may have  done for a minority of women, her major  contribution to history was to further the  expansion of British colonialism. And it  is pretty hard to argue that British colonialism was a positive thing for the  majority of women affected by it.(Although  there were some who really made a killing,  old Queen E. for one. ) It is useful to  look at the relationship of the oppression  of women to overall oppression in society.  Class societies in Western civilization  (of which we have a clear record) have all  depended on an unequal relationship between men and women. Women have been seen  as inferior to men and have, by and large,  been excluded from the execution of power.  Eleanor of Aquitaine, for example, a  twelfth century Franch queen honoured at  The Dinner Party, was both preceded and  succeeded by a long line of predominantly  male rulers.  History is ruling class view of the world  History is written by the ruling class to  present its own world view. And so, the  history that has been handed down to us  highlights the rulers..(And of course the  Church which could always be relied upon  to save the souls of the poor and the  wealth of the rich. ) Because, by and  large, women rarely directly exercised  power, we have much history, little herstory.  When we look more closely for the lives  of individual women, however, it is only  ruling, class women who can be found.  (Those women from other classes who achieved fame usually acted in the interests  of the rulers. Joan of Arc, who led the  king's armies, is a good example. ) However, upon closer inspection, we see that  it is not only the women from the labouring classes who were excluded. The people,  the workers and peasants upon whom society  has depended, are almost invisible in the  historical record. It is not only the women who cooked the dinners for the pharoahs who never get a mention (let alone ¬a- Kinesis   August   '79    19  DINNER PARTY ...  four star rating), but also the women and  men who toiled to feed them, to clothe  them, and to build the great pyramids in  which their great remains lie.  Our understanding of our own history is  important because it gives us a sense of  who we are, where we came from, what we  accomplished along the way and where and  how we can go in the future. It is through  our collective historical experience that  we understand who our friends are and  who are our enemies. If we substitute a  female oppressive ruler for a male oppressive ruler, we are no further ahead.  If we are to rewrite "great men in history", our record will be one of rulers.  Are we any further ahead? But we can document the struggle for the improvement  of women's condition. One woman in the  audience at Langara suggested to Chicago  that we seek to create collective images,  images that help us to identify with our  collective struggle.  Does this mean that The Dinner Party has  no value? No. By all means no. The work  exposes the lie of our traditional history, of the traditional idea of the artist and of art itself. And in exposing  this lie Chicago and those who worked  with her have created a work of art that  is a source of inspiration for many people. ■  Bloodline: twelve million dollars to bring  rape/murder to neighbourhood cinemas  "Kathy Tippel  thinly disguised pornography."  by Women Against Violence Against Women  The movie "Kathy Tippel" oppresses women  and is thinly-disguised pornography. In  this film, director Verhoeven approaches  the Kathy Tippel story in the guise of  presenting a tale of a strong and independent woman, who rose above "sexual  abuse and degradation". What, in fact he  does is to exploit her story by cramming  it with every type of titillating sexual  arousal known to MANkind. Kathy is further  exploited by the producer and director  "cashing in" on marketing the film in the  so-called 'woman's genre'.  Although Kathy is shown occasionally taking  control over her own life, the majority of  the film is- concerned with scenes that reflect negative male myths and fantasies  portraying women as : physically and vicious  ly fighting each other, competitive - never  supportive - companions, sex objects, sexually vulnerable and childlike.  Token scenes are included on the topics of  child prostitution, initiation into prostitution, male nudity, brothel life, masturbation, pseudo-lesbianism, and a presentation of a rape scene that leaves no  details to the imagination. Something for  everyone-.' A particularily misogynistic approach is directed towards the character  development of Kathy's older sister who is  the only other female involved in the film.  Verhoeven continually over-uses sexually  explicit scenes that are spurious to the  content of the film in the name of '"European realism".  Ultimately, Kathy's escape is not by economic independence, but through marriage  to a man whom she believes is "the first  man that never wanted anything from her".  If he indeed wants nothing from her, he  is alone for Verhoeven's producers will  continue to wring every last cent they  can from her story. ■  by Brig Anderson  garrote or garrotte, also garrotte: a  Spanish method of execution by means of-  an iron collar affixed to a post and  tightened by a screw until, the victim  is strangled; strangulation with an implement  (as a length of piano wire with  wooden handles) used for this purpose  —Webster's Third New International Dictionary  Will audiences be shocked at director  Terence^Young's use of 'snuff movies' in  the 12 million dollar all-star thriller  BLOODLINE?  Will they flinch at the sadistic voyer-  ism of James Mason watching the filming  and garrotting (see advertisement) of  four different women hired especially for  that purpose? Will they walk out and demand their money back? Not in my screening they didn't.  Unless another campaign is launched against the latest outbreak of woman-hating in  movies, sodomy in LAST TANGO IN PARIS  (1975), rape in SHAMPOO (1976) and child  prostitution in PRETTY BABY (1977) will  soon fade into insignificance as murder/  rape escalate on the celluloid screen.  Our screens not only mirror life on the .  streets, they are an accurate reflection  of it.  Snuff films are a part of the staple diet  of pornographic film-makers and watchers.  They belong to an increasingly profitable  market for underground sex movies, and are  now available in cheap videotapes for home  viewing. What makes snuff films notorious  and sinister is that the woman is shown  enjoying sex i.e. the act of making love  (?) with the man who has paid for her services. At the moment of orgasm he Strang-,  les her, in BLOODLINE, with the red ribbon she has decorated her neck with.  Writing about violence against women in  movies is problematic. Interpreting visual  language gives the critic the power to legitimize in words what has only been a fleeting and disturbing image on the screen.  Of course in BLOODLINE the horror is repeated four times: the swift jerk, the  rolled-back head and bulging eyes, the  mouth open in a mute scream—these are  given a reality in print that the movie  denies.  Unwittingly, the critic perpetuates the  traditional mass entertainment function  . of women in film, as a projection of male  fantasy, as the sexist values of the dominant patriarchal culture. To analyze and  dissect sexist codes in BLOODLINE we must  include at "least a reference to its plot  which, in some ways, shows how Hollywood  applies a women's movement veneer to its  ideology.  Audrey Hepburn, looking marvellous at age  50, as daughter of murdered head of a vast  pharmaceutical empire, never once convinces as the autonomous career woman. She  refuses to sell the company shares, but  must rely on her husband-protector to rescue her.  The plot is as implausible as the heroine  herself. Jay Scott in her movie review of  July 4/79' writes in the Globe and Mail  that Hepburn as victim is ideal, that she  uses her, tremulous voice as an instrument  of torture: one whimper is like the  scratch of a long red fingernail across an  open heart—a haute couture Mia Farrow.  Needed: feminist film critics  What this country needs is some feminist  film critics who can give us the other  side of the following synopsis of BLOODLINE: But her victimization extends beyond the bounds of the script in Bloodline,   the sloppiest,  most luridly absurd  international soap opera since The Other  Side of Midnight,  also based on a Sheldon novel.  The money spent on this movie does not  show up on the screen:  it   went to agents.  The implication that if the plot had been  better, if the cast had been given better  lines, and the acting had been better,  then BLOODLINE would have been worth seeing. Not a word is said about the use of  snuff movies, or about the jealous, vindictive and murderous women in the movie.  Hepburn strolls through the park with her  executive assistant and future husband  Rhys Williams (Ben Gazarra). Her fault is  that she has always wanted to be like her  father, she says. But I was born a girl.  That was my original sin.   Vivian (Michelle  Phillips ) is married to politican James  Mason and has no scruples. It is she who  turns out to be the villian, having plotted the numerous murders in BLOODLINE. All  the women are elegant, upper class, and  with the exception of Hepburn, bitches  and whores. They are all betrayed by men. ■  _ Summertime sexism rages on.  larger than life at 4th and Stephens,  Will somebody please trash this billboard? 20    Kinesis    August   '79  WOMEN'S CULTURE  LIKE IT REALLY IS:  Woman-loving in the movies  by Brig Anderson  How can we produce a feminist culture in  film production and criticism that will  counter the dominant Hollywood sex and  victim ages on our screens?  Kay Armatage, Canadian film-maker, teacher and critic, discusses the need for  political feminist films (Feminist Filmmaking Theory and Practice, Canadian Women's Studies, vol. 3, P- 49-50.) Using  her own film, Gertrude and Alice in Passing, an eight-minute fictionalized account of the friendship between Gertrude  Stein and Alice Toklas (available, along  with her earlier film, Jill Johnston October 1975 from the Canadian Filmmakers  Distribution Centre, 406 Jarvis Street,  Toronto, Ontario M4Y 2G6), she describes  her deliberate use of:  * the pro-filmic event: creating theatre  * editing by fragmenting actors performances  * camera and audience as voyeur watching  a spectacle  I can hardly wait to see Gertrude and Alice  in Passing. It's about Gertrude's wild driving, and Alice's quarrelling with her in  the car, but we as audience do not experience the alienation effect of mainstream  cinema. Instead we are invited to participate in seeing how the film is done,  identify with characters, and provide the  happy ending, presumably by getting up at  the end of the movie which is also the  end of the quarrel.  The sad fact remains that friendship and  love between women remains largely the  prerogative of Hollywood, with the movies  like Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore,  Julia and Girlfriends.  As Varda Burstyn points out in "The seductive Illusion: Women and class in the  Hollywood cinema" (Socialist Voice, July/  August 1979) these films exploit the image  of the new autonomous women of the '70s,  but the options for all are still traditional.  We still need models that aspire to a transcendence of sex/class roles, visionaries  who break romantic with possessive love,  who change relationships through struggling  for intimacy, nurturance and permanence in  collective ways.  Until then, we must be satisfied with women  making films about issues and historical  events: With Babies and Banners: A story of  the Women's Emergency Brigade, documents"  the 1936-37 U.S. Flint Sit-Down strike a-  gainst General Motors. Women were instrumental in winning the strike, an inspiring  example of group action. (Available from  W.L.H.*F.P., P.O. Box 135, Franklin Lakes,  N.Y. 07417)  Watch also for the Women Fighting Inco sud-  bury Film, now in the editing stage. Directors Martin Duckworth, Joyce Rock and  Sophie Bissonnettee still need money to  complete the documentary of how the women  organized,, the effects of their involvement on their own lives and on their families as the long strike continued for  14 months. (For more information, write to  Jown Kuyek, 260 Edmund Street, Sudbury,  Ontario P3E 1M2, or phone (705) 674-3635)■  Creating a new feminist myth of ecology,  women and nature  WOMAN AND NATURE The Roaring Inside  Her by Susan Griffin (Harper & Row)  $9.95  Carolyn Benson Cohen  In Woman and Nature Susan Griffin speaks  with two voices, the "paternal," or patriarchal voice, which expresses attitudes  of men throughout history about nature  and women, and, as she writes in the Preface, "my voice...quickly joined by the  voices of other women, and voices from  nature, with which I feel more and more  strongly identified, particularly as I  heard the opinions of men about us."  She has turned men's demeaning identification of woman with nature into an  irony of acceptance and celebration. To  do so, she places her own artistic consciousness at the center of the book,  distilling time, events and feelings,  and containing the two opposing voices.  Griffin is an accomplished poet (read  Like the Iris of an Eye, Harper and Row,  1976) and it is as a poet that she has  written Woman and Nature.  Griffin's subjective approach establishes  organic unity, but causes difficulties  in the lengthy first sections where the  patriarchal voice speaks. She provides  an interesting bibliography but she has  relied heavily on secondary sources for  the judgments of men about women and the  natural world. She further increases our  distance by parodying the voice of patriarchal thought. Parody imitates, it  works best when telling us about things  already familiar. But Griffin is introducing information that is provocative  and fascinating. She is telling us about  the forces that have threatened us and  we want to experience them more directly.  Her artistry is to create in us her  feelings about the patriarchal voice, but  our feelings spring up spontaneously  when she lets the voice speak directly  for itself. Books One and Two of Woman  and Nature create stereotypes and dangerously approach harangue. They should be  more effective to support the rising  countermelody of her feminist voice.  In the final two sections, "Passage," and  "Her Vision," Griffin reaches her full  poetic powers. She is eloquent about  self-realization and growth: "The year  when her anger gave her clarity and all  her weeping was filled with intelligence."  She is lyrical-her woman's voice rises  and sings with a beauty that must be  read aloud.  In these final sections Griffin is creating a new feminist myth, based on an  ecology of woman and nature: "We say in  every practice every act lives." In experiencing this book we enter a new time,  with a new history, where images of nature verify the common, no longer deniable  perceptions of the feminine being-historical, daily, physical, and erotic.  The new myth that Griffin creates is one  of transition and becoming. When she  tells of elephants burying their dead and .  instilling in their children hatred and  fear of the hunter/killer, she says only  when a whole generation passes without  being captured or used to the hunter's  purposes will the killer be absolved.  (New Directions for Women)  Award for  "This Film is about Rape."  "This Film Is About Rape" was the winner of  a major international film award on June  1st at the American Film Festival in New  York.  The American Film Festival is conducted by  the Educational Film Library Association  and is the largest educational film event  of its kind.  Entered in the "Changing Society" category  of the Festival, the film won second prize.  Over 1,000 films from all over North America and Europe were,entered in the Festival  and "This Film Is About Rape" was one of  five Canadian entrants.  Rape Prevention Project coordinator, Dorthea  Atwater of the B.C. Police Commission, explained the film was developed by Rape  Crisis Centre workers and police officers  working together.  We had a very good filmmaker,  Bonnie Kreps  on the project for us,   Atwater said, we  knew it was a good film.  "This Film Is About Rape" is distributed  through the Canadian Filmmakers Distribution Centre, #430, 144 Front Street W.,  Toronto, Ontario.*  Met Chiclet yet?  CHICLET GOMEZ, by Dorothy 0'Connell  Deneau and Greenberg, Ottawa $4.95  Reviewed by Janet Beebe  Chiclet Gomez has apparently been on the  bookstands for more than a year. I regret  not having come across it sooner.  Dorothy 0'Connell, characterized in the  cover blurb as a "low-rent Erma Bombeck",  has created in Chiclet Gomez a formidable  character - a "tough public housing lady"  •with distinct feminist leanings.  This book is a compilation of 27 short  stories narrated by Tillie, Chiclet's  friend and neighbour in the project.  0'Connell's renderings of the adventure  of Chiclet and gang struck me as very  real, though of course the aim is comedy  and the situations are fictionalized.  Chiclet seems to personify hope for change  to those neighbours who support her, and  her status in community evolves from her  charisma. Her imaginative schemes range  from fund-raising (always fund-raising)  to running for mayor to organizing a summer retreat for mothers trapped year-round  in the project.  Given the adversity of a public housing  environment, it's not surprising that  most of their plans fizzle, but necessity  if nothing else drives them on.  This book is available locally. Read it  twice and pass it on.■  Atwood,  Laurence censored  Teachers in Lambton County, Ontario have  dropped six titles from the school board's  book list after a group of parents complained they contained violence, profanity, blasphemy and descriptions of sexual  acts.  Removed from the reading list were Catcher  in the Rye; Ecstasy of Rita Joe; La Guerre,  Yes Sir; The Edible Woman; Cabbagetown and  Rachel, Rachel. The last book was re-entered under its alternate title, A Jest  of God. (CP)m WOMEN IJM S^OkTS"  Kinesis    August   '79    21  Women are out, striking out  by Libby Weiser  Voices are heard admist the barking of dogs,  city street noises, and the watchful eyes  of the physically handicapped spectators  confined to wheelchairs.  All right,   you got   'er,   you got   'er swing-  in there.  Okay Danyele,  make it good now,  make it  good.   You know where  to put it.  Strike'.  Oh yes'.   Beautiful'.  Way to watch   'em there,   way  to watch   'em.  Hey Murphl That was a beauty of a hit.  Orca,   one down,   runner on first,  play for  two,   Orca.   Ready on two.  Baseball season is in full swing at Con-  naught Park this Wednesday night. Orca  isn't doing too well in this game; four of  their regulars aren't playing, and in the  league standings they are only fourth.  However, last year they were in fourth  place too before playoffs and then everyone came together to play cohesive integrated softball, and they ended up league  champions. The team isn't odds on favorite this year to win since six people  left from last year, but it could be  Orca is one of those teams that, take a  while to gel and then, watch out! Any  pitcher can become unbeatable and Danyele sure does know how to throw that  ball well.  This season there are two Mariloma teams,  as well as" CP Air, the Chatham Stealers,  and Unitow.  Why the name Orca? Well, seems that Orca  is a killer whale and someone who came  to a game had a dog named Orca and the  name caught on.  This is competitive sports, but there is  a feeling of fun here too. Orca plays with  the recreational league which is the bottom rung. There is also Senior A, B and C.  Senior A, Doc's Blues, is the second best  team in the world. Senior league play takes  place Tuesday and Thursday at South Memorial  Park at 41st between Fraser and Knight.  Game time is 7:30  Orca's manager, Geordie Stowell, isn't  nlaying tonight.  The   last game I hurt my  leg.   Massive  tissue  damage -and I'm really bitter.   I want to  play real bad and it really hurts not to.  As for the competition,   I like it.   It's a  legitimate way to be competitive.  I also  like interacting and this is a really good  way to do  that.   It's  two or three times a  week of playing.   It's getting a whole  bunch of people who are friends  together.  While we're here, we're really here and  really together and getting more towards  playoffs the teams start grouping. Some  of it transfers to after the game and we  start doing social things together. I  love winning but it's nice just to play.  By the way, injuries are an acceptable  risk in this league. If the game is well  played,   injuries are cut to zero.  Another member of the team, and one of the  originals, Deb Thiessen says, Sure,   it's  competitive.   I'm semi-competitive.   I'm not  quite so hot on winning as I am on playing,  but most of the people on the  team are  fairly competitive.   It's one way of getting  it out.   If you get it out on the field,  then you're not getting it into your personal relationships.   I love playing soft-  ball.   I just like playing it.   It's fun.  Everybody plays for different reasons.   Some  people do it for exercise.   I just  like the  skill,   the feeling you get when you catch  a ball or when you hit one.  They are well liked in the league even  though it is obvious they are gay and out.  The team has a house painter, a library  worker, a truck driver, letter carriers,  women on UIC and welfare. In the five years  Orca has been in existence at least thirty women have played. The team started  when the original Mariloma team formed.  There were too many for one team and so it  split into two. It just so happened that  the orginal Lomas stayed together and  most of Geordie and her friends formed a  separate group.  Mariloma is a sports club which has been  around for 60 years out of Connaught Park.  It originally started as a men's swim  team and has been a men's football-rugby  club. It .is international in scope in  that they have national calibre rugby  players and their football program is one  of the best. Within the last five years,  women have become involved in it through  field hockey, softball, baskerball and  volleyball.  Orca finally got enough money to pay for  tee shirts. It costs fifty dollars to  join the league, sixty dollars for balls  and equipment, about seventy-five dollars  for tournament fees and then about one  hundred dollars for tee shirts every year.  Everyone pays twenty-five dollars to play  and this is the lowest fee in the league  since the team is the most unemployed.  Back to the game. It's one out, runner on  first. Orca plays for two and makes a  double play. But it's too late in the game  to catch up and Lorna wins.  Three cheers for Lorna I. Hip hip, hurray,  hurray,   hurray.   One for Orca,   hurray'.  Some of the Orca members wheel the physically handicapped back to their van.  Orca playoff games are at Connaught Park  at either 3:30 or 6:30. Call Ariel books  at 733-3511 to confirm days they play.a  Sports, women and the tories  The new minister for sports and fitness in  the federal government is Steve Paproski,  a former Edmonton Eskimo.  One of his first comments on taking over  the job from Iona Campognolo's job was a  caveat to athletes: In this day and age,  I think athletes have to look after themselves. I don't believe the stories that  athletes are being forced to get along on  one meal a day.  We 're not prepared to finance these people  so that they have no other responsibilities  in  life.   We 're not a socialist country.  Loto Canada, the fund-raiser for sports and  fitness is due to be axed, in accordance  with a PC campaign promise.  Paproski says that private business will  have to help out, We have to muster some  support from the business community ta  help these athletes get jobs.  Michelle Hill, an Upstream reporter, puts  this in a feminist perspective: It seems  probable that women's sports will suffer  considerably in the new ministry.   If funding for athletes is cut,  you can be sure  that one of the first programs to get  hit will be  the women's program.   Instead of  inching forward,  we will probably be taking  a few steps back.u  Feminism and spirituality  FEMINISM AND SPIRITUALITY: Towards Healing and Integration  A workshop which includes ballads, tales  of fantasy and illusion (both serious and  tragic), myths of heroines and goddesses.  A photographic collection of 250 of the  best of an extensive collection of the art  and' sculpture of the ancient Mediterranean  societies. A gleaning from many sources.  Workshop'themes include: Integration of  sexuality and spirituality; healing self  and others through music and poetry;  structures of consciousness; creative space  and spiritual change, and the path to per-  sonhood.  Barbara Newton will be organizing this  workshop through Continuing Education at  UBC. Times: Four 1 p.m. - 4:30 p.m. sessions on the last three Saturdays of  September, and the first Saturday of Oct-  I ober.  i, For more details about place and time, call  | Barbara at 732-7916 'ñ† 22    Kinesis    August   '79  More debate about the women's building  The following thoughts were elicited from  Ros Sherrard, a member of the Women's  Building Planning Committee. Comments were  thrown in from some of the other women  workers at Wild West Organic Harvest—a  warehouse distribution outlet run collectively by women—over morning coffee, and  recorded by Gillian Marie for KINESIS.  The Fantasy of a Women's Building:  A place which included a benefit space,  a good sound system, a concert area for  women performers to perform in a supportive environment. The Kay Gardner concert illustrated to many of us that a  women-created space is really necessary  in this city,  she said. The women who organized that concert really tried to create a mood,  but they were hampered by the  constraints of the building that they had  to rent.   Just imagine what we could create with women's energy in our own building.  A space which included a restaurant, one  that was conscious of food politics. We  here at the warehouse are very conscious  about food as a way in which we are controlled.   The women's movement has worked  at the issue of control of our bodies.  A  women's right to reproductive control  over her body is a tenet of the women's  movement.     Some of us have  learned assertiveness training to counter verbal abuse  of our bodies and/or self defense techniques to prevent physical abuse.   But we  have given little attention to the way  in which we are controlled by the food  that we eat.   Chemical additives do alter  our moods,   they do effect our response  to situations.   I would like  to see a  women's building that was holistic    in  its philosophy,  and that includes food  that we share.  What about some of the objections that  have been raised to the concept of a  women's building? The centralization  argument ?  Well,   it is true that the women's movement has been diffuse, and I don't  think that the women's building will  change that.   The women's movement is  too large  to fit into one building anyway,  even if we wanted it to.  But I do see  the need for a central  place where we can organize politically,  meet socially, and provide counselling  services.   We do have offices that provide  these services,  but they are scattered  right now,  and dependent on government  grants. This situation has to change.   We  need a secure space that pays for itself,  that won 't be revoked by a grant,  that  contains our library,  archives,  files,  information and referral contacts,   telephones,   typewriters,  gestetners,  and all  the other equipment we need to organize  political and social activity.  What about the argument that we already  have all this at the YWCA?  Where 's the lesbian resource centre in  the Y? The present YWCA doesn't fill every  woman's needs.  There is no drop-in,   no  feminist training,   no place to meet and,  for example,  decide haw to deal with an  instance of gross sexism in society.   But  I think that we also need a place where  new women in town can go.  A move to the  city,  or just a visit, is made much easier and more enjoyable for women if they  can plug into the women's movement quick-  ly.  Finally, what about the argument that it  would be divisive of the local women's  movement?  If we  lived our lives by not doing things  that are divisive,  we would be dead.  Many  of us would never have left destructive  relationships.  I see this as a tactic that  is used against us a lot.  To say that a project could be divisive is to attempt to  scare us into inactivity.m  Dear Kinesis,  I do not agree with the maxim that "the end  justifies the means" - the means by which  you achieve something determines the end,  particularly with this kind of project,  where the kind of involvement that women  put into the building, the working together and striving etc. are things that  will help shape the direction of the building when finally it is gained.  One of the best women's centres in London  (England) was squatted.- The ensuing fight  to keep it (which was finally won, because  they showed how much the community needed  it), lives in the spirit of the building  A Women's building should not be a genteel  and bureaucratically respectable place like  the YWCA in Vancouver, but an experimental,  creative, working centre where things get  done, where people learn and where women  We don't want a women's building  that looks like an airport. . .  can meet, with or without their children.  It should be alive with the spirit of  change, not like an airport terminal.  Already the way in which the funds have  been collected for this building (the BCRIC  shares) ensures at least that it will become a showpiece for the provincial government to say "Look - see what the feminists  have done with their shares - just shows  we are living in a democracy, and that our  shares are being used by the people...blah  blah".  It would have been far better if women  gave their own money to the building (by  begging, borrowing or stealing it.) I  know there are many women who could not  afford to do this, but I've also met plenty  here who could afford to give quite a bit,  particularly if it was to become a part of  their lives.  The other thing of course, is to squat a  building. Maybe one that's been left empty  and derelict and re-build it.  It would be  a lot of work and money, but lots would be  learned (about plumbing, wiring, painting,  etc. ) and gained from it. People could  feel they had a real part in the centre's  creation. The right for a building of  this sort could be fought for - in the courts  if necessary. It would help women unfamiliar with the feminist movement/community to punch in in a useful way and feel  part of something growing.  At the end of  Dear Women of Kinesis,  I find your "Devil's Advocacy" of the women's  building written in a very negative and un-  informative way. What if I hadn't had a  copy of the April/May Kinesis to refer to?  What has happened since then? Are the proposals still the same? What happened at  the public meetings the women organizing  the building held? Also, questions can be  written to give negative or positive images,  the questions you give lead to very negative  images of the need, dreams and organization  that has surrounded our building.  The points that you put forward are arguments  that come up time and time again over each  issue in the movement: the abortion issue  will drain energy from the child care issue,  women in prison concerns will divert energy  from family court reforms, going on about  the man issue is a waste of time and drains  energy from everything...  "Women are dreaming: - Surely feminism is  the dream of women, because a feminist  society is not obtained overnight, should  we stop dreaming?  As a past paid worker of V.S.W., past standing committee member of B.C.F.W. and a present worker of Women Against Violence Against  Women here in Vancouver, I can see many of  the assets: no more counselling with small  children playing in the same room, no more  standing in line for a typewriter, no more  spending $2,000 on a shitty photocopier  that breaks down weekly, no more paying $500  a month to men for the honour of overcrowded  working conditions.. We could share:  share the typewriters, the photocopiers,  the child care facilities, the information  and resource files.  The rent would be buying  our own space, woman controlled if not 100JS  woman used.  Most of all, that old-time favorite hassle,  communications, would be a lot easier. How  much better to meet representatives of the  various organizations in our own coffee  shop, have a shared bulletin board, call  across the hall to] find out what Rape Relief,  SORWUC, the Women's Research Centre,  W.A.V.A.W. or Women in Focus is doing today-  not to mention the ease that 'out of town'  women would have contacting the women's  organizations of Vancouver...  I am all for the women's building. V.S.W.  should be well aware of the need especially  as they are no longer providing a free meeting space, have no reception area and no  room for children to play in their offices  (due to a forced move because of increased  rents and an inability to raise sufficient  funds to provide those "extras".)  What is the purpose of devil's advocacy in  >«C H ef^M—  such a struggle, there would be far more  people involved and more support.  A women's centre should be for women only.  The argument that this would be intimidating  to women new to the movement doesn't quite  make sense to me. If women come to the  women's movement, it's usually because  they want a breather from heterosexist dynamics. And what about the women who feel  really uncomfortable with men around? A  really thriving and creative women's centre  has to be for women only at this point in  time.  Finally, to put some perspective on my  suggestions, I'm still not overly familiar  with North America, with all the cultural  legal, social differences.  But if the only  alternative to getting a women's building  is the one that's being taken, then something is going wrong with the women's movement somewhere.  Beryl Beanm  the women's movement - surely we have  enough outside hassles to put up with.  This  is an incredible waste of time. The women's  building committee has held public meetings,  women from Vancouver/Lower Mainland have  had the opportunity of attending these, women  from outside the area have had the opportunity to write to them and give their views.  The only view I am interested in reading is  the 'official' stand of V.S.W. - Are you for  or against our building? Will you put any  effort into organizing it? Will you use it  when it is in existence? You give us no  idea of this except in the way that this  anonymous piece was written - I really hope  that the impression I have is false.  Sue Moore,   27076 - 108th Avenue,   Whonnock BC  VSW staff, members and executive have been  working on the women's building committee  since its inception. - Ed.u BE  Kinesis August  '79    23  BULLETIN BOARD  KINESIS  KINESIS is published monthly by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to enhance understanding about the  changing position of women in society  and work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED.IN KINESIS are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the KINESIS editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: KINESIS, Vancouver Status  of Women, 1090 West 7 Ave., Vancouver,  B.C. V6H 1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women  is by donation. KINESIS is mailed monthly to all members. Individual subs to  KINESIS are $8 per year. We ask members  to base their donations on this and their  own financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the  right to edit, and submission does not  guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if  you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe, Lyn  Buckle, Kris Craig, Jean Faguy, Janice  Pentland Smith, Joey Thompson, Gayla Reid,  Cat Wickstrom, Jan Wood, Leslie Macdonald  Women's Work Directory  Volume #1 of Women's Work Directory is  now available by mail.  If you are in need of a product or service and would prefer to deal with a woman, write to us for your free copy of  Women's Work Directory Vol. #1.  In it you will find 55 listings of women  who: build furniture; read palms; take  pictures and more.  Send 50 cents  to: Women's Work Directory  C/0 1612 East 8th Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 1T5  Completely produced by women. Watch for  Volume #2.  LIL line 688-4519  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE 685-4519  We want to be able to tell our callers  what's on about town. If you have any  information about upcoming events call  us anytime and leave a message on our •  tape.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE 685-4519  Lil's grand garage sale  Don't forget the LIL Garage Sale, August  19, 10:00 a.m. - 3:00 p.m., 812 West 18th  Ave. Phone 324-1193 to arrange to drop  off all your choice junk.  Rock against repression  ROCK AGAINST REPRESSION August 11. Benefit in the Carpenters' Hall, 726 12th  St. New Westminster. Film, speakers, dance  for the SFU 18, CUPW, Adams Lab., Endako  and Muckamuck workers. Ad Hoc will play.  Price: $3.00 for employed people; $2.00  students and unemployed. Free to strikers.  Call 253-4810 for more details.  Woman identified  Canada's first lesbian show. Every Thursday evening at 7.30 on 102.7 FM.  August 9: Lesbians in Prisons.  August 16: Lesbian Art and the Art of Responsibility.  August 23: Lesbians and Alcohol.  August 30: Lesbians and Music.  btft  CJUhHre.  tAjjiAAtdztJo  Diaphragm fittings  If you are interested in getting a diaphragm, there is now a diaphragm collective that is doing fittings. They can be  contacted through the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective.  If you are interested in learning how to  fit diaphragms, there will be a diaphragm  teaching workshop Saturday, September 15th.  For more info, contact the Health Collective, 736-6696  An exhibition of recent works by CLAIRE  KUJUNZIC is open at the Women in Focus Art  Gallery throughout August.  Gallery hours are 10-4 Monday through  Friday, except for Thursday, when it is  open until 8 p.m.  Water-colour prints by COLETTE FRENCH are  scheduled for September; woodcut prints and  sculpture with an anti-psychiatry theme  by PORTLAND FRANK and PERSIMMON BLACKBRIDGE  are coming up in October.  WOMEN IN FOCUS ART GALLERY is located at  #6 - 45 Kingsway, Vancouver.  Mr. Women's Self Help  The Health Collective received a letter  from the American Express Card company  recently, canvassing for "applications.  The letter was addressed: Mr. Women's Self-  Help, Gynecological Clinic.  Mr. Kinesis got one, too.  Post-abortion rap  If you have had an abortion and are left  with unresolved feelings or if you simply want to talk with other women who have  had the same expedience, contact the Vancouver Women's Health Collective about a  group being formed for that purpose. This  will be a small group that will meet weekly with two facilitators. Call the Health  Collective at 736-6696  Endometreosis  Several women who have endometreosis are  meeting to share experiences and talk  about research, treatment, etc. Call the  Health Collective for more info. 736-6696  Trouble with allergies?  Having trouble with allergies? Women interested in a health group on allergies: talking about and doing research on the causes  and cures for allergies, contact Laura:  873-5887.   oajward!  S=^ look <»A+ f&r  |   subscriber $••"  Sustainers are keeping us alive in deep waters  Thank you,  sustainers.    Your contributions give us a powerful feeling of  community support.     Practically,   they make the - continued existence of '  Kinesis possible.  If you have not yet made a sustainer donation or pledge, but have sufficient  income to do so, we ask you to think about it. Sustainers make a personal  commitment to keeping Kinesis alive. Sustainers contribute $50 a year, in  a lump sum or in ten installments of $5.00 (or any variation of the above).  Sustainers receive their own subscription, along with any number of free  trial subs, for their friends.  Why not fill out this sustainer form to help Kinesis continue?  NAME  Postal code  I enclose my monthly installment of  I enclose a lump sum of $50    Clip and mail to : Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 1090 West 7th Ave.  Vancouver V6H IB3