 'f OCTOBER 1997      UBC students slam APEC.pg 4     CMRAS2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax: (604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Tues Oct 7 and  Tues Nov 4 at our new office, 309-  877 E. Hastings St. Production for the  November issue is from Oct-28. All  women welcome even if you don't  have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism.classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller (on leave),  Agnes Huang, Sook C. Kong  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Mariene del Hoyo, Janet Mou, Ednoi  Boun, Anne Webb, Fatima Jaffer,  Andrea Imada, Catherine Munn, Mary  Logan, Siren Ahmedi, Russel Baskin,  Linda Hayton, Dorothy Elias, Carol  Read, Persimmon Blackbridge, Ali  Grant, El Apostol, Lisa Valencia-  Svensson, Agnes Huang, Dana  Putnam, Joan Bridget  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson, Chrystal  Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Co-ordinator: Swee Sim Tan  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  Women united Take Back The  Night in Vancouver.  Photos by Fatima Jaf  and Agnes Huanc  PRESS DAT  September 30, 19!  SUBSCRIPTS  Individual: $20 per year (+5  or what you can a  fnstitutions/Gro  $45 per year (+$3.15  VSW Membership (inclu<  Kinesis subscript  $30 per year (+S1.40 G  SUBMISSION  Women and girls are w  make submissions. Wa n  right to edit and submissior  y H     'l QP      ..  ions should be typ  spaced and must be sigr  include an address, telephc  and SASE. Kinesis d  poetry or fiction. E  are available upon r<  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received ir  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan a  issues.  Features and review;  News: 15th  Letters i  Display '    'eni ,.  lews ^  Government's response to self-defense review 3  by Agnes Huang  Postal workers prepared to strike 3  by Marion Pollack  UBC activists want APEC off campus 4  by Nicole Capler  Taking back the night...and the streets 5     Corporate globalization  photo essay by Fatima Jaffer, with Mabel Nipshank, Elvira  Balakshin and Alice Lee  Features  The agenda behind corporate globalization 9  compiled by Lisa Valencia-Svensson, Fatima Jaffer and Agnes  Huang  Organizing Korean women workers 13  by Serapina Cha-Mi-Kyung as told to Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Protecting Aboriginal rights and Voisey's Bay 14  by Joyce Ford  Centrespread  APEC: Social clauses are not the answer ..  by Sunera Thobani  Arts  Exposing the roots of breast cancer 15  by Kelly Haydon  Review of the lesbian documentary Stolen Moments 16  by Marusya Bociurkiw  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 7  compiled by Andrea Imada, Mariene del Hoyo and Leanne Keltie  Movement Matters 8  by Mariene del Hoyo and Andrea Imada  Bulletin Board 17  compiled by Kelly Haydon  Exposing breast cancer 15  Stolen Moments 16  OCTOBER 1997 As Kinesis goes to press, we are being  inundated with the growing reality of male  violence against women. On the same day  as Vancouver's Take Back the Night, a  woman in Toronto was pushed in front of  a subway car by a man. She later died in  hospital. Interestingly, it was the first time  the mainstream media acknowledged that  the woman was targetted just because she  was a woman and the man wanted to lash  out against a woman.  Last month, we also read about several brutal murders in BC: of Heidi  (Thailand and her four children, and of  Tammy Grono and her mother Cecile. And  we had to endure reports on the trial of  Terry Driver in the sexual assault and murder of Tanya Smith and the sexual assault  and attempted murder of Misty Cockerill.  We learned about a trial judge in Edmonton who ruled that Bill C-46—the legislation restricting the disclosure of women's personal records in sexual assault  cases—was unconstitutional. His decision  was based on the balance of rights; that is,  the right of the accused to a fair trial and  the right of the witnesses to "privacy."  How about the ever-increasing backlash against women and feminism... A classic example: September's edition of Saturday Night Magazine, which featured a  seven-page article on the "husband" abuse.  In it we're told that "women are just as  likely to batter as men." Try again.  What has been the response of our  leaders in government to the recent spate  of violence against women? BC's Minister  of Women's Equality has tried to shift the  focus of responsibility onto the larger popu  lation and away from the inadequacies of  the police and justice systems [see page 9.]  And the federal Liberals responded by  re-introducing their DNA databank legislation, which the cops support (although  they would like it to have given them more  powers) and feminists criticize as totally  missing the point on the roots and realities  of male violence against women.  Violence against women worldwide is  very much tied to the spread of the corporate agenda. We as feminists have known  this for a long time, but it seems our elected  officials can't seem to grasp this.  As we speak, our federal and provincial government leaders are busy touting  trade liberalization, deregulation, privatization, and "free trade."  As an example of this, last month, the  BC provincial government kicked off its  "APEC Connections Youth Tour," a mobile,  interactive display intended to sell young  people on the "benefits" of APEC. Glen  Clark attended the launch in a Richmond  mall, and was promptly met by the youth  NO! to APEC coalition.  Not fazed by the protesters—Clark  called them a "fringe" group—the premier  proceeded to justify his government's avid  support of APEC. When questioned about  human right violations, Clark was reported  in a Richmond paper as saying: "We trade,  right now, with countries that have atrocious human rights, but our standard of living would be cut in half if we didn't trade  with them...Increased economic relationships are expected to highlight Canada's attractive lifestyles and freedoms."  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  subscriptions or donated to Vancouver Status of Women in September.  Helen Babalos * Pat Barter * Liz Bennett * Gillian Creese * Allison Flack &  Daniel Huang * Maureen Fraser * Pat Fuller * Gina Gagne * Jennifer Johnstone * L.  Kuchinka * Heather Leighton * M. K. Louis * Fiona Miller * Ruth Pierson * Laura  Quilici * Julie Wong * Rita Kim Wong * The Blue Ewe  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and  Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Nancy Duff * Allison Flack * Jody Gordon * Erin Graham * Barbara LeBrasseur  * Eha Onno  A special thanks also to the following trade unions who have demonstrated their  support of our work with contributions to VSW:  BC Federation of Labour (CLC) * Communications, Energy and Paperworkers  Union, Local 444 * International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 258 * Marine & Shipbuilders Union, Local 506 * United Plumbing & Pipefitting Union, Local 170.  Corrections  In the story on the self-defense review on page 3 of our September 1997 issue, we  incorrectly noted the recommendations of Judge Lynn Ratushny. In the cases of the seven  women, Ratushny recommended three free pardons, three sentence reductions, and one  referral to a court of appeal. In this issue, we have an update of the story [see page 3,] and  disappointingly, the federal government did not abide by any of Judge Ratushny's recommendations. We apologize for the confusion.  Also last month, in our centrespread piece, we incorrectly spelled Walter Twinn's  last name. And it seems that the graphic ghoulies paid us a visit and caused us to mistakenly lay out the eagle feathers upside down. Yikes.  And to the question about whether  First Nations people would benefit from  APEC Clark was quoted as saying: "Aboriginal people have huge potential, specifically when it comes to the lucrative business of selling aboriginal art to Japanese  visitors."  A number of groups have been organizing actions specifically targetting the  APEC Summit when it comes to Vancouver (November 24 and 25).  The Second International Women's  Conference Against APEC (736-3346 or 291-  4023) is putting together a conference on  November 17-18. The conference will include panel discussions and workshops in  four areas: labour, human rights, environment, and economic and social development.  And the Vancouver Status of Women  (255-6554) is organizing local activities for  the NAC-declared National Women's Day  of Protest Against APEC on November 24.  As a starting point, VSW is inviting individual women and women's groups to a  meeting on "How APEC impacts our lives  and our movements" on October 9,7-10pm  at the Downtown Eastside Seniors' Centre,  509 E. Hastings St.  One last thing before Kinesis goes to  press...women in Canada need to step up  our campaign to save our public pension  system. Late last month, the federal Liberals tabled their Canada Pension Plan "reforms" in the House of Commons. Finance  Department bureaucrats then spent a week  in different cities trying to sell the Liberal  government's proposals.  Women may soon get a chance to publicly address the proposed changes.The legislation will likely reach the committee  stage in October, at which time women will  have an opportunity to present briefs on  the need for a public pension system.  That's all for this month, as Kinesis goes  to press. We hope you'll all join in on actions in your community during the National Women's Day of Protest Against  APEC. Remember, the words of Bella  Abzug "it's a two-fisted fight."  Rain didn't stop us from having the  biggest Take Back the Night ever in Vancouver. And rain didn't stop us from making it to press on time...  This month, other factors were involved in the delay in publishing our October issue. We thought it would be important to cover the National Action Committee on the Status of Women's 25th anniversary celebration. We postponed Kinesis'  press day by a week so Ed Boarder Agnes  Huang could attend NAC's AGM and its  annual lobby of federal political parties in  Ottawa.  Given the rush to get everything done  on time though, we had to drop four pages  from this issue. But we still have 20 pages  packed with feminist news and analysis  (and some fun things, too.)  Unfortunuately, this has meant that our  pre- anti-APEC organizing coverage this  month is not as complete as we had wanted  it to be.  Next month, we will definitely have  comprehensive coverage of what is happening to challenge the global corporate  agenda in Vancouver, other parts of Canada  and the world.  Back to this issue for a moment...we'd  like to welcome our new writers this  month: Nicole Capler and Marusya  Bociurkiw. Welcome and thanks also go out  to our new production volunteers: Linda  Hay ton, Russel Baskin, Ali Grant and Joan  Bridget.  If you're interested in getting involved  in the writing, production or any other aspect of putting Kinesis together, give us a  call at 255-5499.  This month, we also have something  else "new" to report. Yes, it's true...Kinesis  has gone "high" tech. We now have an e-  mail address (and it's very simple):  kinesis@web.net. But wait, before you go  and dash off a whole bunch of great electronic articles and (love) letters to Kinesis,  we have to tell you something; seems that  our modem phone line and our computer  aren't talking yet, but we plan on getting  things sorted out very soon so we can send  you things and you can send us things.  What fun.  Other things to report: we're sad to say  that two women have officially resigned  from the Editorial Board. Longtime Ed  Boarder wendy lee kenward has told us she  won't be able to return to Kinesis with as  much time and energy as she would want.  Last year, wendy took a break from Kinesis  to have a baby. Since Sky was bom, wendy's  life hasn't slowed down much.  wendy has been such an amazing supporter of Kinesis, as a writer, proofer and  paster-upper, Benefit organizer, childcare  worker, and all-around fun-gal-to-have-  around. wendy says she'll help out as much  as she can during production, but still, we'll  miss having her on the Ed Board. Thanks  wendy for everything.  Kinesis also wants to thank Rachel  Rosen for her work on the Ed Board. When  Rachel joined the Ed Board earlier this year,  she was already involved in a lot of community activism, with NO! to APEC, Environmental Youth Alliance, and a queer Jewish women's discussion group. Over the  months, things just kept getting busier and  busier for Rachel.  Rachel is resigning from the Ed Board,  but not from Kinesis altogether. She says she  wants to be able to devote more time to  writing (one story every month!) and helping out with production. Thank you for  your contributions to Kinesis, Rachel. See  you at the next story meeting.  Speaking of volunteering...remember  we mentioned the Kinesis Benefit last  month? Well, we're still looking for as many  women as possible to help out in organizing the fun-filled, fabulous annual event.  Call us: 255-5499. Thanks.  One last tidbit before we sign  off...What do you think of Ed Boarder  Fatima Jaffer's pose on the back cover.  Pretty style-y, isn't she? If you want another  copy of that picture, you can find it in the  new 1998 daybook from gynergy press,  Portraits. The spiral bound agenda contains  the photos and words of 24 women in  Canada "who make activism a part of their  daily lives." To get your copy, check your  local feminist or community bookstore, or  contact gynergy press, PO Box 2023,  Charlottetown, PEI, CIA 7N7; tel: (902) 566-  5750; fax: (902) 566-4473; e-mail:  books@gynery.com  OCTOBER 1997 News  Women and the self-defense review in Canada:  Long wait, no real justice  by Agnes Huang  Women wanted justice, but the federal  government just offered "mercy." For the  women who had been recommended for  relief by the self-defense review—and their  advocates—the government's response  was a disappointment.  On September 26th, federal Minister of  Justice Anne McLellan and Solicitor General Andy Scott issued their recommendations in the cases of seven women who had  been convicted of killing abusive men. The  women claim they acted in self-defense.  The ministers' announcement was a  response to the final report Judge Lynn  Ratushny turned over to them in July.  Ratushny was appointed by the federal  government in 1995 to head the independent review. She was given the narrow mandate to look specifically at cases of women  who had been convicted of manslaughter  or murder in which the law of self-defense  may not have been applied appropriately.  In total, Ratushny heard from 98 women—  the government had only anticipated 15  cases.  While McLellan and Scott provided  some relief to only five of the seven women,  they didn't accept most of Ratushny's recommendations and legal analysis. In the  cases of two women who had already  served 20 years in jail for their involvement  in the deaths of abusive men, the ministers  rejected recommendations for sentence reductions.  The ministers did agree that one women's sentence should be cut short, and that  another woman's case should be referred  to the court of appeal. However, in the cases  of three women recommended for free pardons, two were given conditional pardons  by the government. (Their criminal records  will be sealed and re-opened only if they  reoffend). The third woman's free pardon  was refused, but she was freed from serving the remainder of her sentence. (The conviction will still be on her record).  Kim Pate of the Canadian Association  of Elizabeth Fry Society (CAEFS) says it  appears the ministers did not have much  confidence in the outcome of the self-  defense review.  "Even though Judge Ratushny did a  stringent review, made recommendations  in only seven cases, and gave conservative  legal analysis, the government did not  agree with any of her recommendations,"  says Pate.  The government also turned over  Ratushny's recommendations to provincial  prosecuting authorities for re-examination,  and subsequently, the recommendations  were modified.  Even more troubling about the government's response to the self-defense review  is the ministers saying they acted on "humanitarian grounds."  "This reasoning is really patronizing,"  says Pate. "Essentially, it's still the same  misogynist and racist stereotyping coming  into play."  "With their approach, what the ministers in effect said was that these women  were not classic 'good girls'," says Lee  Lakeman of the Canadian Association of  Sexual Assault Centres. "They don't fit the  stereotype of a woman who would act in  self-defense.  This is really a travesty of justice, continues Lakeman. "There is no reason to  have called the review unless the government knew women had been wronged. But  they have managed to cover this fact so  tightly, it doesn't look like there was an issue of justice not being served."  Lakeman says it is critical to continue  putting pressure on the minister of justice.  "The minister has total power to deliver  clemency and should be pressed to do so,"  says Lakeman.  Feminists have long been calling for a  systematic change in the way the justice  system deals with women responding to  violence against them. With regards to self-  defense, anti-violence-against-women activists say there needs to a rewriting of law  to take into account women's realities.  Says Lakeman: "The best outcome of  the review would have been to have found  a better way to deal with violence against  women in general and to have changed  police practice, Crown charging policies  and the administration of justice so that the  Charter Rights and Freedoms is applied to  the cases where women are charged with  killing men in self-defense."  "The self-defence review...exposed the  urgent need for reform within the criminal  justice system and Judge Ratushny has  pointed to several law reform possibilities,"  says Kim Pate. "CAEFS and other equlity  seeking groups...will continue to urge the  government to implement appropriate law  reform initiatives."  Agnes Huang is an Chinese feminist activist  living in Vancouver.  Women and postal work in Canada:  Canada Post acting unfairly  by Marion Pollack  There may be a mail strike in Canada  in the very near future. Members of the  Canadian Union of Postal Workers (CUPW)  may be forced off the job by the bargaining  stance of Canada Post. Mail delivery would  be halted, if letter carriers, sorters and drivers would be forced on to the picket lines.  CUPW represents over 46,000 people  who work for Canada Post. While full-time  postal jobs have been decreasing, temporary and casual postal work has been increasing at a rapid pace. In the last decade,  the number of full time jobs has dropped,  even though mail volume has risen dramatically. Meanwhile, according to Erin  Paul, CUPW's Pacific Regional Grievance  Officer, the number of temporary workers  with no job security has climbed j ust as dramatically.  Paul says that, "in most stations in  Greater Vancouver, temporary letter carriers are used on a continuous basis. In the  processing plants, temporary sorters are  used on an all too frequent basis."  In this round of bargaining, CUPW is  focusing on getting Canada Post to turn  temporary, overtime, and extended part-  time hours (in excess of normally sched  uled hours) worked in major postal plants  into hundreds of permanent jobs.  According to Sharon Fitzsimons, President of the Vancouver Local of CUPW, approximately 16 per cent of the total hours  worked in major postal plants are either  overtime, temporary or extended part time  hours. She says that converting those irregular hours to full-time jobs would mean  the creation of almost 2,000 new permanent  jobs.  CUPW's bargaining demand has widespread implications for women. Increasingly, the work available to women with  Canada Post is either temporary or part-  time. For many women in Canada, full-  time, full-year employment is essentially a  thing of the past. In 1996, all the growth in  jobs for women was in the part time and  temporary categories. Now, one in 10 jobs  in Canada is temporary. This trend dooms  women to a lifetime of poor wages, lousy  benefits, and substandard working conditions.  It would represent a major challenge  to this trend if the CUPW were successful  in attaining its bargaining demand. "If  CUPW can force Canada Post to create  regular jobs instead of relying on temporary workers, it would send a message to  every employer in Canada," says  Fitzsimons.  CUPW is also negotiating for an increase of day shift employment for inside  postal workers (primarily mail sorters).  Canada Post has been forcing more and  more workers onto afternoon and midnight  shifts. "This creates a hardship for parents  who want to spend time with their children," says Erin Paul. Canada Post could  have more people on day shift and improve  service to the public at the same time. However, to date, it has ignored this demand  and is insisting that most mail be processed  during the evenings and nights.  The union is also demanding that  Canada Post improve and expand the benefits to temporary workers. "Right now,  Canada Post uses temporary workers as  cheap labour," says Fitzsimmons. "We want  to make sure they have more rights and  benefits, but Canada Post does not want to  improve their status. Instead, they want to  take away many of the rights temporary  workers have achieved."  The federal Liberals do not appear to  be interested in negotiating fairly with  CUPW. As an example of this, a document  that the union received indicates the Liberal government was planning on setting  up scab "distribution centres" to hand out  pension and other government cheques in  the event of a strike.  "This is an attempt to break our strike,"  Paul says. "In 1991, the distribution centres were an unmitigated disaster—senior  citizens were forced to stand long line ups  only to find their cheques were not ready."  "If CUPW is forced out on strike, the  union is prepared to sort and deliver pension cheques," says Paul. "We don't think  it is fair that the Liberal government tries  to play on the well-being of senior citizens  as part of their bargaining strategy."  The button many postal workers are  wearing seems to sum up their position. It  reads: "I don't want to strike, but I will."  Marion Pollack is a postal worker who is active with CUPW.  OCTOBER 1997 News   Protesting against APEC in Vancouver:  AELM not welcome on  campus  by Nicole Capler  On November 25, the University of  British Columbia (UBC) will host the APEC  (Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation) Economic Leaders' Meeting. APEC operates  through closed meetings of bureaucrats,  politicians, big business representatives  and academics. APEC does not have a  mechanism for the genuine participation of  the people who are most adversely affected  by APEC's policies.  In true APEC fashion, the decision to  host the APEC Economic Leaders' Meeting  (AELM) was made unilaterally by outgoing UBC President David Strangway. There  was no consultation whatsoever with students, staff or faculty—the people who actually make up the university population.  In agreeing to host the AELM, UBC will also  be welcoming leaders of countries with  some of the world's most notorious human  rights records, notably Jiang Zemin of  China and General Suharto of Indonesia.  Both are complicit in the murder of thousands of people, including many students.  China's record at Tiananmen Square in  1989, where many students were killed and  others are still in prison for demonstrating  for more democratic processes, resonates  especially loud at UBC. In fact, UBC erected  the Goddess of Democracy statue in front  of the Students' Union Building to commemorate those killed in Tiananmen  Square.  Moreover, the AELM will bring to UBC  what the RCMP have admitted will be the  largest security operation in its history. The  presence of snipers and riot police on campus has been confirmed. The AELM will  lead to a significant disruption of campus  life. The entire north end of the campus will  be fenced off as part of the "Red Zone" of  the security ring, and the remainder of the  campus will fall within the boundaries of  the "Yellow Zone."  UBC students, faculty and staff will be  under close surveillance up to and during  the Leaders' Meeting. Approximately 500  RCMP and Army staff will be located at the  Graduate Students' Society (GSS) Centre,  which along with the Faculty of Graduate  Studies will not be open to students during the AELM. UBC's Ceremonies Office  has told the Graduate Students' Society that  "all staff will require accreditation prior to  the event if they need to enter the building  on the day."  Students and faculty of the Sociology  and Anthropology department will have  access to their building greatly restricted  during the Leaders' Meeting. The Museum  of Anthropology, the site of the Leaders'  Meeting will be closed the week prior to  the meeting, and no one except a few senior staff will be permitted on the premises.  Having APEC at UBC, an educational  institution, serves to legitimize and be  complicit in both the abuses and the exploitative "free trade" initiatives it supports. One of the primary functions of universities in Canada should be to facilitate  true and genuine debate and discussion,  free from the coercion of state or corporate  interests. The decision to have the APEC  Leaders' Meeting at UBC seriously compromises these objectives.  Although APEC shuts out most of society, and doesn't address the broad consequences of trade deals on human rights,  workers' rights and the environment, it has  a forum regarding education which proposes the privatization of universities and  the eradication of liberal arts in favour of  business degrees. We are already seeing this  trend happening in many post-secondary  education institutions in Canada.  Both the government and UBC administration say that bringing APEC to UBC  will provide students with an excellent  04&efi  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street,Vancouver,B.C.,V6E 1N4  (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  "1 pledge  allegiance to  the flag of the  country that  gives me the  best deal."  opportunity to display opposition. This  logic is obviously contradictory—if they already know people at UBC are opposed to  APEC, then why are they bringing the  AELM to campus? The only thing UBC's  decision is giving us is an opportunity to  become a united campus that will not abide  by unilateral decisions made by the administration on issues that deeply affect us all.  APEC-Alert, a grassroots group of faculty, staff, students and former students,  formed to oppose the UBC administration's  decision to host the AELM. The group is  also extremely critical of the entire APEC  agenda. APEC-Alert has been working hard  to bring awareness to the campus community, as well as organize all campus groups  so that our concerns are addressed and the  AELM is removed from campus.  Initiatives from the group include: information forums, literature distribution, a  film festival, street theatre, public meetings,  and non-violent direct actions. Apec-Alert  is also working closely with other organizations and educational institutions in Vancouver to mobilize city-wide opposition to  APEC.  APEC-Alert has declared an "APEC-  free Zone" around the Goddess of Democracy, and will expand this zone weekly so  that by November 25 it will encompass the  sites where the Leaders' Meeting is scheduled to take place. The group is also planning a student walk-out and teach-in to be  held on November 24 and 25.  Opposition to the administration's decision has been growing. The GSS passed a  motion opposing the AELM on campus and  in protest refused to accept the RCMP's financial incentive for taking over the GSS  building.  The Canadian Federation of Students  has also taken an official stand against  UBC's decision and is coordinating letters  of protest from students associations across  Canada. And CUPE Locals 116, 2970 and  2278, representing unionized employees on  campus, have all passed motions to oppose  AELM on campus both due to the lack of  human rights on the agenda at these trade  talks and the lack of consultation with the  community.  Conspicuously missing from the protesting groups on campus are the Alma  Mater Society (AMS) and the Faculty Association. While the AMS did achieve a  majority in its vote to pass a motion to oppose the meeting, it did not reach the required two-thirds 'yes' votes, The AMS also  seems hindered from taking a stance  against the AELM and APEC by the fact  that at least one of the executive members,  Jenny Chen, is officially working with the  APEC organizers on campus.  APEC-Alert does not believe the  AMS's stand is representative of its membership. Likewise, many faculty members  are opposed to the administration's decision, even though their association has refused to speak out against the decision.  APEC-Alert's peaceful and non-violent  actions on campus have so far been met by  RCMP presence and warning that they will  be everywhere the protesters are. Already  this has been proven to be true. On September 22, RCMP charged two students  with mischief for painting a circle on the  pavement around the Goddess of Democracy statue. The RCMP admitted they were  told to make the arrests by members of the  UBC administration.  In spite of the intimidation and harassment tactics of police and campus administrators, APEC-Alert vows to continue its  work mobilizing the campus to oppose  APEC and the AELM.  For more information about APEC-Alert's  activities, e-mail alert@netinfo.ubc.ca, or call  251-9914. Also check out their webpage at  http://www.cs.ubc.ca/spider/fuller/apec_alert/  Nicole Capler is an alumni of UBC. She recently graduated with a Masters in Health  Administration. She is an active member of  APEC-Alert.  OCTOBER 1997 News  Vancouver women Take Back the Night:  The loudest women-  powered jam in town!  by Fatima Jaffer  It was music, and it was really loud  music. Sweet to the ears, especially as we  marched under the tunnel between the law  courts, where, every day, women fight to  be heard and for justice.  "It" was Take Back the Night in Vancouver, and the "music" was the "unladylike" chanting, screaming, singing, pot-  banging and whistleblowing of the almost  5,000 women out on the streets that night.  September 27 saw one of Vancouver's  most powerful and exhilarating Take Back  the Night marches yet. Despite the rain, it  was a display of incredible solidarity and  celebration of woman-power.  It is the one night of the year that  women collectively assert our right to walk  the streets safely without the protection of  men. So even though the police showed up  in force, they had little to do. The 200  "safety women" volunteers took care of  things, lining the streets to ensure that  women didn't get  harassed or hurt,  and that the  women-only rally  and march stayed  that way.  As usual, there  were a few minor  incidents where  men attempted to  disrupt things.  There was at least  one disturbing,  pre-planned incident—a man, with  male photographer  in tow, kept insisting on "his right"  to join us.  All in all, the  rally and march  was a huge success, a fact even the mainstream media had to acknowledge. Their  coverage of Take Back the Night reflected  a rare understanding of the issues women  raised that night, and for once they reported  an almost accurate estimate of the crowd  size.  Some women suggest the large crowd  and interest of the media in the event have  much to do with public anger and sadness  at the recent spate of murders in BC of  women at the hands of men [see What's  News, page 9].  Indeed, all the speakers at the rally referred not only to the ongoing pattern of  male violence, but to the increase in women's deaths in areas like the Downtown  Eastside, to the links between corporate  globalization and male violence, and to the  growing backlash against women's organizing and feminism in Canada.  After the speeches, women strode off  together along the major streets of downtown Vancouver, gaining momentum and  numbers. As we marched along, we were  spontaneously joined by a number of  women who happened to be dining or  shopping, especially on Robson Street. Support came from many women that night—  from a woman bus driver to four teenagers coming out of Virgin Records to an older  woman in a car with her husband.  Chants included the traditional ones,  along with the more recent "Hey, Mister get  off my sister" and "No more patriarchy, no  more shit."  Several women's organizations  brought their banners, and there were also  banners identifying students, labour and  community groups.  Take Back the Night in Vancouver is  organized each year by Vancouver Rape  Relief and Women's Shelter. This year,  women also took back the streets in 20 other  locations in BC and 52 locations across  Canada.  See speeches, page 6  Not without humour we feminists are! Co-emcee Alice Lee, of  Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter read out some funny  messages from the politicians on  the occasion of Take Back the  Night:  "The Reform Party doesn't know  what to say, except that they are puzzled why we are not marching with our  husbands."  "The Liberal Party sends their support, as long as it doesn't cost them anything."  "The provincial NDP also sends  their support, but premier Glen Clark  wonders how this march will impact on  the fisheries."  "The BC Attorney General expresses his concern about women's  safety. He decided to address this problem by sending all these cops to police  us. I guess aE these cops are here to protect us from each other and all this scary  feminist stuff.''  OCTOBER 1997 News  continued from page 5  The following is excerpted from the speech made at the rally  by Mabel Nipshank of the Battered Women's Support Services.  Nitshank is Cree and a long time worker in the Downtown  Eastside:  "As women, we all have been oppressed for centuries and face  barriers daily. But women of colour, poor women, and particularly  Aboriginal women, face ten times the barriers that our white sisters  face. We encounter racist beliefs, sexist beliefs, every single day of our  lives.  "Every waking moment is a struggle! At times, we do not even  have a place to rest our aching, weary, assaulted bodies. Our babies  are snatched from our arms and placed in foster homes by an unfeeling, uncaring and racist system. We are stereotyped repeatedly as being either too drunk, too stupid, too poor, or too lazy to raise our own  children. We are by far the most marginalized women with the least  amount of power within the system.  "In the past year, 20 women have died in Vancouver's Downtown  Eastside. Eighty five percent of them were Aboriginal women. There  has been 315 sexual offenses against women in the Downtown Eastside.  There is never any mention of this is the media, as opposed to the  worldwide coverage Princess Diana's death got.  "Melanie Carpenter's homicide has been resolved. This is not so  for most of the women from the Downtown Eastside who've been  killed or who are missing. It is as if these women did not exist. These women  left behind mothers, sisters, grandmothers and children. They were very real.  And to us, they will never be forgotten."  Nipshank ended by calling upon women to participate in next year's Valentine's  Day march (held on Feb 14 every year) to commemorate women who have died violent  'ñ† deaths in the Downtown Eastside.  "It  tecting  Atone  The following is excerpted from the speech made at the rally by Elvira  Balakshin of the women's caucus of the Canadian Federation of Students. Balakshin is also a volunteer with Vancouver Rape Relief Women's Shelter:  has become obvious that university and college campuses are not pro-  the interests of women; they are protecting themselves from legal action.  time, zero tolerance policies toward sexual harassment were gaining in  popularity. Now, sexual harassment policies are becoming de-gendered  into equity policies and conduct codes.  "These polices also increasingly promote mediation as a solution.  Mediation is notoriously ineffective for women because it fails to recognize the power that men have over us. Because of this, the politics  of harassment are reduced to mere conflict resolution. This ain't victim feminism; it's reality.  "Women have made gains by organizing women's centres on campus in order to give women safe spaces to network and organize, and  by fighting for effective and pro-woman sexual harassment polices.  We cannot waste our time by just being silent with our support and  agreement.  "We need to fight back against the male struggle to keep women  out of their once male-dominated learning sphere. We women here  tonight who are students need to organize with student unions and  campus women's centres. Most of all, we need to join with the women's movement to organize and work together.  "Women's right to formal education was and still is a primary goal  of the women's movement. As a group, we have been denied by our  sex, race, ability, and class the access to it. We need to continue fighting together against men's tactics more than ever to ensure we have  access to an education we want and deserve."  Load and proud in Ottawa: Women take back the night!  OCTOBER 1997 What's News  compiled by Leanne Keltie, Mariene  del Hoyo and Andrea Imada   BC women's lives at  stake  The spate of women murdered in British Columbia has once again brought attention to the lack of accountability and  commitment to protect women from male  violence.  "How many women have to lose their  lives as a result of 'mistakes' by the police  and the criminal justice system which are  supposed to protect them?" asks Fatima  Jaffer of the Battered Women's Support  Services.  Last year, British Columbians witnessed the failure of authorities to prevent  the murder of Rajwar Ghakal and her family in Vernon, the attempted murder of  Sharon Velisek, the murder of Patti  Ducharme, and the attempt on Bonnie  Mooney's life."  "This year the pattern continues," says  Jaffer. Most recently, Heidi Jean Challand  and her four children were bludgeoned to  death in Black Creek, allegedly by her common-law partner. In Summerland, the estranged partner of Tammy Grono shot and  killed both Tammy and her mother Cecilia.  Many of these women had turned to  the criminal justice system for help. Tammy  Grono had requested that she be informed  of her ex-partner's release. (He was on day  parole when he killed her and her mother.)  The system failed her.  Attorney General Ujjal Dosanjh has admitted that the provincial court service  made a mistake by not automatically registering Tammy's protection order in the BC  Central Database, which is the procedure.  Bonnie Mooney of Prince George had  twice requested the RCMP's assistance in  the case involving her ex-husband before  he showed up at her house with a sawed-  off shotgun, and killed her best friend and  wounded her daughter. Mooney escaped.  Under the Attorney General's policy  on violence against women in relationships,  Mooney's requests required the police to  arrest her ex-husband when she first contacted them. This didn't happen.  "Women are not being taken seriously,"  says Bonnie Agnew of Vancouver Rape  Relief and Women's Shelter. "When women  go to the police, they are seeking swift, thorough, and effective assistance, not platitudes and inaction."  Recent comments by the Minister of  Women's Equality, Sue Hammell, suggest  that the responsibility for continued violence against women lies with all 'British  Columbians.' "While this may be true in  general terms, it is a shameful attempt to  deflect attention away from the failure of  the system—a system whose mandate is to  protect women from violence," Vancouver  Status of Women's Agnes Huang says.  "Let's be clear," adds Yasmin Jiwani of  the FREDA Centre for Research on Violence  against Women and Children. "This is not  an issue of increasing the size of the police  force. It is a matter of implementing existing policies and recommendations that  women have made repeatedly to the Attorney General and other ministries. It's a  matter of ensuring that women's groups  around the province have the resources required to continue their work of assisting  survivors of violence, not just picking up  the pieces left by the criminal justice system's failures."  Harjit Kaur of WAVAW (Women  Against Violence Against Women) Rape  Crisis Centre and the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women-BC region's anti-violence subcommittee issued  this statement: "This is a warning to the  Ministries of Attorney General and Women's Equality that unless they hold the systems accountable, such errors will continue,  and women will continue to pay for them  with their lives."  US AIDS groups reject  funding  "This was a ploy to pit us against our  natural allies," Daniel Zingale of AIDS Action Council said, as leading AIDS advocacy groups in the United States asked the  House of Representatives to oppose two  amendments calling for more AIDS program funding.  A coalition of AIDS groups said it  could not support the amendments because  they called for taking funds away from  health programs earmarked for migrant  workers, refugees, homeless people, and  family planning centres.  The amendments would have upset a  carefully crafted compromise which sets  funding levels for AIDS programs along  with dozens of other programs. The two  amendments aimed at increasing AIDS  funding, if approved, would have forced  the reduction in spending for other programs in the departments of Health and  Human Services, Labour and Education.  "Do we need more money for AIDS?  Absolutely. But not at the expense of other  important health programs," Zingale said.  Both amendments were defeated.  Mixed decision for  Pauline Au  Workers' rights and social justice advocates are hailing a Ontario Labour Board  decision which has declared sexual harassment a workplace hazard. The decision  came in a September ruling on the case of  Pauline Au, a former employee of the  Lyndhurst Hospital in Sudbury, Ontario.  Au had filed a complaint of sexual harassment, and was terminated by the hospital  shortly after. The hospital claimed Au's dismissal was due to hospital restructuring  and cutbacks.  The landmark decision recognizes that  sexual harassment is covered under the  Ontario Health and Safety Act (OHSA) of  the Labour Code—and workers will have  the protection of the code if they file sexual  harassment charges.  The Labour Board decision notes: "it  was conceded by the hospital, and we find  as fact, that sexual harassment can be hazardous to both physical and mental health.  If sexual harassment is recognized as a potential cause of injury, as something hazardous to health must be, it is difficult to  resist the conclusion that it falls within the  common meaning of the word "hazard" in  the Ontario Health and Safety Act."  In a disappointing turn, however, the  Board ruled that Au had not been terminated in reprisal for her complaint of sexual  harassment, and did not award any financial compensation to her.  The decision in Au's case may also  open the door for other cases of harassment  based on race or sexual orientation. In September, the Labour Board heard another  key case brought by Selwyn Pieters which  will argue that racial harassment is also a  workplace hazard under the OHSA. Mean  while, the Conservative government has  recommended changes that would weaken  the OHSA, and has specifically argued that  sexual harassment should not be covered  under theAct.  Victory for lesbians and  gays in Japan  The Tokyo High Court has rejected the  appeal of the Tokyo Metropolitan Government (TMG) against the Japan Association  for the Lesbian and Gay Movement (OCCUR). After a six year legal challenge by  OCCUR, Tokyo's city government has been  ordered to throw out its youth hostel policy  on homosexuals sharing a room.  In 1991, the Tokyo Board of Education  (TBE), which oversees a number of city-  funded youth hostels, established a policy  against admitting gays and lesbians. The  policy was adopted following a 1990 incident at a hostel in the western Tokyo suburb of Fuchu, in which members of OCCUR  were harassed all night after coming out to  other guests. The city rationalized the ban  as an extension of its rule against members  of the opposite gender sharing a room.  In 1994, the Tokyo District Court struck  down the policy, finding that individuals'  sexual orientation did not in and of itself  determine the likelihood that they would  engage in sexual acts at the hostel. The city  appealed the decision.  In this latest decision, the appeal court  stated that an exclusive focus on the possibility of sexual relations would make it  impossible for homosexuals to use the facility. The presiding judge in Japan's first  sexual orientation lawsuit said the TMG's  "rejection was unconstitutional as it denied  gay people equal access to the public facility The city government should have given  due consideration to homosexual people,  and its indifference and ignorance will not  be tolerated."  The court also rejected the TMG's  claim that the TBE has broad powers of discretion as to what constitute's the 'sound'  upbringing of Tokyo's youth. The Tokyo  High Court stated that young people are  perfectly capable of understanding homosexuality.  Seoul queer film festival  shut down  On opening night, authorities in Seoul,  Korea shut down the first ever Queer Film  and Video Festival in the country. The festival was scheduled to screen some 85 films  from around the world in mid-September.  Local district officials delivered the  cancellation order, stating that the festival  was not government-registered. They  threatened to seize all equipment and film  prints, fine the organizers $20,000 US, and  jail them for up to three years. Yonsei University, the site of the festival, also withdrew  their support, threatening to turn off electricity to the theatre.  After being turned away from the theatre, the festival staff and audience gathered  at a nearby bar. They took to the stage and  vowed to re-open the festival. Festival programmer, Seo Dongjin said: "We will never  surrender to their violent interruptions and  will surely reopen our festival within some  weeks." Staff are now searching for an alternative legal venue.  National censorship authorities have  said they would not permit the festival to  import or screen foreign films. They banned  Wong Kar-Wai's latest film, Happy Together,  because it is "not relevant to the emotional  life of Korean people." However, the same  authorities allowed the screening of homosexual-related films at South Korea's Pusan  International Film Festival.  Organizers of the festival are seeking letters of support. Contact Seo Dongjin at  Nakwon-dong 195-1, Midong Building #301,  Chongno-ku, Seoul, ROK Korea; e-mail:  ©interpia.net  Abortion outlawed in El  Salvador  The Legislative Assembly of El Salvador has voted to outlaw abortion. The  change, which will take effect in 1998, will  make it illegal to have, procure or perform  an abortion for any reason.  Under the former penal code, abortion  was legal if the pregnancy resulted from  rape, or was a serious threat to a woman's  life, or in cases where a severe anomaly is  detected in the fetus. The new code, which  is among the strictest in the world, also increases penalties for violations.  The new law stipulates that anyone  who has encouraged a woman to seek an  abortion, helped her pay for the procedure,  or otherwise facilitated the termination of  a pregnancy could face a [prison] sentence  of up to 15 years.  [From Pro-Choice News, Summer 1997]  Poland tightens access  to abortion  Poland's Constitutional Tribunal has  struck down the new liberalized abortion  law. The Sejm recently passed a bill that  allowed women to terminate their pregnancies before 12 weeks if they faced "financial or personal problems". However, the  Constitutional Tribunal ruled that this new,  liberalized law clashed with constitutional  guarantees of a fetus' "right to life."  According to women's health advocates in Poland, the court has found that a  woman's constitutional rights are limited  by a fetal right to life. Unless pro-choice  advocates can muster two-thirds of the vote  needed to overturn the Tribunal's decision,  the government will tighten the current law.  Under the law passed in 1993 by a  Catholic-aligned government, abortion is  virtually illegal.  [From Pro-Choice News, Summer 1997]  Pro-choice victory in  Germany  Bavaria's attempt to introduce restrictive abortion legislation was blocked by  Germany's highest court in late June. The  Bavarian state government was attempting  to implement measures that would restrict  the number of abortions providers could  perform, as well as which doctors are eligible to perform the procedure.  The Christian Social Union, the ruling  party in this strongly Roman Catholic region, wanted to implement a law that restricts doctors to earning only one-quarter  of their income from performing abortions.  The legislation also sought to limit the  number of doctors performing the procedure by authorizing only gynaecologists  with a special license to carry out abortions.  Judges at the Federal Constitutional  Court have stated the law until the high  court has finished a full examination of its  implications. A final decision is expected  by the end of the year.  [From Pro-Choice News, Summer 1997]  OCTOBER 1997 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  compiled by Andrea Imada and  Mariene del Hoyo   Feminist bookstores in  Canada dwindling  After almost 23 years of feminist  bookselling, Everywomans Books in Victoria has had to make the difficult decision  to close its doors at the end of November.  The reason? The same reason that forced  the Vancouver Women's Bookstore to close  its doors in May 1996: financial hardship.  Since the early days of the organized  women's movement in Canada, women's  bookstores have often been the cornerstone  of feminist analysis and activism. Sadly,  they are all but extinct in Canada.  Everywomans Books is the last nonprofit, feminist bookstore, run by a volunteer collective in Canada. The bookstore  cites the rising cost of books, coupled with  the rise of mega-bookstores as major factors in their financial downturn. [Chapters  Inc. recently announced it was speeding up expansion of its stores so it could solidify its position as the biggest bookstore chain in Canada.]  Everywomans will hold two final  events. The first is a fundraiser titled,  "Feminists to the Rescue Fundraising Auction" on October 23, 7:30 pm at the Red  Cross Hall, 909 Fairfield St. The auction will  help the bookstore pay down its debts before it closes its doors.  The final event hosted by the bookstore  will be the launch of Press Gang Publishers' fall books on November 28, with Sheila  Baxter, Sheila Norgate, and Persimmon  Blackbridge reading from their new works.  Everywomans is asking for community  contributions—items or services—for its auction. Please call Kyle Mitchell at (250) 598-  9034 by October 10 if you can make a contribution.  World march for  women  Drawing from their experience of organizing the women's march in Quebec in  1996, the Federation des femmes du Quebec (FFQ) is spearheading the organizing  of an international Bread and Roses World  March of Women. The March, set for the  year 2000, will focus on women's poverty  in the face of rising economic globalization,  war, genocide and violence, to name only  a few of the devastating factors which are  contributing to the worsening of women's  poverty.  Over 130 women's groups from 42  countries have already expressed interest  in the project, and organizers are continuing their outreach to other groups. The FFQ  is currently seeking comments about the  planned world women's march by the end  of October.  Contact Bread and Roses World March of  Women, FFQ, 5225, rue Berri #100, Montreal,  Quebec, Canada H2J 2S4; tel: (514) 948-3262;  fax: (514) 948-3264; e-mail: femmes@ffa.qc.ca  Campaign against  Quinacrine  The Quinacrine Alert Network (QAN)  is calling on women to join in the campaign  against the use of Quinacrine as a sterilization drug. Although Quinacrine has never  been properly trialed and is not approved  for use by the World Health Organization,  it is being given to women—often without  their knowledge—in several countries in  the South.  Quinacrine itself is a widely available  and cheap drug, which was developed in  the 1920s to treat malaria, and is currently  used for a variety of other medical conditions.  The use of Quinacrine as a non-surgical sterilization method is related to its capacity to induce scarring. The sterilization  method is an inexpensive, non-surgical procedure, which produces scar tissue, and  thus blockage, in the fallopian tubes.  QAN says that most women are not  being informed about the experimental  nature of the method, nor are they being  offered a choice between that method and  alternative, comparable and approved  methods.  What is even more reprehensible, the  group says, is that trials are being carried  out on women before adequate studies on  the drug's toxicity have been conducted.  QAN say some of the concerns with Quinacrine include the potential risk of cancer  and birth defects. Moreover, the use of  Quinacrine increases the risk of ectopic  pregnancy, which in and of itself poses a  serious threat to the lives of women.  Quinacrine is also being promoted on  the Internet as a self-abortion, self-sterilization kit. This is yet another reprehensible act which prompted the US Food and  Drug Administration to issue a warning  which states that the "kit uses pellets of  quinacrine hydrochloride, an unapproved  drug which can cause ectopic pregnancy,  abnormal pregnancies and permanent  damage to a woman's reproductive organs."  Ultimately, promoters of Quinacrine,  who have close links to the population control movement, have highly questionable  motives which do not appear to include  women's reproductive rights and freedom.  For more information about this campaign, contact Women's Global Network for  Reproductive Rights, NZ Voorbugwal 32,1012  RZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands; fax: 31-20-  620-96-72; e-mail: wgnrr@antenna.nl. Or contact CERAS/Alternatives, Centre a"etudes el  de ressources sur I'Asie du Sud, 3680 Jeanne  Mance Street, Montreal, Quebec, Canada,  phone: (514) 982-6606, fax: (514) 982-6612,  e-mail: ceras@alternatives.ca  Cuban women call solidarity meeting  The Women's International Democratic Federation, the Continental Front for  Women for a Life with Dignity and the Federation of Cuban Women are inviting  women to participate in the Meeting of Solidarity Among Women for Equality, Development and Peace. The meeting, will take  place in Havana from April 13 to 16.  The meeting will include discussions  on various topics including: Women,  Economy and Sustainable Development;  Women, Political Participation and Decision Making; Women, Health, Education,  Culture and Social Security; Women and  Media; Women, Violence and Discrimina  tion; and Women, National Independence,  Sovereignty and Peace.  The organizers say they will also create space for women in specific sectors,  such as indigenous women, peasants, students, communicators, parliamentarians,  and others to meet.  Organizers are also inviting women to  organize workshops or present papers at  the meeting.  The registration fee is US$30. Participants will have to cover their own airfare,  lodging and food expenses, but accommodation arrangements are available.  For more information contact the Federation of Cuban Women, Paseo 260, Vedado, La  Habana, Cuba; tel: (537) 301582; fax: (537)  333019; e-mail: FMCCU CEN1A1.CU.  Women wishing to facilitate a workshop or  present a paper are asked to respond by November 15.  Counting women in  Mothers Are Women (MAW) is continuing its work on ensuring women's unpaid work in Canada is recognized. The  group is working on a new policy paper  which will be released next Spring at the  same time as the release of "household activities" data collected in the 1996 Census.  MAW has long advocated for unpaid  domestic labour to be counted in the Census data, as well as in national accounts and  other statistical measures used in Canada.  The 1996 Census marked the first time unpaid work was acknowledged. However,  it was not included in the labour force data,  and therefore not counted as making a contribution to the economy.  MAW's policy paper, called Making It  Work, will focus on integrating me data and  analysis about women's unpaid work into  policy decision-making on childcare, dependent care, community planning, health  care, paid workplace policy, economic accounting and taxation policy. The recommendations in the paper will be directed at  both governments and businesses.  To help develop the paper, MAW is  sponsoring a symposium on Unpaid Work  & Public Policy in Ottawa on October 17 to  18.  For more information about the symposium or the policy paper, contact MAW  at (613) 722-7851, by e-mail at  maw@cyberus.ca or visit the group's  website at www.cyberus.ca/maw  Taking action against  sweatshop labour  The Labour Behind the Label Coalition  has developed a "Wear Fair Action Kit,"  designed to give individuals and organizations the tools to "ask the right questions  and make strategic demands of clothing  retailers and major labels" regarding the  working conditions and wages of garment  workers.  The Toronto-based coalition consists of  unions, church groups, international development agencies and community organizations working to "support garment  workers in Canada and internationally in  their efforts to improve their wages and  working conditions."  The Wear Fair Kit includes: action tips  from successful anti-sweatshop campaigns;  corporate profiles on Nike and Woolworth  corporations; issue sheets on "The Changing Face of a Global Industry," "Child Labour," "Codes of Conduct," and "Independent Monitoring;" and actions tools  such as a question sheet for concerned consumers, the Wear Fair Charter for Fair Treatment of Garment Workers, and a guide to  label and corporate research. The cost of  the Wear Fair Kit is $5 (includes postage)  in Canada. For orders in the U.S. add $1  and for international orders add $5. Discounts are available for bulk orders.  To order a kit contact the Labour Behind  the Label Coalition c/o Maquila Solidarity  Network, 606 Shaw Street, Toronto, Ontario,  M6G 3L6; tel: (416) 532-8584; fax: (416) 532-  7688; e-mail: i  Urgent action to restore  research labs  The Canadian Health Coalition (CHC)  is calling on concerned groups and individuals to protest the federal government's  decision to close both its food and its drug  in-house applied research labs. (The drug  labs have already been closed and the food  labs are in the process of being closed.)  Because of their concerns with the decision, 75 Health Canada scientists have  spoken out to say, "these cuts will have disastrous health effects on Canadians."  The research conducted by the food  and drug labs is critical to ensuring the food  we eat and the drugs we take are safe. The  in-house labs play a critical role in providing early warning signals to potential health  risks, safeguarding people from hazardous  products and corporate fraud.  Particularly affected will be long term  research on the connection of different food  or drug products to cancer, birth defects,  strokes, heart attacks, kidney and liver disease, dementia, and learning disabilities,  among others.  For further information about the cuts,  contact the CHC at 2841 Riverside Dr, Ottawa,  Ontario, K1V 8X7; tel: (613) 521-3400. Send  letters of protest to Allan Rock, Minister of  Health, or your member of parliament, c/o the  House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A  OA6 (no postage required).  Women's Monument  completed  The installation of the Women's Monument in Vancouver has been completed.  The monument, titled "Marker of Change,"  is dedicated to all women who are victims  of male violence, and commemorates the  14 women who were murdered at l'Ecole  Polytechnique in Montreal in 1989. Created  by Toronto artist BethAlber, the monument  stands in Thornton Park at Main and Terminal Streets in front of the city's main bus  and train station.  September 30 will mark the completion  of Marker of Change, which consists of 14  bench-like forms sculpted in pink granite.  Each bench bears the name of one of the  women killed at l'Ecole Polytechnique. The  official unveiling of the monument will take  place on December 6, the anniversary of the  Montreal massacre.  OCTOBER 1997 Feature  The World Bank, IMF, GATT, WTO, NAFTA, MAI..  Capitalism's soldiers  compiled by Agnes Huang, Fatima  Jaffer and Lisa Valencia-Svensson  The following is excerpted and rewritten  from the Vancouver Status of Women's (VSW)  position paper on anti-corporate globalization.  VSW's document, which is a work-in-progress,  was created to engage women's groups in a dialogue about corporate globalization and ways  to resist its devastating impact on women, children, poor peoples, indigenous peoples, migrant  and other workers, immigrants, refugees and  people of colour. The work below incorporates  contributions from individual women and  women's groups across Canada.  A framework of the document is listed on  page 12.  So, what is "corporate  globalization"?  Globalization has to be understood as  an inevitable result of the technological  revolutions of the 20th Century. The women's movement is working towards becoming truly global, as are other social movements. In globalization, we have found new  strengths and faced new challenges.  Northern (or Western) capitalism has  also evolved into a global phenomenon. In  its current form, "corporate globalization"  increases economic exploitation by forcing  the integration ot countries into a global  economic system which promotes unfettered capitalism.  Corporate globalization is resulting in  multinational corporations having greater  influence over national economies. An example of this is their role in pressing governments to sign trade liberalization agreements, like the North American Free Trade  Agreement (NAFTA).  The end goal of this kind of economic  restructuring is greater profits for the corporations. These are achieved through  measures such as government cuts to social spending, and increased deregulation  and privatization.  The work of resisting corporate globalization includes efforts to advocate for  cooperative values. It includes the work of  building alternative structures that are  egalitarian and encourage the participation  of all members of our communities according to our abilities.  History and context of  corporate globalization  Corporate globalization is not a new  thing. It has its roots in colonialization, neocolonialism and older forms of capitalism.  Corporate globalization (also referred  to as "neoliberalism" in the South) has been  imposed on the countries in the South for  decades.  More recently, we have seen the spread  of corporate globalization in countries of  the North and the former Soviet bloc. When  countries in the South gained political independence from their colonial rulers—independence on paper, but for most countries not in reality—this threatened to cut  off the access enjoyed by the colonial pow  ers (Europe and later NorthAmerica) to the  natural resources and cheap labour in their  former colonies.  Despite the end of "colonialism," Western capitalist powers still had indirect control over the former colonies, with the support of local elites, through measures such  as "third world" debt financing through the  International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the  World Bank, Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs), and the maintainance of  military bases.  As overproduction of goods brought  economic recessions to industrialized nations, the United States, European countries, and Japan set up trading blocs in an  effort to dig themselves out from recessions  and carve out spheres of economic power.  The collapse of the communist bloc in the  late 1980s further paved the way for the rise  to global dominance of capitalism.  The spread of the corporate agenda  didn't go unchallenged. The strength of  peoples' resistance movements also had an  impact on the direction capital took. The  hard won gains of unions, grassroots communities, women's groups, environmental  activists, indigenous peoples and others  fighting for social and economic justice  range from the introduction of social programs and tough environmental legislation  in the North, to rights to education, health  care and improvements in working conditions in the South.  Indigenous peoples pressed for acknowledgement of their claim to traditional  territories. Women united to voice clear and  strong demands for social, economic and  political change throughout the world.  Recognizing the threat peoples' movements posed to their domination of world  resources, the multinational corporations  took action to try and defeat these movements. One major strategy has been to  physically relocate factories from countries in the North to countries in the South  which, as a result of colonialism and  neocolonialism, have lower wages, poorly  enforced labour laws and less strict regulations on foreign capital.  A second strategy has been to urge governments both in the North and South to  sign onto "free trade" agreements, and to  support resolutions within GATT (the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) that  call for more trade liberalization and IMF/  World Bank loan packages to countries in  the South which benefit capital. These economic policies are intended to force governments to reduce or remove social, labour  and environmental regulations and other  barriers, such as social program spending,  which stand in the way of higher profits  for the corporations.  Global capitalist strategies have had,  and are continuing to have, a profound  negative impact on the ability of people to  control their countries, their economies and  their communities.  More and more, global capital calls the  shots when it comes to making decisions  that affect our lives. And as we begin to feel  the impact of the rubber stamping of corporate wishes by our elected politicians, a  dangerous apathy has set in among peoples in the North.  Resistance to corporate globalization in  the South has a more  developed history because people there  have felt and understood the impact of  capital's greed for  longer. In comparison,  awareness of and resistance to destructive  global economic  mechanisms used by  international capital is  a relatively new phenomenon in the North.  Our struggles in  the North have only  recently included an  understanding of how the materialism of  the North feeds the hunger of multinational  corporations for ever-higher profits.  Mechanisms of Corporate Globalization  The IMF, World Bank and SAPs  Corporate globalization takes many  specific forms. It perhaps began with the  creation of the International Monetary  Fund (IMF) and the International Bank for  Reconstruction and Development (the  World Bank) in 1944. Those two institutions  were meant to deal with global economic  recovery after World War II.  The IMF was to provide short-term  loans to countries experiencing trade deficits and negative balance of payments,  whereas the World Bank aimed to provide  loans for long-term reconstruction projects.  (At the same time, a world trade organization now known as the General Agreement  on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) was created  to promote world trade.)  Over the decades, countries in the  South have found themselves unable to repay their commercial bank debts. This debt  crisis was due mainly to increases in already high interest rates and to the continued economic exploitation by big business  in the North.  The IMF/World Bank responded with  a series of lending packages. These debt  rescheduling plans had long strings attached, including the restructuring of the  debtor country's economy along the lines  of "free market" economic policy reforms.  Commonly known as Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPs), the reforms are  designed to improve a country's foreign  investment climate by eliminating regulations on trade and investment, promoting  exports and boosting foreign exchange  earnings, reducing government deficits  through cuts in social spending, and so on.  The stated goal of the reforms is to ensure  that debtor countries move from  recessionary crisis to economic recovery.  This recovery is based on the assumption  that private sector foreign investment will  inevitably lead to economic growth.  Specific conditions imposed on countries as part of their SAPs include: moving  from food crops grown for domestic consumption to cash crops for export (result  ing in shortages of food within the nation  and the need to import food); abolishing  food and agricultural subsidies; deep cuts  to social spending on health, education and  housing, and layoffs in the public sector;  currency devaluation; liberalization of  trade and investment with high interest  rates to attract foreign investment; and privatization of publically-owned enterprises.  Needless to say, the impacts of such  harsh economic measures on people in  debtor countries have been devastating.  Women have shouldered a disproportionate share of the burden. SAPs have also  deepened the gap between rich and poor  people and resulted in environmental destruction, population dislocation and displacement, and weaker state sovereignty.  The GATT and WTO  During the 1980s, another mechanism  of corporate globalization was introduced  by multinational corporations to further  their access to the economies of the world.  This time it included control of the economies of countries in the North. This mechanism, known as "the free trade agreement"  is much more familiar to women in Canada.  A crucial player in the free trade or  trade liberalization framework is the GATT,  which was replaced by the World Trade  Organization (WTO) at the end of the Uruguay Round of the GATT discussions in  1994.  The GATT/WTO-induced trade policies are strongly driven by the United States  and are aimed at opening up economies to  international trade and investment and restricting the control of national governments over international capital. Such trade  policies include measures similar to those  imposed by SAPs, such as cuts to agricultural subsidies and removal of tariffs on  imports.  The core of policies of the GATT/WTO  relate to the areas of services, and come in  the form of Trade-Related Investment  Measures (TRTMs) and Trade-Related Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs). Using  TRIMs and TRIPs, the GATT/WTO aims  to open up the banking, insurance, construction, telecommunications, and legal  services sectors of countries around the  world.  continued on page 12  OCTOBER 1997 tnp  Women mobilizing against corporate globalization:  9n preparation for the November arrival of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) Summit in Vancouver, British Columbia, the organizers of the People's  Summit held a pre-conference forum in September. The People's Summit, a parallel  conference to the official APEC Summit, is being organized by non-governmental,  labour and peoples' organizations. The stated goal of the People's Summit is to provide "a place to discuss, debate and build opposing and alternative visions." During  the People's Summit various issue forums will be held—forums on women, human  rights, indigenous peoples, youth, media, poverty, and labour, among others.  While some of the individuals and groups participating in the People's Summit  have spoken out against the corporate agenda, the People's Summit itself has not  taken a position to oppose APEC and other forms of corporate globalization. Rather,  the People's Summit has decided to let the groups who participate in the Summit  determine what position it should take.  At the opening panel of the pre-conference forum, Sunera Thobani provided a  critical analysis of the agenda driving APEC. She also spoke about the need to be dear  in our opposition against corporate globalization and focus our energies on creating  real alternatives rather than settling for compromises, such as social clauses. [Also on  the panel was former leader of the federal New Democratic Party Ed Broadbent,  who spoke strongly in favour of social clauses.]  Sunera Thobani is currently the Ruth Wynn Woodward Chair of Women's Studies at Simon Fraser University and the past president of the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC). She is also a member of the organizing committee of the Second International Women's Conference Against APEC—part of the  People's Summit—which will be held November 17-18.  by Sunera Thobani  I just read in the newspaper that the  eight corporations who gave a bit of money  to "sponsor" the APEC Summit—BC Tel,  General Motors, IBM, Canadian Airlines,  Fedex, Toronto Dominion Bank, Nortel and  the Export Development Corporation—  will have their logos displayed on the 900  APEC banners around the city. This is a very  good indicator of what APEC is and whose  interests are being served.  While it is critical we all actively oppose APEC, I think it would be a mistake  for us to see APEC as isolated from the  whole corporate-driven globalization  agenda that has taken off in the 1990s.  This current phase of corporate globalization is resulting in a free market ideology being reasserted in the form of neo-  conservative social and economic policies.  These policies are being imposed globally.  We're seeing enormous changes in countries of the South as globalization is imposed through Structural Adjustment Programs (SAPS), and in countries of the North  through radical economic and social restructuring. And all over the world, corporate globalization profoundly affects the  status of women.  APEC's goal is to increase profits for  capital in a region in which 40 percent of  the world's population live, and 50 percent  of the world's GNP is produced. This region is projected to have the highest rate of  economic growth in the coming decade.  APEC is about who will control the enormous profits from this economic growth.  APEC is intended to ensure the free flow  of goods and services and capital in the region. APEC also wants countries to control  population, the mobility of workers, and  migration.  APEC has opened the doors for governments and corporations to work closely  together to develop policies. At the People's  Summit in Manila [in November 1996] I  was shocked to hear heads of state called  "leaders of economies."  In APEC, the partners are not equal  players. APEC involves a diverse group of  countries, with different political systems  ranging from what we call "liberal democracies" to dictatorships. But one thing all  the countries have in common is that the  agenda fuellingAPEC's policies—trade liberalization and corporate globalization—  is increasing the inequalities within these  societies and destroying any democratic  space that had been won by peoples' movements.  In Canada, for example, government  is in partnership with business on APEC.  There is no public debate on what position  the Canadian government is taking on  APEC. The negotiations are held in secret.  In the countries in the South, this form  of globalization is being defined and experienced as re-colonization. It is wiping out  the gains people in those countries have  made since they ended direct colonial rule.  The statement from the Latin American and Caribbean Trade Union Conference  on the External Debt, says that globalization has led to the loss of sovereignty and  the re-colonization of their country. The  Philippine Freedom From Debt Coalition  says globalization has led to the violation  of Philippine sovereignty by the IMF (International Monetary Fund) and the World  Bank.  [Renowned Indian environmental activist] Vandana Shiva says the IMF and the  World Bank have taken over the language  of underdevelopment and poverty, and  have imposed a new bondage on countries  in the South based on development, financing and debt burden.  Corporate-driven globalization has  failed miserably to improve the lives of  women. Globalization has increased the  poverty and inequality of women. However, it has successfully increased the power  of corporations and international financial  institutions, and it has made rich people in  both the countries of the North and South  much richer.  This is not an accidental by-product,  corporate globalization depends on the  cheapening of the women's labour. It relies  on women to pick up the pieces when com-  Social clauses are  the wrong answer  munities and livelihoods are destroyed; it  depends on women to provide services  when social programs are cut, it depends  on women's unpaid labour.  We're seeing increasing violence  against women in the Asia-Pacific region,  and this is the legacy of globalization. We  are seeing a huge industry in the trafficking of women and children, and this is the  legacy of globalization.  Women workers in the South have  been central in the labour force of this new  global economy and we often hear the argument that jobs are being created for  women there through export-oriented  growth. But these jobs have the lowest  wages and working conditions which endanger women's health and lives.  The increased presence of multinational corporations in the South also threatens the livelihoods of women, farmers and  traders. Women are losing access to land  as more and more land is put aside for export production.  In Canada, we're very familiar with  how economic and social restructuring has  led to the erosion of all of the gains women  have made over the past 20 years. We've  seen the erosion of women's rights, the dismantling of social programs, the increase  in poverty and unemployment of women.  Corporate globalization will try to pit  women against each other, particularly  women in the North against women in the  South. I think it's important for women's  movements to say we not only reject the  global corporate agenda, we also reject being pitted against each other.  I want to talk about the issue of human rights. There's been some discussion  in Canada about the Canadian government's separation of its concerns for human rights internationally and its trade policies. The government has  said that human rights will  not be on the agenda at the  APEC Summit in Vancouver.  Organizations and individuals have called on the  Canadian government to  put human rights on the  agenda. This needs to be  done, but I think we need to  go further than that.  We have to stop pretending that human rights  violations take place only in  Asian countries. We have to  call the Canadian govern  ment on its human rights records right here  at home. Year after year, the Canadian Human Rights Commission has called the  treatment of Aboriginal people the worst  human rights abuses in Canada.  We also have to expose the Canadian  government's role at the international level  in helping to create the conditions where  human rights violations are increasing in  countries of the South. By working in the  G-7 [the grouping of the seven most industrialized nations,] the IMF and the World  Racism  In APEC  tes  Bank, by supporting free trade policies and  promoting business interests above everything else, and by helping develop and implement SAPs in countries of the South, the  Canadian government promotes and upholds the conditions which give rise to increased human right violations.  Women are fighting back against oppression and the repression of women is  increasing. Human rights violations are increasing in the attempt to destroy women's  opposition. By propping up repressive regimes and by building partnerships with  them in the hopes of increasing corporate  profits, the Canadian government is supporting the human rights violations of these  regimes.  There is a lot of racism being expressed  in the debate on APEC. Specifically, I'm referring to seeing Asian cultures represented  as inherently condoning human rights violations. Repressive regimes use the stereotype of "Asian values" to sell their population's labour cheaply on the world markets. The governments promote women's  labour by saying Asian women are pleased  to serve corporations in any and every way.  Here in North America, we hear our  government using the culture argument to  rationalize and justify their dealings with  repressive regimes. We are told that the informal nature of APEC is based on an Asian  mode.  All of these are very racist stereotypes.  They help hide the truth about who is actually benefittng from APEC—and it sure  as hell is not Asian women.  I have been present on many panels  concerning APEC and one of the arguments  I continually hear is that Asian immigrants  in Canada support APEC and that it is very  hard to mobilize opposition against APEC  among immigrant communities.  Every time I hear this, I see it for the  racism it is. We have to stop using Asian  cultures and values in this way; we have to  stop calling APEC something that is a peculiarly an Asian model.  Increased migration is also an inevitable result of APEC and globalization. And  what is the Canadian government doing in  response? It is putting more restrictions on  people coming in to Canada as immigrants,  and increasing the use of migrant workers  who come in on temporary work permits.  The use of temporary migrant workers has  exploded at the same time the Canadian  government brought in the "head tax"—  the $975 landing fee for all immigrants—  and tightened the sponsorship regulations.  This is something we have to use to  mobilize against APEC and to bring to the  public's awareness the situation of women  who are forced to come into Canada on  temporary work permits and who are left  vulnerable to all kinds of exploitation.  Internationally, there have been many  responses to APEC. I want to discuss one  in particular because it has been gaining a  lot of attention. Calls have been made re  cently to demand a social clause—covering labour, environmental and human  rights—be included in APEC, and that it is  something we should mobilize our movements around.  I want to say what I think is wrong  with it this position. Fighting for a social  clause accepts the inevitability of corporate-  driven globalization. All a social clause  does is say we want a better deal within  APEC's policies, and within trade agreements, generally. A social clause does not  represent either an alternative or an opposition to corporate globalization. Instead,  it is a compromise.  Social clauses will do nothing to fight  the polarization of workers within countries and between the countries of the North  and South. In the North, the polarization is  between the decreasing number of workers who have full-time work and protection of their rights and the growing number  of workers who are forced into contract  work, part-time work and casual employment and who have no job security, no benefits.  [New Zealand law professor] Jane  Kelsey has pointed out that the trade union vision for APEC, which was prepared  by the Asia Pacific Labour Network of the  International Confederation of Free Trade  Unions (ICFTU)—the world's largest trade  union body—says that APEC provides potential for substantially higher economic  growth and employment creation, and  higher living standards and poverty alleviation for workers.  The ICFTU argues that the task is just  to ensure businesses do not profit from exploitative practices. The ICFTU supports  having a social clause to create a policy climate "in which workers, through legal  rights to form and join their freely chosen  organizations, are able to work with employers and the governments to establish a  sound system of industrial relations."  This is a selling out of the women's  movement, and of all the coalitions and alliances we have worked so hard to build.  This is to protect rights only of the most  privileged sector of the working class.  Kelsey has also pointed out that support for a social clause has come only from  the Anglo-American countries. Trade unions in those  countries are calling for a  social clause in order to  protect their members from  losing jobs to countries  where labour costs are  cheaper. Governments and  businesses in those countries are calling for a social  clause because they can't  compete with countries  where there are no (or few)  labour, human rights and  environmental codes.  These governments are  calling for standards in  other countries, while at  the same time they are  eroding existing standards  in their own countries. This is not a genuine commitment to workers' rights.  Social  QM   clauses don't  m   benefit  JPW  vmen  Because women in all countries are  more likely to be working in the informal  sectors—casual, temporary work—social  clauses won't have any benefit for them.  Part of women's inequality is based on all  the unpaid work we do. What will the social clause do to address the reality of women's work situations? Nothing. All social  clauses will do is lead to trade sanctions  by powerful countries against weaker ones.  Another fundamental flaw of social  clauses is that it targets only governments  and not multinational corporations. There  are also no mechanisms to enforce social  clauses.  Women Working Worldwide (WWW),  an NGO based in London, England that  works with a global network of women  workers' organizations, argues that two issues are at the top of their concern in the  work they do in the APEC region: reproductive rights and the right to be free from  physical and sexual abuse. WWW argues  that by not putting women at the centre of  the fight for workers' rights, social clauses  have extremely limited relevance to women  workers. Opposition to social clauses is  coming not only from sources outside the  trade union movement, but also from organizations representing women workers.  Trade unions want to protect their  workers' rights and that's what they were  created for. The question is how to protect  these rights in the strongest possible way.  Is it by fighting for crumbs and allowing  workers to be divided from workers from  other countries? Is it by fighting to protect  the rights of the most privileged sector of  the working class while leaving aside those  workers who are increasingly being pushed  into the informal economy?  Those of us who say "no" to the social  clause alternative realize that ultimately  corporate globalization will continue to pit  workers against each other. Corporate globalization will also continue to attack our  rights, so buying into a compromise position—which is what social clauses are—  will not fundamentally change this agenda;  it will only strengthen the power of capital.  Of course, this doesn't mean we don't  support workers' rights—the majority of  the women in the Asia-Pacific region are  workers.  I think the fundamental question we  face today when we look at APEC and MAI  (the Multilateral Agreement on Investment)  is what kind of world do we want to build.  For the women who attended the Women's  Conference [on APEC last year] in Manila  and for those of us who are organizing the  Second International Women's Conference  Against APEC here in Vancouver, the answer is very simple. We oppose corporate  rule, and we oppose the destruction of democracy which puts the interests of corporations above those of women in our community.  The APEC People's Summit is an opportunity for us to develop an alternate vision which is based on democratizing our  governments and institutions. It is an opportunity to put women at the centre.  real  m  ating  real  idtives  It is a moment not just to discuss what  is happening in our different countries, but  a moment to mobilize our movements, to  mobilize women in Canada against globalization. The Women's March Against Poverty, organized by NAC and the Canadian  Labour Congress last year, went to 90 communities right across the country. We saw  the level of opposition that exists among  women to the federal and provincial government's economic and social policies.  It is the responsibility of our organizations and our movements to mobilize the  anger, the fear, and the anxiety people are  feeling everywhere as a result of globalization. It is critical that we do not turn people against each other, but that we build a  movement based on social solidarity justice, and democracy.  We need to be clear in saying that we  do not support an agenda that might benefit some of us living in the North at the  expense of those living in countries in the  South.  For a copy of Women Working World-  wide's critique of social clauses, contact them  at the Centre for Employment Research, Room  126, MMU Humanities Building, Rosamond  St. W, Manchester, England, M15 6LL; tel:  0161-247-1760; fax: 0161-247-6333; e-mail:  GeonetMCRl:women-ww; internet: women-  ww@mcrl .poptel.org.uk.  For more information about the Women's  Conference Against APEC contact them at  219-1675 W. 8th Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6]  1V2; tel/fax: (604) 736-3346; or tel: (604) 291-  4023; fax: (604) 291-5518; e-mail:  rjiwa@arts.sfu.ca; website: http://  users.uniserve.com/~devina/apec.html.  Graphics by Sur Mehat. Drawing from Latin  American Working Group Letter, Issue No.  17. Feature  The World Bank, IMF, GATT,  m0, NAFTA, MAI...  continued from page 9  The trend in TRIMs is to prevent countries from using foreign investment to further processes of national industrialization.  But the most frightening component of the  GATT/WTO policies is TRIPs, which  builds on an old practice of denying access  to and control of science and technology to  people in the South.  When mines, factories, plantations, for  example, were set up in the South, the  know-how of designing and operating  these imported technologies was not shared  with the peoples of the South. Instead, tight  control over this knowledge ensured the  colonizing powers their dominance over  their colonies.  TRIPs not only allow for increased patent protection for high-tech companies but  also extend patents to food, micro-organisms, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals, and  to their production processes. Multinational corporations now use TRIPs to patent seeds and traditional agricultural  knowledge—this means farmers and peasants are being charged for the seeds and  farming methods they have used and developed for centuries!  Free trade agreements  Free trade deals specific to certain regions or groupings of countries have been  negotiated or are in the process of being finalized and ratified. Canada signed onto  the Free Trade Agreement (FTA) in 1989 and  the North American Free Trade Agreement  (NAFTA) in 1994.  Canada is also involved with the Asia  Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the  Enterprise of the Americas Initiative (EAI),  which is an expansion of NAFTA, and the  Multilateral Agreement on Investment  (MAI,) which is being negotiated by the  Organization for Economic Cooperation  and Development (OECD).  Elsewhere in the world, European nations are working towards building up the  European Union; Caribbean nations are  strengthening CARICOM; MERCOSUR  has been established in South America, et  cetera.  The specific goals of these free trade  zone arrangements are very similar to those  of the SAPs: deregulation, privatization and  trade liberalization resulting in greater  profits for corporations. Once again, under  these agreements, governments are  strongly encouraged to make deep cuts in  their social spending; to loosen environmental, labour, taxation, tariff and other  regulations on businesses, especially foreign investors; and to privatize state-owned  enterprises.  All of these changes are sold to citizens  as being necessary in order to pay off government deficits and debts. In reality, government deficits and debts are caused by  uncollected corporate taxes, high interest  rates and high unemployment.  Free trade agreements also work to  open up more sectors to the corporations,  through the privatization of healthcare,  education, welfare, pensions and utilities.  They also create a cheaper labour force as  people become desperate for any sort of  income.  Most recently in Canada, the federal  government has followed the corporate globalization recipe well. The Liberals have  brought in huge spending cuts to social  programs, introduced plans to privatize  our pension system, eliminated the Canada  Assistance Plan, and supported Bill C-91,  12  which gives multinational pharmaceutical  companies a 20-year patent on new drugs  and forbids generic drug companies to produce affordable generic versions of the new  drugs.  The deregulation of the Canadian airline industry led to the near-collapse of  Canadian Airlines and the accompanying  threat of massive job loss. Ontario and Alberta residents are perhaps the most painfully aware of the devastation that comes  from cuts to social spending; watering  down labour legislation to weaken workers' muscles at the bargaining table and  lower costs for capital; privatizing and contracting out government enterprises and  services; dismantling environmental standards; and opening up protected natural resources to corporate plunder.  Even as international capital pushes  hard for free trade agreements, it pushes  even harder to ensure that negotiations of  such deals happen in secret and with less  public scrutiny than ever before. The Asia  Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), for  example, is not a free trade agreement in  the same sense as NAFTA. Because it is a  "looser" grouping of 18 countries making  seemingly informal, unenforceable deals  with each other, it allows governments to  bypass scrutiny from the general population. In fact, APEC's meetings have been  described as the most secretive and undemocratic ever held around trade liberalization. However, big business (representing "civil society") is ensured a seat at the  APEC negotiating table.  A measure of how dangerous APEC is  is exemplified by how few people know  that at the APEC Leaders' Summit in Jakarta, Indonesia in 1994, APEC members  agreed to a voluntary, non-binding code of  investment principles and pledged to  achieve free and open trade and investment  among themselves by the year 2020. The  Canadian government has yet to initiate  public debate on whether Canada should  continue participating in APEC and striving for such goals.  The Multilateral Agreement on  Investment (MAI)  The MAI is another frighteningly dangerous free trade agreement currently being negotiated by the Organization for Economic Development (OECD)—made up of  29 of the world's wealthiest nations. The  MAI has been dubbed a "Charter of Rights  and Freedoms" for the biggest and richest  corporations.  The purpose of the MAI is to ensure  that foreign corporations are not "discriminated against" by any government. This  means that so-called protectionist measures, such as national standards of social  programs, laws protecting the environment  and natural resources from exploitation,  and funding grants for arts and culture  would be disallowed under the MAI.  The MAI would only initially apply to  OECD member countries, but it will likely  be extended to countries worldwide. Once  adopted, five-years notice is required in  order for countries to withdraw from the  MAI.  Again, the conditions on Canada's participation in the MAI are being kept a virtual secret—discussions were formally initiated in 1995 and consensus on approximately 90 percent of the agreement was  reached by January 1997. May 1998 has  been set as the current deadline for the signing of the MAI.  Few people outside the immediate circles of those negotiating the agreement had  even heard of the MAI. Even many members of parliament in Canada had not heard  of the MAI!   The mainstream media  Free trade agreements come with a language all of their own, which then pollutes  our day-to-day language and further  commodities our bodies, our labour, our  natural resources, and other aspects of our  lives. As an example of this, APEC refers  to people as "human resources," and  strictly adheres to the usage of the term  "economies" for countries.  Ownership of mainstream media is  increasingly concentrated in the hands of  an elite few who are dedicated to promoting the corporate agenda. The mainstream  media has played a crucial role in convincing people globally that corporate globalization and its impact on our lives is inevitable.  People are urged to join "the race" to  become the most competitive country internationally. In Canada, we are told that  the economic benefits of being competitive  —more jobs and increased government revenues—will automatically trickle down to  all Canadians.  Non-participation, we are told, is nothing short of economic suicide. Arguments  against corporate globalization or in opposition to the signing of free trade deals are  rarely given voice in mainstream publications, radio or TV.  Another critical role of the mainstream  media has been to flood communities with  the message that national debts have  reached unsustainable levels and that drastic cuts to social spending are the only  means out. We are also told we are paying  too many taxes, and that government-run  corporations and services are inefficient  and waste taxpayers' money. The solution  is privatization.  The mainstream media consistently  neglect to inform us that in fact high interest rates on our debts account for approximately 44 percent of the Canadian federal  debt; that tax breaks for wealthy individuals and corporations are responsible for  about 50 percent; and that social programs  contribute only the remaining six percent.  We do not read about how privatization  and deep government spending cuts will  result in fewer and fewer available jobs, less  taxes being paid, and higher government  debts.  And finally, the international mass  media is the biggest promoter worldwide  of the American dream of individualism  and economic success above all else. Often, it is in pursuit of this dream that millions of people around the world allow  their governments to sign away their lives  to the agenda of international capital.  Vancouver Status of Women's document is a  work-in-progress by VSW's Anti-Corporate  Globalization Working Committee. Committee  members are: Lisa Valencia-Svensson (researcher and writer), Fatima Jaffer, Ellen  Woodsworth, Ema Oropeza and Agnes Huang.  To obtain a copy of the document, please contact VSW at 309-877 E. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1; tel: (604) 255-6554; fax:  (604) 255-5511; e-mail: vsw@web.net. VSW  welcomes input from women on the content,  structure and style of the document.  VSW will also be facilitating a discussion  group on October 9th to develop strategies for  raising public consciousness and confronting  corporate globalization, and to plan local actions for the National Women's Day of Protest  Against APEC on November 24. The discussion group is sponsored by the Lower Mainland Feminist Networking Group. Call VSW  for full details.  Framework of the  Vancouver Status of  Women's Document  SECTION ONE - CORPORATE  GLOBALIZATION  This section looks at the history  and context of corporate globalization,  and mechanisms of corporate globalization such as: IMF-World Bank-structural adjustment programs, GATT-  World Trade Organization, free trade  agreements, mainstream mass media,  and militarism.  SECTION TWO - IMPACTS  OF CORPORATE  GLOBALIZATION ON  WOMEN  This section summarizes the impacts on different groups of women  and on different sectors.  SECTION THREE -  STRATEGIES OF  OPPOSITION AND  RESISTANCE  This section discusses the need for  the Canadian women's movement to  develop a comprehensive feminist  analysis of corporate globalization and  strategies of resistance. It also lists  some specific groups in Canada  (mainly in Vancouver) organizing  against this November's APEC Leaders' Summit, and gives contact information for the APEC Summit and the  Canada Year of Asia Pacific.  SECTION FOUR - VARIOUS  FORMS OF RESISTANCE  This section provides a sampling  of various actions taken around the  world to resist corporate globalization,  to strengthen existing healthy communities and structures, and to build alternatives. The categories of action are:  taking to the streets/ fighting back,  campaigns, conferences/ gatherings,  ongoing organizing work, coalition &  network building, solidarity work,  public education, research, alternative  visions, alternative economic structures, and initiatives by international  bodies.  SECTION FIVE - SERIOUS  QUESTIONS ABOUT SOCIAL  CLAUSES & SOCIAL  CHARTERS  This section examines the debate  around whether social justice movements should "engage" free trade  agreements by fighting for the inclusion of social clauses/ social charters  on labour, environment, et cetera into  the agreements. Many argue that social clauses are ineffective and that social justice movements should reject  free trade agreements outright. Included is:  • Information on the document  from Women Working Worldwide:  "Trade liberalization and the rights of  women workers. Are social clauses the  answer?"  • Information on the publication  from Common Frontiers and Latin  American Working Group: Social Charters: Perspectives from the Americas.  • excerpts from paper by Dr. Jane  Kelsey, Professor of Law, Auckland  University, New Zealand: "To Engage  or Not to Engage APEC."  OCTOBER 1997 Feature  Interview with Korean trade union activist Serapina Cha Mi-kyung:  Organizing under  globalization  as told to Lisa Valencia-Svensson  Serapina Cha Mi-Kyung is a Korean feminist, labour activist and researcher. From 1993-  97 she worked for the Asia Monitor Resource  Center (AMRC) in Hong Kong. During that  time, she wrote several studies, including an  investigation into the garment industry in  China. In March, Cha returned to Korea where  she is curently working with the Korean House  for International Solidarity (KHIS) as a coordinator. She is heading up a project to monitor  investment overseas by Korean companies,  such as Hyun Dai.  Cha was invited to Canada in July by the  Hospital Employees Union and the Maquila  Solidarity Network. As part of the same trip,  she visited Tijuana, Mexico-hosted by Factor  X/Casa de la Mujer—where she met with Hyun  Dai workers. While Cha was in Vancouver, Lisa  Valencia-Svensson had the opportunity to  speak to her about the building of the women's  union movement in Korea.  Lisa Valencia-Svensson: When you were  with AMRC, you advocated for workers in  the toy and garment factories. Can you talk  about the conditions for the workers?  Cha Mi-kyung: Most of the workers in  free trade zones are young women who  came there to earn money to support their  families. But this is not a new story in the  toy and garment industries.  In the 1970s, in countries like Hong  Kong, Taiwan and Korea, many women  workers contributed to the national economies. Then, after industrial restructuring,  many of the foreign-owned, as well as East  Asian companies, closed their plants and  moved to South and Southeast Asia.  However, toys, garments and textiles  are still being produced by subcontractors  in the free trade zones in East Asia, mainly  through home workers. I don't think  women workers' situation has changed  much since the 1970s. Foreign investors still  want to find cheap labour and to use young  women workers.  Valencia-Svensson: As you say, young  Asian women workers have been targeted  by multinational corporations for three  decades. What kind of labour organizing  was going on during the same time period?  Cha: In the 1970s, South Korean women  started a trade union movement.  The women faced a lot of oppression  from the government as well as from the  companies, including being dismissed from  their jobs. Many of the workers' eyes were  opened as to why they had to continue the  struggle to improve their working situations.  At the end of the 1980s, the companies  closed up their factories and women workers lost their jobs. As a result, the trade union movement which was led by the female  workers was weakened.  We had to find an alternative way to  mobilize women. This is currently our challenge: to organize women workers in their  communities and at the regional level in  South Korea.  The situation in Indonesia now is similar to the situation in South Korea in 1970s  and 80s because the Indonesian government doesn't allow any independent trade  unions, and companies can dismiss workers very easily. The trade union movement  that does exist in Indonesia is also led  mostly by men. However, we're seeing is  that the biggest struggles there are being  fought by women workers in the garment  and textile industries.  Valencia-Svensson: Can you talk more  about the impact of corporate globalization  on women workers in Korea?  Cha: When the multinational companies move to other countries in search of  cheap labour, this creates burden for the  women workers left behind. Even though  the women had worked long hours for  years in the garment and shoe industries-  for example, Nike and Reebok the factories  were shut down and moved to locations  where there were more opportunities to  exploit the working conditions.  For Nike, when it became more expensive to produce shoes in South Korea (than  in other countries in Asia), they left. Nike  didn't care whether the workers had good  wages or working conditions. And now in  Korea, you find a lot of skilled female workers working as home-based workers for  subcontractors.  Valencia-Svensson: Right now, you're  educating and organizing against human  rights violations and the harsh treatment  by Korean corporations of their workers.  How is the Korean trade union movement  reacting to the current labour situation in  Korea? For example, how is the movement  reacting to the increasing number of home  workers?  Cha: Even though the number of home  workers in South Korea has increased, this  issue has not received a lot of attention because we are focussing on changing working conditions, changing the anti-labour  law, and developing the legal position of  the Korean Confederation of Trade Unions  (KCTU). Our focus is not home-based  workers.  At the national level, the South Korean  [progressive] movement is pushing for democracy and a better society. That's why  when the general strike of December 26,  1996 was called by the KCTU, those on  strike were fighting not only for workers'  rights but also for people's democracy and  rights.  Valencia-Svensson: Was the strike considered successful?  Cha: The general strike was an historic  event. Even though it was led by the trade  union movement, it received the full participation of the people as well as the workers. During the general strike, many people recognized how undemocratic political  realities affect their lives. It was the largest  strike since the Korean war. Every day for  one month, more than 400,000 people demonstrated. When the KCTU decided to go  on strike, all of the workers left their machines and joined the struggle of the people in the streets.  One problem was that  some trade unions were seen  as "showing off," when they  talked about the overall situation in South Korea. I think  this is an important lesson for  trade unions in Canada, too.  Many of the trade union  movements, are becoming  very male and conservative  under globalization.  If organizations with  huge memberships, such as  the trade unions, were to raise  social and political issues as  well as economic ones, then  people outside of unions  would be able to identify with  what the trade unions are  fighting for. Trade unions are  able to use the collective bargaining process to improve working conditions. But  homeless people, or political prisoners, or  poor female workers who don't have trade  unions at the workplace, cannot use collective bargaining as a form of struggle.  Trade unions should be constantly  aware of other sectors, and should consider  how trade unions can raise these issues in  society. Under globalization, if trade unions  become more conservative, I think the situation for the worker will probably become  worse.  Valencia-Svensson: How are women  involved in the Korean trade union movement? Are they playing a large role or is it  still a very male-dominated movement?  Cha: Many women workers working  in the service sectors in South Korea-such  as in the banks, printing houses, and hospitals-are now part of a trade union movement that is very strong. The women activists who led the trade union movement in  1970s and 80s are now trying to organize  women workers into new community unions.  Valencia-Svensson: Can you explain  what a community union is?  Cha: Community unions do not only  consider conditions in the workplace. Community unions, or community workers'  associations, develop women workers,  women's welfare, and lobby for workers'  rights.  Because most women workers are not  working for big companies right now, they  cannot raise their issues in the workplace.  Women working in small enterprises, with  only four or five employees, cannot use  collective bargaining. In these cases,  women can raise their issues through the  community unions to the Department of  Labour and demand responses from the  government to their concerns.  Valencia-Svensson: And do they have  official links to the larger trade unions?  Cha: Yes.  Valencia-Svensson: Are women in the  leadership in these sectors?  Cha: Except in the steel and car industries, there are more women workers than  men who participate in trade union movement. However, there are still too many  men in the top leadership positions.  Serapina Cha Mi-Kyung  The male trade unionists cannot see the  women's creative skills. They are good at  making decisions but don't know much  about process. Process is needed to promote  dialogue between the workers, while militant power is needed for our struggles. Of  course, I'm not saying that women don't  have militant power.  Valencia-Svensson: What has the focus  of the Korean trade union movement been  since the strike in 1996?  Cha: Many factories are reducing the  number of workers, so a lot of workers are  just trying to keep their jobs. It is challenging for the trade union movement to keep  their membership up.  At the same time, a lot of Korean multinationals are moving rapidly to other  countries in Central America and Eastern  Europe. Of course, the trade union movement realizes we cannot keep capital from  going to other countries.  Now we have two challenges. One is  to respond to the increasing unemployment  rate and fight cases of dismissal by companies. And two is to develop protection for  workers working in Korean companies  abroad. That's why, since 1995, the PSPD  (People's Solidarity for Participatory Democracy) and the Korean International  House for Solidarity has been monitoring  Korean companies abroad, raising awareness of cases of human rights violations on  the part of there companies.  Valencia-Svensson: What countries are  the Korean multinationals mainly operating in?  Cha: China, Indonesia, the Philippines  and Sri Lanka are big investment areas for  Korean companies producing garments,  toys and textiles. Korean transnational corporations are also investing in Central  America, and in Eastern Europe. So now  we have a plant monitor in Central  America.  I hope to connect with groups that are  working for Central and South America  workers. This year, we are developing joint  solidarity work with trade unions in those  countries. I think this kind of work is important. Asia and Central America may be  far apart, but it's important we share our  experiences and find out which trade unions We should support.  OCTOBER 1997  13 Feature  The rights of Aboriginal peoples in Canada:  Protecting Voisey's Bay  by Joyce Ford  In 1994, the federal and Newfoundland  governments and a major Canadian mining  company suddenly took great interest in  Voisey's Bay in northern Labrador. Their interest coincided with the discovery of a large  quantity of nickel in the area.  Voisey's Bay is the traditional homeland  of 5,000 Inuit and 1,500 Innu peoples. Neither the federal nor provincial governments  have taken adequate steps in recognizing the  inherent rights of Aboriginal peoples in Labrador. Neither have played a positive role in  resolving the conflict at Voisey's Bay. The premier of Newfoundland, Brian Tobin, has even  made comments to the effect that if the Innu  don't back off from their opposition to mining  at Voisey's Bay, the provincial government will  take further action against them. Says Katie  Rich, president of the Innu Nation: "What are  they going to do, 'spank us?' They can't hurt  us anymore than they already have."  Joyce Ford, an Inukfrom Makkovik, Labrador, spoke at the Annual General Meeting of  the National Action Committee on the Status  of Women in September about the struggle of  the Inuit to protect their homeland and culture  and to stop the destruction and exploitation of  Voisey's Bay. She is a member of the Labrador  Inuit Association (LIA) and Tongamuit Inuit  Annait (Inuit Women of the Torngat). Below  is Ford's speech.  There are 5,000 Inuit who live in Labrador. We represent a very small fraction  of the Canadian population and an even  smaller fraction still of the world's population. Our homeland is part of what is now  known as Labrador. My ancestors (on my  mother's side) lived there for thousands of  years.  I am here to state that even though  there are only 5,000 of us, we are important and we have to do whatever we need  to do to protect our homeland and our  rights. We deserve to live according to our  traditions in our homeland. Our culture  deserves to be protected; our language deserves to be preserved and used; our customs deserve to be practised; and our way  of life deserves to be respected. We, the Inuit  of Labrador, deserve to be recognized.  A couple of years ago, a rich deposit  of minerals was found on our land at  Voisey's Bay. Millions of dollars have been  spent exploring the minerals. The largest  amount was spent by the Voisey's Bay  Nickel Company (VBNC), a subsidiary of  Inco.  The LIA has been negotiating an Impact and Benefits Agreement (IBA) with  VBNC. We signed a Memorandum of Understanding with the federal and provincial governments to conduct an environmental review of the impact on Voisey's  Bay. We are also currently negotiating a land  claims agreement with the federal and provincial governments, despite the fact that  the provincial government doesn't acknowledge that Aboriginal people in Newfoundland and Labrador have [inherent  rights as indigenous peoples.]  All these processes were going well  until the provincial government gave  VBNC permission to build a 12 kilometre  road and airstrip between two exploration  camps. We were opposed to the provincial  government's decision because we thought  that the work should be considered by the  environmental review committee before  being given the go-ahead. But VBNC argued that the road and airstrip were part  of exploration and not development, which  is how it managed to get them approved  without the consideration of the environmental review panel.  Also, the IBA negotiations were not satisfactory. VBCN offered us [the Inuit and  Innu] a package (of $100 million), but we  didn't think it was adequate, so we turned  it down. [Inco paid out $4.3 billion to acquire  the rights to exploit the nickel mines.] There  was also some hesitation at the land claims  negotiation table.  The LIA went to court to ask for a ruling that the provincial minister of the environment did not have the right to give  VBNC permission to build the road and airstrip. The judge did not agree with us—he  said the minister was in the right. That same  day, the provincial government gave VBNC  the green flag to start construction. The  company started cutting down trees, and  brought in barge loads of heavy equipment  to start the road and trailers to house the  extra workers.  The LIA decided to do three things: to  appeal the judges decision; to apply for an  injunction to stop construction until our  appeal was heard; and to plan a non-violent protest in the event we lost in court.  We filed for an injunction, and the court  took its time setting a date. All this time  the trees were being cut and the road was  being built.  VBNC asked for a meeting with the  LIA board, because they didn't believe the  board members were well informed with  regards to what was in the IBA. We met  with them and asked them to offer us a  better deal and to stop construction of the  road and airstrip. They wouldn't.  The LIA board decided they couldn't  wait for the court to decide on an injunction—the road was progressing fast—so  they announced that they would go into  Anaktalak Bay (the site of one of the two  VBNC exploration camps) to protest  against VBNC.  I was one of the people who went in to  protest. We called the first day of protest  "A-Day," A for Anaktalak. We landed on  the beach. We took a boat from Nain to  Anaktalak Bay. We were very well organized. We sent in a set-up crew first; they set  up the tents. We brought over four-wheelers, and we had a propane stove, freezer,  two generators, tents, tent stoves.  It was very scary riding up through the  camp, especially when passing some of the  workers. I expected them to call us names,  but they didn't. We blocked the road early  the next morning. VBNC pulled out their  equipment and construction stopped.  We expected them to apply for an injunction to remove us. We had to think really hard about whether or not we were  willing to get arrested. I decided I was willing. I proclaimed that if Canada is willing  to arrest me for standing up for my rights,  then so be it. Shame on Canada if they were  Inuit and Innu peoples protest against the start of construction of a road  and airstrip at Anaktalak Bay, August 26-28,1997.  willing to do that. We're supposed to be the  best country to live in. I guess it is only if  your language is not threatened, if your  homeland is not threatened, and your culture is not in danger of disappearing.  I was willing to get arrested in order  to protect my homeland because this is the  only home we know. We don't have anywhere else to go. We don't want to live anywhere else.  I felt so strongly about going to the  protest because I was tired, at the age of 28,  of the government telling us what we can  and cannot do. I was tired of them giving  us no choice but to put up with what the  government decides is best for us, or best  for their budget. Tired because of all the  things they did to my mother when they  forced her to move from her home in 1959.  Tired because of what they did to her  mother when her husband's body wasn't  sent home after he died in a Newfoundland hospital.  I decided I wasn't going to be a victim  of the government any more. In 1997, the  government is still ignoring us, ignoring  our wishes, our rights as Aboriginal people. I decided I wasn't going to put up with  it anymore. It was very liberating.  Well, we won in the court; the judges  granted us an injunction. We thought that  since we went in to stop construction before the court had a chance to hear our case  that we would lose for sure. I was shocked.  The three judges stated in their decision that this was a case of "justice delayed  is justice denied." VBNC was ordered to  stop construction of the road and airstrip  and any support work on this development  until our appeal was heard.  Our appeal is currently before the  court. We started the hearing on Tuesday  of this week just passed [September 16.] I  was told that the same three judges who  granted us our injunction are hearing our  appeal. That makes me a bit more hopeful  that we might win. If we don't, we will have  to think about going back to Anaktalak Bay  to protest.  I was able to go and protest because I  had an employer who supported us stand  ing up for our rights, and most of all I have  a husband who was able to take care of our  two beautiful girls. And I have some good  friends and family who supported me as  well.  I hope you are able to understand what  I have to say. It is easy to get confused with  the names, negotiations and court processes. I know I am probably preaching to  the converted, but we would appreciate  any support we can get. I kind of compare  this with what I heard happened in World  War II, when a boatload of Jewish people  sought refuge in Canada, but were turned  away. They were sent back to where they  faced the atrocities of genocide.  We, too, are asking the Canadian people for help. Please don't turn us away, for  we are facing cultural genocide.  Since Ford spoke at the NAC AGM, the  Newfoundland Court of Appeal has ruled in  favour ofLIA's appeal to stop Inco/VBNCfrom  building the road and airstrip. The court stated  that no further work should take place until a  full environmental impact assessment is completed.  Inco says its environmental review study  is already six months behind schedule. The review is expected to be released at the end of  this year. Just before the Court of Appeal ruling was issued, the company stated that mining at Voisey's Bay will be put off until late  2000 (one year later than originally planned)  because of delays in the environmental assessment and the unresolved negotiations with the  Innu and Inuit.  The Inuit and Innu are asking for support in their efforts to protect their inherent  rights and the integrity of Voisey's Bay. Lobby  your local member of parliament, and write to  Prime Minister Jean Chretien (House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0A6) and to Premier Brian Tobin, PO Box 8700, St. John's,  Newfoundland, A1B 4J6,fax: (709) 729-5875,  in support of the Inuit and Innu Nations.  14  OCTOBER 1997 Arts  Environmental toxins and breast cancer:  Exposing the truths  by Kelly Haydon  EXPOSURE: Environmental links to  breast cancer  Written by Martha Butterfield  Directed by Francine Zuckerman  Butterfield and Zuckerman Productions,  Toronto, Ontario, 1997  Exposure is a film designed to raise  awareness about the connections between  our health and our environment. In particular, this film looks at the link between breast  cancer and environmental toxins.  Although 70 to 80 percent of women  with breast cancer have none of the "official" risk factors—a family history of breast  cancer, hormonal and reproductive factors  or a high fat diet—almost all of medical  research and information focuses on these  actions.  Exposure is timely in that it fills a huge  gap in the information surrounding breast  cancer by focusing on what the film  presents as a highly underinvestigated and  major contributing factor of the disease: environmental toxins. Narrated by breast cancer survivor Olivia Newton-John, the film  begins with a look at the link between radiation exposure and breast cancer.  Rosalie Bertell, an epidemiologist and  president of the International Institute of  Concern for Public Health in Toronto, talks  about the little known information about  the effects of radiation on Japanese women  from the nucleur bomb droppped on Hiroshima. She points to studies that looked  into the causes of death of women who had  survived the bombing which found that the  rate of breast cancer-related deaths was triple the expected rate.  Bertell says radiation is the most hazardous substance on earth and that "there  is no level of radiation that will not cause  cellular damage." Radioactive residues  have now been found worldwide in milk,  water, fruits and vegetables, and meat and  fish.  One particular group of environmental toxins that should be of great concern  to women are organochlorines—those  found in pesticides, plastics, pharmaceuticals, fuel and cleaning products. Some well  known organochlorines are DDT, PCBs,  CFCs and dioxins. Women exposed to  higher levels of these poisons have higher  incidences of breast cancer. Although some  of these substances are now banned in  NorthAmerica, many of them are still sold  to countries in the South.  Using footage from "An Ounce of Prevention," a breas* cancer forum held in  Vancouver in May 1996, the film shows  Devra Lee Davis, a researcher with the  World Resources Institute in Washington,  DC, explaining the effect of xenoestrogens  [artificial estrogens] on women's hormonal  systems.  Davis talks about the scientific evidence which indicates that pesticides and  other toxic chemicals seem to mimic the  natural hormones in our bodies. These  xenoestrogens stimulate the production of  estrogen, which is significant as we know  that the more estrogen a woman is exposed  to during her life, the greater her risk of  breast cancer.  Davis also points out that higher concentrations of DDT detected in the blood  levels of Black women and White women  seem to be associated with higher risk of  breast cancer, but that this does not appear  to be the case for Asian women. One theory,  Davis says, suggests that Asian women can  better ward off the effects of "bad"  estrogens because they generally have more  soy products—which are "good"  estrogens—in their diets.  Other breast cancer researchers featured in the film are Ana Soto and Carlos  Sonnenschein from Tufts University in Boston. Soto talks about how they discovered  that some plastics shed an estrogen-like  chemical which triggers the growth of cancer cells.  They also found that these substances  have a cumulative effect.  Some chemicals which have no ability  to disrupt human hormones on their own  can cause extensive damage when combined with other chemicals, studies have  shown. Given the huge numbers of chemicals we are exposed to, this is scary news.  In addition to estrogens in the environment, Susan Love, a surgeon and author of  Dr. Susan Love's Breast Book, says we must  also pay attention to the use of synthetic  hormones, such as birth control pills, fertility drugs and hormone replacement  therapy (HRT) drugs, which may increase  our chances of getting breast cancer.  One of the strengths of Exposure is the  way it redirects the focus away from blaming (or pitying) the victim to the actual  causes of breast cancer. A number of activists featured provide testimonies which  serve both to repudiate many of the myths  about breast cancer and uncover the politics surrounding the disease.  Sharon Batt, author of Patient No More:  The Politics of Breast Cancer and chair of the  Breast Cancer Action in Montreal, talks  about how support for breast cancer survivors centres on disconnecting women from  what is happening to them. Instead of really helping women deal with the disease,  emphasis is placed on making women look  good and "feel" better through makeup  tips, prosthetics and a new and improved  lifestyles.  The myth that breast cancer is an older  woman's disease is also challenged by the  story of Diana Matherly. Matherly an artist and activist from Boston, recounts first  being diagnosed with breast cancer at 21  and given treatment. At age 31, the cancer  had returned.  Other myths are dispelled and replaced with more accurate information,  such as: that treatments are inadequate and  have not changed nor improved in thirty  years; that mammography does not work  for women under fifty and it may even  cause breast cancer in previosly healthy  women; and that screening programs create more cancer than they detect.  Another strength of Exposure is that it  clearly places the causes, prevention and  treatment of breast cancer, and the priorities of  breast cancer policies  and research within a  socio-economic and political context. Toxicity  and breast cancer and  the health of women is  linked to militarism, racism and our economic  system.  As Vuyiswa Keyi of  Women's Health in  Women's Hands in Toronto notes: "On top of  the toxins...there is also  the issue of racism. By  the time African American women have the  time or the energy to go  for health care and  health services it's too    late."  Batt also points out that the vested interest of businesses in sustaining the breast  cancer "industry" is enormous. "The same  companies that make a lot of the polluting  chemicals also make a lot of the cancer treatment drugs."  An example of this is the pharmaceutical firm Zeneca. Zeneca is the manufacturer of the world's best selling breast cancer drug, Novaldex (also known as  tamoxifen citrate). But Zeneca also makes  $300 million a year marketing the carcinogenic herbicide Acetochlor, as well as other  pesticide, chlorine and petroleum-based  products.  Politicians, scientists and business  leaders often contend that there is not  enough evidence to prove that environmental toxins cause breast cancer. Davis says  that from a scientific point of view they are  correct—the nature of science is such that  there will never be enough proof. "Science  is inherently uncertain." Still, she argues,  "...the real problem is a public policy challenge."  Who should be responsible for the burden of proof for toxic chemicals? Keyi emphatically states that manufacturers or polluters should have to prove that a substance  is not causing the illness, and that new  products should not be put on the market  until they are proven to be safe.  This is where activism plays a role.  Matuschka, artist, activist and survivor  from New York, reminds us that we all must  become activists if we are to ensure that  future generations of women do not have  to suffer the devastation of breast cancer.  "All of us have an individual responsibility to recycle, to petition our politicians and  industry, and to boycott products and share  the word with everyone you know." About  herself, she says: "I lost a breast and the  world gained an activist."  Former US Congresswoman Bella  Abzug echoes that sentiment: "I don't care  whether you are one breasted, no breasted  or two breasted; this is a two-fisted fight."  Cover from Exposure  Exposure engenders both a feeling of  hopelessness and empowerment. The information relayed and the realization of the  extent to which we are exposed to carcinogens can be overwhelming. However, the  strong activist component of the film saves  viewers from feeling totally hopeless. The  women in this film are impressive.  The visuals interspersed throughout  are also evocative. A hill covered with white  plaster female torsos reminds us of a graveyard and that breast cancer kills. Shots of  women going about their everyday lives  and footage of women's demonstrations are  powerful and serve to keep the viewer connected. It becomes impossible to assume  this has nothing to do with me.  The film comes with an educational  resource guide and community handbook  called Taking Action for a Healthy Future. It  includes suggestions for using the video  and how to involve those viewing the film  using a popular education approach. The  handbook is an excellent resource for those  wanting more information on the issues  raised in the film. It also includes a section  on concrete ways women can reduce their  toxic load as well as how to get active on a  public level. The best thing about this handbook is its extensive list of references in the  wide array of subjects that touch upon  women's health.  Exposure and Taking Action are valuable  because they remind us of the breadth of  the knowledge we have as women, and of  our collective strength to make things happen. As Abzug says in the film: "I've always  believed that women will change the nature of power, rather than power changing  the nature of women."  Exposure and Taking Action are available from the Women's Health Network, 736  Bathurst St, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 2R4; tel:  (416) 516-2600; fax: (416) 531-6214.  Kelly Haydon paints and writes in Vancouver.  OCTOBER 1997 Arts  Review of the NFB documentary, Stolen Moments;  Dykes, bikes  and houseplants  by Marusya Bociurkiw  STOLEN MOMENTS  Written and directed by Margaret Wescott  Produced by Silva Basmajian  National Film Board, Canada, 1997  Stolen Moments, a recently-released  documentary chronicling three centuries of  lesbian existence, begins with a bang: dykes  on bikes gather for Pride Day in New York  to the pulsating music of Two Nice Girls.  Bras, leather, lipstick, and "queer, queer fun  for you and me"... I breathe a sigh of relief  and reach for the Cheezies.  With the director of Goddess Remembered, Donna Read, acting as Associate Director and Editor, I half-expected a film that  would open with the sunset on a Greek isle  and some harp music, followed, perhaps,  with a map of Lesbos and sepia-toned  etchings of Sappho. But no, wait. An earnest voice-over by actor Kate Nelligan  comes in: "Gay Pride Day celebrates the  history of each person's coming out. Until  recently, it was too frightening for most lesbians to be visible. And even today, it isn't  always easy." Oh, bummer.  This ambitious film takes on the enormous burden of representing a diverse  community, with mixed results. Part activist documentary and part ethnographic  film, it follows in the footsteps of such classic queer documentaries as the Mariposa  Film Group's Word is Out (1977) and  Andrea Weiss' Before Stonewall (1984).  Grounded in activism and presenting a  "positive images" view of a somewhat  monolithic lesbian/gay world, those earlier films filled a void, speaking to a les-  Leslie Feinberg  16  bian and gay audience hungry for images  of itself.  In the intervening 20 years, lesbians  and gays have seized the means of video-  film production with a vengeance, and  queer films festivals worldwide feature  hundreds of new titles each year. Attempting a generalized history in this highly articulate, diverse and irreverent universe is  a bit like serving iceberg lettuce when everyone's already happily munching on the  mixed greens.  This project, which was some ten years  in the making, suffers the vagaries of a  changing roster of producers at the NFB  and a fluctuating funding base. The end  result is an oddly careful film, an educational documentary steeped in the assumptions of ethnography, where the filmmaker  seeks to reveal one society to another, to  attempt to see things from the "native's"  (the lesbian's) point of view.  Says Read in the press kit: "I wanted  this film to get out to people who know  nothing about homosexuality." Given that,  the lesbian viewer may be forgiven then for  feeling like she is the wrong audience for  Stolen Moments. Still, there's a pleasure to  be had in the images, which take us to  Amsterdam, Berlin, Paris, San Francisco,  New York, and even a scene of two women  tastefully making love on Greek-looking  beach, complete with a bouzouki-driven  music score.  Once I was able to tune out Nelligan's  overdetermined voice-over, I found myself  getting drawn into some of the more interesting historical tidbits in  the film. A sequence on   i- jj|    J      cross-dressing details the  ^ life of Maria von  Antwerpen, "practising  soldier, healer of skin diseases, tailor, and pipe  smoking patriarch fond of  fish." (Surely, any 17th Century femme's dream!) I  learnt from the film that  Antwerpen travelled the  Dutch countryside cruising  women, until finally settling down with a pretty  gal. It took Antwerpen's  "wife" three years to figure  things out, at which point  our heroine was charged  with the crime of cross-  dressing and summarily  kicked out of town. Other  cross-dressers suffered  even more tragic fates, and  the film movingly recounts  the ways in which hundreds of "passing" women  across medieval Europe  were tried and executed.  Leslie Feinberg, dashing author of Stone Butch  Blues, offers us an update on transgender  identity in the 90s, describing how hormones and male  clothing have, finally,  offered her new vision, at a price. "It was  the first time in my life  that I had enough relief from pressure as a  butch to be able to  look at the world and  see things like class  and race; to be able to  see how society was  structured outside of  my own oppression...  What I had to sacrifice  was the giving up my  entire past in order to  rewrite my history."  Some compelling  interview footage  with poet/author/activist Audre Lorde,  shot in Berlin just before her death in 1992,  enlivens an otherwise  boring section on  coming out. "Being a  Black woman coming out in the 50s...meant  insisting on myself as being a presence, as  being not invisible. Not invisible as a fat,  Black lesbian activist, almost-blind woman  who didn't speak but thought a lot, and  wrote. It meant coming out as a poet."  The comments and perspectives from  Feinberg and Lorde aren't new; those territories have already been covered in existing documentaries about the two writers  and activists. It may indeed by new information for Read's intended audience, but  if so, then why aren't these established lesbian authors given any context? If you  didn't know better you'd have no idea that  Lorde and Feinberg, not to mention Judy  Grahn and Joan Nestle, have penned some  of the most important lesbian texts of our  generation.  Presented as well-spoken but de-  contextualized figures, these "experts" unwittingly become the ethnographer's  "guides": the insiders who lead the audience through the exotic rituals of the tribe.  Such a film floats in an undefined space,  creating, in the words of film theorist Trinh  T. Minh-ha: "a ground that belongs to no  one, not even to the 'creator'."  The women of colour interviewed in  the film—and there are very few—end up  having to be representative of communities that are largely absent from the documentary. I'm puzzled that a work claiming  to document lesbianism in the western  world could find not one First Nations dyke  to interview, or that its vibrant and well-  researched documentation of the queer  Gay Pride Parade in New York City  Holocaust makes no mention of six million  Jews murdered under the Nazis.  More trees and less forest might have  made for a punchier film. For all its fascinating location footage and impressive research, the film has a distanced feel. Read's  editing is capable but uninspired, relying  mostly on long shots that feel wary, almost  uneasy.  Interviewees are filmed against bland  domestic backdrops, ubiquitous house-  plants always in view. Dramatic  reenactments of bars in Berlin and New  York look expensive but aren't much fun.  The expanded vocabulary of 90s documentary is little evidenced here.  I found myself wondering what independent dyke directors like Pratibha  Parmar, Laurel Swenson or Yau Ching  might have done with a fraction of  Margaret Wescott's budget and travel itinerary. I found myself wishing that the NFB  had divided the entire budget oiStolen Moments among 20 outrageous Canadian lesbian film/videomakers, and said: "Go  forth, kick ass, and tell us something we  don't already know."  Stolen Moments is being screened in  Vancouver at the International Film Festival,  October 2 and 4. To order a copy of the film,  call 1-800-267-7710.  Marusya Bociurkiw is an outrageous Canadian  film/videomaker, teacher and pop culture critic.  OCTOBER 1997 Bulletin Board  read   t h i s I     INVOLVEMENT  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are iouble issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into Kinesis  —whether it's news, features or arts—are  invited to one of our next Story Meetings:  Tues Oct 7 and Tues Nov 4 at 7 pm at our  office, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For more  information or if you can't make the  meeting, but still want to find out about  contributing to Kinesis, give Agnes a call at  (604) 255-5499. New and experienced  writers welcome. Childcare and travel  subsidies available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  November 1997 issue is from Oct 22-28.  No experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounts foi  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  ^  Special orders  Voice   604 732-4128  welcome  Fax       604 732-1129  10-6 Daily  ♦   12-5 Sunday  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a  volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women.  VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups,  raise funds, answer the phone lines,  organize the library, help connect women  with the community resources they need,  and get involved in other exciting jobs! The  next volunteer orientation will be on Thurs  Oct 16 at 7pm at VSW, 309-877 E. Hastings St. For more info, call (604) 255-5511.  Please call before the orientation to  confirm attendance. Childcare subsidies  available.   POPULAR EDUCATION PROGRAM  VSW is holding a popular education  program, "Gaining my voice, taking our  strength," Oct 20-Dec 15 (8 sessions).  Issues include health, economics, violence,  homophobia, class and racism. Among our  goals: identifying skills, enhancing self-  esteem, recognizing our common struggles  and taking collective action. Preference to  women on limited income, accessible to  disabled women. Childcare and transportation subsides available. Space limited. For  more info call Ema at 255-6554.  Help !  Social Work student needs your help  I'm a pro-choice feminist seeking input on the need for post-abortion support.  If you experienced emotions (grief, guilt, confusion, etc.) after having an abortion, and you feel  that you could have benefited from a post-abortion support group, or from counselling, I'm  interested in your story.  Our conversation will be anonymous, confidential, and sympathetic, since I have come to this  research project through personal experience.  Please contact Beth: Monday through Wednesday, or Friday, from 9 a.m to 5 p.m.  687-0859 or e-mail me at skypilot@dowco.com  In celebration of Women's History Month  The Ministry of Women's Equality, Sue Hammell, Minister, is proud to  sponsor WOMAN BEING - the seven week television series premiering  7PM Thursday September 25 on the Knowledge Network.  WOMAN BEING examines the many faces of feminism in Canada today.  Provocative and humourous, topical and candid, the series profiles NAC's  Joan Grant-Cummings, writer/educator Ursula Franklin, environmental  activist Marilyn Waring, and more.  Each program is hosted by a stand-up  comedian or actress.  Hear feminists as well as those who reject the  feminist label speak out on the future of this influential movement.  Thursdays, September 25 - November 6 at 7PM  on the Knowledge Network  For more information, visit the Ministry of Women's Equality website  http://www.weq.gov.bc.ca  Sue Hammell, Minister  Ministry of Women's Equality  nnistrv oi  £  FEMINIST DISCUSSION GROUP  The Feminist Networking Group of the  Lower Mainland has started up a monthly  Feminist Discussion Group. The first topic  for discussion will be: "How APEC is  jeopardizing our lives and our movement."  The discussion, facilitated by the Vancouver Status of Women, will take place Thurs  Oct 9, 7-10pm at the Downtown Eastside  Seniors Centre, 509 E. Hastings St. in  Vancouver. For more info call VSW at  (604) 255-6554.           INNER LANDSCAPES  Inner Landscapes, featuring new works by  Gallery Gachet members, will be held until  Oct 18 at the Community Arts Council of  Vancouver, 837 Davie St. Opening reception will be held Thurs Oct 2 at 7pm.  Exhibiters include Tamara Szymanska  (curator), Louise Garand, Sherrill Hardy,  April Porter, Donna Balma, Carolyn  Anderson and Maryla Brodowicz. For  gallery hours call 687-2468.  PHOTO DOCUMENTATION  A photo documentation for artists workshop will to be held on Sun Oct 12, 2-5pm  at the Helen Pitt Gallery, 882 Homer St. in  Vancouver. This three hour workshop is  designed to give artists the skills and  knowledge necessary to produce professional quality 35mm slides and prints of  their artworks. Workshop fee is $45. Space  is limited to seven participants. To register  and for more info call 681-6740.  APECANDWOMEN  An information session on Women and  APEC in preparation for the Second  International Women's Conference Against  APEC'm Vancouver (November 17-19) will  be held on Sat Oct 4, 2:30-5pm at the  Progressive Intercultural Community  Services Society, 109-12414 82nd Ave,  Surrey, BC. Pre-registration is preferred.  Call (604) 736-3346.  MARIA ROOT  Maria Root, editor of Filipino Americans:  Transformation and Identity, will be joined  by some of the contributors for a reading  on Tues Oct 10 at 7:30 pm at Red & Black  Books, 432 15th Ave. in Seattle. Celebrate  Filipino-American month with readers  Cynthia Mejia-Giudici, Barbara Bergano-  Kinney, Jacqueline Jamero Berganio,  Thelma Burgonio-Watson, among others.  Admission is free; donations welcomed. For  more info call (206) 322-READ.   GROWING COLLECTING CONSTRUCTING  Growing Collecting Constructing, an art  installation by three artists with the Berlin  artist exchange will be exhibited until Nov  1 at the Helen Pitt Gallery, 882 Homer St in  Vancouver. Barbara Feuz deals with the  structural change and interconnection  between scientific and artistic systems;  Folke Kobberling engages with the external  world, especially urban space; and Ingrid  Schutz's work is centered on desire,  seduction and the ambivalence that arises  from them. Opening Fri Oct 3, 7pm. Artist  talks Sat Oct 4, 3pm. For gallery hours and  more info call 681-6740.  TOUCHED BY FIRE  Touched By Fire, Gallery Gachet's annual  juried community exhibition will be held  Oct 4-Nov 1 at Gallery Gachet, 88 E.  Cordova St. This exhibit focuses on  voyages through the ungovernable and  dangerous places of the mind. It is about  surviving these voyages and sharing the  experiences. It is simply about the expression of "madness" and creativity. For gallery  hours and more info call 687-2468.   VIDEOWORKSHOPS  Video In Studios in Vancouver is offering  two workshops. The "Week-End Shoot"  workshop offers an intense production  training in the form of a weekend shoot.  Participants will cover technical aspects of  both the new digital camera and the Hi8  camera. Held Oct 4-5, 12-6pm, cost is  $250. The "Digital Camera Orientation"  workshop will be held Wed Oct 8, 7-1 Opm  and Wed Nov 5, 7-1 Opm, cost is $35.  Workshops take place at Video In, 1965  Main St. For more info call (604) 872-8337.  FEMINISM ANDTHE LAW  Susan Boyd and other contributors will  launch their book Challenging the Public/  Private Divide: Feminism, Law & Public  Policy, a timely and unique contribution to  feminist thought. The launch will be held on  Thurs Oct 16, 7-8:30pm at Women in  Print, 3566 W. 4th Ave. in Vancouver. For  more info call 732-4128.   ANTI-POVERTY MARCH  A march will be held Sat Oct 18 starting  1 pm from Canada Place in Vancouver to  mark International Day for the Eradication  of Poverty. The march will be followed by a  poverty fair at Carnegie Centre (Main and  Hastings) until 5pm. The fair will include  speakers; entertainment; survival, educational and children's activities; and refreshments. Call Alice Kendall at 254-0244 or  879-1209 to help organize, to book a  community info table, or for more info.  MADNESS AND CREATIVITY  Madness and Creativity, curatorial presentations by Tamara Szymanska, will be held  on Thurs Oct 9 at 7pm at the Community  Arts Council of Vancouver Gallery, 837  Davie St. The presentation will also be held  on Thurs Oct 16 at Gallery Gachet, 88 E.  Cordova St. Free admission.  Bed & Breakfast  A Beautiful Place  Centre yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of B.C.'s Super Natural  Gulf Islands.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  5 acres of forested  foot paths with ponds  ocean and mountain views  A Memorable Escape  (604) 537-9344  1207 Heddis Road,  Salt Spring Island, B.C. V8K 2C8  OCTOBER 1997 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  1  EVENTS  1  GROUPS  1  GROUPS  ZAINUBVERJEE  Zainub Verjee's Through the Soles of My  Mothers Feet will be exhibited Oct 4-26 at  the Ismaili Jamatkhana and Centre Social  Hall, 4010 Canada Way, Burnaby, BC.  Verjee's video installation is based on  "nomadic architecture": the physical and  social structures cultures take with them to  maintain coherence with their histories. A  Women's Tea and Storytelling will be held  on Sat Oct 11, 2-4pm at the centre and a  discussion on "nomadic architecture" will  take place Tues Oct 14, 7pm at Burnaby  Art Gallery, 6344 Deer Lake Ave. On Sat  Oct 25, 1-3pm, a henna painting session  will be held. For more info about any of the  events call (604) 291-9441.   INDIAN PRINCESSES AND...  Indian Princesses and Cowgirls: Stereotypes from the Frontier will be held until  Oct 12 at Presentation House Gallery, 333  Chesterfield Rd, North Vancouver. The  exhibit offers a selection of historical  images from turn of the century to the mid-  1920s derived from North American  popular culture—archival photographs,  posters, postcards and more. For more info  call 986-1351.   DYKEWORDS COMEDY NIGHT  Stand up comedy by local lesbian performers will be held Thurs Oct 16 at The Lotus,  455 Abbott St, Vancouver. Admission is  sliding scale $1-4. Everyone welcome. Call  685-7777 for more info.   RADICALWOMEN PUBLIC MEETING  On Thurs Oct 16 at 7:30 pm, join union  activists Angela Stark, Wendy McPherson  and Gil Veyna in Seattle for the inside  scoop on the AFL-CIO's new focus on  working women. Dinner at 6:30 for $6  donation. At the New Freeway Hall, 5018  Rainier Ave, S. For more info call (206)  722-6057 or 722-2453.   PERSON'S DAY BREAKFAST  The West Coast Women's Legal Education  and Action Fund (LEAF) is holding its  annual Person's Day Breakfast in three BC  cities. The doors for each will open at 7am;  breakfast begins at 7:30am. In Vancouver,  the Breakfast will take place on Fri, Oct 17  at the Hotel Vancouver with filmmaker  Anne Wheeler as the keynote speaker.  Tickets are $50. On Fri Oct 17 in Victoria,  U.Vic law professor Hester Lessard will  speak at the Harbour Towers Hotel. Tickets  are $25. And in Nanaimo on Thurs Oct 16,  former UBC Dean of Law Lynn Smith will  give the keynote talk. Tickets are $25. For  more info call (604) 684-8772.   NICOLE BROSSARD  Come spend an evening with the renowned  Montreal poet, essayist and novelist on Fri  Oct 24 at 7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566  W 4th Ave. Brossard, who has won  numerous awards for her innovative  writing, will be in town for the Vancouver  International Writers' Festival. For more info  call 732-4128.   AMAZING GREYS V  Amazing Greys and Amazing Greys in  Training are holding a weekend gathering,  in White Rock, BC, Nov 7-9 to celebrate  women in all our diversities, the energy,  creativity and wisdom of mature women,  Relationship Therapy  DANA L. JANSSEN, M.Ed.  Reg. Clinical Counsellor  Relationship Therapy  Individual Counselling  Integrative Body Work  Oak & 8th Ave. Vancouver, B.C.  Tel: (604) 731-2867  and the adventure of aging. This fifth  annual Amazing Greys Gathering will  feature various workshops and a "Croning  Ceremony." Registration is limited. Fee is  $95. For more info write Amazing Greys c/o  Wyneja K. Godwin, #7-15474 Victoria Ave,  White Rock, BC, V4B 1H5 or call (604)  541-1778 or fax (604) 599-4362.   WHEN WOMEN COUNT  When Women Count, a symposium about  unpaid work and public policy, will be held  Oct 17-Oct 18 in Ottawa, Ontario. The  event offers discussions and workshops on  such topics as "Unpaid Work & Public  Education," "Measuring Unpaid Work," and  "Poverty, Economic Security and Unpaid  Work." Proceedings of the symposium will  also be available. For more info contact  When Women Count, PO Box 4104,  Station E. Ottawa, ON, K1S 5B1; fax (613)  692-1388; or e-mail: maw@cyberus.ca.  LESBIAN DINNER/DANCE  Hot Flashes Women's Cafe is holding its  tenth annual Lesbian Dinner and Dance  Sat Oct 18 at 713 Douglas St. in Victoria,  BC. There'll be great music, food and live  entertainment, featuring Vancouver  performance artist Sand and the etiquette  expert, Miss Dee Meenore. Doors open at  6pm, dinner at 7pm and dancing starts at  9:30pm. Tickets are $35 for dinner; $10 for  the dance only, and can picked up at  Zydeco, 565 Johnson St, Victoria or by  calling (250) 474-6085 or 1-800-919-0032.  FUNDRAISING DANCE  The Vancouver Committee for Domestic  Workers' and Caregivers' Rights is holding  a fundraising dance on Sat Oct 25 at The  Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St, Vancouver.  Doors open at 8pm. Tickets are $10. For  more info call Julie or Lorina at 874-0649  or Ana at 520-6426.   VANCOUVER NEW PLAY FESTIVAL  The 24th annual New Play Festival in  Vancouver will run Nov 7-23 at the Arts  Club Theatre on Granville Island. Among  the plays showcased is Elizabeth Dancoes'  Criminal. By using unique costume and  flashback, Criminal tells the stories of  eleven generations of women. Characters  from 1729 to 1993 reveal their reasons for  responding so harshly to men's domination  and chauvinism. For tickets call 687-1644.  JILL BATESON  Jill Bateson will read from her newly  published collection of poetry, Hard Candy,  on Tues Oct 28, 7:30pm at Women in Print,  3566 W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. Hard Candy is  a series of erotic and intensely personal  writings in a sensual style with gritty  imagery. For more info call 732-4128.  FREE WORKSHOPS  Douglas College is holding free workshops  for women attending or interested in  attending the college. The next workshops  will be held on Wed Oct 8, 12-2pm, New  Westminster Campus: "Relaxation Techniques for Women;" Mon Oct 20 12-2pm,  "Building Self-Esteem for Women", New  Westminster Campus; Sat Oct 25, 10am-  4pm, "Body Image Workshop", at the David  Lam Campus; and Mon Oct 27, noon-2pm  "Stress Management Skills for Women" at  David Lam Campus. Workshops will be  held at the David Lam Campus, Rm. 1430,  1250 Pinetree Way, Coquitlam and the New  Westminster Campus, Rm. 2720, 700  Royal Ave, New Westminster.  DISCUSSION ON PROSTITUTION  The Grandview Woodlands Area Council is  presenting a panel and small group  discussion on "A Common Ground:  Towards a Community-Based Solution on  Prostitution." Thurs Oct 23, 7:30-9:30pm in  the Britannia Secondary School cafetaria.  Childcare available.  DOWNTOWN EASTSIDEWOMEN'S  CENTRE  The Downtown Eastside Women's Centre  in Vancouver is holding their next Volunteer  Orientation on Thurs Oct 16 from 10am til  noon. The centre is looking for volunteers  for letter writers, drivers, computer trainers,  literacy tutors, pancake flippers, and  Christmas elves. For more info call Cynthia  at 681-8480.  POSITIVE WOMEN'S FUNDRAISING  The Positive Women's Network (PWN) is  trying to raise funds by selling the 1998  Vancouver Entertainment Book. The books  are $46, with the proceeds going to fund  PWN's Wellness Program. To order call  Nancy Pang at 681-2122 ext. 200, or visit  PWN at 1107 Seymour St. in Vancouver.  CARAL  The Canadian Abortion Rights Action  League (CARAL) has opened an office in  Ottawa. Their new address is 1 Nicholas  St, Suite 726, Ottawa, ON, K1N 7B7. Their  new telephone number is (613) 789-9956;  fax (613) 789-9960; email caral@interlog.  com; website www.interlog.com/~caral.  ILW IN VANCOUVER  Organizers of International Lesbian Week  (ILW) in Vancouver, Nov 15-23, are calling  for volunteers. ILW will feature events such  as: Sexpertise, Lesbobingo, an art show,  and an evening for lesbian mothers and  their children. Organizing meetings are  being held every two weeks at Cafe Deux  Soleils, 2096 Commercial Dr. The next  meeting will be on Mon Oct 6 at 6:30 pm.  For more info, call Linda at 645-6412.  HEALTH COLLECTIVE FUNDRAISER  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective  (VWHC) Women's Health Information  Centre is holding a celebration on Thurs  Oct 23 at the Blarney Stone Pub, 216  Carrall St. Tickets are $5. For more info call  Christine at 218-2272.  FIREMOON  Firemoon: Asia-Pacific Wimmin's Alliance  welcomes all women of mixed, partial or  full Asian and/or Pacific Islander heritage in  the Lower Mainland to discussion groups,  potlucks, rallies and more. For more info or  to suggest discussion topics call Naomi at  473-9575 or e-mail: boun@sfu.ca.  WOMEN'S LEGAL CLINIC  Battered Women's Support Services in  Vancouver and University of British  Columbia Law Students Legal Advice  Program are co-sponsoring free legal  clinics for women on alternate Tuesdays  from 6:30-8:30pm. Fall dates are Oct 14,  Oct 18, and Nov 10. To make an appointment or for more info call 822-5791.  REDEYE ON COOP RADIO  The Redeye program on Co-op Radio,  102.7FM is looking for new volunteers. The  program covers current events, ideas and  culture from a progressive perspective. The  show is looking for people to write scripts,  suggest stories, organize interviews,  operate the controls and host. No experience necessary. For more info call Karen at  254-0007.   BODY IMAGE, SELF IMAGE  The Breast Implant Centre of BC is holding  info and support sessions on Body Image,  Dahl findlay Connors & Evans  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS  • A full range of services to meet your business and  personal legal needs  • Free initial consultation  • Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW  OCTOBER 1997 Bulletin Board  WOMEN'S  PRESSTURNS  25  Feminist publishing house Women's Press in  Toronto is celebrating its 25th  anniversary this  year. Over the  years, the press  has published  more than 120  titles featuring  ie words and  . oices of a broad  range of women  anniversary in evening of readings by three women who  Vancouver, have published with the press: Lydia Kwa,  Women's Press, Carmen Rodriguez [left] and Karen X.  along with Tulchinsky [right]. Kwa is the author of The  Women in Print Colours of Heroines, Rodriguez, the author  bookstore, will of Guerra Prolongada/Protracted War, and  be hosting a Tulchinsky the author of In Her Nature.  The reading will be held on Tuesday, October 7,7:30pm at Women in Print, 3566 W.  4th Ave. Admission is free. For more  information, call 732-4728.  Photos by Alan Creighton-Kelly and Susan  Stewart.  GROUPS  Self Image: Myths & Stereotypes About  Women With Breast Implants. The next  sessions will be held on Tues Oct 7,14,21  & 28 in the evening. Topics of discussion  will include: socio-cultural context,  medicalization of women, and eating  disorders. Call (604) 875-2013 for more  time and venue.  EATING DISORDER AWARENESS  The first annual volunteer committee  meeting to plan for Eating Disorder Awareness Week (in February) will be held on  Tues Oct 28 at 7:30pm at the Eating  Disorder Resource Centre of BC, St. Paul's  Hospital, 1081 Burrard St, Vancouver. For  more info call 631-5313.  WOMEN'S FIGURATIVE ART GROUP  A Women's Figurative Art Group will be  held on Tuesdays from 2-5pm at Basic  Inquiry Studio, 5-901 Main St in Vancouver.  The weekly session is designed to provide  a woman-centred, supportive, cooperative  environment for women to explore their  creativity through painting or drawing the  figure. All levels welcome and encouraged.  Cost is $28/month. For more info call 738-  0708.  SUBMISSIONS  WOMEN ANDTHE MILLENIUM  Papers are invited for submission to be  included in Women and the Millenium,  edited by Somer Brodribb. This collection of  essays will explore, within the frameworks  of women's lives, some of the questions  feminists are considering at the turn of the  millenium. Deadline for proposal Nov 28.  For more info contact Somer Brodribb,  Department of Women's Studies, University  of Victoria, Victoria, BC, V8W 3P4. Call  (250) 472-4277, fax (250) 721-7210, or  email brodribb@uvvm.uvic.ca for more info.  SUBMISSIONS  ARTWORK FOR ILW  International Lesbian Week organizers are  looking for various artwork by women  artists for show during ILW in Vancouver,  Nov 15-23. Page Linda at 645-6412 for  more info.  SMOKING PARTICIPANTS WANTED  Women smokers in their early twenties,  living on a low income, and interested in  quitting smoking are wanted for participation in a study. The project, sponsored by  the Social Planning and Research Council  of BC, is open to women in Vancouver,  Prince George and the Cowichan Valley.  Honorariums will be provided in exchange  for participants time. In Vancouver call  (604) 254-2075, or toll free 1-888-567-  4333.   LIVING UNDER FUNDAMENTALISM  Submissions from women are wanted for  an anthology on the experience of living  under religious fundamentalism. Short  stories, poetry and first person experiences  to a maximum of 3,000 words are requested. For more info contact Deb Ellis,  PO Box 204, Dunnville, ON, N1A 2X5 or  call (905) 774-8091. Deadline is May 31.  VIOLENCE STUDY UNDERWAY  FREDA (the Feminist Research Education  Development and Action Centre) has  undertaken a project to analyze policies in  British Columbia affecting women in or  leaving abusive relationships. The project  will include an annotated bibliography of all  research dealing with violence against  women in BC, and a critical analysis of BC-  based policies. FREDA is seeking input,  particularly unpublished research reports,  needs assessments and curriculum  materials. Contact FREDA at SFU Harbour  Centre, 515 W. Hastings St, Vancouver, BC,  V6B 5K3; tel: (604) 291-5197; fax: (604)  291-5189; e-mail: mhmorrow@sfu.ca  A woman-owned and operated business specializing in defensive driver training, -i  Driver Improvement and Retraining  Become a confident and safe driver with an experienced instructor.  CLASSIFIEDS  LAURA JAMIESON COOP  Laura Jamieson Housing Co-op is accepting applications for 1,2 and 3 bedroom  units. Monthy housing charges from $559-  821. No subsidy available. Active participation is enjoyable and necessary. Share  purchase ($1500) required. Great eastside  location and wonderful people. For an  application, send SASE to: Membership  Committee, 100-1349 E. 2nd Ave, Vancouver, BC, V5N 1C4.  COUNSELLING FOR WOMEN  A feminist approach to sexual abuse,  depression, grief and loss, sexual orientation issues and personal growth. Sliding fee  scale. Free initial appointment. Call Susan  Dales, RPC, at 255-9173.  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.  FRASER RIVER PLACE COOP  Fraser River Place Co-op is accepting  applications for 1-3 bedroom units. No  subsidies, shares are $1600. Housing  costs are $667-977. Participation required.  S.A.S.E. 530 Ginger Dr, New Westminster  BC, V3L 5K8.   SITKA HOUSING COOP  East Vancouver Women's Housing Co-op  welcomes applications for 2-3 bedroom  suites. We encourage lesbians of colour to  apply. For an application please send a  SASE to Sitka Housing Co-op, 1550  Woodland Dr, Vancouver, BC, V5L 5A5.  Attn: Membership Committee.  SALT SPRING HOUSE  A house on Salt Spring Island is available  for rent Nov 1. New three bdrm near  Ganges. Ocean view and beach access.  Gardens, wood stove, appliances. $900 per  month. Owner uses downstairs apt on  weekends. Call (604) 251-3508.   LYDIA KWA  Lydia Kwa, Ph.D, clinical pychologist in  private practice, works with clients dealing  with a wide range of issues. Central  downtown Vancouver location. For appointments, call (604) 682-5818.  CLASSIFIEDS  READING GERTRUDE STEIN  How might queer theory's articulation of  identity formation play through Steinian  compositional practice? We will look at  selections reflecting the diversity of Stein's  work, while taking as a focal text her erotic  long poem "Lifting Belly." This course  welcomes both longtime readers of Stein  and those first coming to her writing.  Instructor: Susan Holbrook. Six Weds, Oct  29-Dec 3, 7-9pm. Tuition fee is $90. Course  takes place at the Kootenay School of  Writing, 112 W. Hastings St, Vancouver. To  enroll call 688-6001.  WRITING WORKSHOP  As women, we face the duress of various  gender role expectations in our daily lives,  and it doesn't stop when we sit down to  create. Beyond D(u)ress, a writing workshop for women, will allow beginning or  advanced writers of different genres  opportunities to explore and experiment  with ways to remove the (U) from some  gender-specific constraints, through use of  writing techniques. There will also be some  exploration of psychological notions of  creativity and how these relate to women.  Instructor: Lydia Kwa. Six Thurs, Oct 16-  Nov 20, 7-9pm. Tuition fee is $90. Course  takes place at the Kootenay School of  Writing, 112 W. Hastings St, Vancouver. To  enroll call 688-6001.   MOVEMENT AND DANCETHERAPY  Creative Movement and Dance Therapy for  women survivors of sexual abuse, with  Sunita Romeder. Mondays for ten weeks,  Sep 22-Dec 1, 7-9:30pm. Admission by  donation. Call Burnaby Family Life Institute  at (604) 266-9736.   ENERGY BALANCING  Empowerment through realignment of  body, heart, mind and soul. Artemis Fire,  B.S.W., B.A.T. 215-9400. Sliding scale.  WHOLE BODY/WHOLE SPIRIT  Women in search of a new spirituality. An  eight week course exploring the links  between body awareness and women's  spiritually, using creative movement,  dance, group reflection and ritual. We will  explore body image, body myths, religious  and cultural influences on our body, the  social construction of the body and gender,  our history from our body, the sacredness  of the body, and spirituality and healing.  With Maria Cervino and Denise Nadeau.  Costs $150. Wed evenings Oct 28-Dec 17  (in Vancouver.) For more info and to  register call (604) 876-6744.   WITCHES, BITCHES & BABES  Check out a new web page on the Net:  Rejecting the Patriarchy at http://  www.mortimer.com/users/medea  DESERT ARTISTS RETREAT  Desert Writing and Painting experience for  women. Tuscon, Arizona. Feb 23-Mar 2,  1998. Creative nonfiction, poetry, fiction,  painting. Cost is $730US, and includes  room and meals. Phone (250)598-6034; or  email: jlightwater@pacificcoast.net.   POTTERY CLASSES  Beginners and intermediate pottery  classes at the Big Peach Gang Ceramic  Studio. Located at Renfrew and McGill,  near the PNE. A fully equipped studio with  an extruder, wheel, slab roller and kiln.  Learn a full range of hand building techniques and develop underglaze skills.Six  lessons, three hours each lesson plus one  day open studio and a class show. All  materials provided. Cost is $110 for 24  hours of instruction, studio time and  materials. Next session starts on Oct 15. To  register call 254-9487.  OCTOBER 1997 LIB1Z8 4/98  LIBRARY PROCESSINB CTR - SERIALS  2206 EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC V6T 1Z8  K  One year  media/for  viewyabx>u£  wome#\/yow  wcwxttxr  read/  Photo by Nancy Ackerman,  from Portraits: Agenda 1998,  Gynergy Books  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name.  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can,  Free to women prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8. i  Vancouver Status of Women Membership g  (includes Kinesis subscription) |  □$30+$1.40 GST 1  Address—  Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1