 O'  Canada 8    | Canada  I  >   73-s305  SERIALS DIVISION  MAIN LIBRARY  UNIVERSITY CF B.C.  VANCOUVER 8, B.C.  Vancouver Status of Women 2029W.4lhAve.  JUNE   1976  VOLUME v      N O. 5 G  ISSN 0317-9095  EXIT  June 15th, 1976 is a very important day for the Vancouver Status of Women! At 7:30 p.m. the  ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING will be held in the Boardroom of the Vancouver YWCA.  This is the opportunity for all members of VSW to come together to discuss the work of VSW  and to elect the officers who will represent us in the coming year in setting VSW policy and  direction. The Annual Report of the activities of VSW during the past year will be presented  and as last year it will be a time for us to discuss what has happened at VSW and what will  happen in the future. With the unsettled conditions that we are working under at present it  is especially important that as many members as possible attend this meeting.  Last year we topped off the Annual Meeting with a few bottles of champagne and some goodies  and a lot of interesting conversation. A good time was had by all! Be certain that you join  us this year!  On the next page is a list of the candidates for the Vancouver Status of Women Board of Directors for 1976-77. Each candidate was asked to say something about herself and why she would like  to serve on the VSW Board of Directors. Come and vote on JUNE 15th. 2  -cammmtc/  PRESIDENT — one to be elected  Nancy Conrod  Having served in this office for a  year, I am totally mad to run again.  But the work is still vital. Our  movement essential. For myself —  thanks for VSW and the women's movement's effect on my life and for  whatever my skills, experiences and  beliefs can do for women. I would  like to serve again.  VICE-PRESIDENT - one to be elected  Nancy Denefreo  —VSW Member at Large for 2 years  —Parent  —Co-ordinator Downtown Resources  Board  TREASURER — one to be elected  Margaret Harriman  I first became involved in the feminist movement when I graduated from  university and found that women do  not generally have the same opportunity to enter and work in business.  Women, in all types of occupations,  are still not given the same opportunities as men.  Last year I was involved with the  group discussing "Feminism & Relationships". Since then, I have been  in a number of situations where women  have been questioning the "roles" that  society has imposed on us.  We have to be recognized as individuals. The VSW is working towards eliminating discrimination and stereotyping and I would like to make my  contribution to the feminist movement.  Lisa Rogers  -No statement available.  SECRETARY - one to be elected  Ramona Gowler  I wish to become Secretary of Vancouver Status of Women because I  feel I could learn more about the  movement and be a more contributing  member.  I have found that through  my present involvement with the  Status of Women I have become a  stronger person and hope to help  "spread the word" as to what our  organization means to do and has  already done for the women of B.C.  MEMBER-AT-LARGE - six to be elected  Marjorie MacDonald 4,  I have been a member of VSW for  five years now and have not done  much for the organization except  pay my dues.  I have watched VSW  grow and make progress, as a result  of hard work by many women.  I want  to now contribute some of my time  and energy to VSW, and work with  women for women. As a single parent  I am now having the same sort of  problems that VSW has been dealing  with, and I would like to get in  on the action.  Heather Kellerhals  Tomboy!  I guess that name thrown  after me at age nine started me  on the long, sometimes halting  road to feminism. Right now my  greatest interest is kids—  ,whether it be watching my own two  rascals grow7, working with other  kids as a social worker, or writing  stories for kids and in the process  trying to really listen and hear.  Have been only a short time in  Vancouver, but already contact with  the VSW office and the marvellous  "characters" there, plus participation in events like the conference on Housewives, has made me  feel a bit like Jack's beanstalk.  Would like to help if I can.  Arlene Gropper  ■— member of VSW for several years.  — concerned about the surrival of  VSW and would like to put some energy  into seeing that it survives viably.  — parent of two children.  — MA in Social Work.  — former staff member of Berger  Commission on Family and Children's  Law. >  — worked on Women Rally for Action  and involved now in follow-up lobby  work.  Dorothy Holme  I coordinate the Letter Lobby  Committee and have been a member  of the Executive for one year.  I  was pleased to represent VSW at the  Annual Meeting of the'National Action  Committee in Ottawa (see report elsewhere in Kinesis).  My commitment to improve the status  of women in Canada—especially  through legislative changes—increases with each year spent in the  women's movement.  That is why I  would like to run for another term  as a Member at Large—being on the  Executive gives one that little  extra impetus needed when dealing  with reluctant provincial and  federal politicians.  Leslie Dixon  I became a member of VSW a year ago  when I began working with VSW in  connection with my position on the  BCFW Standing Committee.  I didn't  become fully involved however until  I was hired to work on the Audio-  Visual Library as part of the 1975  Summer Grant. After the job ended  I found myself wishing to continue  working for VSW, and running for the  executive is one of the ways that  I feel I can contribute.  Lee Grills  Where did the year go? Half was  IWY.  So long hope...for three  seconds. The other half saw the  end of funding from "old" sources.  THEN: Women! Rally for Action. A  great beginning. This coming year  will be no tougher than others.  It  will necessitate more action by our  individual membership. The staff  will be unable to continue if our  funding does indeed cease in July.  That means goodbye apathy and hello  ACTION for all of us. This will  be another beginning.  Barbara Bulmer  —Six years experience as a social  worker; survivor of 12 years of  marriage and 2 children  —On Provincial Executive of Social  Health Services Component of B.C.  Government Employees Union  —Concerned with rights and roles  of women in employment, the trade  union movement, and the welfare  system.  Carol Norman  I am a native of Vancouver—resided  here 28 of my 31 years—a freelance  graphic artist, member of VSW for 2  years, and part of "Women Together"  which published the Women's Directory of B.C. as an IWY project.  I actively participated in the organization of WRA and subsequent  followup.  Why am I running?...because the  political climate in this province  and country is trying to bury the  feminist movement, and I feel that  I can help to throw the dirt out  faster than they can throw it in.  Carole Sinclair  Coming to VSW was like that rush  of stimulation that occurs upon  finding a kindred spirit.  I have  experienced personal growth through  the supportive atmosphere at VSW,  and I feel that there is much to be  done in reaching women and men who  are complacent in their attitudes.  I believe that serving on the executive would be. a step in that  direction.  —VSW member for V-i  years, involved  with Woman Alive committee, Kinesis,  CR, and various other projects.  Donna Trottman  —Lives in Delta,flight attendant  —Member of the women's group that  produced the Women's Directory  —Involved with the bargaining  group trying to improve the status  of flight attendents; writes masses  of letters to the department of  transport  —Vice- president of the Board of  Directors of the Chimo Crisis Centre.  STAFF APPOINTMENTS TO VSW EXECUTIVE  On May 28, 1975, the by-laws of the  Vancouver Status of Women were amended to read:  Article IV, Section I — Officers  "b) In addition there shall be four  appointed officers selected from  amongst the employees of the society  by the said employees. One of the  said appointed officers shall be the  Ombudswoman. The remainder shall be  members-at-large."  In accordance with this by-law the  following staff appointments have  been made:  Lee Masters  Members-at-Large  Nadine Allen  Johanna den Hertog  Jo Lazenby PENSIONS   FOR  HOUSEWIVES  (The following are highlights from  a speech given by Eileen Caner,  Director of the Women's Economic  Rights Branch, Department of  Economic Development to the Canadian Public Service Pension  Conference, June 1975.)  Every woman needs to be assured  of an adequate pension in her  own right...whether working  inside or outside the home,  whether single, married or  widowed...but the facts are  clear...many pension group  insurance, medical and disability plans...discriminate  against women.  We continue to get pension plans  designed by and for men with all  their traditional attitudes  built into the structure...Women  are viewed as economically  dependent on a man.  The consequent assumption is that their  husband's plan will provide for  their needed retirement income.  It is...inaccurate to presume that  the working woman has a husband.  Forty-three per cent of working  women in Canada are single, sep-  erated or divorced and many of  them have dependents.  It is interesting to note that when  the CPP designers addressed themselves to the question of equality  they extended equal benefits  to spouses i.e. the widower  benefitted, but no pension credits  for housewives-:no pension credit  for marriage breakdown-cessation  of widows pensions on remarriage.  They looked after the males who  had suffered discrimination but  left vast areas of discrimination  against females untouched.  Presumably these women were to be  looked after by the male providers  in the system and not by the system itself.  I should like to go back to the  cessation of widows pension on  remarriage. What is the base  •for this provision? Clearly  traditional attitudes about the  role of women.  She is provided  for by one male even after his  death, until another male takes  his place as her economic supporter!  We need an acturial reshuffle  based on the fact that women  who have chosen to stay in the  labour force as homemakers  have earned their right to this  pension by their contribution  to the family economic unit.  She should be receiving an annuity for the rest of her life  issued on years of contribution  to each economic unit- )r marriage.  I should like to tackle the  assumptions built into many  joint and survivor annuity  plans with the usual 50%  survivor benefit. There is  never an economic justification  for this figure.  Facing this cut  in income is a shock for a lot of  women.  They suddenly realize  they are a left-over appendage  of the economic provider.  The logical end of a demand for  equality is the complete abolition  of any survivor benefits at all.  This would be to completely  ignore the realities of our social  and economic system where the  pattern of many women's lives  has been that a significant proportion of the contribution to  the economy is in the form of  unpaid labour in the home.  I suggest that schemes such as  in the new B.C. proposal whereby  the widow may inherit 100% of  1 r.r li stands' pension and can  add to this by her own contributions at work, be examined  in detail. The B.C. proposal  on the inclusion of homemakers  in the CPP does not follow the  same actuarial path as the  British one, but it does  achieve the same result.  On  the death of the spouse, the  pension paid would be the equivalent of 100% of the male coverage  under the existing CPP.  Before the second world war,  women used to work for several  years between leaving school and  getting married, whereupon they  generally withdrew from the labor  market. This image is still implicitly reflected in much of our  pension and benefit structure but  it is no longer valid. Women's  lives have fundamentally changed.  Today in Canada women constitute  34% of the labour force. The  participation rate of women is  just under 40%. Women are in the  labour force...to stay and yet  many pension plans still ask them  to demonstrate their attachment  to the labour force before they  are allowed to join pension plans.  I include the following types of  plans in this category: a) those  made available only to male employees or are compulsory for males  but optional for females b) minimum age requirements, 21 for males  and 25 for females c) maximum age  participation, for females five years  lower than that for males—occasionally it is ten years lower  d) in some plans females must be  employed longer than their male  counterparts in order to subscribe  to fringe benefits schools.  The justification is that the higher  turnover rate of new female employees as compared to new male  employees induces higher administrative costs for a short length  of service. However statistical  data has revealed that high turnover rates are not sex based.  They are characteristic of low  paid routine jobs. Women are  concentrated in those jobs and  therefore suffer double discrimination.  Through income distribution and  occupational discrimination, women  are allocated to an inferior position  in the pension structure.  Consider the general absence of  portability between schemes. Non-  portability favours the long service  employee, that is the male whose  career path is not interrupted by  childrearing and other domestic  demands. Women need both portability of pensions and coverage  for time away from the labour force.  Allowing employers to provide higher  pension benefits for men than for  women on the grounds of higher cost  is to allow employers to assume that  all men are like the 'average' man  and all women are like the 'average'  woman in terms of death. It allows  employers to arrange things so that  the savings in annuity cost for the  16% of males who die early are  entirely monopolized by men, 84%  of whom are in the overlap group.  We would argue that the law, which  forbids using sex as a way of grouping employees, requires the sharing  of these benefits and these costs  over both sexes. Pension plans which  group employees by sex constitute a  denial of equal pay for equal work  for the majority of the population.  Of course, to go the unisex route  will mean some transfer of income  to the disadvantaged group and  whenever we transfer income we are  restructuring our society. An  appropriate place to start is when  provincial pension plan administrators  develop legislation regulating pensions. "From each according to their  ability; to each according to their  needs" has surely progressed from a  revolutionary precept to an administrative cliche with the passage of  time.  (Speech edited by Karen Richardson  WCWN)  census   day  CENSUS DAY  June 1 is Census Day in Canada and  marks a minor breakthrough for women's  liberation.  For the first time, wives, whether  employed outside the mome or not,  may declare themselves "head of the  household" on the form. The change  comes from complaints following the  1971 census, when homemakers who believed themselves in charge of the  house had to play second fiddle (on  paper) to their husbands. On this  year's form, husbands and wives can  flip for who calls themselves the .  boss.  A census is taken every five years  f in Canada with the results forming  j the basis for other surveys, and for  , planning government and other pro-  | grams.  ; Postpaid envelopes and a pencil are  ; provided. Remember that it is against  I the law not to return the census form.  I Besides, the census costs Canadians  j $31 million or roughly $1.50 each.  { -reprinted Chatelaine , June/76.  [ NOTE: The real breakthrough will come  f when the phase "head of household"  is eliminated from the census form.  What is implied is a head above other  heads (in the government's head, at  any rate) and we cannot, in our heads,  conceive of a justification for a  j value judgment or hierarchical ranking of heads — except by boneheads.  _-Yours for Headway,  Anon. CONFESSIONS   OF A CLEANING LADY  "Laundry lady  laughs ...  and works to rule  because she has to work  but she's nobody's fool.  They pay her bad  and make her mad  so — she works to rule  If they ask for more  she knows the score .".  and claims she just don't  understand!"  Yes, I was a cleaning lady at a  private athletic club. I was paid  $3.25/hour to dust, polish, mop, wash,  wax, pick up garbage, wash used towels,  and;— my favorite — scrub accumulated body fat from shower stalls.  From the wage, one would assume that  the job was not important. But it was,  because the men were not allowed to  do women's work ie. use the washing  machine. If they ran out of clean  fluffy white towels, the whole operation came to a grinding halt. I was  expected to give a couple of days  notice if I intended to be "sick" so  that the other cleaning lady could  come in. I came into great conflict  with management because I was genuinely sick and they had to force the  other woman to come in. They tried to  play us off against one another — we  ..were responsible for providing the  service. They refused to be respons-'  ible for being flexible enough to provide for such emergencies.  Our male counterparts had a similar  problem. "Houseboys", however, did  do "men's" work like moving furniture,  emptying garbage cans and vacuuming.  They , of course, received a high  wage.  During the time I was there, a lot  happened to me. For one thing, I left  there in the best physical shape I  have ever been in. It was always a  thrill to look in the bathroom mirror  and see a new muscle.  When I started work at the club I was  feeling desperate, depressed and degraded. I had been working twelve  years. I'd always been long on ability  but short on confidence. Imagine —  coming from working in a women's  centre, with all the new-found confidence that entailed, searching for  a good job, going broke, and having  welfare hand you this plum. I cried  a lot the first few days. I'd come  home exhausted, go directly to bed,  only to find I couldn't sleep because  my feet hurt.  I felt great hostility about being  in this situation. Especially against  management and priviledged club members. Especially against the teenagers who would purposely make gross  messes for us, the servants, to clean  up.  It was like we weren't people. While  we were paid poor wages and weren't  paid for our lunch break, management  did give us free food. Talk about  paternalism. However, we were constantly on call. Imagine being called  from your lunch to clean up vomit.  (It just canre to me now, in a flash,  that some of this must be what being  a mother is like!)  My hostility and resentment came out  indirectly because I needed the job  so desperately. Vandalism! I used to  scratch feminist graffitti on washroom walls. Thievery! I used to steal  small items like soap. I even took to  bringing home items from the lost and  found. Sneakery! I used to hide out  in the laundry room and read, write  and plot. More about the plot later...  Never, in the whole time I was there,  did I puroposefully neglect my actual  work. Pride perhaps, but never in my  life have I ever been satisfied with  .doing a half-assed job at anything.  Besides time goes, faster when you're  busy.  As time passed my confidence grew and  I developed a new ploy — eccentricity!  I once wiped out the business office  by insisting on "cleaning their windows  with ammonia. When asked, "why use  ammonia?" I replied, "because it  smells like I'm really working."  I suffered one humiliation after  another from my boss, but as I was  regaining strength,ie. knowing other  employees felt similarily oppressed,  he was becoming less intimidating.  Once he was standing about 20 feet  from the cigarette machine, gave me  money, told me to buy his cigarettes  and bring them to his office. I assumed that he wanted to have a heart to  heart chat about something. I took  the cigarettes to him in his office^  at the other end of the building,  armed with foul smelling telephone  disinfectant and when it became  apparent that he didn't want to talk  I sprayed his phone, and a goodly  part of his desk,and left.  When I began working at the club, my  co-workers, two very nice Italian  "ladies", insisted that I mustn't  wear pants. They didn't know why,but  it just wasn't done. My explanation  that I was not there to be decorative  but functional did not make sense to  them until about two months later  when one of them realized that when  I bent over "you don't see nothing."  The only other perverse pleasure I  took in dress was wearing my VSW T-  shirts  "MS" and "UPPITY WOMEN  UNITE" — under my green mini-dress  uniform.  It was only after I felt financially  secure that the plotting began. I had  been talking to fellow employees about  their grievances. One woman I worked  with had not recieved a single raise  in the five years she had been there.  Wages were poor, morale was poor,  and staff turn over incredibly high.  People had talked about organizing a  union for two years, but nothing had  ever been done. People just left instead. I was another person to leave,  but before leaving I set up a meeting  to discuss organizing with SORWUC.  (Service,'Office and Retail Workers  Union of Canada)" I took great pleasure  in hiding; out in the laundry room  writing notices and then surreptitiously posting them around the build-  ■ ing.  I wish I could report that the response  was overwhelming. The only overwhelming response was from management. They  called everyone in and the gist of  the conversation was "The rich can't  afford not to exploit the poor." If  we pay better wages we'll have to lay  a lot of you off. Further to this they  threatened some employees with immediate dismissal if they went to the  meeting.  Only one person showed up at the meeting. People would rather switch than  fight? or more likely — people were  not willing to give up a sunny afternoon to attend a meeting that might  not get anywhere. Apathy! "let someone else do it, then we'll reap the  benefit."  It was only after I had given my notice that I felt secure in not only  taking action in trying to unionize,  but to tell my boss off. One day, he  kicked a box of garbage out of my  hands as I walked past him in the  hall. I was furious — so I kicked  it too. Hard! Then when he asked why  I told him off. It's funny, because  from then on he treated me with respect, offered good references and  begged me to stay on. No way! I was  off with others who had forsaken  apathy ~ WOMEN'S RALLY FOR ACTION  — to try to do something about our  lot in life.  - former teacher, civil servant,  clerk, grapefruit picker, and toilet  paper packer. (Name withheld by request.)  NEWS  VRB EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES  Vancouver Resources Board has approved  an equal opportunities program for  women, minorities and handicapped  persons, chaired by Darlene Marzari,  as recommended by Shelagh Day of the  Human Rights Commission. Three unions  will be affected: CUPE, VMERU, SSEU.  The VRB labour force is being studied  and a report is expected sometime in  June this year. For more information  contact Mary Seagull, 33 East 8 Ave.  Vancouver, B.C. or call 872-8154.  (KR) WOMEN    INTHE    URBAN   ENVIRONMENT  What are the issues of concern  to women in the urban development? Habitat Forum on Women  and Human Settlements will soon  examine this neglected theme,  which even our much lauded Royal  Commission Report on the Status  of women 1970 ignored.  In the meantime, let's look  at the report of the national  conference "Women in the Urban  Environment" held in Ottawa,  October 1975 by the National  Capital Commission in celebration of IWY.  Sixty women from acrqss Canada  participated in the conference:  architects, planners, sociologists, design teachers, economists, political scientists,  community representatives.  The conference examined ways  in which development affects  women's lives; generated a  series of criteria relevant to  women's needs for urban planning; recommended how women  can systematically be incorporated into community planning  decisions.  The workshop zeroed in on  special needs of single parent  women, elderly women and  mothers and children generally,  who suffer most from the attitude that social rights are  luxuries in urban development.  "Urban development has proceeded in accordance with  male economic priorities from  a very ad hoc social research  basis, particularly with regard  to women. At best, women's  urban concerns are expressed  in a fragmented and incidental  fashion.  The environment is  designed largely by men, for  principal use by women, whose  representation in planning and  decision-making positions in  urban development is minimal.  Even in those groups where  women are strongly represented,  it is probable that they may  not themselves recognize  possible changes in women's  needs in their own communities; are inhibited from expressing women's concerns in  mixed sex groups.  Location  of new communities is often  solely governed by a private  developers economic convenience in assembling land, not  according to the needs of the  people who will live there.  Women and children suffer  most in the "straggle of  suburbia" without a focus,  without connections baland  of social elements, opportunities for reasonable environment and social prospects,  these factors should not be  a matter of luck.  Lack of  policy controls frequently  results in geographic isolation,  lack of transportation, inadequate community and commercial  facilities, lack of employment  links."  SINGLE PARENTS  The single parent family is  a rapidly growing -.sector of  the population. More than  one-quarter of all Canadian  families are now supported  by single parents. Female heads  of families are five times more  likely to be poor than others.  Half to 3/4 of all public housing is inhabited by motherled  families.  The report says that the basic  problem of single-parent women  is poverty combined with lack  of social services, inadequate  job opportunities, and poor  recreation centres in the urban  community.  Single parents are imprisoned  in the community because  transportation for the public  is usually minimal since most  families are assumed to have  at least one car.  Single parents are also under  more pressure in childrearing  and hence require more privacy  both in the home and in the  community. Yet, they are discriminated against in rentals  by landlords and zoning by-laws  often outlaw adults sharing  accomodation if they are "unrelated."  Urban planning lacks outdoor  recreational space for their  children and themselves and  inadequate childcare centres  place an extra, burden on  single parents.  In addition,  there are no special services  or accomdation for single parents  in the crisis of transition.  Therefore, the report recommends  community planning should be  based on a diversity of lifestyles instead of only designed  for the family with two parents.  This would include:  a) size and number of public  housing units related to projected population mix so they  do not become single parent  ghettos.  b) single parents should be  offered cooperative housing and  financial support for the conversion cf appropriate buildings.  c) zoning by-laws must permit  unrelated persons to live  together to share childcare and  expenses.  d) CMHC should provide funds  to allow single parents to  remain in their original homes  and provide funding for the  establishment of daycare.  ELDERLY WOMEN  By the year 2,000 AD, 16% of the  population will be senior citizens^  and 65% of them will be elderly  women on low pensions with little  savings or investments, after a  lifetime of unpaid work in the home  or low paying jobs.  Elderly people prefer to remain  in their own homes and communities, close to the ground, and  to be able to make some contribution to society while needing  additional privacy and quiet.  The report recommends that the  no-man's land in which many  senior citizens live should be  eliminated  by planning that  integrates them back into the  community.  Housing, shopping and transportation facilities should  be designed taking into account  the reduced income, and reduced  agility of senior citizens,  who should also have the option  of remaining in their own  homes, like single parents,  through financial support  from CMHC.  MOTHERS AND CHILDREN  The report says that women and  children lose most in the community.  "The isolation of today's  two parent family is one of  the factors which mitigates  against stable family life,"  because one parent is almost  totally absent and the other is  isolated. Large numbers of women  and children live in areas where  there are inadequate transportation, recreation, social services, childcare, jobs, etc.  The report therefore makes many  recommendations, among them:  CMHC should formulate policy to  ensure all public projects  sponsor sufficient daycare.  "Every discussion of mothers  hangs on this critical aspect  of social planning in the urban  environment."  Accomodation, work, social,  commercial and transportation  needs of the various lifestyles  of women should receive particular attention until they are  a standard form of planning."  Programs would be designed to  inform women about the community  infrastructure, and responsibility  centres rr.uvt  be established in  government to relate to women's  needs. Women must be encouraged  to participate in research on  their own needs.  In B.C. we are lucky to have the  Women's Economic Rights Branch  in the Department of Economic  Development. This branch is  trying to interpret women's  social and economic needs  into plans for northern development.  (Eileen Canar, WER,DED,  Parliament, Victoria,B.C.)  If you  have any ideas or relevant  materials, please forward them  to her.  Karen Richardson  program  See Page 18 for information on a  special HABITAT program "Women the  Neglected Resource" which will include  a VSW sponsored presentation and  slide show "Women and Planning: the  Example of Vancouver, Canada." 6  As you know, we are trying to develop  our reference library. Although we've  been here for five years, can you believe it — we don't have a decent  shelf of de rigeur feminist paperbacks I  Donations of your oldies but goodies  would be very much appreciated.  Because of very limited funds we are  relying on inexpensive and free copies  of feminist books from publishers, on  the understanding that we will publish  reviews in KINESIS. The following  books are waiting -fco be read and written about. Anyone interested? Contact me  — Karen Richardson, 736-3746. Books  that need to be reviewed are:  Prepared Childbirth, Tucker  Birth Control, Tucker.  Rape, Carol Haros. . .  Menstruation, Hilary Maddux.  Controlled Childbirth, Birkbeck.  The Impstone, Susan Musgrave.  BOOK  OUR BODIES, OURSELVES, Boston Women's  Health Collective  OUR BODIES, OURSELVES Revised and  Expanded, Boston Women's Health  Collective, Musson Book Co., $5.75.  If you have already seen the original  OUR BODIES, OURSELVES which came out  in 1973, then there's not a lot more  to say about this new edition. It  contains revisions, updates and additions and costs two dollars more. But,  basically, it's the same.  Now, if you've never seen the book:  when it came out a few years back,  it was part of the wave of silly pretentious manuels that preached as  though they had the final word on  physical and mental health (the one*  that killed me concerned healing of  a vaginal infection — it suggested  that one lie down and relax, and  think of one's vagina as pink and  healthy — and that should do the  trick!) OUR BODIES, OURSELVES obviously suffered through that era,  and did well, because it's still  around.It's not exactly a "read from  cover to cover" book but a chapter  at a time it becomes interesting and  relevant. Each chapter also contains  a lengthy bibliography, so you can  go beyond. It's a good consciousness  raiser, and is great for young women.  OUR BODIES, OURSELVES contains more  than an explanation of our anatomy  and physiology, it covers our own  sexuality, our relationships, and  our health — from a preventative  perspective. It includes detailed  sections about birth control, abortion, rape, pregnancy, and childbirth.  It goes beyond that as well — into  the politics of health care, which  discusses what to expect from people  in the health profession, and how  one goes about setting up an alternative.  There's a lot of information which  the book attempts to cover, and it  directs itself to women who are reading a lot of this stuff for the first  time, and in doing so, it can tend  to be simplistic and generalized.  But it's concise and easily understood, and it does a lot to de-mystify  the workings of our physical and  emotional selves. It's a great book  to have around!  - Miriam Gropper  BOOK  THE NEW ASSERTIVE WOMAN, Lynn Z. Bloom,  Karen Coburn and Joan Pearlman, Dela-  corte Press, New Yor, 1975.  (Available at Vancouver Public Library)  An excellent primer on Assertiveness  Training, geared especially to women.  It contains practical exercises, checklists and charts.  For those that have read a number of  "popular" books ranging from "Getting  Clear" to the bestseller on Assertiveness Training "When I Say No-, I Feel  Guilty", this book pulls it all together. It is simple, readable and  practical for all women.  "Woman is caught in a mystique, be it  feminine or feminist, is boxed in by  externally imposed expectations."...  "Assertive skills can help break the  repressive molds of both....They can  help a woman be her own person...and  grow beyond the limitations of both  the feminine and feminist mystiques  impase." Truly liberating!  When I Say No, I Feel Guilty , Manuel  J. Smith, PhD, Bantam Paperback, 1975,  is an excellent followup.  - Wynne. LeRoux  BOOK  THE INDOMITABLE LADY DOCTORS,  Carlotta Hacker, Clarke Irwin  & Co. Ltd. Toronto/Vancouver,  1974.  $8.50.  The first woman doctor to practise in Canada, Dr. James Miranda  Barry, successfully posed as a  man for her entire medical career. Dr. Barry became accora-  plised enough in her field to be  appointed Inspector General of  Hospitals for both Upper and  Lower Canada.  It was only after  her death that she was found to  be a woman.  "The most acceptable 'explanation at the time was  that she was a male hemaphrodite."  Of course it was out of the question that she could have achieved  such distinction in an army medical career had she been a woman   Ms. Hacker so begins a well  researched account of pioneer  women doctors in Canada.  The women doctors who followed  Dr. Barry encountered seemingly  insurmountable opposition in the  pursuit of their medical careers. Women were- not allowed  to enter universities, much  less study medicine.  The men  fought to discourage them at  every turn.  The women faced  sarcasm, derision, and ridicule in their efforts to obtain their education.  Even  if they managed to attain the  proper education, they were  most often refused a license  to practise.  Pioneer women doctors entered  medicine for a variety of reasons. Many were true suffragettes such as Dr. Emily Stowe,  who fought for nearly twenty  years for the right to practise medicine.  Dr. Stowe was  a forerunner of the Canadian  women's movement. Many women wanted medical knowledge  so that they could care for  their own families while  others felt it would be useful  in the missionary field. Whatever their motivation, these  women all faced the same adversity in seeking their goals.  The author traces their determination and perserverance  from the early days of their  education through their gradual acceptance in the field  of practise, to their ultimate breakthrough into specialized fields formerly reserved for men. The progression was often slow7, at  ; times seeming closer to regression. Women gradually  established credibility as  physicians today women work  side by side with men and enjoy  the same distinction and  esteem for their achievements.  This book is the Golden Ju-  bileee project of The Federation of Medical Women in Canada.  The project was undertaken because of a need to  record the accomplishments  of this group of Canadian  women.  Carlotta Hacker has  done her research with insight and sensitivity.  The.  book affords the reader an  especially intimate perception  of the problems faced by this  group of pioneer women. The  author notes that over a century ago, as today, these  women faced the problem of  being a good mother and a good  career woman. Ms. Hacker also  draws attention to the fact  thah many women were forced to  take a back seat to their  husbands in terms of financial status. ~^For instance,  single missionary women were  paid by the mission while  wives of missionaries were  expected to give their service free.  In recent years  sex has ceased to be an important issue, in fact, in  1973 Dr. Bette Stephenson  was elected President of the  Canadian Medical Association  ...one of the most prestigious positions available to  any physician in Canada.  The book is worthwhile reading,  particularly for those of us  who assume a non-fiction documentation to be dull reading A pleasant surprise.  Carole Sinclair  The Indomitable Lady Doctors  is on the VSW library shelf. wanted:  a sporting chance  SEXISM IN WOMEN'§ LACROSSE  Lacrosse is Canada's national sport  — for men that is. But Vicky Brkich  of Richmond who has been playing the  game for five years says there is  nothing but opposition towards women  players by the B.C. Lacrosse Association.  According to Ms. Brkich, although the  women pay their yearly fees to the  BCLA they don't receive good coaches,  team trips, good playing times and  lengthy seasons. Apparently some  municipalities in the Lower Mainland  will not even allow girls to register  to play!  As a result, many young women quit  the game each year to play softball  because it can lead to team trips,  tournamants, national and world  championships.  The BCLA apparently argues that women  aren't interested in playing because  they keep quitting. The old doublethink. Every year the BCLA says there  will be no junior girls' lacrosse  team. (There are no senior teams. Ms.  Brkich at 21 is classified under  minor lacrosse!)  But each year, Ms. Brkich rounds up  enough young women to form several  teams, finds them coaches, picks up  their uniforms, etc. She gets no help  from BCLA.  Ms. Brkich says that women do not receive equal opportunity in the sport  and offers last year as an example.  On several days when the junior girls'  teams were to play lacrosse, the arenas  were closed and referees did not show  up. There were no final play-offs.  As a result of complaints, a provincial girls' game was scheduled in a  dirty outdoor box with only one gate.  Both teams sat side by side. Both  coaches controlled the door. Penalized  players sat with team mates. The ref  did not show up so a father from one  of the teams supervised the game.  Aside from bias, he had no qualificat  ions as a referee. And this was a  provincial game!  The American, Australian and English  have women's field lacrosse teams  which compete internationally. In  Canada, there are no national junior  girls' championships, no national  women's lacrosse team, no women's  lacrosse association, no field  lacrosse period. Only box lacrosse.  Vicky Brkich has,written the National  Lacrosse Association in Ottawa, and  she called upon Vancouver Status of  Women to help too. We have written  t;o the B.C. Human Rights Commission,  and the National Conference on Women  and Sport,etc. Now we are calling on  members. Please write your letters  of support to Vicky Brkich at 1020  Caithcart Road, Richmond, B.C. She  needs the ammunition. With a little  help from some friends, maybe we can  change things.  - Karen Richardson  education  Nadine Allen, Chairperson of the  Provincial Advisory Committee on Sex  Discrimination in Public Schools,still  has not received a reply to her inquiries about the Committee,which Super-  intendant of Educational Programs  John Meredith said on January 12th  was "under review".  On May 6th, Nadine sent the following  letter to Dr. Walter Hardwick, Deputy  Minister of Education:  ''Re: Provincial Advisory Committee on  Sex Discrimination in Public Education  The only word the committee has had  from the Department of Education is  John Meredith's vague letter of Jan.  12. (enclosed) His assurance that  "The Department will continue to deal,  with this problem in the course of  its regular programs" does not satisfy me. Mr. Meredith mentions a review of financial and "other priorities" in education. Over the centuries, women's concerns have been given  low.priority — how can you expect  us to believe that the daily workings  of this department will change anything? The Provincial Advisory Com*  mittee, composed of groups concerned  with this issue, offered to the department fresh insight into the problems and attempted to bring forth  some solutions. The very existence  of such a committee indicated at  least an appearance of commitment by  the department.  I understand the work of the committee  is under review and that new proposals  will be made for maintaining progress  in this area. Women's groups are determined that the little progress made  will not be lost. We want to know Dr.  McGeer's position on this issue and  we wnat to know what specific actions  are planned to eradicate sexism from  the public school system.  The Department of Education owes us  at least the courtesy of a reply to  our inquiries."  VSW members should write to Education  Minister McGeer requesting that he  state his position on the issue of  sexism in education and that he nut-  line the specific actions that he  plans to take. Also urge the Minister  to re-instate the Provincial Advisory  Committee on Sex Discrimination. We  must keep the pressure on if there is  to be any action taken in this area.  important  WOMEN'S STUDIES COURSES PRINTED  The Women's Studies Course has been  printed and is available from the  Dept. of Education, David Huggins,  Publications, Victoria. Send for your  copy NOW!  The course must have local school  board approval. So it is very important that each one of us contacts our  School Board and requests that the  course be made available in the schools  in our district. Without this kind  of community support and pressure the  course will be allowed to slide into  oblivion. DO IT NOW!!  bursaries  SINGLE PARENT STUDENT BURSARIES  Vancouver Foundation will award bursaries to single parents who want to  go back to school. Applications will  be accepted as late as June. Write to  Vancouver Foundation, 2211 - 1177  West Hastings, Vancouver, B.C.  (KR)  mfoiw  BIRTH CONTROL  Three sequential birth control pills  have been taken off the market in the  United States because they pose a risk  of endometrial cancer in the lining  of the uterus. Ortho-Novum Pharmaceutical Co. says Canadian women on Ortho-  Novum SQ (one of the discontinued  pills) have misinterpreted recent  reports on the withdrawal of some  products in the US. The Canadian pills  are still on the market but will be  used for "therapeutic" purposes only.  Remember the Dalkon Shield? 000  FEDERAL COMMITTEE ON ABORTION  The Committee on the Operation of the  Abortion Law will be reporting to the  Federal House of Commons in a few  months, at which time the results of  its studies will be made public. Members of the Committee were appointed  by Privy Council. They are Denyse Fo  Fortin Caron, member of the Federal  Law Reform Commission and a specialist  in family law; Dr. Marion Powell is  a professor and chairwoman of the  Family Population Studies Unit of the  University of Toronto. They can be  contacted through Chirwoman Robin  Badgeley, #1805 - 4 King St. West,  Toronto. (KR). 8  REPORT ON N.A.C. ANNUAL MEETING  Discotheque versus Dialogue  About 200 women from all provinces  and territories gathered in Ottawa  for the Annual Meeting of-the National  Action Committfee, April 23-26. Since  N.A.C. is an umbrella organization  for about 80 non-governmental bodies  — including Vancouver Status of Women.— many delegates were there to  assess the political clout of N.A.C.  as well as represent their member  group.  I must confess that on Friday evening it appeared our federal politicians did not take N.A.C. too seriously.  The agenda had promised a "bear pit"  session between the Honourable Ministers Marc Lalonde, Ron Basford, and  John Munro, and '.'a group of Canadian  women." Delegates waited anxiously  for the arrival of the three "stars"  but had to be content with their  "understudies" instead — not one of  the ministers made it.  The "official excuse" given was that  the parliamentary Easter recess had  caused MPs and cabinet ministers to  delay their return to Ottawa until  Monday or Tuesday. I must admit that  this sterile civil servant town can  be pretty dull on weekends, but surely the timing could have been better  coordinated.  The substitute panel consisted of MP  Robert Kaplan (representing Marc  Lalonde), MP John Roberts (came voluntarily^, Martha Hynna (Privy Council), Dr. Harry Strayer (Justice  Department) and Tom Eberlee, Deputy  Minister of Labour. Each panel member -■  outlined briefly what his/her department had done to improve the status  of women during International Women's  Year.  Martha Hynna stressed that women's  issues must now be integrated into  and permeate all government departments, Harry Strayer said that the  Badgeley Commission (on abortion)  should complete its report by the  fall, and Tom Eberlee told of a committee that had been set up in  Labour Canada (Women's Bureau) to  study "equal pay for work of equal  value" and job evaulation. The panel  was then questioned by Wendy Williams  of Newfoundland, Sharon Hurd Clark  of Saskatchewan and Gene Errington  of British Columbia.  During the course of Gene's intensive  questioning the audience realized  that some members of the panel, particularly Robert Kaplan, had little  knowledge of the most basic concerns  of women. The assembled women virtually came to life in unison when  Kaplan stated that national defense  was a more important priority than  women's programs, and that Canada's  pension plan was designed only for  those in the "paid" labour force. I  felt it was unfortunate that Mr.  Lalonde had sent such an uninformed  representative because I know that  the minister's views are vastly different.  It was quite evident by now that the  women had come to Ottawa to talk  about very deep issues — most of  them economic. Unsuspecting Tom Eberlee tried to explain that the "catchup" clause contained in the economic  guidelines was wokable if women could  prove sex discrimination in employment — but the audience wasn't buying. Faced by such formidable challengers as Shirley Carr of the Canadian  Labour Congress, the deputy minister  letter  lobby  admitted that the wage guides were  not meant to be "social program."  This lively dialogue was abruptly  interrupted at 9:30 p.m. by loud rock  and roll music from the discotheque  next door to our meeting room (the  Beacon Arms is a rather old and quaint  hotel.) I found myself wondering  whether a group of man would have  put up with meeting in such antiquated  facilities. Despite the noise, two  panel members — Martha Hynna and  Harry Strayer — stayed on for the  "wine and cheese" affair that followed  and answered further questions.  But the stage had been clearly set  — the overriding issues would concern  the whole relationship of women to  the Canadian economy and all the problems that had been brought about.by  the cutbacks in provincial and federal  government spending. We could only  hope that the government officials  present would convey this message,  loudly and clearly, to their absent  ministers.  Workshops define Issues  Two days of workshop sessions defined  economic issues (wage guides, manpower  training, income tax system, job  evaluation and part-time workers) as  the main concern. Women were also  concerned about how they organize and  spread the word on women's issues. Dr.  Katie Cooke, Chairperson of the federal A.C.S.W., stressed the need for  involved women to mobilize those who  are not yet active, when she spoke  to delegates on Saturday evening.  On social service cutbacks, delegates  felt that strong affirmative action  was needed on the part of the federal  government. As women from each province and territory reported on cutbacks in their area, one fact became  quite ©bvious. The only thing that  all politicans can agree on nowadays  is this — if there are to be cutbacks let them be in women's programs.  It's sort of a political football  right now — the feds blame the provinces and vice versa.  Old issues were re-stated. There was  strong support for abortion reform  and birth planning facilities, for  the rights of Native women who marry  whites, and for a halt to proliferation of nuclear weapons. Women were  deeply concerned about their image  in advertising, and the role image  of men and women presented to children in our educational institutions.  The National Action Committee designated as its priorities for 1976 the  effect of federal wage controls on  women, the right of women to safe,  legal abortion, and the need for a  cross-country effort to tell women  about issues of relevance to them.  The complete list of resolutions will  be detailed in a future Status of  Women News magazine.  Lobbying and Lunching  About 40 delegates stayed for the  Monday lobby and met with over 50 MPs  and cabinet ministers. The Sunday  evening Lobby Workshop had ended with  the suggestion that we all "look  nice" for the lobby (and I thought  this was 1976).  The final evaluations are not yet  tabulated but from conversations with  various lobbying teams, it can be  said that their experiences were diverse. Some MPs had an excellent knowledge of women's issues and dealt  with delegates in a mature manner,  others expounded grandiose economic  theories in answer to simple questions and a few were still back in  the 1950's. It's too bad we couldn't  prepare instant "report cards" as  was done in the March 22nd Women Rally  for Action in Victoria.  Opposition Leader Joe Clark and members of the Conservative party, as  well as the NDP caucus, met with about  30 women in the Centre Block. Both  parties appeared to be aware of the  problems facing women. NDP Leader  Ed Broadbent asked questions later  in the House, and Joe Clark stated  that one of his priorities is to make  a concerted effort to run women candidates in the next federal election.  Liberal MP Aideen Nicholson had kindly  arranged a luncheon that day for about  20 representatives from all parts of  Canada. It's main purpose was to enable delegates to have a meaningful  discussion on women's issues with Hon.  Marc Lalonde and Hon. John Munro.  Also present were Hon. Jeanne Sauve,  MP Monique Begin and MP Iona Campag-  nola. Many women wre still fired up  by the Friday evening session and had  come with the full intention of asking  some very serious questions (in spite  of the fact that the luncheon was a  "stand-up" affair which necessiatated  balancing one's coffee and hor d'  oeuvres while "confronting").  Unfortunately, the delegates were  soon to discover that certain members  of the N.A.C. Executive intended to  handle the two Ministers— seasoned  politicians and in apparent good  health — with kid gloves. Even  Monique Begin asked if she could  "speak freely" with the ministers  present. Can a setting of Wedgewood  blue walls, lush carpet, a silver tea  service and dainty lobster puffs  really be that unsettling to some  women?  The almost two hours was spent going  over old legislation, exchanging polite chit-chat and asking only a few  carefully chosen questions. As a forum  for really finding out what Mr. Munro  and Mr. Lalonde had to say in view of  the stringent new economic measures —  it was not too successful. However,  as a purely social event — it was  delightful! Thank you, Aideen, your  intentions were good.  Summary and Suggestions  In summary, I can say that — in spite  of some organizational problems —  attending the N.A.C. Annual Meeting  was a worthwhile experience. It brought  together women from many diverse organizations who would not otherwise contact .each other. It had a unifying .  effect in that women realized their  problems were the same throughout  this vast country of ours. And it was  encouraging to see women from business,  labour and government sit down together and discuss the issues intelligently (something that the men representing these sectors are finding  most difficult to do right now).  As for suggestions, I believe future  meetings should be just a little more  coordinated in order to iron out the  wrinkles. The lobbying should be more  cont, page 9.... CONTINUED FROM PAGE  intensive and the results more instantaneous. And let's treat our politicians like real people who were elected  to represent the interests of all  Canadians. It's nice to have "tea"  with them — but when women come from  places as far away as the Yukon once  a year, they are entitled to ask  questions on hard-core issues and get  answers. As to the political clout  of N.A.C. — well, it will be only  as tough as the member organizations  chose to make it.  - Dorothy Holme, VSW Delegate  to Annual Meeting of National Action  Committee.  TO LETTER LOBBY MEMBERS  Although the Letter Lobby Committee  does not hold regular monthly meetings  during the summer when our politicians  are on holiday — this shouldn't stop  us from writing letters on any issue  that may come up before September.  Please make sure that you have written  letters on all the items we have highlighted in Letter Lobby during the  past few months. Particularly important at this time is the letter re  "income tax allowances for child care"  featured in April KINESIS.  The federal Advisory Council on the  Status of Women has prepared an excellent report on women and income  tax — and will be tackling the  bureaucrats in the Finance Department  in the near future. But Finance Officials are "the toughest nuts to crack"  and A.C.S.W. will need all the help  it can get from groups such as ours.  Income Tax reform was also a very big  item of concern at the Annual N.A.C.  Meeting — so don't delay, get your  letter in the mail.  Have a nice summer. I hope to see all  the old, and many new, members in the  fall.  - DOROTHY HOLME  Wendy 0'Flaherty interviewed me about  sexism in advertising for CBC Hourglass. The show will be aired soon.  I am now: preparing the VSW Annual  Report for the members' year-end  meeting in mid-June; reorganizing and  developing the Reference Library;  sending myriad letters and resource  materials on women's issues to MLAs  and Cabinet Ministers.  - KAREN RICHARDSON  YOU  NGONAI  WW  Thank you to the 19 members who have  returned the questionnaire which  appeared in the May issue of KINESIS.  The responses have been informative  and will provide direction in forming  new member groups and activities. We  are awaiting responses from our other  800 members — please refer to the  questionnaire in the May KINESIS and  send it in if you are not one of the  19* above! WE NEED TO KNOW YOUR SPECIFIC NEEDS AND INTERESTS.  I am forming a MEMBERSHIP COMMITTEE  and need committee members. Anyone  interested in organizing, talking  to people, typing letters, etc. CALL  THE OFFICE.  THANK YOU to BOBBIE PATRICK and  ISABELLE DUROCHE for volunteering  many hours this month tracking down  current addresses of over 250 people  whose VSW memberships expired over  the past two years. Complimentary  May issues of KINESIS^ere forwarded  '  to all 250 with a letter regarding  membership renewal — hopefully we  will be deluged with responses.  BOBBIE, KAREN RICHARDSON and I are  in the process of sending a compliment  ary issue of KINESIS to all secondary  school, university, college and public  libraries in B.C. that do not now have  a KINESIS subscription, to encourage  new subscriptions. We are also in the  process of establishing newsletter  exchanges with all women's groups in  B.C. not receiving KINESIS.  We are only 5 people short of starting a new CONSCIOUSNESS-RAISING GROUP  at the beginning of July. If you are .  interested, call the office and ask  for Judy.  Also — a CR GROUP specifically for  Lesbian Women is now being formed.  If you're interested call Judy at the  office.  - JUDY BOURNE' *  The LOBBY REPORTS are finally available! We expect the demand for them  to be heavy, so please phone your requests in promptly. If there is enough  of a demand, we may do a second printing. To help defray the cost of paper  and printing, we are asking for a  donation of $1 per booklet. The following booklet, the reprint of the entire Women Rally for Action Brief,  should be available next month.  Lorri Rudland, Lee Grills and I were  invited to speak at the University  Women's Club's Status of Women and  Laws Committee. We spoke on the RALLY,  how it was organized, what happened  on the day, and what we hope to see  happen from here. Although it was a  small meeting, the response was great,  and we hope to see greater communication develop in the future as a result  between VSW and this committee.  I was invited to be keynote speaker  for a weekend conference in Prince  George called Directions '76-. It was  a first for Prince George, with about  120 women of the area attending, and  featured speakers on Woman and the  Law, Native Women, Women and Politics  Education, etc. Many exciting plans  came out of the workshops, and it  looks like Prince George will be a  real hotbed of feminist activity in  the next while.  - JOHANNA DEN HERTOG  I have been speaking about Women and  the Law at Law 11 classes at Sir Winston Senior Secondary School in Vancouver.  I've also done speaking engagements  on follow-up to Women Rally for Action  and am helping to produce the follow-  up packet.  Also working with the committee that  is setting up an inter-centre communications newsletter.  And lots and lots of_0mbnds .cases!  •- LuRRI RUDLAND  MORE STUFF  LEB GRILLS, Member-at-Large on VSW  Executive, has been devoting a lot  of hours to volunteer work in the  office and on speaking engagements.  — University Women's Club on WRA,  and Maple Ridge Status of Women on  Sexist Advertising. She and LEE  MASTERS wenf to Seattle to talk to  the NOW (National Organizatibit of  Women) about fund-raising and at the  end of May Lee Grills is going to  Washington DC to talk about Affirmative Action with women's groups  there.  quote  "Not so paradoxically, the position  of a 'liberated' woman in a liberal  society where the vast majority of  women are not liberated can be embarrassingly easy. Granted a good  dose of talent and certain cheerful  or merely dogged lack of self-  consciousness, one can even escape  (as I did) the initial obstacles and  derision that are likely to afflict  a woman who insists on autonomy....  Her good fortune is like the good  fortune of a few blacks in a liberal  but still racist society. Each liberal  grouping (whether political, professional, or artisitic) needs its token  woman.  Any already 'liberated' woman who  complacently accepts her privileged  situation participates in the oppression of other women. I accuse the overwhelming majority of women with careers  in the arts and sciences, in the liberal professions, and in politics of  doing just that."  - Susan Sontag,"The Third of Women"  The Partisan Review, no. 2, 1973.  NEWS  NO FAULT DIVORCE SOON  Federal Minister of Justice Ron  Basford said May 5th that as a result  of the tabling of the federal Law  Reform Commission recommendations on  matrimony, he expects "no fault divorce" will be a reality by fall of  this year. He called the present  legislation "sexist"..Three cheers  for Basford!   (KR) 10  WRA  LOBBY    REPORTS  SOMEHOW — the lobby report for George  Kerster, Social Credit MLA Coquitlam  was left out of the Women Rally for  Action Lobby Reports in the May issue  of KINESIS. Probably due to the in -  ability of your Editor to count as  high as 55! Apologies to the women  of the Coquitlam Lobby Team and to  Mr. Kerster. Here is the report.  GEORGE KERSTER, SOCIAL CREDIT MLA  COQUITLAM  Daycare-a priority—will support  daycare "if funds are available"  Sexism-should be the concern of  local schools "get parents, teachers  and community involved"  Women's Studies-needs more info,  "We must keep politics out of the  schools"  Family Life-supports dev.of a  structured and optional total health  program taught by qualified instructors  Prov. Co-ordinator's Office- not  needed "when we have 54 MLAs" Is  setting up constituency  liaisons  Family Law-supports Berger Comm.  Maintenance should be rehabilitative  Supports removal of word illegitimacy  from the law  Rape-supportive on all issues and of  funding for centres Preference in  hospitals and police stations should  be for a woman's own doctor, not one  who is specifically female  Women's Centre Funding-will work towards getting it for the area  Supports equal pay for equal work,  but feels the word value was getting  into semantics—seemed confused.  Followup contact: Pat Isert c/o  Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre  Box 243 Port Coquitlam, B.C.  booklet  GET YOUR COPY OF THE RALLY REPORTS!  The first part of the three-part  t  packet on Women Rally for Action is  ready! The May issue of KINESIS  carried summarized versions of the  reports of each of the lobby teams  but this is the full story... the  complete report of each lobby team's  meeting with their MLA. To defray  paper and printing costs a donation  of $1.00 per booklet is requested.  Copies are available at Vancouver  Status of Women. The second booklet  — the reprint of the entire Women  Rally for Action Brief should be  available next month.  media  action  In the May issue of KINESIS we reproduced a Bank of Montreal ad in  which the Bank Manager was referred  to as "she". A copy of KINESIS was  sent to the main branch of the Bank  of Montreal in Vancouver along with  a letter saying we were pleased to  see the ad and asking what proportion  of Bank of Montreal managers were in  fact "women. We received the following  reply.  "Thank you for your kind acknowledgement of one of our Gold Medal ads. W  We appreciate your comments and hope  the following information will be of  interest to you.  As of April 30th, 1976 the Bank of  Montreal had a total of 683 Management positions throughout the province of British Columbia. Approximately 160 of these posts are independent  Branch Managers, with the remaining  being in Administration, Lending or  other specialized areas. Posts are  considered Management if they have  Management supervisory responsibility;  important decision making responsibility such as in lending of funds or  the specialized areas of Marketing,  Credit, Administration or Personnel.  The Bank of Montreal has for a number  of years, been promoting women into  responsible Management positions and  of 683 authorized posts, 201 are  filled with female personnel. This  figure represents 28% of our total  Management inventory and we expect  this percentage to continue increasing over the years ahead.  Yours truly,  R.A. Wallace  Personnel Manager  Bank of Montreal  595 Burrard St. Vancouver.  AN APPEAL  Dear Sisters:  The Rally was great! We felt the  energy and power of Sisterhood. We  made the government and media acknowledge it. But they are still trying  to ignore our ideas and programs. Th  They are cutting off our money. We  cannot let our energy diminish. We  must not stop exerting our power. We  must show them we will not accept a  pat on the head and go quietly back  to our kitchens, like good little  girls.  We must continue, in every B.C. community, the work we have already  begun. Lobby grouos have to keep  making appointments with their MLAs  whenever they come into their constituencies — get together, ask them  what they've been doing for us. Feed  them our information . Letter lobbiests still have to bombard governments and sexists advertisers every  time they step out of line. We will  not be ignored or used without protest. We must continue study groups  in law, education, day care, health  — all our areas of interest, so that  when changes can be made we know what  we want and what the full effect will  be. We have to monitor and serve on  local boards and committees to feed  in feminist ideas and goals. Where  we are employed we must demand equal  pay and opportunities for advancement.  We must also reach out to our sisters.  We need new energy to recharge our  present programs. We need sheer weight  of numbers to increase the pressure  we apply. Initiate consciousness raising groups. Get together a speakers  group and don't wait to be invited.  Ask to speak in classrooms and at  social gatherings — anywhere you  can think of. Try to get access to  local media to educate women about  their present status and inform them  of services and groups in their community.  Last of all — we have to keep in  touch. Write to KINESIS. Exchange  newsletters. Plan area conferences.  Join the B.C. Federation of Women.  Share information. Let us know about  your successes and failures. Support  your sisters and let them support you.  Let no one feel isolated as Gene  Errington told us she did. If you get  some knowledge, if you learn a rule  of the "turkeys" game — share it  with your sisters.  In Sisterhood — Lynn Carter  SALE!  The Women's Press is placing two of  their publications on sale at half-  price. THE CANADIAN KIDS' CALENDAR  for $1.95, and EVERY WOMAN'S ALMANAC  Appointment calendar and handbook  for $1.50. After all there are still  a few months left in 1976'.  Available from The Women's Press,  305 - 280 Bloor St. Toronto, Ontario.  THE RITA MACNEIL S0NGB00K: BORN A  WOMAN — features the best of Rita's  songs together with music and complete with guitar chord notation.  Photographs by ten women photograph- -  ers.  The Women's Press is offering a special discount price for women's groups  only — reduced from $5.95 to $3.75  and with an additional discount to  orders of 5 copies or more, $3.50.  All orders must be pre-paid and include a postage/handling charge of  25c a copy.  Canadian Women's Educational Press,  305 - 280 Bloor St. Toronto, Ontario. This is the good life! Canada has  made enormous economic progress in  the last 25 years. The per capita  Gross National Product (the total.$  value of all goods and services produced in one year) has risen 346%,  the average yearly income has increased from $2450 to $10,694. Canada  has one of the highest standards of  living of any nation in the world.  As a nation we are producing much  more wealth than we did 25 years ago  and as the economy grows the benefits  will gradually trickle down to the  poorest members of our society. It's  the land of opportunity here in Canada  — everyone can share in the opportunities and advantages.  example a single parent mother of 3  children. If she works a 40 hour week  at the minimum wage she will earn ab  about $5600 — far below the $7957,  set by Statistics Canada as the poverty line for a family of four in a  Canadian city.  This is not an unlikely example. The  chances of being poor are much greater  if you are a woman. Although more than  1/3 of the Canadian labour force is  female — in the last 10 years the  number of women has increased by 88.6%  — the average man's wage is 45% more  than that of the average woman — and  the gap is increasing not narrowing.'  85% of single-parent families are  mother-led. Almost 50% of mother-led  MYTH: People are poor because they  abuse, rather than use, the opportunities available to them.  FACT: What opportunities?  The position paper on Guaranteed Anmn  Annual Income, published by the Anglic  Anglican Church of Canada, points out  out "Poverty, like wealth, is. passed  on from generation to generation. The  child of a prosperous or educated f  family gets a start in life that almost always carries him to the top.  The child of a poor family starts with  a handicap that only exceptional ability or good luck can overcome." The  income of your parents determines much  about your health, education and ability to develop yourself.  11  THE POVERTY TRAP  This is the Great Canadian Myth, beloved by those who wear blinkers to  shut out unpleasant sights; enforced  by the mass media (class media?);  used to rationalize the theory that  those people who do not fit into this  picture are failures — they lack  gumption, waste their tine and opportunities, lack ambition, just can't  make it.  It is a myth that limits our understanding and blinds us to reality.  FACT: Reality is that 1 out of every  4 Canadians lives in poverty. 5 million  Canadians are poor.  Canada may be producing more wealth  than ever before but how many people  are benefiting?  FACT: In 1951 the richest 10% of the  Canadian population received about  17 times as much income as the poorest 10%. In 1971 Statistics Canada  data showed that the richest 10% of  the population received 45 times as  much. In June 1975, Marc Lalonde,  Minister of Health and Welfare, stated  "the poorest 20% of Canadian families  receive less than 6% of total Canadian  family income while the top 20% of  Canadian families obtain 39% of that  total."  So much for the "trickle down" theory!  Some more Canadian Poverty Myths:  MYTH: People are poor because they  don't/won't work, prefer to live on  welfare,etc.  FACT: The poor do not choose poverty.  Most poor people work — in low-paying  jobs — or are unable to work. According to the Report of the Special  Senate Committee on Poverty 2 out o£  3 families living in poverty have at  least one member working — at subsistence wages. 84% of those on welfare are unable to work: 26% single  mothers, 9% aged, 41% permanently  handicapped, 8% temporarily disabled.  Gus (Grace) Long, Secretary of the  National Anti-Poverty Organization  (NAPO), says,"When you say poverty,  people think "welfare" — they don't  think of all of us who work hard all  our.lives and are poor."  The working poor are expendable in  our economic structure. They form a  reserve labour pool to be used, at  minimum wages, during economic expansion and are dropped during recessionary periods. They are largely unorganized and have no income protection or job security.  Contrary to our stubborn faith in the  "work ethic" and "opportunity for all"  it is very possible to work hard and  not make a decent living. Take as an  families have yearly incomes of less  than $4000. A male head of family has  a 9.3% chance of living below the  poverty line. A female head pf family  has a 40.1% chance.  This disparity is not reflected in  living expenses — women are not  charged less for rent, food, clothing,  transportation, medical care, etc.  MYTH: Government programs have made  life much easier for the poor — they  are taken care of. This is the welfare  state.  FACT: If 1/4 of the people are living  below the acceptable standard of living in this country, something is  obviously wrong!  "Our tax system is all screwed-up."  says Marjorie Hartling, Executive  Director of NAPO, "Those.tax $$ could  go a long way to eliminate the problems of the poor — instead of our  band-aid programs."  The.Economic Council of Canada study,  "Patterns of Taxation in Canada", *  points out that the poor are overtaxed  relative to their income and that  they pay out almost as much as they  receive in government transfer payments. (This term describes the movement of money from the government to  individuals and organizations receiving benefits and includes welfare,  unemployment insurance payments,  children allowance, medical payments,  etc.) Figures for 1969 show that "the  bottom 28% of income earners paid  $1.9 billion in taxes and received  $1.95 billion in transfer payments.  Less than 20% of this was in welfare  payments."  Federated Anti-Poverty. Groups of B.C.  (FAPG) reports that social assistance  recipients in B.C. last year included  26,000 families'headed mostly by  single parent women. Single employables were only 11% of the total  people on welfare. Almost 70% of the  Department of Human Resources budget  was devoted to programs other than  welfare.  The national unemployment rate was  over 7% — more than 10% ,of the women  and 13% of the youth (14-24 years)  were unemployed.  So much for the views that our taxes  are being used to keep people who  don't want to work on welfare.  And being a welfare recipient is not  the soft life. The single parent  mother-led family of 4 cited above  would receive about $5500. Fear, lack  of training, lack of opportunity,  inadequate day care facilities make  the future seem hopeless to such a  woman.  What opportunities are available to  the middle-aged woman deserted by her  husband, left with her children? How  has our society's view of women, our  education system, our economic structure equipped her to be independent?  What opportunities are available to  the native Indian woman caught in the  double trap of poverty and prejudice?  Is the situation improving?—the  proportion of women in the labour  force who are trapped in the lowest-  paid, most insecure, dead-end jobs  is increasing every year.  MYTH: We are in a period of inflation  and we all have to cut back. It's  tough on everyone.  FACT: We are in a period of inflation but where are the cutbacks? The  largest single saving in the federal  government cutbacks program was the  elimination of the 10.8% increase in  family allowance payments — a saving  of $221.3 million. One out of 4 children in Canada live*in poverty.  The government also placed a surtax  of 10% on incomes over $30,000. An  item in a recent FAPG Newsletter  wondered if this means that a married  man with 2 children and a salary of  //35,000 would pay 19c or 35<? more tax  per week.  Where do poor families cut back? Food  is the only flexible item in their  budget. Poor people fight inflation  with hunger.  MYTH: The rich pay their way through  higher taxes.  FACT: "The present tax system is inequitable in many important respects.  The combined effect of sales taxes,  corporate income' taxes, property taxes  and the present personal income tax  base is such that low-income individuals and families pay higher taxes  than is equitable when compared to  middle and upper income individuals  and families." (Carter Commission  Report)  NAPO reports that the richest 8.5%  of the population pays 40.3c in taxes  per $ of income. The poorest 12.5%  of the population pays 48.7c per $  of income.  Sales tax, because it is the same for  everyone, falls most heavily on the  poor — the sales tax has risen 40%  in B.C. this year.  MYTH: If people are guaranteed a decent standard of living there will  be no incentive to work and why should  we pay for all those people to do  nothing?  FACT: Hundreds of thousands of people  who work for poverty wages have chosen 12  IS  work over welfare.  A GAI test program in New Jersey showed that the GAI had no effect on thhe  work incentive. Given basic security,  people did not quit their jobs. It  also showed that administrative costs  were reduced from $300 per recipient  under the previous welfare program to  $92 per recipient under the test GAI  program.  MYTH: The poor are always with us.  That's just the way it is. There's  really nothing that can be done.  FACT: No one in Canada should have to  work for poverty wages. No one in  Canada should have to live without  adequate food, shelter and clothing.  No one in Canada should have to live  without dignity and hope.  Marjorie Hartling of NAPO says that  being poor "besides being a lack of  income is also a lack of opportunity,  a lack of voice." It is easier to  ignore the poor, to dismiss them as  individual failures rather than the  victims of the collective failure of  our society to distribute the wealth  and resources of the nation among  the people. It is easier to acpept'>  i  the myths and stereotypes than to  investigate the reasons why 5 million  Canadians are living in poverty.  As women we have the greatest chance  of being caught in the poverty trap.  It is time that we found our voices  and used them to insist that a system  be devised that takes into account  our needs and aspirations.  "To finance an income program to  guarantee that no Canadian lives in  poverty would require an additional  income tax of 10% on the top fifth  of the income bracket. If this increase is thought to be excessive,  it should be realized that it leaves  the total tax burden of the top 1/5  roughly equal to that currently borne  by the bottom 13 % of Canadians. Thus,  anyone who argues that the GAI would  cost too much is saying that the rich  should not be asked to carry a tax  burden that many of the poor are  shouldering now or to pay marginal  tax rates which would be less than  that which the recipients of a guaranteed income would be expected to  pay!" (from "Toward a Humane Economy"  prepared by the task force of the  Eastern Synod, Lutheran Church of  America.)  - Jo Lazenby  (Information from Federated Anti-  Poverty Groups Newsletter, National  Anti-Poverty Organization Newsletter,  and The Economics of Injustice published by the United Church of Canada.)  This is what Susan.has to work with  each month:  Welfare payment    -$465.25  whe:  had  Statistics are cold and impersonal  unless they can be related to an  actual person.  This is an actual person — a single  mother of three children living in  Vancouver — and this is what the  statistics mean to her.  ************************************  Susan has done all the right things  — but none of them seem to work.  When her husband left her and their  three children three years ago, she  went out to look for a job. In England she had worked as a telephonist  but she found that office jobs here  required typing. So she took a six  week typing course through the Manpower Training Program and two days  after completing the course she found  a job in a small office. Her duties  were outlined for her — she was to  take care of the switchboard, open  the mail and type invoices. Her take  home pay was $525 a month, rent was  $250 a month and getting to work involved two bus changes to get clear  across"~the city. Susan was fortunate  in that her apartment complex had a  daycare centre and she received a  daycare subsidy.  But things were not going well at work.  Gradually Susan found she was responsible not only for her own duties but  for all the miscellaneous chores in  the office — taking phone orders,  filings, collecting the coffee money,  running out during her lunch hour to  buy the coffee, etc. She was told to  straighten out the filing system  which had been neglected for months  and Susan remembers files She never  had time to deal with being stacked  in piles on her desk, the switchboard  always busy, and the criticism and  nagging of her supervisor. (This is  a common occurrence in small offices  — the "unofficial" duties often exceed the "official" ones.) She was  getting home later and later and becoming more and more irritable with  her children. "It is overwhelming to  try and deal with three seperate  little excited personalities when  you are exhausted from being hassel-  ed all day and all you want is peace  and quiet."  After seven months Susan found it  impossible to carry on and was forced  to quit the job and apply for welfare.  Her rent had gone up to $276.50 and  whereas the three bedroom apartment  had seemed ideal when they had been  view  from  the  inside  living on her husband's salary, it  was now far too expensive. However,  as Susan discovered, finding a landlord in Vancouver who would rent to  a single woman with three children  was impossible. Her own apartment  complex was one of the few in the  city that would accept children and  it is now in the process of converting to Adults Only.  Susan found another job just before  Christmas, 1975, as a saleswoman in  a fashionable women's wear store. Her  hours of work were inconvenient for  a woman with small children — four  weekdays, one night and every Saturdays- and the pay was even less  than her first job — $282 gross  every two weeks — $464 a month take-  home. "You don't work for the money  at those wages", Susan points out,  "You work for your self-respect."  Once again she was fortunate in her  babysitting arrangements — the two  youngest children were cared for by  a friend in the same building. She  liked her job and was feeling optimistic about the future. After seven  months her wages had gone up to $494  a month. The money situation was  still very tight but if she could  just hold on for awhile and find a  cheaper place to live....  Then her friend moved out of the city  and although she searched desperately  Susan could not find a suitable babysitting arrangement. "You can't leave  tham just anywhgce," Susan states,  "You need to know that they are well  cared for when you're away all day."  Finally three months ago, Susan was  forced to quit her job and stay home.  "The image your children have of you  as a parent and of themselves as a'  family is so important," says Susan.  When she explained why she was quitting work, her oldest daughter was very  upset. Susan said she would be on call  and if the store was busy she could  go in and work for a few hours. Her  daughter was relieved,"Oh good. Then  we're not really welfare people."  Susan spends a great deal of time  with her children. "I want them to  . be well-adjusted, to be able to contribute to society. And that takes a  lot of time and work."  Her eleven year old daughter has outstanding athletic ability. Her coach,  Susan reports proudly, has said she  has an excellent chance of competing  in the Moscow Olympic Games. Her training involves parent participation —  5 a.m. workouts — and money — $300  a year just for coaching and use of  the facilities. Cost of equipment,  trips to competitions, etc. are extra.  Somehow Susan has managed so far to  scrape up the money for the coaching  and equipment and even some of the  closer competitions. "How can I tell  her she hasn't the right to develop  this talent?  She works so hard at  it and it means so much to her. For  the kids she trains with, there is  no question, not the slightest possibility, that they won't get the  chance."  Now the middle daughter has developed  an interest in dancing. Where will  the money for that come from? Susan  wonders. Finding a spare penny in her  budget is a miracle.  (This includes an extra $20 because  one of her children requires a special diet. She also requires iron pills  and until recently Susan did not know  that she could get them by showing  the pharmacist her welfare card.  "Communications between welfare recipients and their worker isn't always too good", Susan notes wryly.)  The payment includes $150 rent allowance plus 75% of the difference between this and the actual rent — in  Susan's case the rent is $309 and so  the allowance for the difference is  $95, leaving Susan $60 of the rent  to pay out of the other portion of  the monthly cheque.  Family Allowance   $66.20  Child support none  (Last year Susan's husband paid a  total of $280 in child support. He  earns up to $1400 a month and Susan  has gone to Family Court four times  about his refusal to make .his.'support  payments. He has developed a practice  of quitting his job and disappearing  when served with a court order. Like  many other women with children, Susan  realizes that her husband feels no  responsibility towards the children  he has fathered.)  Grand Total  -$531.45  $309  (Statistic: a 1972 survey of Canada's  eight largest cities showed that the  share of tctal family income spent  for housing by single parents was more  than 75% greater than that paid by  all families.For single parent women  the choice is narrowed still further  because of lower incomes.)  This leaves Susan $222.45 for hydro,  phone, laundry (with three lively  children, not very many changes of  clothing, and facilities charging 35<:  for a'.washer load, 25<? for the dryer  this really adds up!), clothing,  school supplies, transportation, recreation, life insurance payment, TV  payment, and food. As with all poor  families, food is the only really  flexible item in the budget. "I could  write a book — 500 Ways To Eat Macaroni," says Susan.  (Statistic: in 1973, Agricultural  Minister Eugene Whelan's department  came up with a shopping list on which  a person could survive for $6.48 a  week at a Ottawa supermarket. The  diet was labeled starchy and unappetizing by a reporter who tried it. In  May 1976, members of F.A.P.G. took  the same list to some Vancouver super  markets — the week's supply of food  now costs $12.31. So for this rock-  bottom, unappetizing diet: what will  it cost a family of four?)  Susan refuses to go into debt. The  one item she is paying for on time  is her TV set. "I can't afford to go  out or to take the kids to a movie.  It's our entertainment."  A friend drops in while we are talking and announces that it is essential  to have a "benefactor" — someone, a  boyfriend, a grandparent, who will buy  the odd pair of shoes for the kids,  or turn up with a bag of groceries  now and then. Susan is proud and independent and, in spite of everything,  optimistic. She wants to work although  she realizes that is unlikely she will  be paid enough for her family to live  above the poverty line.— 40 hours of  work a week to earn an income that is  insufficient to provide the basic  necessities of life.  She has had her name on the B.C. Housing Commission list since November.  If she were allocated a two bedroom  apartment the rent would be geared  to 25% of her income. But here Catch  22 comes into play — her chances of  getting an apartment are slight because her present accomodations are  adequate (if unaffordable). If she  did get into public housing her welfare payment would be reduced and she  would be no better off financially.  If she found a job she wouldn't have  subsidized daycare and she would have  the expense of transportation, clothing for work, etc. — so she wouldn't  be able to afford to work.  Susan says, "You can'never get ahead.  If housing goes down, daycare goes  up. No matter what I do, I'm always  reaching up to touch bottom!"  "But" she says "if I can just get a  break, I'll be able to cope."      >  With the low value our society places  on work done by women, with the inequality of distribution of resources  in our society, where is a woman like  Susan going to get that break?  - Jo Lazenby  ************************************  Susan's situation is not unique.  There are thousands of women in this  province alone living like Susan.  Perhaps you know one — perhaps you  are one. There is no reason, no justification, for anyone in Canada to  live in poverty. This is a situation  that can be rectified — but it requires that the people of Canada demand that it be rectified.  way  out  "The central objective of social  security in Canada is an acceptable  basic income for all Canadians...  For a basic income is essential if  a person is to live in decency and  in dignity."  Working Paper on Social  Security  Since 1973 the Federal and Provincial  Governments have been reviewing the  social security system - the goal  of that review is the establishment  of a guaranteed annual income.  The  general framework \7hich has emerged  out of this review includes income  .support for those who are unable to  work or can't find work, and income  supplementation for those who are  working, but are receiving insufficient wages for their basic needs.  The proposals are a recognition that  reform of Canada's welfare system is  a necessity.  The supplementation programme could  help an estimated 500,000 Canadian  families whose needs are not being  met by the present system.  These  are the working poor whose annual  8 earnings for a family of four falls  I between $4,000 - $8,500 a year.  I The programmes would introduce  | <a strong federal consistency into  I the maze of provincial provisions  I currently in effect.  The ministers  | have reached agreement on the need  I for a built in work incentative, i.e.  | people on supplementation should  I always be better off financially  I than if they quit work and went  I   onto income support. All receipt-  | ents would be subject to periodic  I   employment availability testing.  ji Financing is to be a cost sharing  arrangement between the federal  government and each provincial  government.  66 -2/3% of supplementation benefits would be picked up by the federal government  while the support payments would  be shared 50 - 50. The provincial  governments are to deliver the  system and they may choose either  a unitary system (combining supplementation and support) or a two-tier  system. The provincial governments  will set maximum levels of support  which they will define as being adequate. There has been no delineatio,  of a federal minimum level that the  provinces can not go below.  Poverty groups are the first to admit  that the Guaranteed Annual Income  does not spell "fat city" for the  poor of this country. What they are  stressing is citizen support of the  concept and the development of a  ki.A.I.   system which will begin to  eliminate some of the major problems  of the existing welfare system.  As the Hon. Marc Lalonde stated in  a speech ..fthe concensus reached by  the federal and provincial government;  will reflect your concensus - the  concensus of Canadians as to the soci.'  \ L4  ;ecurity system they want us their  •epresentatives to provide them with.  ".f the result is a program that is  air and generous, both responsible  md compassionate, an equitable  imbodiment of an enlightened society,  :hen the credit will belong to all  )f us.  If the result is none of  :hese things - or merely less so  :hat it might and should have been  :hen that too will be a responsibility  •e all will share. The Canadian  ociety of tomorrow will be as we  :hoose to build it today."  'riginally the scheme was to have  >egun in April of this year. Discussion now is that the program will  je postponed until economic conditions improve — perhaps 5-10 years  "rom now. The final meeting of Ministers is to take place in June —  this meeting will decide the future  >f the program. We  We are urging people who are concerned  ibout this issue — and poverty is a  women's issue — to write a letter  today! Send copies to:  Hon. Marc Lalonde, Minister of  Health & Welfare, House of Commons,  Ottawa. (No stamp necessary).  Hon.William Vander Zalm, Minister  of Human Resources, Victoria, B.C,  Your Federal M.P. (No stamp necess)  National Anti-Poverty Organization,  300 - 196 Bronson, Ottawa, Ontario.  Points to cover: 1. implementation of  income support and income, supplementation to begin at once. (Guaranteed  Annual Income).  2. re-instatement of  social programs affecting the poor  which have been reduced or terminated  as a result of cuts in government  spending.  DO IT NOW  SUGGESTED READING  Federated Anti-Poverty Newsletter -  available from 411 6th Ave. New Westminster, B.C. Phone 525-3658.  Publications available from National  Anti-Poverty Organization - 300- 196  Bronson, Ottawa, Ontario:  "Towards a Guaranteed Income" $1. *  "A New Tomorrow For Canada's Poor" $1 '  "Protection For The Poor?" 50c  "Unite and Fight For A New Tomorrow"  $1. *  N.A.P.O. Info Newsletter  $3 yearly.*  Publications available from National  Council of Welfare - Brooke C.laxton  Building, Ottawa, Ontario.  "Poor Kids" *  "Guide to Guaranteed Income" *  "One in a World of Two" *  "One Child One Chance" *  * Publication is in the Vancouver  Status of Women Reference Library  & can be read by anyone interested.  - Nadine Allen  I  dubious   security  TOUSEWIVES: A HUSBAND AWAY FROM  WELFARE  It has been said that housewives are just a husband away  from welfare. More than 40,000  Canadian women will become divorced this year.  For women  without careers, elderly and  single parent women, harsh economic realities will result from  marital breakdown long after emotional scars have healed.  The image of the woman who gets  rich from divorce and alimony is  largely a myth.  Both Dr. Donald  MacDougall, UBC law professor  and Ms. Lee Masters, ombudswoman,  Vancouver Status of Women, agree  that maintenance payments awarded  by the court to the. dependent  spouse are frequently inadequate.  Often, three-quarters of the family has to live on one-quarter the  original family income.  "Current divorce laws are des>-  troying the family," says Ms.  Masters. Many divorced women are  forced to go on welfare and  nothing is done to help them off  it.  Judges often limit the maintenance payment to $100 per month  so it won't be deducted from the  social assistance cheque, even  when the wife is not on welfare!"  Access to adequate legal advice  is another problem for the prospective divorcee.  "A few months  ago, all prosecutors were pulled  out of family court where divorce  cases are heard, due to shortage  of provincial money. Low-income  women are now totally without  representation in their divorce  cases," advises Lee Masters.  According to Dr. MacDougall, in  the recent past, after waiting  a long time to see a social worker,  a divorcee was then assigned a  lawyer.  This prosecutor frequently appeared in court only  on the day of the trial, without  even knowing very much about the  client.  VEven that was better than nothing," says Ms: Masters.  "But  what we need are family advocates now, not criminal lawyers  for divorce cases. The government has given no indication  whether it will eventually  replace the prosecutors at all."  For women able to afford their  own lawyers, problems still  arise. Ms. Masters has dealt  with cases in which lawyers  "forgot" to tell divorcees  their basic rights and even  "forgot" to arrive in court  on the appointed day.  If a woman is fortunate enough to  obtain a monetary settlement  enough to support herself and  children, her troubles are not  yet over. A majority of husbands  default on maintenance payments  to ex-wives, after only a few  months or simply disappear.  The woman may then spend hundreds and hundreds of dollars  trying to find him, bringing him  back to court, trying to collect  money which legally is owed to  her.  She is then further in  debt.  The Royal Commission on Family  and Children's Law (Berger  Commission) made 37 recommendations to the provincial government in June 1975, to deal with  these problems. Among them is  a proposal for a unified family  court and a central registry  of all maintenance payments, and  a government agency to collect  and disburse the awards.  This  would relieve the low-income  spouse from repeated expenses.  Dr. MacDougall suggests this  agency could settle divorce  disputes "administratively"  instead of the courts.  But Ms.  Masters thinks this would be  a disservice to individuals  and to the law.  '-'The settlement of disputes is for the  court, not for social workers,"  she says,  "The law is there to  solve social problems."  Any attempt to develop a uniform  and more equitable system of  dealing with the reduced economic  situation which results from  marital breakdown will encounter  difficulties.  The traditional  view of marriage is now in  conflict with the emerging concept of community marital property which recognizes the contribution of the economic provider  and the homemaker as equal.  Dr. MacDougall says that community cf marital property laws  "Presuppose a society in which  women and men are already  treated equally and therefore  are premature." Even these  proposed reforms still result  it seems, in inadequate maintenance awards to the needy  spouse.  For seme time yet, the  choice for housewives may be  between a bad marriage and  poverty.  Joyce Barrett-Gudaitis  WCWN  quote:  "The most deadly uninterested person,  and the one who has the greatest temptation not to think at all, is the  comfortable and happily married woman  —the woman who has a good man between  her and the world, who has not the  saving privilege of having to work.  A sort of fatty degeneration of the  conscience sets in that is disastrous  to the development of thought."'—  Nellie McClung, In Times Like These 15  Miriam Gropper was an ombudswoman at  Vancouver Status of Women for 15 months  months. She left us at the end of  April this year to move on to other  things, which, as she puts it,"are  not for publication." !!  Ombuds work is the most gruelling job  at VSW. We are amazed that Miriam  lasted it out that long without burning out. Here's what she had to say  about it.  Many women come to VSW as a last resort. "They've been so trod upon by  husbands, lawyers, social workers,  and turned away by the system at every  point, that by the time they get to  us, they have no self-esteem left,"  says Miriam.  VSW used to get more calls from working women who had been discriminated  against. Now we get alot of cases of  seperation and divorce. It's usually  a woman who is stuck in a marriage  she abhors. "Her husband beats her  or torments her. She just can't see  a way out. There isn't much money and  she has the kids to look after. All  the factors of her life interlock and  the problem escalates." Miriam notes.  If you ask Miriam what the main problem is, she'll say,"MONEY. These women need a roof over their head and  something to feed themselves and the  kids with. Imagine living month to  month uncertain if your ex-husband  will remember to put a cheque in the  mail. It's really very difficult to  be dependent." .  A lot of the women I see are emotionally on their feet. They are not the  stereotype naive little housewife.  The economic aspect is what is hanging them up."  "Sometimes we have to give a woman  $10 so she can make it to the end of  the week even though VSW really can't  afford it. It doesn't solve her problem. It just makes life more bearable  for her. We try to get her to face the  long-term solution in the meantime."  That gets us to the feminist philosophy  of the ombudservice. The emphasis is  on self-help and personal responsibility. This means educating women on how  to use the system.  "I refuse to lead women by their hand  while they keep a blind eye," advises  Miriam. "I try to give them the courage  to stand up for their rights. But they  are so frustrated they want everything  miriam-  solved immediately. They have to prioritize problems and work through them  nethodically. We can't solve everything  simultaneously."  Many of the ombudscases are not aware  at first that VSW is a feminist organization, but they find out at least  indirectly at some point. "I don't  'ñ† believe in pouring a heavy feminist  line down their throats. I give them  a feminist perspective whether they  know it or not. They end up becoming  more independent, assertive and stronger," says Miriam. "Some we never hea*  from again; some join VSW or join a  C.R. Group; some call us occasionally  or send cards at Christmas."  Women are referred to VSW by lawyers,  social workers, psychiatrists, etc.  But some professionals are hostile  toward VSW being involved with their  client and refuse to help her unless  she drops us.  "In that oase it is very clear to her  how the professional sees women's  rights. She usually gets another lawyer. I keep running into a few lawyers and social workers who are causing women alot of problems."  Sometimes someone sets up an appointment at VSW for a friend. In that case  the woman usually doesn't show up. "I  won't speak to a third party," says  Miriam. "There is a limit to how much  you can interfer in a woman's life.  All you can do is let her know that  you are there if she wants your help."  A daily fare of women's horror stories  is draining and depressing for an om  budswoman who requires alternative  support systems. "Sometimes what these  women say just about kills me," says  Miriam. "But VSW staff always cheered  me up. When I go home I don't want to  argue with friends if I'm right. I  see what I see, and what I see is  garbage."  The number of women seeking help from  VSW has increased steadily over the  years. The load is often heavy but we  never turn anyone away. Sometimes we  just don't have time to be as effective as we'd like."  "I don't feel badly about leaving the  job," says Miriam. "There is a danger  in spending all your energy on this  job. How effective can you be when  you are burnt out? Other women need  to do this work too."  "Being an ombudswoman has definitely  politicized me," she says. "It has  given me a very broad perspective on  the injustices women suffer. The  oppression of women becomes extremely  clear very quickly on this job."  How does the Ombudservice benefit VSW?  "It clarifies the issues and keeps us  in touch with the grass roots woman.  It teaches us how to deal with the  system and gives us a base for political lobbying."  "The names are confidential, but the  cases don't sit in the file. Community  committees are set up to study the  issues raised by ombudswork, and to  educate the public on discrimination  against women."  When accused of applying band-aid.  solutions that delay the revolution  Miriam says, "We're not ready for  revolution. We need more women on our  side first. Every woman we help on the  ombudservice joins ranks in one way  or antoher."  'Women must have the information on  their rights first, and besides every  band-aid has a ripple effect. We have  to do this preliminary work. It is a  slow process. It's great to speak to  a placid audience on Women and the Law  and watch them twitch. That's the beginning of the revolution."  Mim , as she is affectionately known  around the office, will be missed.  Someone once said her face belonged  on a box of breakfast cereal. We wish  she were still with us to cheer us  up.  - Karen Richardson  child cane  MORE DAYCARE SETBACKS?  Human Resources Minister VanderZalm  has been asked to reconsider a ruling  disqualifying daycare subsidies to  families if both parents are students.  Provincial daycare coordinator Marilyn  Dahl said the ruling would affect  only 100 families and therefore was  not worth the screening paperwork.  The requirement discriminates against  women in that if one parent has to  stay home to look after the kids, we  know who it will be. Letters should  be directed to the Minister at Parliament Buildings, Victoria.  (KR)  DAYCARE WORKERS ASK FOR HELP  Daycare workers are asking you to  sign and circulate their petition  for increased daycare subsidies. The  recent increase was too little too  late they say. Contact Ellen Shapiro,  SSEU, 545 West 10th Ave. Vancouver,  or call 299-4877. A number of centres  are still in serious danger of closing  down.  (KR)  magazine  CHILDREN'S MAGAZINE  CANADIAN CHILDREN'S MAGAZINE is a  totally Canadian magazine for young  children, aged 5 - 12. It will be a  quarterly, with the first issue due  in May/76 and is edited by Evelyn  Samuel.  The magazine will contain factual a  articles, easy to read, about history,  museums for children, our ethnic heritage, transportation, stamps, inventions, flora and fauna, and more. Also  illustrations, puzzles and contests  reflecting the Canadian experience and  a penpal club.  Subscription cost is $5 for 1 year  (4 issues) from CANADIAN CHILDREN'S  MAGAZINE, 4150 Bracken Avenue, Victoria , B.C. V8X 3N8 16  ~ When Lorri Rudland joined the Vancouver  Status of Women Ombudservice at the  end of April it was difficult to remember a time when she wasn't here!  As one of the organizers of the Women  Rally for Action, Lorri was in the  office everyday (and most nights!)  for weeks. After the Rally she was  still here — co-ordinating the Rally  Handbook and doing volunteer work for  VSW. Now she is officially ours and  we are delighted.'  Lorri brings a wealth of experience  in a great variety of fields — .  immigration officer, waitress, clerk-  steno, hunting camp cook, door to  door saleswoman, lab technician and  last year, after a year at UBC Law  School, she counselled women at the  Women's Legal Aid Clinic in Vancouver.  Lorri says she wanted to be involved  " .in actively working to promote legislative change to eliminate discrimination in the legal system and at the  same time help women to become aware  of how they are oppressed and how  they can effect change in societal  attitudes and legislation. At VSW her  goals and personal philosophy are in  harmony with her work — the dream of  every working feminist!  One of Lorri's main concerns in her  work on the Ombudservice is the lack  of understanding women have about the  legal system. Time after time she  finds that a woman involved in a legal  case has very little information about  her legal rights and the options  available to her. The legal jargonese,  the aura of "expertise" surrounding  the law and the legal profession, and  often the patronizing attitude of her ,  lawyer, make it impossible for her  to participate in making the choices  Offi  that will greatly affect her life.  Lorri describes her approach to the  problem:"My main concern is to see  that the woman gets a lawyer, probably feminist, who will not just represent her concerns effectively, but  will explain her rights, or lack of  them, in a way that she can understand. Then when there are alternatives available, she can make decisions  based on realistic expectations and  a knowledge of the process of the law,  rather than let herself be funnelled  into a course of a course of action  that she may not have chosen had she  fully understood the issues and her  alternatives. Often this involves a  form of assertiveness training that  will help the woman to;have the confidence to insist on information and  participation rather than subsiding  into a feeling of frustrated and resentful helplessness."  Lorri feels very strongly that the  law must be demystified. Knowledge  of the system that both governs our  behaviour and protects our rights is  one of the "basic life skills", Lorri  points out. The understanding of Family Law is particularly important for  women in making decisions and asserting control over the direction our  . lives take. Lorri feels that the  school system is ver remiss in not  instructing students in this area.  The law courses that are taught in  high school tend to deal with the  more business like aspects — eg.  contracts and torts — and neglect  the sections that have immediate relevance to daily life such as credit,  joint ownership of homes, rights of  married women, etc. At the request  of a concerned teacher, Lorri has be  been visiting a Law 11 class to discuss Family Law and Women and the Law  with the students.  Another of Lorri's major concerns is  communication between women1and she  is working with the BCFW Communications Subcommittee to expand the BCFW  newsletter so that it will reach more  women and provide a means for the  many women's centres to maintain contact. It will also provide a forum  for discussion on feminist issues.  This is another outgrowth of the  WomenrRally for Action and the Intercom newsletter that proved to be such  an exciting and unifying link between  women throughout the province.  Work on the Ombudservice demands commitment and energy and Lorri certainly  has lots of both!  - Jo Lazenby  ftAPt  We at Rape Relief Vancouver do not  offer a pat answer for the problem  of rapey—but because of our concern  for continuous growth in this area  we went to hear Frederick Storaska  — the self-proclaimed "authority  on rape prevention."  Mr. Storaska's wit and charm is even  more overwhelming than his book or  film indicates. While he cites numerous examples and statistics, his  lecture is packed full of humourous  anecdotes which served to captivate  his audience. But once Storaska's  hypnotic effect had worn off we were  able to see more clearly that he  dealt with only one aspect of rape  prevention. His lecture would have  been more beneficial had he not limited alternatives the way he did. Although he frequently used the phrase  "do what feels right for you" he  strongly insinuated that what was  right for you is contained only within his suggested tactics. Storaska  went so far as to say a woman should  not scream in an attack situation as  this may anger the rapist. To date  there is insufficient research conducted on attack situations to validate this advice. There are however,  reports on file of would-be rapists  who lost all confidence when their  intended victim screamed.  Our greatest disappointment was the  lack of encouragement offered for  women to deal with rapists on an  assertive level. Rather, Mr. Stor  aska 's emphasis was geared towards  dealing with a rape situation on a  feminine sexual level, even though  he rightly acknowledges rape as a  crime of aggression.  As Storaska himself agrees, rape is  a social problem. Yet his emphasis  is on a personal responsibility women  have rather than a social responsibility we all have. Men and women need  to know how our social conditioning  feed right into a rape situation.  Hopefully there were more people in  his audience who were able to go home  and filter through his dynamic way of  short-selling rape prevention.  After his first lecture we set up a  meeting with Storaska. This meeting  took place the following afternoon,  before his second and last lecture  at SFU. We tried pointing out to him  that he is patronizing^ but his response was patronizing as well. "You  women really need to hear what I'm  about to say. Lord only knows you  need it."  We question some of his final analysis on women, not because he's a man  but because of the patronizing way  he deals with women. We tried giving  him constructive feedback re assertive  alternatives for women and hopefully  some room to grow.  At his lecture at SFU Storaska did  put some more emphasis on social conditioning and omitted one of his rape  prevention alternatives.  We will be corresponding with Storaska  and hopefully will be able to share  each others' experiences in dealing  with the various aspects of rape.  It's a start!  In Sisterhood -- Di, Angie & Tsippy,  Counsellors of Rape Relief Vancouver.  funding  RAPE CENTRES FUNDED  Attorney-General Garde Gardom announced  that rape relief centres in B.C. will  get more money than the original  $75,000 they were granted. Victoria,  Vancouver and Kamloops Rape Relief  submitted a joint grant proposal to  the department but were awarded less  than requested. Human Resources Minister Bill Vander Zalm said there isn't  enough money in the A.G. budget to  cover the additional grants and funds  would have to come out of Dept. of  Health and Dept. of Human Resources.(KR) victoria  SWAG is busy: with a $5100 grant from  the now defunct Provincial Status of  Women Coordinator they opened a new  office downtown and have a wide variety of committees on:sexist education,  family law reform, women's history,  human rights, women and labour. All  aimed at ACTION. They are now at 8 -  671 Fort St. Victoria, or call Alice  Ages, 388-6332. (KR)  port  alberni  The Port Alberni Women's Centre has  moved to 3178 Second Ave., Port  Alberni. It is open week nights 7-10  p.m. and Saturdays 10 a.m.-4 p.m.  Counselling on human rights, legal  aid, birth control, etc. Call 723-  8281. (KR)  17  chilliwack  Chilliwack Women's Info Centre is  looking for information on how to  organize -heir new service and reference materials to carry. Contact  Lorraine Dyck, 519 Yale Road East,  Chilliwack.  (KR)  north  Rhone  North Shore Women's Centre, 3255  Edgemont Blvd. North Vancouver,  987-4822.  Tami Lundy, a member of the North Shore  Women's Centre and previous office  Co-ordinator, was elected to the vac  vacant school trustee seat in North  Vancouver City in a May 1st by-election. School Board meetings are public  and are held every 2nd & 4th Monday  at 7:30 p.m. at 721 Chesterfield Ave.  The NSWC office could use more volunteers so that the office could stay  open longer. Cost of childcare is  reimbursed. Call 987-4822.  NSWC has funding of $4,284 from Secretary of State to hire two summer  students to work on a project inquiring into part-time work and job-sharing for women on the North Shore. Want  to get involved? Call Trisha or Mary-  Lynn at the NSWC office.  Feminists who would like an evening  out at the movies, plays, concerts,  etc. with congenial companions —  call NSWC office to arrange a group  outing.  Membership in NSWC is $3 per year &  includes a monthly newsletter.  DAY CARE  Concerned Day Care Parents' Association is a new 41 member North Shore  group. The  group claims that children are a low priority in the Social  Credit government and plan to present  a brief to Vander Zalm. Call Doreen  Butterley at 988-7973 for further  details.  exchange  FAIR EXCHANGE  Women fight inflation by swapping  work you do for services you need.'  Trade babysitting for hirdressing,  dressmaking for transportation, etc.  Share your ideas and abilities.  For more information call: Anne  Bettles, 56 Mary St. Port Moody(931-  3552) or Lin Latham, 8758 Armstrong  Ave, Burnaby (526-5781).  workshop  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING WORKSHOP  This self-growth workshop will help  participants reduce their self-defeating behavior and (1) learn how to  distinguish assertion from aggression,  non-assertion from politeness; (2)  develop some beginning skills in acting assertively in personal and professional lives. Format includes discussion of interpersonal rights, exercises designed to overcome whatever  blocks exist to acting assertively,  and role-playing to practice assertive behaviors. Effective ways of expressing feelings, opinions and beliefs will be explored so that one  is able to assert oneself without  violating one's own or others' rights.  A weekend workshop: July 9, 7:00 p.m.  to 10:00 p.m. and July 10, 9:00 a.m.  to 5 :00 p.m. To be-held at the VSW  office, 2029 West 4th St, Vancouver.  Register by calling 736-3746. A $10  deposit is required.  poco  kootenay  Subscribe to the Kootenay Women's  Council newspaper IMAGES. $3 per yr.  Box 1200, Castlegar, B.C.  Women interested in a 8 week introductory course for women exploring  the trades should contact Sena Gates  •at the Outreach office, 352-9666.  Some of the possibilities might be  carpentry, forestry, mechanics,etc.  Approximately two weeks would be used  to cover each one.  Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre,  P.O. Box 243, Port Coquitlam. 941-6311,  Located corner of Chester & Coquitlam  Ave. behind Aggie Hall.  Poco now has T-shirts for sale! $4.50  adults, $3.95 children.  The Poco General Meeting will be at  8 p.m. June 3rd at the Women's Centre.  kitimat  Kitimat Women's Organization has received a grant of $4852 from the  Secretary of State Student Summer  Employment Program to survey women  working in non-traditional jobs in  heavy industry — such as the women  in the ALCAN foundry. They will also  investigate the needs and employment  opportunities for women in the Kitimat  area and make recommendations to Manpower .  Chris Wozney, F3-653 Columbia Ave,  Kitimat. 632-7669.  ishtar  Ishtar Women's Transition House in  Aldergrove reports they have been  funded by the B.C. Department of  Human Resources but the arrangement  is unsatisfactory. They will receive  $12.90 per person per day for women  taking refuge there in crisis. However, this is insufficient since they  need capital to set up another house  since the first one was closed down.  Also the per diem rate is not a  guarantee of sufficient money to pay  salaries and maintain house expenses  without capacity clients. Letters  should be directed to Human Resources  Minister Bill VanderZalm, Parliament,  Victoria, B.C.      (KR)  drop-in  VANCOUVER LESBIAN DROP-IN  The Vancouver Lesbian Drop-In will  be held on Wednesday evening at 8  p.m. 'at the Vancouver Status of Women  office, 2029 West 4th St. 736-3746.  share  IF YOUR GROUP HAS NEWS IT WOULD LIKE  TO SHARE WITH OTHER WOMEN SEND IT TO  KINESIS. 18  people's  law  school  SEMINAR j  ABORIGINAL LAND CLAIMS:The historical j  and legal basis of aboriginal rights; j  the history of native land claims •  struggle in Canada, the Nishga Test  Case, reference to James Bay, N.W.T. ;  and Yukon.  June 7 & 8, 7:30-9:30 p.m. Vancouver  Public Library. j  Instructor: Don Rosenbloom. I  CO-OPERATIVE HOUSING: Philosophy of  Co-operativism and explanation of  .various kinds of housing co-operatives, e.g. par value, refund,etc.  Explanation of available financing &  how to qualify . Discussion of problems that may be encountered construction, zoning, costs, etc.  June 21,22, 23. 7:30-9:30 p.m". Kitsilano Public Library, 2425 MacDonald  Instructors: Bruce Higgs, Nette  Peerboom.  CONSUMER LAW: The new Trade Practice*  Act; various legislation relating to  consumer;, rules of contracts; rights  and obligations of the consumer in a  contract; warranties, guarantees,  credit buying and resources on defective goods.  June 28,29,30. 7:30-9:30 p.m. Vancouver Public Library.  Learn about your laws through the  Vancouver People's Law School's series  of FREE law classes. All courses and  materials are free. To pre-register  call: 681-7532. Note: each course  takes a full three evenings.  bcfw  HANDBOOK  The first BCFW PUBLICATION is hot  off the mimeo machine: MEMBERSHIP  ORGANIZING HANDBOOK. Written by Gail  Borst, Action Organizer of the British Columbia Federation of Women.  Available from BCFW PUBLICATIONS,  c/o 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver.  50c.  AMBULANCE ESCORT SERVICE AXED  The provincial government has canceled the ambulance escort service  initiated by the former NDP government. The service provided for government-paid nurses or doctors to accompany patients transported by the provincial ambulance service.  Low-income people — most of whom are  women — will suffer the most.  Kathryn Hazel, Rural Organizer, B.C.  Federation of Women, is urging women  to write to Health Minister Bob  McClelland protesting this irove and  making him aware of the terrible hardship this will cause those living in  the north or isolated areas of the  province. Send copies of your letter  to Premier Bill Bennett and your own  MLA — care of Parliament Buildings,  Victoria, B.C.  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  cable tv  WOMEN IN FOCUS  WOMEN IN FOCUS is seen on Cable 10  in Vancouver, Monday nights at 9 p.m.  June 14: The Paris Commune, 1871.  June 21: Ruthie Gordon, Folk Singer.  June 28: Mrs. Mary Norton, Socialist  Suffragette.  habitat  WOMEN AND THE ENVIRONMENT  WOMEN, THE NEGLECTED RESOURCE is the  name of the program to be presented  by UBG Continuing Education on June  3rd, 6:45-9:30 p.m. in Hanger 6 at  the Habitat Forum, Jerico Site.  The program will open with a presentation of a brief and slide show  sponsored by the Vancouver Status of  Women and prepared by Joan McHardy  (working toward a PhD in Sociology  at Oxford University) and Viviane  Hotz (Swiss architect currently working in Vancouver, and VSW Executive  Meirber-at-Large). The presentation  entitled "Women and Planning: the  example of Vancouver, Canada" is  explained by Ms. Hotz: "City planning  is an expression of the current social  and economic ideas and does not take  into consideration the needs of women.  This is true of the planning of  communities and of homes. Women must  get into the system and the power  structure so that they can have im-  put in the planning arid change it  to meet the needs of people."  The presentation is one-^half hour in  length. The program continues with  speakers Lisa Hobbs, Rosemary Brown,  Judge Nancy Morrison and Fran P.  Hosken.  For more information call 228-2181,  local 218.  CONFERENCE OF STATUS & NON-STATUS  INDIANS  Invited by Donna Tyndall (^resident  of the B.C. Association of Non-Status  Indians, Local 146) to attend the C  Conference of Status and Non-Status  Indians of B.C. (Courtenay, May 15-18,  1976), a further privilege was offered  to address the closing session.  I therefore took the opportunity to  extend the respects of the B.C. Federation of Women to their deliberations, and to assure them of our own  deep concern about the lack of progress of the Land Claims issue. I  described our plans to organize workshops on this subject so that our  members will be better equipped to  participate in this aspect of the  struggle in B.C.  Personal impressions brought away  from the conference — a young man  solemnly discusses the need for his  own generation to recall the ways of  their people — not to be carried away  in a wave of emotion — to take their  facts and their feelings back to their  Elders — to await their further deliberations.  Respect for the wisdom of age, combined with energy and concern of the  young is reinforcing their resistance.  The pace of the meeting — of the  speeches — was slow and deliberate.  festival  FESTIVAL HABITAT  Ann Mortifee: Vancouver singer, composer at Christ Church Cathedral,  960 Burrard, Vancouver on Wed. June  9th at 8:30 p.m. Tickets are $3.50.  Pauline Julien: Quebec singer, poet,.  actress at Christ Church Cathedral,  Fri. June 11 at 8:30 p.m. Tickets are  $5.  Tickets for both events available  from Vancouver Ticket Centre 683-3255.  Susan Jacks: Vancouver vocalist, at  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, 1895  Venables, Sunday June 27 at 8:30 p.m.  Tickets are $2.50. Call 254-9578.  HABITAT — for information on the  great variety of events, programs,  fairs, plays, concerts, films, etc.  callrHabitat Information Centre at  666-8641.  At no time was there the impression  of rushing to beat the clock to keep  up with the timetable.  Women spoke with equal gravity and  were accorded equal attention,  throughout.  And how did I feel, as part of a very  small handful of whites at this Native  People's conference? where the criminal role of the "Great White Father"  continues t'o poison the very air we  all breathe?  I found myself recalling the gentle  but indisputable analysis recently  offered by an A.I.M. leader:  "We do not blame you for what happened  300 years ago.  We do not blame you for what happened  200 years ago.  We do not blame you for what happened  100 years ago.  But, when we look around and see how  the situation is worsening, how must  we view you at this moment if you do  not support our struggle?"  Individually and collectively, we can  no longer evade the answer.  - Claire Culhane  Latest report — discussions are  under way between Donna Tyndall &  members of the BCFW Standing Cmmttee  about organizing workshops on Land  Claims. Dear Sisters:  As a native Indian woman, I would like  to make a few comments on the March  22nd Women's Rally.  My mother and I were proud that we  were part of this historic action.  We were most impressed by the initiative, enthusiasm' and organization  shown in Victoria that day.  However, I am not happy over the  astounding ignorance about Indian  problems which was displayed by the  majority of the women at the workshops  and at the Legislature.  When I urged support for the Indian  Land Claim, I heard it said aloud and  more or less accepted by most women,  there that our Land Claim "is too political". Mercy me'. Maude, let feminists of B.C. avoid "political issues"  by all means!  Our Land Claim is the only answer, the  only hope for Indian problems. We will  never solve all our problems until we  can do it by ourselves with money that j  we feel is truly ours. This position  was what prompted last year's rejection  of government money by the Union of  B.C. Indian Chiefs and the B.C. Association of Non-Status Indians. These  two organizations were working in the  fields of Welfare, Hosuing, Education,  etcetera, for Indian people. Both  organizations had large , talented I  Indian staffs; large amounts of government funding, and-large beuatiful  response  As the media co-ordinator for Women  Rally for Action, I think it appropriate that I should respond to Donna's  letter with an explanation of program  policy on March 22nd.  On the morning of the 22nd the native  woman speaker, Agnes Dick, was unable  to be present for the time she had  been allotted in the program.  Consequently the program was adjusted to  allow her an opportunity to speak  during the noon-hour time slot if  she arrived later. But in the event  that Agnes was unable to appear,  Donna Tyndall was approached "at  the eleventh hour" and asked to  speak because we felt it very  important that native women's  issues should be publicly expressed  as well as included within our  Brief to the M.L.A.'s.  With this background in mind, there  are two points in Donna's letter  that I most emphatically want to  explain:  1. censorship, and  2.  short speaking time.  There  was never any question of "censorship" of Donna's speech but what  was at issue was "collectivism"  with respect to those points of  view expressed at the Rally by  the speakers who become public  representatives of W.R.A. policy.  One of our concerns through the  whole organization of the Rally  was to ensure that W.R.A. was  really representative of the  issues of concern to all the  women of B.C. and that the type  of action urged to correct discriminatory legislation or attitudes was  consistent with Rally policy. For  example, a Buffer committee was  responsible for overseeing the  demonstration and guarding the  microphones to prevent any disruptive  situations from arising which could  reflect badly upon the Rally and  hence its representatives from all  NATIVE  19  WOMEN  offices. Yet all their work produced  very little in the way of results.  This is the way it has and will always be as long as we are forced to  accept charity and handouts. No matter  how much money is poured into our social problems, it will continue to be  like putting Band-Aids on open festering wounds.  The root cause of all our terrible  distress was the White Man's invasion  and usurpation of our lands, which  eventually deprived native people of  the ability and opportunity to provide their own livings. The beginning  of Society's welfare system for natives was what really destroyed our  people, even more than the stripping-  away of our culture.  The only cure will be affected by US,  not you. And we will do it with our  Land Claim Settlements!  If the middle-class mentality must  exist among feminist groups, send  your used clothing and sympathy to  Guatemala. We Indians do not want it.  We want support in our struggles, and  the first of these is our Land Claim.  If you are unwilling to learn about  Land Claims and become supportive,  over the province. For the same  reasons, another policy decision  of the Rally was that access to the  microphone would be limited to those  women who were already part of the  program.  Some of the speakers had been asked  to address specific issues of the  Brief and had copies of the Brief  beforehand. Others who were not  speaking to issues specifically  contained in the Brief but which  were thought to be vital (eg. women  and housing) were asked to outline  the content of their speech. Consequently, since Donna was approached  at such short notice (and graciously  consented to speak) the same request  was made. As it turned out, Agnes  Dick did arrive but we also included  Donna in the program.  Although  there were other requests to speak  from individuals at the Rally, the  only exception made on the day was  for Donna.  She had participated  in the Sunday workshop and we felt  she did have important issues to  discuss.  Secondly re: the short speaking time,  all speakers to issues of the Brief  were allotted only 5 minutes each.  Both the media cttee and the provincial demonstration cttee realized how  short the time was and how frustrating  for all of the speakers.  But we had  to view the whole day's program in  context.  For example, we had 55 lobby  reports to block in, 10 speakers to  issues in the Brief, 1 Keynote speaker,  4 political speakers (one never arrived), 3 wrap-up speakers, some children's entertainment, and 6 singers  to change the pace and vary the content.,  Since there were two native women  speaking, Donna was asked to limit her  speech .  (Many speakers went over  their allotted time but there was never  a shepherd's crook in the wings, nor  were other speakers time shortened,  we simply varied the schedule and cut  back on entertainment).  As for the Land Claims issue being  forget about Indians once more. We  need no more Band-Aids.  It truly amazed me to be asked to express our needs and wishes, and then  to be told in several instances that  I couldn't do this very thing. The  most glaring and hideous example was  when I was asked to prepare a short  (2% minutes) speech for the afternoon  of the 22nd and then to submit this  in writing for censorship. Censorship  at a Freedom Rally?! This is what was  done to me and I'm obviously not happy.  Two and one half minutes to tell of  300 years of oppression and agony! I  guess that the Committee was afraid  that I might get "political" again.  I've heard the complaint that native  women are not becoming involved in  the women's movement. Considering  the treatment which I received from  the probably most enlightened group  of women in B.C., it is no wonder we  stay away in droves. We recognize  tokenism. We have suffered it for many  years. We know exactly what it is and  what it means.  If women's groups sincerely desire to  "help" us, learn about us. Educate  yourselves about our Land Claim, then  talk to us and we will answer.  In Sisterhood,  Donna Tyndall, Presdient, B.C. Association of Non-Status Indians, Local  146.  Courtenay, B.C.  too political, well, at the least 11  of the 55 lobby teams didn't seem to  think so. The lobby teams of the following ridings all discussed the issue  of Indian Land Claims with their M.L.A.  - Alberni, Atlin, Cariboo, Burnaby  North, Burnaby Willingdon, Comox,  Omenica, Skeena, Van. Centre, Van.  South, and West. Van.-Howe Sound.  Donna's final point is that if  women's groups sincerely desire to  "help" then women should educate  themselves about the Land Claims issues.  We agree!  But we need and want her  "help" and the "help" of other native  women to do this. After receipt of  Donna's letter, I contacted her and  explained W.R.A. Policy with respect  to the program. At the same time  I asked her for direction as to where  we could get up-to-date information  with specific reference to B.C. Land  Claims. These are the two publications she recommended: 1. The  Struggle Continues: Land Claims in  British Columbia (more commonly known  as The Blue Book), which gives the  history of land claims in B.C. and an  analysis of the effect of some recent  Supreme Court of Canada decisions, and  2. NESIKA, a Journal devoted to the  Land Claims movement - this is a publication of the B.C. Association of Non-  Status Indians put out about 6 times a  year. The Blue Book costs $2.00 and  subscription to NESIKA is by donation;  both of these can be obtained by  writing to B.C.A.N.S.I., Room 104-  1099 W. 8th, Vancouver, B.C. or phoning  732-6122.  Furthermore we asked Donna to write  an article on Land Claims for Kinesis  and this will be published next month.  Hope that this explanation clears the  air with respect to censorhhip. and  tokenism! We really hope that more  native women will become involved in  the women's movement in B.C. And  we would appreciate more correspondence  and submissions from native women.  - Lorri Rudland 20  Hello again! Work on developing the  reference library is going well. Dead-  wood has been cleared out. New materials will continue to be ordered. Book  reviews are under way. Files have been  amalgamated. Requests for info are  flowing in. People come in daily to  research women's issues. We now have  a four drawer file chock full of status  o§ women info from A to Z! We'll publish a list of the files we have soon.  Don't forget our free public info desk  downstairs stocked with take-home materials. Watch this section every month  for new feminist resources.  The following materials have been added to the reference library and may  be used for research, general interest, etc. Addresses have been given  so that out-of-towners and people who  want the material for their own files  or their Centre can order copies.  Donations of research papers, thesis,  reports,etc. on women's issues are  welcomed by the VSW Reference Library.  - Karen Richardson  Housing Needs for One-Parent Families:  500 pg. study on problems of single-  parent families and accomodation.  Gives recommendations. On reference  at VSW.  Career Selectors: six booklets aimed  at high school women and women reentering the workforce. Free from  Women's Women's Bureau, Dept. Labour,  Winnipeg, Manitoba.  How to Raise Money for Community  Action: 24 pg. booklet giving basic  rules on fundraising. $1 from SEDFRE,  315 Seventh Ave. New York, N.Y, USA.  Ask for their publications list.  Women in Policing: a 95 pg. book on  why policewomen have been limited in  the past and recommendations to improve their status. Free from Police  Foundation, 1015 Eighteenth St. NW  Washington DC, USA.  Participation of Women in Economic,  Social and Political Development:  Obstacles that Hinder Their Integration: 7 pg. paper by Canada for UN  Seminar in Argentina, March 1976.  Free from Minister on Women, Ottawa.  RESOURCES  Winning the Age Game: how-to guide  for mature women. By Gloria Heidi,  Doubleday, $9.95.  Opportunity for Choice, A Goal for  Women in Canada:217 pg. paperback om  housewives, working mothers and career  women, based on 1971 census. Covers  pay for housework, daycare, maternity  benefits, matrimonial property. $3.75  from Statistics Canada, Ottawa, Ont.  Women in Business: 150 pg. book on  equal opportunity for women, based on  series of newspaper articles. Free  from Financial Post, Maclean-Hunter,  481 University Avenue, Toronto, Ont.  Family Law: Enforcement of Maintenance  Orders: 50 pg. bilingual study paper  proposing several models for tracing  the absconding spouse and the role of  welfare. Good materials for para-legal  divorce counselling. $3.25 from "Info  Canada, 800 .Granville St. Vancouver.  Action Agendas for Local Union Committees: 8 pg. pamphlet tells how  local women's rights committees can  fight sex discrimination in unions.  Also Sex Discrimination Checklist on  how to investigate women's conditions  at your work place. Both free from  AFSCME, 1625 L Street NW, Washington  DC, USA 20037.  Social Antecedents of Women in World  of Work: 25 pg. booklet prepared for  high school guidance counsellors on -  effects of sex-role conditioning on  women's aspirations. Free from Dept.  of Education, Box 911, Harrisburg  Pa. USA 17126.  Survey of Hospital Abortion Committees  in Canada: a report on the inequitable  functioning of abortion laws. Free  from YWCA, 571 Jarvis St. Toronto.  How To Deal With Sex-Role Stereotyping  48 pg. do-it-yourself kit for teachers,  parents and community groups; how to  lobby at school board meetings and  classroom workshops. $2.25 from Choice  for Tomorrow P.O. Box 1455, Cupertino, California, USA 95041.  Why Women Need Less Pay and Other  Myths: leaflet countering stereotypes  about working women and women in education. Free from Project on Status  of Women in Education, AAC, 1818 R  Street.NW, Washington DC 20009. Ask  for their publications list.  Psychological Pressures on Women in  the VTork Force: a 12 pg. speech by  Dr. Barbara Landau to Action 75, IWY  Conference in Ottawa. Free from YWCA,  471 Jarvis St. Toronto, Ont.  Pressure for Change: The Role of  Canadian Women's Groups: 22 pg. brief  prepared for UN seminar in 1974. History of voluntary Canadian women's  groups and how they precipitate change.  Free from Secretary of State, 1525  West 8 Ave, Vancouver.  If You Work in an Office Read This:  leaflet outlining feminist worker's  contract with Vancouver law firm. Free  from SORWUC, 2049 Turner St. Vancouver  or call 253-5059.  Handywoman's Cope Kit: how to fix  faulty fuses, plumbing and appliances.  50c from Chatelaine, 481 University  Ave. Toronto, Ont.  U.S. Women's Bureau Publications: ask  for their list of publications. All  are excellent, and free. Contact  Women's: Bureau, US Dept. of Labour,  Washington, DC,USA 20210.  Ontario Women's Bureau Bibliographies:  ask for their publications list and  bibliography lists. Free from them at  Ontario Ministry of Labour, 400 University St. Toronto, Ont.  Womanpower in the Third World: kit  for secondary teachers examines role  .of women in developing countries. Includes bibliography and IWY poster.  $1.50 from UNICEF Canada, 443 Mt.  Pleasant Road, Toronto, Ont.  Status of'Women in Canada, 1975: 56  pg. bilingual book for outlining federal programs, services and legislation for women. Free from Minister on  Status of Women, Ottawa, Ontario.  WRITE A LETTER!  WHY NOT AN OMBUDSWOMAN?  The Socreds have promised to appoint  a provincial ombudsman to draw attention in the Legislature to public problems. If you would like to see a qualified woman fill this post, write to  them with suggestions of eligible  women. You might remind them that in  1975 there were no female deputy ministers and only 8 women at the program  manager level in the civil service.  Even fewer women become political  appointees; . Write to the Attorney-  General, Garde Gardom, Parliament Bldg.  Victoria.  (KR)  B.C. TO STUDY ABORTION  Provincial Health Minister Bob  McClelland has ordered an investigation into abortion procedures at B.C.  hospitals. The study was prompted by  a brief presented to all four party  caucuses by the B.C. Pro-Life Society  in hopes of reducing the abortion  rate. There are now 30 abortions per  100 live births on the west coast.  Letters expressing your views on the  matter should be directed to the  Minister at Parliament Buildings,  Victoria.       (KR)  ONTARIO FAMILY LAW REFORM  The Ontario Status of Women Council  is conducting a massive compaign to  demonstrate to their government that  there is province-wide support for  family law reform. The present Attorney  General is the third A.G. to promise  such reforms.— but no action. So to  ensure these amendments will be given  real priority by the government, OSWC  is calling on women's groups in Ontario  to endorse their campaign and write  letters to all MLAs. Isn't it time  we did the same in B.C. for the Berger  Commission recommendations?     (KK)  PUBLIC SERVICE FAIR EMPLOYMENT ACT  A bill to repeal the Public Worjcs Fair  Employment Act was given first reading  in the B.C. Legislature in April. The  PWFEA was enacted in 1973 and amended  last year. Through it the Minister of  Labour may require public work contracts to employ minorities and women,  who may them receive temporary or  permanent union membership. At present  this is one of the few vehicles of  affirmative action in the province.  Stop the repeal of this Act. Protest  to Minister of Labour Allan Williams.  Parliament Buildings, Victoria with  cc. to your own MLA.    (KR)  FREDERICK STORASKA CRITICIZED BY RAPE  RELIEF  Frederick Storaska, who travels the  country lecturing on "How to Say No  to a Rapist and Survive", is drawing  criticism from rape centres in B.C. _  For a leaflet outlining their objections to his approach, contact Rape  Relief, 1027 West Broadway, Vancouver.  In the meantime, whether you agree  with him or not, Storaska was paid ,a  about $1350 for two lectures at SFU  — paid by the federal government  while Rape Relief Centres struggle  for funding. If you object to this,  write a letter to Solicitor General  Warren Almand, House of Commons,  Ottawa. (KR) 21  women's maas  Completely Concerned with Sex.  I have recently had cause to delve  back into the memories of my childhood and adolescence some 25/30  years ago in England, and the jingle  'you've come a long way baby' has  assumed a new meaning for me.  I have checked my findings with  Canadian-born women of my vintage  and find the same awareness and  slight incredulity at some of the  changes we have seen.  Back then, girls were expected to be  passive and obedient and it never  occured to the majority of them to  be anything else.  Aggression was  encouraged for small boys:  "don't  be a cissy" if the poor thing didn't  want to hurl his body over a rugby  field or into an unheated outdoor  swimming pool in February. We girls  on the other hand were sheltered to  the point of suffocation expecially  from those strange and obviously  dangerous creatures, men. We went  to a girls only school and were  taught by women, all unmarried.  There was no contact with anything  masculine at all, certainly during  school hours, and it was pointed  out to us that even after hours  we were still members of The School,  and had a certain standard to maintain.  And the magazines we read did nothing  to point out that there may be more  to life than waiting for Mr. Right  to come along.  They were divided  into various categories.  Beauty Tips:  Lots of these from how to cut your  hair and make your chin less Dick  Tracey and more Audrey Hepburn,  to how to apply make-up so you would  look natural for Him. Recipes:  Mostly how to make something out of  nothing, a nourishing meat loaf  from left-over, a stick of celery,  and a family with no taste buds.  Stories:  Always very Romantic, girl  meets boy, loses boy, finds him  again with endless variations.  The good guys were nearly always  called Stephen and the philanderers,  often married, or even worse divorced,  were usually?called Dirk. But it  was to the Agony Column one's fingers turned first to see what  had happened to poor Worried Blue  Eyes this week.  In the two major magazines the  agony letters were supposedly answered  by two ladies (I use the word advisedly) who were probably men, called  Elizabeth and Mary, good dependable  sounding names.  Their invariable  response to the assorted horrors  that were placed before them each  week, was to preach inertia and  stoicism- "after all dear, he  doesn't go out with other women".  Perhaps be better if he did.  For  the unmarried they exhorted "be a  good listener, no pre-marital sex and  never, never never, beat Him at  tennis.  Well, we have come a long way when  one considers Ms. Cosmopolitan et al,  but I wondered how, if at all, the  "womanly" magazines had changed.  At first glance "Woman" looked just  the same, grey-eyed blonde on the  front cover, wearing home-made  mittens (pattern page 28) but across  the bottom of the page I read 'Abortion  - where should we draw the line'.  That certainly was a change, 25  years ago abortion would never have  been mentioned, much less discussed.  On my way to the Agony Column I  ploughed through Fashion :  "The  "active service" look, in sports  style or army surplus, in tough  terrain or in town, is the kit for  this open-air winter". Recipes:  Cheese pudding and Devilled Kidneys  with Yogurt (I swear).  Ignoring the stories which looked  even duller than I remembered, through  a shattering little item on the memories of women who had lived in the  country in the good old days (they  weren't) to the advice page.— now  presided over by one Anna Raeburn,  younger but very sincere looking.  The first question asked what women *  should do about their sex lives, or  lack of them, when their husbands  are in prison for long terms. Far  from advocating stoicism and cold  showers, not to mention morality, Ms.  Raeburn sympathises, "I don't pretend  to understand the morality which says  that the man can break the law and be  sent down (sic) if he does, but the  wife must hold fast blamelessly and  not break another kind of law."  She also copes crisply with a nervous  virgin (relax and read a book, a how-  to book that is), a pregnant teen-,  ager (tell your mother now) and a  worried husband whose wife was tempted by another man —"But women have  sexual drives as much as men, and 1  think your wife wants this man much  as she might want to possess many  another object." That whirring sound  you hear is Queen Victoria spinning  around in her grave, or possibly  Bobby Riggs grinding his teeth.  Woman's Own, the other female bible,  also had a grey-eyed blonde on the  cover but without the mittens. It  also had a story called "This Night  Will Last Forever":"Yes, I am betroth-  NEWS  IWY SECRETARIAT DISBANDED  The IWY Secretariat has been disbanded and the information component of  the office transferred to the Minister Responsible for the Status of  Women. Therefore, their newsletter  will be continuing. The field officers  who travelled B.C. for IWY on the  women's info van will now be part of  the Secretary of State Women's Program.  (KR)  ed, soon to be married, and I am in  love — but it is not with the same  person." I couldn't tell about the  names since the story was set in  Greece and the 'hero' was called  Aimilious.  Advice in plenty; how to save money,  make pickles, lose weight, grow potted plants, and get smouldering eyes,  not necessarily in that order. Another  story: "David and Carol". She finds  him, loses him because he is a famous  pop singer and too good for her (Dirk  was always something in the city,  nobody ever said what). Carol marries  Neal with the lop-sided grin (Stephan  had crinkly eyes and smoked a pipe  but a lop-sided grin isn't bad). David  re-appears — famous, rich and very  sophisticated but Carol stays with  faithful lop-sided Neal. Oh Yeah?  At last, there she is, same name —  Mary Grant — but a different face,  rather younger but very sincere.  Here again we have the remarkable  sight of Ms. Grant not only advocating sex but fun sex. "Do all you can  to encourage an imaginative, more  active approach to sex." Where Ms.  Grant has it over Ms. Raeburn I feel,  is that she has two agony columns,  one exclusively for men. Now in North  America we have Dear Abby and Ann  Landers dispensing wisdom for all  sexes at once, but in the conservative, middle-class England of yesteryear, men never had any problems, and  if they did, they did not plan to  solve them by writing to Mary or  Elizabeth.  Their present day problems seem less  dramatic from those of the gentler  sex. From "may I marry my uncle's  widow?" (yes) to "why can't they leave  us alone." Us being two young people  ,.  (19 and 21) who are lovers but don't  want to marry, she being on the pill.  Included in the answers are the following: "They (the parents) can only see  sexual behaviour in the terms that  applied in their youth — the risk  of pregnancy, loss of respect and so  on" which I suppose is where we came  in.  Assuming, of course, that Mary and  Anna really are women and the letters  from both men and women are genuine,  which is a pretty large assumption.  I have a horrible vision of several  acne-ridden aspiring journalists  backed by a team of cynical old roues,  all presided over by an editor with  dollar-signs instead of eyes, yelling  "write stuff that sells and to hell  with the torpedos1!"  - Margaret Nicholls  NEWS  A.A. IN DEPT. OF AGRICULTURE  Ms. Helen Hogan is now the head of  the Equal Opportunities for Women  Section of the federal Department of  Agriculture. Her salary range is  $13*937 to $16,934. The projected  expenses for her office for 1976-77  are $50,000 including staff salaries  at $10,394 to $11,364.  (KR)  statistics  7% of the students at BCIT are female;  8% of the graduates at UBC are women;  30 % of high school teachers are women; 8 out of 10 women will end up  working outside the home approximately^.  40 years of their lives. 22  member s'     forum  In regard to the article "Wages for  Housework" in the April/76 issue, I  really believe I may have a better  idea, and have been wondering who to  pass it on to.  I was going through my husband's old  Income Tax returns, and suddenly  thought, "why haven't I,,a former  R.N., not filed a return for so long?"  Answer: I have no income.  But that's maddening and silly. It  is by mutual agreement that I gave  up my career to stay home with our  four children and keep a pleasant  home. I work equally hard as my husband, consider my work equally as  important, and furthermore consider  half our assets and half his pay  cheque as mine. Surely it is my undeniable right as a member of this  society to pay taxes.  In order to accomplish this, a marriage  would have to be drawn up legally into  a business partnership type contract.  The beauty of this arrangement shows  up on pay day. The employer would have  to issue the paycheck with two sets  of deductions. There would be the  usual hours of work and overtime,  and gross pay; which would then be  divided into two lines of deductions  beginning with half the gross pay on  each. Then the deductions: income tax,  pension plan, umemployment, medical,  etc. and finally each line ending with  an equal net pay, accompanied by two  equal pay cheques. One in each of the  partners' names.  This would of course drop the wage  earner into a lower income bracket,  so I'm sure there would be a lot of  opposition to its being accepted. If  a wife worked, her paycheque would  have to be split the same way.  The two parties would then be free  to decide to simply pool the money;  each pay half of all expenses — food,  mortgage, etc; or some other arrangement. But each has his or her own  money. There are lots of small problems, but I think they could be worked  out. I think it would have to continue  even after seperation, and would need  a court order, such as a divorce, to  stop the double pay cheque idea. Perhaps another number on the Social  Insurance Number would indicate that  this was a joint number or a joint  wage earner.  What do you think?  Sandra Krogel  Kelowna, B.C.  HANSARD: MLAS TALK ABOUT WOMEN  The provincial Hansard is still hard  to come by these days — problems  with printing and distribution we've  been told. VSW has sporadic copies  for the last month or so and here is  a report on some of the discussion  on women's issues that has been taking place in the B.C. Le:8islature as  a result of the Women Rally for Act-  ion« March 23,1976.  Rosemary Brown, NDP MLA Vancouver  Burrard, objected to the high ICBC  rates which adversely affect the  "wagon wives" of the north who will  -*i   not be able now to afford a second,  but necessary family car. She noted  there would be more mental health  problems due to the resulting isolation of women and children.  Gordon Gibson,-Liberal leader, said  the closure of the Provincial Status  of Women Coordinator's office was a  "petty, chippy, miserable little thing  to do," and urged the reinstatement  of Gene Errington as it was "absolutely keyed" on the WRA brief recommendation for women's responsibility centres  in the provincial government.  He described the WRA brief as "excellent' and "first-rate" and written in  "good spirit."  Mr. Gibson criticized the Socred firing of the Special Advisor on Sex  Discrimination in Public Education  which was justified for budgetary  reasons. He noted that the amount to  be saved was "chicken feed" compared  to the importance of Julia Goulden's  work.  The Liberal leader also urged the  introduction of a bill on Community  of Matrimonial Property, and said he  hoped the Socreds would change their  "neanderthal" attitude towards the  women's movement. (Note:the Community  of Property Act has now had first  reading.)  Gibson went on to say daycare was an  "important investment" which was much  less expensive than supporting women  -y     and children through welfare. He noted that women on welfare become "less  employable" as time goes by. Gibson  also advised that daycare prevented  HANSARD  single fathers from placing their  children in foster homes. He recommended a "gradual complete integration of daycare into our school system."  March 24,1976.  Scott Wallace, Conservative leader,  said he considered the WRA "one of  the best organized and orderly and  perhaps the most reasonable groups  that have come to the Legislature in  the years that I 've been here."  He urged the reinstatement of the  Special Advisor on Sex Discrimination  in Public Education and said,"surely  the government must move to set up  some branch or agency of government  to .-continue the work started in International Women's Year."  Wallace reminded the Legislature that  "equal opportunities do not exist for  women in the government service," and  cited some "impressive statistics"  taken from the WRA brief to prove his  point. He emphasized the importance  of women being employed in decisionmaking posts in the civil service,  as all government policy affects the  quality of women's lives throughout  the province.  NDP MLA Vancouver Centre, Emery Barnes,  criticized the Socreds for "rather  hastily" dismissing "that young lady"  Julia Goulden and reinstating her  until June without sufficient mandate  or staff. He said it was "very cheap"  of them to make her work without her  back-up committee and noted,"That's  not nice you know, really not nice  at all."  Barnes also accused some Socreds who  were previously car salesmen of exploiting women as sex-objects in car  advertisements.  Mr. Barnes professed puzzlement that  the Socreds gave $17,000 to the Dr.  Richards Keep Women Alive breast cancer research project, condemned by  the Dept. of Health, while closing  down Gene Errington's office which  cost very little considering the extent of her work which he described  as "incredible."  Karen'Sanford, NDP MLA Comox, described the Socred policy on social services as "backward" and expressed fear  that daycare centres all over the  province would face closure soon.  April 1, 1976.  Rosemary Brown expressed anger that  married women in B.C. are the only  people who may not change their surnames under any circumstances whatsoever. Minister of Health Bob Mclelland  noted that the recommendations of the  Berger Commission on the matter was  under review. (Note:the Change of  Name Amendment Act,1976, has now had  first reading.)  Provincial Secretary Grace McCarthy  said her officials had met with the  Women's Bureau of Vancouver, which  sponsors the Keep Women Alive project,  and they were impressed with the KWA's  "whole-hearted sincerity." The Dept.  of Health will monitor the breast  cancer project.  KINESIS readers are advised to write  support letters or critical letters  to MLAs and Cabinet Ministers on the  above issues, in order to make sure  they will keep raising women's concerns.  - Karen Richardson  NEWS  PWA ACQUITTAL APPEALED  Federal Dept. of Justice is appealing  the acquittal of PWA Airlines for dismissing pregnant stewardesses. While  the union contract provides that flight  attendants be layed off in their fourth  month of pregnancy, the Canada Labour  Code prohibits women from being dismissed purely on grounds of pregnancy..  Justice Minister Ron Basford was "disappointed" over the second acquittal  of PWA and is "pleased" that an appeal  is forthcoming.  (KR) subscribe!  Letters  23  PHONE   (home)  (work)  OCCUPATION   VSW MEMBERSHIP  (INCLUDES KINESIS SUBSCRIPTION)  KINESIS SUBSCRIPTION ONLY ($5/year)   INSTITUTIONAL SUBSCRIPTION ($10/year)  UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE  RENEWAL^  RENEWAL  NEW SUBSCRIPTION  VSW Membership is by donation and includes subscription to KINESIS. We  would like to remind members that it  costs approximately $5 to produce and  send 12 issues of KINESIS and any  donation above that amount to help  with VSW activities is always appreciated.  Members unable to contribute financially will receive KINESIS on a complimentary basis.  KINESIS is published monthly be the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization, and to provide  information for interested individuals, groups, and members of the  government and media in order to  promote understanding ahout the  changing role of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W. '  PUBLICATION DATE: The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month (e.g.* Nov. 1 for Dec.  issue).  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and wilj. consider those from non-members.' All  submissions, including letters to  the editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be  used where requested. Where necessary, the newsletter committee  will edit for brevity, clarity, and  taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  THIS ISSUED  GRAPHICS: Kathy Horrocks  CONTRIBUTORS: Margaret Nicholls,  Sandra Krogel, Karen Richardson, Judy  Bourne, Dorothy Holme, Johanna den  Hertog, Lorri Rudland, Lynn Carter,  Donna Tyndall, Claire Culhane, Miriam  Gropper, Carole Sinclair, Wynne Le  Roux, Rape Relief, Nadine Allen,  Joyce Barrett-Gudaitis, Jo Lazenby.  WORKERS: Jo Lazenby, Miriam Gropper,  Leslie McDonald, Janice Sommer,  Sheila Mitchell.  EDITOR: Jo Lazenby  KINESIS:  Enclosed is my cheque for $20 to renew my membership and to help cover  mailing costs for the next year. I  would like to commend you on your  excellent publication. I look forward  to KINESIS every month!!  Thanks,  Lynne Harper  Vancouver.  KINESIS:  It will be interesting to see what  the result will be now that financial  assistance has been withdrawn from  Status of Women.  There will be considerably more hardship, of course. Some of the important  projects may have to close down if  volunteers are not available. But  perhaps there is a silver lining to  this black cloud?  Maybe more people will realize that  the financial help was shoring up  the economic and social system that  is the cause of our problems and that  those problems were being alleiviated  to some small extent but not abolished.  I am all for immediate reform, if at  the same time we are trying to get  rid of the system that makes those  reforms necessary.  When help from on high can be depend-  ent upon some particular form of government, how helpful is it in the long  run?  What we need is self-government by  the people, not government by the  servants of industry, whose prime interest is the making of profit, and  all things are1subordinated to that  — health, safety, housing, food,  etc.  Present day technology makes it  possible for people to have what they  need for their physical and mental  and emotional well-being, but such  things are not available — or to  only a relatively few. The social  and economic inequalities preclude  . a healthy society. The interests of  those who own industries and means  of production are diametrically opposed to those who work for wages.  Let us work towards Self Government  where our skills and abilities will  be used to produce necessary things,  not environmentally destructive  fripperies, and the interests and  welfare of the whole community will  be regarded.  Eve Smith  South Pender Island  NEWS  FEDS PREPARE A.A. GUIDELINES  Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women Marc Lalonde says that the _  Dept. of Labour is preparing guidelines to assist companies in developing equal employment opportunity programs, which will be sent to all major  companies under contract with the federal government. In addition, the  government will provide consultative  services to companies wishing advice  on the matter. (KR)  KINESIS:  Enclosed are my feelings about what  we have to do to keep the- momentum  of the Rally up and our movement  growing in the face of government  inaction. Could you use them for a  letter or article in KINESIS? (ED:  see page  ).  I'm grateful for the activist model  you give other women's groups and all  the information you compile for us.  I hope we can feed into you and offer  you support and assistance.  I personally hope to be working to  expand and revitalize Victoria SWAG.  This article may also appear in our  newsletter.  How-about trying to compile a list of  Women's Centres and groups that publish newsletters? (Maybe you already  have and I missed it). If a list went  into KINESIS then we could all make  arrangements to exchange our newsletters. I guess I really see KINESIS  as a focal point for the B.C. Women's  Movement. I feel each group should  have a person who reports KINESIS news  to her group and her group's accomplishments to KINESIS so we can all  share the benefits.  I'm on Charles Barber's lobby team  and may submit an article on our  follow-up meetings with him.  Also, Victoria SWAG has a Secretary  of State student employment grant  that has great potential. When we  hire our students and get going I'll  let you know more about it.  In Sisterhood,  Lynne Carter  Victoria, B.C.  (ED: There are, I think, 16 Women's  Centre's Newsletters in B.C. Will  try to have a list for next issue  of KINESIS.)  KINESIS:  I am a twenty-six year old woman  searching for a challenging job in  Vancouver.  I have a B.A., majoring in psychology,  from University of Toronto and an art  certificate from Vancouver School of  Art majoring in photography and painting.  My previous work experience is three  years in the mental health field with  emotionally disturbed children, adolescents and adults.  Perhaps you could find room in KINESIS  to communicate my search. In any .case,  please find enclosed my cheque to  become a member.  Patricia Morris  2216 Balaclava St. Vancouver B.C.  732-8545  info wanted  NATIVE WOMEN AND EMPLOYMENT  Dr. Thelma Cook, Faculty of Education  UBC is looking for information on  Native Women and Employment. Anyone  who would be willing to be interviewed  or who has information please contact  her. 24  NEWS  WOMEN IN BUSINESS ADVISORY BOARD  Marc Lalonde, Minister Responsible  for Status of Women announced recently  the establishment of a small, informal  committee to advise him on the business  community's progress on status of  women issues. The committee is composed  of senior representatives from key  sectors of the Canadian economy and  will meet with Mr. Lalonde twice a  year. Bluma Appel will continue to act  as liason officer between him and the  industry. Committee members are:  Mr. Blair, President, Alberta Gas  Trunk Line, Calgary; Mr. Burton, Chairman, Simpsons Ltd, Toronto; Ms. Clark,  President R.C.A., Quebec; Ms. Hamilton,  Executive V.P. Thompson Newspapers.  Ltd,Toronto; Ms. McNeil,Chairwoman,  Bank of Montreal, Montreal; Ms. Picard,  President, Marine Industries,Ltd,  Montreal; Mr. Suttoe, President, Equitable Life Insurance Co. Canada, Waterloo, Ontario.      (KR)  delegate  ROSEMARY BROWN. DELEGATE TO HABITAT  Rosemary Brown, NDP MLA Vancouver  Burrard, has been chosen to represent  the B.C. Legislature at the Habitat  Conference being held in Vancouver  May 31 to June 11, 1976.   (KR)  NEWS  BURNING ISSUES  In St. Louis no female wearing a  night-gown, sheer or otherwise, can  be rescued by the fire department.  The law is specific when it states .  that a woman of any age must always  get fully dressed before she can  legally be assisted by the fire department during a fire.  -New Woman, March-April/76.  women, sport  and media  apology  We didn't mention in the May issue  of KINESIS that the Front Page graphic  of a Belgian farm woman was by Kathy  Sopko. Sorry Kathy and thank you again.'  quote:  " 'Lib' is not a word. Derived from  the more descriptive 'liberation',  it is used together with the word  'women's' in order to form 'women's  lib', a subtle put-down conjuring an  image of a flighty, irrational, hostile woman burning her bra, and to  depict such an ideology. (The names  of male-dominated movements are not  shortened and infantilized in this  manner ... who ever heard of a Black  Panthie or a Ku Kluxie?) I suspect  that many males hesitate to use the  word 'liberation' in connection with  women , because it is too threatening." .  - Ellen Farren, Letter  t.o the Editor, L.A. Times.  "How to Make Headlines" by Nancy  Scannell, sports reporter for the  Washington Post, appearing in the  October issue of WOMEN-SPORTS, "des- ,  cribes in detail the steps involved  in getting good press coverage for  women' s athletic events. She explains  how to initiate contact with the  press, how to work smoothly with newsi-  papers and reporters, how to best use  stringers and the wire services. Reprints ot this two-page article are  available for 50c each, postpaid,  from Reprint Manager, WOMENSPORTS,1660  South Amphlett Boulevard, San Mateo,  California,  The Summer 1975 issue of MATRIX,  quarterly publication of Women in  Communications,Inc., has an article  on women who cover sports. Single  issues are $1 plus postage from WICI,  8305-A Shoal Creek Boulevard, Austin  Texas TX 78758.  "Little Miss Muffet sat on a tuffet eating her curds and whey.  Along came a spider and sat down beside her, and that got her  interested in entomology."  jun  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  June 2  WOMAN ALIVE Cable 10.TV,  9:30 p.m.  June 2  LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  June 9  WOMAN ALIVE Cable 10 TV,  9:30 p.m.  June 9  LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  June 10 ORIENTATION MEETING, 7:30  p.m. Come amd find out about  VSW.  June 16 WOMAN ALIVE Cable 10 TV,  9:30 p.m.  June 16 LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p,m.  June 17 BCFW REGIONAL REPS MEETING  7:30 p.m.  June 23 WOMAN ALIVE Cable 10 TV,  9:30 p.m.  June 23 LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  June 24 ORIENTATION MEETING, 7:30 p.m.  June 30 WOMAN ALIVE Cable 10 TV,  9:30 p.m.  June 30 LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.