 q   MARCH 1998    For women-only spaces...pg 15      CMPA $2.25 Inside  KINESIS  #309-877 E. Hastings St.,  Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work  on all aspects of the paper. Our next  Story Meetings are Tues Mar 3 and  Tues Apr 7 at our new office, 309-877  E. Hastings St. Production for theApril  issue is from Mar 17-24. All women  welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  by the Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to be a non-  sectarian feminist voice for women  and to work actively for social change,  specifically combatting sexism,  racism,classism, homophobia,  ableism, and imperialism. Views  expressed in Kinesis are those of the  writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis  Editorial Board.  EDITORIAL BOARD  Fatima Jaffer, Lissa Geller, Agnes  Huang, Kelly Haydon  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Mariene del Hoyo, Fatima Jaffer,  Persimmon Blackbridge, Tanith  Kimsing, Colleen Sheridan, Shochi,  Gloria Orangina, Kelly Haydon, Rita  Wong, Sara Dorsey, Janet Mou,  Ellen Woodsworth, Kate Hook,  Nancy Pang  Advertising: Sur Mehat  Circulation: Audrey Johnson, Chrystal  Fowler  Distribution: Fatima Jaffer  Production Coordinator: marilyn lemon  Typesetter: Sur Mehat  FRONT COVER  The staff at the Toronto Women's  Bookstore celebrate 25 years. (From  top left clockwise) Rachel Kalpana  James, Esther Vise, May Lui and  Anjula Gogia.  Photo by Silvana Hernando.  PRESS DATE  February 24,1998  SUBSCRIPTIONS  Individual: $20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  or what you can afford  Institutions/Groups:  $45 per year (+$3.15 GST)  VSW Membership (includes 1 year  Kinesis subscription):  $30 per year (+$1.40 GST)  SUBMISSIONS  Women and girls are welcome to  make submissions. We reserve the  right to edit and submission does not  guarantee publication. If possible,  submissions should be typed, double  spaced and must be signed and  include an address, telephone number  and SASE. Kinesis does not accept  poetry or fiction. Editorial guidelines  are available upon request.  DEADLINES  All submissions must be received in  the month preceding publication.  Note: Jul/Aug and Dec/Jan are double  issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 1  (design required):  Printing by Horizon Pul  Kinesis is indexed ir  Women's Periodicals Ir  the Alternative Press Inde  member of the Canadia  Publishers Associat  News  No excuse for low level funding for women's groups 3  by Audrey Johnston  BC government puts halfway house for women in jeopardy 3  by Wei Yuen Fong  Apprehensions cause chaos in Quesnel 4  by Mary Gradnitzer  Valentine's March in the Downtown Eastside 5  Custody and access legislation under review 5  by Agnes Huang  Senator Anne Cools condones male violence 5  by Robyn Kelly  Features  Exposing the "mainstreaming" of Reform 9  by Ellen Gould  Salt Spring responds to the MAI 10  by Cherie Geauvreau and Jewel Eldstrom  Issues for women with HIV/AIDS still complex 14  by Janet Madsen  Safeguarding women-only space 15  by Virginia Woo, Jeanne d'Arc, Maria N. Penn and Clara  IWD in Vancouver: a calendar 21  compiled by Kelly Haydon  Centrespread  Happy International Women's Day   greetings and graphics from many women  The federal budget 3  Commentary  Challenges to ensuring the survival of feminist bookstores 17  A Anjula Gogia  rts  Fury for the Sound: Women at Clayoquot 18  reviewed by Shannon e. Ash  Lorna Boschman and her Seven Day Poodle Diet 19  as told to Cynthia Sharp  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  Movement Matters 6  by Ellen Woodsworth and Robyn Hall  What's News 7  compiled by Leanne Keltie and Lissa Geller  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Kelly Haydon  Ardyth and her diet As Kinesis goes to press, the federal  budget has just been released. First off, there  doesn't appear to be any good news for  women's organizations who receive funding from the federal Women's Programs.  We didn't hear any toonies dropping...[see  facing page.]  The Liberal's budget announcement  had that familiar right-wing "privatization"  ring to it. It all started to become clear when  Finance Minister Paul Martin said his  government's goal was to "reduce taxes and  leave more money in the pockets of Canadians..." Putting more money into individual's hands...and less into the collective  hands through social programs—hey, that  sounds very Reform-like.  The focus of the government's spending plan this year is education, which seems  to have been a deliberate ploy to stave off  some criticism from the Right and the Left.  (Who can really argue against measures to  support learning opportunities?)  Even when he got to the topic of  jobs...Martin's response circled back around  to education. The keys to any job strategy  are skills development and training, said  Mr. Martin. But, what about jobs? Aren't  they necessary too?  In most polls, the majority of Canadians said that healthcare should get the biggest boost from the feds. Still, Martin offers very little in the way of increasing  healthcare dollars. Any monies directed  that way still have to be seen in the context  of the already massive cuts to that sector.  Oh, Martin did say his government  was planning to send an additional $7 billion to the provinces in transfer payments  later on, but with no national standards,  there are no guarantees the funds will be  used for social programs that best meet the  needs of women, poor people, immigrants,  and so on.  If s also unlikely much of the new monies will go into social assistance, given that  most provinces are slashing in that area.  Take BC for example. BC Benefits has been  around for more than two years, and it's  not just dollars cuts that poor people in the  province have had to deal with. Last  month, the NDP government brought in a  new poor-bashing wrinkle: consent forms.  People receiving social assistance previously had to agree to allow the ministry  of human resources to check out their financial situation. But what incenses people on social assistance and anti-poverty  activists is that the new consent forms allow the ministry even more sweeping powers, including the right to interview employers, landlords and family members of  social assistance recipients. As a result of a  huge outcry, MHR says it will relook the  consent form.  Speaking of the priorities of public  officials...First, there was Senator Anne  Cools propping up the interests of right-  wing, anti-feminist men/fathers [see page  5.1  Now, there's Ontario independent MP  John Nunziata. He's trying to introduce a  private members' bill to would ban women  from going topless in public. This, he's  picked up from three women who brought  a petition against women's public nudity  to Parliament.  So, what's wrong with allowing  women to decide whether or not they remove their shirts? It harms children and  could "promote sexual assaults," according to Nunziata. What else? Nunziata says  that if the criminal code isn't changed to  stop women from bearing their breasts, an  epidemic would follow with sex trade  workers dropping their drawers on the  streets. "There's nothing stopping a hooker  from going topless, or bottomless."  OK wait. Have either Anne Cools or  John Nunziata ever used their political positions and power to work towards actually ending violence against women?  Speaking of sexual assaults...the Supreme Court of Canada has agreed to hear  a case involving the disclosure legislation.  Over the past few months, lower courts in  Alberta and Ontario have ruled that restrictions on handing women's personal records  over to defense lawyers in sexual assault  cases are unconstitutional.  The lawyer for the 13-year old girl in  the Alberta case petitioned the Supreme  C   O   U   -V   E  Statu;  ~W   O   IV*   E   N  Our appreciation to the following supporters who became members, renewed their  subscriptions or donated to Vancouver Status of Women in February.  Sherry Baker * Charlene Brisson * Inez Curl * Catherine D'Aoust * Louise De  Bruijne * Judy De Vries * Ieke Geise * Chantel Ingram * Maureen MacDonald *  Margaret McMaster * Meh Najak * Margaret Newton * Cynthia Orstad * Henriette  Orth * Margaret Ostrowski * Ingrid Pacey * Lafern Page * Marion Runcie * Christina  Schut * Kay Sinclair * Margaret Stewart * Kim Zander * Canadian Airways Lodge  #764  A special thanks to our donors who give every month. Monthly donations assist  VSW in establishing a reliable funding base to carry out our programs, services and Kinesis throughout the year. Thanks to:  Mary Frey * Lissa Geller * Jody Gordon * Erin Graham * Eha Onno * Sheilah  Thompson  Court to address the issue, bypassing the  Alberta Court of Appeal. No date has been  set for that hearing.  In a court case on another matter...the  BC Court of Appeal recently ruled in favour of Hubert Morrisseau who wa trying  to keep custody of his grandson, Ishmael.  The ruling has wide implications for all  Aboriginal people in the province.  In its decision, the Appeal Court essentially says the preservation of culture is an  important factor in determining the "best  interests" of a child, and that Aboriginal  children should be placed withAboriginal  families.  A couple more things before we go.  Last month, we announced her that there  would be "public consultations" for the  immigration and refugee legislative review.  This issue, we report that a number of  grassroots groups—who work on policy  issues—have been rejected as presenters at  the hearing with Minister Robillard.  Groups Kinesis knows include: the Vancouver Status of Women, the Philippine  Women Centre, the Lesbian and Gay Immigration Task Force, and the Committee  for Equality for Immigrants and New Canadians.  And now, the federal government is  embarking on another legislative review  process that will likely involve a "public  consultation." This one is around custody  and access legislation, and women need to  act on it [see page 5.1  That's all. Have a Happy, Happy IWD!  The skies are clear and the sun was  shining today as Kinesis was going to press.  Inside Kinesis, there were some sunny periods and occasional moments of great  clarity...but also some shifts in the wind,  atmospheric pressures and sporadic turbulence.  First off that bat, we owe some of our  readers who buy Kinesis from corner stores  an apology. No, it was not your imagination—the December/January issue oiKinesis did not make it to some bookshelves at  stores in the Lower Mainland due to difficulties around in-town distribution. That  has now been rectified. The February issue  oiKinesis made it to bookstores, as will this  Happy IWD issue!  Our second glitch in December was the  loss of the Canada Post subsidy that allows  us to mail Kinesis out to subscribers at a  special low rate. The bureaucracy at Canadian Heritage, the fact that such subsidies  to smaller publications has been in jeopardy  for several years now, and a terrible oversight on Kinesis' part combined to wreak  some havoc at the newspaper and call into  question the future of Kinesis.  As a result of multiple financial and  structural concerns, the Kinesis Editorial  Board is holding strategy meetings with the  Vancouver Status of Women (our publishers) and long-time Kinesis supporters to  come up with solutions to Kinesis' woes.  As some of you know, too many feminist  publications have folded over the past few  years as a result of limited and inadequate  resources—including woman-power, monies and backlash. We are determined not to  let this happen to Canada's last and oldest-surviving national feminist newspaper!  We will keep you posted on further developments.  Meanwhile, we shall soon be posting  job notices for new support staff at Kinesis. This will be a crucial step in the right  direction, since Kinesis has been surviving  on the labour of women in contract positions and the commitment and time of numerous loyal, hard-working volunteers  over the past year or so.  In other news, our editor Agnes Huang  has been granted a one-month leave of absence to take care of some personal emergency issues. While she is out of town, we  hope to bring you a thinner version of our  April issue under a guest editor. In the  event things don't work out that way, the  Kinesis Ed Board may choose to suspend  publication for a month (and extend your  subscriptions by a month). We apologise for  inconveniences to all our readers, subscribers, advertisers, and the archivists out there!  Either way, we promise to be back in full  swing with a kick-ass May issue!  In the meantime, we encourage  women to check out our subcription drive  on the back page, and/or to send donations  to Kinesis. We appreciate your support in  keeping the paper alive and kicking!  We'd also like to thank some truly terrific women who kept Kinesis alive and  kicking during production on this issue!  First up, a big thank you to Celeste  Wincapaw who reformatted the hard drive  of our production computer and stayed up  many late nights to reload the programs  back on. We still experience some glitchs,  but are a lot happier and more productive  than in months past!  We'd also like to say many thanks to  marilyn lemon, who cheered up the production room with her PageMaker savvy  and good humour as our fill-in desktop  publisher this month. Marilyn is an artist  and graphic designer who enjoys the tense  moments and high drama of newspaper  production! She did a great job (as you can  see) and we're thrilled!  We'd also like to thank the countless  women who contributed to our International Women's Day coverage this issue—  not only is there food for thought in the  centrespread, but scattered throughout this  issue are bold and beautiful graphics created by the many women who walked into  our offices over the past week or so! From  us to you—Happy IWD!  We have a number of new writers to  welcome this month to the pages of Kinesis: Mary Gradnitzer; Robyn Kelly; Ellen  Gould; Cherie Geauvreau; Jewel Eldstrom;  Janet Madsen; Clara; Jeanne d'Arc; Maria  N. Perm; Virginia Woo; and Cynthia Sharp.  New production volunteers this month are  Tanith Kimsing and Kate Hook. Thanks to  all these cool women!  If you would like to write, proofread,  draw, create, or hang out with the women  who produce Canada's national feminist  newspaper, give us a call at Kinesis at 255-  5499. We'd love to hear from you! Hope  you enjoy hearing from us\  Stay tuned for next month's weather  report Inside Kinesisl  MARCH 1998 News  Federal funding for women's organizations In Canada:  Even a toonie is  not enough  by Wei Yuen Fong  Audrey Johnson   On February 23—the day before the federal budget was released—the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women held press  conferences in Vancouver and Ottawa to call  on the Liberal government to increase funding  to the federal Women's Program budget to at  least $30 million. Money from Women's Programs goes to support the critical work done  by women's organizations across the country.  NAC also challenged the federal government to uphold the commitments it has made  through international conventions to advance  the situation and rights of women. A number  of the presenters at the press conferences addressed how the Liberals'policies—its Canada  Health and Social Transfer, its changes to the  Canada Pension Plan, and its promotion of  investment liberalization agreements like the  MAI, for example—in fact work counter to the  equality interests of women.  In a meeting held three weeks earlier with  members of the Group of 23—the 23 national  women's organizations—Finance Minister  Paul Martin rejected the $30 million call, which  would still amount to only a toonie ($2) per  woman and girl child.  Instead, he touted his government's proposed Millenium Scholarship Fund and Child  lax Korean as positive for women, particularly  single mothers. He also claimed that his government's changes to the public pension system benefits 90 percent of women, and seemed  to have difficulty understanding what objections women's groups have with the proposals.  In response, the national women's groups  demanded that the Liberal government add at  least an additional $1 million to the Women's  Program budget (of just $8 million) as a gesture that Martin has heard even a bit of what  women were saying. He said, if women's groups  would actually accept that offer, he would think  about it.  At the Vancouver press conference,  Audrey Johnson spoke about the impact of the  Liberal government's cuts to social programs  has had on the women who come to the centre  and on the work of the organization itself.  Johnson is the Administrator/Fundraiser of the  Vancouver Status of Women, a grassroots, nonprofit feminist organization involved in advocacy, lobbying and education work.  I want to talk about the effect of the  federal government's cuts to social programs on women's organizations and the  work we do.  One morning last year, I came to work  to find a woman and her two teenage sons  waiting outside our office door. She had  come all the way from Vancouver Island,  running away from an abusive partner.  She had no money and nowhere to go.  Our staff worked for more than half the day  trying to find a shelter or transition house  that wasn't full. At about 3:00, we got a call  from the shelter in Chilliwack [one hour  away from Vancouver] saying they could  take both her and her sons.  VSW gets 30 to 40 calls a day on our  public information line. A lot of those calls  are from women looking for a work;  women looking for income assistance while  they attend school; women needing help  with an appeal to welfare because they've  suddenly become ineligible.  These situations are not unique to the  Vancouver Status of Women. They're happening at women's organizations across the  country. Increasingly, women's centres and  organizations have become dumping  grounds for a government that is throwing  away its social responsibility.  Since the Liberal government came to  power, we have seen cuts to healthcare, to  education, to seniors' benefits and women's programs. We've seen job losses go up;  we've seen unemployment insurance benefits go down.  Audrey Johnson  Women's organizations are seeing the  direct result of those cuts. Centres which  already operate on a shoe-string budget with  too few staff and too much work are having to also provide the services of food  banks and shelters. Overworked staff and  volunteers are also having to be social  workers, court advocates, community liaison workers and childcare providers. And  it goes on. Staff and volunteers are being  forced to do way more with fewer resources  and fewer staff. And we're getting tired,  and we're getting sick.  Currently, the annual budget for Women's Programs is approximately $8 million.  That workr out to 50 cents per woman and  girl child in this country. Fifty cents! We all  know you can't do much with 50 cents these  days, but I know what I'm going to do with  mine.  I'm going to use my 50 cents to call  Prime Minister Jean Chretien and Finance  Minister Paul Martin and tell them we want  $30 million for the Women's Programs.  I'm going to tell them that women are  maxed out; we're stressed out; we're burnt  out. We are sick and tired of cleaning up  after the gluttony of capitalism.  I'll tell them that we want real jobs with  real wages. We want a real future for this  country. Thirty million dollars is a mere  drop in the ocean compared to the $10.63  billion the government spends on defense  each year.  I'll tell Mr Chretien and Mr. Martin that  it's not a crime to show concern for those  who elected them. The real crime is continuing the attack on social programs,  which only account for six percent of government spending, while billions of dollars  in corporate taxes go uncollected.  Women have been the backbone of this  country since its beginnings. Now, we are  being forced to be the arms and legs too.  And I say that's worth a hell of a lot more  than 50 cents!  Halfway house in  jeopardy  In January, the Elizabeth Fry Society of  Greater Vancouver (E. Fry) announced it  would have to close down Columbia Place  on March 31st because of serious  underfunding. Columbia Place, located in  New Westminster (a suburb of Vancouver),  is the only halfway house for women west  of Toronto. 11 houses both federally and  provincially sentenced women.  Columbia Place was previously run as  Balaclava House and located in Vancouver.  E. Fry also came close to shutting Balaclava  House down in 1994, again because of a  critical financial situation [see Kinesis,  March 1994.]  E. Fry says it has contributed nearly  $500,000 toward operating a women's halfway house over the past five years, but can  no longer afford to underwrite services for  women leaving prison.  The women's facility has been chronically underfunded by the provincial government. Last year, it cost E. Fry $321,000  to run Columbia Place, but the Society received only $186,000 in funding from the  Attorney General's office (AG), the Society's executive director Shawn Bayes says.  E. Fry petitioned the Attorney General's office for an increase in funding, but  the government rejected the request. Instead, it informed the Society that it would  be putting the contract out to tender.  Concerned that mens' halfway houses  would be able to bid for the contract and  create co-ed facilities, E. Fry pressed the  provincial government to ensure that  women would be housed in a women-only  facility. It won that battle.  However, what E. Fry hadn't expected  was the loss ol secured runaing ror a minimum number of beds. In its Request for  Proposals sent out late-January, the AG had  removed any guarantees of a minimum  funding level. Instead, the government said  it would pay an agency only for beds actually being used each day. This appears to  be the way the provincial government intends to make up for its inadequate funding contribution to the operation of a women's halfway house.  Bayes says the removal of a funding  guarantee means "the risk of operating the  halfway house will be assumed entirely by  the non-profit agency taking on the contract. The province isn't risking anything."  This funding criteria could seriously  jeopardize the financial stability of the organization that accepts the contract, and  would make it extremely difficult for the  organization to plan staffing, programs and  services.  Bayes says E. Fry did submit a proposal with the same operating cost of  $321,000. The Society estimates the cost per  bed, per day at $141 (based on a six-and-a-  half bed minimum.) While Bayes says she  does not know how many other agencies  have applied, she expects the AG will not'  get many viable proposals with lower operating cost estimates.  The deadline for applications was February 16. The AG has said a decision would  be announced within 10 days of that date.  The provincial government says a halfway  house for women will be operational on  April 1st. News  Child apprehensions In British Columbia:  Chaos rains on Quesnel  by Mary Gradnitzer   Mothers in Quesnel, British Columbia  have sent a loud and clear alarm to the provincial Ministry for Children and Families  (MCF). Recently, over a two month period,  more than 70 children were removed from  their families. Reports say that at least 23  of the children apprehended are Aboriginal.  Women whose children have been  taken are publicly expressing their feelings  of fear, anger and despair. Their courage is  amazing since most of these women had  not faced the media before, nor taken such  a strong united stand against the government authority that controls the future of  their families.  Quesnel, a community in central BC,  serves a rural/urban population of about  24,000. It is located in the territory of the  Carrier Nation and near the First Nations  communities of Red Bluff, Kluskus and  Nazko.  Most jobs in Quesnel are connected to  forestry, pulp and paper industry, agriculture and tourism. The present unemployment rate in Quesnel—13.6 percent—  higher than the provincial average. The av  erage income of women in the community is  one-third that of men.  What made Quesnel the focus of MCF  apprehensions? The situation did not happen overnight. Local social workers say they  had been feeling overwhelmed for some time  by their heavy caseloads—each social worker  was handling between 50 to 80 cases. The  social workers tried to alert the ministry  about the situation, but MCF did not respond  to their pleas for assistance.  Instead, in fall 1997, senior supervisory  staff conducted an audit and the workers  were severely reprimanded. Five of six workers went off on stress leave. The MCF sent in  replacement workers who soon became  known as the "swat team." Their task was to  maintain services to the community and complete an audit of all records.  The large scale apprehensions that resulted were a combination of new cases and  some children identified as at risk from the  audit. The children were placed in foster  homes, which quickly became full.  "MCF is overstacking children into foster homes," says Yvonne Johnson, a board  member with the Quesnel Women's Resource  Centre. "Over the Christmas holiday, I spoke  Dahl findlay Connors & Evans  BARRISTERS & SOLICITORS   ^  » A full range of services to meet your business and  personal legal needs  • Free initial consultation  » Lawyers experienced in protecting the interests and  advancing the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and  transgendered communities  Suite 620, 1033 Davie (near Burrard), Vancouver, B.C.  (604) 687-8752 • Toll Free 1 888 4 GAY LAW  with one woman who had eight children  in her home."  In response, MCF turned its sights to  increasing the number of foster homes (instead of increasing support for families)  and took out an ad in the local newspaper inviting people to come to a Foster  Parent Orientation Workshop in late February. Johnson says MCF had put out a  similar recruitment call last August before this round of wide-scale apprehensions took place.  "If they had put the money [used to  pay foster parents] towards supporting  the families, then the ministry would not  have needed to put so many kids into foster homes," says Johnson.  The apprehended children have been  uprooted from their families, their friends  and often their school. They have been  given no avenue to express their feelings  or identify their needs to an impartial  child advocate. Many women complain  that they do not even know where their  children are, and that they have uncertain visitation rights. A local provincial  court judge also expressed outrage that  MCF was not arranging for routine family visits.  Chaos reigns. Agencies such as the  Quesnel Women's Resource Centre, the  Alcohol and Drug (Abuse) Association,  the Mental Health Division of the Ministry of Health, the Native Friendship Centre, the local transition house, and private  counsellors have been inundated with  calls for help from distraught parents.  The painful memory and legacy of  the forced removal of children from their  communities and placement into residential schools still haunts First Nations people. In order to build trust, the previous  social workers had worked with Band  leaders to develop protocols, which included notifying Band leaders prior to  apprehending Aboriginal children. Aboriginal support workers were also asked  to assist with interviews and act as advocates for the children and families.  In this latest round of apprehensions,  the protocols were not followed. Advocates at the Native Friendship Centre say  they know 18 of the First Nations children  who have been removed. They also say  that only seven have been placed with  extended families; the rest have been  placed in non-Aboriginal foster homes.  This contravenes provincial legislation  which states that Aboriginal children  should be placed in Aboriginal foster  homes.  Many of the women whose children  were apprehended are survivors of abusive homes or relationships. Some of their  ex-spouses upon hearing of the apprehen-  sions have made threats against the  women. Their lives have become a mad circus as they try to see social workers and  lawyers, attend court hearings, make appointments to see their children, arrange for  transportation in a city that has no public  transport, and attend classes or appointments with counsellors.  One young mother remarked as she  watched the media descend on group of  demonstrators: "I hope they don't think  we're all bad parents!" Depression and  anxiety have caused some mothers to be  admitted to hospital. Another mother said  she often cannot sleep because she thinks a  social worker will come and take her children.  MCF has sent top level bureaucrats  from Victoria to speak to the city council,  related health and social agencies and First  Nations leaders. However, the families affected by the apprehensions have not been  given the opportunity of a hearing with  ministry officials. They plan to hold a public meeting to petition for an inquiry.  Before she was replaced as minister for  children and families by Lois Boone, Penny  Priddy had declined requests to meet with  the families and the community. As Kinesis  goes to press, Boone had not indicated that  she would go up to Quesnel.  For Quesnel, MCF will need to put a  healing process in place to help the community recover from all the confrontation.  For a successful resolution, the community  needs to be consulted on how the safety and  well-being of children can be achieved  through a cooperative effort.  Since Justice Thomas Gove's report  came out in 1996, the provincial government's philosophy on "child welfare" has  changed. The safety of children now comes  first, supporting families second. Protecting children from neglect or abuse is crucial; however putting more children into  foster care is not the answer.  "This is a poor answer to a volatile situ-  ation," says Johnson. "Apprehension  should be the very last thought on any social worker's mind. It is a very intrusive  move."  Johnson says she has heard from a  number of young people who say they will  be very careful about what they tell school  counsellors for fear it will be used against  them and their families.  "All it's going to do is drive children  underground so kids who really need protection won't disclose."  Mary Gradnitzer is a board member of the  Quesnel Women's Resource Centre. A former  public health nurse for over 20 years, she now  serves on the local health council.  WAPPY \ KsifrT HAf 7  '*"■*>  -HAPPY   IWD...  HAPPY v  *Y  «WD       ^L'WD"    *****  ,WD  WTY   IWD...   HAPPY I*  ■r^HAPPYJJ  MARCH 1998 News  iMp  irj  < - j  rfUrf  Ml h   1  ^#W  ~- f-Hi SB 1  ^1^ jgjp  '9-1  i -* Mbi  Valentine's march in the Downtown Eastside  More than 300 women and men gathered at Carnegie Centre in the heart of  Vancouver's Downtown Eastside for the 7th Annual Women's Memorial  March.They came to honour the women from the community who have died  violent deaths.  Held on Valentine's Day, February 14, the march "symbolizes the love for  those women and girls who have tragically died on our streets and for the  countless number of women and girls who are missing." Between February  1997 and 1998 alone, 32 women from the Downtown Eastside are known to  have died.  The marchers moved along the main streets of the community, stopping at  a number of places where women have died. At each site, Mabel Nipshank  [pictured above left] led a cleansing ceremoney, and made offerings of  tobacco and roses in the memory of the women. The day concluded with a  sharing of a meal at the Seniors' Centre.  - photo by Fatima Jaffer -  Custody and access legislation:  Bias favours men  by Agnes Huang  The federal government is engaged in  a process that will have significant impact  on women across Canada. Provisions of the  Divorce Act related to custody and access  are currently being reviewed by a Joint Senate/House Committee.  Before going to press, Kinesis was unable to confirm the timeline or the process.  However, few women's groups were even  aware that this review was happening.  "The terms of reference [of the custody  and access review] appear to be biased towards what the fathers' rights groups are  promoting," says Louise Shaughnessy of  the National Association of Women and the  Law. "Fathers' rights groups have managed  to make it look like there are all these mean  women denying access to men."  The bigger problems are men not holding up their end of the access agreements  with their children, and men who have his  tories of violence towards women and children getting access visits.  The fathers' rights groups have found  a vocal ally in Liberal Senator Anne Cools  [see article below.] In fact, it was her blocking of the Child Support Guidelines bill that  forced the federal government to agree to  review the Divorce Act.  To participate in the review process,  contact Catherine Piccinin, Clerk of the  Special Joint Senate and House Committee  on Custody and Access, Senate of Canada,  Committees and Private Legislation Directorate, Room 215,56 Sparks St, 2nd Floor,  Ottawa, Ontario, K1A 0A4; tel: (613) 990-  6087; fax: (613) 947-2104.  NAWL will soon be releasing its brief analyzing  custody and access issues. For a copy, contact  NAWL at #604-1 Nicholas St, Ottawa, Ontario, KIN 7B7; tel: (613) 241-7570; fax: (613)  241-4657; or email: nawl@ftn.net.  Violence against women in Canada:  Wondering about the warzone?  by Robyn Kelly  On Friday, February 6, Senator Anne  Cools came to Vancouver to offer a twisted  and inaccurate version of the reality of male  violence against women. She also offered a  twisted and inaccurate version of the  herstory of the women's liberation movement in Canada and the analyses and perspectives of feminists.  Cools was the keynote speaker at the  forum titled, "The Neglected Aspects of  Abuse in the Family," organized by a  number of right-wing men's groups and  individuals. Billed as a "public consultation," the senator came to talk about what  she sees as the "neglected" issue: the violence perpetrated by women against men  and children.  [Other discussions of the forum included:  "False accusations are a form of abuse," and  "Access denial and parental alienation are child  abuse."]  I organized a bunch of feminists I know  and attended to set the senator straight on  some of her points, especially the lies she  tells about our point of view on male violence against women.  Her speech began by misrespresenting  the feminist movement, so we protested  right away. One woman in our group who  had also "been there," yelled out that her  memories of the women's liberation movement in Canada in the 60's do not include  overwhelming enthusiasm from and unconditional support of men.  It went on from there. We had to tell  the senator that feminists, and in particu  lar anti-male violence against women  workers, do not think or say that men are  biologically pre-disposed to violence and  that women are biologically incapable of  it.  We had to remind her that women  do not "steal" children from fathers, and  that men consistently abandon and neglect even court-ordered involvement in  their children's lives.  We had to interrupt her when she  said women lie all the time about abuses  done to their children by fathers, and that  women are vindictive and teach children  to lie about sexual and physical assault.  When it became obvious that Cools  wasn't going to be heard in this forum  unless she stopped lying, the 50 men who  had come to validate their misogyny got  angry. They were all White, except for  one, and were all between the ages of 25  and 50. Six of them brought their moms.  And while only a few admitted it, I  suspect that all of them are under court-  ordered restricted access for their children because of allegations or convictions  of physical and sexual assault of those  children.  Needless to say, they became violent.  Within 15 minutes of our protest, one  man could no longer contain his "God-  given right" to shut us up. He ran at me,  calling me the standard woman-hating  names, grabbed me and tried to pull me  from my seat. I will never know (nor do  I care) what his intentions might have  been if he'd succeeded, but as this sort  of behaviour by men is common and pre  dictable, I was prepared. The women I was  sitting with acted quickly and we fended  him off before he could hurt me.  Other men quickly created a fortress  around the attacker and Cools, who was  on the stage. We demanded that the mom  who had whipped out the cell phone five  minutes earlier to call police on us, call  them now so the assault could be reported.  She refused.  We called the police.  The police and media arrived together  about 15 minutes later. The senator responded to us by telling us to shut up, calling us stupid and racist (Cools is Black).  She smiled at and obviously supported the  men calling us "pigs," "cunts," "bitches"  and "femi-nazis." They had threatened to  violently remove us.  This was their response to the pointed  and political protest by the feminists there.  Cools refused to answer me when I asked  if this was the type of guy she sought to  protect from women. My attacker refused  to answer when I asked if he reacts to his  children like that when they annoy him.  The police told me they arrested him  even though they didn't take a formal statement from me. Then, they proceeded to  engage with the men and intimidate us.  More than 15 officers arrived. They were  headed by Sargeant Weeks who wasted no  time finding the man in charge of the venue.  Weeks instructed him on what to do so  police could remove us. That's right: us, the  women, the feminists.  The man obeyed. He was escorted by  an officer to each one of us, introduced as  the owner, and told to touch us and tell us  we had to leave. After which, the escorting  cop could then say he was going to take us  out of the building under threat of arrest  for trespassing if we returned.  They started with the women of colour and ended with me. All but four of the  30 or so women there were told to leave.  The man who attacked me never was.  The media interviewed everyone. They  took video files of everyone. They heard the  truth of what had happened. Then they distorted the story so the truth was missing.  In the headline story of the 11:00 news  on both VTV and Global TV, the talking  head reported that police were called to get  rid of some rabble-rousing radical feminists  who had no point. They reported that  "families had gathered" to discuss with  Senator Cools the rights of children. They  didn't mention that I was attacked or who  called the police. They let the Senator call  us stupid on the news.  The Province also reported the event  with the same inaccuracy the next day. The  lies were upheld.  Welcome to the War Zone. Women's  challenges to the false and extemely dangerous statements made by a federally appointed official are considered more problematic than men who assault women.  Women yelling out the truth is less tolerated than men's violence.  This happens all the time. The War is  not over. We have not yet won, and we need  every woman to be in the struggle.  MARCH 1998 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to  be a network of news, updates and  information of special interest to the  women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be edited  for length. Deadline is the 18th of the  month preceding publication.  by Ellen Woodsworth  Bridge Housing  breaks ground  Bridge Housing Society for Women  was created approximately 20 years ago to  build housing for women in need in the  Downtown Eastside of Vancouver, the lowest per capita income area in all of Canada.  On February 13, a site was finally dedicated  at the corner of Columbia and Cordova.  The innovative building which will be  completed by June 1999 will consist of a  new Women's Centre on the main floor,  twelve units of crisis housing for homeless  women on the second floor and 45  longterm units of housing for women on  the top four floors. The building will also  have a a common room and garden on the  roof.  The dedication began with a smudge  of the site by Elder Mabel Nipshank and  was followed by an acknowledgement of  the historical right to the land by the  Burrard and Musqueam bands.  Women from the four races involved  with the Downtown Eastside Women's  Centre spoke about the desperate needs for  safe housing for women in the community.  The relationship between health, HIV/  AIDS, poverty, safety and housing was  made very clear as they talked about the  desperate lives of women driven to pimps,  homelessness and starvation, because of  lack of stable housing. In the past year  alone, 32 women from the Downtown  Eastside have been killed.  The final details of the various agreements with the City of Vancouver, architects, builders and various funders are just  being finalized in order for the construction to begin in June. In addition, the Society is working on a long term study of the  impact of secure housing on women's lives,  involving women who will move into  Bridge.  by Robyn Hall  Another feminist  publication closes  They say they're still committed to  "overthrowing civilization as we know it,"  but the women of London, England-based  feminist magazine Bad Attitude (BA) have  had to shut down the publication.  Several members of the collective  moved out of London or felt the effects of  cuts to the benefits (social assistance) system, wage cuts, pressure on low-rent housing, et cetera forcing the publication to shut  down. They say it was hard for the women  involved to survive on part-time employment and difficult to find new collective  members who could make the commitment  to a regular publication on the scale of BA.  Bad Attitude's first issue came out in  December 1992, and was published at different intervals until last year. It followed  in the footsteps of Shocking Pink and  Feminaxe, two radical women's magazines  of the late 80's.  "BA brought a class struggle, anti-state  approach to feminism that is scarce in any  nationally distributed publication, and we  managed to have a few laughs along the  way. It was something worth fighting for!"  BAsays it is donating their remaining  funds to support new feminist publications  and other women's organizations. Collective members have also written a short  guide to starting and sustaining a feminist  publication, based on a "Bad Activities"  workshop they held in 1995. At least two  new radical women's magazines are in the  works in London.  Their advice to women who want to  start future Bad Attitudes: print a well-produced, readable publication; start with less  issues per year instead of more; get as many  women involved at the beginning and as  diverse a group as possible, and set out a  basic political framework that can allow for  differences. And most of all, "don't mourn,  organise!"  Kinesis thanks and congratulates the  women of Bad Attitude tor their incredible  commitment and work towards building a  vibrant feminist movement. In sisterhood.  New women's group  in Chilliwack  A group of women in Chilliwack, British Columbia are working towards starting up a women's centre in their community. The women have formed the Rainbow  Womyn's Society as the first step.  The society is currently raising funds  for the centre which will promote, improve  and encourage "the well being of women  and support social justice in our communities."  The Society put out its first newsletter  in January which included information on  their actitivies and new goals for 1998, and  an article critiquing the Multilateral Agreement on Investments.  For more information about the Rainbow  Womyn's Society, contact Joyce Harrison (604)  792-9618 or Joan MacPhail (604) 793-4824.  Putting the Platform  into action  Three Alberta groups recently  launched an information kit to support efforts pressuring the Canadian government  to live up to the international commitments  they made at the 1995 4th World Conference on Women in Beijing.  The kit, called The Beijing and Beyond  Info Kit was created by the Calgary Status  of Women Action Committee, OXFAM-  Canada and the Alberta NWT (Northwest  Territories) Network of Immigrant Women.  These groups say that although Canada  was one of the key negotiators of the Platform For Action agreement signed in  Beijing, the federal government has done  little to put the agreement into effect.  They say that "virtually every country  on earth promised to: end armed conflict,...  promote women's health,... end violence  against women,... encourage women's success in education..."  However, governments around the  world and at every level in Canada are enforcing policies which work against these  goals.  For copies of the kit contact the Calgary  Status of Women Action Committee, #200-301  14th St NW, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 2A1; tel:  (403)270-7107.  Anduhyaun celebrates  25 years  Anduhyaun Inc, the Aboriginal women's shelter society in downtown Toronto,  is celebrating its 25th anniversary on March  12th. One of the oldest women's shelters in  Canada, Anduhyaun means "Our Home"  in the Ojibwe language. Its programs and  services are based on Aboriginal cultural  traditions and are staffed by Aboriginal  women and men.  The organization was initially started  by the YWCA in 1969 as "Y" Place, and  operated as a residence for "status Indian"  women who were seeking some type of  vocational training. Eventually theYWCA  yielded leadership of the residence to Aboriginal women, and not suprisingly the  Department of Indian affairs pulled the  funding plug.  Despite this, in 1973, Anduhyaun was  incorporated by its founding mothers Vera  Martin, Mary Jane Young, Jeanette Lavell-  Corbriere and Millie Redmond as an emergency shelter for Aboriginal women and  children.  Another funding cut in 1995 threatened  to shut down the organization—  Anduhyaun lost 41 percent of its government grants—but by reorganizing and  through staff taking severe salary cuts, all  programs and services remained in operation.  The organization offers four major programs. The Anduhyaun emergency shelter  for Aboriginal women and children leaving abusive situations has been operating  24 hours a day, 365 days a year since the  beginning.  Nekenaan Second Stage Housing,  which is in a newly constructed building  in Toronto, operates as a long-term supportive housing program for 42 Aboriginal  women and children. It was opened in 1995  to meet the needs of Aboriginal women  who have been prevented from accomplishing their goals due to the violence they  have experienced. An Elder's suite is also  operated from Neekenaan.  The Society also operates a daycare  program callAwashishuck, for 36 children,  and the Anduhyaun Aboriginal Counselling Service serving both women and men.  Anduhyaun is also starting a capital  fundraising project to raise funds to obtain  a new and larger shelter!  To mark its anniversary Anduhyaun  is holding a "Birthday Bash Weekend" on  March 14 and 15, at two of its locations.  For more details, contact Anduhyaun  at (416) 960-1635.  Mediation is a way of  finding solutions to conflict  which preserve rights,  dignity and the future  ability to work together.  MELINDA MUNRO  MEDIATOR/LAWYER  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  seeking peaceful solutions  which respect difference,  equality and justice  labour/employment, human rights,  civil disputes and conflicts within  community organizations.  Social activism at the  forefront  The British Columbia Teachers' Federation (BCTF) Provincial Status of Women  Committee (SWC) will be celebrating its  25th anniversary this March at its annual  general meeting. However, one of the issues that will be brought to the floor for  debate is the continuing existence of the SW  Committee.  When it was started in 1973, the focus  of the SWC was to get more women into  positions of authority—that is, into high  school teaching positions and vice  principleships—and to remove sexist materials from the curriculum.  That focus later shifted towards collective bargaining and getting contract language changed to be respectful to women  teachers. In particular, the SWC fought for  adequate maternity leave provisions and  equity in the pay scales.  In the early 80s, social activism began  moving to the forefront of the Committee's  work. The big conflict was around women's right to reproductive choice; or more  simply put, abortion. The SWC pushed for  the right of counsellors and teachers to discuss all alternatives to pregnancy and contraceptives. This led to a huge debate...and  victory.  It was from that point on that social  issues stayed front and centre in the work  of the Committee. In fact, last year, the SWC  was very active in the discussions around  homophobia and heterosexism in the education system.  Unfortunately, the Committee's success at pushing social activism within BCTF  may also be the grounds for its demise. The  management of the Committee is planning  to propose a motion at the AGM designed  to dismantle the SWC and amalgamate it  into a broader "social justice" division of  the BCTF.  Those who are pressing for this change  say BCTF has too many other issues to deal  with, that it cannot afford to have the SWC  sitting by itself.  However, Louise de Bruijne, the representative of the SWC in the Metro (Vancouver) region, says a separate Status of  Women Committee has in no way outlived  its relevance and importance.  "Seventy percent of all union members  are women," says de Bruijne. "The management of the Committee and of our union is still very male driven. This move  would take the agenda right away from  women."  Three motions related to the future of  the SWC will be voted on at AGM. de  Bruijne expects a very heated debate but  adds that many women are prepared to  speak out strongly in support of maintaining the integrity of the Committee.  One of SWC's current projects is advocating for the creation of a high school  credited women's studies course. Mary  Filleul of Britannia Secondary School in  Vancouver met with the provincial ministry of education and has made some  progress. Filleul and Debra Trca last month  presented their proposals for a "Women,  Gender and Society 12" course at a Gender  Issues Workshop at Britannia.  Celebrations for SWC's 25th anniversary  will be held during its AGM, March 14-17, at  the Hyatt Regency Hotel. Women are invited  to an Open Celebration/Meet and Greet on  Saturday March 14 from 2-4pm. For more information, call Louise de Bruijne at (604) 321-  1470, or e-mail: ldebruijne@bctfbc.ca.  MARCH 1998 What's .News  compiled by Leanne Keltie   Record settlement  for sexual  harassment  Astra AB, a Swedish pharmaceutical  company, has agreed to pay the equivalent  of $14.3 million Canadian in order to settle  charges that its former president and other  executives at its US headquarters sexually  harassed almost 80 employees.  The executives were accused of, among  other things, firing mothers and older female employees in order to replace them  with younger single women who were  pressured to give sexual favours. The  women who sued Astra said that after-  hours sex was common and total loyalty to  the company was required.  At least 79 women (and one man who  spoke out against the harassment) will  share the sum, which is the biggest sexual  harassment settlement ever obtained by the  Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in the US.  Astra's US president Lars Bildman was  fired in 1996 after being accused by Astra  of spending company cash on home repairs, family vacations and high-priced  prostitutes. Bildman was not alone, however, in his harassment of female employees. During its restructuring process, Astra  also took action against 30 additional individuals, both employees and Astra customers, who took part in the harassment.  Ivan Rowley, new president of the US  headquarters stated: "as a company, we are  ashamed of the unacceptable behaviour  that took place...To each person who has  been harmed and who has suffered because  of that behaviour, I offer our apologies."  While Astra has agreed to implement  a sexual harassment policy following these  incidents, the damage has already been  done. Perhaps other major corporations  will view this $14.3 million victory for  women employees as a wake-up call to be  pro-active against sexual harassment rather  than reactive.  Ex-nanny still owed  $30,000  Women working for domestic workers'  rights are outraged at the Ontario government's inaction to ensure an ex-nanny receives the $30,000 she is owed in back payments from her former employer.  The Ontario labour ministry had ordered Dr. Anita Hunt and her husband  Benjamin Jeyasingham to pay the woman  (whose name was not released) $30,000. She  had been forced to work 14 hours a day,  seven days a week for three years, while  only being paid $300 to $375 a month.  This woman, who is from Sri Lanka, is  not alone in her experiences of being exploited by employers who think they can  get away with paying less than minimum  wage and not paying overtime.  Although the woman is now a Canadian citizen, Consuelo Rubio of the Employment Standards Working group declared, "[when she worked for the couple]  she didn't have permanent status in  Canada and she spoke no English. I don't  know a better definition of vulnerable than  that."  In response, Hunt's lawyer claims the  $30,000 ruling is under appeal and the  funds have been paid into a trust account  until a settlement is reached. An official  with the labour ministry stated that no appeal has been filed.  Social workers say the government is  not only ignoring its own order to enforce  payment, but is in effect telling employers  they can get away with this kind of violation of domestic workers' human rights.  Fifty people staged a protest outside  of Hunt's office, banging drums, chanting,  and handing out information about the exploitation and violations that domestic  workers face wlhen working in Canada.  Canada, this recent decision is definitely a  victory for women across the country.  Deportation appeal  compromised  After steadily working and contributing to Canadian society for over seven  years, Acier Gomez, a former domestic  worker, is facing deportation orders for  "misrepresenting" her marital status. Her  immigration troubles began after she left  Rape shield law  survives challenge  The rape shield law has survived a  major constitutional challenge. The Ontario  Court of Appeal has decided that the 1992  law, which restricts defence lawyers from  questioning sexual assault victims about  any of their sexual history (even their history with the accused) is not a violation of  the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  The law was challenged by an Ottawa  man who was sentenced to nine months in  jail after being convicted of sexually assaulting his former girlfriend.  Associate Chief Justice John Morden  rejected suggestions from the man's lawyer that the rape shield law's provisions are  more draconian than the old rules, and effectively create a "blanket prohibition"  against evidence about the victim's sexual  history.  In a written statement on behalf of the  three-judge panel, Morden declared that:  "the admission of evidence of the prior  sexual activity of a complainant clearly infringes on the complainant's privacy interests."  Morden also stated that the 1992 rules  were designed to eradicate evidence based  on the absurd "twin myths" in sexual assault cases—that an unchaste woman is  more likely to have consented to a sexual  assault, and is therefore less credible than  her attacker.  The appeal court also upheld a rule  which says an accused person cannot claim  the victim consented to the sexual assault  if the accused did not take "reasonable  steps" to obtain her consent.  Morden wrote: "it is difficult to contemplate that a man who has assaulted a  woman can be considered morally innocent  as long as he has not attempted to ascertain whether or not she is giving her consent."  While this case is expected to go one  step higher to the Supreme Court of  her abusive husband in June 1996 [see Kinesis September 1997.]  While Gomez was given the opportunity to appeal the deportation order last  month, this opportunity appears to be nothing more than lip service, as an official with  Canada Immigration in Prince George actively works to undermine the appeal process she is going through.  Gomez has collected over 500 signatures from people in both Prince George  and Vancouver who support her demand  to remain in Canada with her three year old  daughter on humanitarian and compassionate grounds.  "The widespread support that Acier  has gained shows that our community is  fighting back against the deportation of Filipino women," says Jane Ordinario, a member of SIKLAB (a Vancouver-based Filipino  migrant workers' organization.)  Ordinario's groups says they've been  told the immigration official has telephoned several Prince George residents  and organizations who have signed the  petition to be presented at the appeal hearing. One letter of support, which was written by the Immigrant and Multicultural  Services Society, was suddenly withdrawn  after its executive director was pressured  by the official.  "This is an attempt to intimidate and  harass those people who have showed their  genuine support for myself and my daughter to stay in Canada," Acier Gomez said.  "This official is deliberately creating a climate of fear amongst my fellow Filipinas.  This will keep Filipino women silent and  in situations of abuse."  Ordinario stated that "the actions of  this official are extremely improper and  shocking and we are calling for his immediate dismissal. The entire immigration  system must be exposed for what it is: a  system which continues to exploit and oppress marginalized and working women."  Gomes' appeal hearing will continue  March 23rd. Meanwhile, Ordinario has  compiled by Lissa Geller   Breast implanted  women get cash  Approximately 3,000 women in Quebec and Ontario will soon receive US$15.3  million to settle their class action lawsuit  over silicone breast implants. The claim was  against the American firms Heyer-Schulte  Inc and Baxter Healthcare Corporation.  Women will be given different settlements based on the severity and length of  their suffering and the number of women  who register for compensation. As well, the  settlements apply only to women who received their implants in either province  between 1971 and 1984.  Bonnie O'Hearn, a spokesperson for  the Quebec lobby group Acces, noted that  ultimately, the money was not the issue.  "For a woman affected by silicone implants,  even $1 million won't change her condition."  "It's a wonderful achievement," says  Joyce Attis of the Breast Implant Line of  Canada which has dealt with about 7,500  affected women in Canada.  This is the second such settlement  reached in Canada. In 1995, a $28 million  settlement was struck with Bristol-Meyers  Squibb and affected about 5,000 women.  But the largest manufacturer, Dow  Corning, has yet to provide Canadian  women with any compensation for their  suffering. Lawyer Michael Peerless who  represented the Ontario women in the  Baxter settlement said it could be as long  as ten years before Dow Corning, which is  hiding behind US bankruptcy laws, is  forced into Canadian courts to deal with  class-action claims here.  Same-sex couples  recognized in BC  The lobbying efforts of lesbian and gay  rights activists in British Columbia were  rewarded recently when the NDP government announced changes in legislation  which make BC the first province in Canada  to extend legal rights to same-sex couples.  Changes to the Family Relations Act  mean that lesbians and gay men have the  same status in their relationships as common-law couples, and can sue their ex-partners for spousal and child support.  "This legislation will mean that same-  sex couples who break up will have the  same support that heterosexuals have access to," says lesbian rights activist barbara  findlay. "We regard this as a significant  advance for lesbian, gay and transgendered  relationships... and a recognition of all families in whatever form of raising young children."  Calling it an historic day for BC, Attorney General Ujjal Dosanjh noted that  politicians in Canada have traditionally  been remiss in their duty to act to protect  the rights of same-sex couples. "The court  decisions have been clear," he noted, and  politicians must do their part. ?     SFU      $  5gw£ 231-3670  How do you  get clean schools?  Vote for it.  Tl IF. PEOPLE we elect make decisions that directly  affect the quality of our daily lives - decisions on  janitorial services and teaching assistants, parks and  safety inspections, clean water, traffic lights, garbage  pick-up, health care and on hundreds of other  important public services.  The people we elect also decide who provides  those sen-ices - public employees or profit-making,  private contractors.  Before you vote in any election, please take time  to find out where all the candidates stand. Then use  your vote to support good-value public services provided  by the public's employees.  GC1PE&JB.C.  CANADIAN UNION OF PUBLIC EMPLOYEES  BRITISH COLOMBIA DIVISION  Fax: (604)291-9043  Bernice Kirk, President  Colleen Jordan, Secretary-Treasur<  ■i>H»U'l#J»l.,H.I4A[LiAMJ  1107 Seymour Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 5S8  tel:(604) 893-2200  fax: (604) 893-2256  Direct Support  one to one outreach/advocacy  support group  hot lunch program  telephone counselling  one to one outreach  support for family and  care providers  advocacy  referrals  home/hospital visits  day & weekend retreats  Educational Support  newsletter  treatment information  public education and  Systemic Support  systemic advocacy  inity partnerships  Celebrating International Women's Day!  ::^#llffSllllS  1973-/99«,,lUGRAiVI  Celebrating 25 years,  g^r equity L* ? *TM«» in  "KlsoaaJ responsibility.  B.C. TeacT  Federation  100-550 W ,r, BCV5Z4P2  (604) 871-2283 63*9163 • fax 871-2289  bctf.be.ca Feature   The Reform Party of Canada:  The Right in sheep's clothing  by Ellen Gould  The Reform Party is already working  on the sucker punch it will deliver to voters in the next federal election with a new  strategy of portraying itself as something  it isn't: a middle-of-the-road party. Since a  Reform government would radically transform Canada in ways that particularly hurt  women, we need to see beyond this to the  threat Reform represents. We need to alert  others to what a Reform government would  mean, because they will not hear this from  the mass media.  In their drive for electoral victory, Reformers need to overcome three major obstacles: their lack of appeal in Ontario, the  persistent gender gap in their support, and  their record of making racist remarks.  The 1997 election campaign was a disaster for Reform in Ontario. Ontario voters, living next door to Quebec and wary  of the consequences if Quebec separates,  rejected Reform's anti-Quebec campaign  rhetoric. Reform not only lost its only Ontario seat, but it also came second in fewer  ridings than it did in the 1993 election.  So now Reform Party leader Preston  Manning is making conciliatory noises  about recognizing Quebec as unique, and  party strategists say there will be no more  anti-Quebec ads. How much this top-down  repositioning on Quebec works depends on  Manning's ability to control his caucus and  the party faithful. As well, if Reform's support starts shifting to the Conservatives, as  it did during the first half of the 1997 campaign, party strategists will again be  tempted to push the "hot button" of anti-  Quebec feeling to shore up the core Reform  Vote.  But it is Reform's fancy footwork in the  area of social program spending that seems  designed to overcome the gender gap.  Women consistently indicate in poll after  poll that they are more concerned about  health care, education and poverty than  men, and less likely to vote Reform.  In the last election, Reform said it  would put $4 billion back into health and  education, and used this promise to fend  off criticism that Reform was a "slash-and-  burn" party. What their candidates didn't  talk about, though, is that these increases  would only come after Reform had cut even  more than the Liberals from health and education to balance the budget. Or that they  are committed to eliminating all federal  funding for social assistance—a cut of $3.5  billion.  Since the provinces get to allocate the  federal transfer payments they get for  health, education and social assistance  however they want, Reform's promise of  providing $4 billion more for health and  education can only be seen as a deliberate  attempt to mislead voters.  Now their party strategists are making  the same deceptive moves again. The new  "middle-of-the-road" Reform says it would  not reduce the federal budget from $103.5  to $94 billion, as it promised during the last  election. Instead, Reform says it would  freeze spending at current levels. What they  don't highlight is that freezing government  spending at current levels—without adjusting for population growth, inflation, and  increased payouts for old age security—  will mean billions of dollars of cuts anyway. In fact, Reform is committed as ever  to radical cuts: to unemployment insurance, transfers to poorer provinces, foreign  aid, Aboriginal programs, and the complete  elimination of CBC television.  As for racism, Manning repeats over  and over again that the best strategy for  Reform to defend itself against charges of  racism is to have members of "ethnic minorities" as Reform candidates. So now  Reform can have Members of Parliament  like Deepak Obhrai stand up in the House  of Commons and denounce multicultural  funding. Also, Keith Martin, with his South  Asian heritage, becomes Reform's "ideal"  person to make speeches calling programs  for Aboriginal people forms of "apartheid."  Reform's attacks on immigration and  their efforts to portray people who have  Grewal's did not even rate a mention in the  corporate press. Did we hear that Reform  MP Mike Scott stood up in the House of  Commons to accuse former British Columbia premier Mike Harcourt of "bending  over" for US vice president Al Gore, "giving him everything he wanted?"  This is the quality of person that makes  up the Reform "government-in-waiting."  The almost complete success the Party's spin doctors have with the mainstream  media is misleading and dangerous. For example, every chance they get, Reform MPs  denounces the Liberal government for increasing amounts people have to pay into  the Canada Pension Plan. Indeed, criticisms  can be made about the Liberal's changes to  the CPP—hiking contribution rates unnecessarily to 9.9 percent, privatizing part of  the plan, cutting benefits.  The almost complete success the  Party's spin doctors have with the mainstream media is misleading and  dangerous.  refugee status as criminals are every bit as  nasty as they were before the recruitment  of people of colour to the Party's caucus.  Party whip Chuck Strahl himself has  pointed out how ridiculous it is to think  that simply being a member of an "ethnic  minority" provides immunity from buying  into racist views. In an interview on Parliamentary Channel on April 20, 1997,  Strahl said: "If something is stupid or racist, it can be said by anybody, it doesn't  matter what nationality you are."  The carefully crafted "new and improved" image Manning and his inner circle have been successfully selling to the  mainstream media stands in sharp contrast  to what Reform MPs are saying in the  House of Commons. Far from becoming  more responsible or mellow in their second  round in Parliament, Reform MPs have  come out swinging with exactly the same  kind of right-wing vitriol they have expressed previously.  The difference seems to be that the extreme statements spewing out of Reformers are no longer deemed newsworthy. We  don't get to hear about their performance  unless one of them does something really  outrageous, like when Darren Stinton  charged across the Commons towards Conservative leader Jean Charest calling him  "a chubby little sucker."  But did we hear from the mainstream  media that a Reform MP got a parliamentary page to deliver a picture of a hawk  having ripped off the head of a bird to NDP  MP Lome Nystrom? The message scrawled  underneath was that this was how Reform  was going to deal with the NDP. How  about Gurmant Grewal saying that Canada  should adopt the same authoritarian laws  as Singapore to stop young people from joy  riding?  In the last Parliament, Art Hanger's  enthusiasm for Singapore and its use of the  lash was considered newsworthy, but  However, before cheering on the Reform in their attack on the changes, people  should know that Reform wants to totally  privatize the CPP, making seniors completely vulnerable to the whims of the market. If you retire when the market is up,  you'd be in the money; if you retire when  the market crashed, tough luck. Workers in  South Korea are currently experiencing  what it's like to see the pensions they were  counting on disappear in a market crash.  Reform's totally privatized plan would  eliminate maternity and disability benefits.  What would we pay for this gutted pension plan? At a public meeting in Calgary  when he denounced the Liberal's 9.9 percent contribution rate as an outrageous tax  grab, Reform MP Jason Kenney acknowledged that people would have to pay about  nine percent of their salary into a Reform  RRSP-style plan. Independent estimates of  how much Reform's privatized plan would  require in contributions say the rate would  be even higher, between 13 and 15 percent.  Yet, the mainstream media let Reform get  away with its line on the CPP changes as  the "biggest tax grab in history" and as  unfair to young people.  Who would know from all the reports  on Reform's anti-GST statements that their  MPs described the GST as a good tax and  advocated its extension to things like food?  Who would know that despite Reform's claims that they will not meet with  interest groups, Preston Manning had a  personal meeting with the head of [the anti-  choice group] Campaign Life to discuss  entrenching fetal rights in the Constitution?  Who would know from reading the  daily press that Reform's position on the  Multilateral Agreement on Investment (a  draconian treaty that would greatly increase the power of multinationals) is that  the treaty doesn't go far enough?  When the true face of Reform emerges,  such as when former MP Bob Ringma made  his infamous statements about gays and  Blacks being kept at the back of the shop,  Reform's support plummets. Yet Ringma's  statements are totally consistent with Reform's position on women, people of colour, lesbian and gays, Aboriginal people,  and underdeveloped regions: the market  should rule. Manning's way of calming  down the Ringma controversy was to make  a show of stating that Reform stands for  "equality."  Of course, Manning is talking about an  "equality" that is delivered by the market,  based on the premise that both rich people  and poor people are "equally free" to sleep  under bridges. According to this world  view, any government program designed  to overcome historic inequalities is a form  of discrimination. Reformers even claim  that without these government programs,  there would not be any inequality or antagonism between groups. A typical comment made by former Reform MP Sharon  Hayes, Reform's critic for women's issues  is: "employment equity doesn't remove sex  and race bias from the workplace; it institutionalizes it."  Given the general cooperation of the  mainstream media in Reform's effort to recast itself as a middle-of-the-road Party,  there is a greater need than ever to keep  track of what Reform's real record is. Here  are just a few insights into the kind of people who could form the next government  of Canada:  Reform MP Lee Morrison, on child  care: "What does subsiding day care mean  to you? I will tell you what it means to me  as a country boy. It means that a professional couple in Toronto can load their child  into a BMW and take it to the Silver Spoon  Happy Centre for Lucky Tots..." (House of  Commons, November 21,1996)  Reform MP Diane Ablonzy on why the  child tax benefit should not be extended to  pregnant women: "It is a leap of fiction to  believe that pregnant women are malnourished." (Reform Minority Report on the  Child Tax Benefit)  Reform MP Jim Pankiw, in calling for  the repeal of the Employment Equity Act  intended to prevent racism and sexism in  federal employment: "No such discrimination exists in the workplace." (House of  Commons, November 3,1997)  Reform leader Preston Manning, citing  St. Paul on how conflicts should be dealt  with in the family: "Wives, be subject to  your husbands as to the Lord; for the man  is the head of the women..." (The Reconciliation of Parties in Conflict: The Theory  and Application of a Model of Last Resort,  Preston Manning, 1984)  Ellen Gould runs ReformWatch, a research organization which keeps a critical eye on the  Reform Party. ReformWatch also publishes a  newsletter and provides workshops on the Reform and other faces of the New Right in  Canada. Visit their website at www.vc.bc.ca/  refwatch or contact ReformWatch at #4-1155  W. 10th Ave, Vancouver, BC, V6H 1J2; tel:  (604) 739-8560.  MARCH 1998 Feature  The  Multinational Agreement  of Investment:  NAFTA on steroids  by Cherie Geauvreau and Jewel  Eldstrom   Following up on the successful movement-  building work of opposing APEC last year,  feminists are stepping up to the challenge  against the MAI, the Multilateral Agreement  on Investments.  Below, Cherie Geauvreau and Jewel  Eldstrom analyze the MAI agenda. They also  write about the community response on Salt  Spring Island (SSI) to the ongoing trade liberalization moves.  Geauvreau is a poet and community development worker. Her books include Even the  Fawn has Wings (Brick Books), A Place to  Move the World From (Conspiracy Press),  and Salt Spring Women Opposed to Violence and Abuse (FREDA). She is a founding member of HEART of SSI.  Eldstrom is a writer, economist, and community and economic development worker who  was involved in the credit union movement for  23 years. She is a founding member and coadministrator of HEART of SSI.  "The new international trade agreements have facilitated the creation of a single market without a single state to regulate. In this sense, the growth in power of  the corporate sector places nations in about  the same stage of control over capital as  they had at the dawn of the industrial revolution. Our national institutions are not  equipped to cope with the nature of the  changes which have taken place."  - Marjorie Griffen Cohen -  The work that needs to be done is to  prevent our federal government from signing the MAI. The MAI is a draft constitution for transnational corporations (TNCs)  that gives them the power to operate without prejudice or impediment to profit  across international borders.  In response, feminists, social justice  activists, indigenous peoples, peace and  human rights workers, and thousands of  other Canadians are already hard at work—  getting information out to the public, organizing letter campaigns, establishing  websites, calling for parliamentary disclosure, and staging panels, workshops and  debates.  Groups and individuals recognize that  signing the MAI means this latest wave of  economic oppression would be entrenched  in international law. The MAI is being  pushed because those who love money and  power above all else want to change our  world and our country forever.  What's coming?  If the MAI, an agreement based on the  investment provisions of NAFTA (the  North American Free Trade Agreement),  and negotiated at the Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development  (OECD) in Paris, is passed, Canada will be  restricted from protecting:  • any at-risk population, including  women, children, elders, poor people, people with disabilities, refugees and immigrants, indigenous peoples, particular ethnic groups, and all other minority interests  within Canada's boundaries.  • any commercial interests and not-for-  profit groups, including fishers, farmers,  food producers, banks, unions, guilds,  growers' associations of any kind, local industries and non-profit societies receiving  any government funding.  • our public school systems, our post secondary institutions, social programs, public services, Medicare, our hospitals, the  Liberal-promised Pharmacare, social assistance, pensions, child-care, and libraries.  • our cultural, entertainment, broadcasting, media and publishing industries.  • Canada's sovereign right to restrict corporations from violating human rights  codes and environmental standards, nullifying the concept of the "common good"  in local, regional and national communities.  • our natural resources, job programs, labour laws, minimum wage laws, Canadian  content laws and negotiated land claims  treaties.  • our monetary stability.  Who are the players?  The drafters of the MAI—the 29  wealthiest countries of the world, all members of the OECD—want to create a "level  playing field" for TNCs to play money  games on. The rules of the game are designed to ensure free movement of capital—both money and production facilities—across international borders. These  countries would negotiate the treaty and  sign up first. The MAI would then be "offered" to—or rather, forced on—poorer  countries.  What is the game?  The object of the game is to make more  money than presently exists in the world.  This money would be made by and for the  20 percent of the world's population that  already enjoys most of the world's current  wealth. This game has never been played  on such a grand or greedy scale before.  Many of the rules concerning the game  have been meticulously tested in smaller  trading games such as the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the US and  NAFTA.  Canada has been an active participant  in this game since signing the FTA in 1989  by "harmonizing" its social programs to fall  more in line with US federal guidelines.  Three sets of unemployment insurance reforms have been passed since 1991 which  make UI/EI less accessible, and Canada's  national welfare act (the Canada Assistance  Plan) has been struck from the books completely.  The provinces, too, have been systemi-  cally revamping financial laws to facilitate  the coming money game. Here in British  Columbia, the Financial Institutions Act  (FIA) and the Insurance Act of 1989, and  the Fiduciary Responsibility Act of 1991 are  prime examples of legislation that profoundly affect everyday life.  In our community on Salt Spring Island, there were two banks and one credit  union before the passing of the FIA. In those  earlier times, at the end of most business  days, the three managers would meet in  Ganges village centre and exchange "island  only" clearings. Each institution's loan  portfolios were strictly balanced with term  deposits and credit was given based on the  four C's: character, credit rating, collateral  and capacity.  Today, there are three financial institutions on SSI whose investment portfolios  compete on international money markets,  whose clearings are sent off island electronically, and who give credit based on a universal formula that was made law in BC  under the FTA. This has left 30 percent of  Salt Spring residents with no access to  credit through the banks.  With the slash of a pen, community  banking ended in BC. In this province, except for a few brilliant exceptions like CCEC  credit union in Vancouver, credit unions,  banks and trust companies are all the same:  financial institutions that are for sale on the  international markets.  New wrinkles for a new game  The difference between this new  money game and all the others which preceded it, is that the "level field" being created would only exist for one team of players: TNCs. If signed, the MAI restricts sovereign governments from changing rules  they don't like or from adding new rules  to the game. However, sovereign governments would also have to sign a binding  agreement to:  • roll back any pre-existing laws that other  MAI signatories don't have and that are  viewed as impediments to profit (any subsidized programs for women, language  laws in Quebec, or land treaties could be  challenged under this clause.)  • stand still on passing any future laws or  legislation that could be viewed as impediments to profit (any government would be  restricted from introducing a new public  service such as universal, non-profit child  care, or pharmacare).  • lock into the MAI for the first five years.  If a country wants to leave the agreement  any time after that, foreign investors will  be allowed to stay and play the money  game unrestricted for another 15 years under a "grandfathering" clause.  Why this big new game?  TNCs such as Monsanto and Dow  Chemical feel they are spending too much  time and money dealing with diverse non-  tariff barriers to trade and investment. They  want to make things simple for themselves.  The MAI draft document, though mired in  the muck of jargon and disturbingly vague  in its definitions of "investment," is indeed  a simple set of rules for international investors to play by.  What can we do?  • believe we can make a difference.  • become informed on the issues.  • help raise consciousness in your own  neighbourhood, workplace, and/or volunteer organization. The majority may still be  unaware about how this can directly affect  them.  • involve local print media...write a letter  to the editor.  • Find or start a grassroots group in your  community that is interested in developing alternative community and economic  Women's Health Listserve Launched!  On International Women's Day,  women-health@bccewh.bc.ca, an electronic mailing  list, will be launched as a tool for feminist activism,  research, and policy-making.  For more information or to subscribe, e-mail  celeste. wincapaw@bccewh. be. ca  BC Centre of  Excellence for  Women's Health  Main Office, BC Women's  Hospital and Health Centre  E311-4500 Oak Street  Vancouver, BC  V6H3N1 Canada  Tel 604.875.2633  Fax 604.875.3716  bccewh@bccewh.bc.ca  www.bccewh.bc.ca Feature  development models based on trust and  mutual aid; such as economic cooperatives,  community reinvestment banking, lending  circles, local currencies, et cetera. There are  many different ways to conduct business  and lead sustainable community lives.  Where can you find alternative  models?  In your own hearts and your own  backyards. As Starhawk says:  "We are all waiting to go home to some  place we have never been—a place half-remembered and half-envisioned we can  only catch glimpses of from time to time.  Community. Somewhere there are people  to whom we can speak with passion without words catching in our throats. Somewhere a circle of hands will open to receive  us, eyes will light up as we enter, voices  will celebrate with us when we come into  our power. Community means strength  that joins our strength to do the work that  needs to get done."  Here on Salt Spring Island, a group of  such people came together in 1996 and began to dream about a dynamically kinder  community. We had one common vision:  that people, not money, not things, would  always be the priority and that the dream  of the whole could only be achieved by first  recognizing and supporting the dreams of  the individual.  A small, rural island, Salt Spring is a  community of 11,000. This made for a prime  testing ground for an alternative vision of  economic development and community  participation. Why? Well, we watch each  other's children grow up. We see each other  in the village, at the soccer field, at community meetings. Or simply, we know each  other.  HEART of SSI met twice weekly for  over a year. We held monthly potlucks for  the growing "wider group" (those who  didn't have a lot of spare time but who still  wanted to be a part of the dream). We published a monthly newspaper in order to  inspire and conspire with the community  on Salt Spring Island.  The founders recognized that in order  to give structure to the group's dream, they  would have to find some pre-existing  model to start from. We were a group that  made decisions by consensus; we did not  want to operate as a "democracy" where  participants are exempt from taking responsibility for voting "no" or "yes." All  of us wanted to be honoured for our involvement. Before long, our group chose  the co-operative model because the co-op  structure excludes "power-over" relation-  A brief guide to the making of a global corporate constitution. It all began back in...  1944: World Bank is established, creating the International Monetary Fund (IMF)  for world financing...the creation of money  and debt for a new world free of communism.  1948: General Agreement on Tariffs  and Trade (GATT) is signed. This agreement  sets the ground rules for countries to play  together under contract, and entrenches the  "most-favoured nation" clause that stipulates all parties treat each other equally  under the contract—no "discrimination"  allowed.  1989: Free Trade Agreement (FTA)  launches the downsizing or elimination of  most trade tariffs between the US and  Canada. Canadians agree (43 percent, anyway) to compete with the US labour pool  and corporate agenda. Laws in every province have been brought in line with the new  federal agenda. Financial institutions adopt  "formula banking" and insurance companies (the real big winners) begin growing  at an enormous rate.  1994: Canada, Mexico and the US enact the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). More tariff and tax relief  for transnational corporations. Investment  provisions more clearly outlined, making  way for future agreements like the MAI.  1995: The World Trade Organization  (WTO) based in Geneva takes over GATT.  The WTO has a much broader scope and  provides the forum for settling international trade disputes and placing sanctions  on participating nations. Decisions are nonappealable. The WTO sits as an observer  in all MAI negotiations.  1997: The Asian-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) comes to Canada.  APEC's agenda? The elimination of all  trade barriers by 2010 between member and  non-member nations alike. The trading  partners in APEC control 50 percent of  world commerce.  1998?: The MAI will be signed by 29  nations unless... This agreement is being  called "NAFTA on steroids" and the coming of the "new corporate world order." The  OECD is settling a level playing field, a single market, for foreign investors. Although  both Canada and the US recently have  stated they will not be signing the Multilateral Agreement on Investments this May,  negotiations are continuing. Operation  Monkey Wrench is raising awareness in  Europe on the dangers of the MAI. A constitutional challenge is being prepared in  Canada and new coalitions are forming to  campaign for public disclosure and debate  on the MAI.  ships. We thought this was a good place to  begin in our quest to become economically  sustainable.  HEART of SSI, the first community  and economic development project of its  kind in BC, became incorporated in January 1997. In our constitution is written that  all factors being equal, the credit needs of  the less advantaged will be served first. In  addition to visions of sustainability, equity,  diversity, and participation, HEART'S  stated focus is solution-finding rather than  problem-naming.  HEART'S economic goals include:  • funding circles: lending money in support of good ideas for employment/self-  employment;  • cash accounts;  • the establishment of a local currency allowing membership access to goods, services, skills, time, information, experience,  knowledge and mentor relationships;  • community re-investment: local cash  flow from and for local people: and  • consultations, business and non-business planning towards the achievement of  individual and group goals.  HEART'S community development goals  are:  • networking the needs and assets of islanders;  • community education in the co-op  model. (HEART supports affordable co-op  To Kinesis Readers & Women Everywhere  HAPPY INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY  from  Dr. Penny Thompson  Lynn Sanderson, Registered Dental Assistant  Cindy Katryniuk & Diane Barbarash, Receptionists  Practicing Dentistry in Your Community  I  Phone:251-1322 Fax:251-1232  Call Us ... Be a Special Patient j  Or drop by at 1 - 1701 Grant Street (at Commercial Drive), Vancouver  housing, childcare and womancare co-ops,  co-op transportation, co-op organic farming, artists' co-ops, et cetera;)  • matched funding for local non-profits  through fundraising in the local currency;  • partnering with human resources and  other ministries to give folks the power to  make durable changes while benefitting the  community;  • partnering with local administrations to  find solutions to issues that affect the whole  community;  • less work all around for everyone, so  that more time can be restored to people's  lives;  •fun!  Our goal in the co-op and in the community is to seek a win/win/win determination. Economic interdependence assisted  by the use of a local currency will result in  everyone in our co-op and, eventually, the  whole community "having enough"...and  more often than not, a surplus of what we  need.  In view of the coming MAI and the  FSA—the Financial Services Agreement  ...have you heard of that one? [see As Kinesis goes to press]—universal cash cards, and  worldwide corporate sponsors, we may not  be able to see that community-based, financial co-operatives are viable or needed.  Many of us are constrained from dreaming about a different way. We are taught to  be afraid of each other. Cities swallow people. Small northern towns are being abandoned. More and more, Canadians pay attention to the details of their own lives, busy  working too hard for too long to maintain  or achieve security in a world gone amok  with greed and sabre-rattling.  On Salt Spring, life is the same...and  different.  For more information on the MAI, contact the Coalition to Expose the MAI on Salt  Spring Island, tel/fax: (250) 537-2744; the  Vancouver Status of Women, (604) 255-6554;  the Council of Canadians (national office), toll  free at 1-800-387-7177 or http://www.web.net/  coc; or the Council of Canadians in BC: 1-888-  566-3888, fax 1-604-688-5756.  Your voice counts. Send your letters of  opposition to our federal and provincial politicians. Fax to Prime Minister Jean Chretien,  (613) 941-6900; International Trade Minister  Sergio Marchi, (613) 947-4452; NDP Trade  Critic Bill Blaikie, (613) 995-6688; and Reform  Trade Critic Charlie Penson, (613) 947-4782.  Or write to them c/o the House of Commons,  Ottawa, K1A 0A6. (No postage necessary.)  MARCH 1998 Happy International   Women's Day !  Happy International Women's Day.  This year, Women Working with Immigrant  Women is organizing the International  Women's Day rally and march in Toronto,  with a number of partners from labour organizations, the women's community, anti-  poverty groups, and the gay and lesbian  community.  Our theme is: "We won't go back; we  won't back down." The theme is one that  the workers in Ontario have been using in  all our struggles. It was was taken out of  the teacher's strike and a number of other  strikes over the last year.  The issues women here in Toronto are  concerned about are the cuts to healthcare  and education, changes to the welfare act  and the effects on workers, and, of course,  the increasing poverty of women.  Salome Lucas, Women Working with  Immigrant Women, Toronto, Ontario  For International Women's Day, the  National Lesbian Forum would like to encourage all women to ensure that lesbians  are accepted in their organizations and that  they visibly show their support for same-  sex equality.  Kathy Hamre  National Lesbian Forum  Regina, Saskatchewan  I would like to take this opportunity  to applaud all of the successes made to date  by the women of the world and to encourage all of us to work together for the future of those who come after us.  In our communities, we live by the  principles of negotiation, cooperation, inclusion and respect. We are taught to respect others because they are our brothers  and sisters. We are taught that women have  a very special place because they are mothers; they are the keepers of the culture... and  we are the backbone of our communities.  If women are strong and healthy, then our  people and communities will be strong  and healthy. Despite our differences, we all  share the common goal of creating a better  world and as Inuit women, we welcome  the chance of sharing our wisdom, our  ways and our language with you.  Thank you,  Nakurmik  Martha Flaherty, Pauktuutit,  Inuit Women's Association  It's About Sisterhood  Hey Dykes,  International Women's Day is coming  up and we figure it's a good time for us to  put ourselves first. What we mean is, time  to get together and talk-rea//y talk. We need  each other, sisters. We're strong, smart,  powerful, wild and passionate. But we are  isolated, divided and lonely. Not working  together, not being a part of each other's  lives, makes living in patriarchy real tough.  We gotta stick up for ourselves and each  other, Dykes. Have to have some pride in  who we are and begin caring about each  other.  We all act out and end up supporting  male hatreds of ourselves and each other.  Hatreds like racism, ageism, anti-semitism,  classism and sizeism (to mention a very  few) aren't okay. Each of us have Dyke-hating and women-hating behaviours. Gotta  talk about the things that separate us and  the ways that we are all connected and similar. We can change together. Our future  Dyke sisters depend on us being active in  creating our/their culture just like we've  relied on all those who have gone before  us.  If you're a lesbian, that means born female, and are interested in any of this, come  along for: Lesbian Sisterhood, Celebrating International Women's Day, Sunday  March 15, l-4pm at Mount Pleasant Neighbourhood House. An ASL interpreter will  be available at the event, [see the IWD calendar of page 21 for full details.]  Shochi  Tf ALL bVh  Sisters  rU??Y  This IWD, I wish women renewed energy to keep fighting for our feminist revolution. We need to regain the solidarity and  unity that comes from our hearts and minds  and give us a common understanding of  the inter-connectedness of our liberation.  The struggle must continue until each  woman on earth can enjoy a life free from  exploitation and can have autonomy over  their bodies, free from heterosexism and  racism. It must continue until women are  free to have a life that is full no just work  and struggle, but also recreation, creativity  and self-expression.  I am sure that we women won't stop  until we see a complete transformation of  the system in which we live now.  Viva la revolution.  Your companera,  Ema Oropeza, Vancouver Status of  Women  We publish about women and the  Internet and network with women on the  Internet. We're celebrating women taking  up things on the Internet. There's been a  team of women from across Canada working together online and at meetings and  conference to fight for women's equal access to communications technologies.  We're excited to be part of this movement to ensure more resources are made  available to the diversity of women. This  International Women's Day we completely  celebrate the achievements of women who  are creating online resources for all women  and helping to build the global sisterhood.  Jo Sutton, Women'Space, Halifax,  Nova Scotia  y#&*r.  ?N*tVoMAL  *'ñ†  o  >c  -^nie,  rA!  ot  <m s  vD  s.' Feature  Women and HIV/AIDS in Canada:  Issues remain complex  by Janet Madsen  AIDS has had a high profile in the  media for almost twenty years now. Nevertheless, it is still highly stigmatized. At  this stage in the epidemic, there is no end  in sight and the demands placed on AIDS  service organizations are increasing as the  complexity of HIV disease continues to  unfold. Policy and human rights issues are  constantly under scrutiny, and support  services are changing as the profile of the  HTV-positive population expands.  To encourage community services to  respond to these emerging trends, the Canadian AIDS Society sponsored a conference in Toronto in January. Billed as "an interactive learning experience for people  working in HIV/AIDS," the Canadian  HTV/AIDS Skills Building Symposium offered seventy workshops in addition to satellite symposiums and lunch time presentations. Not surprisingly, the days were  packed.  Sessions were organized into five  streams: policy, legal and ethical issues;  care, counselling and support; organizational development; prevention; and treatment. Sessions were presented in three-and-  a-half-hour workshops with an emphasis  on process and hands-on experience.  Because of the length of the sessions, it  was difficult to "hop" from session to session, as is often possible at other HIV/AIDS  conferences. I've focussed here on some issues that affect women's health:  criminalization and mandatory testing, and  the challenge of community education.  Policy issues: troubling questions  Criminalization of HTV transmission is  a hot topic right now, and is coming to the  forefront in a number of legal cases.  Criminalization of HTV transmission refers  to a situation in which an HTV infected person engages in behaviours that could put  another person at risk for HTV infection  without advising the uninfected person that  there is a risk of HTV infection. There have  been a number of court cases—at least 17—  launched against people who have had sex  when they knowingly had HTV infection,  but did not disclose it to their partners. For  women in particular, the criminalization of  HTV infection poses dangerous problems.  In heterosexual relationships, there is always the issue of power imbalance between  men and women. In all but one of these 17  cases, it has been a man putting women at  risk.  One can argue that the criminalization  of HTV transmission could, therefore, protects the rights of women. Yet consider applying the law in reverse circumstances.  Consider a woman in a relationship where  she is dependent on a man who is prone to  violence. She discovers that she is HIV positive, but is afraid to disclose this to her partner, because doing so may mean a beating,  or worse. If HIV transmission is  criminalized, a woman in this situation  could face serious legal ramifications.  Given the potential for discrimination  and violence against all people living with  HIV, the criminalization of transmission is  a frightening prospect.  Another difficult topic relating to  women's health is HTV testing of pregnant  women. As of June 1984, British Columbia  "highly recommends" that women be tested  for HTV as part of prenatal treatment. The  pressing question is: Should HIV testing be  mandatory? Some women might argue that  it already is.  Discussion of testing pregnant women  must include consideration of the impact of  HIV diagnosis on individuals, particularly  at a vulnerable time like pregnancy. It must  also include discussion of care and support,  discrimination, isolation and confidentiality.  If HIV testing is done as part of routine prenatal care, are women receiving appropriate pre-test counselling? If it is done as part  of a routine, are they really able to make an  informed "choice"?  Many women in large urban centres report discrimination and difficulty in accessing respectful, supportive health care. How  might things be for a women who discovers  she's HTV+ and pregnant in a small town  where she is the only HTV+ person her doctor treats? How can HIV treatments be distributed confidentially in a community  where the woman knows the pharmacist and  delivery room nurses?  In North America, the average rate of  transmission from mother to infant without  treatment of any kind is 25 percent. With  treatment (AZT, and often a combination of  other drugs), transmission can be reduced  to less than eight percent. With these odds,  should those who test positive be required  to undergo treatment to reduce the risk of  transmitting HIV to their baby? How is a  pregnant woman's health care compromised  if she opts against treatment.  The problem is that we do not know the  long term effects AZT has on infants. Studies have been done on AZT-treated babies at  18 months of age, and they were at the same  developmental levels as their untreated  peers. But the long term picture is still murky.  What will happen to the children of these  children? It is ethical to recommend therapy  without knowledge of its long term effects?  Given that use of the therapies does decrease  the rate of transmission, it is ethical to let  women go untreated?  Mandatory testing is a tricky field that  can be likened to the abortion debate: whose  rights are more important, mother or child?  Ultimately, testing and treatment decisions  should be up to women.  Providing support: alternative  models  HTV+ women live with the challenges  of poverty, violence, addiction, racism, and  sexism, on top of HIV/AIDS phobia. It is  difficult to reach women with education and  messages of support when they are struggling to meet their basic needs. One session  at the symposium addressed the support  model of meeting populations where they  are at, in a culturally appropriate way.  Presenters Filomena Carvalho, Sarafina  Hui and Anda Li discussed efforts to educate women in metropolitan Toronto. Nobody at the Toronto Women's Health Centre  assumes that women who need help will  phone or drop in for information on HTV and  sexual health.  To ensure that women from  marginalized communities in Toronto have  access to health care and sexual health information, the Centre uses a mobile van  equipped with medical facilities. Many of  the women who use the services are busy  working in factories, and have no chance  to leave their jobs for half a day to see a  doctor. The Mobile Health Unit makes  stops at various sites, offering informa  tion on breast health, reproductive health  and nutrition.  Mobile Health Unit workers report  that HIV education must be delivered as  part of general information on reproductive health, because speaking about HIV  in and of itself would be alienating.  Women tend to think that marriage will  protect them from STDs, but do ask for  information they can give to their children. This creates some room to talk about  HIV The aim is to make sexual health a  normal and everyday discussion among  women and in families.  The Centre says it has managed to get  the support of factory managers by marketing the efforts as non-intrusive on company time (the van visits during scheduled breaks) and as an effort to reduce absenteeism due to ill health. Sessions are  quick (usually about 20 minutes), with  time for women to see a doctor after the  Employers and employees!  Avoid problems in future by  having responsible hiring,  dismissal, harrassment and  human rights policies.  MUNRO« PARFITT  LAWYE RS  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z lk9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  quality legal services  woman friendly atmosphere  labour/employment, human rights,  civil litigation and  public interest advocacy.  general information session. Sessions can  be delivered in a variety of languages.  The issue of community access to HTV  education has been addressed in a different way in Edmonton. Stella Yeung, a nurse  with an interest in community education,  saw the need to educate the non-English  speaking Chinese community about HTV/  AIDS. Addressing the issue with a variety  of approaches, Yeung managed to: get arti-  (\-OBe4*iL*jbo  cles published in the community Chinese  newspaper; coordinate a series of three  broadcasts on Chinese radio; organize HTV  workshops in Chinese churches; and coordinate a 24-hour Chinese health information hotline. Some efforts were more successful than others. The information line  was not well utilized, and Yeung thinks that  the community was too shy to call in with  personal questions. The idea for the newspaper column met resistance from the editor, she said, but was well worth the effort.  The newspaper is circulated to thousands  of readers in Edmonton and Calgary.  What was clear from the conference  presentations is that women are creatively  educating women. It is alarming (and yet  exhaustingly familiar) that women are not  able to discuss their own health with the  power to make their own choices about  birth control or STD risk reduction. What  is energizing, however, is that women aren't  accepting the pressures from communities  to silence the subject of HTV/AIDS.  The conference was well planned and  provided so many interesting options that  it was diffuclt to choose the "right" session  to attend. It addressed a range of topics  from policy development and media relations to providing support strategies and  recognizing the reality of organizational  grief. As a worker in the HTV/AIDs community, I found the sessions thought provoking and valuable in the ongoing strug-  Janet Madsen is the Communications Coordinator at Positive Women's Network in Vancouver, a community-based organization that  supports women living with HIV/AIDS to  make their own choices by providing safe access to services and resources.  MARCH 1998 Feature  Women's organizations and BC Human Rights Code:  The struggle for women  only space  by Virginia Woo, Jeanne d'Arc, Maria  N. Penn and Clara   Four women involved with various Lower  Mainland women's organizations came together last month to talk about feminist political organizing, and the recent recommendations for inclusion of "gender identity" as a  prohibited ground of discrimination under the  BC Human Rights Code. Should BC proceed  with such an amendment to the Code, it would  be the first province in Canada to provide explicit protection for transgendered peoples.  There has been little discussion on the huge  impact such legislation could have on the existing structures of women's organizations, or  how it could cancel out existing protections that  currently allow us to organize women-only  centres and groups.  The four women have chosen to use pseudonyms for fear of reprisals and violence. Collectively they represent women in terms of race,  sexual orientation, disabilities and other  marginalizations. The opinions here are those  of the women, not o/Kinesis.  Clara: It's scary how uncritically The  Vancouver Sun reported the BC Human  Rights Commission's recommendations for  changes to the Human Rights Code. The  new protected area is vague and simplistic  and does not look at why we have women-  only spaces to begin with.  There is a lack of recognition of the realities of how male-to-female transgendered people (M-to-Fs) have been socialized as males. There is so much denial  about this. In a recent issue of Xtra West,  Kate Bornstein [a M-to-F transsexual activist] actually acknowledges she lived with  male privilege when she lived as a man. I  felt so grateful for that scrap of acknowledgement. My hope is that some M-to-F  will say, "Maybe it is okay to acknowledge  my privilege."  Jeanne d'Arc: There is not enough information or honesty on how being a  woman and being transgendered (TG) are  different experiences. A dangerous thing is  that women's concerns and our very real  fears are being dismissed as hysterical,  paranoid. All the terminology that has ever  been used against women to say we are  crazy is being thrown at us again.  Clara: I've heard women who think  transgendered peoples should be welcomed into women's organizations say,  "Well, you just deal with the behaviour. So  what if they are socialized differently?" By  the time that behaviour happens, a significant amount of crap has already been  heaped on women in the organization.  Penn: What if women said, as some  once did, "Why don't we just deal with the  behaviour of men? We don't need women-  only spaces."  Clara: Women have, in large part, been  afraid to talk about these issues for fear  they'll be called "transphobic" or "discriminatory." That silences us. The only voice  being heard in Vancouver on this issue has  been the pro-transsexual, pro-trans-  gendered, pro-"inclusion" one. I've heard  stories of physical and emotional violence  against women, stories of threats and intimidations...  Penn: ...and the lawsuits against  women-only organizations for not letting  M-to-Fs in.  Clara: I want to talk about what it  means when a woman in a woman-only  support group for issues of sexual abuse  or coming out as a lesbian is forced to deal  understanding of "woman," "man," "lesbian," "gay," et cetera. They are  deconstructing terms we still need in order to define what is happening,  deconstructing what it means to mobilize  politically. So what students are being  taught is working against what feminists  are trying to build.  d'Arc: To me, deconstructing is nothing less than destroying. My question is, in  this "post-modernist" movement of which  queer theory is a large part, what exactly is  being created? Queer theory never built a  "When you throw a lawsuit at somebody  knowing it can wipe out the resources they  have, it tells me there is no sense of connection  with the people in that group." - ciara  with someone who has lived with male  privilege, power and all the safety in the  world a male feels in relation to a woman.  We are not talking about just individual or  group rights for transsexuals (TSs). This is  also about the effect on other people,  namely women. On that basis, it may look  like we are being "discriminatory"...  Penn: ...but we don't discriminate because we don't have the power to discriminate. We are discriminated against. That is  why we organize in women-only spaces.  The language we use to describe the oppression we have lived and survived and  fought against for centuries is now being  turned against us. That is why, when people say, you're being "transphobic" or  exclusionary, everybody goes, "Oh shit, I've  been excluded before and I swore I would  never do that to anyone." That is what confuses and silences us.  d'Arc: Women who have experienced  their entire lives as women or females—as  an oppressed group—are now being told  there is a hierarchy of oppressions and we  are actually on top. The argument that  women are oppressing some group of people only works if you completely take out  of a larger social context of patriarchy.  Virginia Woo: We have to think about  why women fought to secure women-only  space. Then, the question becomes "Has  anything really changed that makes those  safe spaces for women unnecessary?" The  answer is that it is more crucial than ever,  given the incredible backlash against  women and lesbians, that these spaces be  safeguarded and valued. There is an idea  out there that we are in a "post-feminist"  phase; we are beyond needing women-only  spaces.  Penn: That impression is very deliberately being put out there. In fact, we are  actually losing in terms of how every one  of our grassroots organizations has been cut  back or negatively affected in recent times.  Clara: Queer theory also works against  us because it attempts to "deconstruct" the  women's centre. Queer theory, as I understand it, never built anything.  The term "queer" has bloomed to encompass not just gay men and lesbians, but  also bisexuals and TGs as allies. Being an  ally is different from actually being a particular group. You can work together to  support one another but you don't have to  then collapse into one another. You can  work with difference and create your own  spaces. It's like being good neighbours. You  have agreement on where your line is, but  you both share that fence. Queer theory  destroys and collapses valid differences.  How is that truly challenging social structures and injustice?  Penn: When you get rid of the labels,  which queer theory does, it does not get  rid of the oppression. Our differences are  expressed through labels.  d'Arc: Naming is a powerful thing. I  have always said to people who identify  as queer, "Fine. You feel you united with  all these groups. But when somebody  strikes you, what ground are you fighting  back from and what for?  Instead of being allies, it has become a  serious competition about being the biggest, baddest, most transgressive without  addressing daily needs, like those of  women who are survivors of abuse. I have  never seen queer theory address any of  those realities. It simply says, "I am free to  be anything I want to be." Yeah, I wake up  every morning and think that too. But I recognize my reality and how hard I have to  work towards creating that reality.  Penn: Queer theory not only doesn't  recognize people's realities, but it challenges women-only spaces with: "Why do  you need them?" They say, "Why are you  creating this gender divide." In their eyes,  we are responsible for creating the problem. We know we are trying to work towards women's equality, and in doing so,  we need to organize women-only spaces.  Woo: The issue of transgendered "inclusion" in women-only spaces is part of a  transgender    (TG):  originally, this word meant (1) what  are also known as full-time cross  dressers or nonsurgical transsexuals, people who live and work  in the opposite (of their physical  anatomical) gender continuously  and for always. Now it also means  (2) the group of all people who are  inclined to cross the gender line,  including transsexuals, cross-  dressers and gender benders  together.This is the main way the  word is used today, and is referred  to as the "umbrella definition" as it  covers everyone. A few use the  word trasgender as (3) a synonym  for transsexual.  transsexual (TS): anyone  who (1) wants to have (2) has had,  or (3) should have a sex-change  operation. (The third definition is  for those in denial.VThis word also  includes (4) nonsurgical transsexuals—transsexuals who seek  sex reallignment through  hormones and who cross-live, but  stop short of surgery.TSs want to  appear "convincing" as their new  selves.  bigger challenge facing women's organizations—the backlash against the women's  movement and feminism. It pisses me off  we have to put so much energy into dealing with the TG issue. We are forced to because we could lose our organizations. The  TG issue has become a big threat for a  number of women's organizations who  have had to expend resources, energy and  time addressing it.  Women's organizations have had  fights internally, collectives have been broken up to the point where it's more difficult to work as women to build a different  and better world, to break down the injustices and the oppressions. I am here because  I believe in feminism. It is one of the few  political movements left that can make  something good happen.  Penn: li it wasn't for the strength of the  women's movement and what women's  groups have to offer, nobody would be  knocking on our doors. We are only just  beginning to be funded for the work we've  been doing for centuries on very minimal  resources. The strength of the women's  movement is what attracts the attacks of the  false memory syndrome lobby-  Woo: ..the fathers' rights groups...  Penn: ...and the TG movement.  d'Arc: I find the use of lawsuits very  interesting, in the way the trans movement  is utilizing the State to get what it perceives  as its right. The trans movement—and I'm  speaking specifically about M-to-Fs—say  they are challenging the State and what  continued next page  15 Feature  society considers to be norm, yet they are  utilizing gender clinics and lawsuits to  break down the very organizations they  assume they want to be in.  Now to me, if you want to be part of  an organization, you don't use a lawsuit.  Collectivity or community building happens by having a real dialogue about one's  own privilege. When you throw a lawsuit  at somebody knowing it can wipe out the  resources they have, it tells me there is no  sense of connection with the people in that  group. It tells me that you think because  the door is closed to you, it should be closed  to everyone else as well. Right there, that  tells me there is a total lack of understanding of women's oppression.  I think people who identify as M-to-F  need space to figure out what their issues  are. I don't think existing women's organizations are the place for that. The TG/TS  communities would probably find a lot  more support from the feminist community  if there was a move to create their own  spaces and gouge out a piece of the pie from  the State to provide basic services for really crucial issues. That is where the money  is at, not with women's organizations  which are already stretched to the gills.  Clara: It is fine if women who are  aligned with M-to-F transsexuals want to  be in groups together. But women born  women need our spaces as well. We cannot rely on the law or the Gender Clinic at  the Vancouver General Hospital to fight for  feminism. What do they care about broader  issues around surgically changing a man  and making him a "woman?" That's about  male-dominated systems controlling people's bodies. It's separate and distant from  the political work we do.  d'Arc: The cost of the surgery and issues of access are also interesting. To create  a M-to-F is way more perfected than a female-to-male (F-to-M). It costs one-third to  create a M-to-F than to create a F-to-M. It  makes you think about the worth of female-  ness from a medical standpoint.  Clara: I've heard of young people refer  to sex-realignment therapy as "trendy." We  know there are some young women who  are vulnerable because they feel feminism  hasn't done for them what they think it  should have. They blame feminism instead  of all the oppressive factors in the world  feminism fights against. These young  women are picking up on sex-realignment  and saying, "Oh, scrap all the labels, I can  be whoever I want." And then they start  popping hormones.  d'Arc: There's a very high risk of liver  damage. You could be choosing deliberately to shorten your life. But that is not  discussed out there as part of the debate.  You can also get hormones illegally and  there are books on how to inject yourself.  Penn: I am worried about how this issue pits women against each other. I've seen  women's organizations doing the same  work, caring about the same women, concerned about the same issues for the last 20  years not talking to each other around this  issue. Once upon a time, women faced censure for "excluding" men by creating  women-only space. When women of colour or Aboriginal women or lesbian caucuses first came about and right up to the  early 90's, the concept of getting together  on their own in spaces separate from white  or straight women was considered  "exclusionary." Now we are considered  "exclusionary" for wanting women-only  spaces all over again.  Clara: How "transphobia" is different  from racism or homophobia comes through  when we look at the issue of how F-to-Ms  can be absorbed into the male-gendered  world without too many problems because  most spaces are male-dominated. The M-  to-F makes the transition into a position of  less privilege, but brings with him the comfort of having had that privilege and power.  And the denial about why women are resisting is typically male. It proves to me  they can get surgically altered and become  "women." But it shows they have been socialized as men to demand the space from  us instead of creating space for themselves.  Now some women might say, "We  know women born women who are  agressive, yet they've been socialized as  women."  Woo: That's why we have to take it  away from being about individuals and  look at it in the larger societal context.  Penn: Only the behaviour is about individuals. What we are addressing is not  about men being good or bad but about  Clara: Most M-to-Fs want to be called  "women," not TGs or TSs. The potential BC  Human Rights amendment forces that division so that, to go back to queer theory,  trying to break down this oppositional  male/female gender model is about having people fit into one or the other gender.  Why can't there be a third option, instead  of having to chose to adapt and force oneself into being either male or female?  d'Arc: It's about forcing that narrow  reality on an entire group of people. What  I've faced from M-to-Fs is having to conform to a certain reality, irrespective of what  my experience has been. But what I hear  from them is "No, you don't have the right  to claim your own herstory. I, with two  years of cross-living experience, have the  right to dictate to you what a woman is."  This is when I realized this has nothing to  do with sharing with other women or con-  "Women's organizations should not be  asked to be gender clinics." -Jeanne d'Arc  male power, the patriarchy and how it  works to oppress women.  Clara: It's about walking down the  street feeling safe at night. It's about being  sexually abused as a five-year old girl.  Penn: It's about our institutions saying  that that five-year old girl should go back  to her daddy who sexually abused her because really, he is a good father, a good provider. It's about women resisting the state  doing that to us, to her.  Woo: Women's organizations were  formed out of a history and a context which  hasn't really changed a lot. It shouldn't get  down to good or bad individuals. We have  to look at why it is necessary to keep women's organizations alive and thriving.  Women's organizations are about  fighting for social change. This notion of  inclusion and what that means to women's  organizations isn't just, "Here's a little  space for you." It structurally changes what  we do when we allow transgendered people into our organizations. It isn't about  "Well, if one walks in the door we just won't  throw him out." It's about how, if a women's organization adopts a policy that says  we will accept TGs or any person identifying as a woman into our space, it will  change the services we provide, how we  do our hirings, what that means in terms  of TGs participating in the decision making of the organization.  d'Arc: What freaks me out in terms of  the socialization of TGs is the short amount  of time it takes for the State to give a M-to-  F or a F-to-M the stamp of approval. I don't  question the possibility of gender dysphoria. However, I suspect you have to play a  certain game in order to stay alive. You  leam to play so you are not targeted. I don't  think it is possible to unlearn all that, especially in a society where being male has  great rewards. And if you can enter women-  only space, it means there is no more re-  socialization work to be done, you've "arrived."  The Vancouver General Hospital will  support sex realignment surgery if you can  "cross-live" successfully for two years.  Medical Services Plan and the gender clinics in Montreal and Toronto also suggest  two-year frameworks. Woman-oppression  starts the day a woman is born, but a  transexxual can cross-live as a "woman" for  two years and that is supposedly enough  to undo a lifetime of what you had to learn  to survive.  necting with women. It has everything to  do with "You have to plug into my  reality...and if you don't, I'll stick Big  Brother on you."  Penn: One issue people talk about is  violence against TGs and TSs. TGs do get  raped-sometimes because they are mistaken for women; sometimes because they  are TGs or TSs. But the experience of rape  is not the same. Historically, women have  always lived closer to the potential of rape  and often experience it at very young ages.  Again, it speaks to the difference in experience that comes with being a woman.  But why do you think that until now  women's organizations have been silent on  the issue of TGs in women's organizations?  D'Arc: People are afraid to go on  record. Why are we all anonymous here in  this article? You are afraid to go on record  because if the legislation goes though you  can get seriously ostracized. The rights to  debates and to know all sides of the argument has being taken away from us. There  are no forums with all sides of the argument for people to get informed.  We also haven't talked about the issue  of behaviour in terms of our organizations  becoming volunteer spots for M-to-Fs trying to transition to "womanhood." It becomes a trial-and-error experiment in trying to figure it out "Am I a woman? Can I  pass as a woman?"  You can end up wreaking complete  havoc in a women's organization as you  attempt to unlearn male privilege. An organization that exists to assist women in  crisis ends up dealing with something antithetically opposed to its mandate, and  distracting, disruptive and destructive to a  healing space. This behaviour stems from  the woman-hating and disrespect men are  taught. It's not the same as internalized sexism, no matter how badly a M-to-F may  want to argue it is.  Clara: The onus falls on the women in  the women's organization to spend time  and resources in trying to resocialize the  M-to-Fs...  d'Arc:...and having to call them on their  shit, which includes envy of women born  women. Women's organizations should not  be asked to be gender clinics. Women are  there to share with one another based on  lifelong experience and collective understanding. There seems to be a real refusal  to acknowlege that M-to-F transsexuality  is a completely different issue. It is sad there  is little sharing with each other except on a  political level to attack us and state their  claims.  Penn: It's easy for everyone to be a  champion of TG people and say, "Yeah, we  are going to serve them." But what do we  have to offer? Who understands that particular experience TGs have been through?  It has then been argued that maybe women's organizations should start offering  services specifically for TG people.  Woo: Why do women's organizations  have to take that on? With limited resources, women's organizations are still trying to meet the needs of lesbians, women  of colour, Aboriginal women, women with  disabilities.  Penn: Does the BC Human Rights legislation to protect TGs intend to put some  money behind it? Are they actually going  to offer some services to TGs or are they to  be off-loaded onto community and women's agencies?  d'Arc: Each community has to think  really hard about this issue because it's easy  for everybody to just "fall in line" without  seriously recognizing the implications for  women [and women's organizations] on a  day-to-day basis. No one wants to talk  about transitioning and all the things that  occur when people are going through  change. Nobody's talking about the fact  that what they call "transsexual  adolesence" is about serious shifts in personality that come from taking hormones.  What does it mean to deal with people  who are on serious medication and trying  to transition? How does socialization in  male agression and hormones interplay?  Does it mean getting labelled "transphobic"  if you are not willing to deal with someone  going through that transition?  I'd like to know whether the BC Human Rights Commission is ready to open  their door for a bunch of claims, for example, from some individual who just decides  "I can say, 'I'm female in a man's body'." Is  the Commission ready for the backlog they  are going to have with that kind of stuff?  Clara: My hope is that women will consider what agency we have, the power we  have now and the power we potentially  stand to lose if the proposed recommendations become law.  d'Arc: Oddly enough, I look at this as  women learning to respect and honour our  own difference and claim it without getting  into feeling we are discriminating. It is guilt  that is stopping women from speaking up  and saying, "Look, I'm not transphobic. I'm  different. Good luck organizing your own  stuff. I will help you create what you need  for your own resources, but don't destroy  my resources." I think M-to-Fs are unwilling to admit the kind of silencing and the  disruption to service in women's centres  they've created.  Woo: That's why the women's movement has to take the transgendered issue  seriously. It isn't something to which we can  say "Let's wait and see" or "It won't happen here," or "It's just a BC issue." A lot of  women's organizations are being challenged, targeted and sued, legislation or no  legislation.  There was more than a decade-long  struggle towards just getting some acknowledgement of the need for women's  equality-even on paper. It's interesting to  note that the TG issue has the support of  the State pushing it. Where the hell was the  State in protecting the rights of women?  Where is it now? Feminist bookstores in  Canada:  Survival is critical  by Anjula Gogia  When I was asked to write an article  on the "state of feminist bookstores," the  first thing that came to mind was a question that almost every bookseller working  in a progressive independent bookstore  gets asked: why do we do it? The pay is  lousy, the hours long, the work is endless,  et cetera.  Our usual response: because it's a labour of love, because of our passion for  books, a drive to showcase writing and literature otherwise ignored, and a commitment to ideas and imagination that nurture  the soul and challenge the view that the  bottom line of profit is all-important.  The second thing that came to mind  were all the stores that have closed in the  past two years—from Halifax to Victoria,  New York to Anchorage, women's and independent bookstores have been closing  down, while others are in serious trouble.  The list of closures is endless: Ottawa Women's Bookstore, Vancouver Women's Bookstore, Red Herring in Halifax, Women's  Work in Nanaimo, Everywoman Books in  Victoria.  From my position as a buyer for the  Toronto Women's Bookstore, it's a depressing situation, but one that makes us more  determined to stay alive and thrive.  The reasons for this perilous state are  numerous. Most obvious is the tremendous  effect that the explosion of "superstores"  have had on independent bookstores across  the continent. In Canada, Chapters expects  to have 75 superstores by the year 2000.  We need only to look at the situation  in the United States, where superstores  have dominated the market for several  years, to predict the outcome. In many cities in the US, there are no independent  bookstores—feminist or otherwise—since  Barnes & Noble and Borders, the two largest chains, opened up.  Proponents of these chains argue that  their existence should make smaller independents more "competitive." This argument could be true if we were all in a level  playing field, but we are not. Superstores,  in Canada and the US, have been able to  form virtual monopolies because of the  unfair advantages they have claimed. They  obtain higher discounts, more lenient credit  status, first dibs on author readings and  signings, and the list goes on.  The case of higher discounts is an important one. Few people realize how small  the mark-up on books is: an average of 40  percent. For example, if you buy a book for  $10, the store keeps $4, and sends $6 to the  publisher. When superstores can demand  higher discounts on books, they can then  use that extra money for ads, promotions,  salaries and so on.  Another disturbing trend is the charge  these superstores levy for displaying books.  Publishers are now paying big money to  get 100 copies of their latest celebrity biography stacked near the entrance; they're  paying fees even to get their books faced  out on the shelves. This notion is reprehensible to anyone who promotes books not  for their dollar value, but for their creative  and intellectual worth.  Recently, the American Booksellers'  Association successfully sued the large  publishing house Penguin /Pearson for $25  million in a landmark anti-trust case. This  settlement remunerated independent booksellers for the enormous damage done by  illegal and unfair trading practices that favour the chains and superstores. In the case,  Penguin acknowledged that they had  awarded $77 million more in discounts to  a handful of accounts, presumably  older books. She said it was, in fact, women's and independent bookstores that have  always carried her full range of books. The  disappearance of women's bookstores  means that books like Alice Walker's—  which are feminist, anti-racist, and progressive—will be harder and harder to find.  The Toronto Women's Bookstore has  had its own share of difficulties. We have  We approach our future with a mixture of  hope, faith and fear.  superstores. The ABA demonstrated that  although independent bookstores purchases equalled those of the superstores, the  latter were rewarded with the additional  discounts. This case is interesting to us in  Canada because it proves that large discrepancies do exist, and that they are illegal.  The situation of women's bookstores,  in many ways, parallels that of independent and feminist presses. Across the US and  Canada, many small presses are also in  danger of closing down, while others have  greatly reduced the number of titles they  offer. These presses are suffering.  While many people have lauded the  fact that superstores stock large numbers  of books, they often overlook the fact that  the same stores also return huge volumes  of books to publishers. So the actual  number of books being sold by the smaller  and feminist presses has decreased in the  past few years.  Other critics wonder if women's bookstores, as well as feminist presses, are relevant now that the large stores carry many  women's titles, and large publishing houses  represent many prominent women writers.  It is true that the chain bookstores now  stock many women writers; however, they  can never compare to the range and depth  offered by women's bookstores.  I stepped into the large new Barnes &  Noble bookstore in Philadelphia recently.  Their lesbian fiction section was a meagre  two rows, while the Toronto Women's  Bookstore has at least ten times that  amount.  Women's bookstores have a commitment to stocking books on violence against  women, lesbian fiction and non-fiction,  feminist theory, and much more. We have  very strong policies against carrying any  racist or homophobic books. We care more  about the contents of a book than about  the profit incentive.  Alice Walker reiterated this fact last  year during the tour for her book Anything  We Love Can Be Saved. She mentioned that  while the two large American bookstore  chains displayed pictures of her and her  new book, they did not carry any of her  just launched our 25th anniversary celebrations, which have given us a chance to reflect on the many ups and downs in our  history. In many ways, our story parallels  that of the women's movement. We began  as a small shelf in a resource library, and  have now grown to be the largest feminist  non-profit bookstore in the country. We  have alternated between collective and private ownership, hierarchical and collective  decision making, and struggled over issues  of racism.  Five years ago, we narrowly averted  bankruptcy and barely kept our doors  open. We have been particularly hard hit  by the recession and the devastating impact  of the Conservative government of Mike  Harris on the province. We approach 1998,  however, with a renewed sense of stability,  growth and excitement, in spite of the huge  new Chapters store only three blocks away.  What's the reason for this optimism?  A turning point was our extensive store  renovations in March 1996, which not only  made our stock wheelchair accessible, but  gave the store a new sense of vitality. The  renovations also created a large space to  hold author readings, which we have organized for over two years.  There are five factors that have worked  in tandem to get us to where we are now.  First, we have an efficient staff. After our  near closure in 1992, the store moved from  a collective to a system of a manager who  has staff working with her. Although decisions are made cooperatively, there is someone accountable and responsible to our  customers and suppliers. We now have four  full time staff, each with her own area of  responsibility in running the store.  Second, we have the good fortune of  having an extremely loyal customer base.  These are the customers who have stuck  with us through hard times and good—  women who have shopped and volunteered here for years, and who have rallied  around us and continued to shop when we  almost closed our doors.  Third, many local, national and international women writers have supported us  by launching their books at the store. In the  past two years, we have sponsored at least  one reading a month at the store. Women  such as Lee Maracle, Joy Kogawa, Elly  Danica, Daphne Marlatt, Anne Michaels,  Dionne Brand and many, many more have  shown us their commitment to independent spaces for women's words.  Canadian presses, as well as many of  the larger publishing houses, have shown  us the trust and support that is crucial to  the survival of the independent bookstores.  And finally, the academic community  in Toronto has ensured that the store stays  around for another 25 years. Course book  sales to the University of Toronto, York  University, and many other colleges have  formed an integral part of the bookstore's  economic revival and growth. Thanks to  the ongoing faith of many feminist professors we have a stable source of income during the months of September and January.  If any women's bookstore is going to  survive in this increasingly corporate and  global economy, it must be able to find stable sources of income in order to sustain  itself. Community groups and conference  organizers should always consider the local women's independent bookstore for  supplying their large conference. The academic community must realize that independent bookstores ensure access to books  on feminist and queer theory, psychology,  and other disciplines.  Organizations including shelters, libraries, and community groups need to  turn to their women's bookstore for large  buying. Publishers need to remember that  independent bookstores pride ourselves on  our depth of knowledge and love of books,  and our ability to hand-sell books by talking about them—something that the large  chains are rarely be able to do. Customers  who love to browse at the big stores, write  down that book you wanted and order it  through your local women's bookstore. We  need every sale and all the support we can  get.  As the Toronto Women's Bookstore  celebrates a quarter of a century, we are  finding new ways of linking with Toronto's diverse and active community to help  us celebrate. For the past two years we have  initiated our "community venture" project,  whereby we donate 10 percent of our regular sales on the last Friday of every month  to a different community organization.  From 1996 to 1997, we have donated over  $1,000 to groups such as the Native Women's Resource Centre, Black Coalition for  AIDS Prevention, Toronto Rape Crisis Centre, and many others. This has enabled us  to help local groups that have been devastated by cuts, and to reach many other constituencies in the city.  We are continuing our popular reading series, as well as offering courses, workshops and reading groups in the store. In  January, we launched our website (http: / /  www.web.net/~twb) with the help of volunteers.  We approach our future with a mixture  of hope, faith and fear. As we see our sister  stores struggling and closing across the continent, we know just how precarious our  own situation is. As with most independent bookstores, we battle and juggle to pay  our bills. We witness the invasion of  superstores, but we are hopeful that our  sales will continue to sustain us so that we  can nurture a vision for women's writing  and culture.  Anjula Gogia has been working at her dream  job as buyer at the Toronto Women's Bookstore  since August 1996. Women and environmental activism:  Feminist camp at  Clayoquot  by Shannon e. Ash   FURY FOR THE SOUND: THE  WOMEN AT CLAYOQUOT  Written, directed and produced by Shelley  Wine, Telltale Productions, Vancouver, BC,  1998  It's been almost five years since the  Clayoquot Sound blockade became the  largest civil disobedience action in Canadian history. Yet, this film about the protest  against the logging of old-growth forests  The historical connection is emphasized from the start, with the voices of  women protesting the logging over shots  of clearcuts followed by comments about  women as activists and footage (somewhat  worse for wear) of a women's suffrage  march.  We see also footage of the Chipko  Movement (subtitled "the original tree-  huggers"—humorous, yet giving credit  where it is due)— which began as a  "Social movements don't die.  they grow."  on Vancouver Island and the women who  took part in it, is still timely.  Fury for the Sound focuses on women's roles in the Clayoquot protest: what  brought them there, their experiences and  their analysis, and linking this to the  broader history of women's environmental activism. The film begins by noting that  two thirds of those arrested at Clayoquot  in 1993 were women. Filmmaker Shelley  Wine describes the film as a "personal narrative within a historical record."  In-depth interviews with key women  involved in the blockade are featured. Some  were at the centre of the media spotlight,  such as Valerie Langer of the Friends of  Clayoquot Sound (FOCS) and Tzeporah  Berman, a blockade organizer. Others are  lesser-known: grandmothers Betty  Krawczyk and Irene Abbey, and Peggy  Fraser, a young woman from the Ahousat  Nation.  The interviews take place at different  times in different locations. Since the time  of the blockade, the women interviewed  have had a chance to reflect upon their experiences.  Himalayan women's protest against deforestation but spread without a formal movement. Says Vandana Shiva, Indian ecological feminist activist: "Movements like that  are never born, so they don't die...they're  part of the collective consciousness."  The focus of this film, however, is on  Clayoquot Sound. We learn about Vancouver Island logging, these women's first impressions of the Sound area, and we see footage of earlier, smaller blockades. This  "Clayoquot 101" may be old news for those  already familiar with the issue, but it is a  useful introduction.  The April 1993 Clayoquot land-use decision by then-premier of British Columbia  Mike Harcourt and the NDP government,  which sparked the blockade, is also covered.  Commenting on the government's role in  the decision and its later legal manoeuvres—changing the charges against protesters from civil to criminal contempt—protester Wanda Best comments: "The biggest  intent of government is to stay in  government...If they don't work with big  business, they don't survive."  We get "behind the scenes" look at the  peace camp and blockade. The massive sup-  XfgfBookA  ,    V    9^     Art Emporium  Western Canada's  Lesbian & Gay  Bookstore  Open Daily 10am to 1 lpm  Our Books/Our Issues  Gay Fiction  Lesbian Fiction  Our Magazines & Journals  AIDS/Health  Humour  Erotica  Little Sister's Book & Art Emporium  1238 Davie Street,Vancouver,B.C,V6E 1N4  (604)669-1753 Phone Orders 1-800-567-1662  Internet Address: http://www.lsisters.com  Queer Theory  Feminist Theory  Biographies, Essays, Poetry  Religion & Spirituality  Art & Photography  Community  port the Clayoquot blockade received was  unexpected, says Tzeporah Berman, given  it began with a small group of experienced  but "burned out" activists.  Berman discusses how the peace camp  was explicitly based on feminist principles,  with the Greenham Common women's  peace camp as a model. The peace camp  (and the blockade) served as a focal point  for those frustrated with clearcut logging  and needing to belong to a movement. The  camp also instilled a non-violence code,  had non-violence training, and was the site  of decision-making.  Valerie Langer notes that the camp was  a protest community and could not really  function like a "normal" community. She  also brings up the "image" or "hippie" issue, saying, with an amused chagrin, that  at times she thought: "Oh, my god... this is  like the '60s revisited." Middle-class, middle-aged protesters had to confront their  prejudices when standing beside those who  didn't fit a mainstream profile.  The role of children in the blockade  was also discussed. When some children  decided they would participate and be arrested, parents (mostly mothers) were  warned that their children could be apprehended by the Ministry of Social Services.  This particularly caused anxiety for the  mother of Peggy Fraser.  (Shelley Wine herself was arrested at  the women and children's blockade. Reference is made to the "controversy" regarding her receiving funds to make this film  from the Canada Council.)  Broader links are examined as Berman  speaks of women's social/cultural roles as  caretakers, which "give women an insight"  into environmental issues (such as toxins  affecting homes and children). It's argued  that the North American environmental  movement began with women's protests  against nuclear bomb tests.  Fury for the Sound touches on many issues, which is both its strength and its  weakness. That there are historical links  and complex issues is made clear, but some  of these issues, such as camp protocol and  image, and relationships with First Nations  communities, are not explored in any  depth. The specific "sections" of the film  are good but the connecting thread—women's historical role in environmental activism—is lost at times, as the film gets bogged  down in legal issues during the latter half.  I also have a minor quibble. Credits for  speakers are inconsistent; while some  speakers are identified right away, others  not until later in the film.  Overall, Fury for the Sound is inspiring  and informative, presenting a range of  women at different points in their experiences. It also has a great soundtrack—featured musicians include the Wyrd Sisters  and Veda Hille as part of a chorus singing  Bob Bossin's "Sulphur Passage."  The great variety of footage (not always of great quality) is very well put together—kudos to film editor Bonni Devlin.  Though the Clayoquot blockade of  1993 is now a memory, Fury for the Sound  succeeds in showing its continued relevance to environmental issues and women's activism. Faced with the comment that  the movement seems to have died down  since the mass arrests, Sile Simpson, sentenced to six months in jail for her part in  the blockade, replies: "Social movements  don't die...they grow."  Fury for the Sound will premiere in Vancouver on Friday, March 6 at 8:00pm at the  Vogue Theatre, 918 Granville St.  Shannon e. Ash, now living in Victoria, was  at the Clayoquot blockade and peace camp in  August 1993. Interview with videomaker Lorna Boschman:  The absurdity of dieting  as told to Cynthia Sharp   Vancouver's Lorna Boschman has an exciting new video out: Dr. Lorna's Seven Day  Poodle Diet. It's a 75-minute humorous look  at human reactions to the overblown diet industry and the disruption it causes through all  aspects of our lives.  Boschman is known for her earlier works,  such as the award winning videos True Inversions, produced with Kiss and Tell, and Our  Normal Childhood, and A Cancer Video, a  lyrical documentary of a friend's battle with  cancer.  The Seven Day Poodle Diet, Boschman's  first feature-length "filideo," stars Ardyth the  dancing poodle and a cast of "fat experts." It  will be the feature presentation during the  three-day Body Image Mini-Festival programmed by Video In Studios and Big B Productions, to be held on the International Women's Day weekend.  Cynthia Sharp had the chance to hook up  with Lorna Boschman to ask her about her latest video and her videomaking. Sharp is an  aspiring writer and video producer, enjoying  her first year on the coast.  Cynthia Sharp: In Dr. Lorna's Seven Day  Poodle Diet, you explore relationships between oppressions people face around the  construction of body image as well as other  oppressions such as racism and sexism. It  seems that you take a lot of feminist issues  like safety, violence against women and  male control of women and relate them to  body image. What do you see as the similarities and differences between oppression  based on the construction of body image  and other forms of oppression?  Lorna Boschman: The way I approached  it was not really from that perspective, but  I think that comes across because those are  my beliefs. When you're working on something as an artist, you set out to make a specific point and often it sounds really dogmatic. What I often try to do is to use it a  bit of humor, kind of as an investigation.  With the Seven Day Poodle Diet, it was  like going back to the old statement "the  personal is political." I wanted to use interviews because I wanted to explore for  myself what it really means to be fat, and  how I am treated by other people as a result.  What I found interesting to begin with  was that the more I learned about it, the  more I realized that the issue doesn't just  affect women and men who are fat; it affects everyone. The way it affects us fat  people is more obvious, like when someone points to you and says, "Oh, that person has no self-control" and makes fun of  you. There have been studies showing that  people who are fat are hired less often,  make lower wages and are disrespected in  many different ways.  Something that struck me in doing the  research for the video were the responses  to the word "fat." Even going around with  the press release, we were struck at how a  lot of people were turned off the festival  when they read the word "fat." They think  the video is just something for overweight  i people. Then, there are fat people themselves who say that the word is derogatory  and don't use it to identify themselves.  Surprisingly, even with all these ["anti-  fat" sentiments,] Readers' Digest says dieting is bad for you. I mean the most conservative magazine imaginable in North  America says dieting can lead to death. It's  almost unbelievable but there are doctors  who are still encouraging people to go on  diets. Diets don't work; they just mislead  people and build up their expectations. A  part of that is related to how people react  to the word fat.  I talked to people who were born in  different countries, and not just Canada, because I wanted to see just how people  around the world look at body image, and  how it is affected by culture. That was very  interesting because I think people born in  North America have a very different way  of looking at things.  In my research, I talked to a woman  who was born in India and she said that  when she was younger she never got any  dates because she was too skinny. The girls  who were plumper got more dates.  That was when she was growing up.  Now, she says, western media has come in  and has influenced a lot of people's approach. They have become more "westernized" in their outlook on body image.  In times where there's more scarcity of  food, then obviously the people who are  fat are the ones who are the wealthiest and  the ones who are more respected.  In some cultures, the most honoured  women are the queens and these queens are  totally fat. So, I guess, that's the way I approach it: more from a specific political  viewpoint.  Sharp: I remember someone in the  video saying that she went on a diet where  she didn't eat for 35 days. What is it like to  actually be able to say that and get the message out about how mainstream dieting is  affecting people's lives and how serious it  is?  Boschman: I think that for a lot of the  people interviewed it was the first time  someone had sat them down and said, "Tell  me what it's like to be fat." We had many  heart-to-heart conversations about being  fat. That's partly what I'm trying to do in  the Seven Day Poodle Diet: give the sense of  what, when nobody else is around, fat people talk about. It's almost like you're listening in on a private conversation.  One of the women who I think had the  most dramatic reaction to being in the video  is Sheila Baxter. She is an anti-poverty activist [in Vancouver] and if there's anyone  who is a model of what I'd like to be like  when I get a little bit older, it's Sheila.  She's not someone who has ever been  beaten down without a fight. She's very  active in the community. The other day she  was telling me she'd started facilitating a  writers' group at Carnegie Centre. Anyway,  in the video, it was the first time she'd really had a chance to talk about being fat.  Sheila said she tried everything: dieting pills when she was younger through to  every kind of therapy you can access. She  tried one diet and it made her gain ten  pounds. Now she's on another diet and  she's gained another ten pounds.  When I got the idea for the Pound  Keepers, who are "fat vigilantes," Sheila  Dr. Lorna in "Poodle Diet", photo by Susan Stewart  was so excited. These women shoot guns  and terrorize fat oppressors. She was having a really bad week and I just happened  to call her at the right time. It was the most  fun thing she could possibly imagine: doing a drive-by shooting at Jenny Craig.  Sharp: You use a lot of humour in your  work. How do you use that as a tool in  addressing the serious issues you raise?  Boschman: When I was in my twenties,  I was a stand-up comedian. I started doing  film and video in my thirties, so I've been  doing that for about ten years. Even though  I've dealt with really serious social issues,  I feel I've always put a little bit of humour  in there as well.  In this work, I think I'm really coming  back to the humour and the comedy characters I used to do. Partly, it opens people  up to the more serious material—people  can laugh along with Dr. Lorna and talk  about how totally absurd all these different diet ads are, and then people will be  talking about something that has really hurt  them in some way. The audience is much  more receptive, than if it were a serious film  all the way through.  Sharp: You must have some memorable moments from producing the Seven Day  Poodle Diet. Does anything stand out as a  real turning point?  Boschman: I hate to be so blunt, but the  driving force—what made it move faster  at certain points—was that I got some funding. It's hard to make a video on your own  time with no money. You can only get so  far and I wanted to make sure I was able to  have a good sound mix and that I would  still have a little bit of money left over. I  mainly got funding from BC Cultural Services and so I'm very thankful for that.  I want to make sure the video reaches  a broader audience. I don't want it to be  shown just in art gallery type settings or at  gay and lesbian or feminist film festivals.  What I'd like to do is open it up to a larger  audience because I think that's what it's  about, getting the message out and not just  preaching to the converted.  It's about community building, about  people coming in and meeting each other  and talking about how the different issues  connect with their lives. That's why I  thought it would be great to show the feature as part of a festival. And so that's when  we dreamed up the idea of the Body Image Mini-Festival.  Sharp: Okay, so tell us why you chose  the films you have for the festival?  Boschman: There are very few venues  for shorter works. Some of the animation  programmed in the festival has been shown  on the Comedy Network or WTN, but others, like the video Mz. Frankenstein, haven't  really had a lot of play.  I think something like the Body Image  Mini-Festival will really help all of those  shorter works reach a larger theatrical audience. It's a different experience when  you're siting in an audience with 100 or 200  other people than sitting at home watching it on television.  Part of the festival idea was to make  people comfortable, make them feel at  home, so that's why we've gone out and  rented comfortable chairs. I don't want people to be sitting there in pain. There'll also  be food and drinks and all of that. And,  there might be a surprise visit by Dr. Lorna  herself.  The Body Image Mini-Festival runs from  March 6th to 8th at the Video In Studios in  Vancouver. Other videos that will be screened  are Your Name in Cellulite by Gail Noonan,  Personality Software by Sylie Fefer, and  Tanya Mars' Mz. Frankenstein. The festival  closes with Anne Golden's Big Girl Town, an  urban lesbian western climaxing with a showdown and square dance on Main St. For program details, see the IWD Calendar on page  21.  J Serving Vancouver's women's community  for over 22years  uomoMofusatCCEc  CCEC Credit Union  mcrcial Drive, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9  cphonc 254-4100 'Ģ Fax 254-6558  Greetings on  International  Women's  Day  Bring in this coupon for  20% off regular priced books  until March 25, 1998  1391 Commercial Dr.  Van, BC V5L 3X5  253-6442  HAPPY  INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S DAY  SISTERS  FROM THE PSAC.  VANCOUVER REGIONAL  WOMEN'S COMMITTEE  430-5631  Happy International  Women's Day!  from all of us at...  EastsicIe    f  DataGrapLhcs   *l  1458 Commercial Daive  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 5X9  PhoNE: (604) 255-9559  Recycled Paper Products and Tree-Free Stationery  Union Shop  JL  jusncE  INSTITUTE  0FB.G  Interdisciplinary Studies wishes to acknowledge  the accomplishments or B.C. women over the past year  and  to join in solidarity with other women  in recognizing  International Women's Day  Upcoming programs featuring feminists include:  Marck 6-7  featuring Sandra Butier  April 23-24  featuring Ellen Pence  Integrating Sexuality and Intimacy into Couple and Family Work: An intei  on two aspects of couples lives: sexuality and intimacy.  April 16-18  For furtker information on tkese and otker programs  and courses offered by Interdiscplinary Studies,  call 528-5632 or visit our website: www.jibc.bc.ca  Rivkir  Skelley J  Skeila McCallum  Heatker Olson  Cindy Bettcker  Denette Retel  Amber Hall  Sandra Rice  Nenita Capili  Patricia McNe:  Lynda Getz  Ckeryl Bell Gadsby Bulletin Board  read   this  Bulletin Board listings have a  maximum of 50 words. Groups,  organizations and individuals eligible  for free space in the Bulletin Board  must be, or have, non-profit  objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will  appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Note: Kinesis is  published ten times a year. Jul/Aug  and Dec/Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be  required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to  research the goods and services  advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #309-877 E. Hastings Street,  Vancouver, BC, V6A 3Y1, or fax: (604)  255-5511. For more information call  (604) 255-5499.  INVOLVEMENT  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. All  women interested in what goes into  Kinesis—whether it's news, features or arts-  -are invited to one of our next Story  Meetings: Tues Apr 7 at 7pm at our office,  309-877 E. Hastings St. For more information or if you can't make the meeting, but  still want to find out about contributing to  Kinesis, give Agnes a call at (604) 255-  5499. New and experienced writers  welcome. Childcare and travel subsidies  available.  CALLING ALL VOLUNTEERS  Are you interested in finding out how  Kinesis is put together? Well...just drop by  during our next production dates and help  us design and lay out Canada's national  feminist newspaper. Production for the  April 1998 issue is from Mar 17-24. No  experience is necessary. Training and  support will be provided. If this notice  intrigues you, call us at (604) 255-5499.  Childcare and travel subsidies available.  INVOLVEMENT  VSW IS LOOKING FOR YOU!  If you are interested in learning to do  referral and peer counselling work, at VSW  we are offering a great opportunity to  women who are interested in volunteer  work during the day. Come answer the  phone lines, and talk to women who drop  in, and help connect them with the community resources they need. For more information call Ema at 255-6554. Childcare  and travel subsidies available.  RESOURCE LIBRARIAN NEEDED  If you have knowledge of organizing and  maintaining a Resource Centre and want  to hang out with great group of women,  VSW is the perfect place for you. VSW is  looking for women to help make our  resources more accessible and user-  friendly to women. For more info call Ema  at 255-6554. Childcare and travel subsidies  available.  EVENTS  Vancouver Status of Women will be closed  during the week of Monday March 16,  1998. Our regular business hours will  resume on March 23, 1998 at 9:30 pm.  -rf»ffj Jkfc?n«Ao«J?   O  o*m*  HEATHER BISHOP  Heather Bishop, a popular Prairie performer, plays at the WISE Hall in Vancouver  Sat Mar 28 at 8pm. A captivating stage  presence since the late 70's, Bishop'  powerful voice, provacative lyrics and  sense of humour have entertained audiences at concerts, festivals, political rallies,  folk circles throughout North America,  Europe and Australia, where she toured  with Judy Small. An outspoken voice in  women's and folk music. Juno Award  nominee, Bishop is also a children's  performer, winner of the Parent's Choice  Gold Award for A Duck in New York City. At  the WISE Hall, Tickets $12-16 sliding scale;  available from Urban Empire, Little Sister's  and Women in Print. For more info call  Sounds & Furies 253-7189.  FERRON  Ferron will be in concert with cellist Jamie  Sieber at the Norman Rothstein Theatre,  950 W. 41st Ave, Vancouver on Fri May 15.  Save this date. Tickets available soon! For  more info on Sounds & Furies events,  including the 1999 3rd Journey to Ireland  for Women and the essay contest, "Why I  want to Go to Ireland," call 253-7189.  WOMEN AT CLAYOQUOT  The premiere film screening of Fury for the  Sound: The Women at Clayoquot will be  held on Fri Mar 6, 8pm at the Vogue  Theatre, 918 Granville St, Vancouver. The  film focusses on how "ordinary" women  came to political awareness at Clayoquot  on Vancouver Island (during the protest  against clearcut logging).Tickets are $12/  10 and can be picked up at Duthie Books,  Banyen Sound, Women In Print, People's  Co-op Bookstore or call Ticketmaster 604-  280-4444.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY CALENDAR  Happy International Women's Day. Below is a list of some of the IWD events happening in Vancouver this March.  VANCOUVER MARCH & RALLY  International Women's Day will be marked  in Vancouver on Saturday March 7 by a  rally, march and information tables. Gathering at the Vancouver Art Gallery (Hornby  and Robson) at Ham, the rally—with  speeches, poetry and songs—will begin at  11:30am. Following the rally, participants  will march to the Landmark Hotel, 1400  Robson St. for information sharing. For  more information call 255-6554.  MAHILA MELA  Mahila Mela, a party and dance for women  only, will be held on Sunday March 8 at  the Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St. Doors  open at 8pm; show begins at 8:30pm. The  evening begins with cabaret performances, including soulful vocals by Penny  Singh, readings by Anita Rau Badami  author of Tamarind Mem, and dancers.  Performnces also by Jathinder Sandhu and  Sheila James. Later, DJs Shazia and Huma  will have women dancing to the spicy  grooves of soul, R&C, reggae, chutney,  sega, bhangra, soca, hip hop. Massage  and mehndi on-site. Raffles and door  prizes too. Tickets are $3-8 sliding scale at  the door. In advance, tickets can be  purchased two for $5 at Burcu's Angels,  Little Sister's or at the South Asian Women's Centre. Call in advance for child care.  For more info call Gita at 325-6637 or  Shazia at 802-0377. The event is a  fundraiser for the South Asian Women's  Centre.  SURREY IWD  The 4th annual "Celebration for Women,"  IWD event in Surrey, BC will be held on  Saturday March 7 noon-3pm at the Surrey  Conference Centre, Room 2, 9260-140th  St. Guest speakers from the Philippine  Women Centre and the Garment Workers'  Union. The event is put on by union women  organizing to connect with women in the  community. For more info call 581-9381 or  evenings 584-3642, 594-8022, 597-4358.  BODY IMAGE MINI-FESTIVAL  Video In Studios and Big B Productions is  celebrating International Women's Day with  a mini-festival March 6, 7 & 8. The nightly  feature is Canada's premiere engagement  of Dr. Lorna's Seven Day Poodle Diet.  Directed by Lorna Boschman (and starring  Ardyth the poodle), the Poodle Diet is a  hilarious look at human reactions to the  overblown diet industry and the disruption  it causes through all our lives. Opening  Friday night with the Poodle Diet are two  animated shorts, Your Name In Cellulite by  Gail Noonan and Personality Software by  Sylvie Fefer. Saturday night's short is Mz.  Frankenstein by Tanya Mars, and the  festival closes on Sunday with the urban  lesbian western Big Girl Town by Anne  Golden. Tickets are sliding scale $5-10 at  the door. Child care subsidies are available.  The Video In is located at 1965 Main St.  For more info call 872-8337.  BREAD AND ROSES  South SurreyA/Vhite Rock Women's Place  and Atira Transition House is holding a  celebration for IWD on Sunday March 8 at  Beecher Place, 12160 Beecher St, Cresent  Beach, South Surrey. Featuring poetry,  singing and refreshments. For more info  call 536-9611.  LESBIAN SISTERHOOD  Celebrating International Women's Day  If you're a Lesbian, that means born  female, let's talk about Lesbian culture, the  ways we're connected and the things that  separate us. Sunday March 15, 1-4 pm at  Mount Pleasant Neighbourhood House,  Room 3, 800 East Broadway. Lesbians of  colour, First Nations Lesbians, Lesbians of  all ages, Jewish Lesbians, differently abled  and/or disabled Lesbians, Lesbians of poor  or working class backgrounds and ALL  other Lesbians, let's get together!! Bring  your ideas. Bring your Lesbian friends.  Bring your stories, knowledge and experience. An ASL interpreter will be available  at the event. Room and washrooms are  accessible for Dykes using wheelchairs.  This event is free. For more information or  other arrangements, leave a message for  Shochi at 255-6554. And please, don't  wear any scents.  DOUGLAS COLLEGE  Douglas College in New Westminster is  holding an art show of local women artists  on Friday March 6 from 10am to 2:30pm  on the 2nd floor concourse. There will also  be an open house with refreshments at the  Women's Centre, Room 4810. In the  evening a dinner, "Unsung Women Heroines," will be held from 5:30-9pm in the  Cafeteria. A First Nations cuisine will be  served and Susan Witter, president of the  college, will be the guest speaker. Come  nominate your favourite unsung heroine.  For tickets or more info call 527-5148.  CAPILANO COLLEGE  Capilano College in North Vancouver is  hosting a full day of activities on Thursday  March 5. Throughout the day, faculty  members will open their classrooms to the  communnity with lectures and performances on women. The Cap College  Women's Centre will host an Open House  with a visual display of the herstory of the  centre. There will be lunch music and other  activities. Everyone is welcome 10:30am-  2pm. In the evening psychiatrist Susan  Penfold will present "Shame and Blame:  Obstacles To Recovery From Sexual Abuse  By Health Professionals" at 7:30pm in  Cedar 148. All events are free. For more  info call 984-4953. Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  GROUPS  SOCIAL CHANGEWORKSHOP  Stitching for Social Change workshop will  be held on Sun Mar 15 from 10am-5pm at  the Roundhouse Community Centre, 181  Roundhouse Mews, Vancouver. Participants will have an opportunity to listen to  each others stories and create fabrics  pieces learning how to translate ideas and  politics into art. Instructor Elizabeth Shefrin  is a feminist artist, quilter and banner  maker who has been researching and  practising political stitchery for years. Cost  is $35. Phone 713-1800 for more information.  RECOMMENDINGWOMEN IX  Vancouver Status of Women together with  VanCity Credit Union will host VSW's 9th  annual premier fundraising event, Recommending Women on Thurs Apr 9 at the  Point Grey Golf and Country Club, 3350  S.W. Marine Dr. This year's guest speaker  will be Vancouver's own Shani Mootoo,  author of Cereus Blooms at Night. The fun  begins at 7pm. A silent auction, hors  d'oeuvres, entertainment and a cash bar  will be the order of the evening. Television  news anchor, Simi Sera will emcee. Tickets  are $50. Space is limited so call 255-6554  to reserve your spot.  HIV/AIDS CONFERENCE  The 1998 Women, Children & Youth HIV/  AIDS Conference will be held in Vancouver  Mar 6-7. This conference will address the  unique needs of women, children and  youth infected with and affected by HIV  disease. The conference will be held at the  Coast Plaza at Stanley Park, 1733 Comox  St. For more info call (604) 822-2626 or toll  free within BC 1-800-663-0348.  FIERCE FERI  Fierce Feri Dark Moon outdoor Ritual will  be held on Sat Mar 28. An expression of  ecstatic passion for existence; designed to  bring the human back to the land. Everyone welcome. For info call Phoenix Baye at  215-0043.   SHEILA NORGATE  Visual artist Sheila Norgate will present  Nice Girl/Bad Girl; The Incredible True  Story of One Woman's Psyche, (or What's  A Nice Girl Like You Doing In A Slide Show  Like This?) on Wednesday April 1 at 8pm  at Capilano College. The presentation is a  scripted slide show of her evolution as a  visual artist and recovering bad girl. This  event is free (2055 Purcell Way, North  Vancouver), Cedar 148. For more info call  984-4953.   MENOPAUSEWORKSHOP  Unraveling the Myths of Menopause, a day  long workshop will be held on Sat Mar 28  in Quesnel. the event will be held at the  Quesnel Recreation Centre, W. Fraser  Room, North Star Rd, 8:30am-4pm. Cost  is $15 if pre-registered by Mar 23 otherwise $20. Lunch is included and the guest  speaker will be Dr. Jerilyn Prior. For more  info call the Quesnel Women's Resource  Centre at (250) 922-8472.   DENISE CARSON WILDE  Denise Carson Wilde will exhibit Butterfly  Eyes: Recent Drawings at the grunt gallery  in Vancouver from Mar 10-28. Throughout  these instinctual and automatic drawings,  Wilde explores various aspects of interrelationships, especially those associated with  childhood. Opening night reception on Tues  Mar 10 at the grunt, 116-350 E. 2nd Ave.  For gallery hours and more info call 875-  9516.  FRAN MUIR  Vancouver writer Fran Muir will read from  her new book, Coming to Bones Tues Mar  10 at 7:30pm at Women In Print 3566 W.  4th Ave, Vancouver. Coming To Bones is a  stunning new book of four vivid and moving  short stories. For more info call 732-4128.  MAI DAY ON SALT SPRING  An MAI (Multilateral Agreement on Investments) information day will be held at All  Saints By The Sea in Ganges on Salt  Spring Island Sat Mar 14 from 10am-  4:30pm. Panelists include Connie Fogal  and Margaret Fulton. It is a bag lunch affair.  For more info and location call Cherie at  (250) 537-1027.   HOT AND BOTHERED  The anthology of erotica Hot and Bothered:  Short Short Fiction of Lesbian Desire,  edited by Karen X. Tulchinsky, will be  launched in Vancouver on Sat Mar 7, 9pm  at the Lotus, 455 Abbott St. The night will  feature readings by local contributors,  including Persimmon Blackbridge, Terrie  Hamazaki, Lydia Kwa, Rita Wong, Anna  Nobile, Susan Holbrook, Dianne Whelan  and others. For more info call Arsenal Pulp  Press at 687-4233.   JULIE BRICKMAN  Julie Brickman will give a reading on Wed  Mar 18 at 7:30pm at Women In Print, 3566  W. 4th Ave, Vancouver. A psychologist and  therapist, Brickman will read from her book  What Birds Can Only Whisper, a novel  about recovered memory and childhood  sexual abuse. For more info call 732-4128.  DYKEWORDS COMEDY NIGHT  Dykewords Comedy Night will be held on  Thurs Mar 5, featuring stand up performers Karen Hoskins, Briar Sandeman,  Sheree Cleland, Sharon Novak and more.  This event will be held at The Lotus, 455  Abbott St. Admission is $1-4. Everyone  welcome. For more info call 685-7777.  WORKSHOPS FOR SOCIAL  CHANGE  Workshops For Social Change will be held  on Wed Mar 4 at Simon Fraser University  in Burnaby. These free workshops include:  Consensus Decision-Making, Anti-Hate  Activism and Successful Event Planning.  Workshop participants are also invited to a  social gathering at 4:30pm to unwind and  meet new people. For more info call 291 -  4360 or email sf-pirg@sfu.ca  CO-OP LIVING  China Creek Housing Co-op is having an  information evening for anyone interested  in becoming a member in the co-op on  Wed Mar 11 at 7pm. The meeting will bee  held in the common room of the co-op,  1230 E. 8th Ave. For more info call 876-  4286.  The Power of Women on Silk  Art   by  Linda   Sweat?  March 1 - 30  Central Library  350 West Georgia St.  Wednesday, March 4th  7:00 pm - Reception Moat Gallery,  *&> Alma Van Dusen  8:00 pm - Slides  and Peter Kaye Rooms  POPULAR EDUCATION PROGRAM  Vancouver Status of Women is holding a  popular education program "Gaining my  voice, taking our strength" starting April 20  (eight sessions). Issues include health,  economics, violence, homophobia, class  and racism. Among our goals: identifying  skills, enhancing self-esteem, recognizing  our common struggles and taking collective  action. Preference to women living on a  limited income and partially accessible to  women with disabilities. Childcare and  transportation subsidies available. Space  limited. For more info call Ema at 255-  6554.   VSW FUNDRAISING RAFFLE  Vancouver Status of Women is holding a  fundraising raffle. Fabulous prizes include  a luxury round trip for two through the  Canadian Rockies to Edmonton aboard Via  Rail, a day at Soma Therapy Centre and  Spa, golf lessons and green fees from  Eaglequest Golf Centres, Arts Club  Theatre tickets, Fringe Festival passes, a  one day outdoor adventure tour from GAIA  Adventures for Women, and much, much  more! Draw date is Thursday, April 9th,  1998. Tickets are $3 each or two for $5.  Call 255-6554 to get yours today!  CONTACT POINT  This ongoing brown-bag Sunday drop-in  support group for women who love women  of all ages, colours and creeds is presently  on hiatus. Due to full-time creative commitments, founder Rhodea Omler can no  longer "anchor" this group and welcomes  enquiries from women interested in doing  so. Responsibility, integrity and commitment are musts, with spiritual and "feelin'  goo-ood" rewards guaranteed. Call Rhodea  at 228-9051.   PWN BOARD  The Positive Women's Network in Vancouver is looking for new board members to  serve a two year term beginning June  1998. PWN supports women living with  HIV/AIDS to make their own choices by  providing safe access to services and  resources. For more info call Margreth  Tolson at 681-2122, local 229, or Diana  Peabody at 875-3782.   LESBIANS OVER 30 SOCIAL  The Over 30's Social Group meets every  2nd Saturday at 5:30pm for a potluck at  the Vancouver Lesbian Connection (VLC),  876 Commercial Dr. For more info call 254-  8458.   SHAKTI-STRENGTH  Shakti "strength" is a self-help group for  South Asian Indo-Canadian Women who  have experienced the psychiatric system.  The group meets every 1st and 3rd  Tuesdays of the month from 7-9pm at  South Vancouver Neighbourhood House  6470 Victoria Dr. Admission is free. For  more info call Helen (in English) at 733-  5570 or Jito (in Punjabi) 590-8212.   RAPE RELIEF  Vancouver Rape Relief and Woman's  Shelter needs women who are interested  in volunteering for their 24-hour crisis line  and transition house for women and  children. Training sessions are on Tuesday  evenings. For more info and for a training  interview call (604) 872-8212.  SUBMISSIONS  COMPLEXLY CARIBBEAN  Seeking short stories for an anthology on  female Caribbean Identities into the 21st  century—who are we now? Looking for  fiction which deals with the experiences of  being complexly Caribbean from Caribbean (broadly defined) women inside and  outside the region. Especially interested in  experimental writing and writing which  breaks new ground and the mold of  nostalgic first generation migrant experience fiction. Send submissions to: Complexly Caribbean, Sister Vision Press, P.O.  Box 217, Stn. E, Toronto, Ont. Canada,  M6H 4E2. Deadline is Sept 1998.   SPIRITUALITY ANTHOLOGY  Calling all writers, story-tellers & oracles,  sherece taffe & Sister Vision Black Women  and Women of Colour Press been waitin' to  hear your views, opinions, stories, anecdotes, critiques and whatever else ya got  about all Religions/spiritual/ritualistic and  ceremonial denominations. All Black and  Brown ("of colour") dykes, lesbians, bi/  sexual, gay women and queer gals, send  yo stuff now to sherece taffe at Recovering  c/o Sister Vision Black Women and Women  of Colour Press, PO Box 217 Stn E,  Toronto, ON, M6H 4E2. Deadline is May 1.  w  D  Carol Weaver  Graphic Design & Illustration  • fine shirt design  • business stationary, logos  • posters &• Illustration  (604) 929-0776  WOM EN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  Discounlsfor  book clubs  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC  Special orders  Voice   604 752-1128  welcome  Fax       604 752M129  10-6 Daily  •   12-5 Sunday Bulletin Board  Pfhe^de si re  to at tract" M  Battention has no place ■  Bin the  worHi of good     M  Bbreeding,  Who wishes      M  »to be  stared at,   re-     II  fcaarked utjoti,   openly       ?■  I  ldmired,if not* the         Jfl  -bred woman,        Z^^m  SHEILA NORGATE  Visual artist Sheila Norgate will present Nice Girl/Bad Girl; The Incredible True  Story of One Woman's Psyche, (or What's A Nice Girl Like You Doing In A Slide  Show Like This?) on Wednesday April 1 at 8pm at Capilano College. The  presentation is a scripted slide show of her evolution as a visual artist and  recovering bad girl. This event is free (2055 Purcell Way, North Vancouver),  Cedar 148. For more info call 984-4953.  CLASSIFIEDS  INTUITIVE PRACTICE  Intuitive practice through the body. "Using  movement practicies evolved from Aikido,  sitting, breath and trance work, we will  explore the function of time and timeless-  ness in intuition to start, or deepen, a daily  practice for grounding and strengthening  our centre." Taught by Cybele (Suzanne  Rochat) from San Francisco, Lomi  Bodyworker and Wiccan teacher who  brings years of training and practice to her  work. $95-165 sliding scale. For more info  call Sounds & Furies/Pat at 253-7189.  WOMEN'S SELF-DEFENSE  Women Educating in Self-defense Training  (WEST) teaches Wenlido. In Basic classes,  you learn how to make the most of mental,  physical and verbal skills to get away from  assault situations. Continuing training  builds on basic techniques to improve  physical and mental strength. By women,  for women. For info, call 876-6390.  CLASSIFIEDS  FRASER RIVER PLACE COOP  Fraser River Place Co-op is accepting  applications for 1-3 bedroom units. No  subsidies, shares are $1600. Housing  costs are $667-977. Participation required.  S.A.S.E. 530 Ginger Dr, New Westminster  BC, V3L 5K8.   LYDIA KWA  Lydia Kwa, Ph.D, clinical pychologist in  private practice, works with clients dealing  with a wide range of issues. Central  downtown Vancouver location. For appoint-  ments, call (604) 682-5818.   DEEP COMFORTING RELAXATION  Experience massage. Warmth. Tranquility.  Warm oils. Hot towels. Luxurious. Soothing.  Rejuvenating. All sizes. Take care of and  rejoice in your self. Kinesis readers' March/  April special 90 minutes for $50. Bring a  friend for company or split the time. Flexible  hours. Healthful. Respectful. Feels Fabulous. Lonsdale, North Vancouver. For an  appointment call 990-1049.  *'  f>  ■ft  -£.n-ten  ii  ,1*  °1G.\  M  ^ $  3  QJ./  H*p/>Y / v.n M  •    Women /  A Beautiful Place  5 acres of forested foot paths with  ponds, ocean and mountain views.  Healthy Breakfasts  Hot Tub & Sauna  dob  1207 Beddis Road, Salt Spring Island, BC V8K 2C8  -A woman-owned and operated business specializing in defensive driver training. ■  Driver Improvement and Retraining  Become a confident and safe driver with an experienced instructor.  VAnCOUVER  W0MEITS  FUnD  I he Vancouver Women s Fund  would like to uia.nk the dancers and communities of  women  for its support at its Dancethon on February 13th  We a. also like to thank...  The volunteers: Laraine, Tracy Nishimura, Miki, Tracey  Barker, Yee Jim, Wendy, Harminder, Hazre, Marina and  Sharon; as well as emcees Agnes and Erin; and deejays April,  Ebony, Yolanda; Shelley; and techies June and Johnny!!!  The donors: Abasa Optical Lab; Bach Alley Wineworks;  Cosmopolis; Cynthia Low; Delilah's;  Deserving Thyme; Firehall Arts  Centre; Harry's on Commercial; Kao  Kaori; Krua Thai Restaurant;  LadySport Ltd; Liberty Thrift; Little  Sister's Book and Art Emporium;  Melriche's; Music World; Parkhill  Hotel; Ragz & Rerunzz; Rosedale on  Robson Suite Hotel; Sam The  Record Man; Shiatsu Divine; Spa  Lady; Subeez Cafe; Touchstone  Theatre; the Waldorf Hotel;  Wazubeez; and Women in View. LIB1Z8 4/98  LIBRARY PROCESSING CTR - SERIALS  220b EAST MALL, U.B.C.  VANCOUVER, BC V6T 1ZB  Hflvvy mv\  ton,  kinesis  V / /  U /  /^  %  >f«M\^(  <sr  &  Hey, how do I get a cool Kinesis t-shirt?  Easy! Just three simple steps.  1. Get three friends to buy a sub.  2. Tell them to say you sent them.  3. Contact us for your free Kinesis t-shirt.  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST □ Bill me  Two years □ New  □$36 + $2.52 GST □ Renewal  Institutions/Groups □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST □ Donation  Name_  □ Cheque enclosed   For individuals who can't afford the full amount 3  for Kinesis subscription, send what you can.  Free to women prisoners.  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Address—  Country   Telephone _  Postal code_  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #309-877 E. Hastings St., Vancouver, BC V6A 3Y1