 gKCMLELECTIONS  Canada 1  Can,  ***£j  73-S305  Serials Division  Main Library-  University of B.  C.  VANCOUVER,  B.C.  Vancouver Status off Women 2029 W. 4th Ave.  JULY    1»76  VOLUME V      NO. 5 "7  HOME O  v^ot^Mc  ISSN 0317- 9095  VSW ANNUAL MEETING   PAGE 2  1976-77 Board of Directors and a plea for support  NATIVE WOMEN  .... PAGE 4  Donna Tyndall explains the Land Claims issues  CHILDREN'S LITERATURE  PAGE 6  Nadine & Heather attend the Pacific Rim  Conference on Children's Literature  WOMEN APE EXCLUDED  PAGE 7  Karen condenses the paper "Ideological Structures and How Women Are Excluded" by Dr. Dorothy  Smith, Associate Sociology Prof at UBC  RESOURCES  PAGE 8  Some of the resource materials available for  you in the VSW Reference Library  HUMAN RIGHTS  PAGE 10  "What" asks Lorri, "is happening in the Human  Rights Department under the new Minister of  Labour?" Answer: not much  HABITAT PAGE 12  13  A brief look at some of the women's programs at  Habitat  BOOK REVIEWS PAGE 14  YOU AND THE LAW PAGE 15  A new monthly feature supplied by Vancouver  People's Law School — this month "Family Court  Maintenance Orders"  NORTHERN NOTES PAGE 16  Ex-staffer & now Community Education Consultant  on Women's Issues for Secretary of State in North  em B.C. Diana Bissell tells what & how she's  doing  WOMEN IN PORTUGAL Page 19  A golden day has not arrived for Portuguese women  PARTY WOMEN PAGE 20  How to contact the women's committees of the four  political parties represented in the B.C. Legislature  MEMBERS" FORUM PAGE 22  Share ideas through the forum  LETTERS PAGE 23  We love to get mail! PLEA TO KINESIS READERS  We urgently ask you to write a letter  to Provincial Secretary Grace McCarthy  immediately, urging her to fund VSW  for the rest of this fiscal year,  until March 1977, at the full amount  we requested (one additional staff  and salary increase of 8%).  When our grant ran out in March this  year, we were funded for four months,  until the end of July, on an interim  quarterly basis, at last year's inadequate level. The matter is now  "under review". Mid-summer is fast  approaching with no commitment from  the Provincial Secretary to support  us financially after that time.  Our numerous grant applications to  other funding bodies have all been  turned down, unlike in past years,  and VSW membership fees only pay for  producing KINESIS, so we are now  totally dependent on funding from the  Provincial Secretary.  It is evident that funding for citizen's advocacy groups critical of the  government is being cut-off or cutback. The excuse is always the budget.  Funding is a political tool. VSW is  PLEA  a strong women's rights lobby and  women's issues are not a priority with  government. We feel one reason VSW  was funded was a result of the intense  publicity on feminist issues generated  by the Women's Rally for Action.  But now it seems inevitable that Provincial Secretary will cut us off or  cut us back at the end of July, unless  we demonstrate a visible and massive  support for VSW, not only from the  entire B.C. women's movement, but also  from our members province-wide. It is  imperative that each and every one of  our 837 individual members flood  McCarthy's desk with support letters.  Please ask her to fund us for the full  amount requested. There is great danger  she will give us only another four  months funding at last year's level,  which means already inadequate staff,  or that she will give us partial funding for even less staff. Ploys designed to break us?  Your letters will have more impact  if you also outline briefly how VSW  helps you or other women. Also, send  us carbon copies as we need to know  exactly how many support letters were  sent and by whom, in order to prove  to press and government that we deserve funding.  Please be assured we are doing everything in our power to organize community and movement support and we will  go to the press when necessary with  a massive media campaign. We are prepared to fight but we desperately  need your help. As the oldest and  largest feminist organization in B.C.  we will not die overnight from lack  of funding, but without a paid staff  our effectiveness will be severely  curtailed.  Please help us NOW. Write your letter  TODAY. Address it to "The Honourable  Grace McCarthy, Provincial Secretary,  Legislative Buildings, Victoria, B.C."  Send VSW a carbon copy and a carbon  to your MLA. If you don't know who it  is ask us. A copy of VSW's Annual  Report (May 31,1975 - June 1,1976)  is available on request from the VSW  Office.  Thank You. We are anxious to hear  from you.  Nancy Conrod, President VSW  1976-77 BOARD  1976-77 VSW BOARD OF DIRECTORS  MEETING  ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  Approximately 140 women attended the  Vancouver Status of Women Annual  General Meeting the evening of June  15th.  Copies of the 24 page Annual Report  of VSW for 1975-76 were handed out  to everyone as they came in the door  and copies are available through the  VSW office for anyone who was unable  to attend the meeting. The Annual  Report contains: List of Executive  and Staff, President's Report, Treasurer's Report, Ombudservice Report,  Education Report, Membership Activities Report, Kinesis Report, Public  Relations Report, VSW Media Coverage  Report, VSW Speaking Engagements Report, Woman Alive T.V. Report, Reference Library Report and VSW Political  Activity Report.  Nancy Conrod, out-going President,  reminded the gathering that the interim funding granted VSW in early  April runs out at the end of July  and as yet there has been no indication from the Provincial Secretary's  Office whether or not we will receive  funds after that time. Repeated  attempts to schedule a meeting with  Provincial Secretary Grace McCarthy  have been unsuccessful. Nancy urged  members to start a letter campaign  to prod the government into action.  While the ballots were being counted  to determine the election of the 1976-  77 VSW Board of Directors Connie  Smith and her guitar entertained us  with feminist songs.  The business portion of the meeting  was followed by champagne, snacks  and talking to old and new friends.  Before and after the business portion  of the evening women enjoyed browsing  through a variety of publications and  resource materials. Sales of booklets,  T-shirts, etc were brisk!  PRESIDENT — Nancy Conrod (re-elected)  VICE PRESIDENT — Nancy Denofreo  TREASURER — Lisa'Rogers  SECRETARY — Ramona Gowler  MEMBERS-AT-LARGE — Arlene Gropper,  Dorothy Holmes, Barbara Bulmer, Lee  Grills, Carol Norman, Carole Sinclair  STAFF APPOINTEES ~ Nadine Allen,  Johanna den Hertog, Jo Lazenby  REPORT  PRESIDENT'S REPORT  It is very hard to sum up a years  but in looking back I see three  areas on which to focus.  (The  already mourned IWY is net one).  First, VSW has now lived for a  year with by-laws amended to  promote better relations between  the staff and the board. The  organization has never functioned  better. Our experiment—deliberately insuring a large staff  representation on the board—  offended some of those used to  more traditional organizations.  But it worked.  The exchange of  information and ideas has been  tremendous. And most important,  much of the tension which seems  almost inevitable between a paid  staff and a volunteer board is  gone. As a result all of us have  become more free to devote our  energies to the work to be done.  Second, VSW has developed good  working relationships with more  and more other women's groups.  The first highlight in this  process came last fall at the  B.C. Federation of Women's convention.  For a year a structure  committee, which included VSW  members, had worked very hard to  write a constitution which could  unite women's groups in B.C. while  respecting their autonomy and individual interests. The resulting  constitution met both needs, the  convention adopted it, and VSW  now belongs to the federatxon.  The major highlight of cooperation  was of course Women Rally for  Action. The people who organized  WRA mobilized all of us—groups  and individuals—and heightened  our sense of power when united.  The VSW people who worked with  the organizing group, who lobbied,  or who simply attended, can never  doubt the value of cooperation  with all the women of B.C. And  again, cooperation and sisterhood,  freeing us from rivalry, leave our  energy for the work.  Third and finally, unfortunately  on the down side, our financial  situation has become precarious"  We enjoyed three relatively fat  years of Provincial Secretary  grants for core funding. The  Ombuds service and the rest of  the staff could feel secure after  the April 1 grant decision panic  date.  This year we were granted  only four months provisional core  funding, which runs out July 31st"  We do not know what funds we may  receive from the many sources to  which we have applied. Without  substantial outside funding we  cannot support a staff.  So we  must plan what shape VSW will  take with a reduced staff or no  staff. We have changed over tne  years trom a purely volunteer group  to one with a paid staff. We can  surely survive a change back to  volunteer status.  But to do so  we will need all the ideas, energy,  and sadly, money, our members can  supply,,  Traditionally, presidents' reports  say that the job has been a pleasure.  The job itself has been so mixed—  pleasure, excitement, tension,  anxiety, that I'm not quite sure  how to describe it.  The people  certainly have been a pleasure—  I would not have missed working  with the board and staff in the  last year.  Nancy D. Conrod TO THE TOP!  vp  /  A CI.IMBINC. PARTY  Mt. Burckss  DHSCUNMUNT. I'Hl' '  Mr. Via -I>kk>ii  The photos of women climbers are from the Alpine Club of Canada Journal 1907,  courtesy of the North West History Division of the Vancouver Public Library.  The tribulations of mountain climbing at the turn of the century!  Freckled, sunburned faces were thought  to be neither attractive, nor quite  proper, but even floppy hats could  not prevent the sun at high altitudes  from turning noses red. Legs or  "limbs" as they were called were supposed to be decently covered at all  times.  This presented problems since  long pants for women were definitely  not "in". Either skirts were worn  and then tucked in at the boot tops,  or hardier souls wore baggy pants  that looked rather like skirts.  Climbing equipment was minimal:  alpenstocks, heavy hemp ropes and  leather soled boots with nails or  cleats.  In those days climbing a mountain on  the North Shore was a regular expedition - boat across the Burrard Inlet,  rough trails, followed bushwacking  and mosquitoes aplenty. Women were  expected to look respectable in public  at all times, so this often meant  changing into climbing attire only  when well away from civilization.  Ditto on the return trip, if no bear  had broken into the pack containing  the 'civilized' clothes that had been  left at the base of the mountain.  Even before the turn of the century  there were women explorers and  climbers in the Canadian Rockies.  Apart from the physical difficulties  they encountered in a rugged, unmapped  area, they had social pressures to  contend with. Women who climbed  were generally regarded as being  "somewhat touched in the head" and  at the worst not quite "ladies".  - Heather Kellerhals  only yesterday  "Though public elementary and secondary schools were co-educational, it  took courage and persistence for  Martha Hamm Lewis to attend normal  school in New Brunswick in 1949. Repeatedly refused admission to normal  school in Saint John on the grounds  that no woman had ever been admitted  she appealed to the Lieutenant-Governor who ruled that she could enter.  The alarmed principal stipulated  that she must enter the classroom  10 minutes before the male students,  sit alone at the back of the room,  always wear a veil, leave the classroom five minutes before the end of  the lesson and leave the building  without speaking to any of the young  men. Martha survived these restrictions and in 1850 received her license  to teach."  (from History of Women's Rights in  Canada, by Margaret E. MacLennan,  reprinted in Calgary Women's Newspaper)  vecc  VANCOUVER EAST CULTURAL CENTRE  CULTURAL FUNQUE, PHUNK, PHUNQU --  Valri Bromfield  Bonanza of comedic cultural funquism  (sic).  Sunday, July 11, 8:30, $2.50.  BLACK & BLUE — Rosalind Keene sings  the Blues  August 1, 8:30 p.m. $2.50.  VECC 1895 Venables St. Vancouver.  254-9578. In the June issue of KINESIS we printed a letter from Donna Tyndall, President, B.C. Association of Non-Status  Indians, Local 146, Courtenay, B.C.,  in which she expressed her unhappiness  concerning the ignorance of most women  regarding Indian problems and the  Land Claims issue. We invited Donna  to submit an article on this subject  to KINESIS. The article follows.  Editorial in The British Colonist,  1863:  "...shall we allow a few red vagrants  to prevent forever industrious settlers from settling on the unoccupied  lands? Not at all...Locate reservations for them in which to earn  their own living, and if they trespass on white settlers, punish them  severely. A few lessons would soon  enable them to form a correct estimation of their own inferiority,  and settle the Indian title too."  The British Columbian, December 2,  1865:  "Colonization necessarily involves  the contact, and practically the  collisionm of two races of men—one  is superior, and the other is inferior,  the latter being in possession of the  soil,-the former gradually supplanting  it...Everywhere, in obedience to what  appears to be a natural law, the uncivilized native has receded before  the civilizer."  The preceding editorial excerpts  most clearly show the attitude of  the majority of B.C.'s people and  their leaders at the most crucial  of times for the Indians of this  province.  In- those days "Indian  Affairs" were administered by one  Joseph Trutch, Commissioner of Lands  and Works. Trutch's personal attitudes were incredibly bigoted and  ignorant.  To quote from Robin  Fisher's well documented essay  "Joseph Trutch and Indian Land  Policy"—"Joseph Trutch had come  to British Columbia in 1859 with  eight years experience behind him  as a surveyor and farmer south of  the 49th parallel...Trutch was  very much a product of Imperial  England's confidence in the superiority of her own civilization.  Other races came somewhat lower  on the scale of human existence  than the English, and the North  American Indian was barely part  of the scale at all.  In a reference to the Indians of Oregon  Territory, Trutch used revealing  terminology,,  "I think they are  the laziest and ugliest creatures  I ever saw, and we should as soon  think of being afraid of our dogs  as of them..,," The indigenous  American tended towards the bestial  rather than the human according  to Trutch, and his view was essentially unmodified by continued  contact with the Indians. During  the years between 1859 and 1864  he employed Indians on his public  works projects in British Columbia,  and as Chief Commissioner of Lands  and Works he visited Indian villages in many parts of the province.  Yet he continued to see the Indians  as uncivilized savages.  In 1872  he told the Prime Minister of Canada  that most of the British Columbian  Indians were "utter savages living  along the coast, frequently committing murder and robbery amongst  themselves, one tribe upon another,  and on white people who go amongst  them for the purposes of trade."  This then, was the man responsible  for the policy toward Indian peoples  NATIVE  WOMEN  in B.C.—a policy which has essentially  two abiding principles:  1) That because "they were not making  productive use of it anyway," Indians  should be allowed as little land as  possible—and the worst land possible.  2) That ther be no compensation to  Indians for their lands nor the resources of these lands.  B.C. and Trutch followed these principles strictly, defended them after  joining Confederation, and B.C. continues today to follow them.  The Royal Proclamation of 1763 was  signed by King George III, and was  a paper recognizing Indian rights in  Indian Country. This paper has  never been recinded, but was totally  ignored in B.C. According to the  Proclamation, these Indian rights,  including ownership of all "traditional  territory" could only be extinguished  before Confederation by surrender to  the British Crown and after Confederation by surrender to the Dominion  Government. And these rights have  never been extinguished or surrendered  in B.C. by the British Columbia  Indians. The Indians in this province  were never defeated in battle, they  signed no treaties and they did not  sell their lands. However, they have  been relegated to. small rural prisons  areas of land which no one else  wanted.  For if ever any Indian  land becomes, for any reason, val-  uble to any White Man's eyes, the  Indians are always made to step  aside. These land thefts are carried out in many ways—re-surveys,  and lands taken for "public purposes" being two of the most popular.  Then in 1912, the Federal and Provincial governments set up the  McKenna-McBride Commission.  Ob-  stensibly, the Commission's job  was to review the location and  size of Indian Reserves in British Columbia. Part of the Com  mission's terms of reference  (and a long-established Indian  land policy) was the right to  cut off areas of reserve land  ONLY if the Indian band involved  agreed.  In no case did any  band agree to cut-offs, yet  cut-offs were ordered from 23  bands—these cut-offs total more  than 36,000 acres.  In sales of  much of these lands immediately  following the Cut-offs, the government realized a tidy $1.2  million profit.  Compensation  to the Owners of these lands—  again nil.  Many people today say that they  are not to be held responsible  for the deeds or misdeeds of their  forebears. Even if such an abnegation of responsibility could be  accepted, people in B.C. should  know that the theft of Indian land  goes on today.  Indian lands are  appropriated for highways, power  lines, railways—in fact, Public  Works often goes miles out of its  original way to go through INDIAN  land, realizing that the use of  other lands would be too expensive.  The ultimate goal of all levels  of government in B.C. is the extinguishment of all Indian rights  and Indian lands.  Their methods  have become more sophisticated  because today's society like to  fancy itself "humane and unpred-  judiced". Measures are being  carried out which make life on  the Reserves untenable.  For  example, cloaked in the idealistic-  sounding name of "Integration"  school policies which require  Indian students to be taken from  their homes, sent to Urban centres  to be boarded out for ten months  of the year are causing many  Indian families to leave their  traditional homes and ties just  for the privilege of having  their children come home every  day after school rather than a  couple of months only, in the  summer. Many little schools on  remote reserves are boarded-up  so that the children must be  sent from home to continue their  educations.  Traditional forms of livelihood,  such as fishing, hunting and  trapping have become more and  more difficult and unprotitable  and no alternatives have been  provided so that Indian people  must leave their reserves to  find work or else remain and rot  on Welfare.  "Why don't the  Indians farm their lands, or set up  small industries on the reserves?"  you may ask. Most people are unaware  that it is impossible to borrow money  from banks or other financial institutions for any development on Indian  reserves. How many white farmers or  businessmen could have gotten a start  without initial financial aid? There  are in recent years some programs such  as ARDA and DREE which will aid development on Indian reserves. That  Indians can and will make good use o£  their land and resources with the  proper support is evidenced by the  Ehattesaht Logging project on western  Vancouver Island and the Port Simpson  Cannery on the north coast. However,  that this aid is extremely difficult  to obtain and maintain is also evident  by the recent fate of the Port Simpson  Cannery — promised governmental aid  was suddenly withheld after B.C.'s  recent change in governments until  Indians were forced to sign over  effective control to the government  or lose it all.  Medical facilities and their availability to Indian people on many reserves are usually so poor that it  constitutes an extreme hazard to the  very lives of the people. Families  with members, especially children in  need of special and/or constant medical attention must move to the ghettos  of urban areas.  The bottom line of all this, folks,  is that once reserve land remains uninhabited for a period of seven years  it reverts to Crown land. There have  been cancellations of several reserves  and at least one reversion to the  province because it was claimed that  the Band was extinct.  Indians in B.C. have not sat idly  watching their lands and lives being  taken from them. Long before Trutch's  repression, a large group of Indians  camped outside Fort Victoria demanding land compensation. They were given  instead blankets infected with smallpox, whcih many carried home. Entire  villages were decimated. The Haida  nation, proud inhabitants of the Queen  Charlotte Islands, barely survived  this epidemic — their population  dropped from 80,000 to just over 1,000.  CONTINUED ON PAGE 5. .CONTINUED FROM PAGE 4  In 1913, the Nishga Nation of the Nass  River Valley petitioned the King of  England as they were dissatisfied  with Provincial and Federal government responses to their rights. The  Nishga thought the figurehead of the  British Commonwealth might help them  achieve justice.  The Indian people of this province  have never stopped working and fighting for their rights and the settlement of their Land Claims. Countless  trips to Victoria and Ottawa have been  made by countless Indian leaders —  many of whom have passed on with their  struggles unfinished and largely unrewarded. In recent years more militant  actions have taken place, and many  more will follow. Who can gainsay such  actions? Nothing else has worked. Our  land steadily disappears, our people  continue to die. Our problems multiply  at a frightening rate. The average  life expectancy of an Indian woman is  40 years. Our suicide rate is 7 times  the average of the rest of society.  People without hope turn to alcohol  and drugs — both serious problems  among our people. About 70% of the  province's prison populations are "Indian. Our school drop-out rate is 97%.  It is my personal belief, and a belief  held by most Indian people, that a  just settlement of our Land Claims is  the only hope for our survival as a  peopleo When we can administer our  own affairs from an equitable land  base with money and resources which  are OURS we can begin to rebuild Indian pride and heal Indian wounds.  Any other programs are nothing but  band-aids applied to open festering  sores. What is the Canadian taxpayer  paying for these useless band-aids  administered by the Department of  Indian Affairs? The figure is approximately $400,000,000 each year.  "That'll buy a lot of band-aids,"  you may say. Think, however, of the  cost of maintaining the incredible  bureaucracy of DIA. As of 1975, this  department employed 9151 employees,  43 of whom received salaries over  $30,000, 623 salaries over $20,000,  4257 salaries between $10,000 and  $20,000, 4228 salaries of under  $10,000. Add to these figures the  cost of office rentals, office equipment, cars, holiday pay, plane fares,  other travel expenses, special bonuses  etc. Only 3% of the total Indian  Affairs personnel are Indian people.  Of the yearly $400 million, after it  filters through the DIA, only 15%  reaches the Indian people at the reserve level.  Certainly the Indian people can do no  worse than the DIA. In its 100 years  of administering our affairs, it has  brought our people to the point where  Indian leaders, such as George Manual,  president of the National Indian  Brotherhood, and Chief Dan George of  British Columbia, have declared it a  major Indian victory that we have  survived at all.  What can the general public do to  help the Indian people? Educate your  selves to our problems. Learn what we  are saying in regards to our land  claims. Any intelligent, feeling human  being,upon becoming aware of the facts,  can do nothing in conscience but  SUPPORT our claim for justice.  Educational material is now available  and more and better material will soon  be available. I will be showing this  material at a workshop at the next  B.C. federation of Women meeting in  Prince George in August. Until then  write to Mike Lewis , Nesika News,  1099 West 8th Ave. Vancouver, or to  myself, Donna Tyndall, 28 - 240 Back  Road, Courtenay, B.C.  A book "The Struggle Continues — Land  Claims in B.C." is available for-$2  per copy from: T. McNamara, Box 5084,  Station B, Victoria, B.C. or Union  of B.C. Indian Chiefs, Box 370, Sardis  B.C.  - Donna Tyndall  Several Indian newspapers are available in B.C. Among them are:  Ha-Shilth-Sa, published by the West  Coast District Council of Indian Chiefs  c/o 3010 Anderson, Port Alberni. Subscription is $5/year.  Nesika, published by the B.C. Association of Non Status Indians, Room  104 - 1099 West 8th, Vancouver, B.C.  Subscription is by donation.  The Indian Voice, published by the  Indian Homemakers' Association, 423  West Broadway, Vancouver, B.C. Subscriptions are $4/year Canadian, $4.50  U.S. and Overseas.  bcfw  MEMBERSHIP  BCFW is growing and we want that trend  to continue. To acquire the power to  bring about meaningful change, women  must organize to maximize the collective strength of the Women's Movement.  If YOUR group is not a member, consider  and discuss it NOW. To achieve delegate  representation for the Convention all  groups must have applied for and received affiliation at least two months  prior to the Convention. Make August  28th your deadline. (Date of Standing  Committee meeting prior to Convention)  Any group or organization can affiliate by payment of one month's per  capita fees and must signify in writing  general agreement and support with  the goals and aims of BCFW. Fees are  low — 10c per female member per month  (minimum $2).  Send letters and payment to: Jan  Lancaster, 1061 East 40th Ave. Vancouver, 327 6277 (Membership Organizer)  CONVENTION  We are already starting to plan the  3rd Annual BCFW Convention which is  tentatively scheduled for November 5,  6,7 to he held somewhere in the Okanagan. NOW is the time for your group to  start discussing your delegation to  the Convention. Contact Jan Lancaster  (see above) re your delegate entitlement.  POLICY  The main business of the BCFW Convent  ion in early November will be to debate and vote on policy resolutions.  BCFW can speak and act only on matters  covered by policy and we are at the  moment severely handicapped by lack  of policy in many areas. We need more  policy! Especially in the areas of  Health, Rural Women, Mental Health,  Childcare, Native Women, Welfare  Rights, Employment, Education and many  other areas. (You name it, you write  it.) Proposed policy will be available  to BCFW member groups for debate six  weeks prior to Convention if policy  resolutions are submitted NOW. The  Policy Gathering Committee is willing  to assist groups in turning ideas into  properly worded resolutions. Deadline  for policy submissions will be the  end of August, so there's not much ti  time. Contact the Policy Gathering  Committee:  Nym Hughes — 19331 - 60th Ave. Surrey  530-3477  Yvette Perreault — 894 West 19th Ave.  Vancouver. 872-2156.  Diana Bissell — #210 - 550 Victoria  St. Prince George  562-3710  Kate Swann — #1 - 2516 West 5th Ave,  Vancouver 733-4974  BCFW PUBLICATION  The first BCFW Publication is hot off  the mimeo machine: MEMBERSHIP ORGANIZING HANDBOOK, written by Gail Borst,  Action Organizer for BCFW. Available  from BCFW Publications, c/o 2029 West  4th Ave Vancouver. (50c)  nova scotla  ANOTHER WOMEN'S MINISTRY  The Task Force on the Status of  Women in Nova Scotia recently recommended the establishment of  a provincial women's ministry  with an innovative structure to  provide extensive community women's participation in decisionmaking .  Regional women's councils, composed of representatives of local status of women groups, minority women, business women,  home-  makers, etc. would identify grass  roots women's issues, set priority  and policy for their own communities.  These decisions would then be conveyed to the minister responsible  for cabinet action, by field workers employed as part of a small  central staff of the women's  ministry.  Like other proposed women's ministries, the eastcoast concept  would monitor government and private sector to ensure equal opportunity for women; educate the  public on women's issues; provide services to women's groups;  initiate government action on  women's rights.  No immediate action on the recommendation is expected.  For  more information, order a copy  of "Herself", from the Task Force  on the status of Women, Halifax,  Nova Scotia.  It's free.  (K.R.) 6  CHILDREN'S   LITERATURE  KIDBOOKS  A conference on children's literature  took place at UBC during the week  of May 10-15. Pacific Rim Conference  was an apt name for a gathering that  drew people from as far away as the  U.S., Mexico, Peru, Australia, New  Zealand, Japan, Singapore, and Great  Britain. Unfortunately, the guest  speakers from China and the USSR  did not materialize.  It was interesting to look around  the conference room that first Monday morning. The audience was at  least 95% women and looking further  at the registration list it became  obvious that the majority were librarians, interspersed with a few  elementary school teachers and a  sprinkling of book editors, university professors and writers.  What about that other 5%? Primarily  writers, illustrators, book editors  and lecturers.  Obviously the day  to day business of 'dishing out'  children's literature to the consumer is still, for better or worse,  a woman's domain.  But enough of  the statistical approach.  Mandy  and the  Flying Map  by Beveriey Allinson  Illustrated by Ann Powell  It would be impossible to go over  each day's happenings, short of  writing a book, and since the  conference was recorded, a volume  will no doubt be forthcoming.  Besides the principal speakers there  was a vast array.of discussion  groups to choose from, one of them  being on the topic of non-sexist  books—"Sleeping Beauty wakes up:  non-sexist books for children."  This was the only official mention  I heard of non-sexist books during  the conference.  The conference was not only educational, but exciting as well.  One  could simply sit back and enjoy  the rhythms of language as spun  out by a Leon Garfield, and Ivan  Southall, or a Susan Musgrave.  muklu  THE BACKWARD MUSKOX  by Heather Kellerhals-Stewart  After listening to speakers from  Peru, Mexico, or Singapore it was  difficult to talk about the "overwhelming" problems of publishing a  children's book in Canada, or the  lack of "quality" books, whatever  that means exactly.  For many of us though, the most  exciting day was Canada Day, the  Friday devoted to looking at  children's books in this country"  I thought some of the "nicest"  remarks of the whole "conference  came from Kathleen Hill, a teller  of folktales (the Glooscap stories)  from Nova Scotia.  She said very  simply that she had been struggling with the whole question of  adapting and retelling native folktales o Had it been in the past  some kind of exploitation?  She  told the audience that she had been  asked recently to do another series  of stories but had refused.  "I  leave it to you" she said, turning  to the person at her side—Anne  Anderson, the well known Cree  storyteller.  On this same day, author Suzanne  Martel gave a fantastic talk, or  mor accurately, a one woman show,  on the state of children's literature in French Canada0  People  were seen stalking about afterward  and muttering, "My God, did you  hear her speak? We can't lose  them!" Wake up from your isolation  B.C!  The conference helped.  Heather Kellerhals  Heather Kellerhals writes books for  children — among them She Shoots She  She Scores! about a girl who makes  the hockey team, and Muktu, The Backward Muskox  (whose picture appears  on this page).  SLEEPING BEAUTY WAKES UP  Sleeping Beauty may have awakened but  one is not convinced that the majority  of librarians (who select the books)  have. The participants in the workshop  I attended spent a great deal of time  discussing whether we wanted male  children to grow up like some of the  "sissy males" who were at this Pacific  Rim Conference" Several of us were  further shocked to hear that males  need to hunt — it makes them feel  like men.  Although the workshop leader was knowledgeable about non-sexist books, the  work group was unable to focus on the  topic. One came away with the feeling  that the child is still "He" and that  if parents want good non-sexist books  they will have to ask their librarians  to order them.  - Nadine Allen  Nadine Allen is the "Education Person"  on the VSW Staff. Also a mother.  Fresh Fish...  and Chips  by <Jan Andrews  Illustrated by Linda Donnelly '  Books shown on this page are available  from: Canadian Women's Educational  Press, 280 Bloor St, Suite 305,  Toronto, Ontario.  magazines  ART IN AMERICA,May/June 1976. $3.  Special 18 page section containing  "Women's Art in the '70s" by Lawrence  Alloway— a progress report on women's  art examining the history, social  effects, possible esthetic correlatives and critical problems of what the  author sees as a new avant garde.  Also in the same issue: "The Pains and  Pleasures of Rebirth:Women's Body Art"  by Lucy R. Lippard.  (Sent in by Carol McQuarrie).  WRITERS & ARTISTS  MAKARA "the Canadian magazine by  women for people" invites writers,  artists and photographers to submit  their work. MAKARA is looking for  material about people who are thinking and testing out alternate ways of  working, living and relating to each  other. MAKARA features artwork, photor  graphy, fiction, poetry, children's  stories, Canadian histroy and reviews.  Payment is small but it's there!  MAKARA, loll Commercial Drive, Vancouver, B.C. 253-8931.  NEWS  CONGRESS OF CANADIAN WOMEN  A"Bill of Rights for Canadian Women"  and support for sisters in Angola  were highlights of the meeting of the  National Executive of the Congress of  Canadian Women. CCW invites messages  and donations for the Angolan Women's  Organization. For more information  contact: Congress of Canadian Women,  Box 188, Station E, Toronto, Ontario. WOMEN ARE EXCLUDED  (The following is a condensed version  of a paper entitled, "Ideological  Structures and How Women are Excluded,"  prepared by Dr. Dorothy Smith, Assoc.  Professor of Sociology at UBC.  It  was delivered during 1975 as part of  the UBC IWY program.)  For a long time women have been deprived of the opportunity, skills,  settings, and means, to produce the  images, forms of thought and symbols  giving social form to their experience. The world as it is, or could  be, known from their position in it,  remains unexplicated.  Of course women have made use of a  limited and largely domestic zone of  women's magazine's, books, poetry,  etc.  But it is a limited zone. The  universe of ideas, images and themes  has largely been produced by men or  controlled by them. Women have  participated minimally in its making  and insofar as their work has become  part of this general currency, it has  been on men's terms and because it has  been approved by men.  This is a crucial problem in this  kind of society—first because it is  a society in which much of the administering, managing and governing  is done in words or other symbolic  forms; and second, because much of  how we know it comes to us secondhand via the media or in endless  varieties of other documentary  material.  (Words, expressing ideas  and concepts) provide the terms in  which we can talk to others about  what is happening, and the terms  therefore in which things can be  acted upon.  Women's exclusion from full participation in the making of this  universe of discourse has not been  the result of biological impairment.  Women have been actively excluded  from access to the means of "mental  production" and from claiming the  authority to speak for themselves.  Women who have attempted to make  such claims have in the past been  burned, guillotined, exiled, and  incarcerated in mental institutions,  and in the present they have been  (and continue to be) ridiculed,  reviled, and insulted. More powerful, however, as a means of exclusion  in contemporary society are ordinary  organizational practices. These do  the same work of exclusion but in a  quieter, more civilized, less observable fashion.  We can examine how this works in  the ordinary conduct of intellectual  business—that is, in how we, the  intelligentsia, communicate in  written products or in meetings,  seminars, conferences, conventions,  classrooms and the like. The sex  of the speaker modifies the author-  itativeness of the communication.  How it is received, and listened to,  its force, is by no means a quality  wholly intrinsic to the message.  The same message, the same act,  changes in value depending upon  which sex says or does it.  These general "assumptions" also  shape the patterns of face-to-face  communication. Generally men talk  more. Generally women are more  tentative, more likely to suggest  than to assert.  Talk is organized  so that men control the topics which  get "into play", and women sit around  facilitating, interjecting, supporting  and commenting—but not initiating  or asserting, and above all never  developing topics among themselves  which override those of men.  Lack of authority for women in general means that women lack authority  for each other. .We have become familiar in the women's movement with  how women have needed to learn to  relate to one another. We also need  to learn how to treat what other women  say as a source and basis for our own  work and thinking.  We have to accord authority to circles  of women.  If women have not developed  ideas, poetry, images, forms of art,  etc., offering a distinctive expression to women's experience (or converting the general currencies so  they also express the world from our  position in it), it is in large part  because they have been deprived of the  authority essential to that.  This of course is the reason that we  have a history constructed largely  from the. perspective of men and largely  about men and what they have done. This  is why we have so few or no records  of women who survived the hazards of  attempting to be a poet, visonary or  thinker. This is why we have an anthro  pology which tells about other societies from the point of view of men  and hence has so distorted the cross-  cultural record that it may now be impossible to learn from it what we  might have known about the situation  of women in other societies.  I am not convinced that matters are  improved simply by including women  in the professional and academic  positions of influence, though this  is an important and essential step.  The professional discourse has by now  a momentum of its own. The structures  which have been developed have become  the criteria and standards of proper  professional performance. Being a professional involves knowing how to do  it this way and doing it this way is  how we recognize ourselves as professionals. The perspective of men is  not apparent as such for it has become  institutionalized as the "field" or  the "discipline".  I believe the implications for women's  studies are radical and far-reaching.  We cannot, I think, be content with  women's studies organized in the box  created by the male monopoly of artistic, ideological and other resources  so that it is "women's business" and  confined in the same way as women's  magazines, women's novels, women's  programs.  Women's studies, it seems to me, must  offer a major critique. In some sense  it must dare to reinvent the world  of knowledge, of thought, of symbols  and images. Not, of course, by repudiating everything that has been done  but by subjecting it to exacting scrutiny and critique from the position  of women as subject (knower). And by  refusing to be confined by "women's"  as qualifier and limitation.  As a result of teaching for two years  in this form ... I have begun to have  a sense of the extraordinary depth  and extent of what remains to be discovered by women working from the  perspective and experience of women,  but insisting that they are not bound  by that.  - Condensed by Karen Richardson  (WCWN)  The November 1975 issue of "Canadian  Review of Sociology and Anthropology"  contains the full text of Dr. Smith's  paper.  NEWS  WOMEN'S COMMUNICATIONS CENTRE  The Women's Communications Centre  has moved to new offices at 3 Church  St, Suite 401, Toronto, Ontario.  The Centre's services are available  for your use. Write,phone or drop in  with questions about women.  (416) 368-0764.  film  "Women Want..." is a 25-minute 16 mm.  colour film produced by the IWY Secretariat, examining the changing  status of women from various perspectives. Available on loan without charge  from all regional offices of the National Film Board, listed in the white  pages of the telephone book.  -IWY Secretariat Newsletter  poem  TWO VIEWS OF LOVE  At 17  ephemeral  as the petals  of a daisy  so we  scatter  our love  At 29  love  is  not always  the pause  that  refreshes  conference  The conference Toward A Strategy For  The Lesbian Movement sponsored by  Wages Due Lesbians, will be held in  Toronto at the Don Vale Community  Centre at 80 Winchester St, July 23,  24,25* 1976. Register as soon as  possible.  Wages Due Lesbians, P.O. Box 38,  Station "E", Toronto, Ontario.  Phone: 466-7457 or 465-6822.  NEWS  70% Would Not Have Children Again  Good Housekeeping magazine, June  1976 reports that out of 10,000  women responding to a survey by  Ann Landers, 70% said if they had  known then, what they know now,  they would not have children! 8  The following materials are available  for use in the VSW Resource Library.  - Karen Richardson  The Public Archives of Canada have a  collection of tapes examining the role  of women, amongst them the regional  hearings of the Royal Commission on  the Status of Women, held from April  to October 1968. There is also a tape  on the first world war and its aftermath, offering insights into the  changing role of women during the  period when universal suffrage came  into existence.  Contact them in  Ottawa, Ontario.  "Yukon Women" , a book produced by the  Yukon Status of Women Council as an  IWY project, dealing with history,  laws, food health care of women in the  north, past and present.  $2.00 from  Ms. Read, Box 4456, Whitehorse,  Yukon.  Discovering Life Skills with Women:  manual on how to run life skill groups,  how to train coaches and plan programs.  Gives case histories.  Involves role-  playing.  $13.95 from YWCA, 80 Woodland  Ave. East, Toronto, Ontario.  Feminist Communications Kit: 25 page  publication primer for women's groups  beginning to do press releases, letters  to editors, speaking engagements,  media appearances, letter lobbying,  Free from WCWN, 2029 West 4 Avenue,  Vancouver, B.C. or call 736-3746.  New From Now Inc.: an incredible publications list of feminist resource  materials.  Excellent information.  Very inexpensive. Write for a copy  to P.O. BOX 86031, Pittsburgh,  Pennsylvania, USA 15221.  Business and Professional Women's  Information: ask for their publications list which covers homemakers,  volunteers, career counselling, women  executives, working mothers, women in  politics, women in management, daycare  etc. They're at 2012 Massachusetts  Avenue N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036,  U.S.A.  Women on Welfare: 30 page booklet  (bilingual) tells how to sue for maintenance, declare paternity, outlines  welfare payments on clothing, furniture, legal and financial aid, health,  housing aid, insurance, recreation,  childcare supplements, vocational  training, etc.  Free from Research  Collective on Women on Welfare,  School of Social Work, Carleton University, Ottawa, Ontario.  RESOURCES  Women in Business:  75 page booklet on  discrimination against working women,  consequences of equal opportunities,  female entrepreneurship. $3.00 from  Journal of Contemporary Business,  University of Washington, Seattle,  Wash., USA 98195 (1976)  Herself is a 90 page report on the  status of women in Nova Scotia, 1976.  Covers homemakers, matrimonial property, employment, childcare, education, physical/mental health, women  and the law, ministry of women.  Free from Task Force on Status of  Women, Halifax, Nova Scotia.  Membership Organizing Handbook:  4  page pamphlet written by the BCFW  Action Organizer Gail Borst to share  information relevant to organizing in  any women's group.  50$ from BCFW  Publications, 2029 West 4 Ave.,  Vancouver, B.C. or call 736-3746.  One In A World of Two's:  is a 40  page report on one-parent families  in Canada.  Issued April, 1976, covering their problems in the labour  market, the childcare dilemma, welfare,  lack of housing and the prospect for  change. Free from National Council  of Welfare, Brooke ClaxtoniBuilding,  Ottawa, Ontario.  Insurance and Women: a 30 page report  of the <New York State Senate Task  Force on Critical Problems covers  discrimination against-women in auto,  homeowners, life, health and disability insurance.  Issued October  1974. Free from Woman Alive, WNET  356 West 58 Street, New York, N.Y.  USA 10019.  Sex Discrimination in Fringe Benefits:  60 page report prepared for the fed<-  eral Advisory Council on the Status of  Women, February 1975. Deals with  occupational pension plans, Canada  Pension Plan, cost/benefit problems,  etc. Free from M. Bossen and Assoc,  123 Home St., Winnipeg, Manitoba.  Sex Roles: Journal of Research: free  examination copy includes: American  Menstrual Expressions; Femininity of  Competent Women; Psychology of Tokenism; Process of Sex Atribution; Women  in Draft Resistance Movement, Sex  Differences in Depression. Holt,  Rinehart, Winston of Canada Ltd.,  55 Horner Ave., Toronto, Ontario  or $14.00 per year.  Self-Study Guide to Sexism in Schools:  65 page booklet covers curriculum,  instructional materials, libraries,  staffing, guidance and counselling,  admissions, extra-curricular activities, the school environment and what  to do about it. Free from Office of  Equal Rights, Dept. of Education,  Box 911, Harrisburg, Pennsylvania,  USA 17126.  Beyond the Big Three: Career Counselling Kit for Girls:  encourages  young women to ignore teaching, secretarial work and nursing and go into  non-traditional jobs.  5 info booklets,  Offers high cross section of female  trail blazers, and a look at marriage.  $17.00 from Ms. Rydale, University  Women's Club, 467 Tipperton Crescent,  Oakville, Ontario.  New Career Options for Women: Counsellors' Sourcebook, (330 pages about  working women and the law). Things  Are Looking Up (60 page condensed  version of first booklet) and Selected Annotated Bibliography (240  pages). 1976. Price unknown. Order from  Human Sciences Press, 72 Fifth Avenue,  New York, N.Y., USA 10011.  For Better For Worse: Marriage Laws  and the Berger Commission: a pamphlet;  significant questions on the status  of women in marriage and summarizing  Berger Commission recommendations.  Free from Victoria Status of Women  Action Group, 766 Monterrey Avenue,  Victoria, B.C.  Battered Women Materials: collection:  houseworkers' handbook; what did you  do to provoke him? Stay Away From My  Body; Sexual Inequality Cultural Norms  and Wifebeating; The Abused Wife Problem: Law Enforcement Problems with  Intra-Family Violence.  $8.00 from  Leghorn and Warrior, 46 Pleasant St.,  Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.  T|1rrT Mnf^ine Spring 1976: 15 page  booklet by the Dept. of IndianAffairs  is devoted to native women m busxness.  Free from Editor, Ideas, #630-400 La  Laurier Avenue West, Ottawa, Ont.  Feminist Resources for Schools and  Colleges:  20 page booklet by the  Clearinghouse on Women's Studies, a  guide to multimedia Curricular Materials.  Covers sexism in education for  the elementary, high school and college teacher.  $1.25 from Feminist  Press, Suny College, Box 334, Old  Westbury, New York, N.Y.  11568 USA  NEWS  MANAGEMENT CONSULTANT FOR WOMEN  Imla Roberts is a freelance consultant in management training for women.  She offers courses which enable women  to upgrade qualifications and communications skills, using participatory  feedback techniques. Her clients include corporations, educational institutions, and government agencies.  For further information write: Imla  Roberts, 22 Rowanwood Ave. Toronto  Ontario.  men's liberation  MEN'S LIBERATION FILM  "Men's Lives" is a documentary film  about masculinity in America, the  expectations and demands of machismo,  an examination of men's socialization  in a sensitive yet political manner.  It is 16mm and runs 43 minutes. Rental  I is $59 but reduced rates can be arrang-  j ed. Contact New Day Films, a feminist  j organization, at P.O. Box 315, Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, USA.  -WCWN  CANADIAN MALE NEWSLETTER,which grew  out of the Men*s Conference in Waterloo, Ontario last October, is planning its second issue. Contributions  from men and women are welcom. Subscriptions are $2 a year, ads 75c  an inch.  Canadian Male Newsletter, c/o Hassle  Free Clinic, 201 Church St, Toronto,  Ontario. 9  Staff have begun our funding blitz.  We sent off letters to all 837 VSW  members, requesting they write to  Provincial Secretary and their own  MLA in support of our grant application. A similar request was  mailed out to some 200 feminist  groups in the province.  In addition, everyone who calls or walks  into our office is handed a leaflet  outlining our funding situation and  asking them also to write Grace  McCarthy. We are hoping her desk  will soon be swamped with some  1,000 letters lobbying for more  money for VSW as our grant runs  out July 31. On July 1, our media  campaign starts if we have not been  granted a meeting with McCarthy by  that time. We are now in the  process of contacting the leaders  of the three opposition parties to  lobby them to bring up the issue  of VSW funding and funding for  women's centres generally, before  the debates of the legislature  close at the end of June.  Special thanks to Paul Aaloe, a  student of Gladstone Secondary  School in the east end, a track  and field enthusiast, who claims  the women's movement has helped  him in his relationships with young  women. Paul dropped into the office  one day this month out of the blue  and offered to do an hour's work  for us. He helped stuff envelopes  for the lobbying letters outlined  above.  In the meantime we showed  him our files on men's liberation!  KAREN RICHARDSON  LOOK! LOOK! SEE! SEE! Judy spots the bus sign  and is delighted!  INSURANCE PROTECTION  Vancouver Status of Women received a  letter from Barb Gedroff who a few  months ago entered the Insurance  field. She feels that women .have been  neglectful about insurance protection  and would appreciate the opportunity  of discussing some ideas she has with  women individually or in groups. Interested women can call her at 682-  1641 (office) or 738-1952 (home).  Margaret McKay and I did a moving  workshop on sex role stereotyping  for the SFU teachers-in-training  programme (PDP) at the Dawson  school. Judy and I attended the Open  House at Ideal School and did a  session for people on issues of  the Women's Movement and VSW and  education. I am now on the Women's  Committee on Drugs and Crime of the  Vancouver Justice Council. Judy and I  are working with Betty Ann Buss of  IDERA on an exciting film series this  fall (more info in next KINESIS).  NADINE ALLEN  On Monday, June 14 I was asked to do  a two-hour stint on the CJOR talk-  show with Alan Garr on the issue of  women's liberation. As is to be  expected, some of the discussions  with callers become rather heated,  but nevertheless the programme seemed  to have made a positive impact, as  several listeners later followed up  to call the Vancouver Status of Women  with favourable comments.  The NDP women's group of New Westminster invited me to speak at their  monthly general meeting. The topic  was rather general - on the Vancouver  Status of Women, the issues'of the  Rally, and some on Women and the  Law. They all seemed keenly interested in our organization, and our  publications (especially Kinesis!)  JOHANNA DEN HERTOG  I was an official observer at Habitat  and was sorry I was limited by time  to attending so few sessions and not  preparing the expected article for  these pages .  I was delighted to meet  Margaret Mead there, and extend a VSW  welcome to Vancouver to a woman who  has done so much to raise the status  of women.  I agreed to represent the VSW on the  board of New Kitsilano Community  Forum, and serve as vice-chairperson  of the board.  I'm also buried in Ombuds cases, and  am making a sincere effort at cutting  back to a 40 hour work week, or a  reasonable facsimile thereof.  LEE MASTERS  CO-OP HOUSING  VSW member Sharon Simpson has been  investigating the feasibility on a  women's co-operative getting in on  Phase 2 of the False Creek development. If we get a group together she  will share her information with us.  Call the VSW Office 736-3746.  Head of Household  If you disagree that either/or  the man/woman must be termed the  head of household in the most  recent Canadian Census (1976),  write to Statistics Canada,  Ottawa, Ontario. Why can't both  be listed as heads of household?  Marriage is supposed to be an  equal partnership, isn't it?  Karen Richardson  Following is a letter written by Ms.  Kathleen Ruff, Director, Human Rights  Code, Department of Labour, Victoria  to Dr. Kirkham, Chief Statistician,  Tunney's Pasture, Ottawa, Ontario.  ''Dear Mr. Kirkham:  I have received a number of complaints  concerning the use of the term "head  of the household" in the Census Canada  questionnaire.  It is the view of the complainants,  and my own. view, that this term is  offensive and, in its effect, if not  on the surface, derogatory towards  women. Traditionally the family has  been thought of as a hierarchical  institution with a. male as the head  of household and the female in an  inferior subordinate status. Our laws  and customs have been tailored to  this discriminatory concept.  WRITE A LETTER!  Very great difficulties have been encountered by women in their struggle  to achieve equal dignity and rights  in our society. The use of the term  "head of household" simply reinforces  the age old inferior status of women.  In this regard I would draw your attention to the recent Giant Mines  Yellowhead Limited Supreme Court  Decision, in which a policy based on  "head of the household" was found to  be discriminatory in practice and a  violation of the Fair Practices Ordinance.  Even should the exceptional family  decide to put the woman as the head  of the household, this is no solution.  Women are not seeking to perpetuate  discrimination by now placing men in  the inferior position to which women  have historically been relegated.  A person's self-concept is of critical  importance in determining whether in  fact that person does enjoy equal  rights in our society. By basing the  Census Canada on the concept "head  of the household", the Federal Government has placed the force of its  enormous power and its stamp of approval to legitimatize and institutionalize  a concept that is destructive and  debilitative as far as women's hopes  of achieving recognition as equals  in our society is concerned. It is as  offensive and unacceptable to be required to name the "head of household"  as it would be to name "the preferred  child."  This office has contacted Mr. Clair  Thompson, Vancouver Regional Census  Director, concerning this matter. We  were told that "head of household"  was used for lack of a better term. I  It is clear that other terms such as  "signer", "reference person", "person  completing the form" could be used.  It appears that the only reason "head  of household" is used is because it  is a traditional discriminatory term  and because of lack of interest and  sensitivity to the question of equal  status of women.  I sincerely hope there will now be  some concern in the question of  women's rights and that the term  "head of household" will not again  be used in Census Canada.  I would appreciate receiving your  comments.  Yours Sincerely,  Kathleen Ruff, Director,  Code  Human Rights 10  HUMAN RIGHTS  What is happening in the Human Rights  Department under the new Minister of  Labour, Alan Williams? Reports have  been circulating that properly investigated complaints, under which no  voluntary settlement could be reached,  have been presented to the Minister  in order that a Board of Inquiry could  be constituted — BUT few if any  Boards have been set up. There has  even been the charge of political  interference in one case involving  the Langley Curling Club and sex discrimination with respect to the use  of recreational facilities. (Jack  Wasserman, The Vancouver Sun, Monday  June7, 1976).  The dispute in the Langley Curling  Club case centers around the fact that  women members of the club were arbitrarily assigned a time slot that was  not suitable and while they offered  to alternate with the men whose time  slots were more acceptable this offer  was refused. After many discussions,  the women were left with no time slot  at.all in which to use the facilities  and had to curl out in Cloverdale.  For women to be denied the use of any  public facility on an equal basis  with men is discrimination on the  basis of sex and is just as repellent  as if native peoples, blacks, Jews,  Catholics, or any other group of people  were denied the use of the same facilities. As long as women can be shuffled  into any time slot there is available  that doesn't suit the men, we have  proof of our subordinate status in  this society. We must contest this  instance of discrimination just as  hotly as any other.  The women members of the Langley Curling Club did just that. They finally  felt there was no recourse but to file  a complaint with the Human Rights  Branch. This complaint was investigated and the Human Rights Officer  found no reason to dismiss the case.  Because the joint respondents — the  Langley Curling Club and the Langley  Municipality — refused to settle,  the Human Rights Officers had to refer  the case to .the Minister of Labour.  And there it still sits. To date there  has been no Board of Inquiry set up  to examine the evidence and determine  whether in fact the respondents have -  contravened the Human Rights Code.  Could the Minister of Labour feel this  instance of sex discrimination is too  trivial to proceed upon, or, could  the fact that the present mayor of  Langley, George Dreidiger, is a past  president of the Social Credit Party  have anything to do with Alan Williams'  failure to set up a Board? With a  party in power that has no policy on  women's issues, the failure to set up  ombudsperson  Provincial Ombudsman?  Executive Assistant to Attorney-  General Garde Gardom replies that  the VSW letter advising that the  Ombudsman be a woman, will be  placed in their files, and forwarded to a committee designated  to select the Ombudsman. Write  to the A.G. at Parliament in  Victoria right now urging the  appointment of a woman to the  position of Ombudsperson, c.c.  to your own MLA.  a Board of Inquiry on an issue of sex •  discrimination with respect to the  use of recreational facilities may  be constituted as a very public statement of Social Credit's policy on  women's rights.  A case, exactly parallel to the Langley Curling Club dispute was settled  not long ago with the assistance of  the Human Rights Branch. Ms. Dutchie  Mathison, her husband, daughter and  a male friend went to play golf at  the Maple Ridge Golf Course. They  were informed that women couldn't  play on the golf course before 11:00  a.m. on weekends and statutory holidays and that if they just waited  until 11:00 a.m. they could all play  together. Or, of course, the men could  go on ahead. The golf course in question operates on a lease from the municipality. Ms. Mathison filed a com- •.  plaint with the Human Rights Branch  and eventually a voluntary settlement  was reached. The Maple Ridge Golf  Course will now be operated in a  manner consistent with the Human  Rights Code of British Columbia.  Male and female members and non-  members will be treated equally in  so far as hours of play and green  fees are concerned. All types of mem- ..  bership will be equally open to men  and women. The corporation of the  District of Maple Ridge and the proprietor of the golf course will publish an announcement of the change  of policy of the course and an apology  to Ms. Mathison in the local newspaper.  And finally, the lease of the golf  course land will be amended to include  a term that the tenant shall abide  by the provisions of the Human RightS-  Code of British Columbia. The settlement reached in this case is an excellent one.  But, like any other legislation, the  Human Rights Code is only as effective as the parties resposnible for  its implementation choose it to be.  The Langley Curling Club case is not  the first time the new Minister of  Labour has been involved in a controversy over failing to set up a Board  of Inquiry. The well-publicized case,  of the Danish dentist, Dr. Jonna Bruhn  Mou, is an instance where the former  Labour Minister, Bill King, approved  the Board of Inquiry but six months  later the new Minister of Labour,  Alan Williams, has still failed to  set up such a Board. The issues in  this case are clear. Dr. Mou received  her dentistry degree from the well-  respected University of Copenhagen,  whose standards are approved by the  International Federation of Dentists.  The B.C. College of Dental Surgeons,  however, will not recognize her qualif  ications as being of "equal educational  standard" and thereby will not allow  her to write the provincial dentistry  Bxams in order to obtain a licence  to practice. Dr. Mou took her case  to the Supreme Court of B.C. in January, 1975 and under a narrow legal  interpretation of the Dentistry Act,  the Court ruled that the College had  the right to recognize whom it chose.  Thereupon Dr. Mou took her complaint  to the Human Rights Branch under the  section "no person should be denied  opportunity of employment, including  professional work, by reason of race,  colour, creed, or place of origin.y  The Human Rights Officers subsequently  referred the case to the then Minister  of Labour, Bill King, who approved the  Board of Inquiry. But again, the case  is still sitting on the Minister's  desk. Do Human Rights take precedence  over the B.C. College of Dental Surgeons or any other self-interest group  or do they not? Until a Board of Inquiry is appointed to examine the  evidence we will never know.  Furthermore, the Minister of Labour  should not have the discretion to set  up a Board or to hand-pick the persons  who will constitute this Board. Delays  in setting up Boards quite naturally  give rise to inferences of political  interference. The practice in the  Workers' Compensation Board, the B.C.  Rentalsman's Office, and the Labour  Relations Board is to entrust an impartial non-partisan appointee with  the responsibility of setting up the  Board of Inquiry and setting up a  procedure whereby persons are selected  to sit on that Board in a manner that  is free from political manipulation.  The central issue here is not whether  Dr. Mau or the women members of the  Langley Curling Club were in fact  discriminated against. That is for  the Board of Inquiry to decide upon  in an examination of the evidence  before it. The real issue is: do we  have a government willing to implement the Human Rights Code or not?.  The cases referred to the Minister  of Labour have been properly investigated by Human Rights Officers who  found no reason to dismiss the case  and were unable to negotiate a voluntary settlement between the parties.  The surest way of subverting the intent of the Human Rights Code is to  fail to appoint a Board of Inquiry  where the complaint can be examined  and appropriate action can be ordered  by the Board if the complaint is found  justified.  - Lorri Rudland  NEWS  Wives in Business  The Women's Education and Social  Action Association of Quebec did  an in-depth study of the legal and  financial status of French Canadian  women working with their husbands  in independent family businesses.  This was an IWY project. They  found that 85% of the women interviewed received no regular salary.  Over half the women were in rural  areas presumably farm women. The  Report recommends that women working with husbands should have a  right to salary and benefits, right  to retraining at Canada Manpower  and to participate as a shareholder  or partner in the business should  be assured under all matrimonial  regimes. Other principles were  asserted ensuring equity for the  wife on the death of the spouse or  the purchase of or.sale of the  business upon death. B.C.    WOMENS   PUBLICATIONS  11  In the July issue of KINESIS a reader suggested that we provide a list of Women's Centres  and groups that produce newsletters so that we could all exchange newsletters and keep in  touch with one another. The following list is the most recent published by Karen Richardson  (for the late WCWN) and we think it is complete. If anyone knows of a newsletter that is  not included on the list please let us know.  BCFW NEWS  B.C. Federation of Women  1730 Stephens St. Vancouver  circulation 250, bi-monthly  $2.50 annually  provincial base  STATUS OF WOMEN NEWS  B.C. Teachers Federation  #105-2235 Burrard St.  Vancouver, B.C. 731-8121  circulation 100  quarterly, free  provincial base  CRWP NEWS  Campbell River Women's Place  923 Island Highway  Campbell River  circulation,250 $3/year  local  IMAGES  West Kootenay Women's Council  Box 1200, Selkirk College  Castlegar, B.C. 226-7624  monthly, #3/year  local  ISHTAR NEWS  Women's Resource Centre  2420 Montrose Ave.  Abbotsford,B.C0 859-7681  circulation 200, monthly  $3/year, local  KSW NEWS  Kelowna Status of Women  375 Bernard Ave, #8  Kelowna, 763-8223  circulation 50, monthly  $5/year, local  KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th, Vancouver  736-3746  circulation 1500, monthly  $5/year, provincial base  MAKARA  The Ad Company  1011 Commercial Drive  Vancouver, 253-8931  bi-monthly magazine  general interest  $6/year  MRSW NEWS  Maple Ridge Status of Women  22369 Lougheed Hwy  Maple Ridge, 467-1633  circulation 65, monthly  $3/year, local  NSWC NEWS.  North Shore Women's Centre  3255 Edgemont Bvld,    »<  North Vancouver 987-4822  circulation 150, monthly  $3/year, local  PEDESTAL  Pedestal Collective  6854 Inverness St.  Vancouver, B.C.  circulation 800, monthly  $3/year  lesbian-feminist  PRIORITIES  NDP Women's Committee  '3485 West 15, Vancouver  circulation 900, monthly  $4/year, provincial  socialist  ROOM OF ONE'S OWN  Growing Room Collective  1918 Waterloo, Vancouver  733-6276  circulation 800, quarterly  $5/year, literary mag.  VWC NEWS  Vernon Women's Centre  6 - 3000 - 30 St.  Vernon, 545-6552  monthly, $3/year  local  SWAG NEWS  Victoria Status of Women  8 - 671 Fort St.  Victoria, 388-6332  circulation 500, monthly  $3/year, Vancouver Island  WOMAN TODAY  Poco Women's Centre  P.O. Box 243  Port Coquitlam, B.C.  941-6311  circulation 250  monthly, local  $4/year  INTERCOM  Box 243, Port Coquitlam  941-6311  Intercom is a special publication — it grew out of  the need for communication  between women's centres  during Women Rally for  Action. It is produced &  sent free to any women's  centre (not individuals)  Future is uncertain &  POCO would like feedback  A number of status of women issues  have been raised in the House of  Commons over the past few months  which we'd like to draw your attention to. In most cases, MPs asked permission to present a motion on a women's issue and without unanimous  consent were unable to do so. It is  bad enough when women's issues are  not even raised in the House, but when  they are, and then voted down....Unfortunately, discussion of many women's  issues end this way in Parliament, but  not if you write to your MP urging  them to bring it up again. Write your  MP, House of Commons, Ottawa, Ontario.  - Karen Richardson  CPP for Housewives  Two thirds of the provinces must agree  to amend the national Canada Pension  Plan before the federal government can  pay benefits to housewives. Write to  Bill Vander Zalm, Minister of Human  Resources, Parliament Bldg. Victoria,  to urge him to pass the amendment NOW.  GAI for Homemakers  In May this year MP Caouette of Quebec  tried to present a motion to the House  of Commons to examine the possibility  of establishing a guaranteed annual  income for homemakers. He did not get  unanimous consent to present the  motion so it was not discussed. Ask  your MP to bring up this issue again.  Taxes on Maintenance Payments  In April, MP Hugh Anderson of Comox/  Alberni, requested that maintenance  payments, above those ordered by the  court, be tax deductible, to reward  generous ex-spouses. Jack Cullen,  Minister of National Revenue, replied  that he would suggest this to the  Minister of Finance. This motion  HANSARD  appears at first glance to be an excellent idea. Ask your MP for further  discussion on this issue.  Enforcing Abortion Law  In May MP Caouette of Quebec requested  permission to move a motion to withdraw the terms of reference of.the  parliamentary committee studying  abortion in Canada and replace it with  a committee to ensure abortion law is  enforced to prevent some hospitals  from providing "abortion on demand".  Permission to present the motion was  denied. Write to your MP upholding  the present committee.  Rugranking in Civil Service  Three months ago, MP Stanley Knowles  of Winnipeg asked the House of Commons  if the federal government would stop  rugranking secretaries employed in  the public service. President of the  Treasury Board Jean Chretien repleid  that he hoped so but that there were  "budgetary restrictions." Since that  time nothing more has been said on  the matter..Urge your MP to bring it  up again. Short funds are no justification for discrimination.  Grants to Childcare Centres  In May MP Knowles of Winnipeg asked  the Minister Responsible for the Status  of Women if the federal government  would increase grants towards capital  costs of childcare centres. Lalonde  replied he will introduce a bill "to  give greater flexibility" on the  matter, sometime in the fall. Make  sure he does. Write to him, (cc. to  your MP) because B.C. childcare centres  are still in financial danger.  Protecting the Unborn Child  In May MP Douglas Roche of Edmonton  wanted to present a motion that the  House commend the organizers of the  petition of 1 million anti-abortion  signatures for their continuing efforts  to protect the unborn and "thus foster  a life-sustaining society." Permission  was denied. Write to your MP expressing your views on abortion.  Juvenile Rape  In May, MP Ursula Appolloni of Ontario  moved for leave to introduce Bill C-  438 to amend the Criminal Code, the  purpose of which is to provide increased protection for juvenile victims of rape by raising the age of  "child" from 14 to under 16. Motion  was agreed to, the Bill was given  first reading and ordered to be printed. If you agree, write to your MP  saying so and urging speedy passage.  Veterans Pensions for Widows  For the past three months, MP Stanley  Knowles of Winnipeg has been trying  to present a motion to the House of  Commons to extend veterans pensions  to widows. Common-law spouses are  covered. However, unanimous consent  has been lacking. It seems even MPs  have difficulty getting colleagues  to discuss women's issues. Write to  your MP urging that the issue be discussed.  Old Age Security Spouse's Allowances  For several months Stanley Knowles  of Winnipeg and MP Andy Hogan of Cape  Breton have been trying to get the  House to extend old age benefits to  single persons, widows and separated  or divorced spouses who are past age  60 but not yet 65. This would especially help elderly women. Write to  your MP stating your views. 12  program on women  personal reflections  13  If the participation of women — the  neglected resource, the wasted force  — in the public and political sector  does not force the conflict with poverty, with exploitation, with the  practice of competition rather than  cooperation, then there is no hope  for this planet! Rosemary Brown told  approximately 700 cold women and men  huddled on the rough wooden bleachers  in Hangar 6, Habitat Forum, the evening of June 3rd.  Introduced by moderator Judge Nancy  Morrison as a "feminist who is tough,  warm and unrelenting", a "heavy-duty  lady", Rosemary Brown was appearing  with author an associate editor of the  Vancouver Sun Lisa Hobbs, Judee Nancy  Morrison, and U.S. urban planner  Fran P. Hosken, in the UBC Continuing  Education sponsored program for Habitat, "Women the Neglected Resource."  Rosemary emphasized that it is essential that we as women take the authority  and responsibility for development of  our country on ourselves. Women "have  to run for office,,learn how to use  the vote effectively to elect women  dedicated to the evolution of a different way of people relating to each  other."  How, she asked, can male-dominated government and government agencies make  decisions for all the people when 50%  of the people are not represented?  This theme was also voiced by Lisa  Hobbs who stated that women are systematically excluded from power, and  conferences "piously pontificating  about housing" are band-aids, rich  rhetoric to shore up the existing  structure. She called on women to  raise their voice on the international  scene, to demand that women be includ- '  ed at every level of decision making,  to tell the "misogynist structure"  that our potential must be taken into  account. "Tell them," she said,"we  have pulled the plow long enough —  now' we are going to start planting  the seeds."  Fran P. Hosken joined in urging women  to "think globally, act locally". There  must be active participation of men  in the home environment, she stated,  — only then can homes and communities  be designed to meet the needs of everyone — women, men and children.  A town planner from Adelaide, South  Australia, elicited a delighted response during the open forum period  following the speeches when she  announced that the problems with the  design of houses and communities is  one of "puberty and algebra" — when  girls hit puberty they are told they  can't do algebra. So they don't become  engineers, town planners, architects,  town planners, mathematicians....  The program concluded with the unanimous acceptance of a resolution  urging members of the UN Habitat  conference to work' towards the equal  participation of women in all decisionmaking processes at every level of  government.  - Jo Lazenby  RESOLUTION OF WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION  IN THE PLANNING OF HUMAN SETTLEMENTS  WHEREAS:  Women should have the right to equal  representation in the planning decisions which affect their environment  and the quality of their lives, and  WHEREAS:  Women everywhere must cope with the  deficiencies of Human Settlements,  and  WHEREAS:  Implementation of the World Plan of  Action developed at the World Conference of the International Women's  Year demands vigorous, positive implementation, and  WHEREAS:  The United Nations has declared the  year 1975 to 1985 The Decade for  Women  We resolve:  That member countries of the United  Nations Conference on Human Settlements work toward the equal participation of women in all decisionmaking processes at every level of  government:  a) International delegations and  committees.  b) National governing bodies and  advisory boards.  c) Local decision-making levels.-  During the United Nations Conference  on Human Settlement, the Vancouver  Status of Women was invited to attend  a downtown press conference where  Elaine Livingston, President of the  "Women's Decade for Health Committee",  would speak on a proposal for an  "international Preventive Medicine  Corps" that is to deal with the unmet health needs of women all over  the world.  It sounded impressive and interesting  so we attended. However, both the press  conference and the proposal itself  were disappointing.  The press conference was poorly attended, and of the 30 or so women who came  I could only identify one as "press".  Aside from VSW only one other local  feminist organization was represented  — Vancouver Women's Health Collective.  Although Livingston spoke for about  30 minutes, it wasn't until the subsequent question period that it really  became clear what the plans are — and  the goals. The initial impression  given was that of a large, already  half-operative, internationally-based,  para-medical, feminist programme. The  pamphlet that was passed out, and the  answers to the audience's questions  gave however rather a different focus.  The pamphlet stated that the Committee  had been set up by the American Health  Foundation, that its goal was to  "raise the level of health consciousness of women and men throughout the  world", and would focus on the issues  of primary health care, nutrition,  sanitation, pre- and post-natal care,  environmental hazards and disease-risk  factor examinations. The Corps is to  to be composed of "students, volunteers and all persons interested in  health training opportunities." So  far the Committee has run only one  pilot project of a mobile health van  in New Jersey, USA.  Firstly, it seemed rather questionable  how "women-oriented" this programme  really is — considering its stated  goal and the focus areas. Also, its  intention to rely predominantly on  volunteer labour seems rather unfortunate, both in terms of the limits -  that puts on the potential of success,  and in terms of its relegating women  thus once again to working in a volunteer capacity.  Although the ultimate aim is to set  up an International Preventive Medicine Corps, there is no specific  plan to make this feasible, beyond  the . "hope" expressed by the Committee that women of other nations  "that are looking for ideas will  adapt this one", and pressure their  own governments to allot funds (perhaps U.N. funds) to* this purpose  and so become participants in this  International Corps.  It is also questionable, however,  how this could come about when even  in such relatively affluent countries as Canada, already existing  groups that have exactly such a  Before I went to Habitat Forum I had  heard a great many conflicting reports  — ranging from "a free exchange of  ideas and experiences in a fantastic  setting" to "a humanist P.N.E. without  rides." After I had been to Habitat _  Forum my feelings were just as mixed.  First of all — the setting is fantastic! I was lucky enough to be there  on one of the sunny days (Lord knows  they were few) and the flags of all  nations were waving in a slight breeee  and behind them was the blue water of  English Bay and beyond that the buildings of the West End and beyond that  the mountains! Truly spectacular! As  good as a postcard!  The old airplane  hangars have been transformed — well  not really transformed ... they are  quite obviously still old airplane  hangars — but rough yellow cedar  benches climb steeply up towards the  ceiling and enormous batik and  applique hangings billow down from  above and float back and forth across  the windows. They are most definitely  fantastic! Painstakingly authentic  replicas of wild flowers, panels of  salmon progressing upriver, soaring  trees, designs and figures all in  brilliant colours with the light shining through, always gently moving  I liked my little pottery Habitat  medallion the Registration table gave  me, and I even saved one of the special Habitat coins that were the only  women 81 health  HABITAT  preventive fecus and are also  largely run on volunteer labour (such  as the Vancouver Women's Health  Collective) must struggle desperately  to survive financially, and receive  very little support from the government, or the rest of the medical  profession.  Furthermore, having  the'International Preventive Medicine grow out of a committee of the  American Health Foundation seems more  conducive to a multinational American corps, than an international one.  Thirdly, no part of the proposal deals  with an examination of the causes of  the poor preventive medical care for  women, or states that its purpose is  to change existing medical systems,  institutions, or government policy to  more adequately deal with women's  needs, or involve women more directly  in such existing programmes.  In fact,  Elaine Livingston quite emphatically  pointed out at the very beginning  that this programme was "not to be in  competition with any existing programmes".  While we all may agree that women all  over the world get second-class care,  I left the meeting wondering if this  programme would do anything more than  just provide the United States with  a facile claim that they are making  a contribution to the United Nation's  Decade for Women"  Johanna den Hertog  legal tender at the Forum. And the  world's longest bar certainly was long  — 250 feet of polished cedar snaking  CANADIAN DELEGATION  The Canadian delegation to the UN  Conference on Human Settlement: of  the 70 member delegation, 65 were  men and 5 were women. All six official  delegates were male* Two of the women  were alternate delegates. The other  3 were advisors.  The Canadian government asked a group  of academics to monitor the conference — all men *•- because there were  no women of the necessary caliber  available.  HOME OF MAN?  An explanation given for why Barbara  Ward's book Home of Man could not be  titled Home of Humankind, Home of  People, etc: it would not translate  into other languages. If this strikes  you as being not a very good explanation write to Ms. Ward urging her to  consider a non-sexist title for further  editions of the book. A letter sent  through Hangar VII. The booths and  displays by a great variety of groups  concerned with a great variety of  problems were interesting — even  though I nearly O.D.ed on guilt (I  am capable of and experienced at  assuming the guilt of the world on  a moment's notice) and helplessness  after the first hour — the Minamata  mercury poisoning, the conditions in  prisons, the dangers of the Trident  base, the plight of political prisoners in Chile.... Lines of students  trooping through the maze absorbing  a microcosmic view of the world's  sicknesses.  I escaped out into the sunshine and  sat on a log and watched the kites  and Evelyn Roth's colourful fabric  cyclinders. As the person inside  swayed and ran and jumped the cyclinders tumbled like bright tumbleweeds  along the ground followed by children  and the inevitable camera nut.  Some of my feelings about Habitat Forum  were not as satisfying. I didn't mind  that the hangars were bitterly cold  at night — after all they were hangars  not auditoriums — even though my  journalistic fingers turned blue as  I gripped my pencil. Some of the  bleachers had grey blankets folded on  the seats and as Nancy Morrison pointed  out in her opening remarks — a good  turnout ensures body heat. I did mind  that it was almost impossible to find  out what was going on. Events were published in the special daily newspaper  Jericho, but not only were the listings  so brief and non-informative as to  be almost useless, when changes or  cancellations occurred no one seemed  to have any information. I chose the  afternoon I went to Habitat Forum in  order to attend the second part of the  Women in Human Settlement Workshop.  At 3 p.m. I, along with a large number  of women and a few men and a recording  crew from a local radio station, turned up at the designated hangar. After  an hour of everyone wandering around  asking everyone else if they knew  what was going on, a man bounded onto  the stage — he had come to see a workshop on women and it was up to the  women present to provide one and that  was the trouble with women, they al--*  ways wait for someone else to do  things, etc. He sat down on the stage,  folded his arms and announced that he  was waiting. The women present felt  disinclined to entertain this bored  individual and he was generally ignored. After awhile a woman carrying some  papers arrived and informed the assembly that there would hot be a Part II  as everything about Women and Human  Settlements had already been said in  Part I. At this point another man leapt  to the stage and announced that we  would have our own Forum— "that's  what it is all about." He numbered  the microphones — One and Two — and  invited people to step up to them. A  woman stepped up and stated that the  issue dividing women in Canada was  abortion. I couldn't tell from her  statement if it was because there were  .too many abortions or not enough. Another woman began what appeardd to be  a travelogue on Kenya. As I left I  could hear, "Kenya has an area of....  square miles. The official languages  are "  A free exchange of ideas is a laudable  goal, but because of the lack of organization and direction and communication, the impression I came away from  Habitat Forum with was one of separate  groups^of people, each off in its own  corner, beating its own drum, and talking to itself.  - Jo Lazenby  women &  The lack of awareness of the needs  of women in the urban environment was  the focus of the Brief/Slide Show  Presentation "Women and Planning:the  Example of Vancouver, Canada" sponsored by the Vancouver Status of Women  and presented at Habitat Forum the  evening of June 3rd.  The Presentation was created and delivered by Viviane Hotz ( a Swiss  architect currently working in Van*-  couver and member of the 1975-76 VSW  Board of Directors) and Joan McHardy  ( PhD. candidate in Sociology at Oxford University). Using slides simultaneously with the reading of the  Brief, the Presentation discussed  how decisions in planning homes, sub-  burbs, communities and the urban  environment vitally affect women and  yet women have no part in the decision  making structure and their needs are  not understood or considered. This  lack of input from women was dramatically illustrated by examples of unsafe  streets, inconvenient public transportation, houses designed by men for women to work in, the isolation of women  in the subburb housing developments,  the lack of recreational and cultural  facilities at shopping centres, and  the indifference to the needs of the  predominantly female workers of  planning  large city shopping malls.  The Brief emphasized that the source  of real change in town planning is  not within the planning profession,  but within the political and social  structures of our society. "Women  must participate in the allocation  of scarce urban resources."  VSW hopes to obtain a copy of the  Brief/Slide Show Presentation for  the VSW Library.  - Jo Lazenby  ROSEMARY NOT A DELEGATE  Rosemary Brown had requested that  she be allowed to represent B.C.  at the Habitat Conference but her  request was refused. She was told  that if she were interested in the  Conference she could watch it on  television. Judge Nancy Morrison  commented that the provincial government would probably much rather have  Rosmary on THAT side of a television  set. 14  The following books are now in the  VSW library. We receive free copies of new books from publishers  provided we publish reviews in  Kinesis. Anyone interested in  reading and reviewing the following books should contact me  at the office.  Thanks.  Power Politics by Margaret Atwood  Privilege of Sex by Zaremba  The Law Is Not For Women by June  Callwood  Women Look at Psychiatry by Dr.  Dorothy Smith & Sara David  Women's Evolution by Evelyn Reed  We received 17 feminist review books  this month! All but the above five  were taken out to be reviewed by 3  avid VSW members!  Special thanks to Beth Jankola for  donating her book of poems, The  Way I See It. to the VSW library.  We hope others will do the same.  - Karen Richardson  BOOK  The Paradise Papers, (Suppression  of Women's Rites) by Merlin Stone  (Virago Press, June 1976) examines  the original supremacy of goddess  worship, the high status of women  in ancient female cultures, how  and why this was destroyed by  sexist male religions and the  effects of this on today's woman.  Of interest to feminist historians  and religious feminists, it is  nevertheless light on feminist  rhetoric.  I thoroughly enjoyed  my overdue introduction to numerous female deities with mysterious ancient names and heroinic  qualities.  The author does not propose we  return to worshipping female gods.  She simply says understanding our  heritage will help us debunk oppressive patriarchy.  I wish however that she had made some actual concrete suggestions for the  future.  Stone states, "originally god was  a woman," worshipped as lawmaker,  prophet, healer.  Before the  relation between coitus and conception was known, "She" was also  considered the sole giver-of-life  mother, not wife. Man's role in  fertility was unknown, therefore,  matrilineality and matriarchy  developed as a natural consequence.  In earliest time, the "Queen of  HEAVEN," was ruler of the state  too. Her religious shrines were  social and economic centres in  which women were either supreme  or at the very least equal to  men.  Stone offers numerous  examples of ancient women in  government, finance and war, and  men in corresponding reversed  roles.  Goddess worship was a "geographically vast and major religion,"  she says, which until extremely  recently has been intentionally  obscured. The "Divine Ancetress"  was worshipped as early as 25,000  BC long before the first prophet  of Yahweh, (Abraham between 1800-  1500 BC)  and until as late as  AD 500 when the last of her temples was closed.  Female religion and culture did  not fade away by itself, the author points out, but was destroyed  gradually in violent persecutions  over many centuries by advocates  of male gods.  Stone says the underlying causes were male political maneuvering over land and property. Theology, she maintains  has more to do with social power  dynamics than with god. The female goddess, she reminds us,  ruled communally while monotheism  reflects the political ideology  of power in a single dominant male.  Once the male role in fertility was  known, it was necessary for men  to control women completely, like  property, in order to be certain  of paternity and maintain patriarchy.  In this context, the author  explains, the free sexuality of  the female goddess was seen as  lewd aggressive, a threat to male  power. Thus the moral stance of  premarital virginity and marital  fidelity for women developed.  Male religious ideology justified  the supremacy of the male god  and kept women in their place  through the concept of sexual  sin.  Stone also reveals that the female goddess myths were rewritten using male characters.  Goddesses were censored by male  religious writers.  More recently, supposedly objective male archaeologists of the  1800's further obscured the history of women's religion and culture  by ignoring and'Äûexcluding  the material evidence of goddess  worship. Their conclusions were  drawn before much of the archaeological data were in.  How does all this affect us today?  Stone recalls we never learned  about the goddess in Sunday school.  In our most impressionable childhood years we were taught that  Eve cause the downfall* of mankind  and therefore women must submit  to men.  Stone notes that sexist theology  is imposed even on non-religious  people because the ideology permeated today's education, law,  literature, philosophy, and media.  But then she muses, what  else can you expect from a culture with a male god?  She says women must remove the  male mystique from archaeology  and history and develop our own  evidence and interpretations  rather than depend on biased  male translations of the past.  Stone first became interested in  the goddess as a sculptor when  she realised Venus figures are  the earliest art.  This lead  her to research the subject  over the past ten years by  personally visiting many ancient  cities.  I'm glad she did because another  part of my female identity has  been confirmed by reading this  book - a heritage I had not even  realized was there.  It is a good  book to read in conjunction with  Andrea Dworkin's Womanhating.  Here are some of the female gods:  Isis "more excellent than any other  god" Egypt, 1400 BC  Arinna (Turkey) 1500 BC  Ishtar (Babylon) 1800-700 BC ("Goddess of the universe")  Nana "the Creatress", (Summer)  1900 BC  Brigit,"the patron Deity of Language"  (Celt)  Gaia, "Goddess of Divine Revelation"  (pre-Greek)  Demeter, "Law-giver" (Greek)  Maat, "Ordered the Universe" (Egypt)  Nut, Hathor, Nammu, Tiamat, Aruru,  Mawa, Ashtoreth, Astarte, Anat, Cybele,  Ua, Zit, Nekheby, etc   - Karen Richardson  BOOK  Menstruation and Menopause: The  Physiology and the Psychology, the  Myth and the Reality, by Paula  Weideger, (New York, Alfred A. Knopf,  1976).  Reviewed by Jane Evans, June 1976.  This book is a comprehensive and readable exposition of a subject which  deeply concerns all women. Much of  the information was gathered from  more than 500 questionnaires completed  by readers of MS. Magazine'. The price,  at $10, may seem a little stiff but  for many women with ambivalent feelings toward menstruation, it will be  money well spent.  The entire reproductive cycle is covered, from menarche to menopause, with  discussions on premenstrual tension,  women's self image and, most important  of all, our acceptance of the taboos  which men have placed on the manifestations of menstruation. A large portion of the book is devoted to the menopause and its consequences and the  widespread belief that the sexual life  of the postmenopausal woman is over.  Weideger suggests that much of man's  fear of the power of woman stems from  her ability to bleed regularly without  a wound. Genital blood arouses in the  male strong fears of castration and  this has led to the age-old strictures cr. the menstruating woman. Exr-  amples are given of the taboos of  primative societies where women are  secluded in huts and forbidden to  touch various objects during their  periods; among the ancient Persians,  a woman who menstruated longer than  four days was given 100 lashes.  The  author believes, however, that "sophisticated literate modern day men  have the same fears as their primitive brothers had." The book presents an extraordinary picture of  the ways in which women have internalised the assumptions underlying  the taboos and have come to believe  that their periods were offensive,  messy and unpleasant.  Some of our  premenstrual discomfort is -psychosomatic, but not nearly as much as  some physicians would have us believe. Many women, when trying  to discuss cramps, tension, and so  on with their doctors, have been  told that these are signs of their  rejection of the female role.  Much of the information we receive  about ourselves is misleading,  sometimes dangerously-so. The So-  lana Health Centre in Texas has a  publication called The Miracle of  Living Foods which states that  "...women who do not befoul their  bodies with poison habits and dead  foods do not menstruate.  Menstruation is symptomatic of inherent  body pathology." A pamphlet issued  CONTINUED PAGE 15 15  .....CONTINUED FROM PAGE 14  by the U.S. Parks Dept. warns menstruating women to keep out of the  parks, "...bears and other large  carnivores have attacked women in  this physiological condition."  Why not a few huts at the park  gate for us to wait in?  Obviously the taboos are alive and  well.  This book encourages us to question most of our preconceptions  about the consequences of being  women. Weideger believes that  those who would wish to deny the  differences between the sexes  have bought the male myth of  menstrual taboo with its allied  low opinion of feminity and.sexual identity. Some women's communities now celebrate the menstrual synchrony which comes from  living together. Menstruation  and menopause are part of our  emotional and social experience,  says Paula Weideger, and we  must learn to reject the distortion of women's image and see  menstruation as a powerful and  reassuring sign of our female-  ness.  POEM  A EULOGY  Ana Lacome lives a life of death  and despair  depression is her constant friend  Joy,-if it was ever there, has  all disappeared  Her days all run together,  her days all stand still  Ana Lacombe has a house and husband and kids  He knows power, had goals, has  achieved success  But SHE is a woman, she never had  goals, never knew power, never came  near success  Ana Lacombe has made the rounds  of Medical Science  visited countless psychaitrists,  psychologists, gynocologists and  G.P.'s  Been diagnosed manic depressive,  un-cooperative, psychotic, neurotic  Ana Lacombe lives a life of silent  sadness, of quiet sorrow, of private  anguish—of running in circles and  never leaping bounds or even seeing  the hedges  Ana Lacombe died today  Death by her own Hand  She entombed herself in  The Family station wagon  In the backyard garage  She turned the key in the  Ignition and pushed Her  Foot on the gas pedal  To the floor  Ana Lacombe died today  Ana died today  She's dead  YOU & THE LAW  This column will be a regular feature  written by the staff of Vancouver  People's Law School. More information  about each topic can be obtained by  calling the People's Law School (681-  7532) and ordering the booklets  mentioned below. The Vancouver People's  .Law School offers a regular series of  talks for lay people on various areas  of the law. The summer schedule can  also be obtained by calling the above  number.  FAMILY COURT MAINTENANCE ORDERS  A Family Court judge can order a spouse  to pay monthly support to the other  spouse and/or the children. The person  applying for maintenance must first  establish certain grounds.  The grounds for obtaining support for  a child are, that the other parent:  1) neglected the child or refused to  provide reasonable support, or  2) deserted the child, or  3) treated the child with physical  or mental cruelty.  For a spouse to obtain support, he  or she must establish  1) neglect or refusal of reasonable  support by the other spouse, or  2) actual desertion by the other spouse  or constructive desertion (i.e. your  spouse behaves in such a way that you  are forced to leave home), or  3) physical or mental cruelty, or  4) excessive drinking or drug use or  5) adultery or homosexuality which  has not been condoned (i.e. "forgiven")  You should see a family counsellor at  Family Court for more information.  Once the grounds are established, the  Judge will determine the amount of the  payments. Prior to the hearing, each  party will supply a statement of  monthly income and expenses. The Judge  considers the previous- standard of  living of the family, the present  living conditions of each household,  and each spouses future plans, i.e.  for retraining or employment.  The support order is enforceable like  any other court order for the payment  of money. The spouse will be required  to make the payments regularly. If he  or she does not pay, you should notiiy  the enforcement officer of the Family  Court. A future column will explain  enforcement.  Common law wives are only eligible for  support orders in very special circumstances. If an order for support of  an illegitimate child is made, the  mother can obtain support payments  until the child is six years old.  Children are eligible for support from  a man who is not their legal father,  if their mother and the man have lived  together as husband and wife flor two  years and the man supported the child  for one year. The man need not have  been the biological father of the  child. If the parents have not lived  together for two years, the mother  can apply for support for the child  under the Children of Unmarried Par- .  ent's Act, but she must establish  that the man is the biological father  of the child.  You and your spouse can enter into an  agreement about support. This is called  a separation agreement. The separation  agreement can be registered at the  Family Court and is enforceable, as  if it is a court order.  Also, you can both consent to a Family  Court order. The terms are negotiated  between you like a separation agree*1  ment but the result is a formal court  order.  To obtain more information about Family Court maintenance orders, phone  the Vancouver People's Law School  (681-7532) for our booklet on Family  Court Procedure or contact your local  Family Court:  Vancouver      255-5131  Burnaby        525-6461  Richmond       273-1044  North Vancouver 980-7521  West Vancouver  926-7521  Surrey 584-8111  Delta 946-7694  nunn  (p.p.)  FACTS ABOUT THE PILL  "Doctors don't really know exactly  how the Pill works. The fact that it  can prevent ovulation was stumbled  upon while researchers were trying  to find a drug that would increase  fertility. What is known is that the  Pill interferes with the action of  the pituitary gland, the governing  gland of the body which regulates  the proper function of other regulatory glands and such vital life functions as growth, maturation, reproduction, and metabolism. The dangers  of the Pill were overshadowed by the  potential market for a nearly 100  per cent effective contraceptive.  Caution was hidden by the familiar  "relatively safe" label."  Prevention Magazine, March  1976, page 84.  Many women are surprised to learn  about the risks that go along with  the convenience of oral contraceptives.  Among the health risks Involved are  depression, headaches, acne and thromboembolism (blood vessel clotting).  When the clot lodges in the vessels  supplying the brain the result is a  stroke. Although the risk factor fo.r  strokes among pill-users may seem low  at 1 or 2 per cent per 10,000 the  risk is very definitely a real one.  Some nutrional needs also skyrocket  when using the Pill. The need for  the B vitamin pyridoxine (B6) increases substantially and its lack  has been linked with the depression  that often goes along with oral contraceptives. Other vitamins to increase are Vitamins C, A and the B  vitamin folic acid. General food  sources for these nutrients are green  fresh vegetables (vitamin A and folic  acid), orange and yellow vegetables  (vitamin A), citrus fruits (vitamin  C and folic acid). Nutritional food  yeasts are an excellent source of B  complex vitamins, B6 included.  (Reprinted from SISTERHOOD,  Quesnel Women's Study Group  Newsletter, May 1976) 16  Diana Bissell (former VSW Membership  Coordinator and now Community Education Consultant on Women's Issues for  Secretary of State, based in Prince  George) has promised to keep us informed about her activities in Northern  B.C. The first of these chatty "reports" arrived the day after the June  issue went to the printers so we are  running it this month. Diana would  love to hear from women: 210 - 550  Victoria St, Prince George, B.C.  On May 13 I attended, as Coordinator  of the BC Federation of Women, a Cross  Cultural Women's Conference in Kelowna.  This conference was sponsored by the  Okanagan Native Women's Ad Hoc Committee, funded by Secretary of State  and its purpose was to investigate  the possibilities of native and non-  native women working together on various issues. We were also looking into  the reasons why this had not happened  in the past as well as doing some down  to earth communicating!  The conference was attended by approximately 40 women from Women's Centres  and Indian Friendship Centres from  throughout the Okanagan and Kootenay  areas including Williams Lake, Kamloops, Vernon, Armstrong, Salmon Arm,  Kelowna, Penticton, Nelson, Cranbrook,  and Merritt. It marled the first time  native and non-native women had really  sat down together to discuss common  and dissimilar problems. I'm going to  go through the day in chronological  order for you, beginning with the reports from the Women's Centres. (The  whole conference was highly organized  —reports from Women's Centres, then  Indian Friendship Centres, address on  native women's needs, workshops,  resolutions,etc).  I enjoyed the Women's Centres Reports  probably more than most people given  that I am involved with so many of  them these days — it was fascinating  to see how differently each was operating — how all of them were coping  with tremendous funding problems —  how different areas focus on vastly  different things. Nelson is heavily  into the health scene with post-partum  counselling, childbirth education  classes, liaising with hospital boards  etc; while Vernon has been putting  energy into craft classes and daycare.  Kelowna Centre is run as a project by  the local Status of Women and is down  to one staff member only after last  year's 7 researchers completed their  study of the status of women in  Kelowna. Penticton is out of money  completely and is using volunteers —  has done 2 TV shows recently. Armstrong women are stepping delicately  into the area of community education  on women's issues — they are a very  new group only in operation 4 months.  Salmon Arm has money from Gene (Gene  Errington's old office Provincial  Coordinator for Status of Women Programs) and Secretary of State and  they are using it very carefully —  have only now found a suitable place  for an office and will be open one  day a week. They had a marvellously  successful spring festival with 200  people from the community attending!  Cranbrook Women's Resource Centre is  at present just a group of women with  no money, no space but they have run  a film series on women, have a C.R.  group and some women's studies going  — they are still looking for more  women before they can investigate the  money situation. Kamloops has done a  lot of work on rape — and after having  NORTHERN NOTES  funding for 4 years is really scrambling for some money to continue its  progress. Interesting note — all of  them were involved with the Rally and  BCFW Okanagan regional rep Dorothy  Behncke (Armstrong) is in the process  of organizing most of them into an  active region of the BC Federation of  Women.  Mary Thomas of the Native Women's Society spoke eloquently of her socialization as a native person while ad*-.-  dressing the conference on the topic  'What Are Native Women's Needs". She  pointed out how she had been taught  to forget her cultural heritage --  her "Indian-ness" — and to learn how  to be a white person, only to have  to face a society that refuses you  entry because you are not a real white  person. Mary's commitment at this time  is to work in the schools teaching  young native people to have pride in  their culture and background. The  following is an abbreviated list of  some of the particular problems/needs  of native women as Mary saw them:  1.Native single mothers seem to get  desperately needed assistance ONLY  AFTER diaster has struck — i.e. they  have no money, no jobs, can't find  housing — then children are taken  away. She would like to see more  counselling/opportunities available  as a preventive measure.  2.There is a tremendous amount of  wife beating yet there are so few  options for native women except to  take it — and they get so put down  for doing this by their own people  and outsiders.  3.There is little knowledge of birth  control and basic health knowledge.  4.There are a large number of deserted wives (not much divorce —  people just seem,to split up and go  off).  5.There are a tremendous number of  problems created by the Indian Act  (band membership, illegitimacy of  children, losing Indian status etc.).  6.The problems of alcoholism, common  to all cultures is compounded here by  the incredible frustration of the situation.  Mary Thomas closed her talk by asking  Women's Centres if they could provide  any assistance in the form of family  counselling, legal advice, native  worker at the Women's Centre, the. provision of space by the Women's Centre  for cultural exchanges, workshops,  educationals between native and non-  native women.  The women representing the Indian  Friendship Centres outlined the programs that they run for native people.  (Friendship Centres are core funded by  Sec. of State by the way — usually  2 salaries — Executive Director and  Secretary-Treasurer— and often Dept.  Human Resources provides an incentive  worker too.) Williams Lake I.F.C. does  a lot of work with native people in  hospitals — assiting them with language problems, acting as 'family' when  the patient may be far from home,etc.  Kelowna I.F.C. is very involved with  education -- runs a cultural program  in the schools and a museum as well  as dealing with the bad housing problem created by the influx of native  seasonal workers at fruit-picking time.  They try to deal with the housing needs  of single parent families as well as  working with families whose children  have been removed from their home. All  Friendship Centres were concerned with  -supporting and encouraging native  people to make life better for themselves in the community as well as trying to educate the non-native people  about native culture,etc.  The most fruitful part of the day was  the scant hour and a quarter we had  for workshops in which native and non-  native women from each region gathered  together to discuss their problems/  needs. I dropped in on all four workshops and from notes collected there,  as well as a review of their reports,  it was apparent that non-native women  gained a greater understanding of the  widely different politics expressed  by native women. I was told by one  woman that the land claim issue was  silly — and by another that they were  the only issue. Non-native women also  learned that they should not translate  the reticence of native women to become  involved in actions as apathy, and I  sensed that many saw for the first  time just how bad the Indian Act is  and how it has mutilated the native  culture and spirit. Native women were  truly surprised to see how many Women's  Centres had funding problems and one  very astutely remarked that perhaps  Women's Centre should hire a native  woman as staff person and their funding problems would be over! Native women  also realized what services were in  operation at Centres and there was good  dialogue on how it could be utilized  by native women. And perhaps most importantly — there was a recognition  on both sides that there are many differences between native and non-native  women — differences that cannot be  rushed into some kind of mock "unity"  —nor should they be.  I was the "after-dinner speaker" (just  me and the mints!) and had been asked  to tie up the loose ends, give an overview of the women's movement and talk  about BC Federation of Women, the Rally  etc. I'm not going to give a repeat  of the"talk here — but the main point  I wanted to stress was that non-native  women had no right to demand that native women become "involved" in the  women's movement — it was up to native  women to voice their own needs — and  if native women choose to act within  the women's movement context they  should look over the structure and  dynamics of it very carefully to ensure that their particular needs (due  to double discrimination and double  oppression) do not get left out. Non-  native women need to educate themselves  about the native issues and it is our  own responsibility to seek out that  education and communication.  Conclusions — for me the conference  was useful because of the chance to  meet and hear native women and make  new friends, Useful too because communications can and will improve between  Women's Centres and Friendship Centres.  The conference was also incredibly  frustrating for me because better communication is not the answer to the  oppression of native and non-native  women — and it is sometimes viewed  as the ultimate panacea (indeed often  foisted on us by government as being  the ultimate panacea) for all our  assorted ills. I know what I am doing  in my life and work with that misleading panacea, so the resolution of my  frustration for the present time is  to keep on truckin' and keep on talkin'  so others may choose to see that the  answer is more than just working together.  - Diana Bissell 17  maple nidge  DESIGNING WOMEN UNLIMITED is a store operated by the Maple Ridge Status of Women.  The store has weavings, pottery, macrame,  and leather sandals made to order. If you  are interested in submitting articles for  sale the store will sell them for your  price and 30% commission. The commission  is used for running the store - all profits go to the Maple Ridge Women's  Centre, 22369 Lougheed Highway.(467-  1633). Open Tues.-Fri. 11 a.m.-4 p.  p.m.  and Sat. 10 a.m.-4 p.m.  ,     | _       I whom I h<  north shone ~m.  NSWC needs volunteers to work in the  office and to help on the summer  student project. The cost of child  care is reimbursed. Call Merle, office  co-ordinator, 987-4822, if you can  spare some time.  3255 Edgemont Bvld., North Vancouver  987-4822.  NSWC is compiling a Directory of  North Shore Doctors for women. To  give or get information call their  Better Doctor Bureau, 987-4822 on  Tuesday afternoons. Ask for Eileen.  — terrace-  On May 29 the Terrace Women's Organization hosted a conference for northern  women called "Women's Changing Roles."  About 150 women attended, including  women from women's groups in Mackenzie,  Vanderhoof, Prince Rupert, the Charlottes, and many other districts in  the North.  ISIS  ISIS: WOMEN'S MEDIA DISTRIBUTION AND  PRODUCTION CENTRE  9 - 2185 West 4th Ave. Vancouver.  731-3324.  Isis has a constantly growing library  of 16mm. films, videotapes, and slide/  sound productions that can be borrowed  for the cost of postage, insurance and  basic maintenance. Write for listing.  Isis also offers help in programme  planning — P.R., setting up art exhibits, using equipment,etc.  Darkroom facilities can be booked for  use.  If you have production ideas for new  16mm. films or tapes call ISIS.  It was exciting to once again meet  many of the same women I had first met  in March with the Women Rally for  Action.in Victoria, and to see the  huge contingent of Prince George women  whom I had had the occasion to meet  at their fantastic conference two  weeks previously.  Five speakers were invited to this  Terrace conference. I was invited as  a representative from the Vancouver  Status of Women and began the conference with a speech giving a historical  perspective on the B.C. women's movement. Gail Borst, Women's Organizer  for the B.C. Federation of Labour,  prince  george  Prince George Women's Centre, 1306 -  7th Ave. Prince George. 562-1762.  Prince George Women's Centre held a  very successful women's conference in  May. Workshop topics included Women  & Health, Women & Education, Women &  the Law, Women in Politics, Women in  Poverty, and Women & Unions. For a  report on the workshops and the panel  discussion contact the Centre.  The Centre has a Doctor Referral  Service. If you are dissatisfied with  your doctor or have a great doctor  you would like other women to know  about call the Centre and leave a  message for Emily Carter.  Blanche Killon is the contact person  in Prince George for Human Rights. I€  you feel you have received unfair  treatment, especially in labour, call  562-8131, local 356.  spoke at lengthnabout the need,and  the how-tos, of union organizing  among female workers. Julia Goulden,  in her soon-to-end role as Special  Advisor to the Minister of Education  on Sex Discrimination in Public Education, talked about the monumental  task still before us in ending the  sex-role stereotyping that is caused  by current curricular material  and sexist educational institutions.  Rosemary Brown then gave one of her  typically rousing speeches on women  and politics. Diana Bissell, as Northern Consultant on Women's Issues,  wrapped up the conference speaking  about the needs of the women's movement in the north and some ideas for  bigger and better collective activities during the next year.  The day was long and exciting. All of  us — including us speakers — had  had our consciousness raised once  again rather a few notches.  - Johanna den Hertog  rich.mond  Richmond Women's Resource Centre will  be opening Wednesday, July 7th with  an Open House from 2 p.m. to 9 p.m.  at South Arm United Church, corner of  Steveston Highway and #3 Road.  Richmond Women's Resource Centre is  a Centre for self-discovery, self-  help, mutual support, and direct action for women of all ages.  For more information call 277-9638.  campbell  river  Campbell River Women's Place funding  ran out in March this year. Their  application for funding from the provincial government was denied. They  need $5000 to continue. Are there 1000  women who would like to donate $5 each  to keep them alive? Send money to them  at 923 Island Hwy, Campbell River, B.C.  They are open noon to 5 p.m. Monday  to Friday.    (KR)  The women of the Quesnel Women's Study  Group, c/o 310 Front St., Quesnel,  have written to KINESIS to share with  other women's groups how they organized  a Women's Studies Program in their  area:  "In the fall of 1975 the Dept. of  Continuing Education held a seminar  on Women's Roles in Society. This was  only a one evening event and most of  us in attendence felt that something  more was needed. We approached the  director of Adult Education and proposed holding a 10 week course. We  submitted a list of topics, speakers,  and films that we might include and  discussed the purpose of the course  being to increase the awareness of  women as to their status. The course  was approved but the director thought  that we should just try a 6 week course  to see how it went. The enrolment was  13 people, including 2 men, and Adult  Education felt that it was a pretty  good turnout. The District Resource  Centre provided us with a classroom  quesnel  in a junior high school library and  we used the projection equipment  available there. The most popular  sessions turned out to be the speakers  and discussions rather than the films  but that could be because the films  we did get were rather out of date. 0  On the whole however we felt that the  course went satisfactorily and we took  in $85 for giving it. We hope to expand on the course and increase the  time to 10 weeks to put it on in the  fall of 1976. One or two people handled  the past course but we hope to have  a cooperative teaching situation tor  the fall with one or two different  people handling each class session.  That way each one in the group will  gain experience organizing and con"  ducting the sessions.  Women's Studies Course Outline  Feb.5,1976  The Image of Women —  discussion of current magazine articles and advertising.  Feb.12,1976 Film from NFB.Portrait  of Four Families by Margaret Mead.  Discussion as to current similar problems.  Feb. 19,1976 Daycare, presentation by  Philippa Buckingham, daycare worker.  Videotape of daycare session and discussion of training, operation and  philosophy of daycare.  Feb.26,1976 Film from NFB, Illegal  Abortion. Discussion of abortion situation in Quesnel and B.C., medical  aspects, legalization and birth control information.  March 4,1976 Women in Public Education, presented by Joan Wallace, BCTF  Status of Women rep — explanation of  the power structure in education,  examination of textbooks as to sex  role stereotyping, discussion of gains  BCTF has made and what still needs to  be done and discussion of status of  women in high school on down to primary level particularly in Quesnel.  March 11,1976 Analyze and discuss  Canadian Women and the Law. " 18  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  woman alive  The Vancouver Status of Women TV show  WOMAN ALIVE is seen on Vancouver Cable  10 TV Wednesday evenings at 9:30 p.m.  Video tapes (h  inch) of the shows are  in the VSW Audio-Visual Library and  can be borrowed for $1 per tape (to  cover postage).  JUNE 30 - Men's Liberation. Host: Lee  Masters. Guest: Marvin Lazerson, Assoc.  Professor of Education at UBC. Theme:  Discussion of the emerging awareness  of men of their own lives and expectations — often an awareness begun by  the feminist movement.  JULY 7 - Human Rights. Host: Glinda  Sutherland. Guest: Hanne Jensen. Theme:  The provisions of the Human Rights  Code of B.C. Hanne Jensen, a Human  Rights Officer, explains what the code  covers, the protection for complainants,  and the means cf placing a complaint.  JULY 14 - Sex Discrimination in Education. Host: Glinda Sutherland. Guest:  Reva Dexter. Theme: Steps being taken  to combat sexism. Discussion revolves  around self image and roles, text  books, attitudes (misrepresentation  of women), courses, counselling,  chores, discipline.  JULY 21 - Feminist Counselling. Host:  Diana Bissell. Guests: Cathy Stewart,  Capilano College Women's Program Director & Eileen Hendry, Women's Resources Centre UBC. Theme: New  approaches to theraphy for women. A  provocative debate on two types of  counselling that can be offered to  women. Defines non-sexist counselling  and feminist counselling and discusses  the methodology, goals and political  implications of both.  JULY 28 - Matrimonial Property. Host:  Host: Glinda Sutherland. Guest: Rita  MacDonald. Theme: A discussion of the  need for Community of Property. Rita  MacDonald, one of the members of the  Berger Commission,explains the community of property proposals and the  reasons behind the present recommendations.  people's   law    school  Learn about your law* through the  Vancouver People's Law School's serie*-  of FREE law classes. All courses and  materials are free, to pre-register  call: 681-7532. Sotet each course  takes a full three evenings.  LEGAL RESEARCH. July 5,6,7. 7:30 - 9:30  p.m. at UBC Law Library. Instructor:  Alan Soroka. The first two evenings  will be an introduction on how to use  a law library, the third evening students will practice doing their own  research, assisted by law students.  LABOUR LAW. July 12,13,14. 7:30 - 9:30  p.m. at B.C. Labour Federation Bldg.,  517 East Broadway. Instructors: Rod  Germaine, Carolyn Gibbons. Discussion  of Legislation affecting non-unionized  workers, unions and their right to  organize: certification procedures,  collective bargaining, strikes, lockouts and picketing.  WOMEN AND THE LAW. July 19,20,21. 7:30-  9:30 p.m. at YWCA, 580 Burrard Street.  Instructor: Penny Bain. This course  is designed to provide an over-view  of the legal status of women. All the  Federal and Provincial laws that give  special status to women will be discussed. These include: labour laws,  matrimonial property laws, criminal  laws, income tax law, etc.  SEMINAR  FEDERAL WAGE AND PRICE CONTROLS  July 26 & 27, 7:30 - 9:30 p.m. at  West End Community Services Bldg.,  1655 Robson. Instructor: Leo McGrady.  1.History of wage and price controls  in Canada (a) War-time controls (b)  voluntary controls.  2.Terms of Anti-inflation Act, administration of Act; inequities.  workshop  ASSERTIVENESS TRAINING WORKSHOP  This self-growth workshop will hei't?  participants reduce their self-defeating behavior and (1) learn how to ;-  distinguish assertion from aggression,  non-assertion from politeness; (2)  develop some beginning skills in acting assertively in personal and professional^ lives. Format includes discussion of interpersonal rights, exercises designed to overcome whatever  blocks exist to acting assertively,  and role-playing to practice assertive behaviors. Effective ways of expressing feelings, opinions and beliefs will be explored so that one  is able to assert oneself without  violating one's own or others' rights.  A weekend workshop: July 9, 7:00 p.m.  to 10:00 p.m. and July 10, 9:00 a.m.  to 5 :00 p.m. To be'held at the VSW  office, 2029 West 4th St, Vancouver.  Register by calling 736-3746ji_Aii£10  deposit is required.  Full price: $30/woman.  Leader: Charlotte Atlung  nape  vag  Vancouver Art Gallery, 1145 West  Georgia St. 682-5621.  EXHIBITION:  EMILY CARR , Watercolours and Drawings  July 10 to August 29.  This showing of works from the VAG  permanent collection will complement  a major presentation of Carr paintings  at the Art Gallery of Greater Victoria  Tuly 20 to September 12. The Victoria  exhibition includes 26 canvasses on  loan from. VAG,  SPECIAL EVENTS:  PEANUT GALLERY , Lunch hour events for  children aged 6 to 10, Tuesdays, Wed--  nesdays & Thursdays at noon. Admission  is free. Call 682-5621, local 21 for  more information.  For other Exhibitions call 682-5621.  The Vancouver Feminist Karate Association, is sponsoring a lh  hour slide  show/talk on Rape Prevention entitled  "To Stop Rape". The programme will be  given by Pye Bateman, Black Belt in  Karate and chief instructor of Seattle  Feminist Karate Union.  Tuesday, July 6th, 7:30 p.m. at 2144  West 12th Ave. Vancouver. For more  information call Marsha 736-2881.  Gable tv  WOMEN IN FOCUS •  WOMEN IN FOCUS is seen on Cable 10  in Vancouver, Monday nights at 9 p.i  JULY 5 - Tomorrow's Leaders  JULY 12 - Rape Is A Social Disease  JULY 19 - Karate and Self-Defence  For Women  JULY 26 - Great Artists  cap college  WEST COAST EXPLORATIONS 1976  The Capilano College Summer Institute  of the Arts offers the following non-  credit programme of courses from July  12 to August 7. Register in person or  send to West Coast Summer Institute  of the Arts, Capilano College, 2055  Purcell Way, North Vancouver, B.C.  Phone inquiries 986-1911, Local 321  or 325.  West Coast Literature. Instructor:  Dorothy Jantzen. Early and recent  examples of West Coast Literature.  Tues. & Thurs. 2 - 5 p.m. $40.  West Coast Theatre. Instructor: Kayla  Armstrong. Explore the theatrical  heritage of the West Coast and the  lives of people who shaped the heritage. Weds. 7.-.10 p.m., Sats. 10 a.m.  - 3 p.m.  $40.  West Coast Religion. Instructor: Bob  Gallacher. The religion and mythology  of West Coast Indians will be examined  around central themes such as man and  his environment and man and the cosmos. Tues. & Thurs. 10 a.m. - 1 p.m.  $40.  West Coast Art and Architecture. I  Instructor: Ann Rosenberg. Various  phases in the development of West  Coast art and architecture will be  demonstrated through a series of slide  lectures, guest lectures and guided  tours. Fri. 10 a.m.-5p.m. $40.  --&"  WOMEN'S STUDIES  Capilano College in North Vancouver  is planning the following Credit  courses in Women's Studies this Fall:  General Introduction to Women's Studies, Women & Men in Transition, Women  in Theatre, Women in Managementc  The Women's Studies programme welcomes  input from community women. Call coordinator Marsha Trew, 986-1911,  local 294. WOMEN IN: PORTUGAL  19  In the November 1975 KINESIS we published an article on women in Portugal  supplied to us by Mark Sandison and  written by his brother Paul Sandison  and Anne-Marie Larsson. We recently  received a letter from Paul in Stockholm Sweden offering us a followup  article. The article is in four parts  and is accompanied by excellent photographs. We are running the first two  parts this month and will conclude in  next month's issue. The articles are  written by LENA ISRAELSSON, a member  of the Swedish Portugal Committee and  of Group 8 a Socialist women's movement in Sweden. STEFAN DEHLEN took  some of the pictures with LENA. He  is also a member of the Swedish Portugal Committee. PAUL SANDISON Is  responsible for the translation from  Swedish to English. We are very grateful to PAUL, LENA and STEFAN for sending us this material.  THE WOMEN'S SITUATION IN PORTUGAL  The overthrow of fascism in Portugal  on the 25 April 1974 has involved far-  reaching changes in the Portuguese  society and a wide section of the  population has been organized into  workers' committees, housing committees, soldier councils, people's  assemblies and agricultural collectives. But what has this revolution  meant for Portugal's women?  A seamstress at the textile factory Confecao Lord outside Lisbon  which the workers took over and  formed into a co-operative.  Many industries with mainly female  v/orkers — most of all the textile  factories — have been occupied or  taken over by the workers and many  women have taken part in actions  and strikes. The latest example is  the nurses' strike for higher wages  and better working conditions. In  the rural workers' strike against  the landowners the women have by  tradition played a leading role. The  women have organized themselves at  their place of work, in trade unions,  and in housing committees. The intensified general political activity  concerns the women to a large extent.  After a long 40 year struggle  against fascism and the landowner,  this old farmworker in the 'red'  district of Alentejo has witnessed how the.patriarch was  kicked out and an'agricultural  collective farm formed.  In some areas an attempt at collect*  ive childcaring during the day has  been made by the housing committees.  The conditions have heen ripe for the  awakening of the women's struggle and  a start towards liberation. But the  men of the revolution maintained that  the liberation of the women would  automatically come with the revolution.  Very little has been done, therefore,  to improve the women's situation.  Abortion is still forbidden, as well  as the distribution of contraceptives  according to laws from the fascist  days which are still in force.  Most of the women bear their children  at home in cold, drafty and substandard homes. Child and mother care is  not a right in Portugal. The child  mortality is also the highest in  Europe.  The women are alone responsible for  the long and tedious housework. This  one-sided situation has hardly been  questioned. The laws regarding the  family clearly place the legal position  of women as completely under the power  of her husband. After the occupation  of the textile factory called Sogantal  the women were not able to build up  a co-operative because their men  (legally their guardians) refused to  sign.  Unemployment among women is now widespread and during this present economic crisis it is the women who are made  redundant first on the grounds that  they do not have a right to work like  the men have.  There exist hardly any daycare centres  at all in Portugal. The caring of  children is organized through nannies.  It costs at least 700 escudos (14  pounds) a month per child. In a working class family one can only afford  to have one or two children with the  nanny. If one has more than one child  the woman generally stays at home.  The women are also badly represented  in the People's assemblies and the  other committees. Even in the industries which are traditionally based  upon female labour the male representatives have been in the majority.  Now that censorship has been abolished  the way has been opened for the economic exploitation of woman's body and  pornographic industry is developing  fast.  The promotion of capitalist interests  in a more reactionary form has been  more and more successful, especially  after November 25 when most of the  left was outmaneuvred, and the government has openly shown on whose side  it stands. Noone has any longer any  illusions that the government will  steer Portugal closer to socialism  or the liberation of women.  However the right has not yet dared  to crush the People's assemblies and  committees, and it is in these organizations — the textile workers' committees, the domestic workers' union,  the housing committees etc — that  the women's struggle is carried out  and it is here that the conditions  for the liberation of women already  exist.  WOMEN'S LIBERATION MOVEMENT IN STORMY .  WEATHER  There is a women's liberation movement  in Portugal, but it struggles against  formidable odds. MLM (Movimento libet-  acao mulheres) has been persecuted  and harassed (also bodily) so very  much that the women often have thought  of giving up. The international women's  liberation sign awakens enormous  violence and aggression in Portugal.  This in itself can be taken as a definite sign that the liberation struggle  is not only needed but needs to be  intensified. This is why MLM still  exist: despite the odds.  When I visited Women's House in Lisbon  which MLM had occupied together with  MCALG (The Action Group for Free  Abortion and Contraception) I could  not help noticing the nailed-up windows, and the facade with its faded  and torn down posters. What had happened to Women's House which had been  such a hive of activity last summer,  a House which had even been the centre  for an International Women's Week?  "Well," a woman from MLM told me,  "the building workers in the area close  by have time and time again broken  into the house, broken or stolen all  our furniture, belongings and files  and left only misogynist and obseene  slogans on the walls."  "We have tried to talk to the builders.  But it hasn't helped, the vandalism  has continued and now we have neither  the money or time to fix up the House  again. And even if we do it up we  cannot be sure that it wouldn't happen  again."  MLM's first demonstration was routed  in tumult when the demonstrators, women and children, were attacked by  CONTINUED ON PAGE 20. 29  .CONTINUED FROM PAGE 19  about 5000 men. These men were from  both the right and the left and they  spontaneously gathered to beat up the  little group of demonstrators. The  men beat the children and began stripping the women. Further resistence  was useless in light of the huge discrepancy in numbers.  Recently MLM has concentrated mainly  on the abortion question. Together  with MCALG the women go out to the  factories and discuss abortion and  contraception. In the discussions  MLM try to raise the consciousness  of the women and convince them of  the necessity of taking an active  part in the struggle.  There do exist other women's organizations, but it is only MLM and MCALG  which have recognized the necessity  of a separate struggle for women.  MDM (Movimento democratico de Mulheres)  an organization close to the Portuguese  Communist Party, has the support of  most of the women on the left. But  MDM has no independent line on women's  problems, not even on the abortion  question.  "One cannot preach free abortion for  women who are illiterate and who hardly know what abortion is," explained  Luisa Amorin from MDM when I wondered  why. Her statement is both silly and  arrogant when it is very well known  that it is just among this group of  women one finds women who have had  20 to 30 abortions.  "Women's House" in Lisbon, which earlier was the centre of the  women's movement and a hive of activity, now stands deserted  after the local building workers' vandalization.  Instead MDM ran a Women's Year campaign  with Valentina Tereschkowa, the astronaut and memer of the Russian elite  as the hero. MDM hopes and believes  that the socialist system will itself  give women equality through the establishment of community services like  daycare centres. Thanks to this passive attitude MDM has won the support  of the parties on the Left in Portugal.  MDM is the only true revolutionary  women's organization,! was told.  Luisa Amorin talked about the future  in Portugal with a certain degree of  pessimism. I hope (as does MLM) that  this giant organization will dare to  step out and amaintain an independent  line in the women's question. It would  result in an enormous upswing for  women's liberation in Portugal.  PARTY WOMEN  Women Rally for Action and the follow-  up lobby activities has increased the  interest of many women jn political  involvement and in finding out more  about a particular political party  and its policies and commitments on  women. On this page KINESIS gives  information on how to contact the  women's committees of the four political parties represented in the B. C.  Legislative Assembly. Each of these  committees will try to put you in  touch with a group in your own area.  LIBERAL PARTY  B.C. Women's Liberal Commission: For  information write Kilby Day, President  of the Women's Commission, 8020 Ash  St. Vancouver. (324-4724, after 6).  Membership is $2 per year. The Women's  Commission does not have its own newsletter but the provincial party newspaper "The Grit" is sent to members  every 6 weeks and an information  bulletin announcing meetings, etc is  sent out when the need arises. The  federal party publication is "Dialogue"  Women are invited to contact Kilby  Day if they have an issue they would  like to discus.  NEW DEMOCRATIC PARTY  Standing Committee on Women's Rights  of the B.C. New Democratic Party:  Information can be obtained by writing  to "Priorities", c/o 3485 West 15th  Ave, Vancouver (733-5990). "Priorities"  is the monthly publication of the NDP  Women's Committee and contains feminist socialist articles, general  concerns of women, reports from the  women's committees, convention information and party news. Subscriptions  are $4/year for individuals, $8 for  institutions, 50c for a single copy.  Anyone is welcome to submit articles  to the Editorial Committee (c/0 Melodie  Corrigall at above address).  "The Democrat" is the provincial party  newspaper sent monthly to all party  members. There is a women's news page  in each issue.  PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE PARTY  Progressive Conservative Women's  Association: Information can be obtained from Progressive Conservative  Party Headquarters, #505 - 900 West  Pender, Vancouver. (683-8545). Copies  of the policies on women passed at  the P.C. Convention in October 1975  can be obtained from the same address.  The Women's Association does not have  its own newspaper but the provincial  party paper "The P.C. Times" is sent  to all members and contains news on  women and youth as well as party activities.  SOCIAL CREDIT PARTY  Social Credit Women's Auxiliary: For  information on the Auxiliary write to  the President Zonzabel Sather, 1001  Bruce Ave,Nanaimo. The Women's Auxiliary produces a quarterly publication — the next one will appear at the  end of June — which is sent to all  Auxiliary members. If you would like  a sample copy contact the Auxiliary.  The provincial party paper is "The  Unity News."  NEWS  Women in Public Life  The March, 1976 issue of Business  and Professional Woman reports that  in 1973 there were only 33 women  mayors in Canada, although there  were hundreds of alderwomen and  female school trustees. Of over  3 million women in our labour force,  under 1 per cent earned over $15,000.  This year there are 3 provincial  cabinet ministers  (female), in  the country, a Canadian record.  (K.R.) 21  Recollections,- Reflections and  Nausea of the Abbotsford Wowen's  Festival plus a few men, not  to mention "bring your spouse"  to the Saturday nite party  We were a van full of Vancouver  women looking through one pair  of eyes  at a large concrete rectangle  bearing these words:  Fraser Valley College  Aghast at the lack of grass and  trees and the abundance of concrete and pavement  We bravely entered the concrete  through glass doors  Once inside there were signs of  life -  women festival organizers  women workshop goers  women poetry readers  women from SFU  women from Makara  women from Press Gang  at book displays  a woman running 4 continuous  short films - Our Dear Sisters  late in the afternoon 2 women  from UBC showing discrimination  in AV and the WRA from March 22  there were:  women quilting  festival  woman dancing  women serving tea and cookies  woman with children in tow  woman doing daycare  woman with husbands in tow  women saying "I still like men"  one woman down on her knees and  throwing up in the toilet (wonder  what made her ill)  a woman asking me annoying questions, reminding me of my mother  Jane Perks - trying against great  odds to give a performance with  bad accoustics, over air-conditioning and the rudeness of people  meandering in and out of the theatre, talking - over an hour behind schedule  Then escape,.back through the rain  back to the city - thank god!  A women's festival took place at  Fraser Valley College in Abbotsford Friday nite May 28 and all  day Saturday, May 29. A diversity  of women from the Fraser valley  and Vancouver attended the Festival, although the turn out was  fairly light. The atmosphere  was strongly apolitical. Workshop  topics ranged from Assertiveness  training and Rape Prevention to  the Worthy Homemaker and Creating  A Marriage.  One of the primary topics of discussion, with definately political  overtones, was why were there men  attending a women's festival? One  woman commented, "You'd think women  could be on their own for a day  and a half."  I myself feel that men have no place  at a women's festival.  The amount  of energy burned up by women angered by the presense of men and  the amount of energy burned up by  women defending their presense  could have been concentrated on  women getting together with women.  Although I found the festival much  too "middle of the road" for my  tastes, I do appreciate the fact  that a lot of organization and  time was given by Fraser Valley  women to make this weekend possible.  (Comments and response from  Festival organizers would be welcome and may add a different  perspective of opinion).  (P.P.)  CANADIAN WOMEN & RELIGION  Canadian Women and Religion describes  itself:"we are an interdominational  group of people with a common concern  for women as members of the Body of  Christ, and for their status and functions in that Body. Our objectives  include these aims: 1) to promote,  organize and support activities which  would lead to the following outcomes  in.Christian churches and organizations: — equal status and evaulation  of men and women  — removal of all sexism from  liturgy and teachings  — development of males and females into full maturity of  personhood in equal fellowship with each other and in  their relationship to God,  2) to conduct research and engage in educational programmes in accordance with these aims,  3) to co-operate  with other organizations whose objectives are similar to Canadian Women  and Religion.  CANADIAN WOMEN AND RELIGION is a newsletter published in Saskatoon. Subscriptions are $2 per year (for 4  issues or more) and membership in the  group is $3 full, $2 associate. The  address is 1332 Osier Street, Saskatoon Saskatoon. (652-7265).  The following were listed under the  heading New Literature in the April  1976 issue:  "Study Guide: Part I, Women in the  Bible and Early Anabaptism. Part II.  Lesson Helps for "All We're Meant To  Be", edited by Herta Funk, 1975.  This booklet was put together through  the efforts of Herta Funk, Director  of Adult Education, General Conference  Mennonite Church. Herta is doing tremendous work in the area of female/  male relations in the church. Part I  contains short scholarly and clearly  written articles on such topics as  "Jesus and Women" and "Paul's Teaching on the Status of Men and Women"  and Part II provides suggestions for  group activities^ to help people to -  discover their assumptions and attitudes about sex roles when using All  We're Meant To Be (by Letha Scanzoni  and Nancy Hardesty), in addition to  studying the Bible. The Study Guide  is available at the moment free of  charge from: Herta Funk, Director of  Adult Education, General Conference  Mennonite- Church, 722 Main Street,  Box 347, Newton, Kansas, USA 67114."  "Wilpower: a learning packet based on  the experience of Women in Leadership  (WIL). This was an experimental four-  year project funded by United Presbyterian Women's Offering Giving which  enabled over forty local groups of  women to develop change-directed projects in their local communities. The  learnings are categorized under 14  headings, each printed on an individual flyer and include such topics as  sharing leadership, balancing task  and support, expanding the group,  utilizing resources and evaluating.  The packet costs $1 and may be ordered  from PDS, 225 Varick Street, New York  New York, USA 10014."  "Project Feedback : some reports are  now available of Project Feedback, a  social experiment carried out in 1974-  75 for the Canadian Catholic Conference by Grant Maxwell. He talked to  750 people in 40 urban and rural communities in 10 provinces, in order to  explore how a cross-section of Canadians felt about social goals, everyday life and other subjects. Titles of  the reports are: I. People's Social  Hopes, II. Assessing Everyday Life,  III. Searching for Wholeness, IV.  What's Expected of Religious Leader-  " ship, and V. How People Feel About  the 1980s. Of the three reports so  is of particular interest to Christian feminists because it contains  comment on women and the church and  a "priority" indicated by the respondents' comments stated as follows:  "A 'male dominated'Church' must take  the Women's Movement seriously. Viable  answers will be found at all levels  in the measure that women participate  in decision-making." These reports  can be ordered for $1.50 per copy from  Project Feedback, c/o Social Affairs,  Canadian Catholic Conference, 90  Parent Avenue, Ottawa, Ontario."  Canadian Women and Religion is interested in publishing a book on Christian Feminism, and invites women and  men to send brief statements on the  topic "Why I Am A Christian Feminist"  or if you prefer "Why I Am A Christian and A Feminist." Please include  a brief autobiographical note to give  an idea of your background.  quote.-  "...a man will say he considers his  wife in no wise degraded because she .  has no gainful occupation. The profession of housewife is just as lofty,  and so on. But when the first quarrel  comes, he will exclaim"Why, you  couldn't make your living without  me!"  -Simon de Beauvoir, The Second  Sex. 22  members'  forum  I recently read Marlene Schneider's  article on wages for housework that  appeared in Images (Edr note:April  issue of KINESIS carried a reprint  of Marlene Schneider's article from  The Optimist, Newspaper of the Victoria  Faulkner Women's Centre, Whitehorse)  and hope that it is not too late to  respond.  The way Marlene outlined what she  thought were the positive points for  wages for housework were very important. She was really explaining how  getting a wage for our housework will  begin to free us from it — by allowing us time away from the children/  husbands, economic independence from  men, etc. etc.  But then she goes on to express doubts  about how much money we'll get, whether  it will be tied to productivity (i.e.  do your housework or you'll be fired)  and so on. What this overlooks is the  entire process of women making a  struggle on an international scale  to win that wage. No government is  going to cheerfully start mailing out  paycheques to us. (That's even more  obvious now when we see the only money  some of us do get for the work of  raising kids — the Family Allowance  and welfare — under attack by the  state). We are going to have to fight  for wages for housework, and many  women already are. The Wages for House  work Campaign, which has been underway internationally for a couple of  years, is gaining enormous support,  with wages for housework groups  springing up all over. (There are  three in Ontario.)  Fighting for and winning a wage for  our work is going to transform our  present powerlessness as women. When  we have some money, it becomes a lever  of power to demand more. (Look at the*  nurses across Canada who have destroyed  the myth of Florence Nightengale and  are making double the wages of a few  years ago). It becomes a lever of  power to demand daycare centres, food  co-ops — whatever wr ^ant — not in  order to free us for more work, but  so that we can do less.  The other way in which we ensure that  we get the money on our terms is to  demand it for all women , and not only  women at home full-time. As long as  housework and the whole crippling  personality that goes with it (one  of self-sacrifice, subservience) is  identified as women's work, none of  us can escape it. We all must have a  wage so that housework and the housewives personality is no longer considered women's nature, the end result  of all our training/socialization.  In response to the freeze in the Family Allowance and' Trudeau's anti-  inflation program, the Toronto Wages  for Housework Committee has been making a national protest, primarily in  the form of a petition demanding the  Family Allowance increase as scheduled,  that Family Allowance no longer be  taxed, and wages for housework for  all women from the government, as  the only way to solve our problem of  poverty. Over 7000 have signed the  petition, and many are taking copies  to get friends, family, community  groups, etc to sign. This is evidence  of how the questions of wages for  housework for many women is not an  abstract one. The economic crisis is  hitting women hardest, and more and  more of us are responding, not by  letting the government take away still  more, but by demanding wages for housework.  We are also producing a "Campaign  Bulletin" with news of the Family  Allowance Protest and of the international wages for housework campaign.  To get copies of it, the petition, or  other literature, write to us at P.O.  Box.38, Station E, Toronto, Ontario.  In Sisterhood,  Frances Gregory  Wages for Housework Committee  members'     forum  FAT CATS  From the VSW President's report:  "...the Vancouver Status of Women  has developed good working relationships with more and more women's groups."  But — have we "developed good working  relationships" with the women at Gran-  isle — the ones who entered a float  in their local parade which displayed  a mock corpse, symbolic of their dying  town. Aren't these wives and mothers  of members of C.A.I.M.A.N. (Canadian  Association of Industrial, Mechanical  and Allied Workers, Loc.10) the kind  of women who joined our March 22nd  Rally for Action —  "...the Vancouver Status of Women  can never doubt the value of cooperation with all women in B.C."  But — did we vote to join the 24 hour-  round-the-clock picket line at Charles  and McLean (still going on) where 105  immigrant women (members of the Upholsterers Intl. Union, Local 1) are  courageously defying Skyway Luggage Co.  in their struggle to improve their incredibly inhuman working conditions  and low pay rates —  "...it(Ombudservice) exists to  help women take control of their  own lives and to stand with them  against the wrath they incur when  they do so."  But—what have we done for those women  detained in B.C. prisons, such as the  eight Doukhobor women as they dare to  fast until death, to prove their innocence —  "We (Ombudservice) exist to change  the balance of power."  But — where is Vancouver Status of  Women when our Native Indian sisters  each day are pushed, shoved, humiliated and threatened by the police as  they rally to the support of Leonard  Peltier at the Vancouver Court House.  "Solidarity" signifies a unity of  purpose — existing support between  people and groups as they struggle  together against those forces which  would destroy them all — not —  repeat not — when a group of women  get together to divide a half million  dollar government grant.  At 10 p.m. at the annual meeting of  the VSW last week I could appreciate  the Chairperson's quandry about permitting an unscheduled member to speak.  However, I must confess I did find it  terribly painful to see the meeting  close (for wine and cheese) without a  single reference to the real life .  around us — not even an opportunity  to identify with a specific struggle  of women so much less fortunate than  ourselves just a stone's throw away.  Kinesis described itself as a  "...forum in which readers can discuss issues important to the  feminist movement."  I'll throw down the gauntlet and invite debate on whether the feminist  movement is to remain restricted to  "consciousness-raising" — "finding  ourselves" — "developing our strenghs"  without ever goming to grips with the  reasons and purposes for which we are  developing our strengths!!  I submit that our new found strengths,  to have any validity at all, must be  channeled into "areas calculated to  change the political, economic and  social system in which we live. We  must work to change our immoral, self-  aggrandizing, power-hungry,.male-  dominated nation to one where every  human being has the opportunity to  develop their skills and arts for the  mutual benefit of all.  Some speakers at the recent Habitat'-  Conference pointed the way — but none  so accurately as the one who said it  was time that people began to plan  actions to make these changes, and  stop relying on governments to do it.  The triumph of organization manifested  at our March 22nd Rally for Action must  go on to greater plans of coordinated  actions with wider sections of the  community. We did it before and we  can do it again, but only if we move  from that "personal-solution-seeking-  space" to a broader understanding of  what else is happening within our feminist spectrum.  - Claire Culhane  trivia  The word BRIDE is derived from an  ancient Teutonic word meaning "to  cook." SUCfcjOf ll—Jw»  Letters  23  Enclosed please find a cheque for my  • membership.  What a fine article in your June  KINESIS about my sister Miriam. Thank  you!  Risa Levine  PHONE (home)  (work)  OCCUPATION   VSW MEMBERSHIP  (INCLUDES KINESIS SUBSCRIPTION)  KINESIS SUBSCRIPTION ONLY ($5/year)   INSTITUTIONAL SUBSCRIPTION ($10/year)  UNABLE TO CONTRIBUTE  RENEWAL  NEW SUBSCRIPTION  VSW Membership is by donation and includes subscription to KINESIS. We  would like to remind members that it  costs approximately $5 to produce and  send 12 issues of KINESIS and any  donation above that amount to help  with VSW activities is always appreciated.  Members unable to contribute financially will receive KINESIS on a complimentary basis.  KINESIS is published monthly be the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization, and to provide  information for interested individuals , groups, and members of the  government and media in order to  promote understanding ahout the  changing role of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W. '  PUBLICATION DATE: The third week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month (e.g.'Nov. 1 for Dec.  issue).  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and wilj. consider- those from non-members.' All  submissions, including letters to  the editorial committee,' must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be  used where requested. Where necessary, the newsletter committee  will edit for brevity, clarity, and  taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone: 736-374o  THIS ISSUE:-  FRONT PAGE GRAPHIC: Kathy Horrocks  CONTRIBUTORS: Heather Kellerhals,  Donna Tyndall, Nadine Allen, Karen  Richardson, Lorri Rudland, Johanna  den Hertog, Jane Evans, Diana Bissell,  Paul Sandison, Lena Israelsson, Stefan  Dehlen, Frances Gregory, Claire Culhane  Jo Lazenby  WORKERS: Kathy Taylor, Janice Sommer,  Leslie McDonald, Sheila Mitchell,  Miriam Gropper, Jo Lazenby  EDITOR: Jo Lazenby  KINESIS:  I read with interest Karen Richardson's  article on the joys of being a mail-  woman in the April issue of KINESIS,  since I applied for a job as letter  carrier with the Port Alberni Post  Office in March — and was unsuccessful, because I "flunked" the I.Q.  test. (The form Kathryn inclosed was  headed "Notice of Examination Results"  and under "Class : Letter Carrier"  Kathryn was assigned "Code: 4". The  back of the form provided the following interpretation of Code 4 :"The  mark you obtained in the written .  examination was not sufficiently high  for you to receive further consideration in this competition." )  I have five years of University and  graduated with first-class honours  from the University of British Columbia in 1969, so I don't think I can  be called stupid. This I.Q. test —  as administered in Port Alberni, anyway — consisted of numbers series,  spatial relationships questions, and  figure-ground symbols. I found it sort  of strange that this was used to determine who would make a good postie!  I also found it very demoralizing.  Becoming a letter carrier isn't as  easy as the article makes it sound,  in my experience. I hope you will let  your readers know this, so that they  won't be as disappointed as I was.  In Sisterhood,  Kathryn Hazel  KINESIS:  Possibly you have been wondering why  I was so slow in sending my contribution toward the work you do, and I  would like to explain.  For several years I have let the responsibility of children keep me close  to the house, and in the beginning I  did not want an escape, until I realized that I wasn't being protected  — I was being stifled. Then I began  to reach out with articles to magazines, and with photographs I had  taken. The sale of my work became very  important. Recently all my markets  seem to have dried up, through no  fault of mine, and I have had to look  elsewhere for an income.  It is my interest in the VSW, not my  husband's and I felt that the money  should come from my earnings, so I  waited until there was some. Now I  have a little, and when you get the  letter you will have a little too.  I feel I am part of something when I  add my words to the letter lobby. I  wish that I could attend meetings,  but Surrey might as well be in Europe  for all the chance I have to visit  Vancouver....alone.  My best wishes in your endeavour to  gain financial backing.  Love and Peace,  Eunice Brooks  KINESIS:  Enclosed is a Xerox Copy of the  poster on "apathy" which was widely  circulated around the Women's Rally  for Action campaign in March 1976.  Also enclosed is the Oxford Dictionary  definition of apathy. As far as Oxford's definition is concerned, I  feel that neither #1 nor #2 applies  to women as a whole, and if either  did, then implicit in "non apathy"  would be impossible standards of  perfection. There are undoubtedly  individual women who could be described as apathetic, but it is apparent to me through the experience of  being alive, that feeling, suffering  and passion, all three are aspects  of the life of a woman living under  today's (an evidently, through historical record, past) conditions. Given  all of the mythology of civilaization,  which seeks to belittle women, and  limit our participation in social  activity, surely we show considerable  lack of apathy just in our continual  daily struggle in the home and at  work. I feel the content of the poster  amounts to an insinuation of personal  and individual fault concerning the  continued existence of sexism and  economic exploitation in our society.  Get involved? I am involved and so  are millions of other women. Get involved in a demonstration? Yes, but  for concrete reasons through which I  clarify my relationship to this movement not with confusing and guilt-  ridden, slogan-like definitions about  the degree and influence of my "apathy"  on the struggle for social change.  Yours Truly,  Aird Fraser  from Oxford Dictionary:  apathy — from Latin apathia — without feeling, suffering, passion.  1. freedom from, or insensibility to,  suffering; hence, freedom from, or  insensibility to, passion or feeling;  passionless existence.  2. indolence of mind, indifference to  what is calculated to move the feelings, or to excite interest or action.  ^apathy doesn't pay*  ''you equal wages for worl^  w equal value • apathy is not     .,  Vthe mother of invention ■ apathy  pdoesnt make cents ■ apathy today  lone tomorrow- is an apathetic persoi.   ipathy mayn  Z fte_^_y_^^_u_v_a_a_i_api  ^___\ HKat  PPM Hap  where • apathy guaranl  Wa pathetic .  ^e hazardouj  ■an equal opp]   (get you nowhere  ? child a continui  Ian apatheti^  ^apathy doe]  \out apathy!1   .  ^where ■ apathy today gone tomorrow  ^warning: apathy may be hazardous  ^to your health Rx: get involved!^  ^support:V\fomen's Rally for  ^Action!  22 March  yjctoria,  »athy is not 1  I apathy will I  pathy guarantees your I  sexist education- is |  jc person ? J  e|p stamp / 24  correction  The article Dubious Security printed  in the June issue of Kinesis contained  sections in which the two people  interviewed felt they had been misquoted.They have submitted the following statements to rectify the  errors in the article. We apologize  to Ms Masters and Dr. MacDougall  for any difficulties these inaccuracies have caused them.  Editor  Lee Masters:  Divorce cases are not heard in Vancouver Family Court, and B.C. prosecutors have never to my knowledge  worked in the field of divorce law.  Family Court handles family disputes  other than divorce, i.e. maintenance,  custody, access, and family assaults.  With the possible exception of a  pilot project in Surrey, Delta, and  Richmond, a divorce is never available  through a family court because there  are no Supreme Court judges in these  Provincial Courts.  Dr. Donald MacDougall:  The federal Law Reform Commission has  recommended that "a right to financial  provision should continue for so long  as the reasonable needs exist and no  longer". Dr. MacDougall commented that  similar legislation in the U.S. has  led to maintenance awards which are  smaller in amount and shorter in duration. Limiting maintenance to  "reasonable needs" "presupposes a  society in which women and men are  already treated equally and are  therefore premature,"  HELP NOW!  STRIKING SKYWAY LUGGAGE WOMEN NEED  SUPPORT  The members of the Upholsters International Union struck Skyway Luggage  April 5th for better wages and improved working conditions. Most of  the 100 workers are immigrant women  who presently earn from $2.80 to  $3.10 per hour. At the same time their  production is 700 pieces of luggage  per day and the company's declared  profit last year was $10.7 million.  The workers need the support of other  workers and particularly their sisters  in the form of picketing, leafleting,  fund-raising and organization. A Skyway Luggage workers' defense committee  has been formed to organize support.  Contact the committee at 526-0455  or 253-8381.  If you have any spare time — even  an hour or so — these women can use  your help!  quote:  "The male monopoly will not be broken  voluntarily. It will require the  pressure of law.... given the past  discrimination, eduacational institutions, notably universities and centres  of professional training, must for a  period discriminate affirmatively in  favour of women. To do otherwise is  implicitly to perpetuate past discrimination. The higher reaches of  the technostructure must be under  legal pressure to hire and advance  women. Professional and other schools  must be under legal pressure to provide them. When the effects of past  discrimination have been erased —  the same is true for racial minorities  — selections can become sex-blind.  But only then."  - John Kenneth Galbraith,  Economics and the Public Purpose  (1973).  >,  July  xNoy Charles, I don't have a cold. What you  hear in my voice is contempt." <-\ .,^K  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  July 7  LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  July 7  WOMAN ALIVE, Cable 16 TV,  9:30 p.m. "Human Rights"  July 8  ORIENTATION MEETING, 7:30  p.m. Come and find out  about VSW.  July 14 LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  July 14 WOMAN ALIVE, Cable 10r.TV,  9:30 p.m. "Sex Discrimination  in Education"  July 21 LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  July 21 WOMAN ALIVE, Cable 10 TV,  9:30 p.m. "Feminist Counselling"  July 22 ORIENTATION MEETING, 7:30  p.m. Come and find out  about VSW.  July 28 LESBIAN DROP-IN, 7:30 p.m.  July 28 WOMAN ALIVE, Cable 10 TV,  9:30 p.m.  Property"  'Matrimonial