 Canac£*Q  <^ HAPPY I.W.Y. ^    * —. ___ -  ^73-330?^  Serials Division  in Library  ^^^^—tfft±versity Of  Vancouver Status of Women 2029 W. 4th Ave.  kinesis  JSL-  VOLUME V    NO.50     ISSN 0317-9095  October  Panting after racing in on the  freeway from Coquitlam to make  the 4:30 appointment, I plunked  myself in a chair beside Linda  Shuto, the British Columbia  Teacher's Federation Executive  Assistant hired two years ago  to coordinate the Status of  Women in Education program in  B.C.  I noticed three things  about Linda's office immediately.  The desk was in a corner bound  in by two walls, so that I was  sitting next to her, not across  from her.  The next thing noted  was a poster of Golda Meir  and  underneath the words, "But can  she type." When my eyes wandered  to the Che Guevara quotation on  the wall, Linda said, "I love  that quotation0" The quotation  was, "Let me say at the risk-of  seeming ridiculous that the true  revolutionary is guided by great  feelings of love."  Linda was in a temporary office  in the British Columbia Teachers  Federation Building, preparing to  #    leave her position to return to  teaching in September.  Jim  MacFarlan fiery "no-holds-barred"  ex-President of the B.C.T.F. described Linda as "a remarkable  young woman, who in spite of tremendous obstacles and the great  deal of sexism and hostility engendered by some people two years  ago, took the message of the Status  of Women program around the Province,  built a net-work of contacts and  established that program as one of  the most progressive and forceful  programs in the B.C.T.F."  In her initial two years, the coordinator feels her job has been  focused on "awareness raising" and  to force people to realize that discrimination was not a joke.  She  began her job in September, 1973.  Extensive travel and the creation  of a contact in each District brought  out the areas of concern which  the Status of Women program would  tackle.  The development of local  committees was the first major  accomplishment of the program.  A Metro contact meeting was held  each month, where members from  many Districts could pool ideas,  so that they would not be operating in isolation.  Many Committee  members found themselves incredibly  hassled by their own teachers at  the beginning of the program.  Discrimination in schools was attacked in four central areas:  textbooks, curricula, teacher's  attitudes and the structure and  philosophy.of the school.  Two years later, after things have  settled down, there is a new direction in the Status of Women program. "People are not laughing like  they used to. They are beginning to  realize that sex discrimination is  a social fact which affects the stu- .  dents ability to learn and with that  the school system can no longer deal  only with the three Rs," commented  Lindao  "At the Annual General meeting,"  remarked Jim MacFarlan "people were  shocked when Linda said that the  Status of Women group was not interested in getting women into administration.  "She feels that way,"  added Jim, "because she does not  want to see women co-opted into a  shitty systenio"  The primary job of the Status of  Women group is to change education,  Linda feels, not to change education  at the expense of principles0 The  role of the principal is seen to be  detrimental to constructively working together and the major aspect of  the Women's Movement is women working collectively towards a common  goal.  Linda did not let anyone who took  the Status of Women Program lightly  get away with it.  It is largely as  a result of the success of the Status  of Women program as a pilot project  that the BCTF is now establishing a  Task Force on Racism and assisting  a new-program in the North ^East working class area of Vancouver. There  is also a Committee to provide aid  to the Viet Nam schools for reconstruction. The program has increased  teachers' social conscience and as  .MacFarlan remarked,"It's almost invulnerable now."  "I think that the  decision to open the Task Force on  Racism has been the gateway to convincing people to be nicer," said  Linda.  "We are beginning to look  at the structure and say what it is  that causes women, Indians, poor  people and mental patients to be  discriminated against?"  There have been many highlights for  Linda this year as results . of her  years of labor are beginning to  come together. At the B.C.T.F.  Association's General Meeting in  the spring of this year, the Status  of Women group, received much more  support.  "There was no laughter  this time, they really took it seriously," said Linda,  "Two years  ago the number of women attending  the meeting was 25%.  This year it  was 50%. As well, two years ago,  there was one women on the executive. Now there are four on the  Provincial Executive Committee."  "A candidate," added Ms. Shuto,  "who doesn't take a stand on the  Status of Women in Education issue  does not have much chance of election.  In this year's campaign  speeches almost all candidates  mentioned the Status of Women  problem."  Another highlight this year was  the Conference on Women in Education held in March 1974 at  Simon Fraser University.  When  it was being planned, they.thought  if they got 300, it would be  really successful.  800 women  turned up I And there was not  enough room for them all.  "This  was a really big moment,".commented Linda. "It really got it off  the ground."  Linda does not negate the political  aspect of the Women's Movement.  She  believes that women must understand  the structures of the local teacher's  assiciation and School Board in order  to wring what they want to get out of  ito "There's no point in naievely  blundering through." she said.  The Status of Women program is broadening its base and expanding to parents and students. The Provincial  Contact Conference was a tremendously  enriching and exciting experience for  Linda. A roomful of women all working for the same cause, with the same  feelings.  When asked to direct some comments,  particularly to "Kinesis" readers,  Linda said "Parents should be pressured into doing something to pressure  their School Boards.  If they had  time, knowledge of the structure and  were organized, there is very little  continued page 2 they couldn't doe  It is very difficult for individual parents to change  the school.  There must be a coordinated effort."  MacFarlancommented on Linda's freshness and vitality as a classroom  teacher.  "She brought that kind of  vitality, staying two years and has  gone back to the classroom to carry  on her work and overall she's certainly made an impact on the Federation and we're really proud tb have  had her on staff.1" My last interview  with Linda was in her Burnaby Elementary School.  Nora Grove, who has replaced Linda  as the B.C.T.F.'s executive assistant  to co-ordinate the Status of Women  program, and Linda spent the month of  August working together to help the  program carry on smoothly. Linda, however, is not a person to take an executive position and then drop out  of sight when she returns to the field0  "I hope to be still involved.  I am  still on the Department of Education's  Provincial Advisory Committee and on  the Burnaby Status of Women Committee.  I will still be involved."  Initially Nora Grove was overwhelmed by the diversity and  number of things being thrown  at her.  In her job, you can  never finish anything.  But by  the end of the month, her predecessor said she is "fitting  in beautifully." Nora has been  involved in the program for two  years.  She was on the Status of  Women Task Force for one year  and was a contact peron with the  Vancouver Elementary teachers'  group.  "She really knew a lot  when she began and should do a  really fine job." added Linda0  Linda, although she enjoys teaching Grade 3's, has mixed feelings  about returning.  "I would like  some day to teach Women's Studies  in High School. My experience  with the B.C.T.F., provided me  with a wealth of, resources and  contacts which I have no use for  in my present job and that's a  shame because in two more years  my knowledge will be out of date."  "People," concluded Linda, "are more  conscious of the Women's Movement.  The snickering and joking at the  movement is no longer socially  acceptable.  People on my staff  made me feel really welcome and  they take me seriously.  The staff  thinks my work is important and  worthwhile.  It is really fine to  be on a staff where the principal  really supports you."  And so ends my voyage of exploration  into the BCTF's Status of Women program.  I would like to conclude with a comment from ex-BCTF President, Jim  MacFarlan on the scope of the program  which Linda has co-ordinated so ably  in the last two years.  "I can't think of any program in the  last decade, introduced by the B.C.  Teachers Federation, which has had  a more profound effect on the organization and, for that matter, on  education in this province than the  Status of Women program. To a very  significant degree the success of  that program has been built around  the work of Ms. Shuto and the task  force on the status of women."  - Karen Loder  -Sexism    & theVS.B.  At a meeting September 16, the  Vancouver School Board brought  forward their official policy  regarding sexist practices in  the Vancouver School district.  The Board's action came as a  result of two briefs presented  to V.S.B. last winter by Vancouver Elementary & Secondary  School Teachers Associations.  (March "Kinesis")  The excerpts below indicate  the essence of V.S.B. thinking  on this issue.  A complete copy  of the Proposed District Policy  Statement Regarding Discriminatory Practices may be obtained  from V.S.B. - Phone: 731-1131.  Integration of Playgrounds,  Classes and Programs.  "In accordance with the intent "  of the Human Rights Code of B.C.,  all educational and recreational  facilities, all courses, programs,  activities, classes and clubs  under the jurisdiction of schools  within the Vancouver School District, will be considered open to  all students, unless reasonable  cause exists to make such arrangements impractical or inappropriate.  Women's Studies Curriculum and  Program Development.  "It is recommended that consideration be given to implementation  of units in Women's Studies when  these curriculum guides are approved  by the Department of Education."  Stereotyping and Discrimination in  Instructional Materials.  "The existence of discrimination and  stereotyping in educational print  and non-print materials will be  investigated, and information will  be communicated to staffs in an  effort to promote increasing awareness of this problem in instructional materials used at the school  levelo"  Equal Opportunities in Administrative  and Support Roles.  "in keeping with Board policy, it is  recommended that a professional  development program be designed to  acquaint teachers with the role  descriptions and expectations of  educators in positions of supervision and administration."  The Management and Coordinating  Committee has yet to define policy  on the integration of staffrooms.  Committee III - Education and  Student Services report seems to  indicate that we cannot expect  much action soon on this.  "Committee members stated that the  Planning and Building Committee is  directly concerned with integrating of classrooms as this recommendation has financial and architectural dimensions, and while that  Committee was in agreement with  the general rule, it had become  apparent that some caution would  have to be exercised in adopting  this recommendation.  D. Lupini,  Superintendent of Schools, commented that physical integration  of staffrooms in all schools would  be very costly; however, this  would take place in those schools  which are involved in the modernization programme, and it is first  on the priority list for secondary  schools.  He added that the intent  of the recommendation of the Personnel and Staff Services Committee  is that the Board adopt some affirmative action on the integration of  staffrooms by encouraging principals  to be aware of this problem and to  encourage staffs to gradually integrate. Questioned as to the period  over which modernization will take  place, D. Lupini replied that most  of the modernization work will be  near completion in 3 to* 4 years,  and it was expected that the entire  modernization project would be completed in 5 years."  Do you think if the staffrooms were  marked "whites" and "Others" that  this situation would be allowed?  Perhaps a letter to Katherine  Mirhady, Chairperson of V.S.B.,  would hasten the process of  integration.  - Nadine Allen  quotes:  "Nobody objects to a woman's being  a good writer or sculptor or geneticist  if, at the same time, she manages to  be a good wife, a gpod mother,  good  looking, good-tempered, well-dressed,  well-groomed, and unaggressive."  Mayra Mannes  "Who is the enemy?  Despite what you  see in the media image of the women's  movement, it is not men, though many  women believe this in their justified  rage at their exploitation, but a  vicious and obsolete system that has  locked both men and women into an  out-dated form of behaviour."  -Betty Friedan  "I am most anxious to enlist everyone  who can speak or write to join in  checking this mad, wicked folly of  Women's Rights with all its attendant  horrors..c"  - Queen Victoria in her Journals,  1860, as reported in Queen Victori;. feminism ■■■    what   price?  Volunteering to help with the  distribution of our esteemed  monthly paper "Kinesis" seemed  a relatively harmless undertaking at the time. Armed with  40 copies, a list of bookstores  and best wishes from editor  Jo Lazenby, I proceeded on my  route about town.  My first stop was the Women's  Bookstore.  The woman in charge  was engrossed in conversation  so I decided to make a quick perusal of the shelves.  Standing  before a collection of Anais Nin,  I noticed a copy of "House of  Incest" seemed to be moving  toward me.  I glanced around to  see if anyone else had noticed.  The book continued to move forward with a quick jerking motion.  Before I could step aside it made  one final spasm and fell into my  open straw bag.  The woman at that moment turned  around to remark on my obvious  interest in the author and ask if  I would like any other of her  works.  I said I had most and  sweating profusely over my predicament I handed her 5 copies of  "Kinesis" and the money for the  book.  Slowly backing out of the  store I was still not convinced  the incident had actually taken  place.  I calmed myself with a quick  coffee at a local cafe and proceeded to Duthie's Books. Waiting  to sort out the amount owing for  "Kinesis" sold, I glanced apprehensively about me, acutely conscious of each of the bookshelves.  Everything seemed intact and I  began to relax.  Noticing some  newly arrived journals sitting  on the desk, I picked up the top  one and began thumbing through"  As I went to replace it, I felt a  sticky substance on my hand - the  book would not be dislodged I  I  shook it and pushed at it with my  free hand.  It remained steadfast.  Should I mention it to the proprietor?  She was eyeing my spasmodic movements.  I decided to  feign control.  She paid me the  54c for "Kinesis" and I paid her  the $3.50 for the journal.  Somewhat distraught over this latest incident, I decided to call it  a day. A fresh start tomorrow would  discourage any further disaster.  Next morning, I arrived at Peregrine  Books.  I went directly to the desk.  The proprietress greeted me with  warm recognition.  "I have the book  you ordered in at last I" she  exclaimed.  Having never before set foot in the  store I explained that she must be  mistaken.  She insisted that I had  ordered the book some weeks previous.  Considering the events of the previous day, I was no longer sure that  perhaps I hadn't suffered a lapse of  memory.  Not wanting to offend her  or diminish her obvious delight in  having obtained the book in question,  I paid for the book and left her 5  copies of "Kinesis".  Catastrophe struck repeatedly as I  continued my route.  Time after time  circumstances far beyond my control  forced me to purchase more books.  I arrived home to safety at last,  having collected $2.54 for "Kinesis"  and personally spending $18.50!  Feminism doesn't come cheap for me  And now I have all these books to  read before next month's "Kinesis"  comes out I   "  , n.     , .  -Carole Sinclair  FOCUS...  north  shone  Focus, in contrast to TV, will be  having its reruns in the winter.  There's unfinished business to keep an  eye on - major bills that have been  introduced but have not yet been passed  by Parliament. These include changes  in citizenship laws, amendments to the  Criminal Code regarding rape, and the  bill to set up a federal Human Rights  Commission.  Some of this legislation  is under study by interested and knowledgeable persons, and it may well be  necessary to press for revisions.  Focus will be concerned, too, in future  months, with recommendations of the  Royal Commission Report affecting areas  of federal jurisdiction where implementation has been only partial and with  recommendations pertaining to juris- .  diction of the provinces and territories.  But we won't leave you without something to think about this month.  Not  mom's  MOM'S REPAIRS  This women's educational garage was  started in the summer by some high  school women on an OFY grant. They  can conduct workshops for women anywhere in Vancouver, on simple car  repairs, maintenance and tune-ups.  Contact: Myrna Thomson at 976 Ring-  wood Avenue, Vancouver B.C. or call  876-0635.  -WCWN  a top priority in view of much that  is urgent, but an idea that very much  appealed to Focus person while daydreaming of a world she'd like to be  living in.  This is Recommendation No.  71:  That the federal government provide special funds for young women and  nen to acquire university education,  such as is provided for young men who  attend military college, leading to a  degree in fields designated to be of  special interest for aid to developing  areas, the terms to include commitment  to some specific national or international service.  Seems a really common-sense way of  helping individuals to higher education and benefitting society.  In our  view, well worth mentioning to your  M.P. next time you are in contact with  him or — if you live in one of 9 out  of 264 ridings — her.  NEWS  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION  The province of Quebec has just created a Human Rights Commission, composed of six commissioners, one of whom  is a woman, Monica Matte. She has  been very active in women's groups,  especially the "Y" as well as with  ethnic groups. The Human Rights Commission will be responsible for the  enforcement of the new provincial  Bill of Rights.  -IWY Secretariat Newsletter  The North Shore women now have an  office. By affiliating with the  sexism, schools and society committee which organized the successful  workshop in June, the North Shore  Women's Centre was able to secure  funding for 6 months. The S.S.& S  Committee has now become the Education Committee of the North Shore  Women's Centre.  The Centre is located at Highlands  United Church, 3255 Edgemont Boulevard, North Vancouver.  Phone:  987-4822. The Centre is  open Tuesday to Friday from noon to  5 pm and Thursday and Friday evenings from 9.30 to 11 pm and provides  a referral service as well as information, a library, drop-in facilities,  interest groups and a pub night.  Two women are paid as incentive workers by the Department of Human Resources to run the Centre and they  are helped by volunteers from the  membership.  The Centre had its grand opening  Tuesday, September 23rd" when approximately 60 women gathered to talk,  look at displays and listen to  Ulrike Ruebsaat sing about women.  The next event scheduled at the  Centre is an evening with Vancouver  Women's Health Collective, 0cto 7th.  at 7.30 pm. All women are welcome  to come and learn the technique of  breast and pelvic self-examination. On       Our      Own  BOOK REVIEW: "Creative Divorce"  by Mel Krantzler, published by  M. Evans & Company, 1973.  This book is an encouragement to  people going through a divorce.  It is a positive statement from  a man who suffered a divorce but  who later saw it as a turning-  point in his life. He wrote the  book to help others view their  own marriage breakups realistically and positively, and to  look into the future with confidence and independence instead of  with fear and uncertainty.  Mel Krantzler was a 50-year-old  career and family counsellor when  his marriage ended. He writes of  the emotional impact of the  divorce and of how he had to  painfully develop his inner resources to cope with the emptiness  and fear which came to him. He tells  of his struggles in coping with his  single status - his difficulties  in his relationships with his  wife, his children, his dates,  his nightmare of housekeeping  and shopping.  After many months of mourning,  and analysis, and coming to terms  with the past, he entered into  what he says was the most personally enriching period of his life.  He realized that there was very  little professional help for  people going through a divorce,  a crisis which can lead to loss  of identity, loss of comfort,  loss of securityo So he became  self-employed, leading counselling groups, workshops and  seminars for divorcing people,  to help them realize "they were  not alone".  Krantzler really "socks" it  to society for its negative  attitude toward divorce,  (another word for "failure")  and its tendency to assign  blame. The roles that society  has made for us - the independent  male who must be strong and assertive, who must never be emotional;  and the dependent, submissive  female who must be young and good-  looking, whose personal fulfilment  can only come from a man and a  family - these roles deny the  realities that people face when  they find themselves alone.  The women's liberation movement,  says Krantzler, is "one of the  healthiest developments in  contemporary America".)  The author takes the reader  through the various stages of  divorce - the shock, the conflicting feelings, the isolation,  the financial problems, adjusting  to new roles, the legal settlements - and gives a series of  guidelines to help deal with the  divorce positively:  What does your marriage breakdown tell you of your needs?  Accept your conflicting feelings, your anger, and try to  understand conflicting feelings of your friends - it's  difficult for them, too.  Be businesslike in your dealings with your ex-wife or ex-  husband, avoid blame-giving  and blame-taking.  Don't hesitate to seek help  if you need it.  Set goals for yourself and  periodically assess progress  - after each new accomplishment,  remember to take time for a bow.  Accept yourself for what you  are, the sum total of your  actions, thoughts, feelings as  they are NOW.  Give higher priority to your  own interests, be more self-  pleasing.  Go along with your feelings,  it's great. Do what feels good,  stop when it doesn't feel good.  Be honest in your relationship's,  try for better communication0  Don't feel guilty about your  children. "The American  family set-up wasn't so hot  after all". They can survive as long as they know  they are loved.  Enjoy sex.  Meet new people by pursuing  your own interests.  Krantzler says if you can  learn to deal positively  with your divorce, you can  live up to your full potential and take responsibility  for your own life, and that  life becomes a series of  choices, not inevitabilities.  - Marjorie MacDonald  UBC is offering a public  lecture on "Creative Divorce"  on Friday, Novc 21, at 8 p0m.  in the Hebb Theatre, East Mall,  UBC, and a 2-day workshop Nov.  22 & 23 in the Conference Room,  Centre for Continuing Education,  UBC. One of the instructors  trained with Mel Krantzler at  his Creative Divorce Institute.  For further information, phone  228-2181, local 273.  marl  W\.,  >■ WK^WLplAllb Ur WUmtN  ■BB3BK^T|JP  2829 W. 4n m.   73S374S  w ■  WUmill  **"■-•  h  VSW  Vancouver Status of Women's  activities and publications  have been getting some much  appreciated visibility in the  Information Centre on the main  floor of the Vancouver Public  Library. A display board was  there for browsers throughout  September.  Thanks from the VSW  to Ann Thurlow of the Information  Centre.  directory  The Women's Business Directory for  British Columbia will be ready for  distribution in early December. The _  Directory.is being compiled by Women  Together and will include listings  of businesses owned and operated by  women, professional women, crafts-  women, artists and women working full  or part time on any project(s) through  their home.  If you would like to be listed contact:  Carol Norman, #205 - 6750 Balmoral St.  Burnaby, B.C. There is no charge for  the listing but your written consent  is required.  Phone 524-0885.  Funding for this project is provided  by a grant from the Department of the  Provincial Secretary, Gene Errington  — Provincial Co-ordinator, Status  of Women Program  Photo by Bobbie Patrick no   action  The following letter has been sent  to all members of the B.C. Legislative  Assembly and a copy to all women's  centres in B.C. accompanied by a list  of B.C.'s MLAs.  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  2029 West 4 Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Sept. 5, 1975  TO ALL MEMBERS OF THE B.C.  LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY:  Vancouver Status of Women is  appalled at Provincial inaction  on Women's Rights legislation,  programs and funding, during  International Women's Year.  Except for the Equal Status of  Men and Women Amendment Act, which  is essentially a housecleaning  bill, the Provincial Government  has not passed any significant  Women's Rights legislation during  IWY.  We understand the recommendations  of the Berger Commission on Matrimonial Property are considered  a "dead issue" by male politicians.  Nevertheless, women all over B.C.  are keenly interested in this  matter.  Indeed, many people are  under the impression this legislation has already been passed.  New labour standards legislation  has not been forthcoming as regards maternity protection.  We  are especially concerned about  this because the rights of pregnant working women are in jeopardy  as shown by the stewardesses controversy.  Although the Equal Employment  Opportunities Program for the  civil service was announced early  this year, nothing has been done to  set this up.  In addition, the Provincial Government has largely ignored the recom  mendations of the Royal Commission  Report on the Status of Women which  come under Provincial jurisdiction.  We are thankful for the offices of  the Provincial Status of Women Coordinator and the Women's Economic  Rights Branctu However, we are  angry these offices have not been  given the funding or staff necessary to carry out their mandates  w-il-h pffpct.  On behalf of our 900 members in  B.C., Vancouver Status of Women  urges the B.C. legislative assembly  to set up the above mentioned programs and pass some significant  Women's Rights legislation before  the end of International Women's  Year.  We would appreciate your  reply.  Nancy D. Conrod  President  Vancouver Status of Women  the avid   articler  PSYCHOLOGY TODAY/September/75. "Fluffy  Women and Chesty Men" — a description  of tests and results by psychologist,  Dr. Sandra L. Bern of Stanford, confirming restrictions on behaviour imposed  by sex-role stereotyping and contrasting this with richness in range of  response by androgynous persons. Also  an inset essay on the same theme,"The  High Price of Macho" by Marc Fc Fast-  eau, author of the book, The Male  Machine, published last year by McGraw-  Hill.  MACLEAN'S/ September/75. Myrna Kostash,  in "The Spirit Is Willing But The Flesh  Is Bone-tired", asks whether anything  significant has really been happening  for women with all the movement's  'noise'. Sees more fragmentation than  unity, is concerned about a lack of  strategy, and beset by doubts.  She  is 'withdrawing to think about all  this." A one-page article.  The UNESCO Courier devotes its March  1975 issue to IWY. It contains articles on Women worldwide, including  one on Latin America's "Machismo"  cult, and another "From a Young Burmese Girl's Notebook." Published in  15 languages, including Russian, German, Turkish, Hindi,etc. Available  from Information Canada or write:  Editor-in-Chief, UNESCO, Place de  Fontenoy, 75700, Paris,France.  COMMUNIQUE/ May/75.  The May 1975 issue of Communique is  devoted to Women in the Arts in Canada. Articles on women writers,  artists, dancers, film-makers, poets,  and musicians. Published in a bilingual edition by the Canadian Conference of the Arts; write for more  information: Suite 47, 3 Church St.  Toronto, Ontario M5E 1M2  BRANCHING OUT/ Sept./Oct./75. "The  Public and Private Sylva Gelber" —  Georgina Wyman and Vivian Frankel  interview the Director of the Women's  Bureau, Labour Canada.  THE CANADIAN FORUM/ Sept./75 — is  a "Women's Issue". Articles, poems,  stories and reviews.  $1 and 10c  postage from 56 Esplande(4th floor)  East, Toronto, Ontario.  MS./Oct./75. A special issue on men  — including a quiz by Alan Alda,  actor, director and member of the  National Commission on the observance  of International Women's Year, to  determine if the man in your life  is suffering from testosterone poisoning.  Last minute phone calls have just,  notified us of an article on men  and insecurities in the September  READER'S DIGEST, and an article entitled "What They Really Think of  You — Women in the Office" in the  Sept/Oct QUEST.  women   and family  A one-day conference on Women and  the family sponsored by the Vancouver  Family Life Education Association  and the Unitarian Family Life Centre  will be held on Saturday, October  18th from 9 am to 5 pm. at 949 West  49th Ave.- Vancouver.  The conference is to provide an opportunity for women of all ages and backgrounds to explore — in a supportive  setting — the changes occurfing in  family life, the growth movement,  and the women's movement ... and to  become aware of resources and alternatives available to us.  The conference will be limited to 150  participants and 50 spaces are being  reserved for out of town women.  Cost  is $5 including lunch.  To register: Women and the Family C  Conference, 949 West 49th Ave,  Vancouver, B.C. Phone: 263-0624.  Funding has been provided by The  Honourable Hugh Faulkner, Secretary  of State and Gene Errington, Provincial Co-ordinator of Status of Women  Program.  cbc  CBC WOMEN'S PROGRAMME  "Some of My Best Friends Are Men" —  starting this fall on CBC, Thursdays  at 10:30 pm. — is the CBC's first  prime time feminist public affairs  programme.  Producer Carole Gault is  looking for ideas and suggestions for  reports and editorials of interest  to women nationally. Contact her at  CBC, Arts and Science Department,  PoO. Box 500, Terminal A, Toronto,Ont.  -WCWN THEATRE  TO DO ... WITH SQRIEUX-DE-DIEUX  Betty Lambert's most recent dramatic  offering, Sqrieux-de-dieux, held  at the Vancouver East Cultural Center,  concerned certain 'Vancouver types'  - of all things, and specifically  Vancouver women, as she seems to see  them.  Certainly, it was not an Evening  of Great Theatre, but there were a  few amusing moments. The first act  looked promising, with the West End  mistress type, and the West Vancouver  wife-type in quite obviously interchangeable roles, pandering to the  soppy and boring university  professor-type who expects his ego to  be the center of his women's lives,  but offers little in return.  Indeed,  when both women purchase some Davie  St. Love Equipment, he seems quite  incapable of either understanding or  wanting to participate in their  sexual feelings (an ironic twist on the  Frigid Women) - clearly, this man is  emotionally impotent (not sexually  impotent, however, for he eventually  drunkenly rapes the wife).  So, in the second act, when the two  women meet, become friends and confidantes, you would expect them to see the  folly of their lives and tell this man-  jerk to go to hell, right? Wrong.  After confessing their secret desires  of changing roles, and then actually  doing so (which is in itself an element  of growth - there are some nice liberation lines: wife and mother of four  becoming West End mistress:  "My God,  I don't have to cook supper tonight!"),  - these women maintain exactly the  same kind of relationships with this  creepy man, with just the labels  switchedo  It makes one think of a certain  definition of wife: mistress reduced to slavery. The equivalent in  this play is mistress:  barren wife.  You see, in this play, Lambert  presents women with two choices, and  two choices only. Either you are a  successful, single career woman, seeing  a man Tuesday and Thursday nights,  and yearning for children (quite  impossible, of course) or you are a  harassed, frustrated, martini-  soaked housewife who loses her husband  on Tuesday and Thursday nights.  I had thought that the trend of  limited fecale stereotypes, especially  by women writers, had come to a  timely demise. Now, I'm no longer  sure.  • J. Annis Freeman  Men in the Office  Recently, a male film crew rented  the space downstairs next to the  VSW office, sharing a common hallway and bathroom area.  Before  they had even moved in, the new  tenants wanted to use our front  door, coffee machine, copier and  "lounge."  The staff was in an immediate  panic.  We weren't nasty to them,  but neither were we all smiles.  The tension in the air was apparent.  We don't mind when male friends  and relatives drop in for a short  visit, or when men make deliveries  and repairs to the office, but to  have them around regularly?  It isn't that we hate men.  But  it's easy to see how that myth  gets started about feminists.  It  comes from our being necessarily  defensive.  Paranoia about men  doesn't come from nowhere.  It  comes from our past experiences  with them.  The trouble is, it can become a  prejudice too easily ... "They're  men so they'll take advantage."  We conjured up endless visions  of male impositions:  their un  washed coffee cups; cracks like  "babe, chick, love, sweetie" and  "girl" in passing in the halls;  awkward scenes asking them to  leave what they called the "lounge"  so we could counsel ombudscases  in what we considered our "office."  Small but significant things which  nevertheless they could pass off  as petty.  This is the first time in 4 years  that men will be in constant close  proximity and it made us realize  how territorial we had become.  The VSW office is a sanctuary possibly the last and only space each  of us as women, has to ourselves —  privacy and belonging.  We feared for the fragile feelings  of the women we counsel who come  to us in mid-crisis, who won't  speak up for themselves in the  presence of men.  But most of all we were thinking  of ourselves as staff. We resented and feared their presence.  We had come to expect hassles from  men at work, and did not relish  confrontations, especially because  as women, we usually lose out. We  felt threatened.  One of the staff became the spirit  of moderation.  She had a talk with  the new neighbours and explained to  them our hesitancy.  They understood  and admitted they would probably  make a lot of mistakes without realizing it, but that it would be a  good learning experience for us all.  They agreed to minimal use of our  premises.  We enjoy the company of men - at  other times and other places and  except once in a while, ( a few men  are members) we just don't want men  in the office. Can we legitimately  be accused of discriminating against  them? We think there are legitimate  reasons for maintaining something  that is precious to us.  Being a  woman is almost a bona fide occupational qualification for the movement!  We tolerate men in the office, but  we don't encourage it.  Ideally, it  wouldn't have to be this way.  But  realistically, can it be any different at this point in time?  K.R.  western  conference  The third phase in efforts of the  Western Conference Committee -  Opportunities for Women will take  place in Vancouver on October the  9th. when women concerned about  employment opportunities will hold  a "consultation" with top management officials in Government, business, and industry.  Two earlier  Western Conference projects consisted of conferences of women,  held to discuss needs and ways of  meeting them.  This third phase is  a direct approach to employers.  Approximtely 100 high-level management officials have been invited to  the consultation and a luncheon at  the Bayshore Inn under funding by  the B.C. Department of Labour and  the Employers' Council of B.C.  Joyce Searcy is the chairperson.  Speakers will include the Honourable Bill King, Minister of Labour,  and Denis Timmis, President of  MacMillan Bloedel. A women's panel  will answer questions from employers,  who will also view a slide presentation - "Realities" - dealing with  women in employment and attempting  to put forward a positive view.  It  was prepared by Kathy Sopko and  Ellie Epp.  guide  PARLIAMENTARY LOBBY GUIDE  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC) is organizing  women's groups nationally to lobby  their federal, provincial and municipal government for specific commitments to implement the recommendations  of the Royal Commission Report on  the Status of Women.  Representatives of NAC will be visiting every federal MP to discuss status  of women issues. NAC has published  an outline of how to interview your  elected officials, and follow-up  procedures.  For a copy, write to  Parliamentary Lobby, NAC, 121 Avenue  Road, Toronto, Ontario.  -WCWN Qmbuds-  cSTAFF  Miriam Gropper joined the VSW Ombuds  staff in February of this year, and  in August replaced Glinda Sutherland  as Ombudswoman.  Prior to coming to the VSW, Miriam  took a B.A. in Psychology at UBC  and travelled in Europe and the  Middle East. Her experiences,  included several months of work  in a kibbutz in Israel.  minam  During the months that she has  been counselling women who come  to the Ombuds Service Miriam  has become especially concerned  about the need for drastic  changes in Family Law. A huge  proportion of the Ombuds cases  illustrate the great disadvantage  women are at in this area. Miriam  sees the establishment of full  and immediate community of property as one of the steps in    ,  righting the imbalance in Family  Law.  Miriam does not want the job of  the Ombuds Service to be a "self-  perpetuating one." As individual  women are counselled and helped,  the information received from  them is carefully recorded and  used as input in briefs, reports  to commissions etc. as part of  the effort to promote legislative  changes that will help women.  Miriam sits on the Board of  the Women's Employment Boutique  and is a member of the women's  committee of the Vancouver  Justice Council, the B0C. Bar  Association Family Law subsection, and the Family Law  Foundation. She fills speaking  engagements, which so far have  ranged from high school classes  to groups of men at the B.C.  Penitentiary. She also organizes  and hosts some of the VSW's  Woman Alive TV programs.  Johanna den Hertog joined the VSW  Ombuds staff September 15th, and is  already up to her neck in counselling,  speaking engagements, picketing, and  assorted other activities.  Johanna took honours Political Science  and Anthropology at McGill University  and moved to Vancouver in 1972. In  September 1973, after several-months  work with Rape Relief in Seattle, she  began to organize the funding for  the Vancouver Rape Relief Centre. The  Centre opened in February 1974 and  Johanna worked there until May 1975.  Rape Relief has a policy of rotational  salary contracts so that all the volunteers have an opportunity to be  paid for their service.  While at Rape Relief Johanna also  did volunteer work with the Women's  Health Collective. After leaving Rape  Relief, she wanted to continue to  work within the women's movement but  felt a need to get away from the  strictly emergency type work of Rape  Relief and into something with a  broader base directed towards bringing about changes in the social system.  Johanna is a member of the B.C. Police  Commission Task Force on Women which  is studying the problems specific to  women in relation to police — women  as police officers, as victims and as  offenders.  johanna  glinda  On August 15th Glinda Sutherland  concluded almost two years of  service on the VSW Ombuds staff.  Glinda began working for the VSW  in March, 1973 and joined the  Ombuds staff in September of that  year0 In January of this year she  replaced Gene Errington as Ombuds-  Glinda has been a member of the  Board of Directors of Vancouver  Community Legal Assistance, the  B.Co Bar Association Family Law  subsection, the Family Law Foundation, and the BoC. Delegates  Group to the National Conference  on Women and Sporta She organized  and hosted the VSW's weekly  Channel 10 TV program, Woman Alive.  Glinda's work in the Ombuds Service was touched with a special  sensitivity, and many were the  overtime evening and weekend  hours she spent counselling and  seeking further advice for women  in need of help0 We, in the office,  especially miss her talents as  "social convenor," we especially  miss her delight in all things  romantic (I)....we just miss her  and wish her well.  Lee Masters is a longtime member of  the VSW and joined the Ombuds staff  in August. She is writing her final  paper for a law degree from UBC but  has decided not to article for the  present. She feels that the law is  too far removed from the people and  she is dissatisfied with the present  operation of the legal profession.  Lee believes that society should be .  run by the people and that the practice of law has become a mystique.  "By turning over law to people who  get off on highly technical points,  we have lost sight of the fact that  one of the most important parts of  law is the settlement of disputes  between neighbours."  Lee feels that law - " the rules by  which we regulate the behaviour of  our society" - should be taught as  a basic course in schools.  She is also very concerned about the  problems of women and employment and  would like to form a Women in the  Economy group, which would approach  business executives and convince them  that they are wasting a great resource  of talent by not utilizing women more  effectively.  Lee sits on the B.C. Bar Association  Family Law subsection, maintains a  busy round of speaking engagements  and appears frequently on TV and radio  programs to discuss issues important  to the Women's Movement. 8  BOOK REVIEW GROUP  The office is acquiring a lot of  feminist books - and we get to keep  them if we publish reviews on them!  We also get to find out whether or  not they are worthwhile if we do a  review on them.  We also get to  announce that there will be a BOOK  REVIEW GROUP forming to do these  reviews!  If you are interested  in reading and reviewing books  please come to a meeting Wed»,  Oct 15 at 8 pm in the office.  If  it's difficult for you to come  that evening please call the office  and talk to Jo or Leslie.  MONEY GROUP  At a recent orientation meeting  member Marjorie Armstrong said  that she would be willing to  co-ordinate a "self-help" advisory  group on money.  So I handed her a  sheet of paper and a pencil and this  is what she wrote—"We are getting  a group together to discuss all  aspects of handling money (banking,  mortgages, income tax, bonds etc.),  Anyone who has some knowledge of a  particular area, or who has a problem  or who would be willing to participate  in research/learning projects, please  come to our first meeting at the  VSW office on Tues, Oct 21 at 8 pm."  FEMINIST WRITERS WORKSHOP  Both men and women are welcome  to join in a feminist writers  workshop that meets every Monday  evening from 6-8 pm at the VSW  office.  There is no "leader" in  the group, we just read each  others work and make comments  on it - you don't have to be a  professional writer to be involved. Many of us are just  starting to write and our comments  on-other people's work are just as  valid as someone who has been  writing for a long time - for  we are all readers.  Interested?  Then just appear on Monday evenings.  If you want to check to make sure a  meeting isn't cancelled, call VSW  at 736-3746.  SEX DISCRIMINATION CTTEE  Nadine Allen and Betty Ann Buss  have been the VSW representatives  for the past year on the Provincial  Advisory Committee on Sex Discrimination in Public Education.  This  has been a very active committee, madi  up of representatives from the Department of Education, BCTF, Trustees,  Human Rights, Women's Groups and  lay groups. Betty Ann recently  resigned from the committee to  devote more time to her job  and we'd like to thank her for  her active thoughtful participation  on behalf of VSW.  Nadine will be  continuing her work on the committee  and was elected chairperson at their  last meeting. The new VSW rep. is  Linda Forsythe, a member presently  teaching at Mt. Currie Community  School.  4 '    •   ' '  WAGES FOR HOUSEWORK  Wages for Housework booklets  are available in a limited  quantity from the office at  75c ea. Buttons with "Wages  for Housework" on them are here  too - 50c ea. Call or write the  office to order.  THANKS  To those people who responded to  the plea for KINESIS helpers in  last month's paper.  It has  eased the load considerably.  REMINDERS  The C.AoRoA.L. group always needs  new energy to continue its important work. General meetings  are held on the last Wed. of each  month, steering cttee meetings  every Monc at 7:30 pm0 - always  in the VSW office. Watch our  Woman Alive TV show on Wed., Oct  8 for a full half hour show on  C.A.R.AoL.  LETTER LOBBY has had its first  meeting and is focussing on  follow-up letters on community  property this month - see page  9.  Karen Richardson is putting  together one fantastic MEDIA  ACTION LOBBY KIT.  Please call  or write if you or your group is  interested in being-part of  this group's war against sexist  advertising.  FEMINISM & RELATIONSHIPS group meets  every second Monday at 8 pm in the  office. Discussion is fantastic,  feel free to join them.  Oct 6 & 20  are the dates.  A new C.R. GROUP began last month  and we are starting a new list of  names for the next group. Call  Diana at the office if you are  interested.  STAFF  STUFF  JOHANNA DEN HERTOG has joined our  staff as the third member of the  Ombudservice. Johanna was one of  the founders of Vancouver's Rape  Relief Centre and we are truly glad  to have her with us - not only  because of her considerable expertise and talents, but because-  anyone who can find herself a large  wooden desk and comfy chair from  the Salvation Army for only $13 is  worth having as a resource person too!  Speaking engagements are beginning -  MIRIAM GROPPER and JOHANNA spoke to  a John Oliver class on "Women &  Employment".  LEE MASTERS appeared  on BCTV's "10 A0M." show to discuss  family law, and has also taped an  hour long CBC interview on "How to  build a non-sexist society". DIANA  and member SUSAN SANDERSON did a two  hour workshop on Verbal Self-Defence  at the Y, and NADINE and DIANA have  begun the weekly schedule of community centre lectures»  EXECUTIVE MEMBERS are involved in  lobbying Pederal MP's in the area - .  watch for a review in next month's  paper.  JUDY BOURNE has been coordinating volunteer workers in the  office and a large backlog of typing  publications has now been completed.  NADINE and JO LAZENBY attended the  opening of a new non-sexist day care  centre that member JOY BRADBURY had  much to do with.  LEE MASTERS attended the session  Otto Lang had with UBC law students  and managed to ask several pertinent  auestions about Dr. Morgentaler.  All of VSW participated in the  Manpower demonstration downtown.  The general meeting adjourned to  picket the office, and all staff  members took turns marching and  just being there to lend support.  BOBBIE PATRICK has begun a personal  research project to try and find out  how effective our public relations  campaign is, and BOBBIE and NADINE  co-ordinated a large display for  use in the Van. Library info centre  for six weeks.  MEXICO IWY CONFERENCE  Here is a notice for all those  members who came to the September  General Meeting to hear the speakers  on IWY - the University Women's  Club has invited the same speakers  to talk on the same topic on  TUESDAY, OCT. 28 at 8 pm at  Hycroft, 16th & Granville. Why  not drop by to that meeting  and hear what you missed.  See  you there!  WOMAN ALIVE  A group of women got together a  few weeks ago to set up programming  ideas for this season's Woman  Alive shows.  Several of them are  very interested in working with  porta-pack equipment and doing  some film work outside the  studio. We are having regular  monthly meetings - next one will  be Monday, Oct. 20 at 8 pm.  Join us. MEMO:  To all concerned members of  VSW.  FROM:  Letter Lobby Committee  RE:   Community of Property  proposals of Berger  Commission.  letter lobby?  knowing what their personal stance  on the topic. All letters can  sent c/o Parliament Buildings,  Victoria, B.C.  Over the past few months it has become apparent that the provincial  government intends to drag its feet  in regards to implementing the Berger  Commission recommendations on community property. We have heard that  some opponents of the idea think it  is much to involved-and complicated  to instigate, others think it will  "break up" the family, and yet others  don't WANT to share equally with  their spouse.  There's no doubt about the fact that  this is a hot issue - and it has always  been any government's tactic to avoid  hot issues when there is election  talk in the air. However, it seems  they are forgetting the number of votes  that women have, perhaps too, they are  not aware that there is at least one  issue that ALL B.C. women are concerned about and that issue is  community property.  Just to serve as a short reminder,  here are the four basic principles  that the Matrimonial Property Working  Committee of the Berger Commission  operated from:  1. All persons should be equal  under the law.  2. Marriage is a partnership of  shared responsibilities.  3. The roles of economic provider  and homemaker are of equal value to  the relationship.  4. Married women are not economically  incompetent.  It seems that more pressure is going  to have to be applied by all of us  in order to keep the community property issue alive. Women in high places,  in government, in bureaucracy, in  groups and in private are constantly  raising the issue, demanding a  dialogue with those few who hold the  power.  If you haven't become knowledgeable  about what community property means  for you - get with it! We have  written material available at the  office and last December's KINESIS  had an article on it. There is a  tape of a Woman Alive show available  for out of town groups on the topic.  And finally, continue (or begin)  your communication with the government  on the issue.  Please write out  the following letter to Attorney  General Alex McDonald, and send a  carbon copy to Premier Barrett.  Send a separate letter to your own  MLA indicating that as her/his  constituent you are interested in  Dear Sir:  I am most concerned about the lack  of government action on the Community  of Property Proposals of the Berger  Commission on Family and Children's  Law.  Full and immediate community  of property with joint management  allows for equality of responsibility  and independence between men and  women between marriage.  When Implemented, the community of property  recommendations will adequately reflect  the way both partners intend their  married life to be ordered by allowing both of them to participate  in the relationship as equals.  To avoid introducing legislation on  this issue would clearly indicate  to me a lack of concern about an  issue that ALL women of this province  have a most active interest in.  I would appreciate knowing what your  stand is on this vital issue as well  as learning what kind of action  the government plans to take in  the near future'Äû  Yours sincerely,  -responses  The following is the response to a  mailing done by the Letter Lobby  Committee to all M.P.'s and cabinet  ministers in which we urged speedy  passage of the Omnibus Bill, less  delay in bringing forward new legislation relating to women. We also  urged specific action in several areas  and felt you would be interested in  reading the response of the Minister  Responsible for the Status of Women,  Marc Lalonde. (slightly edited for  space reasons).  Dear Ms. Bissell:  Thank you for your May 13 letter to the  Hon. Marc Lalonde in which you enclosed a  copy of a letter written by the Letter  Lobby Committee of the VSW. He has asked  me to reply on his behalf.  In your letter'you mention the delay in  passing legislation relating to the status  of women. The government regrets this  delay which is attributable to a large  extent to factors beyond its control such  as the need for bringing down a new budget.  However, you will be pleased to hear that  Bill C-16 has been passed and has received  Royal Assent and second reading has commenced on Bill C-20, the Citizenship Bill.  In the copy of the letter written by the  Letter Lobby Committee, it states that it  is illegal to advertise the most effective  method of birth control, the contraceptive  pill. This is true, but it is a restriction  that applies to all prescription drugs,  which can only be advertised in publications  for the medical profession.  All nonprescription forms of birth control may  be advertised to the general public.  The question of abortion is a complex and  contentious one. Mr. Lalonde has expressed  his concern over the lack of hospitals with  therapeutic abortion committees in certain  parts of the country, which has resulted in  many women not being able to apply for  therapeutic abortions. As you may be aware,  Mr. Lang has indicated recently in public  statements his view that it may be necessary  to undertake a study of how the abortion  law is oeprating.  If such a study is undertaken it will have the actjLve support of Mr.  Lalonde in his dual capacities of Minister  of National Health and Welfare and Minister  Responsible for^the Status of Women.  The question of the criteria for subsidizing child care services is one of the  matters currently being considered within  the context of the ongoing social  security review. At the present time the  federal government, through the Canada  Assistance Plan, shares in the cost to  provinces and municipalities of providing  this service to those families in need,  or who would be likely to be in need if  they did not receive this service.  On July 21, the Canadian Human Rights Act  received first reading in the House.  In  regard to the law relating to rape, first  reading was given to Bill C-7i, the Criminal  Law Amendment Act 1975, introducing procedural  changes which are intended to have the  effect of making a rape trial less of an  ordeal for the victim. We await with interest the results of the review by the Advisory  Council on the Status of Women of the  report on sexual offenses prepared by  their Working Group. Also in Bill C-71  is an amendment which will prevent an  appellate court for substituting a  verdict of guilty on a jury acquittal.  I wish to apologize for the delay in  answering your letter0 May I thank you for  writing to express your concerns in these  matters to Mr. Lalonde.  Yours truly,  Ann C. Jamieson  Executive Assistant. 10  occupation  II  Sixteen female employees of  Manpower Outreach programs  occupied the Vancouver Manpower  office for three days this month.  They demanded that Manpower hire  a Women's Advocate to end sex  discrimination in training and  hiring policies.  The demonstration ended peacefully September 17, when Manpower agreed to meet with them  the following week to discuss  grievances, not to fire the participants and not to lay charges.  The women, employees of the  Women's Independence Necessary  and the Women's Employment Boutique, among others, want community participation in job creation  programs at Manpower, establishment  of relevant training for women, and  support services for women.  They  are prepared to re-occupy the  building should new negotiations  prove unsuccessfulo  During most of the time, VSW staff  participated in the demonstration  outside the Manpower office, even  adjourning a quarterly general  meeting of membership to do so.  Following are some scenes from the  event.  Ten women were locked, by Manpower,  into the front lobby when they refused to leave, isolated from  another six near the top floor.  Having slept two nights(on the floor,  they were tired, and looked it but  spirits were high.  Three lawyers  consulted with the women inside by  yelling through the locked plate  glass doors crammed with "Why Not"  posterso  The faces of the women demonstrating  outside were familiar from numerous  women's conferences, the ones who  always come, the candidates for getting burnt out.  There were 50 to 100 supporters at  any given time, half of whom were  male.  They picketed the office continually,  handing out leaflets, getting people  to sign their petition to Robert  Andras, playing flutes, drums and  tambourines to keep it all going.  A  number stayed on in shifts through  the night, lighting candles.  From  time to time supporters chanted  "2-4-6-8-, hire the women's advocate.1  Aside from that, the demonstration  could have used a little more street  theatre.  Some supporters were nervous, hoping  reporters would not ask them personally for a statement, fearing they  would blow it.  Others wished like  hell for a chance to say something  publicly.  Some were novices, others  old hands at demonstrating.  Eyes  were wide with expectancy, hesitation,  anger and laughter.  On-lookers were the run-of-the-mill  spectacle watchers.  The odd half-  drunk hanger-on stood on the fringes  of the crowd making irrelevant comments.  A few plain-clothesmen sat  on car fenders looking bored.  The  "man-on-the-street" gathered with  silly smiles to gawk at the women  in the demonstration.  There were the usual charges from  onlookers about lesbians.  Demonstrators wondered what that made the  male supporters and promptly proclaimed them "honorary women's libbers,"  tongue-in-cheek.  The "Howe Street Boys" gathered near  the stock exchange, some incredulous,  others ogling those "libbers."  Some  of us after all had once been their  secretaries.  Nowhere to be seen were  the thousands of women who worked in  the offices within the square block  surrounding Manpower.  There was the inevitable confrontation  with the male passer-by who thought he  knew it all but asked the demonstrators  their opinion anyway, then proceeded  not to listen while he chastised them  for interrupting him.'  During the entire time, some  police were stationed inside the  building.  Relations between lawyers and demonstrators was generally excellent, the police being  eager to avoid confrontations, not  wanting to resolve the conflict by  force.  At some points, the police were  involved in actual negotiations  with Manpower and the Women to get  them out of the building.  The  women inside were pleased with the  role of the police and did not  leave the premises under threat of  police eviction as rumor had it.  They left, escorted by police, peacefully, when Manpower agreed to their  terms'Äû  The women said Manpower administrators had been indecisive, divided  among themselves about what to do  with the new occupants and generally  had not effective mechanism for dealing with the demonstrators, hoping  the police would deal with it for  them. They considered it a* victory  that Manpower finally agreed to meet  with them at a later date, to end  the confrontation without force.  At almost any time, they could have  been arrested for trespassing although Manpower is a public Federal  building.  This seemed ludicrous to  some of the demonstrators since Manpower had actually locked the women  inside when they closed down'the  offices.  If the police had "read  the riot act," the supporters outside could have been arrested but  fortunately this never happened.  grievances -  THE WOMEN'S ADVOCATE AD HOC COMMITTEE  FOR B.C. AND THE YUKON published the  following list of grievances against  the services provided for women by  Manpower.  1 - Manpower is funding several  women's outreach projects to reach  women in the community and to teach  Manpower, new ways of serving them.  Manpower has turned a deaf ear to  identify errors in their service and  MANPOWER  .:.".' ... >'  DEMONSTRATION  Criticism of the demonstration was  vicious in some cases.  The general  public was not aware that employees  of Manpower itself were involved in  organizing the event.  It was too  easy for the press to dismiss the  affair as the action of a few Fourth  Avenue "neer-do-wells." Not enough  publicity was given to the numerous  women's groups, community organisations and labour lobbies who endorsed the demonstration.  Nevertheless, it made the public  aware that "Yes, George..." there  really is such a thing as sex discrimination in this day and age,  even and especially in Federal Govt  eminent agencies,  (see list of supporters and  criticism of Manpower.)  - K.R.  VSW  statement  has ignored our recommendations for  overdue changes.  According to  Gordon E. Hublay, Director, Manpower,  Pacific Region, Women are not "PRIORITY"  2 - Manpower practices sex discrimination in training allowances.  Women,  unlike men, must have documented evidence of their breadwinner status to  qualify for maximum training allowances o  3 - Manpower displays sex-stereotyped  brochure which effectively limit female aspirations to traditional low  income occupations at the assistant  level.  4 - Manpower counsellors tend to  channel clients into sex-typed       ^  occupations.  5 - Manpower services discriminating  employers by allowing "off the record"  sex preferences in job orders.  Manpower takes no "follow up" action  against discriminating employers.  6 - Manpower is an employer service,  not a public service. Manpower views  employers as clients and the unemployed  are only vehicles to achieving employer  satisfaction rather than vice-versa.  The following is the text of the  public statement read on behalf  of VSW by Diana Bissell supporting  the BoC. & YUKON WOMEN'S ADVOCATE  AD HOC COMMITTEE DEMONSTRATION.  September 15,1975.  The Vancouver Status of Women wishes  to indicate its support of today's  demonstration of the B.C. and Yukon  Women's Advocate Ad Hoc Committee.  I'm. sure we all wish that this demonstration was not necessary, but  continued rejection of the hiring of  a Women's Advocate, to be chosen by  and responsible to both Canada Man  power and community representatives,  has forced us to become more public.  We are acutely aware of the enormity  of problems that women face in employment.  It is imperative that Canada  Manpower be a leader in redressing  these grievances and attacking these  problems. A Women's Advocate is essential to the furthering of women's  employment opportunities and advancement. The establishment of such a  client oriented position would be a  major step toward making Canada Manpower's policy of non-discrimination  a practice.  7 - Manpower does not expose clients  to the scope of employment and training opportunities as promised in their  policy paper on "Women's Employment."  This could be accomplished through  audio-visual aids.  8 - The criteria in recruiting new  Manpower staff is "status quo conservatism." We recommend a community  cross-section representation in the  staffing of all Canada Manpower Centres.  9 - The Manpower regional women's  coordinator is considered by a majority  of community women's groups to be  "non-communicative," "uncooperative"  and "unresponsive" to the employment  needs of women.  10 - Manpower does not provide child  supervision and facilities while  mothers apply for employment assistance.  11 - Manpower does not offer priority  to native Canadians (French and Indian)  in language training and the main  "Centre de Main D'oeuvre" has recently  functioned in the absence of bilingual  counsellors.  Immigrant men have priority over immigrant women in language  training placements.  12 - Manpower decision makers are  bureaucratically insulated, inaccessible and unidentifiable.  Grievances are referred elsewhere  or brushed off.  13 - Manpower has made no effort  to develop employer back up services for women such as child care  and industrialized home cleaning  services. Job creation in these  areas is vital to permitting  women free entry into the labour  force.  14 - Manpower has not played a  significant educational role in  eradicating oppressive attitudes  held by employers and unions.  15 - Manpower closed competitions  for employment is discriminatory.  16 - The main Manpower Centre provides adeqate washroom facilities  for staff but not for clients.  17 - Manpower perpetuates a  dehumanizing atmosphere and client  alienation is the price they pay  for their impersonal efficiency.  Miriam Gropper  The members present at  the VSW General Meeting  September 16th voted to  adjourn the meeting and  join the demonstrators  at the Manpower building. Members and staff  were present throughout  the demonstration. Ombuds  staffer Lee Masters  marched her way through  a 2 am. to 4 am. shift!  supporters  Expressions of support for the  appointment of a Women's Advocate,  as proposed by the Ad Hoc Committee, were received from the  groups listed below. In the case  of some Outreach groups support  came only from women, in the case  of other Outreach groups from  both women and men.  (Vancouver Status of Women; Immigrant  Women's Advocate Committee; Yukon  Status of Women; Community Workers  of the Vancouver Resources Board;  Nelson Outreach; Unemployed Women  of New Westminster, Burnaby and  Delta; Rags to Riches (Outreach)  Victoria;Job Development (Outreach);  B.C. Federation of Labour Women's  Rights Committee; Women's Employment Boutique (Outreach) Company  of Young Canadians -Vancouver and  Yukon Branches; B.C. Association  of Non Status Indians; Vancouver  Opportunities Program; Women's  Independence Necessary (Outreach);  Strathcona Outreach; Nelson Women'i  Centre; Nelson Family Day Care;  BoC. Association for the Advancement of Coloured People; People's  Employment Project, Nanaimo; UBC  Women's Centre; SFU Women's  Centre; Vernon Women's Centre;  Futures (Outreach) New Westminster; Vancouver Women's Health  Collective; B.C. Women's Studies  Association; B.C. Federation of  Women; Press Gang; Yukon Outreach;  New Westminster Housing Registry;  B.C. NDP Women's Rights Committee;  Mission Outreach; B.C. Teachers  Federation Status of Women  Program; People's Employment  Project (Outreach) Prince  George; Vancouver and District  Labour Council. 12  It's Friday night, about 11:00 pm  and you're sitting down to catch  the late news.  Outbursts of a  loud argument and screams are coming from the house next door.  But  you've heard it before on several  occasions. You wonder what's  going on but there's nothing much  you can do about it.  Some domestic disputes end as a'  statistic on the homicide records  of the police office. Of the 30  homicides that happened in Vancouver last year, 12 (40%) were  the result of domestic assault.-  usually by a man on a woman.  "One woman who came to us was  really battered.  She still had  marks on her throat where she had  almost been choked to.death.  Her  face was really messy," recalls  Ms. Gloria Greenfield, staff  worker at Vancouver's Transition  House, a refuge for women and  their children while in crisis.  Transition House handled some  200 cases of wife-beating in a  year and a half.  Glinda Sutherland, former Vancouver Status of  Women ombudswoman, states that,  "out of a thousand cases of marital breakdown handled by V.S.W.  between the fall of 1973 and  January 1975, more than 80%  involved wife-beating."  The battered woman (not only  wives but also a large portion  of women involved in common-law  relationships) is still an unknown fact in today's statistics0  Her age ranges from 20 to 60 years  and she comes from almost every  economical background, but little  more is known about her.  Frequently, ti.ed by her economic  dependence to a violent man, she  sees no escape.  She is too ashamed  to bring in outside help and often  hides the problem from her closest  friends.  She fears vindication  from her partner should she report  him or press chargeso  She knows  little of the assistance available  to her,  "In most cases, beating is not consciously provoked by the woman.  It  is being imposed on her," admits  Mr. Don Dutton, Assistant Professor  at U.B.C.  Mr. Dutton also teaches in both the  Criminology Program at Simon Fraser  University and at the B.C. Police  College.  While on sabbatical Asst.  Professor Dutton is doing research  on domestic violence in Vancouver.  Most of his statistical information  is based on the Kansas city report  done in 1970-71 as there are no  dance  Hallow'een is the first day of the  witches year. Witches were the first  doctors and also priestesses of the  first religion — Wicca.  Celebrate at a Women Only Dance at  Simon Fraser University, South Court  Lounge, October 31st —8 pm to 2 am.  Admission $1.50. Refreshments available.  data as yet on the extent of this  problem in Vancouver.  The Kansas city report showed that  between 40 and 70 per cent of all  homicides and assaults in any major  city, happen in the home0  "The  reason that research has not begun  before this" states Asst. Professor  Dutton, "is the way most people  think about crime."  BATTERED  IAIOMEN  "They think crime happens in the  streets. They say criminals are  different from them.  When you speak  of-domestic violence you've got to  admit everyone of us has the potential for this crime*," he says.  "People strongly resist this idea,"  notes Mr. Dutton.  "And because they  resist that idea, they resist any  police policy that suggests it."  It is because of this resistance  that it took almost four years to  establish Transition House in Vancouver and others like it in B.C.  and right across Canada.  Facilities  and funds have been minimal for  groups dealing with this problem.  "Human Resources Minister, Norman  Levi, who funds Transition House,  recognizes that we are servicing a  serious need," says Ms. Greenfield.  "But he opposes expanding the facilities because he thinks by making  women independent, we are breaking  up marriages."  Vancouver Transition uouse nas  to turn away some 70 women per  month during winter. Before it  existed, these women were put up  in hotels and a social worker  would visit when possible.  The  woman was isolated and usually  returned home to the problem.  "One of the valuable things about  Transition House is that the women  become aware that their case is  not unusual, that people do care.  Often, the women in the house help  one another,", says Ms. Greenfield.  Psychosis and drugs are major contributors to the problem of battered wives. Ms. Greenfield finds  that alcohol plays a strong role  in wife-beating too.  "A man drinks, gets violent, beats  his wife and sometimes his child  ren and possibly loses his job,  because of drinking," she advises.  "Women get to the point where they  just can't take it anymore. They  leave and have no-where to go,  except here."  In addition to emotional support,  Transition House offers legal counselling and aid to women in need of  social assistance, medical services  and a place to live. While such  status of women groups provide as'  much help as they can, it is the  police who will have to take the  burden of preventing wife-beating.  Asst. Professor Dutton has been  instrumental in establishing a  training course for recruits in the  handling of domestic disputes.  In  study sessions done with the police,  using films and simulated incidents,  he found the immediate response from  the officers was to side with the man,  "Overwhelming chauvinism, is the  only way to describe it," he says.  "It is necessary to teach them  about male-female politics and the  necessity that they remain neutral."  Mr. Dutton maintains that if police  want to do an effective job, they  have got to get in touch with their  own attitudes about men and women.  "They can't let it affect their behaviour," he says.  The purpose of the training course  is to get the police into households  that seem prone to violence, where  there have been a couple of calls  but the situation hasn't blown out  of proportion as yet.  A.s a result of police training in  San Francisco and Kansas City, there  has been a notable drop in the number of domestic assaults and homicides.  With a trained police force in San  Francisco, 50 per cent of the domestic dispute cases were using referrals to social agencies, given  them by the police, in comparison  with only 10 per cent using referrals where the force was untrained.  "We want the police to put less emphasis on breaking and entering,  busting hookers and closing gay bars  and more emphasis on dealing with  crimes in the home," says Asst. Prof.  Dutton.  For the battered woman, there is  ;,, some hope at arm's reach - if she'll  just pick up the phone and call for  help. Training is being given to  - switchboard operators of the new 911  emergency system being instituted  in Vancouver, so they can assess the  violence potential of any situation.  - Nancy Borsa, WCWN  conferences  A conference on women and the church  will be held October 17,18 and 19 in  Saskatoon by Canadian Women and Religion.  Some 250 women of inter-denominational faith are expected to attend  from the western provinces and territories. A C-R kit on sexism in the  church is now available from the group.  Travel bursaries can be obtained.  Those wishing to attend should contact  Kathy Storrie, Canadian Women and  Religion, 1332 Osier Street, Saskatoon  Saskatchewan. ' _mm  "MAKE THE WORLD A HOME" __ a conference called by B.C. Voice of Women  to bring together men and women concerned with living on a clean and  peaceful planet, to plan joint action  for 1976. To be held October 3,4 and  5 at YMCA Camp Elphinstone, Langdale,  B.Co Some subsidies are available,  mainly for students, homemakers and  seniors.  $30 covers registration,  bed and five meals.  Contact: Joan Jennings, 124 East Kings  Road, North Vancouver, B.C. leaving home  First printed in 1954, "Swamp  Angel" by Ethel Wilson (New  Canadian Library N.29, $1.95)  is now into its fourth reprint.  It tells the story of a woman  who leaves her husband, and tells  it in such a way that it brings  to mind that repellent commercial  jingle, "You've come a long way  baby"" Maggie Vardoe, widowed  and childless, (have you ever  noticed how few runners-away have  children, probably because children have a built-in tendency to  complicate things) makes a disastrous second marriage to a mean  little real estate agent with a  mean little mind and a mouth to  match.  A nagging, carping little  man - a male chauvinist piglet.  Maggie "endured humiliations and  almost unbearable resentments" and  came to dread those "nightly assaults" which is as much description of sexual activity as one  gets. Rather a relief after the  blow by blow accounts we often get  nowadays, and, it seems to me,  chillingly effective in its understatement.  The whole book is in  fact understated when compared to  another, more publicised runner-  away,  Isadora Wing in Erica Jong's  "Fear of Flying" whereas Jong rants  and raves, Wilson speaks gently and  simply as befits a Vancouver doctr  or's wife in her sixties and living  in comfortable circumstances.  Whereas Isadora agonises, and tears  herself apart, Maggie Vardoe  quietly, very quietly, leaves.  Wilson tells of Maggie's escape  and her eventual haven, which would  probably give Gloria Stenam fits  since she finishes up back in the  kitchen but at least she gets paid  for it so maybe it's alright,  Maggie's few friends are skillfully  brought to life and become part of  the story which is of perhaps more  interest now than when it was first  written over twenty years ago.  The swamp angel of the title is a  small gun that is symbolic rather  than dangerous.  I personally find  symbolism rather irritating, like  those appalling Scandinavian films  with everyone giving each other  meaningful glances whilst doing the  oddest things.  I always seem to  miss the point; never mind, maybe  there isn't any point.. No real  trouble here though, Wilson tells  a good story in a straightforward  manner and who can resist an author  who, describing the thoughts going  through the husband's mind as he  realises his wife is missing, looks  into the kitchen and says "My God,  she's left the dishes, she must be  dead."  Margaret Nicholls.  books for    children  The Canadian Women's Educational Press  has published several new non-sexist  children's books. If they are not  available in your local bookstore  contact: Women's Press, 280 Bloor  St. W., Suite 305, Toronto,Ontario.  MUMBLES AND SNITS by Beverley Allinson,  illustrated by Ann Powell is a read-  aloud book about Mumbles and Snits  whose shapes suggest a variety of  objects and animals.  The book is  designed to stimulate creativity in  young children and to appeal to their  interest in sounds as well as to point  out the general ideas of co-operation,  acceptance of individual talent, and  learning rrom groups of a dissimilar  background.  8x8, 32 pages, 2 colour illustrations every page. $2.75 paper, $6.75  cloth.  SHE SHOOTS! SHE SCORES! is a new non-  sexist book for kids. It is about  Hilary Lachapelle who likes being a  girl but doesn't like figure-skating.  She'd rather play hockey!  Written by Heather Kellerhals-Stewart,  SHE SHOOTS! SHE SCORES! is set in  Edmonton and grew out of her experiences while trying to organize and  coach a girls' hockey team there.  The book is highlighted by 26 action  photographs by Carol Gordon and Heather  Kellerhals-Stewart.  64 pages, 95c — get it from:  Women's Press  280 Bloor St.W. Suite 305  Toronto, Ontario  I CLIMB MOUNTAINS by Barbara Taylor  and illustrated by Barbara Yacono is  a humourous poetic story about three  children who meet on the sidewalk for  one of those neighbourhood exchanges  that happen every day on every block  where children live. The book is non-  sexist, and it also points out that  age and temperment are no barriers to  creativity and ability.  Children  are encouraged to respect each other  and co-operate among themselves.  8x8, 32 pages, 3 colour illustrations every page. $3 paer, $6.75 cloth.  BOOKS  Pioneer of Birth Control — Margaret  Sanger, by Lader and Maltzer. A biography of an important crusader in  birth control and family planning.  Mother's Day is Over by Shirley L.  Radl is available at $1.50 from  Quality of Life,220 Miramonte Ave.  Palo Alto, California, 94306. Or  try your public library.  Women of Canada — Their Life and  Work  has been re-issued by The  National Council of Women as an IWY  project. It was originally published  in 1900, and provides a portrait of  women's heritage. Available at $4.50  per copy from: National Council of  Women, 270 MacLaren Street, Ottawa.  Canadian women will have a new magazine by the end of November.  MAKARA will be published every two  months by the Pacific Women's Graphic  Arts Co-operative Association and  printed by Press Gang Publishers, a  feminist press. Makara is a composite  beast and the magazine will be a general interest magazine (articles,  research reports, reviews, fiction,  graphics, a children's section and  other features) reflecting the concerns of women.  MAKARA welcomes contributions, letters  and suggestions for articles. All  manuscripts will be promptly returned  if a stamped, self-addressed envelope  is included. A fee for material used  will be arranged with contributors.  To subscribe ($6 for 6 issues), contribute or obtain advertising rates  "and data contact:  MAKARA  Pacific Women's Graphic Arts  Co-operative Association  1011 Commercial Drive  Vancouver, B.C.  almanac  EVERYWOMAN'S ALMANAC 1976:  Appointment Calendar and Handbook  by The Every Day Collective  4% x 6*2, 192 pages, $2.95. Published  by Women's Press.  A woman's calendar which combines the  features of daytimer and information  guide in a handy pocket book.  The handbook section provides information and comment on such topics as daycare, birth control, law, women and  media, funding, rape, health, sexism  in the schools, old-age and women in  other countries.  The appointment calendar is made up  of two-page spreads, one for each week,  interspersed with cartoons, graphics,  quotes and poems.  Next is a section  for addresses and phone numbers and  a further information sectionaat the  back of the book supplies metric and  Celsius conversions along with a time  zone map of North America. The day  spaces are arranged in such a way that  they can be used to record notes and  memos as well as appointments.  Order from: The Women's Press, 305 -  280 Bloor St. W., Toronto, Ontario. 14  dialogue   with employers  Some slumbering giants appear to be  waking up.  We've had an investigation into the status of women in the  CBC, and a promise to implement recommendations for improvement.  Now,  consciousness is being raised in another large crown corporation.  At the instigation of a group of  women employees and with the co-operation of management (perhaps with a nod  to the approach of IWY), it was  decided last November to establish a  Women's Bureau within the Central  Mortgage and Housing Corporation.  A  major area of attention would be the  CMH C's practices as an employer.  A full-time Co-ordinator, Huguette  Sipling, was appointed early this year  to head the Bureau and a structure  was worked out for the election of  provincial representatives to form a  national women's advisory council.  The  council members relay to the Coordinator concerns of the women  employees in their areas and periodically hold conferences for the discussions of problems and communication  with management officials.  The representative for B.C. and the  Yukon on the advisory council is  Loretta Malone of Vancouver, who says  major problems for women in the CMHC are  traditional ones - pay issues and  minimal representation in management  positions.  It is one thing to be assured that an  organization's policiy is one of non  discrimination.  It is another to prove  that the policy is not always observed.  Loretta says the women in the CMHC  believe that, in many instances, they  are getting less pay than men for what  amounts to the same work.  But the  CMHC management has to be convinced  of this and some thorough research will  be needed for examples to be documented.  To its credit,  CMHC is willing to pay  for the hiring of outside researchers,  to be selected through the Women's  Bureau.  It is presumed that, for  findings to be of real validity,  the researchers will not only be  given access to personnel records,  but also the opportunity to interview employees.  In the meantime,  Loretta would like to see some sort  of preliminary studies undertaken  in local areas by the women themselves and would appreciate ideas  and advice on going about this -  possibly suggestions for a questionnaire.  There is almost no course training  for management within the CMHC  itself, but in the Spring of this  year a Management Development Division was set up, primarily to  provide guidance and counselling on  where training might be obtained.  The Division will be getting input  from the Women's Bureau on the needs  of numbers of women who, with the  help of training, and given the  opportunity, could get their feet on  the management ladder.  Loretta thinks more is required in  the way-of training programs for women  with management aspirations - programs acknowledging the existence of  certain problems arising out of  conditioning and the attitudes of  others.  She also hopes to see more  women's committees former within  companies and organizations, with or  without managerial encouragement.  She believes they can provide an  effective means of uniting women in  efforts to have inequalities in pay  and opportunity removed and are also  a valuable contact for the channelling in of information,  from outside sources, that could be of  benefit - course and workshop outlines, results of studies, speakers'  lists, and so on. For one reason or  another, the fate of such material,  sent only to some department or  supervisor, can be uncertain.  Loretta thinks it would be most helpful, too, if women's committees  could establish links for the sharing  of knowledge and experience.  Has the establishment of the  Women's Bureau within the CMHC  produced any really positive result  already? Definitely, says Loretta,  in the opening up of communications  with management that were virtually  non-existent before. There is ongoing contact through the Women's  Bureau and opportunity for additional  communication at national conferences  of the advisory council.  High-level  CMHC officials, including the president, attended some of the sessions  of a council meeting in June and  they'll return for further feedback  at a similar conference this mdnth.  In Loretta's words, "They now know  that we're there."  B.P.  SEND FOR  Information Canada has available a  new publication, Federal Services  for Women, which is a bilingual guide  to federal programs, services and  grants of interest to women, including special responsibility centres.  Available free at Information Canada  bookstores, or by writing Information  Canada, 171 Slater Street, Ottawa,  Ontario, K1A 0S9.  AIRTIME PUBLICITY HANDBOOK  "If You Want Airtime", is a publicity  booklet published by the National  Association of Broadcasters0 A complete guide to do's and don'ts when  requesting airtime from television  and radio stations.  Order copies  from NAB, 1771 N Street NW, Washington D.C.  -WCWN  GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS AND WOMEN  "Minorities and Women as Government  Contractors", is a report by the US  Commission on Civil Rights, giving  60 recommendations to make government  contracting programs more effective  in assisting minorities and women.  For a copy of the report write to Ms.  Hartley, Office of Information, US  Commission on Civil Rights, Washington, D.Co  -WCWN  BREAST CANCER BRIEF  The Registered Nurses Association of  B.C. has published "Investigation of  the Approach to Early Detection of  Breast Cancer." The report covers  the incidence of breast cancer in  B.C., public education on the issue,  mass screening for carcinoma of the  breast, mammography, a breast screening prposal and notes on approval of  diagnostic equipment.  For a copy,  contact Ms. Stella Black, RNABC, 2130  West 12 Avenue, Vancouver B.C. or  call 736-7231.  -WCWN  DIVORCE AND MATRIMONIAL LAW BOOKLET  A reference booklet, "Divorce and  Matrimonial Law", as it affects the  status of women, is available from  Vancouver People's Law School.  The  pamphlet covers legal implications  of women entering marriage, the  change in their rights as married  women, divorce and separation procedures, maintenance, custody and division of property.  Send 50c to VPLS  at #610 - 207 West Hastings Street,  Vancouver or call 681-7532.  -WCWN  HIGH SCHOOL WOMEN'S LIFE PLANNING KIT  "What Now?" is a life planning kit  for high school women prepared by  the Saskatoon University Women's Club  for IWY with funds from Secretary of  State. The kit includes a variety of  C-R materials plus life planning  games, articles on positive role  models for young women, and suggestions for use of the kit in pilot seminars and action proposals. For a  copy write to Mary Helen Richards,  1128 Elliot Street, Saskatoon, Sask.  Cost is $2.  -WCWN  WAGKb   i?UK   tlUUbJKWUKK  "Wages for Housework" is a collection  of speeches given by the May Day  Wages for Housework Rally in Toronto.  The 40 page booklet is compiled by  the Toronto Wages for Housework Committee which, in conjunction with  similar groups in six countries, is  lobbying to improve the status of  housewives. Videotapes and other aids  are available from the group0  For  copy of the booklet contact them at  P.Oo Box 38, Station E, Toronto,  Ontario.  -WCWN 15  chetwynd  Brenda Burtch of Chetwynd is trying  to start a single parents' group in  that area.  If you are interested in  helping organize it or have some suggestions, contact her at Box 603,  Chetwynd, B0C0  ishtar  Ishtar Women's Resource Centre is  closing its old office as of October  1st. The group hopes to re-establish  in Abbotsford and to open a second  women's centre in Langley, They will  remain in operation as a collective  with their transition house in Aldergrove. Contact Susan Belford at their  new address: 2420 Montrose Avenue,  Abbotsford B.C, or call 859-7681.  -WCWN  keremeos  A group of women in Keremeos are interested in studying issues relevant  to the status of women.  If you .have  any material which they could use,  please forward it to Karen Findlay,  RR1, Keremeos, B.C.  -WCWN  WHAT'S  GOING  ON?  rraser lake  omnlaExchaneetsani  quesnel  HERITAGE AND THE WOMAN  Beta Sigma Phi, an international  cultural enrichment group for women,  is looking for historical data on  women for their "Heritage and the  Woman" project for IWY. Forward  material to them through Mary Ann  Hajer at 118 Coach Road, Quesnel,  B.C.  -WCWN  poco  The Port Coquitlam Area Women's Centre  is open for Drop-In and Information  Referral Service. The open hours are  1 pm to 5 pm Monday through Friday,  and 5 pm to 9 pm Monday and Wednesday  evenings. All women are welcome to  come in and have coffee with us. We  have a children's corner.  The Centre will be offering various  programs for women in the Fall, including C-R Groups,a parent study course,  and a "Woman Today" course.  Corner of Chester & Coquitlam Ave.  Port Coquitlam, B.C. Phone 941 -6311.  EMOTIONAL SELF-DEFENSE FOR WOMEN  Plans are being made by the Port  Coquitlam Recreation Department for  an emotional self-defense course for  women. The course will consist of 6  sessions to be held at the new Rec.  Centre on Laurier Avenue. The course  is to start Sunday, October 12th,  from 7-9 pm. Cost $25. Watch for  more details later.  karate  FEMINIST KARATE ASSOCIATION  This new group teaches women karate  and short, practical self-defense  courses. Lessons can be scheduled  at different locations and are currently offered at UBC and Kitsilano Community Centre. For further information, contact Marsha Enomoto at 2663  West 43 Avenue, Vancouver B,C. or  call 263-7452.  -wrwN  The Fraser Lake Women's Resource  Centre is working in history of  women in that area, with a grant  from the Secretary of State.  If  you have any material of interest,  contact Emily Pacholuk at 4 Chow-  sunket, Fraser Lake, B.C.  -WCWN  terrace  The Terrace Women's Organization  sponsored a very successful Human  Rights Night on September 20th.  One hundred and fifty women and  men turned out to hear Kathleen  Ruff, Director of Human Rights  Branch, Eileen Caner, Director  of Women's Economic Rights  Branch, Dept of Economic Development and Nancy Conrod, President  of V.S.W.  Nancy has promised a write-up  for next month's "Kinesis."  victoria  OUR HIDDEN HERITAGE: Women in British  Columbia History is an exhibit at the  Provincial Museum in Victoria.  It is  an attempt by the Victoria Status of  Women Action Group (SWAG) to right the  wrongs of historians who have traditionally looked on the province's past  as something belonging only to a man's  world. The idea came from SWAG president Norrie Preston and the project  has been pieced together by Linda  Gilligan, co-ordinator and research  director.  The project received some federal and  provincial funding and also was given  a $5,000 grant from the B.C. Status  of Women Program. Under the program,  projects are funded by Provincial  Secretary Ernest Hall following recommendation by Provincial Status of Women Co-ordinator Gene Errington.  The exhibit will remain at the museum  until October 10. After that SWAG  hopes to have it moved to various  centres throughout the province.  WOMEN'S MOTORCYCLE ASSOCIATION  Some 40 women are participating in  the Vancouver Island Women's Motorcycle Association which formed in  March this year. They give instructions in how to drive bikes, workshops  on motorcycle mechanics, arrange outings and are trying to change the  public's attitude about women involved  in motorcycle clubs. If you are interested in joining them, contact:  Nicole Nelson, 1291 Downham Road,  Victoria, B.C. or call 477-5507.  -WCWN  Omnia Exchange is a new service in  Kitsilano.  It is sponsored jointly  by Kits House, the provincial department of Human Resources through the  Kitsilano Community Resource Board,  and the federal department of the  Secretary of State.  It features a  combination of social, educational  and recreational activities and services, such as counselling, health  education, hobby groups, consumer  affairs and many others. There is  an informal drop-in centre every  weekday from 9:30 am til 2 pm with  coffee and lunch available. Other  programs include a Fibre Workshop,  Women's Self-Defense, Exercise to  Music, Friday night get-togethers  and a babies and adult drop-in group.  For more information contact:  Omnia Exchange, KitsHouse, 7th and  Vine, Vancouver, phone 736-3588.  quebec  The Quebec Status of Women Council  has taken a firm position on abortion:  it call for the repeal of existing  law in favour of a new law permitting  abortion on demand in the first 12 w  weeks of pregnancy in consultation  with the woman's physician. It calls  for repayment of costs under the  Quebec Health Insurance Board and as  a complement calls for the creation  of family planning clinics throughout  the province.  - IWY Secretariat Newsletter  parents  Crossreach Single Parents is a  non-profit organization funded  by several Vancouver agencies.  Informal group meetings are held  at various locations throughout  the city so that single parents  can get together without having  to worry about travelling too  far, or about arranging and paying for babysitters.  For information Phone: 736-1817  nk  Leisure Link is an attempt to ofier  a solution to the problems of big  city alienation.  If you would like  a partner for skiing, cards or a walk  in the park phone Leisure Link weekdays  between 6 pm and 9 pm at 683-2556 or  drop by Gordon House, 1068 Davie St.  Vancouver. There are hundreds of  people in the Lower Mainland of all  ages listed with Leisure Link who  want to share their hobbies and activities — from skydiving to chess.  Also Bridge Groups, Arts and Crafts,  etc. 16  cap college  Capilano College Community Education  Helping Skills for Volunteers —  Level 1,  This course is designed for those  looking for the opportunity to develop skills in helping people to help  themselves.  Tues. 7:30-9:30 pnu starting Oct. 7.  10 sessions. Fee: $25. West Vancouver  United Church  Effective Group and Leadership Skills  Members of the community who are involved in voluntary organizations and  who wish to become more effective,  either as group leaders, or as group  members, will find this course valuable.  One-day session to be held Sat. Oct.  4th from 9:00 am to 3:00 pm. Fee:$25  Lynnmour Centre.  Weekend Workshop for Couples  Program for couples, married or not,  who wish to explore in greater depth  alternatives in communication and  personal growth within a relationship.  Fri. Oct. 3, 8:30-10:00 pm. Sat. Oct 4  9:00 am to 4:00 pm. Sun. Oct,5, 9:00  am to 4:00 pm. Fee: $40 per couple.  Lynnmour Centre.  WOMEN AND MUSIC — Thurs. 7:30-y:JUpm  Starting Oct. 2 for 8 sessions.  Fee: $16  Lynnmour Centre  Contact: Wendy Hurst, Programme Developer for Women's Studoes Committee,  Capilano College, 980-7511.  EXPLORATIONS  A Lecture series to introduce women  to the role of their predecessors  and contemporaries in various areas  of society.  Wednesdays,7:30-9:30 pm at St. David's  United Church, 1525 Taylor Way, West  Vancouver.  Fee: $1 per session. Co-ordinator:  Wendy Hurst.  Oct. 1 — How and why it went on; women  in the industrial revolution and modern capitalism.  D. Smith  Oct. 8 - Apple pie and motherhood; women and the family  Oct. 15 — Makers or spenders? Women  and economy. M. Benston  Oct. 22 — Always the social secretary;  never the candidate! Women and political power.  Oct, 29 — Inequality before the law!  Women and the legal system.  Clare  Culhame.  One Parent Families  An opportunity for men or women to  share concerns and ideas about parenting, especially in one-pprent families.  At the North Shore Family Services,  Wed. 7:30-9:30 pm for 10 sessions  starting Oct. 1. Fee:$10. Register:  988-7128.  Learning for Family Living — for  parents of young children, sponsored  by North Shore Family Services. Starting week of Oct.6, 7:30-9:30, Glen-  eagles Community School. Fee: $15/  family, $10/person. Register:988-7128.  Learning for Family Living — for  parents of pre-teens.  Wed. 7:30-9:30 pm. 8 sessions starting Oct, 8, at St. Anthony's School  Library. Fee:$15/family, $10/person.  Register: 984-9335.  Pre-natal Group  k  series of psychoprophylactic prenatal classes for expectant parents  sponsored by Vancouver Childbirth  Association. Mon.&Tues. 8:00-10;00pm  every nine weeks throughout the year.  Fee:$35 for couple or single parent.  St. DavidsUnited Church, West Van.  Register: 733-4626 or 263-7910.  Shifting Gears for the Middle Years  Sponsored by North Shore Family Services and Capilano Community Council.  An opportunity for women in the middle  years to discuss common concerns, reevaluate goals and strengths, and  share ideas about meeting the challenge of the middle years in creative  and constructive ways.  Two locations: Highlands United Church,  North Vancouver & West Vancouver United Church,  Thurs0 10 sessions starting Oct. 2.  9:30-11:30 amc $10/person. Register:  988-7128, 988-1611, 922-91710  Divorce Lifeline  Sponsored by Christ Church Cathedral &  North Shore Living and Learning Centre  To assist people contemplating divorce,  in the process of divorce or already  divorcedo Six general meetings to be  held at Christ Church Cathedral,  Vancouver. Speakers and panels, open  discussions followed by coffee hour.  Tues, 8:00pm. Sept,23, Oct.28, Nov.25,  Dec.16, Jan,27, Feb.24,  people's   law  school  WELFARE RIGHTS — Sept.29,30 & Oct.l  Kitsilano Secondary School  Instructors: Sid Filkow, lawyer, Judith  Lewis, psychiatric nurse  FAMILY COURT PROCEDURES — Oct.6,7,8.  Technical Secondary School  Instructor: Karen Kahn, articling law  student  CIVIL LIBERTIES — Oct.14,15 & 16  King George Secondary School  Onstructor: Judge David Hart, family  court judge.  IMMIGRATION PROCEDURES — Oct.20,21.22  Point Grey Secondary School  Instructor: Bill Black,  aw professor  JURISPRUDENCE AND POLITICAL PHILOSOPHY-  — Oct. 27,28&29  Technical Secondary School  Instructor: Don Rosenbloom, lawyer  ywca  L.I.F.E. - Living is for Everyone  - is a group of widowed, separated  and divorced women, who have learned  from personal experience the many  problems both practical and emotional  that a woman may face when she is  left on her own.  L.I.F.E. meets every Wednesday at  1 pm at the Y.W.C.A. Phone: 683-2531,  local 248 or 238 for information.  SPECIAL EVENTS.  Inequities of the Administration  of the Immigration Act,  Thursday, October 9th,  8-10 pm.  Fee: $3,00  Investment and Money Management.  Thursday, October 16th.  8-10 pm.  Fee: $3.00  Sensory Awakening Weekend,  Saturday, October 18th. 10 am - 5 pm,  Sunday,  October 19th, 10 am - 5 pm.  Members $30,00  Non-members $34,00  Tradeswoman: A New Career Option,  Sunday, October 26th,  1.00  to  4,30 pm.  Fee:   $5,00  important  The women's programme at Capilano  College has gained recognition as  one of the most innovative in Canada, We believe this is because  the programme was designed by a  committee representing community  women as well as faculty staff and  students of the College working in  conjunction with a program developer.  The control of the program by women  is in danger of being undermined by  the College bureaucracy.  Please lend your support and write a  letter so that women in this community and the College continue to have  a direct voice in Women's Studies at  Capilano College.  - Women's Studies Committee.  ubc  Centre for Continuing Education, UBC  is presenting Women In The Canadian  Criminal Justice System, Friday, Oct.  17 and Saturday,Oct. 18 at the Sheraton  Villa Hotel, Burnaby,  Topics include: The Changing Role of  Women in Crime, Apprehension and Pre-  Trial Alternatives, Sentencing and  Custody, Release Programs,  Fee is $40. Contact: Registration  Centre for Continuing Education,  UBC, Vancouver, B.C.  WOMEN - PENSIONS  "Women - and Their Right to  Adequate Pension" will be the  subject of an address by the  Minister of Human Resources,the  Honourable Norm Levi, on October  the 9th.  The place:  Vancouver Public  Library Auditorium.  The time:  12:10 p.m. - 1 p.m.  Introduction by Dr. Phelim Boyle  Faculty of Commerce & Business  Administration, U.B.C.  Sponsored by the Women's        »  Resources Centre, Centre for  Continuing Education, U.B.C. in  cooperation with the Vancouver  Public Library.  It's FREE. IWY at UBC  17  OPENING EVENT OF IWY AT UBC  SETS TONE FOR FALL PROGRAM.  "We (women) must dare to reinvent the world ..."  The opening event of the Fall  program for International Women's  Year at UBC packs clout.  A provocative study of the opinion  structures within our society and  how those opinions (developed and  controlled by men) function to  exclude women from positions of  authority is the central thesis of  the opening evening.  Dr. Dorothy Smith, author of the  paper, Ideological Structures and  How Women Are Excluded, is Associate Professor of Sociology at  the University of British Columbia.  Dr. Smith delivers her paper on  Monday, September 22, at 7:30 p.m.  in the Woodward Instructional  Resources Centre, Lecture Hall 2, on  the UBC campus.  Her statement may  well become one of the basic tenets  in the developing idea-bank within the  women's movement.  The analysis of how  certain men create and control the sea  of opinion in which women (and 'other"  men) swim; her lucid explanation of  how women come to be excluded from  policy-making positions and her  closing statement, "We (women)  must dare to re-invent the world of  knowledge, of thought, of symbols and  images," will make exciting listening for those who have the ears to  hear and will be a powerful kick-off  for UBC's extensive program.  A group of women, loosely grouped  under the title Ad Hoc Committee  for Planning IWY at UBC, have been  meeting since last October,  They  produced a Spring Program and then  met and worked diligently throughout  the summer to come up with the  multi-event program below.  It is perhaps interesting that the  group was far from homogenous in its  attitudes to International Women's  Year. The interests and goals  ranged from militant feminist to  conformist. The meetings were sometimes stormy, sometimes painful, more  often filled with a sense of purpose  to achieve integration. BUT, and  it's a big but that may well spell  survival for the women's movement  generally, the women proved more  resilient than stubborn.  In almost  all cases they verbalized the unifying idea that the important thing  was to produce a program that would  help women, both on and off campus,  to further their quest for understanding, independence and autonomy.  In developing the program, four  major themes were used as guidelines  for keeping within the context of  women-oriented projects: Women and  the Economy ** Women, Children and  Men ** Women in Motion:  Health,  Sport and Recreation ** Woman, The  New Person.  Events are located on campus and in  down-town locations so that ALL  women might participate.  Community  women are especially welcome to  attend as many events as they find  interesting.  There are NO admission  charges.  - Lois Crawley  October 1 to 30.  WOMEN IN ART.  An exhibition of the painting,  drawing and sculpture of B.C.  women.  Special noon events: poetry  readings, theatre, crafts, etc.  Further information, call 684-2079.  October 6 to 11.  WOMEN'S WEEK.  Projects to include feminist  theatre, poetry readings, karate and  self-defence, films, women's music,  a lecture discussion with Marie-  Claire Blais, and more.  For full information call the Student  Women's Office at 228-2082.  October 7 to December 2.  I.W.Y:  WHO IN THE WORLD NEEDS IT?  Eight Tuesdays.  Film and discussion.  Vancouver Public Library, Rm. 301,  12:10 to 1 p.m,  October 16, Thursday.  FEMINISM AND THE EVOLUTION OF  AWARENESS,  Dr. Diana Alstad ("a new awareness  bringing creative responses from both  men and women is urgently needed").  UBC Student Union Building Art Gallery.  12:30 to 2:30 p.m.  October 16, Thursday.  WOMEN, MEN AND CHILDREN  Families with different lifestyles  discuss the myths and possibilities  of their roles, present and future.  Vancouver Public Library. 12 to 1:30  October 23 to November 27.  WOMEN WORKING TO MAKE THINGS BETTER  Six Thursdays. Talks by women who take  an active role in shaping our society.  Vancouver Public Library, Room 301.  12:10 to 1 pm.  October 22 to 30.  WOMEN IN MOTION: HEALTH, SPORT AND  RECREATION  An extensive program arranged by UBC  Women's Athletic Department for ALL  women — on and off campus.  The Conference: Thursday, October 23  to Sunday, October 26. An impressive  array of guests will speak on sport,  recreation, positive health, the identity search, shaking the cultural  pattern, etc.  The Sports Festival: Wednesday, October  22 to Thursday, October 30, See demonstrations of a variety of sports little  known in this area — then participate!  Waterpolo, synchronized swimming and  fitness swim in the Empire Pool. Fitness evaluation clinics every day  except Sunday at 12:30 and 4:30 pm,,  Memorial Gym. Rhythmic Gymnastics,  Net Ball, Co-ed Volleyball and Yoga  in the Memorial Gym. Ringette, Basic  and Power and Speed Skating in the  Winter Sports Centre. Squash and  Racquetball tournaments on six different occasions, Winter Sports Centre.  Soft Lacrosse, Karate and Self-defense,  And THE GREAT PUMPKIN RACE from Memorial Gym on October 30!  For full information on Women in  Motion, please call UBC Women's  Athletic Department at 228-2295,  Marilyn Pomfret, Director.  The November Events will appear in  next month's KINESIS.  health  The B.C. Federation of Medical Women  is presenting a series of women's  health seminars.  Workshops will cover  such topics as menstruation, birth  control, vaginal infections, venereal  disease, abortion, skin care and nutrition.  Agendas are flexible and open to  suggestions for topics. The schedule  is as follows: Vancouver (at the Playhouse Theatre) October 18; Victoria,  October 19; Courtenay in November;  Kamloops in February; Vancouver again  in March. For further information  contact Dr. Elizabeth whynot, Pine  Free Clinic. 1985 West 4th Ave. Vancouver or call 736-2391.  -WCWN  older  women  The National Organization for Women  (NOW) is sponsoring a Task Force on  Older Women. They publish a newsletter,  distribute information, buttons,  videotype material, and lobby for  political reform for jobs for older  women, to raise the status of home-  making, and to seek ways of creative  aging. For more information write:  Task Force on Older Women, 434-66th  St. Oakland, California 94609. 18  media action  MEDIA ACTION GROUP  The MEDIA ACTION GROUP (MAG) will be  reactivating this fall by means of a  letter lobby for the convenience of  those members who cannot attend meetings. A c.r. pamphlet on sexist ads  and what to do about them is in preparation for anyone interested in  joining MAG.  HOTEL VANCOUVER: Big Daddy  Our sexist ad of the month was submitted by Carol McQuarrie of North  Vancouver.  Similar ads from members  wanting action on them, are welcome.  There is a special place for rimes like this.  AWeddinj  ,. She tells you she's grown up now  and you shouldn't call her "Princess" anymore. Sure, you say, and pat  her on the head like you did the day you rescued her and the cat from  that big maple tree. Yes, it's been a long time since     /2\  she sat on your knee but she's still daddy's little (Jg, 1—Ipvfv^I  girl. And daddy's pretty proud right about now.\ /_V^L'.SfSSrL  Phone the Director of Sales, 684-3131. Vdl IL  ncouver  Following is the VSW protest letter,  Jbut one isn't enough. We hope you  {will also write to Hotel Vancouver.  [If you get a reply, we would like to  juse it for publication in the next  ■issue of Kinesis. You can use this  iletter as a protype for your own, but  Iremember individually composed letters  are always more effective than cutting out and sending form letters or  copying this one.  Hotel Vancouver  Advertising and Sales Department  900 West Georgia Street  Vancouver, B.C.  Re: "There is a special place for times  like these."  May we draw your attention to the  wedding reception ad placed by  Hotel Vancouver in the Vancouver Sun,  September 3, 1975.  We object to the portrayal of women  as helpless daddy's girls. A woman  is a female adult.  That means she  is grown up, whether daddy likes it  or not.  To say,"Sure, and pat her on the head  like the day you rescued her from the  big maple tree," is a patronizing,  chauvinistic insult.  We do not object to tender feelings  between father and daughter but we  do resent obsolete sexist stereotypes  of women in advertising. We think  Daddy had better grow up.  May we remind you that the Human Rights  Commission has ruled that sexist ads  violate the Human Rights Code in pri  principle, if not the letter of the  law.  We suggest that this ad is alienating  to a growing portion of the female  public including your liberated fathers  and it might therefore be in your best  interests to withdraw this ad from  further publication.  On behalf of our 900 members in British Columbia, the Vancouver Status of  Women Media Action Group would appreciate your reply. Thank you for your  attention to this matter.  Ms. Karen Richardson  Vancouver Status of Women  Media Action Group  c,c. Vancouver Sun  Canadian Advertising and Review Board  Human Rights Commission  project  The Women's History Project is continuing their research on the contributions of women to the Trade Union  Movement in B.C. If you have any  information on such women the Project  would be pleased to hear from you.  Also any information on the B.C.  Interior Fruit and Vegetable Workers  Union would be appreciated.  Contact: Women's History Project  United Fishermen & Allied  Workers Union  138 East Cordova Street  Vancouver, B.C.  Pictures — photographs and cartoons  — will be an important part of the  booklet being researched and written  by the Women's Auxiliary to the United Fishermen & Allied Workers Union.  The booklet will be a history of the  role that women have played in the  building of the trade union movement  of B.C.  If you have any photos or  know of any that could be used in the  booklet, the Women's History Project  would appreciate being able to copy  them. All photos will be returned.  Contact: Women's History Project,  U.F.A.W.U.—W.A., 138 East Cordova  St., Vancouver, B.C.  iwy    world congress  poem  THE SOCIAL WORKER  She holds her scalpel  above my head.  My hand is on my heart.  She delicately dissects my  emotions and tears my soul apart.  Generosity becomes demanding  and love a pain in the ass.  Yet, she's in the School of  Social Work and,  I hear,  at the top of her class.  - Karen Loder  A geologist from the North West  Territories, A librarian from Newfoundland, and a Pacific Coast Fishing Union Organizer — three women  with a common interest — they are  part of the 30 woman Canadian delegation chosen to go to the WORLD  CONGRESS for INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S  YEAR in Berlin, GDR October 20-24.  The Canadian Preparatory Committee  has selected the English-speaking  delegates and they will be joined  by French-Canadian women for the  5-day World Congress hosted by the  German Democratic Women's Federation.  Together with 2000 women from every  continent, they will study the UN  World Plan of Action outlined at the  Mexico Conference in June, as well  as nine key themes linked to the IWY  theme, "Equality, Development and  Peace."  Several national organizations will  be represented by delegates such as  Fort St. John farmer Jean Leahy of  the National Farmers Union, Theresa  Padgham of Voice of Women, Mary Dennis,  Association of Canada, and the Association of United Ukrainian Canadians.  Helen O'Shaughnessy is a union organizer from the United Fishermen and  Allied Workers Union; Evelyn Armstrong  represents the United Electrical Radio & Machine Workers, with experience  in Metro Toronto Labour Council. An  Autoworkers' Auxiliary backs Jean  Dearing as does the Windsor Women's  Centre and other local groups.  Other delegates are Mary Crockford of  London, Yvonne Earle of Newfoundland  (with others expected from the Mari-  times), Kate Hladiy of Winnipeg,  Cathleen Morrison,Toronto, Eunice  Parker, Coquitlam, Mary Reed, Oxbow,  Saskatchewan, and Louise Swift who  chairs the IWY Coordinating Committee  President of the Congress of Canadian  tfomen, Jeannette Morgan of the Canadian Peace Congress, as well as executive members of the Native Women's  for Edmonton, Alberta. A guest and  member of the International Preparatory Committee is Helen Tucker,  Toronto. subscribe!  PHONE (home)  OCCUPATION  (work)  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  LIBRARIES, etc. SUBSCRIPTION $10/ YEAR  RENEWAL   NEW MEMBER    Kinesis is sent to all members in good  standing. Membership dues are by yearly donation. In determining your donation we ask you to balance your own  financial position and the fact that  KINESIS costs approximately $3.00 per  person per year to print and mail.  Letters  19  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women. Its objective is to provide an open channel  of communication between the members  of the organization and to promote  understanding about the changing position of women in society.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those  of the writer and unless specifically  stated do not reflect the policy of  V.S.W.  PUBLICATION DATE:  The third week of  each month. ,  COPY DEADLINE: The 1st of the previous month (e.g. Nov. 1 for Dec.  issue).  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will consider those from non-members. All  submissions, including letters to  the editorial committee, must be  accompanied by the writer's name  and address. Pseudonyms will be  used where requested. Where necessary, the newsletter committee  will edit for brevity, clarity, and  taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to: KINESIS  Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.  Telephone: 736-3746  THIS ISSUE:  EDITORIAL COMMITTEE:  Jo Lazenby,  Bobbie Patrick, Monica Mui, Eloah  Giacomelli, Viviane Hotz, Diana  Bissell  CONTRIBUTORS: Karen Richardson,  Karen Loder, J. Annis Freeman, Carole  Sinclair, Margaret Nicholls, Nancy.  Conrod, Bobbie Patrick, Marjorie  MacDonald, Lois Crawley  PHOTOS: Bobbie Patrick, Karen Richardson  TYPING: Joan Chandler, Helen Smith,  Bobbie Patrick, Diana Bissell, Jo  Lazenby  LAYOUT: Jo Lazenby  "KINESIS:"  Much was said and written earlier  this year in V.S.W. on the advisability or otherwise of political  involvement.  We respect the majority decision - despite our obvious dedication to the contrary  view! However, we would like to  draw members attention to the report of the Board of Directors on  page 20 of the September "Kinesis."  The meeting that Karen Richardson,  Nancy Conrod and Joan Wallace attended with Secretary of State Hugh  Faulkner resulted in your new brief  on funding.  That meeting was arranged by this Commission using our  political contacts and credibility.  We invited women from other organisations in an endeavour to further  their individual causes - to all of  which our Commission is dedicated.  We feel that you are somewhat remiss  in not making some acknowledgement  and showing that political involvement - in any party - is worthwhile  and obviously can produce results.  - Moyra A. Roberts  President  British Columbia Women's  Liberal Commission.  A comment on the views expressed in  Members' Forum last month.  Politics aside, and the question of  whether competition has much to do  with the 'path to dignity', I disagree  with Ms. Ramsay's opinion that the  Feminist Movement should dissociate  itself from the problems of lesbian  women. At what price would the Movement accept the support which she  believes would be gained? At the  price, in my view, of betraying those,  both lesbian and non-lesbian, who have  been working to win freedom for women  to be themselves, finding fulfilment,  as they choose, in the various areas  of life which fulfilment may encompass.  I was as moved as Ms. Ramsay by the  account of the woman "for whom nothing  is working".  I have also been moved  by encounters, in psychiatric hospitals,  with people who had come apart because  of censure , ridicule and rejection,  or the fear of these things.  At this stage, lesbianism is not a  strictly personal matter. It is also  a social one, and greatly in need, as  is so much else, of changes in social  attitudes.  Bobbie Patrick  KINESIS:  I wish to join the Vancouver Status  of Women and receive your monthly  newspaper.  If I can be of any help to any woman  in her middle age who has been left  by her husband after 25-30 years of  marriage and feels that her life has  ended, I would be only too happy to  speak to her and let her know, as in  my own case, life has just begun.  (But it does take time.)  Yours truly,  Irene Esson  KINESIS:  Greetings from Newfoundland!  I was moved  to write to you last month from New  Brunswick concerning the alarming  difference I'd noticed here in the  Maritimes between eastern women's issues  and those concerning us Vancouverites,  and until I arrived in Newfoundland,  I thought I'd seen just about the worst  imaginable status of women.  Here in Newfoundland, with an election  a week away, one can appreciate the  glaring fact that this province is a  man's world, lock, stock and barrel!  There is one lonely woman candidate  running for the N.D.P., but the  ruling P.C. slogan pleads with the  voter to elect 'your man in the P.C.  party". Although the mayor of the  capital, St. John's, is a woman,  (surprise, surprise!) I listened to  two hours of an open-line phone-in  show last week during which time  the general consensus was that  Dorothy Wyatt was elected through  some kind of freak accident, with  not one word spoken either for or  against her political accomplishments!  Fishermen in the tiny  village of Happy Adventure would  not take me out in their boats for  the morning, (although they readily  invited my husband to come along)  because it is considered to be a  jinx to have a woman on board!  Because so much of Newfoundland's  history and economy stem from the  sea, one can understand why women  have figured so minimally in  Newfoundland's politics—they  can't even get into the damn  BOATS JI  I have heard Newfoundland women  argue rings around open-line  moderators every day for three weeks—  can you imagine a mere woman getting  the last decisive word in over Webster  or Bannerman? And yet in spite of  the impressive articulation and  common sense I've heard from these  women, Newfoundland is undoubtedly  a political wasteland as far as  female participation is concerned.  In a province where one out of every  five people is unemployed, issues  like "equal pay for equal work" are  just not discussed.  I have spoken  with many women in various jobs  throughout the province who echo  the same sentiment:  "I'm just glad  to be -able to bring a few extra  dollars home each week!"  And we in Vancouver think we have a  long way to go!  Take care,  (Your travelling sister...)  Carolyn Thomas  KINESIS:  Enclosed is a cheque for renewal of  Kinesis, I have gratefully enjoyed  it and it has in its way helped me  to have faith in myself as a homemaker.  I detest the word housewife!  Sincerely,  Sophie Bales  Have certainly enjoyed the paper. It's  a real mind opener.  Ruby GoIding  V 20  VSW  general  meeting  At the September 16th VSW General  Meeting the members present voted  to adjourn the meeting and join the  demonstrators in front of the Manpower  building. This meant that the program  on the International Women's Year  Conference and Tribune held in Mexico  City was cancelled.  However the  three women — Gene Errington, Mary  Bishop and Margaret Fulton — who  were to have spoken at the meeting  will be taking part in the Special  Program for IWY sponsored by the  University Women's Club, Tuesday Oct.  28, 8 pm. Hycroft, 1489 McRae Ave.  Vancouver.  Women are welcome to  attend the program.  See announcement  this page.  board of  directors  The monthly meeting of the VSW Board  of Directors was held on August 27th.  It was announced that Glinda Sutherland had resigned as Ombudswoman,  effective August 15th, and had been  replaced by Miriam Gropper. Lee Masters  has been hired to work on the Ombuds  9taff. Dorothy Home offered to coordinate a meeting with Marc Lalonde  on behalf of the VSW.  C.A.R.A.L.  will be using a corner of the VSW  office for the next little while.  Next meeting is Sept. 24.  iwy program  University Women's Club is presenting  a SPECIAL PROGRAM FOR INTERNATIONAL  WOMEN'S YEAR on Tuesday, October 28  at 8 pm. Hycroft, 1489 McRae Ave.,  Vancouver.  Four B.C. women attended the World  Conference and Tribune of the United  Nations International Women's Year,  held in Mexico City in June,1975.  They will discuss their impressions  from different points of view. The  women afe Gene Errington, Co-ordinator  of the Provincial Status of Women  Program; V.erna Splane, Third Vice-  President of the International Council  of Nurses; Mary Bishop, a Vice-President of the Planned Parenthood Federation of Canada; and Margaret Fulton  Dean of Women UBC.  Members of the Vancouver Status of  Women who were disappointed in not  hearing the scheduled talks at the  last General Meeting of VSW should  plan to attend this special progEam.  %A^  HJ^£^  "If we let her play, she'll win all our marbles. So, let's just  tell her she can't play because she's a girl."  OCTOBfaR  CALENDAR OF EVENTS  OCT 6 - Writer's Workshop,  6-8 pm, office.  - C.A.R.A.L. Steering  Cttee, 7:30 pm, office.  -Feminism & Relationships, 8 pm, office.  KINESIS meeting, anyone  interested in helping  with newsletter?—7:30 pm,  office.  • ORIENTATION MEETING,  8 pm, office. If you want  to learn more about what  we do at VSW and how you  can help, this is the  meeting for you!  OCT 10 - Letter Lobby, 10:30 AM  office.  OCT 15 - Book Review Group's 1st  meeting, 8 pm, office.  OCT 20 - Writer's Workshop,  6-8 pm, office.  - C.A.R.A.L. Steering Cttee,  7:30 pm, office.  - Feminism & Relationships  discussion group, 8 pm,  office.  OCT 21 - Women's "Self-help" money  group - learn how to handle  your money, 8 pm, office.  OCT 23 t- OPEN HOUSE - 8-10:30 pm,  drop in, read, browse, use  our resource files, talk.  OCT 27 - Writer's Workshop,  6-8 pm, office.  -CARAL Steering Cttee,  7:30 pm, office.  OCT 28 - I.W.Y. talk at University  Women's Club, 8 pm, Hycroft.  (for those who  missed the Sept. general  meeting)  OCT 29 - C.A.R.A.L. general meeting  for all interested people -  help with abortion lobbying,  7:30 pm, office.