 u Dec/Jan. 1991  Ontario's NDP—what to expect?  cmpa $2.25 of the  paper. Call us at 255-  Our next Writer's Meeting is  Thur. Jan. 3 at 7 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Christine Cosby, Nancy Pollak, Andrea Lowe, A. Alisa Nemesis, Jackie Brown, Maggie  Roy,   Sandra   Gillespie,   Soni-  larino, Janisse Browning-  Leveque, Frances Wasserlein,  Carol Lamarche, Jean Lum,  Agnes Huang, Jill Mandrake,  Heidi Walsh, Corilee Fox, Me-  Ardyche, Ann Rainbeth,  Jeanette Ashley, Sandy James,  Karen Martin, Winnifred's wa-  xer and Christine's applesauce  ;s  FRONT COVER: Beisan Zubi  and Molly Kraft at vigil of the  Jewish Women's Committee  to End the Occupation, in Toronto—IWD, 1990. photo by  Rachel Epstein.  EDITORIAL   BOARD:   Nancy Pollak, Michele Valiquel  Terrie    Hamazaki,    Chri  Cosby  CIRCULATION AND DIS'  BUTION: Jennifer Johnston*  Chau Tran, Rachel Fox  ADVERTISING:  Birgit Schinke  OFFICE: Jennifer Johr  Chau Tran  uette,  STRI-  I  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis  are those of the writer and  do not necessarily reflect VSW  policy. All unsigned material is  the responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial Board.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  subscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  ! is $30 or what you can afford,  l   includes subscription to Kine-  SUBMISSIONS:  Women  and  girls are welcome to make submissions. We reserve the right  to edit  and  submission  does  lot guarantee publication.  If  >ossible,   submissions   should  be typed  double  spaced  and  i must   be  signed   and   include  j an address and phone number.  | Please note: Kinesis does not  ; accept poetry or fiction con-  i tributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  DEADLINE: For features and  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication;  news copy: 15th; letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  16th.  It isn't easy being Jewish and critical of Israeli  policies 11  You're having your baby ...  or are you?   Sheila Kitzinger on how  birthing should be 14  Poet Betsy Warland comes together by taking  language apart 23  INSIDE  RRffl&tfiS  Midwifery ruling will be crucial   ...3  Vancouver's new child care program    4  Don't look it up in this dictionary    4  Movement Matters 2  Ontario's NDP—who's who, what's up?   ....5  What's News? 6  by Linda Choquette  fpajotefni Parent: a view from Quebec    7  as told to Ellen Woodsworth  UBC: dealing with sexual harassment   ...8  by Agnes Huang & Heidi Walsh  Commentary 16  VSW's brief to the Royal Commission on NRTs..  ....9  by Silva Tenenbein  by Bonnie Waterstone  & Karen X. Tulchinsky  Encuentro Feminista—3,000 feminist invasion...  ...12  by Carmen Rodriguez  Against Apartheid   by Lteap)rt*ager  ...13  Making Waves 19  by Lauri E. Nerman  ^ong wr'a Sansei: in review   ...17  by Lily Yuriko Shinde  Two kicks at the filmmaker's can   ...18  Letters... 25  by Meg Edwards  Gcina Mholope—breaking the barriers   ...20  Bulletin Board 26  Language in Her Eye: in review     ...22  compiled by Avery August  by Gladys We  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kine-'  sis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association.  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-9095  KINESIS Movement Matters  ^s*^  !^  Movement  matters listings  information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  Support nat'l  daycare assoc.  The Canadian Day Care Advocacy Association (CDCAA) had its funding slashed by  the Secretary of State by 15 percent in 1989  and frozen in 1990. The CDCAA is on a  membership drive to fund continued lobbying of the federal government for a comprehensive child care system in Canada, and to  continue its public information campaigns  on the need for affordable, high quality, nonprofit child care in Canada.  Consider supporting the work of the CDCAA by becoming a member or by having your organization take out a membership. Included is a regular publication on  child care developments. Two-year memberships are $10 (individual), $20 (family) or  $30 (groups/organizations). Send cheques  or money orders with name and mailing address to The Canadian Day Care Advocacy  Association, 323 Chapel St, Ottawa, Ont.  KIN 7Z2  Strategies  for Change:  the book  The Women's Research Centre has prepared a book titled Strategies for Change:  From women's experience to a plan for  action. The book is intended to assist  women's groups in deciding on strategy. It  starts from the assumption that once we  raise an issue, how we work for change has  a real impact on the results.  The book is divided into two parts. "The  Story of Three Issues" looks at wage discrimination and pay equity, wife assault,  and custody and access laws. Each case  study begins with a brief history of the issue and a discussion of how the issue was  denned. At the heart of the exploration is a  roundtable exchange with a women's group  which has been actively involved in the issue.  The second part describes "Four Steps to  a Strategy for Change." Each step outlines  the key questions groups should answer in  strategy development and offers some how-  to's. As the authors say, "Planing a strategy is not difficult. It's a matter of asking  the right questions and building upon answers. This book shows you how."  To order Strategies for Change (90  pgs., spiral bound) send $9 plus postage and  handling ($1.50 for the first book, $.75 for  each additional item) to: Women's Research  Centre, 101—2245 W. Broadway, Van. BC,  V6K 2E4. (Call 734-0485 for information on  discounts for multiple orders.)  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with  memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became  members, renewed their memberships or donated in November:  Margaret Akulia • Carol Anderson • Rosemary Carson • Viviana Comensoli • Jane Cov-  ernton • Gail Cryer • Frances Darling • Veronica Delorme • Ann Doyle • Nancy Duff •  Elsie M. Eccles • Brenda Felker • Marilyn Fuchs • Lynda Griffiths • Madeline Harrington • Faune Johnson • Angela Kelly • Tamara Knox • Rowena Macpherson • Susan Cole  Marshall • Leo McGrady • Barbara Monita • Mary Moore • Chris Morrissey • Margaret  Ostrowski • Lynne Parisien • Tracy Potter • Linda Pugh • Diane Ransom • Adrianne  Ross • Janet Sawyer • Marguerite Scandiffio • Moni Vangolen • Judith Walker • Peggy  Ward • Elaine Young  Women of  colour collective  in Calgary  The Women of Colour Collective is a  feminist collective of Canadian women of  colour committed to the empowerment of  all women. The group does educational, advocacy and support work, and links with  other organizations committed to economic,  social and political change. The collective  makes presentations on racism to various  groups and in September 1990 published  the first of its quarterly newsletters, the  only paper in western Canada produced and  written entirely by women of colour.  For further information contact Women  of Colour Collective, 319—223 12th Ave.  SW, Calgary, Alberta, T2R 0G9 Tel.(403)  262-1873  Queer Press  seeks queer  readers, writers  A new Canadian publishing company,  Queer Press, is calling for innovative lesbian  and gay writing. Queer Press is Canada's  only lesbian and gay book publishing firm.  They are committed to prioritizing the publication of lesbian and gay voices which are  historically marginalized and socially dis-  empowered. Queer Press are currently in  the process of acquiring non-profit status.  Queer Press is committed to donating up  to three percent of each press run of every title to lesbians and gay men incarcerated in prisons and psychiatric institutes.  Yearly memberships to the press are also  available for $25. Members are entitled to a  20 percent discount on all Queer Press titles, which will be available by mail.  Publication of both fiction and non-  fiction titles is planned. The press is particularly interested in material produced  by the poor or working class, rural, disabled, young, old, political radicals, people  of colour, and the culturally and religiously  diverse. Queer Press is now soliciting articles for an anthology of writings by and  about lesbian and gay survivors of childhood sexual abuse. The working title is Loving in Fear. The press is seeking the following sorts of articles: political analyses,  autobiographies, poetry, graphics, legal information, fiction, therapy stories, etc. The  deadline is Feb. 1991.  Address all letters and queries to: Q.  Press P.O. Box 485, Stn. P Toronto, Ont.  M5S 2T1  conneXlgns  ...provides reliable news and analysis  about development and social justice in  Latin America.  "Latin America Connexions  is a fine journal, lively,  informative, very impressive.  It will prove valuable to those  who hope to understand what  is happening in the region."  -Noam Chomsky  For a one year subscription  please send $10 to:  LATIN AMERICA CONNEXIONS  BOX 4453, MPO  VANCOUVER, B.C. v6b 3z8  Kinesis  Women of  Colour  Caucus  next meeting:  Wednesday, December 3  7p.m.  at 301-1720 Grant St.  contact Terrie at 321-0575  for more information  InsTdel  Kinesis  One evening in early December last year,  a group of women from Kinesis met in a  restaurant to discuss editing—how to, when  to, why to—the range of practical and philosophical questions confronting a feminist  newspaper. One woman arrived late and  told us the news. News from Montre'al about  shootings at a university, about women being dead—vague news, horrific news. December 6th, 1989.  A year later and many more women  have died. For being women, for disobeying orders, for being—or appearing to be—  feminists, for being women in their own  right. Women have called for December 6  to be designated the national Day of Commemoration to mourn all female victims of  male violence. Even without official recognition, that day will be one on which feminists  remember with anger and grief the women  who die—and remember too our determination to change the world.  You'll notice a new ingredient in this issue of Kinesis. At our last Editorial Board  meeting, we decided to ask authors of features and arts stories to submit a one-line  autobiographical description. Until now, we  would occasionally supply that information  for stories where the author had an obvious  stake or bias: if so-and-so was the campaign  manager for such-and-such, we thought you  had a right—and a need—to know that her  glowing account of the campaign came from  that perspective. Now, you'll routinely get  that kind of information, as well as any  other the author deems pertinent to your  understanding of her writing.  Speaking of writing, we welcome several newcomers this month: Cathy Grif-  fen, Shlomit Segal, Allana Murray, Meg  Edwards, Lily Yuriko Shinde, Lizann Foster and Karen X. Tulchinsky. Arriving on  the scene with a combination of writing  and production duties are Agnes "Most  Wanted" Huang, Heidi Walsh, Jeannette  Ashley, Jill Mandrake and Carol Lamarche.  New production workers this issue are  Karen Martin and Corilee Fox.  The big story on the production front,  of course, is our new typesetter, Janisse  Browning-Leveque. After an intense seven-  day rite of passage (the evidence of which  you now hold in your hand), Janisse has  shown herself to be a worthy successor to  the long line of Kinesis typesetters. She's  clearly a woman of great skill, caring and  nerve—things do get a little ripe on press  night—and we're lucky to have her. Welcome, Janisse.  And two women who contributed to Kinesis need thanking. Sylvia Hunt has done  our camera work at The Peak for well over  a year, and she's done it wonderfully. Well,  she's Peaked, so it's thanks and goodbye.  We also say thank-you to Ginger Plum who  did a great impromptu job as relief typesetter recently. Thanks a lot, Ginger.  This publication is regularly indexed in the Canadian Women's  Periodicals Index.  The index is a reference guide to articles about women printed in  more than 80 English and French periodicals, for use by researchers,  lecturers, students and anyone else interested in women's studies.  This alphabetized hardcopy of a comprehensive computerized index  is produced three times a year by the Canadian Research Institute for  the Advancement of Women, and is available on a subscription basis.  For more information, please write:  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index  University of Alberta  11019-90 Avenue  Edmonton, Alberta  CANADA, T6G2E1  KINESIS v,-/y////y//////y///y/////////y/////////yy/////yy/////y//y/yy/y//y/y//////////y///y/////////////y//yy//j'/y/////y'/  /////////////////////^^^^  //////////////////////^^^  NEWS  Legal status of fetus:  Ruling on midwives crucial  by Joni Miller  When the Supreme Court of  Canada rules on the conviction  of Vancouver lay midwives Gloria  LeMay and Mary Sullivan, the ruling may well define the legal relationship of Canadian women to  their fetuses.  It will also impact on Canadian  midwives, whose struggle for legal recognition as a health profession is slowly progressing throughout the country.  LeMay and Sullivan have been  embroiled in court battles since  1985 when a home birth they were  attending resulted in the suffocation death of the baby.  The BC College of Physicians  and Surgeons filed a complaint  against LeMay and Sullivan, a  complaint which eventually resulted in the women being convicted of criminal negligence causing bodily harm to the mother.  The women appealed their conviction to the Supreme Court  of Canada, where the case was  argued at the end of October,  1990. A ruling is expected anytime  within the next six months.  Jewel Voth, the pregnant woman in the 1985 home birth incident, experienced a very painful  and difficult labour. The baby's  head was born alive, but the body  became stuck. Voth was transported to hospital by ambulance,  where her baby was delivered with  forceps, dead.  At issue in Sullivan and  Lemay is the question of when  a baby becomes fully human under the law. At stake is a woman's  right to control her own body.  The midwives' legal path has  been long and twisted. LeMay and  Women protest doctor's  presence at commission  by Nancy Pollak  Women's groups protesting the  activities of a California-based  physician who condones the practice of femicide reacted angrily  to the doctor's appearance at the  Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies in late  November.  Dr. John Stephens of San Jose  requested and received permission to appear at the commission's public hearings in Vancouver. Stephens recently targeted the  Indo-Canadian community in Vancouver in a campaign advertising  an ultra-sound scanning technique  that he claims can determine the  sex of a fetus as early as 12 weeks  into a pregnancy.  The doctor acknowledges that  his test is used to detect "unwanted" female fetuses, which are  then aborted.  Stephen's campaign, which included direct mailings to thousands of Indo-Canadian households and advertisements in newspapers, enraged women of the India Mahila Association and the  South Asian Women's Group,  among others.  And his presence at the Royal  Commission hearings did more  than anger women—it left others  feeling threatened.  Sunera Thobani of the South  Asian Women's Group contacted  the commission in Ottawa to  protest the doctor's planned appearance. "I told them that a number of women who had wanted to  attend the hearings had decided  not to because of Stephens," said  Thobani. "They just felt too intimidated."  Thobani also wanted to know  why an American doctor would  be granted a berth at Canadian  proceedings. (Stephens applied for  a hearing many months past the  deadline.) Denise Cole of the commission's Ottawa office informed  her that anyone, regardless of nationality, could have the commission's ear.  Citing the example of Dr. Henry  Morgentaler, the abortion rights  activist, Cole pointed out that the  commission had already demonstrated a willingness to hear from  controversial doctors.  Anger at Dr. Stephens stems  from two related factors: his apparent indifference to the practice  of femicide, and his publicly stated  opinion that the Indian community is anti-female.  Thobani has led the protest  against Stephens' racism. "He's  claiming that this [anti-female  bias] is part of our cultural tradition," said Thobani. "I want to say  that there is also a tradition of resistance. And the women who are  active around this issue represent  that tradition of resistance."  While the doctor addressed  the hearings, representatives from  over 12 women's and anti-racist  groups protested outside.  Amazingly, Stephens presented  himself as a "pro-life and anti-  abortion" doctor who offers "true  freedom of choice to women." His  patented procedure, he further  claimed, "allows a woman to exercise her right to reproductive options."  Stephens is by no means the  first to co-opt the language of  choice. Many advocates of reproductive technologies—processes which are invasive and controlling of women's bodies—use  choice-talk to legitimize their interests.  See page 9 for more on the  Royal Commission's hearings.  Sullivan were initially charged and  convicted of criminal negligence  causing the death of the child. The  trial judge sentenced them to probation and ordered them to stay  away from women in childbirth.  A BC Appeal court judge, arguing that a fetus is not a person but  a part of its mother, acquitted the  women on the first count and substituted a conviction of criminal  negligence causing bodily harm to  Jewel Voth.  In Supreme Court, Sullivan and  LeMay's lawyer, Thomas Berger,  argued that, legally, a fetus should  occupy an intermediate position.  H a fetus is neither a "person"  under the law nor a part of its  mother, LeMay and Sullivan cannot be convicted of either of the  charges they faced.  LeMay is confident they will  be acquitted."Our lawyers always  told us 'you'll never win in BC, but  if you can get this case out of BC,  you can't lose,' " she said.  LEAF (Women's Legal Education and Action Fund) acted as an  intervenor in the Supreme Court  hearing, arguing against Sullivan  and LeMay's position.  "This case raises important  questions," says Vicky Grey of  West Coast LEAF. "It's a unique  opportunity to consider the relationship of the fetus to the  mother." According to LEAF,  Sullivan and LeMay has the potential to affect women's rights  to equality and self-determination,  especially those relating to child-  bearing capacity.  LEAF believes the case has  been presented in a way that fails  to place the pregnant woman at  the centre of the legal analysis.  In LEAF'S brief, lawyers Lynn  Smith and Mary Eberts state:  "Jewel Voth desired a baby. She  experienced pregnancy, a lengthy,  painful and wasted delivery, and  anguish due to the loss of that expected baby. Yet Jewel Voth has  receded into the background of  this case as legal issues relating  to the characterization of the fetus  are defined and then debated."  Smith and Eberts argue that a  pregnant woman has a unique relationship with her fetus—that the  fetus is "in her and of her," and  harm to the fetus in the process of  giving birth is harm to the woman.  "We hope the court will conclude that the fetus is a part of the  mother," says Grey. LEAF also  argues that a woman's right to  choice of care in childbirth is a sex  equality issue.  Midwives are also watching the  case."We don't expect this case to  have any direct effect on us," says  Linda Knox of the Midwifery Association of BC (MABC). "It will  have an impact on women, though,  and that may affect us."  The association has always  carefully distanced itself from  LeMay and Sullivan because of  their status as lay— unlicensed—  midwives. Members of MABC are  generally trained and licensed in  other countries and adhere to  strict guidelines.  LeMay and Sullivan followed a  more informal approach to training. LeMay became involved in  labour coaching after the birth of  her daughter. She trained initially  as a prenatal instructor and began attending hospital births as  a labour coach. Her home birth  practise evolved in response to repeated requests. In 1983 she met  Mary Sullivan at the birth of a mutual friend and took her on as an  apprentice.  LeMay regrets the lack of  communication with MABC but  disagrees with the association's  guidelines. "The more rules there  are for midwives, the less choices  there are for women," says LeMay.  Home birth options seem to be  closing down in BC, possibly as  a result of Sullivan and LeMay's  conviction.  "Home births are still happening," says MABC's Knox. "The  demand exists, but there are few  practitioners around." Knox says  she is in the process of winding  down her practise. Several other  midwives have quietly withdrawn  from their home birth practises  over the last few years.  "It's a case of burnout," Knox  says, "There's a lack of support-  politically, emotionally.  "When you're a midwife, you're  on call 24 hours a day." Knox believes the current situation, with  no regulations in place, offers no  protection for consumers.  "As qualified practitioners give  up," she says, "unqualified ones  will pick up the slack."  Knox sees a possible avenue for  regulation of midwives under the  recently declared "Health Professions Act" put forward by the BC  government. But the BC Medical  Association—the doctors —stands  squarely in the way of such a development.  "They keep dragging out the  same tired arguments," Knox says,  "about continuity of care, duplication of services."  LeMay advocates for the decriminalization of midwifery and  believes that without lay mid-  wives, women in BC lack alternatives to the medical establishment.  Back in business after her court ordered hiatus, she has no shortage  of customers. She rejects the argument that uninformed women may  turn to lay midwives.  "My last few clients included  a registered nurse, an optometrist  and a dentist. These are not exactly vulnerable people."  LeMay says the trial has changed her practise. "I won't be naive  again," she says. Prospective clients are fully informed about the  trial, and LeMay says she is less inclined to present herself as an expert.  "Nobody can guarantee you a  safe ride," she says.  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. 91 sw^m. I\1E\X/S  ■   Child care program:  City's first step applauded  by Cathy Griffen  Daycare.  It's a word that can evoke fear  in working parents. It's always in  your thoughts because when it collapses, so does your stability and  peace of mind. Fortunately, if you  live in Vancouver, the new Civic  Child Care Strategy may benefit  you and your children.  On October 23rd, 1990, Vancouver city council unanimously  adopted the Civic Child Care  Strategy prepared and presented  by the Children's Advocate, Rita  Chudnovsky.  Chudnovsky's report, 18 months  in the making, addresses the critical shortage of affordable, accessible, quality licensed child care in  Vancouver.  Highlights of the strategy include:  • spending about one million dollars in operating and start-up  costs for daycares. $300,000 will  be allocated to non-profit daycares to help stabilize and enhance existing programs without raising, parent's fees;  $650,000 will go to buy portables for daycare facilities as well  as assembling land for these  sites  • providing operational funding  to high need areas, such as inner  city pre-school projects; services  for infant toddlers and emergency shift work situations; and  salary enhancement grants  • appointment of a committee  made up of councillors and community members to press the  provincial government to amend  its GAIN (welfare) program  guidelines to give single mothers  a choice regarding employment  and work outside the home  • appointment of a child care coordinator for ongoing administration of the city's childcare  policies and programs  • encouraging developers to build  and equip daycare facilities as a  condition of rezoning.  Vancouver, like other urban  centres across Canada, is desperate for a comprehensive child care  program.  In this city alone, there are approximately 52,000 children under  the age of 12, yet there are only  3,800 hcensed group and family  daycare spaces. The federal Conservatives have withdrawn support  for a national child care program,  Dictionary chokes  Choice of wrong word or no word  by Carol Lamarche  An illustrated dictionary for  children widely circulated in school  libraries includes anatomical drawings of a naked man and a naked  woman in which the women's genitals are labelled "sex."  The man's penis is labelled—a  penis.  Stoddart's Junior Visual Dictionary, published in 1989, also  correctly describes heads, legs,  necks and the hke—but evidently  choked on the words vagina or  vulva.  According to Don Bastian, an  editor at Stoddart's in Toronto,  the Junior Visual Dictionary  was developed and edited by  another company and Stoddart  merely owns the Canadian rights.  Bastian said the "sex" reference  was a mistake and employees at  Stoddart "don't know how [the label] got there."  The book was originally published in a French edition in which  the woman's vulva was labelled  "la sexe." Stoddart sales manager  Rick Walker beheves the Enghsh  version simply foUowed the original edition's terminology.  Trisha Joel of the Vancouver  Status of Women described the  book's drawing as "either a sexist  joke that should never have gotten  past the editorial staff, or a reflection of how sexist the Enghsh language is—or both."  Said Joel: "There are so few  words in common usage to describe women's genitals that are  specific and respectful. This reflects the discomfort society feels  about women's bodies and sexuahty. Girls can grow up not even  knowing they have vaginas, let  alone that there is a word for that  part of our bodies."  Stoddaart has responded to the  outcry with a revised edition.  Now, the woman's genitals are  unidentified.  The book also depicts Caucasian people only. An unidentified editorial assistant at Stoddart's said that racial representation was a "question of detail" and  that there are "[publishing houses]  that specialize in those issues."  Currently there are 110 copies  of the Junior Visual Dictionary  in Vancouver schools, with one  or more copies in every elementary school. Several teacher librarians in the Vancouver School District have complained to the school  board about the book.  The dictionaries have been in  the schools for more than a year  and a half.  The manager of the Processing Centre for Vancouver schools,  Penny Haggarty, said some librarians have withdrawn the books and  others have relabelled the illustration, yet many copies remain unaltered on the shelves.  Liz Austrom, the District Principle for Curriculum and Resources for the Vancouver School  Board, said that "not all books  can do everything for everyone."  According to Austrom, the book  was originally ordered by a teacher  working with children with learning disorders because it provides  clearly labeUed Ulustrations which  are useful aids in encouraging vocabulary development.  PhylUs Westhora is the Coordinator of the Status of Women  Program of the British Columbia  Teachers Federation (BCTF). She  said that a book Uke the Junior  Visual Dictionary would not  be removed from the shelves for  what might be considered a "small  infraction" because of money—  economy plays a significant role in  dictating what materials wiU be  avaUable in the schools, a view  echoed by Austrom.  Westhora said that taking action to have a book evaluated depends on individual teachers or librarians (or parents), whose sensitivities detect the problem and  whose persistence brings it to the  attention of a committee such as  the BCTF's Status of Women.  Elaine Decker, spokesperson for  the BCTF said that: "In 1990,  when we are grapphng with the  Montreal massacre, Uttle girls are  stiU being told their bodies are a  joke."  and parents scramble to use whatever meager facUities are avaUable.  The City of Vancouver's response to this crisis is a first step  in the right direction, say community organizations.  Penny Coates, president of the  Canadian Daycare Advocacy Association, calls the report terrific.  "It addresses aU the major  problems and concerns," says  Coates, "although only time wUl  tell if Vancouver city council is serious about implementing the policy." She has been appointed to  the committee which wUl lobby  for the province to amend its  welfare pohcy which labels single mothers with chUdren over 6  months"employable."  Jean Swanson of End Legislated  Poverty was also appointed to the  committee. She was surprised the  report passed unanimously and is  generaUy satisfied with the pohcy.  The timing of the proposal—  it went to city hall a few  weeks before the November municipal election—may account for its  unanimous passage.  "The NPA had no choice but  to vote for the pohcy," says Libby  Davies, re-elected COPE councillor. "It was too close to the election for them to do much else."  NPA mayor Gordon CampbeU,  also re-elected, was unavailable for  comment but a spokesperson from  his office described the daycare issue as "close to his heart." Says  Muriel Honey:"Mayor CampbeU  hopes council wUl continue to support the pohcy."  Davies and the other COPE  counciUors, who gained two seats  in the election, are serious about  ensuring a financial committment  to daycare services in Vancouver.  "This pohcy is a first step in a  series of steps," says Davies, "and  we should applaud the city's progressive stance."  She warns, however, that long-  term success depends on the federal and provincial governments  committing themselves to cost-  sharing arrangements, since the  city cannot bear the expense  alone.  For Davies, the city's chUd care  strategy is only one facet of the  larger problem facing women—the  problem of pay equity. While there  is money in the strategy to enhance salaries, the appallingly low  pay of cluld care workers must be  systemically addressed.  It is the usual dichotomy. "We  value our chUdren," says Davies,  "but not the women and men who  care for them. Caregivers are in  stressful and demanding jobs, with  an alarming rate of turnover.  "High wages and good benefits  must be avaUable to these individuals to ensure quality chUd care."  KINESIS ' ^^^^^^^^^^^^^  The NDP in ONT:  To govern in a new way?  by Susan O'Donnell  When the Ontario New Democratic  Party swept into office in September, many  feminist activists happUy claimed victory—  of the three major parties, the NDP has  long been considered champion of women's  rights. However, feminist deUght turned to  apprehension when the province's supposed  $20 miUion budget surplus turned out to be  a $2.2 bilUon deficit.  Clearly, finding the money necessary for  reform is not going to be an easy task.  Despite the daunting financial situation,  the signs are positive for women in Ontario.  For starters, many of the NDP poUticians  now trying to juggle the government budget  are women, a reflection of their party's efforts to bring more women to Queen's Park.  During the election campaign, the NDP  offered their women candidates extra campaign workers, a women's support, group  and a telephone hothne. The strategy  helped elect 19 NDP women, 11 of whom  were then appointed to cabinet; women  make up 50 percent of important cabinet  committees.  Before the budget deficit was revealed,  the NDP made campaign promises on key  women's issues, including proposals to extend pay equity to all women, provide  more subsidized daycare, raise the minimum wage, and stop collecting income tax  from people below the poverty Une.  As the honeymoon period accorded a new  government ends and the province enters  what wUl hkely be a long, cold winter—  complete with recession—the women who  elected the NDP government wUl be expecting action.  Two pressing feminist issues are support  for abused women and abortion rights, and  the three cabinet members who wUl be dealing directly with these two issues—Anne  Swarbrick, Evelyn Gigantes and Zanana  Akande—have a firm commitment to feminism.  Anne Swarbrick, minister responsible for  women's issues, has a strong labour background. She was the founding organizer  of an advocacy centre for working immigrant women and an executive assistant at  the Labour CouncU of Toronto, where she  lobbied for pay equity, employment equity  and choice in reproductive issues. Swarbrick  served on the board of directors of a shelter  for battered women and an affordable housing group. Swarbrick has said the women in  the party will avoid "the sandbox mentality" of Question Period and try and respond  to issues in a more cohesive and responsible  way.  Health minister Evelyn Gigantes has  been a solid supporter of feminist issues for  many years. First elected provinciaUy for an  Ottawa riding in 1975, she has served as the  NDP critic for several portfolios. Gigantes  successfuUy introduced legislation to amend  Ontario's human rights code to include protection from discrimination because of sexual orientation.  Zanana Akande, community and social  services minister, is no stranger to feminist  activism. Co-founder of Tiger Lily, a magazine for visible minority women, she also  worked with a shelter for abused women.  Akande has been involved with the National Black Women's Congress, the Elizabeth Fry Society, and the Federation of  Women Teachers' Association.   Soon after her cabinet appointment,  Akande spoke puhhcly of the change that  the women will make. "We're not comfortable in being part of a government that governs [the old way]," Akande said. "I think  sometimes we make the men rather frustrated in that we're reluctant to move in  a piecemeal way. Women have a style that  says it all has to be integrated. And we're  insisting that it be done."  Akande and her staff in community and  social services wiU be feeUng some heat this  winter from activists working to improve  the condition of abused women. PubUc and  domestic violence threatens women across  the country and the problem is particularly  acute in Ontario, where the rapidly growing  population of Toronto has severely strained  the city's capabihties to offer support and  solutions to the many women seeking escape  from violence in their homes.  The System is Strained  A woman arriving on the doorstep of a  Zanana Akande  women's shelter in Ontario stands a 50 percent chance of being turned away because of  lack of space. Shelter workers' salaries continue to be low—as do staffing levels.  In an eight-month period monitored  by the Ontario Association of Interval  and Transition Houses (OAITH), Metro  Toronto Pohce investigated less than 10 percent of the 31,000 cases of 'domestic disputes' reported. The most common sentences for wife battering are absolute or conditional discharges, and many violent men  may have their charges dropped altogether  in a criminal justice system straining under  a 14-month backlog of cases.  Abused women have nowhere to go—  affordable housing is almost impossible to  find in Toronto. In 1987, the Liberal government pledged to create 1,000 new units and  modify 2,500 units for women escaping vio  lent homes. More than two years later, not  a single unit had been bruit or modified.  According to OAITH, the needs of  abused disabled women and women from  diverse cultural backgrounds continue to  be inadequately addressed by government  housing programs.  Ontario's family court justice system has  faUed single mothers —90,000 children are  affected by non-payment of court-ordered  support payments, and as many as 80 percent of women who were abused whUe Uving with their mates continue to be abused  or threatened with assault after separation,  usuaUy during court-ordered access visits.  OAITH is hoping the NDP wUl respond  to the issue of domestic violence more positively as a government than it did as an  opposition party. In a progress report issued at the time of the election, OAITH  stated that the NDP "needs improvement  in their attitudes and commitment to battered women."  Anne Swarbick,  Evelyn Gigantes  and  Zanana Akande  have a firm  commitment  to feminism  As late as June of this year, the NDP  had no official party platform on the issue of  domestic violence against women, and during the eight-month period monitored by  OAITH, the NDP raised the issue in the legislature only nine times, fewer than the Progressive Conservatives, also in opposition.  By comparison, the NDP raised the issue of  auto insurance 55 times.  Anne Swarbrick, in one of her first pubUc statements as women's minister, announced the NDP's commitment to permanently finance a wife assault program. The  widespread campaign against domestic violence wiU focus on public education, poUce  enforcement and support services for victims and perpetrators, but offers no additional funds to the $43.2 miUion set aside  by the previous Liberal government.  At their November 19 Queen's Park  lobby on domestic violence, OAITH asked  the ministry of community and social ser  vices to reevaluate their funding formula  for shelters and services, and commit more  money to the program. However, it is not  yet clear if Akande will be able to loosen  her ministry's purse strings enough to begin meaningful reform.  Abortion rights promises to be another  hot topic in Ontario this winter. (Passed by  the House of Commons and awaiting approval by the Senate as Kinesis goes to  press, BUl C-43 makes women who have  abortions and doctors who perform them U-  able for criminal prosecution.)  "The NDP government has given some  signs that it's not Uke the [previous governments], and we're very hopeful" of Ontario  government intervention into the federal  legislation, Jane Holmes of the Canadian  Abortion Rights Action League (CARAL)  told Kinesis. She explained that the NDP  has commissioned a study to investigate access to abortion by adolescents, is actively  consulting with pro-choice groups, and is  looking at challenging C-43 under the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.  Very Much a Pollyanna  Within weeks of being named to the cabinet, Anne Swarbrick and Evelyn Gigantes  met with federal justice minister Kim  CampbeU to explain Ontario's opposition to  the bill. After the meeting, during which  CampbeU insisted that C-43 would not  Umit access to abortions, Swarbrick told reporters she beheved CampbeU was "being  very much a PoUyanna in terms of how she's  looking at the reaUty of the impact of that  bUl on the streets."  Actively lobbying against C-43 in the federal arena is one sign pro-choice activists  are looking for. Another is a strong statement from the province's attorney-general  Howard Hampton that the biU would be  unenforceable. Soon after his appointment,  Hampton said it would not be proper to say  in advance that his government could not  administer the law, but a cabinet committee  is now studying the possibihty. CARAL's  Holmes, noting that the Quebec government declared the abortion law unenforceable in 1976, said she expects the Ontario  cabinet "to use their imaginations, be creative, and come up with an effective statement." At press time, the women of Ontario  are stiU awaiting that statement.  In mid-November, the NDP announced  its intention to extend the province's health  insurance funding to free-standing abortion chnics and to provide travel money to  women in rural areas who must go to cities  for abortions. The province also plans to instruct pohce to get tougher with protesters  who harass women outside abortion clinics.  Response to the government's abortion  plans were lukewarm. Cherie MacDonald of  the Ontario Coalition for Abortion Chnics  told The Globe and Mail: "The funding  of the clinics probably would have come  through even with a Liberal government."  MacDonald stressed the importance of the  NDP declaring C-43 unenforceable.  Clearly, Akande, Gigantes, Swarbrick  and their cabinet colleagues wUl be working overtime in the long months ahead—but  wiU they be able to fulfill the high expectations of the many Ontario feminists hoping for substantial social change from the  province's first NDP government?  Susan O 'Donnell is a writer living in  Toronto.  KINESIS Across Canada  XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX\XXXXXXXXXXXXXX\X\\X\X\X\XX\X\\\\\\XX\XXXXX\\\X\\XXXXX^^  ^NX^XX^XX^XX^^^^  NJ?XXXS^XXXSS^^NXXX^^^>^^^  WHAT" S NEWS?  by Linda Choquette  Longer leave  for parents  in Quebec  Quebec parents could get up to 34 weeks  parental leave if legislation introduced mid-  November becomes law. The bUl is part of  the Quebec government's continuing effort  to increase the birth rate in that province.  The 34-week leave would be unpaid and  could be taken by either parent to care for  a newborn or newly adopted chUd.  Presently, women in Quebec are eUgi-  ble for 18 weeks unpaid maternity leave.  Amendments to Quebec's Labour Standards Act, also introduced mid-November,  extend eUgibiUty to all pregnant women regardless of the number of weeks worked.  H the proposed legislation becomes law,  a woman choosing to take the 34 weeks  parental leave immediately after her maternity leave would have a full year to spend  with her cluld whUe her job is held. FuU-  time or part-time workers could claim the  benefit.  "This is only the first step toward paid  parental leave," said Violette Trepanier,  Quebec's minister responsible for the status of women and for the family. After this  bUl is adopted, she said, the next challenge  facing the government wUl be finding an efficient way to provide paid parental leave.  "We want to make it easier for parents to  reconcile their professional and family obligations," said Trepanier.  The federal Unemployment Insurance  Act provides 15 weeks unemployment insurance benefits to women only. Amendments  to the act, effective Nov. 18, 1990 provide  10 weeks unpaid parental leave for men or  women, subject to the approval of employ-  Women pleased  to win Supreme  Court appeal  The Supreme Court of Canada agreed in  November to hear the case of a WiUiams  Lake woman who was denied the right to sue  her doctor for negligence and sexual assault.  Laura Norberg's claim was earlier denied by  the BC Supreme Court on the grounds that  she had no right to sue because her own conduct was "Ulegal and immoral."  Norberg, addicted at the time to a barbiturate compound called Fiorinal, had sex  with the doctor in exchange for drug prescriptions. Denied the right to sue in March  1988, Norberg appealed. Two years later the  BC Court of Appeal upheld the lower court  judgment, citing a legal principle, ex turpi  causa, which states that persons involved  in Ulegal or immoral acts cannot have legal redress against each other for the consequence of their actions.  Norberg had argued that the doctor had  exploited her addiction and had therefore  not consented to have sex with him. Pleased  with the court's decision, Norberg said, "I  felt in the beginning that because I am a nobody, just this Uttle person ... that people  wouldn't Usten, people wouldn't care." According to Norberg's lawyer J.J. Camp, it  is unusual for the Supreme Court to agree  to hear appeals of civil cases. The court apparently wants to deal with "the issues of  whether a female can give a viable consent  to a medical practitioner where he is trading drugs for sexual favours, " said Camp.  Norberg is supported in her appeal by the  Women's Legal Education and Action Fund  who wUl intervene when the case is heard.  Tackling the  male model of  scientific research  Sexist attitudes in science and medical  research discriminate against and downgrade work by and about women, said the  president-elect of the Canadian Psychological Association.  Speaking at a Toronto symposium on  gender, science and medicine in November,  Cannie Stark-Adamec said the "old guard"  of male academics who control institutions  and determine project funding are responsible for the sexism. "There has been only  one model for scientific research. That has  been a male model," said Stark-Adamec.  Women and issues relevant to women are  not considered appropriate research fields  by the men who control funding, Stark-  Adamec told conference delegates. Women  often have to finance research out of their  own pockets. Then, because their work often "rocks the boat, makes waves and offends reviewers," the research is rejected by  traditional, mainstream academic journals.  PubUshing in these journals is requisite to  secure tenure or to qualify for positions on  the boards which rule on research funding.  "For women, therefore, it becomes a vicious circle if they want to change things  from within," said Stark-Adamec.  Another speaker, Ursula Franklin, professor emeritus of engineering at the University of Toronto, said that women branded  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you - proofreading  Kinesis.  Please call  as feminists or troublemakers are denied  academic recognition and tenure. "Gender  bias is aUve and weU in the dean's office,"  said Franldin. "As women get more sophisticated, the opposition gets more sophisticated."  Dioxins furans  on the rise in  breast milk  Furans and dioxins found in breast milk  are 16.5 times higher than acceptable government standards for ingesting toxic chemicals, a federal study has found.  Officials said that the joint health and  environment department study—released in  November—revealed toxins in several other  foods, but that the average daily intake of  dioxins and furans over a Ufe time remains  weU below what Ottawa considers a threatening level.  An official conceded that breast-fed infants consume the chemicals at levels exceeding government standards but said it  occurs over a short period of time.  The medical director of the Vancouver  Breast Feeding Centre, Dr. Verity Livingstone, said she finds the whole thing scary.  "It should alert us that we are probably using more [dioxins and furans] than we ought  and at some stage in the future it should  alert us that future buUdup could be dangerous," said Livingstone.  However, people must remember the benefits of breast feeding, she said, and not drop  the practice. "We should try reducing the  use of dioxins."  According to health department spokesperson Bev Hous ton, much of the food on  the marketplace would have to be removed  if the current federal regulation on dioxin in  food were appUed. "The health department  is considering whether to introduce a new  dioxin standard to get around this problem."  Greenpeace activist Stan Gray said Ottawa is preparing tolegaUze dioxin poUution  in food rather than eUminate the sources.  Gray has been researching dioxins for the  past year and accuses federal officials of  concealing the risks. "They've dehberately  ignored and tried to explain away powerful evidence—that they themselves have  produced—of extremely high toxic doses,  rather than act to reduce it."  JOURNALS, ECOFEMINISM  FEATURES:  LANGUAGE IN HER EYE  PB $18.95  A WOMAN'S BOOK  OF RITUAL:  CASTING THE CIRCLE  BY DIANE STEIN  PBS16.95  The facts on how  little formal  power we have...  Women are vastly under-represented in  formal pohtics at aU levels, particularly in  the House of Commons. Compared with  1984, only 12 more women took seats in the  1988 federal election. At that rate gender  parity won't be achieved for 45 years, says  a new study commissioned by the Canadian  Advisory CouncU on the Status of Women  (CACSW).  Primed for Power: Women in Canadian Politics, written by Chantal MaUle,  traces the development of women's representation in Canadian poUtical institutions. Although poUtical parties are nominating an increasing number of women, men  have a much better chance of being elected.  CACSW president Glenda Simms said that  men are tied into financial and poUtical networks, and are overwhelmingly selected for  the courts, the Senate and as managers in  the civU service.  As of January 1, 1990, only 40 of the 295  seats in the House of Commons were held by  women. Of 625 full time positions with various federal boards, agencies, commissions  and Crown Corporations, women fiUed 181  jobs. Of 850 federally appointed judges, only  73 are women.  The paper suggests a series of initiatives  to increase the number of women in elected  and nominated positions of power. Among  them are the suggestions that poUtical parties should adopt numerical targets for female candidates, and that the government  should establish a fund for female (or male)  candidates who wish to run for election but  can't afford it.  Shabby treatment  for women  seeking abortions  In Nova Scotia hospitals, getting an abortion is often a painful, humiliating, frustrating and even dangerous experience according to 25 women who gave complaints to the  Canadian Abortion Rights Action League  (CARAL).  A recently released study done for the  Hahfax chapter of CARAL hsted complaints ranging from family doctors who refused to refer them for abortions, to mental  and physical pain caused by the operation.  The study contrasts praise by four women  who received services at the Morgentaler  chnics in Montreal and Toronto with descriptions of Nova Scotia hospital experiences.  Several women said they received Uttle  counselhng in the hospitals and were treated  roughly by doctors and nurses. "There was  no nurturing or caring or anything," said  one  The Halifax abortion cUnic established  by Dr. Henry Morgentaler re-opened in  November after an 11-month closure. The  chnic was closed whUe Morgentaler and pro-  choice activists successfuUy fought legislation the province introduced to make aU  but hospital abortions Ulegal. The law was  struck down by a provincial court judge last  October and the Supreme Court of Canada  has refused to review the decision. Morgentaler has also run into opposition in St.  John's, Newfoundland, the site of his newest  chnic.  KINESIS [ NEWS  x^^^^^^^^^^^^  Madelaine Parent:  A voice  from Quebec  as told to Ellen Woodsworth  At 72, Madelaine Parent—feminist, trade  unionist and peace advocate —continues to  play a key role in shaping the history of contemporary Quebec. She became an activist  in the late 30s whUe a student at McGiU  University. There, she campaigned for scholarships for poor people. During the war Parent organized in the textUe and manufacturing industries and was arrested on several occasions for her activities. In the 50s,  she co-founded the Canadian TextUe Workers Union and in 1969 she helped establish a  Canadian union central, the Confederation  of Canadian Unions.  Parent is no stranger to feminism. In  1972, she attended the founding meeting  of the National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC). Today, she is  Quebec's regional representative to NAC.  Although she retired from her union position at the age of 65, Parent remains an active member of the coordinating committee  of the Solidarite populaire Quebec, a coaUtion of union, church, women's and community groups.  Madelaine Parent visited Vancouver in  October. The foUowing is excerpted from  her speech and an interview with Ellen  Woodsworth.  Ellen Woodsworth: Who were the significant people who shaped your life ?  Madelaine: I was born in the East End  of Montreal in 1918.1 had a widowed grandmother who spent a lot of time with me.  Her husband had been a nationalist and an  active spectator, to say the least, in the  demonstrations and protests of the time.  She was an influence on me because she told  me those stories with so much vividness and  drama—as though she hved them again.  For example, [she described] the very  great protest and mourning at the hanging  of Louis Riel and the defeat of the Metis  and Indians who were fighting for provincial status in Manitoba and Saskatchewan.  She also had a critical eye for the right-wing  of the CathoUc Church. Although she was a  behever herself, she made a distinction between those priests who stood with the people on issues and those who stood with the  government against the people.  I was also inspired by Dolores Ibarruri  for her role in the Spanish civU war, and by  Idola St. Jean and Therese Casgrain in their  fight for Quebecoise women's right to vote,  and for equahty and rights for working class  women. And I was especiaUy inspired by Simone de Beauvoir.  The first women's strike of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union were  in 1937. Lea Roback was a key organizer  there. She taught me many things and by  the end of my years at McGiU, I knew that  I wanted to be a union organizer. I had  to keep it a big dark secret because everyone would have thought that I was crazy.  But I confided in Lea and she said, "why of  course." That was very encouraging to me.  In the spring of 1942, the American Federation of Labour unions launched a campaign to organize workers in the war industries which employed a large number of  women. I was an office secretary—the only  job they would let me have at the time—but  it gave me time to be at the factory gates in  the mornings as long as I was at my desk at  9 am. After work I was free to attend union  meetings to help organize and visit workers  in their homes, and to work on pamphlet  composition and translation.  I came in touch with some magnificent  women in these industries who just took  hold of the unions. In 1943 we organized  the cotton miU workers in Montreal, choosing a miU that had had strikes since the  1890s when women had organized for pay  increases for themselves and chUdren. We  stiU had chUd labour in the 1940s.  These strikes were very successful, although Parent and others were arrested:  she was charged with sedition for her  role in the massive strike at the Valley-  field mill. Parent continued to organize  in Montreal but was forced to move to  Toronto in 1967 because of the pressure  from the the right-wing. She now resides  in Montreal.  Madelaine: When I was a young girl and  later as a young organizer, the predominant  myth was that a woman's place was in the  home looking after husband, chUdren, the  sick and the elderly—even though in actual  fact a lot of women were out working in cotton miUs, woolen mills, tobacco plants, in  the food industries, as domestics, in department stores and offices.  Every time women in the cotton miUs  would complain about their conditions and  Madelaine Parent  unpaid maternity or paternity leave with  maintenance of benefits.  Also at this time, community health chnics were being set up ah over Quebec. Doctors were able to perform abortions in them,  ignoring the federal law. The first one was  in the headquarters of the National Trade  Unions.  There are over 1,500 women's groups  in Quebec today. In the movement itself,  I would be glad if there was more cohesion and support. You have one group that  is very good and that is the network of  women's centres. We have about 80 centres aU over Quebec and they are very  grassroots—85 percent of the women who  use them are housewives. However, the cen-  The women's movement helped organize over  two dozen demonstrations in support of  the Mohawks, but the mass media  didn't tell you about that  begin to organize, the reaction was:" Your  place is in the home," although the employers were very happy to exploit them.  Ellen: What is the situation of the  women's movement today?  Madelaine: In the 1960s, the Federation des femmes de Quebec was the main  women's organization. It concentrated on  women's rights and for choice on abortion  and was mainly a young women's organization. This was a time of rebeUion against the  controls of the church. Many of the movements to organize the nurses, teachers, government workers, and other hospital workers were drives to organize women.  A lot of the nationalist movement which  brought the Parti Quebecois (PQ) to power  in 1976 [came from] the support of pubhc sector workers where women were very  active and strong. When the PQ turned  against the pubUc sector during the recession of 1982, they lost their volunteers and  lost the next election. It was as simple as  that.  In the public sector negotiations in 1979,  workers won 20 weeks of maternity leave at  93 percent of their pay whUe stiU accumulating seniority, pensions, health benefits,  and paid vacations—as weU as two years  tres were hurt very badly by the Secretary  of State cutbacks [in February, 1990] and  are fighting to survive.  The women's movement in Quebec's  trade unions is greater than anywhere else  on the North American continent and represent hundreds of thousands of women.  There is also a strong women farmers union  which supported the Mohawks and also the  rights of immigrant women in recent demonstrations.  There are women organized in the pro-  choice movement, the welfare movement,  the lesbian movement and others. Violence  against women and chUdren is a very important issue right now and includes the struggle against chUd sexual abuse. This movement has been fighting the right-wing dominated court system, the CathoUc School  Board and the Quebec Education Department.  Minority, immigrant and women of colour  have had to stand up within the women's  movement—which hasn't been easy because  of ehtist tendencies. For example, last AprU  there was a celebration of 50 years of [non-  Native] women's vote. The honorary godmother of the event was Lise Payette who  had made a film that promoted fear and dis  trust of minorities—as though they were the  ones who threaten Quebec. So there was a  protest and a boycott of the ceremonies.  The Quebec Native Women's Association  is weU-rooted in aU of the reserves, and  Montreal runs a transition house. During  the Mohawk crisis [in the summer of 1  their one goal was to get money and food  and medicine through the pohce and army  hnes. The National Action Committee on  the Status of Women (NAC) offered them  help as did some other women's groups.  However, some elements in the women's  movement were reluctant to [get involved]-  they were cooled off by Bourassa's portrayal  of the struggle as the work of Warriors and  that Native people were being used by the  Warriors.  But it was Bourassa's violent military attack on the Mohawks that made the Warriors indispensible. And he was so violent  because he didn't want Native people to  gain any more power [and] block his plans to  buUd the James Bay II hydro electric plant  on Native lands.  The women's movement helped organize  over two dozen demonstrations in support  of the Mohawks, but the mass media didn't  teU you about them. You must remember that when you think of the people of  Quebec, make sure you don't confuse us  with Bourassa and Parizeau [leader of the  PQ]-  Ellen: Who are the key players in the  movement for Quebec independence ?  Madelaine: The Parti Quebecois is  now led by bourgeois nationalists. Lucien  Bouchard's group [Bloc Quebecois] is conservative and hasn't even criticized Mulroney. The commission Bourassa set up [after the failure of the Meech Lake Accord]  is chaired by two big bankers and has representatives from the Liberals, the PQ, the  Equahty Party, four union representatives,  one representative of culture—but no representatives from Native, women's, immigrant  and visible minority groups.  Then there are the progressive movements for self-determination that consist of  the women's movement, churches, unions,  Native groups etc. which want a Quebec  that has strong social programs and social  justice as part of a new society.  Ellen Woodsworth is a long time  political activist, a characteristic she  shares with her 77-year-old mother  KINESISd At UBC  Dealing with harassment  by Agnes Huang and Heidi Walsh  Some women won't acknowledge the  problem. Some drop courses because of it.  The issue is sexual harassment on campus.  In hght of the recent Vanier Park  incident—when male students sent violently  sexist handwritten notes to women's dorm  rooms—we went to the University of British  Columbia to find out more about its formal  structures for dealing with harassment complaints and to determine how effective they  are.  In 1988, UBC introduced definitions of  sexual harassment and set up guidelines  for handUng sexual harassment complaints.  The university was forced to formalize its  approach to harassment for several reasons,  including many years of agitation by women  students and the Supreme Court decision in  the late 1980s which made sexual harassment the responsibility of the employer and  deemed it a form of sex discrimination.  The Sexual Harassment Office was estab-  Ushed in AprU, 1989. Margaretha Hoek, who  counselled women at the post-secondary  level for 15 years, and Dr. Jon Shapiro, professor of education, were hired as advisors.  The office's mandate is twofold: to receive inquiries and complaints from those  who have been sexuaUy harassed and, on a  wider scope, to educate the campus population about harassment.  The office received 60 inquiries in its first  year, but since September 1990 has already  dealt with over forty. The proportion of incidents of harassment which are reported is  not known—hke rape, sexual harassment is  frequently experienced and infrequently reported. The majority of those who visit the  office are female students. Female staff and  faculty members and a few men have also  made inquiries.  "Ninety-five percent come in just to talk  about the incident," says Hoek. "We do  some problem-solving with them and give  them a lot of support. They usually want to  find some informal way of making [the harassment] stop."  The university has a four-step procedure  for handUng harassment complaints which  is only activated when the harassed woman  makes a formal, written complaint. In the  first step, the advisors take the complaint  to the alleged harasser (respondent) and invite a written response. Copies of aU written materials are given to the respondent's  dean and kept on permanent record.  The harassed woman decides how far  the complaint process goes. If she wants  to pursue the matter further, she may ask  for a mediated discussion with the accused  and/or for an investigation. If the investigation confirms the harassment, the case can  be given a formal hearing by a three-person  committee. The committee can recommend  disciplinary actions which may include anything from verbal admonishments to recommendations for expulsion or firing.  Only five percent of the women who come  to the office make a formal complaint—the  majority have been sexuaUy assaulted. To  date, no complaint has reached the formal  hearing stage, although a few are now being  set up for investigation.  Letting Off Steam  The overwhelming majority who visit the  office simply want to let off steam. They  most commonly report sexist remarks or  threats of extortion made by professors or  peers. Graduate students working under  close faculty supervision are especially vulnerable to threats, as are students from  Third World countries who fear losing their  visas.  "The tendency is that [the complainants]  don't wish to pursue [the incident] other  than with informal mechanisms. They  would rather do that and then drop [the  matter], or choose to leave a class," says  Shapiro. Some students even drop out of  their programs entirely.  The advisors are recommending more  flexibility in the pohcy to aUow them to initiate conversations with aUeged harassers  without a formal complaint being made.  "The changes that we're trying to make is to  recognize that sometimes the power problems are so bad that [the formal complaint  requirement] doesn't work weU enough,"  says Hoek. "As the university, we have to  take on more and not leave it to the woman  Affirmative action  for McGill students  by Allana Murray  By early 1991, the Student Society of McGiU University (SSMU) may be the first of  its kind in Canada to include an affirmative action clause in its constitution. In November 1990, Student CouncU passed a by-law amendment put forward by the McGiU Affirmative Action Coalition. Clause 7.03 previously stated that: "the membership of each accredited Activity, Club and Functional Group of the Society must be open to all members of the Society"(emphasis added). The by-law now goes on to say: "does not preclude  a distinction, exclusion or preference in membership or officers by a group, club or activity  at McGiU devoted exclusively to the weU-being of a group disadvantaged because of race,  national or ethnic origin, colour, rehgion, sex, age, mental or physical disabihty, sexual orientation, or social class."  The amendment is the result of efforts by two student groups, the McGiU Women's  Union and the Walk-Safe Network. Their constitutions have remained unratified because  the Women's Union reserved the right to restrict its membership to women only, and the  Walk-Safe Network required its executive to be a majority of women. Without SSMU  recognition, groups on campus are unable to receive funding. Rather than alter their constitutions, the two groups formed the Affirmative Action Coalition with other progressive  student groups in order to influence the SSMU to amend its own constitution.  According to Coalition member Monica Brennan, the by-law change is only the first step  in a longer process to make the improvement of "conditions of disadvantaged groups an  integral part of Student Society's constitution and aims." In order to assure a permanent  place for affirmative action within the SSMU constitution, a motion is being prepared for  CouncU to sponsor a referendum on the issue which would take place in the spring.  herself." The Board of Governors wUl review the recommendations in December.  "A lot of women won't come forward  because of concerns of confidentiahty, "  says Linda Shout, coordinator of UBC's  Women's Centre. "As weU, many won't recognize what has happened to them as sexual harassment."  The term 'harassment' itself is problematic: rarely is it seen as referring to a legit-  their educational programs. They frequently talk to faculty groups on sexual  harassment, but are having a harder time  reaching the student body.  To increase their visibUity, they hold  workshops and information sessions for students. They have spoken at student residences, and have held group discussions  with students involved in the Vanier Park  incident. This year, the advisors were invited to give two lectures to first year en-  imate and serious offence. Many feel an act  of harassment only occurs when a conscious  intent to harass exists. This attitude was U-  lustrated in the Vanier Park incident when  many female and male residents dismissed  the offensive invitations as harmless pranks.  A major weakness of the UBC pohcy is  that it has no mechanism for confronting  systemic sexism. While the pohcy deals with  conduct and comments of a sexual nature,  it does not address the underlying issue of  gender discrimination. SUencing women students, by disregarding their contributions in  class and devaluing their achievements, are  overlooked, although they are more subtle  forms of sexual harassment.  Ellen Pond, a student affiliated with the  Women's Centre, says the poUcy is also  powerless to deal with harassment cases  in which the perpetrator is unknown. The  abundant misogynist graffiti on campus, for  example, remains outside the pohcy's scope.  Hoek and Shapiro hope to help change  the perceptions of sexual harassment through  gineering students on gender discrimination  and sexual harassment.  Linda Shout beheves the administration  could do much more to create a less violent  and discriminatory atmosphere on campus.  Reducing the male bias in the curriculum  and increasing female appointments to faculty and the administration are important  first steps.  They are also steps that go to the very  core of the university's power structures—  structures that are distinctly patriarchal.  In the university environment, where  problems are often intellectuaUzed and then  rationalized, how can more men be made  to understand the seriousness of sexual harassment, and more women encouraged to  complain and resist? UntU these questions  are resolved, no formal structure or pohcy  alone can ever hope to effectively deal with  the issue.  Agnes Huang aspires to be on the  CSIS Most Wanted List. Heidi Walsh  is a freelance writer in Vancouver.  Don't  be shy  At Kinesis, we know that  writing is a brave act,  especially if you've never been  published before. We offer  support and advice to women  who want to write — reviews,  interviews, features, news  Come to our Writers Meeting  (see Bulletin Board for  details) or call 255-5499.  KINESIS ^c/ MEWS  ^^^^^^^%^^^^^  Reproductive technologies:  Our voices must be heeded  by Bonnie Waterstone  On November 26, the Vancouver Status of Women presented the following  brief to the Royal Commission on New  Reproductive Technologies.  The Vancouver Status of Women has responded to the invitation of the Royal Commission of New Reproductive Technologies  because we beheve that, under present circumstances, the development and use of  new reproductive technologies (NRTs) does  not support women's equality.  NRTs have serious negative impUcations  for women, including a misplaced focus on  technological rather than social solutions,  the use of women as experimental subjects,  increased exploitation of poor women and  women of colour, and the threat that women  wiU lose what httle control they now have  over their bodies.  NRTs are often presented as increasing  women's choices with regard to reproduction, whUe in fact they limit women's control over their own bodies. Control is given  over to the experts: medical and legal practitioners who understand the complexities  of the new technologies.  What is being presented as choice is  really only a set of consumer options, a  Western version of freedom—the freedom  to consume more. The foundations of authentic choice are dignity, integrity and self-  determination. To discuss choice outside  this context is to distort and destroy its  meaning.  There are very real choices that women  lack; for example, the choice of money, adequate housing, health care, physical safety,  and access to chUd care and education.  Women's options are constrained by a lack  of basic economic and social justice. WhUe  money, time and energy is avaUable to research and develop NRTs, measures which  would improve the conditions which limit  women's lives are not explored.  The so-called treatments for infertUity—  actually medical interventions which bypass, rather than treat, infertUity—are not  avaUable to everyone. Very few couples are  being offered the consumer option of having  a baby with the help of NRTs. This paraUels  the reality of that we hve in a world where  the vast majority of people, resources and  the earth itself are being exploited for the  benefit of a few.  These technologies are not neutral and  they are costly. The money and energy devoted to their development could be used instead to improve the conditions into which  chUdren are born, and the conditions in  which women and chUdren Uve.  If concern about infertUity were genuine,  then public health pohcy would be developed and implemented which investigated  and acted upon the causes of infertUity.  Treatments for infertUity in men would be  as common as for women and accessibihty  to treatment would be equitable.  Preventing infertUity would help many  more people, now and in the future, than  techniques of artificial fertiUzation. Action  needs to be taken to eUminate the environmental and iatrogenic (doctor-caused)  roots of infertUity as well as infertUity  caused by sexually transmitted diseases,  workplace hazards, contraceptives, industrial/agricultural chemicals, and hazards in  consumer products.  Sirmlarly, NRTs take a distorted approach to the issue of genetically-based disabiUties. With their false promise of "perfect babies," NRTs actually threaten to  erode the equality rights of people with dis  abiUties by implying that such people are—  and should be—"preventable."  Further, the leading cause of infant disabihty is poverty. Genetic screening or genetic intervention cannot solve this problem, but funding for services could begin to.  The development of NRTs goes hand-in-  hand with the creation of markets for prc-  Uferating pharmaceutical and biotechnology  industries. A "can do, must do" phUosophy  has taken over as the interests of scientists  and corporations coincide. The commercialization of reproduction has dangerous consequences for women and for future generations.  Who benefits from this commercialization of the reproductive process? Doctors,  lawyers, medical researchers and large corporations benefit. As body parts (eggs,  sperm, embryos) become commodities to be  voted to improving technologies. Obviously,  the emphasis is not on increasing women's  abihty to make informed decisions about  their own bodies. Rather, the emphasis is  on research without regard for the reaUty  of women's Uves.  Women remember their experiences as  guinea pigs for the old reproductive technologies. The new technologies are also full  of risks. The long term effects of the new  powerful drugs involved are not known. In  vitro fertiUzation has such a low success  rate and such attendant health risks that it  can only be considered experimental.  The medical establishment takes advantage of the social conditioning to bear a biological chUd in order to secure willing—  sometimes paying—subjects for their research. The choices not to have chUdren,  or to adopt or to foster a chUd, challenge  being done by groups such as the Immigrant Women's Health Centre in Toronto.  Statutes providing for the sterilization of  mentally handicapped people existed in BC  and Alberta untU the 1970s.  In all countries of the world, male chUdren are preferred over female. It is also  a weU-documented fact that ah sex selection clinics report a very high preference for  male offspring. This is a form of oppression  of women.  Medical interventions which by-pass infertUity are marketed to white, middle or  upper class couples. Women of colour, poor  women, UUterate women, disabled, single,  lesbian, mentally-handicapped women, or  those who Uve in a country the West has  labeUed as over-populated and underdeveloped are not considered suitable.  bought and sold, the danger to women increases. Poor and Third World women wUl  be particular targets, as economic necessity  forces them to seU body parts or enter surrogate contracts. This exploitation of women  is presented as "sexual and reproductive  choice," an example of using the rhetoric of  choice against women.  Along with the commodification of body  parts, the fragmentation of the reproductive process reinforces the idea of a separation between a woman and her fetus.  This threatens a woman's right to bod-  Uy integrity. The woman herself must have  decision-making power regarding her own  body and must be given aU necessary information to enable her to make informed decisions.  The complex and experimental nature  of NRTs makes it extremely difficult for  women to give informed consent regarding medical procedures. At the same time,  these medical interventions are becoming  routine. Health care education and preventative health care programs remain inadequate whUe money, time and energy is de-  the assumptions upon which the marketing  of NRTs are based, and threaten the profitability of the biotechnology industry.  Reducing the issue of infertUity to a debate between women who "just want their  own baby" and feminists who are characterized as "anti-famUy" is misleading, dangerous and anti-feminist. This polarization  side-steps the real threat these technologies  pose to women's hves, pits women against  each other, masks the actual vUlain—the  sexist, racist, classist society upheld by the  patriarchal status quo—and effectively prevents positive debate and change.  NRTs obstruct the equahty rights of aU  women because of the context of racism and  classism within which they are being developed. In Canada, as in aU countries of  the world, the practice of eugenics is a reality. The rate of sterilization of women of  colour, disabled women and poor women is  much higher than that of white, middle or  upper class, able-bodied women. SterUization abuse of Native women in Canada has  been weU-documented. Investigation into  coercive sterilization practices in Canada is  It is within this climate of eugenics,  of racism, classism and sexism that NRTs  are promoted. The prejudice favours white,  middle or upper class males. At the same  time, it is women's hves and women's bodies that are at stake.  Much more pubUc discussion on NRTs is  needed, as weU as more information, more  pubhc education and more consultation.  Women's voices must be heard and heeded.  The Royal Commission has initiated pubhc discourse. The commission should also  ensure that information about these technologies, their effects, and their potential  impact, is accessible to the public, in order that responsible public pohcy decisions  can be made. We need pohcies which protect equahty rights, promote the weU-being  and respect of women and their chUdren,  and benefit the majority of people in the  present and for generations to come.  Please see next page for Vancouver  Status of Women's recommendations to  the Royal Commission.  KINESIS Dec/Jan. 91 Recommendations  From previous page.  The Vancouver Status of Women calls upon  the Royal Commission to recommend pubUc poUcies as foUows:  1) Improve social and economic conditions:  • to combat the increasing poverty of  women and chUdren, make guaranteed annual income, universal chUd care, and edu-  catioal opportunities a priority  2) Expand women's autonomy and self-  determination and create the possibiUty for  real choices:  • increase funding and support for parents raising special needs chUdren, to make  raising a disabled child a positive choice  • make adoption more accessible  3) Improve health care, and take pro-active  steps to ensure that informed consent with  regard to NRTs becomes a reaUty. In particular, we endorse the Canadian Research  Institute for the Advancement of Women  (CRIAW) recommendation:  • Publicly funded locaUy-based reproductive clinics should be established to provide information and counselling on aU aspects of reproduction and to practise those  reproductive technologies established as legal. These clinics would offer services for  birth control, adoption, infertUity coun-  seUing and treatment, abortion, hormone  replacement therapy, treatment of sexuaUy  transmitted diseases and menstrual disorders, and birthing. Women must play a cen  tral role in the planning, regulation, and implementation of these reproductive chnics.  4) Take the initiative in de-commerciaUzing  NRTs, including implementing strict controls for research:  • prohibit testing for sex selection  I  • prohibit research into human cloning, |  ectogenesis (developing a human fetus out- <£  side the womb), and growth or use of fetuses |  for tissue or organ transplants £  • prohibit import of ova, sperm, and fe- ^  tai tissue from other countries i  • treat embryos and other human genetic  materials in the same manner as the Canadian Red Cross treats blood, i.e., they must  be considered a gift, and cannot be bought  or sold  5) Redirect research funding into:  • causes of infertUity—environmental, iatrogenic causes, as weU as infertUity caused  by sexuaUy transmitted diseases, industrial/agricultural chemicals, workplace hazards, contraceptives, hazards in consumer  products, emotional factors.  • long-term effects of aU reproductive  technologies, new and old  • research into rates of infertUity for  women of different socio-economic and ethnic backgrounds in Canada  • causes of male infertUity  • funding for educational programs about  the dangers of sexuaUy transmitted diseases, including programs in the schools  • research into safe contraception  6) In vitro fertiUzation (IVF) programs:  • there should be no criteria other than  medical for entry, but the eligibility period should be extended from one to two  years (i.e. infertUity should be re-defined  to mean "the faUure to conceive after two  years of normal intercourse.") We endorse  the CRIAW recommendation that women  undergoing IVF must be considered experimental subjects and provided with appropriate information on the medical risks to  their own bodies and the uncertain long-  term effects on the potential fetuses.  7) Artificial (alternative) insemination:  • there should be no requirements for  medical supervision for this process and no  restrictions on access.  8) Surrogacy/contract motherhood arrangements:  There should be no commerciaUzation or financial transactions aUowed in the contract  motherhood arrangements. Further, these  arrangements should not be regulated by  law, except that:  • the payment of money should be prohibited  • commercial surrogacy  arrangements  should be made a criminal offence  • the advertising of contract motherhood  arrangements should be banned  9) Facilitate continuing discussion on NRTs  by:  • consulting with feminist organizations  • funding feminist groups to provide pubhc education.  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C., V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  Hours: Monday-Saturday 11:00-5:30 pm  E^l  it^Ho  PRESSIONS  1395 Commercial Drive Van. B.C. 255-5944  F PRESS B  W% women's printshop • worker-owned  • since JdrO^H  • union shop       ;>£'■)•■   CWA Local 226 ^*  ■p             253-1224            Zj  CROSSLAND CONSULTING  Personal Management  Services for Artists  Individuals                                                            Resumes  Arts Organizations                                   Career Counselling  Grant and Proposal Writing              Bookkeeping Services  * FIRST CONSULTATION FREE*  Jackie Crossland  By Appointment Only                      435-2273  ^^^^          1 Let our experience help you make  1       ^^  | the most of your printing budget.   |       ^p  ^^^CCUJPERATIVES AND UNIONS WORKING TOGETHER" M  milaaoos  1108 Commercial Drive  255-8168  A Latin American-Canadian  enterprise, MILAGROS offers  uniquely designed silver and  bead jewellery, handicrafts  from Nicaragua, and weavings  and finely made clothing from  Guatemala. Come see the  products of co-ops and  solidarity.  Hours: through Christmas  7 days a week  11:00 a.m.-8:00p.m.  Social Change Tool  for the 90's  ROMS. tfflB  This quarterly subject index to over  200 alternative publications will be  an invaluable tool In your efforts to  bring about social change.  So ask the folks at your library to  subscribe to the Alternative Press Index,  if they don't already.  Libraries: $110/year  Individuals and movement groups: $30/year  Directory of Alternative & Radical  Publications: $3  For more information write:  Alternative Press Center  P.O. Box 33091  Baltimore, Maryland 21218  FREE 0NE-0N-0NE  COUNSELLING  for women  at EASTSIDE FAMILY PLACE  Tuesday and Thursday,  9:30am to 3pm  Information/Appointments  call Trish or Iris at:  255-9802 or 255-9841  Some Childcare Provided  (Counselling provided by UBC School of  Social Work Students)  Ariel Books  open  Monday to Saturday  10-6  Sunday  1-5  arid books for women  2766\v.4th ave. van., b.c. 733-35U  >KINESIS ' /////////////////////^^^^^  /////////////////////^^^^^  International  End the Occupation  As Jews, feminists, activists.  by Rachel Epstein  The last Thursday of every month the  Jewish Women's Committee to End the  Occupation of the West Bank and Gaza  (JWCEO) stands vigil from 5:30 to 6:30 pm  in front of the Israeli Consulate in Toronto.  We dress in black and carry our banner and  signs that say "End the Occupation."  Response to our vigils is varied—recently  we got some encouraging honks from passing cars and a few thumbs up signs from  people passing by. We were also told by a  Jewish couple that we "should have died in  the camps" and that we "are traitors to our  own people;" another woman took a swipe  at one of our members with her briefcase.  Our Thursday vigils are held in solidarity with Women in Black vigils organized by  women in Israel who are opposed to their  government's policies and actions in the Occupied Territories. The current Palestinian  uprising or Intifada, which began in December 1987, has swelled the ranks of the Israeli  peace movement and there are now hundreds of groups in Israel and the Occupied  Territories working for a peaceful solution  In Israel and  in Canada, it is  difficult to speak  as Jews against Israel  to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Women's  groups, including Women in Black, are central to this movement.  Women in Black began in Jerusalem and  has now spread to more than 80 locations  throughout Israel and around the world.  Every Friday from 1 to 2 pm women gather  at a busy intersection, dressed in black carrying signs: "Stop the Occupation".  The responses we encounter in Toronto  seem mild compared to reports from women  in Israel. There they are subjected to intense verbal and sometimes physical abuse  from right-wing Israelis who disagree with  them. Women have been called "whores of  the Arabs," they are told "all you girls need  is a Httle rape to make you feel better" and  "what's the matter, ladies, fucking Arafat is  better?" Some people throw things—eggs,  fruit, tomatoes, water. There have been incidents of men beating women and the poUce continue to be hostile to the vigils.  In Israel and in Canada, it is difficult to  speak as Jews against Israel. It can feel hke  you are going against your own people and  indeed, we often risk losing ties not only  to the larger mainstream Jewish community  but to our immediate family and friends. It  is difficult for some Jews to accept those of  us who are critical of Israel's actions.  However, as Jews, as feminists, as pohtical activists and as people committed to  fighting for justice, the women in JWCEO  feel we cannot stand silent while Israel commits acts of violence against Palestinians.  Our group is not completely unified politically but we agree on the need for an immediate end to the occupation in the West  Bank and Gaza and for Israel to negotiate  with the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) towards the creation of a Palestinian state (although our anarchist member gets uncomfortable when we talk about  the creation of any state). We want to dia-  logue with other Jews and to put pressure  on the Canadian and Israeli governments to  recognize and negotiate with the PLO.  Confusing, Painful Journey  We come to this position from very different experiences. I am unusual in that I come  from a family that never supported the existence of an exclusively Jewish state. Most  of us come from backgrounds where an uncritical allegiance to Israel was a given. For  many of us it has been a confusing and  painful journey to discover that much of  what we were taught about Israel is not true  and to confront the reality of the Israeli Occupation.  Our group has its roots in some workshops held in 1988 to look at what blocks or  prevents Jewish women activists from working in solidarity with Palestinians. We held  two workshops, one to look at these blocks,  the other to consider answers to some of the  difficult questions we are asked when we do  speak out against Israeli pohcies. The results of these workshops made it clear that  there were Jewish women wanting to learn  more about and be active on these issues.  In March, 1989 the Women in Black vigils started in Toronto, originally sponsored  by women from Jews For a Just Peace, another Jewish peace group. Women who attended these vigils were looking for a way  to be active as women around the Middle  East. The JWCEO was formed to organize  a special vigil on October 2, 1989 in honour of the Days of Awe, the days between  the Jewish holidays of Rosh Hashanna and  Yom Kippur, days traditionally committed  to meditation, reflection and a recommitment to the values of justice and peace.  Vigils were held in 17 US cities and in  Toronto in solidarity with Israeli and Palestinian peace groups. At the vigil in Toronto  about 50 women came; we lit candles, sang,  heard speeches and remembered in silence  the Palestinians who had died at the hands  of the Israeli military.  International Women's Day, 1990 was a  coming out for the JWCEO. We made our  first banner and marched with the Palestinian women's contingent, an historic moment in Toronto's women's movement. We  had a table at the fair where we sold buttons and articles, displayed photographs of  our vigils and gave out hamantashen (Jewish cookies eaten at Purim). We held another special vigil in response to Women in  Black in Israel's call to "all the women of  the world" to hold vigils on March 8th.  The mainstream  media has largely  ignored us...  Since then we have maintained our regular vigils at the Israeh consulate and we've  co-sponsored several educational events  with other Jewish peace groups such as  Jews for a Just Peace, new Jewish Agenda  and the United Jewish People's Order.  These have included a showing of the film  Shattered Dreams and a speaking tour  by members of Yesh G'vul, an organization  of Israelis who refuse to do military duty  in the Occupied Territories. In June, 1990  we joined with a local Palestinian women's  group to organize a demonstration at the  Israeh consulate to commemorate the 23rd  anniversary of the occupation.  Our current project is to organize a series  of workshops for Jewish women. The first  workshop will look at questions of Jewish  identity and experiences of Jewish oppression (I avoid using the term "anti-semitism"  because it is an inaccurate term: both Jews  and Arabs are Semitic people but the term  has historically been used only to describe  the oppression of Jews.) The second will focus on the connections between Jewish op  pression and racism, and will look at Jewish responses to the Middle East.  As a group we also want to make links  with other anti-racist struggles. Last year  we joined the Women's Coalition Against  Racism and Pohce Violence, a Toronto  women's coalition formed after Sophia  Cook, a young Black woman, was shot and  maimed by Toronto pohce. The shooting  was another in a long history of state violence towards Black people in Toronto,  and makes clear the need to protest state-  endorsed racism, whether it happens in  Toronto or in the West Bank and Gaza  While our primary purpose is to organize politically as Jewish women towards an  end to the Israeh occupation, we also exist  as a group of Jewish women interested in  meeting together. Our meetings are held on  Friday nights and large quantities of food  are usually involved. We often hold special gatherings on Jewish holidays and we  choose different ways to recognize and celebrate our Jewishness.  We work in JWCEO because it is important that there be a loud Jewish voice in  opposition to Israeh repression in the Occupied Territories. The voice does exist, in Israel and around the world, but it is difficult  to hear. Most people in North America are  unaware of the extent of the Israeh peace  movement; most people in Canada do not  hear about the activities of our group and  other Jewish peace groups. The mainstream  media has largely ignored us, despite our repeated efforts.  Ours is an unpopular voice but one we'  are determined to use. We encourage other  women to join us and the thousands of other  women around the world who make up the  women's call for peace in the Middle East.  See  "What you can do .  page.  " next  Rachel Epstein used to live in Vancouver, still considers it her home, and  hopes to aliyah back there some day.  KINESIS c ««s^  International  Fifth Encuentro Feminista:  3,000 feminists invade town  by Carmen Rodriguez  At the end of November, more than 3,000  femimsts literally invaded every corner of  San Bernardo, an Atlantic resort town over  300 kilometres south of Buenos Aires.  The reason: the Fifth Encuentro Feminista Latinoamericano y del Caribe—an opportunity to discuss the issues of organized  Latin American and Caribbean women from  all over the Americas and some European  countries.  The powerful trade union representing  Argentinian workers in the energy industry (Luz y Fuerza) had originally offered  its gigantic hotel to the Encuentro—a location which could have lodged everybody,  plus given space to the hundreds of scheduled workshops, readings, meetings and discussion groups. The union apparently withdrew its offer for "pohtical" reasons: the  word feminist is also an "f" word in Latin  America.  Organizers were left with the overwhelming task of trying to accomodate everybody  in the twenty-odd hotels in San Bernardo,  and to schedule events in every possible  space, from hotel lobbies and empty storefronts to the central plaza and, of course,  the beach.  The opening ceremony, on the evening of  Sunday, November 18th, took place in the  plaza. Women gathered around signs with  the names of their countries of origin and,  after the organizer's opening remarks and a  performance by a dance troupe, every delegation went on stage to greet the crowd,  talk about their expectations of the encuentro, and even perform a song or a dance.  It was a vibrant and emotional ceremony—3,000 women celebrating their differences but, above all, their unity of purpose: to advance towards the construction  of a truly democratic society, where women  and men can hve in peace and fully develop  as human beings.  However, as the week advanced, several  issues became apparent:  • Not all the women were represented; in  fact, working class, Native, Black and  other particularly oppressed sectors were  minimally present  • Theoreticians and professionals became  the "ruhng class" of the event, while the  UPRISING  BQEAD&  BAKERY  All natural  fruitcakes,  whole wheat  shortbreads,  tourtiere,  mince meat tarts.  Look for January  bread specials  1697 Venables Street  Vancouver 254-5635  women doing concrete work on specific  issues, such as battered women, rape,  health, were relegated to a "second class"  status  ► Organizational problems hindered full  participation: too many events happening at the same time, misinformation  about times and places, long line-ups for  lunch and dinner, inappropriate workshop spaces, etc. This led to a generalized feehng of frustration and alienation.  ...feminist is also  an "f" word  in Latin America  *mm  «M  At the same time, the growing awareness of these kinds of problems produced  some important impromptu happenings: a  group of women, tired of waiting at their  hotel for news on the times and places of  particular events, decided to do a workshop with the chamber maids, who were  happy to exchange views and experiences  with the visitors; an Argentinean woman  hving in Toronto, exasperated by the commentaries on "the privilege of hving in a 'developed' country" eloquently spoke to the  media about the difficulties that ethnic minorities, and women in particular, face in  Canada; a few Native women from different countries took a space and organized a  workshop where they addressed their particular concerns.  All in all, with the event still so close  to our noses and without the perspective  that time and distance can give, we can  say that this Fifth Encuentro Feminista of  Latin American and Caribbean Women has  been a fruitful experience. We have learned  that femimsts have come a long way and  engaged in an infinite number of important  tasks. Nevertheless, there is stiU much room  to grow before we can actually talk about  a continental femimst movement advancing  towards a common goal.  Carmen Rodriguez filed this story  from San Bernardo. Kinesis will carry  more on the Encuentro in a future issue.  To end the occupation  What you can do...  From previous page.  Many people are concerned about the continuing Israeh occupation of the West Bank  and Gaza and support the idea of a peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians.  Here is a hst of actions that readers can take to support the struggle for peace and justice.  To All Readers:  • Read up on the subject. We suggest: Jewish Women's Call For Peace: A Handbook for Jewish Women on the Israeli/Palestinian Conflict. Edited by Rita Fal-  bel, Irena Klepfisz, and Donna Nevel, Firebrand Books, 1990.- Also, check out the chapter "Palestinian Women: Building Barricades and Breaking Barriers" in Intifada: The  Palestinian Uprising Against Israeli Occupation. Edited by Zachary Lockman and  Joel Beinin, Between the Lines Press, 1989.  • Write to the Canadian government to voice your support for Palestinian self-  determination as well as Israel's right to exist. Put pressure on the Canadian government to recognize the PLO.  • Write to the Israeh embassy and articulate your concerns about their government's refusal to negotiate with the PLO. Urge them to move towards a peaceful settlement with  the Palestinians. Voice your opposition to the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza.  • Write to your local newspapers to voice your concerns about articles or letters which  tow the hne of the Israeh government.  • Attend meetings and demonstrations which support an end to the occupation and a  peaceful settlement between Israel and the Palestinians, (If you hve in Toronto, join the  JWCEO at our monthly vigils.)  • Send money to organizations hke the Union of Palestine Medical Relief Committees (Box  19369, Jerusalem, Israel) or the Women's Organization for Pohtical Prisoners (PO Box  31811, Tel Aviv 61318, Israel)  To Jewish Women:  • Speak to your Jewish friends and family members about the occupation. The opinion of  the Jewish community is gradually shifting in our direction. You can help to accelerate  this process.  • Write to newspapers to respond to articles which tow the hne of the Israeh government.  Identify yourself as a concerned Jew who doesn't agree with Shamir's pohcies regarding  the Occupied Territories.  • If you are a member of a Jewish group or synagogue, raise the issue of the occupation.  Invite Palestinian speakers and speakers from the peace movement in Israel.  • Join Jewish groups which support an end to the occupation and dialogue with Palestinians. These groups include Jews for a Just Peace, New Jewish Agenda, Canadian Friends  of Peace Now, and JWCEO. (PO Box 810, Station P, Toronto, Ont. M5S 2Z1).  • Form your own "Women in Black" group. Demonstrate in front of your local Israeh consulate and/or organize other relevant activities.  -  —Shlomit Segal  •■■.-.:■' iX^'Zr*  ^KINESIS International  Against apartheid:  Until I stopped believing...  by Lizann Foster  "But how are you, Mummy?" she asks  for the second time across the thousands of  miles being bridged by the telephone call.  Of course I give her the easiest answer: "I'm  fine, baby. Now tell me about everything at  home. How are things at school? How does  the garden look these days? What were you  doing when I called?" And so she tells me  that the jacarandas are in bloom, carpeting  the ground with their lilac blossoms; that it  is so hot she went swimming the day before  and that she has made a new friend who  hves next door.  And when the call ends, I am struck once  again by the irony in her question: "How are  you7.'"  My daughter Candice hves in the civil  war zone that Durban, Natal, South Africa  has become. Bag searches at the entrances  of all the shopping malls and bomb explosions are part of her daily hfe. She used to  question the madness around her when she  was a httle younger, but now she seems as  resigned as the adults around her appear to  be. When the television news flashes scenes  from yet another massacre, she sometimes  says: "I wish they would stop fighting," but  mostly she says nothing.  Candice goes to a school for children designated "coloured" by the South African  government. The school used to be a white  school but when it got too old the government handed it over to the "coloured" Department of Education, one of the 15 education departments in South Africa. The  school is quite close to my parents' home in  a "coloured" residential area to the north of  Durban.  In the 10 years of her hfe, Candice has  seen some changes. Some of the places she  could not go to when she was six years old  are now open to her. The fact that she has  to hve in a residential area set aside for people who are not white and go to a school  especially designated for people her colour  does not seem so important to her, yet.  It has always Oeen important to me and  the source of my frustration and resentment. The critical shortage of housing in  Black residential areas when the white areas have hundreds of houses and apartments  vacant is characteristic of a pohtical system  where 87 percent of the land is owned by 13  percent of the population. The shortage has  resulted in astronomical rents in the Black  areas and often one can only get an apartment through favours and bribes.  Candice and I got our apartment through  a friend of a friend of a friend. We were  luckier than most people, 'though. I was a  teacher-counsellor in a secondary school and  making just enough money to keep us sheltered and fed. In a country where jobs are  reserved for those of fairer hue, teaching is  one of the few occupations that is relatively  easy to get into. Having a job as a teacher  does not guarantee financial security and  many of my colleagues moonlighted, even  though this is not officially allowed.  The school where I taught was a converted factory situated right next to a chemical factory that emitted noxious gases all  daylong. The whole area was surrounded by  heavy industry. In South Africa it is really  easy to find the Black residential areas—  just look for the industrial areas. The residents in the area have a drill they practice  whenever the oil refinery on the east end of  the township goes up in flames. The people  whose homes are just across the road from  the refinery hve in morbid fear of this ever  happening: it is unhkely that they would be  able to get out in time. Many roads in the  township are not tarred and become impassable during the rainy seasons.  Some of the houses are actually converted  army barracks and are totally unsuitable for  not born white, was what characterised my  job as a teacher- counsellor. I used to tell  them that they could not let the apartheid  system win and add their names to the  masses of unemployed Black people. I used  to tell them that they could beat the system by getting a good education and leaving the township to make a better hfe for  themselves elsewhere. For seven years I told  them this, until I stopped beheving that it  Candice Foster, at age six  the families of 10 people or more occupying  them. My pupils often came to school hungry, having not eaten since the night before.  The economic evil wrought by the apartheid  system ensures that poverty has a colour—  Black. Most of the pupils I taught had at  least one parent unemployed and knew lots  of other people around them without jobs.  Helping my pupils to deal with the social  and psychological problems associated with  a political system that denigrated all those  was possible for as long as the present government was in power.  I risked losing my job by criticizing their  syllabi, the examination system and all the  other inequalities associated with an inferior education. Some teachers had been detained for doing just that.  I felt so powerless and so useless. All  I could offer was a sympathetic ear while  helping students to develop an attitude toward their circumstances that was non-  defeatist...until I felt defeated myself. One  of the worst counselling experiences I had  was talking to a parent who came to school  in tears to tell us the reason her children had not been in school the day before  was because their home had been razed by  Inkatha, the Black pohtical group headed  by Mangosothu Buthelezi and beheved to  be behind most of the violence in Natal.  After trying for seven years to battle a  system that allocates 1,200,000 Rand for every white child's education and 430 Rand  for every Black child's education, a system  that ensures white children have schools  with tennis courts, swimming pools, indoor  gymnasiums and well-stocked science laboratories where they are trained to be the  bosses—and Black children are lucky if their  schools have electricity and one soccer ball  as sports equipment for their "physical education" while they are trained to be obedient servants—after seven years I quit.  Perhaps I gave up too easily. Perhaps the  experiences of friends who were detained in  solitary confinement for months on end or  who were beaten up for attending pohtical  rallies scared me too much. I hved in constant fear that I would be next. The night I  sheltered a friend who was on the run from  the security pohce was one of the longest I  ever had to hve through. I became hke a lot  of adults around me: numbed by the system  we had hved in for so long.  Perhaps that is why the children took  over the struggle. They got tired of waiting.  Their natural impatience inspired them to  speed the revolution up—to take it into the  classroom and out into the streets. Many of  them died but the pressure has not stopped  and finally the government has begun to  make the changes they demand.  Lots of things are changing in South  Africa today but the changes are cosmetic and superficial. The foundations of  apartheid are still very firmly in place. The  Land Act of 1913, the Group Areas Act  and the Population Registration Act are  the cornerstones of the system and until  they are removed from the statute books,  no real change can take place. Even the few  changes that President De Klerk has implemented are too much for the neo-Nazi  Afrikaaner Resistance Movement who have  declared war on the government, a government already at war with most of its citizens, a government that provides the ammunition for those citizens who war with  each other over the meagre resources they  are allocated.  Even though the area that Candice hves  in with my parents is relatively safe, there  can be no-really safe place during a civil  war. Sometimes I wonder whether the decision to leave her until I had settled somewhere else was the right one. But it seemed  as though I would be taking her from a bad  situation into a worse one by dragging her  along with me, not knowing if my quest for  a better hfe would be successful.  What my daughter really wants to know  is whether, after being here for eight  months, I have made any progress trying to  start a new hfe for both of us, whether I am  any closer to being able to send for her. She  wants to know when she can join me in this  place on the other side of the world where  freedom to choose where and how to hve is  taken for granted and is not a privilege for  the few.  Lizann  Foster is  a  South  African  woman of colour and a refugee.  KINESIS Dec/Jan. 91 Sheila Kitzinger  FOR THE  Birth of  by Pam Galloway  Birth has many rituals.  In Greece, an opening flower is placed beside the labouring woman. As the flower unfolds, the woman's body opens to give birth. In Africa, a Zulu woman labours in a specially prepared hut, the floor strewn with dried dung, the room decorated with wood  carvings. There is a hole in the roof so the woman can look at the sky. It is said that at  night, "she counts the stars with pain."  Sheila Kitzinger, writer, social anthropologist and birth educator, told these and other  stories of birth to an audience of about 260 women at the conference "Crisis in the Perinatal Period" held recently in Vancouver. The women—nurses, midwives and childbirth  educators from around BC—gathered to hsten to Kitzinger's wisdom, wisdom which has  inspired proponents of natural childbirth for many years.  Kitzinger comes from a family where women have passed their strength and passion  from generation to generation. She calls it "a female cultural inheritance." Her mother  helped set up one of England's first birth control chnics, and Kitzinger clearly feels the  impact of growing up with a woman who was a midwife, a pacifist and a radical.  And Kitzinger's five daughters have learned from their mother, as she has from them.  Three of her daughters are radical femimsts who have played a large part in her own  politicization.  Sheila Kitzinger began her hfe's work for and with women after studying social anthropology at Oxford—she realized she was reading only about men's hves.  "I wanted to look at the great transformations in women's hves, the bonds that hnked  women together and social systems that were meaningful [for women]," said Kitzinger.  She began cross-cultural studies of women's hves, traveUing extensively. Her focus came  to rest on women's health concerns and, after her own babies, on women's birthing experiences. She saw connections between what she had learned about women and the way  women were treated in the western medical system.  Kitzinger is known internationally for her books on childbirth and women's sexuahty  which have been translated into 18 languages.  In comparing the experiences of women in different countries and cultures, Kitzinger  developed a strong sensitivity to the difficulties faced by immigrant women in Britain.  As she spoke—gently, almost lovingly—about birthing rituals in various cultures,  she entreated her predominantly white, Canadian audience to be sensitive to individual  women's personal rituals and to make them feel secure in labour.  Then, Kitzinger's tone shifted to a controlled anger as she spoke of the ritual of the  modern, hospital birth in technological societies.  Rituals of Control  We assume that medical acts are based on good, scientific theory but Kitzinger beheves  many are actually part of patriarchy's rituals of control. She used the example of the  common face mask which, she says, "is employed as a talisman against infection"—it is  well established that masks do not prevent the spread of infection after 15 minutes of  In the hospital, it is important that women remain passive and numerous ritualistic  acts are performed to maintain this control. Preparation of the woman for birth, including dressing her in de-personalizing hospital garments and exposing her genitals in a way  which de-sexes her, begin the ceremony. The attachment of technological devices such  as electronic fetal monitors and intravenous drips separate the woman from the natural  rhythms of her own body. Birth attendants gather around her and cheer on her efforts in  a ritualistic dance around her bed. "Immediately before dehvery an act of genital mutilation is performed," said Kitzinger, referring to episiotomy, the cutting of the tissue between the vagina and the rectum to allow the baby's head to pass through without tearing. She said there is no evidence to support the value of episiotomy and beheves it can  only be seen as a form of punishment.  Kitzinger compellingly compared cultures where ritual serves to support and  strengthen women in childbirth, with modern Euro-American cultures where ritual controls and hurts women—and where even the most straightforward, uncomphcated birth  is turned into a crisis.  "Doctors define birth while women experience it,"said Kitzinger. Modern obstetrics  has taken the natural and normal hfe process of birth and turned it into an industrial  procedure which must be managed. "The medical system is centred on crisis management...! think it [must] seem rather dull and tedious not to be managing a crisis," she  said. Birth has become a crisis. It is, however, an artificial crisis in which women are defined as "feckless, stupid, egotistical and even dangerous to their babies," said Kitzinger.  Germany, 16th century: a midwife assists at the delivery of a woman on a birth stool. Frc  an unknown artist.  l a woodcut by  When women began to be hospitalized instead of giving birth at home, every birth became hke an illness to be treated with modern technology and drugs. "It's very difficult  to turn birth into a crisis at home," said Kitzinger.  In one of her many studies, Kitzinger compared the language used during 40 home  births and 40 hospital births. She found the language used in the home birth accounts  was far more positive than that in the hospital birth accounts. Words hke "bewildering"  and "traumatic" were often used in hospital accounts and notably, words hke "allowed"  and "let" (as in: "the doctor allowed me to hold the baby straight away") which suggest  the control hes with the doctor. At home, the women themselves were in control and did  not use these or similar terms in any of their reports.  Technological intervention was common in the hospital births—only one in forty received no intervention—while in the home birth reports, 4/5 births had no intervention.  Hospitals are bureaucracies and as such, are extremely time-conscious. There is an  emphasis on time management and, indeed, three-quarters of the hospital birth reports  made frequent reference to time. Kitzinger described hospital births as "a race against  timc.the technology which is the most threatening and which has changed the charact  of birth has been around a long time—it's the clock."  Labour is deemed to be short or long, and long labours, being undesirable, have led  to the use of drugs to speed up contractions. Drug-induced labours are more intense,  which means that contractions of the uterus are stronger, forcing the walls of the uterus  against the baby—an assault. Kitzinger said: "...the babies have no voice, we must spea!  for them."  She refers scornfully to what she describes as "the patchwork quilt syndrome" manifested in birthing rooms in hospitals. Pleasant decorations and furniture (including the  patchwork quilt) change only the surface environment and not the attitudes that exist in  the room.  Kitzinger beheves women should be able to give birth in their own space: "Perhaps we can change hospitals so that they can become the best place for the birth of  lovc.otherwise the best place for birth is at home."  To demonstrate this Kitzinger showed shdes and shared the story of a home-birth of  her own grandson, Sam. It was a water birth, a practice growing in popularity in Europe. Kitzinger's daughter, Tess, was seen at various stages of her labour both in and  out of the small pool which had been brought into the home especially for the birth. It  was clear the event was bathed in calm, and a close bonding was evident between those  present; Kitzinger, Tess and her midwife and Tess's husband. Baby Sam was born, moving from one warm, water environment to another, from his mother's uterus to the pool.  There was a soft gasp of surprise in the audience when Kitzinger pointed out that in  the whole event Tess's blood loss was about a teaspoonful. For Kitzinger, this underlined the gentleness and non-violent nature of both home and water births for mother  and baby.  Hospital births are bloody not because blood is a natural component of the birth process, said Kitzinger, but because they are violent. She sees the experience of birth for  many women to be "an institutionalized act of violence". Birth as rape.  Kitzinger beheves that the disempowerment women undergo in birth leads to feehngs  of having been violated. This theory grew from Kitzinger's discussions with two of her  daughters who work in the fields of rape crisis counselling and with survivors of child  sexual abuse. Kitzinger noticed that in their descriptions of their experiences, women  who had been assaulted and women who had difficult births used the same language. To  further develop the theory, Kitzinger put ads in newspapers asking women to write to  her about their birthing experiences. She received 345 letters.  She had not suggested what she was looking for. "I feel invaded and mutilated, I don't  eel the same woman anymore," said one letter. Another: "I just didn't have the words  o explain why I felt so violated." Words such as "skewered...trash...mauled...a bloody  were common.  Women had been robbed of their identity, their bodies fragmented with attention paid  oidy to their genitals. Emotional blackmail was often used to gain a women's compliance:  telling a woman she may hurt or even kill her baby if she does not "go along" will usuaUy guarantee her assent. Women felt they must have gratitude towards those who had  "...given her a baby" and yet they also felt unease at the way they had been treated.  Women often blame themselves after rape and bear guilt and so did many of the  women who wrote Kitzinger: "I ended up having an episiotomy because I didn't relax."  If the woman doesn't blame herself then society wUl do it for her. Rape victims are often said to have "contributed to" or "provoked" the assault. Women often faU to report  rape because they fear such a response. Likewise, few women ever complain about hospital care.  Post-Natal Depression is Grief...  The common thread running through aU the accounts said Kitzinger, was a sense of powerlessness. After such disempowerment and emotional injury, many women become post-  nataUy depressed. Kitzinger said, "post-natal depression is...grief that foUows...violence."  In western culture, distress after chUdbirth is seen to be due to hormonal imbalances:  "women are fundamentally flawed." Kitzinger beheves that post-natal depression stems  from attitudes in society which trivialize unhappiness or treat it as a mental Ulness.  Women's unhappiness is hkely to be ignored untU it has some effect on others. This view  of women's emotional condition after birth deflects responsibility from the medical system and does not deal with how the system should be changed to prevent women's distress.  Kitzinger's analysis of modern, obstetrical birth as an act of violence drew a strong response from her audience. Some delegates disagreed with her, saying things have already  changed, that they were working hard to bring further change and that, in any case, "it  isn't hke that in Canada."  Kitzinger acknowledged that the women at the conference were working for more supportive birthing environments and that her words may have seemed hke an attack. She  then invited women to come forward, to speak of their experiences in Canada either as  women who had given birth or as birth attendants. And they did. For 45 minutes women  spoke, often emotionaUy. And the room somehow seemed smaUer as each one spoke to  Kitzinger, aUowing the rest of the audience to eavesdrop.  A trained mid-wife had left her profession because: "I couldn't handle what goes on in  the dehvery room. To constantly see this violation of women is upsetting." Women expressed more than distress. There was anger: "As women we are constantly oppressed  and suppressed." There was frustration: "What can you say to this doctor who has so  much experience?"  There was also strength. A nurse spoke of sending physicians out of the dehvery room,  and of challenging doctors on their arbitrary and possibly hurtful decisions. She urged  women to speak up, to not be afraid.  Kitzinger responded: "There is a strength of power in this room amongst you as  women which can change things."  So what of change?  Delegates at the conference seemed to beheve that some of the things Kitzinger spoke  of have already changed, but as one said, "the whole issue of turning birth into a violent  act is very pertinent."  Another added, "You do feel awful because you're assisting at a birth with procedures  you don't approve of."  Kitzinger described how things had changed in Britain. Women there are able to dehver on mats if they choose and, "once you get women onto the floor, obstetricians are  no longer interested."  Eight hospitals in England have instaUed pools to enable women to have water births.  The pools are in daUy use and half the women who use them actually dehver their babies in the water. Eighty-five percent of babies are delivered by midwives in Britain.  For Kitzinger, the midwife is the central person at a birth, the one who can balance the  physical events with the emotional.  On midwifery in Canada, Kitzinger was completely positive. "It is coming," she stated  firmly, as if to think otherwise might in itself prevent progress.  In the meantime, Kitzinger said it is important for women to take control of other  health concerns. She sees the women's health movement as having helped many women  to take care of themselves and to learn how to deal with doctors. She said: "When  women accept responsibiUty for themselves...and are part of the decision-making pro-  cess...we [remove] the basis of this expectation that doctors should take the whole responsibility for producing a perfect baby."  In Britain, there is a network of birth crisis counseUors who support women after  difficult births and help them: "slot together the pieces of their experiences to make a  whole." Kitzinger hkened the service to rape crisis counselling and stressed how important it is for women to have someone to hsten, to beheve and to validate their experiences. She said that nurses, midwives and chUdbirth educators aU have: "the natural  power to heal, to make whole."  Delegates again responded to Kitzinger's words with examples of how nurses and mid-  wives in BC are working to change birthing experiences for women.  "It's very difficult  to turn birth into  a crisis at home..."  Penny, of the Pacific Post-Partum Society, described her work in hstening to women  who call for general information but who, when gently encouraged, reveal that they are  in fact depressed and need help. The society provides support groups as weU as individual counselling for women. A nurse described pre-natal tours at her hospital which include open discussion of birth plans or other conceriis.  Kitzinger underscored the importance of women working together. She suggested that  women working within the medical system form study groups where they can share ideas  and decide upon strategies. They should endeavour to hold workshops with obstetricians  to look at recent research findings and to chaUenge doctors to consider the results and  how hospital practice might change.  Kitzinger said: "This is pohtics [and] we need good strategies."  In the end, Kitzinger beheves that we must look critically at the system and the society which continues to demean and disempower women. But she is optimistic: "We are  hke water that may seem weak...but, steadily, over time, we can gain the power to cut  rock."  Pam Galloway is a writer with an interest in women's health issues.  * KINESIS  KINESISc Commentary  We want you to pay attention  In the year 5751:  by Silva Tenenbein  and Karen X. Tulchinsky  So here it is, nearly Chanukkah. Time  to dig out the draydels. Polish the meno-  rah. Buy some latke ingredients. (Mmmm,  sour cream.) Time sure has flown. It hardly  seems hke two months since Simhat Torah.  But then, that month, with Rosh Hashana  and then Yom Kippur and then Sukkot and  then Simhat Torah—aU within three and a  half weeks—always seems to make us exhausted. Exuberant, but exhausted. And  this year, with the Christian Thanksgiving falling on the same weekend as Sukkot,  those of us who were being polite and observing other people's festivals are really  worn ragged.  Speaking of being pohte, some of us decided, again, this year not to make a fuss  about the Take Back the Night march being  scheduled on Rosh Hashana We just didn't  go again. We wonder if the organizers have  any idea how many more women would participate if it wasn't on this holy day. Would  you come to our march if it was on Easter  Sunday? Maybe we know you won't be in  church, but stUl we think you'd be offended.  Nu? We're not aU in shul on Rosh Hashana,  but it's stiU a special day, a tradition, and  it's an ignor-ance, in the sense of being ignored, to have a march on such a special  day.  We would never do it to you and we cannot understand why you persist in doing it.  Do you not care? Do you think you wUl assimilate us? Not hkely. We have a long history. This is the year 5751 by our reckoning.  Maybe we don't want to be assimilated.  We've noticed that other people have  other kinds of holidays. How could we not  notice? Ever tried not to notice HaUowe'en?  Then the day after HaUowe'en, down come  the orange pumpkins and the black cats and  up goes the red tinsel and the green boughs.  How could we not notice?  You know, 3,000 years ago the Druids in  England would sacrifice a white ox under an  oak tree at the winter solstice—sun return,  their New Year. They would hang the ox's  entrails on an evergreen tree and predict the  events of the new year by how the entrails  hung. People have been hanging long shiny  red things on evergreen trees at the winter  solstice ever since. Interesting tradition.  Also, there've been a couple of dozen  messiahs in the last few thousand years, who  were born of a virgin on the winter solstice,  died in the spring equinox and rose again  three days later. It gets difficult to sort them  out, there were so many. Of course we can  recognize Jesus. The only Jew among them.  One of ours that made good. We should be  so proud.  So, what's this about?  Difference. Different perspectives. Not  everyone is a Christian. This is often forgotten at this time of year—except by those  of us who are not Christians. Christmas.  Christ Mass. Christmas is a Christian holiday. We often hear from people that Christmas is not a Christian holiday, that it's a  Christian calendar this year, it was September 20th and 21st. Yom Kippur is 10 days  after Rosh Hashana. These ten days are  called the Days of Awe. Yom Kippur itself is  caUed the Day of Atonement. A week after  Yom Kippur is Sukkot. Sukkot is the celebration of the harvest. Then a week later is  Simhat Torah: a celebration of the Torah.  (The Torah? There is the Law, and then  there is the Soul of the Law, caUed the Zo-  har, or Book of Splendor. The Torah is the  Soul of the Soul of the Law.)  On Simhat Torah, Jews celebrate the existence of the Soul of the Soul of the Law.  North American festival celebrated by people who are not Christians, that you don't  have to be Christian to have Christmas; a  tree, some gifts. Santa Claus. Elves. What's  the matter with presents and good cheer  and a couple of days off? Why do we have  to be strident? Denying people their traditions, their httle bit of fun?  Our traditions get lost in your traditions.  Would it be so difficult, in October, to wish  us Happy New Year? Would you choke to  wish us written in the Book of Life? We  would have such an easier time wishing people happy holidays in December if you had  done the same for us in October.  Not instead. As weU. Us too. Them too.  Everyone. With all our divergent pasts.  So, what's this about?  This article is written by Jews. Rosh  Hashana, Yom Kippur, Simhat Torah,  Sukkot, Channukah are Jewish holidays.  Rosh Hashana is the New Year. On the  It's quite a celebration. Of course, not all  Jews actually do something to celebrate  that day—or any other day. Not aU of any  group does any one thing at any one time.  Two months after Simhat Torah is  Chanukkah. Chanukkah is the Festival of  the Lights. It doesn't have anything at aU to  do with Christmas. Chanukkah is not Jewish Christmas. Jews don't have Christmas  because we're Jews and by definition we  don't have Christmas—even though Jesus  was a Jew. Chanakkah is the celebration of  a pohtical victory of freedom from religious  persecution. It is something of an irony that  Chanakkah, of aU Jewish holidays, is persistently mis-interpreted as some Jewish version of a Christian festival. Chanakkah is  very much a Jewish holiday. It has been  around much longer than Jesus (who must  have celebrated it too, because, after aU, Jesus was a Jew. A Sephardic Jew, incidentally. Not white).  Facsimile • Electronic Publishing & Graphic Design Service  1670 Commercial Drive    •    Ph 253-3153    •    Fax 253-3073  We've driven by... it was nice.  o  Fix your bureaucracy  up at DataGraphics,  Stationery & Office Supplies • Artists' Materials • Copying  146Q Commercial Drive • Ph 255-9559  .—   FOR  Feminist  THE0RY&  ITERATURE  parTacus  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B1H6 TEL. 688-6138  In the spring Jews have Passover, a celebration to commemorate our exodus from  Egypt, the crossing of the Red Sea, Many  Christians don't even seem to know that  the Last Supper was a Passover Seder.  They make the story of the Last Supper have bread in it. There is no bread  at Passover. Matzoh, unleavened bread, is  eaten at Passover. No leavening.  So, what's this about?  What's this got to do with you?  With all due respect, we want you to pay  attention. We hve here too. Learn about our  traditions. You might hke them. We do. We  know lots about your traditions. We can't  help it. To learn the same amount about our  traditions would take a httle research. The  information about our traditions isn't avaUable in every store window, hke it is about  yours. But it is avaUable.  Chanukkah is anywhere from early December to mid-January. The Jewish calendar is lunar and matches differently every  year with the solar Christian calendar. This  year Chanakkah is December 12th to December 20th.  At Chanukkah wish us Happy Chanukkah. In the faU, wish us Happy New Year.  (We say L'Shana Tova. You could say that,  too.) In the spring wish us Good Yon-  tif. Chanakkah is not a difficult word to  remember—and it's not Jewish Christmas.  Don't wish us a Happy Jewish Christmas  or Season's Greetings. We wUl just assume  that you mean your season. Happy Holiday is not good enough either. Christians  say Happy Hohday to each other at Christmas. We've noticed this. Don't ask us what  we are doing for Christmas. We don't do  Christmas.  Find out what we do do. Find out when  our holidays are. Don't organize events on  those days.  So, what's this about?  This is about mutual respect. We want  you to start holding up your end of the relationship.  Silva Tenenbein is a Jewish dyke student at Simon Fraser University who  studies the public discourse in psychiatry. Karen X. Tulchinsky is a Jewish  lesbian political activist writer.  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  873-3278  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  FAMILY PRACTICE  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  11 E. BROADWAY AVENUE  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  873-1991  KINESIS //////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////////^^^^  Arts  Jude Narita  Compelling, brilliant theatre  by Lily Yuriko Shinde  Jude Narita, a Japanese American Sansei (third generation Japanese American) writer-actor performed Coming Into  Passion—Song For A Sansei in Vancouver during the last week of October. Her  show was a co-presentation of the PoweU  Street Festival and the Vancouver East Cultural Centre and was Narita's Canadian debut.  Coming Into Passion—Song For a  Sansei ran for 19 months in Los Angeles  and is now being produced in New York  City. Narita received the 1989 Los Angeles  Drama Critic's Awards, and a 1987 Drama-  logue and Jimmie award from the Association of Pacific American Artists. In the last  two years she has performed at over two  dozen Asian events and women's festivals  around the United States, and was chosen  to represent American theatre in the 1988  Mark Taper/USIA tour of Poland.  Narita is a multi-talented performer; she  not only wrote the script, but acted and  produced this powerful and moving show.  Her motivation to perform and produce  this show resulted from her frustration with  the limited and negative stereotypical roles  given to Asian American women by the  mainstream theatre groups.  Cobi Narita, her mother, was her biggest  inspiration and supported and encouraged  her to pursue a theatrical career. Narita acknowledges and credits her mother for her  success as an actor.  The show is structured with "Judith"  having a series of Night/Dreams in which  Narita characterizes the hves of five different Asian women. The first vignette,  "Good Job", was about a Vietnamese barmaid/hooker who survives by making her  hving through prostitution. She considers  herself lucky to have such a "good job" because "she did not have to work in cages"  hke the other prostitutes on the street. She  tells stories of her experiences with her customers and then reads an old letter from a  geous mother, and "Little Boy", the powerful atomic bomb. Narita's graceful hand  movements, expressive face and powerful  dehvery graphicaUy described the devastation of nuclear war.  "Nisei Days," was a poignant vignette  about Nobuko, a Nisei (second generation  Japanese American) who breaks the sUence  of Nisei experience by confronting a white  man's racism. She seemed very afraid, almost meek and mild-mannered in her approach and ends by saying: "Have a nice  day." This was the reaUty of the Nisei generation when speaking out was an act of  ...speaking out was an act of courage  G.L American ex-boyfriend who she naively  beheves wUl rescue her and her family to  immigrate to Los Angeles, "the City of Angels." This is a painful story of a Vietnamese  woman who is a survivor/victim hving in a  war-torn country.  In the second piece, "No. 852," Lita,  a PhiUipina is undergoing a preliminary  video-taped interview—she is applying to  be a maU-order bride for the United States  market. WhUe she has the hope of meeting "the perfect future husband," the interviewer, via taped voice, bombards her  with condescending and degrading ques  tions and manipulates and coerces her to  agree to marry a possibly alcoholic, abusive  and older future husband. The interviewer's  obnoxious and exploitative tactics fiUed me  with rage; I noticed other women in the audience hissing at his questions.  In "Little Boy" (the nick-name given to  the Hiroshima bomb) Narita presents a legend/myth about a Japanese mother, her  daughter Kimiko and her chUdhood friends  trying to escape from the Hiroshima bomb.  This story was inspired by "ChUdren of Hiroshima," a coUection of letters from chUdren who survived the atomic bomb.  "Little Boy" exemplifies Narita's talent  as a writer and actor. It is beautifully poetic: "Kimiko arrives at the school where  the chUdren with flesh falling away Uke red  tissue in the wind, drop to the ground hke  black stones." Narita writes with such descriptive imagery, and the simplicity of this  fairy-tale touches the chUd in each of us.  Narita sat spotlighted on stage in her  shimmering blue kimono with the lavender fan backdrop. Her acting skiUs shone  as she smoothly shifted through the three  different characters: Kimiko, the helpless  and innocent chUd, the brave and coura-  courage. This story was inspired by Narita's  mother, a Nisei woman who experienced the  harsh reaUties of hving in Manzanar, an internment camp in the United States.  The final act, "Karate/Bamboo," seemed  to be the most popular with the audience. It  was a hvely vignette about a punky Sansei  teenager who rebels against her famUy traditions and the pressure to exceU academ-  icaUy. This energetic and comical story is  closest to Narita's heart. Of this piece, she  says, "I was tall, sarcastic and had a loud  laugh. I reacted against that by dressing aU  in black, and though I was a high achiever,  I created a lot of animosity."  The depictions of the Vietnamese and  PhiUipina women in the first two vignettes  lacked depth and dimension. Is it culturaUy  appropriate or pohticaUy acceptable for an  Asian American woman to portray the hves  of a PhiUipina and Vietnamese woman?  However, I would rather see an Asian American actor repre sent so-called Third World  Asian women than white women actors.  And I wonder if the rest of the audience  analyzed these characters or did they see it  as purely entertainment?  Narita minimized the pohtical impact of  her show with her closing personal message.  She impUed that in our hearts and souls we  are aU one and in the end nothing matters.  It smeUed of the esoteric new-age 'chUdren  of the universe' phUosophy that is practiced  by people with privUege. It certainly did not  seem to have any connection with the five  women in the show. Narita's show is brilliant enough without pacifying other people's hberal guUt.  Overall, I enjoyed Coming Into Passion—Song For A Sansei. Certainly it  touched my heart and left me emotionaUy  fractured as it took me on an emotional  roUer-coaster ride for weeks afterwards. I  feel angry and sad that the oppressions of  racism, sexual exploitation and victimization of Asian women around the world are  stiU a reality.  It was heart-warming and empowering  to see the inner strength and resistance to  racism of the Japanese American women in  the show; but most of aU it made me proud  of who I am, a Japanese Canadian woman.  Thank you, Jude Narita, for a most com-  peUing show.  Lily Yuriko Shinde is a Japanese  Canadian Nisei living in Vancouver and  practising accupuncture and massage,  No conquest,  no invasion  by Sherrill Rowland  GERTRUDE STEIN AND  A COMPANION  by Win Wells  directed by Sandra E. Fellner  Gertrude Stein And a Companion,  a production of the BLT Theatre Company, played recently in Vancouver to audiences at the Station Street Arts Centre.  I was there on opening night and I enjoyed the performance very much. In January, Gertrude Stein And a Companion  wUl play at the First Seattle Fringe Festival.  As women we are in a process of claiming our hterary inheritance from the women  who hved and died before us, and we're examining closely the terms of our legacy. Director Sandra FeUner suggests this is why  there's been a resurgence of interest in the  hves and work of women such as Gertrude  Stein and AUce Toklas. FeUner beheves that  Stein's message continues to encourage, and  that we may learn something to our advantage if we know more about Toklas' successful forty-year partnership with Stein.  The stage at the Station Arts Centre is  three-quarter round; there's no curtain and,  on stage, the attractive set was minimally  furnished with two chairs, a desk and a hat-  rack. Danielle Cormier, cast as Toklas, and  Linda QuibeU as Stein, were charged with  the responsibiUty of carrying us through the  play from beginning to end.  It began by looking hke a big job for  two people. In short, I could see there was  nowhere for any of us to hide if something  went wrong. In those first few moments on  opening night I felt some fear. But not for  long. The action on stage intrigued me eas-  Uy right at the start and continued to reward my attention throughout. And I did  emerge feehng encouraged and I think I can  say why.  See TOKLAS page 18  KINESIS Dec/Jan. 91 SsSSSS****^^^^^  ARTS  Who ordered this meaning?  Two kicks at the filmmaker's can  by Meg Edwards  NEW SHOES  by Ann Marie Fleming  Vancouver, Cinephile Dist, 1990  CONNECTING LINES  by Mary Daniel  Vancouver, CFDW, 1990  Cineworks is home to many alternative  filmmakers—artists whose visions are opposed to the mainstream cinematic culture  for pohtical, aesthetic or structural reasons.  These filmmakers challenge our traditional  ways of assimUating visual images: by rejecting conventional forms of narrative, they  comment on the pohtical or aesthetic aspects of the filmmaking process itself. Experimental films therefore play an important role in the growing need for visual literacy in our image-laden society.  ten surprised by the unstructured quality of  her feature. In New Shoes, the art of filmmaking becomes transparently self-reflexive  and Fleming's storyhne is saturated with a  self-conscious and mocking tone.  Fleming plays EmUy, a character obsessed by an act of violence in the hfe of  romantic costumes playing in the snow. According to Fleming, it is a personal symbolic order, not a structural or thematic order, that puUs together the many ideas and  images in this "long, short film."  Fleming poses many rhetorical questions.  In one scene entitled "The Act of Violence,"  At the November evening of the  retrospective series hosted by Cineworks on  their tenth anniversary, two films shown  made an interesting comparison of the experimental genre. Both New Shoes by  Ann Marie Fleming and Connecting Lines  by Mary Daniel experiment with the conventions of storyteUing and film narrative.  They are both personal explorations into  the nature of filmmaking and the expression  of 'self. And yet it is this simUar process of  self-discovery that hes at the heart of their  differences. Daniel analyzes our need for order and organization in a carefully structured and insightful film. Fleming, in the  same quest, rejects our need for structure  in a patchwork of images and ideas from her  Ufe.  Ann Marie Fleming took the runner-up  prize for Best Short Film at this year's  Festival of Festivals in Toronto as part of  the National Film Board's Five Feminist  Minutes. According to Fleming, her short  film (also titled New Shoes) has more of  an expected "true form" and people are of-  Ann Marie Fleming  her friend, Ellen (Valerie Buhagiar from  Roadkill). The story moves from flashbacks of an episode in Ellen's Ufe, in which  an ex-boyfriend shoots her in the back  and then kiUs himself, to the daily activities of an "emotionaUy neglected rich  kid from KitsUano" (Emily). Interspersed  within this theme are mysterious and obviously symbohc scenes from her unconscious  mind: black and white photos of a pregnant  woman, or EmUy and her friend dressed in  TOKLAS from page 17  For much of the history of theatre,  women weren't aUowed to stand on stage;  the few women's roles were played by men.  More recently women have appeared on  stage cast as objects to be acted upon by  the subjects of the patriarchal drama; stiU,  men only who act in the world, who  are the real actors. Often, the scene onstage  unfolds not unhke the street scene where  we learn that as women we don't really  have a right to be there on our own. When  men claim ownership of the street or the  stage, women's fight for hberation becomes  a struggle for reclamation of the right to be  on stage or in the street, and in the world.  When any woman successfuUy claims the  stage, in so doing she asserts, "I am the doer  who does, I am the author of my acts."  It's clear that Gertrude Stein, in real hfe,  in everyday hfe, was capable of giving just  such a performance, a strong presence in the  world. In this play, AUce Toklas is portrayed  equaUy as doer, and author of her acts.  When she wrote Gertrude Stein And  a Companion, playwright Win WeUs created two powerful characters, each with an  equal right to be present—heart and mind  and body. In so doing, WeUs draws a credible Alice Babette Toklas out of the shadows,  into the spothght with Stein. Each owns the  drama, each takes action in the world, and  each is portrayed in possession of an active hfe of the mind, with a capacity for  pleasures which are sensual and inteUectual  and comical. This is reclamation in process,  and I find it heartening—and encouraging—  to see quick-witted theatrical performances  portraying women as thinkers and doers.  DanieUe Cormier and Linda QuibeU  worked weU together. Their performances  were honest, weU-researched and accessible— dehvered straight-across. With intelligence, each firmly claimed the territory which was hers as performer; self-  possessed, she owned her words and her personal space. On stage, there was a mutual  respect displayed which seemed to extend  itself to the audience. There was no conquest and no invasion.  Interviewed near the end of her hfe, Stein  reflected: "Nobody enters into the mind of  someone else, not even a husband and wife.  You may touch, but you do not enter into  each other's mind." And in Tender Buttons, she wrote, "There is no use, there  no use at aU in smeU, in taste, in teeth, in  toast, in anything, there is no use at aU and  the respect is mutual."  Sherrill Rowland is the daughter and  granddaughter of single mothers; her  feminism marks their achievement and  reckons the cost.  Fleming tries to connect an unsuccessful  mugging—actuaUy an attempt to snatch  her purse—with the general sad and evil  state of the world. As EmUy rants about her  feehngs of inadequacy—"how can I carry  on hving when there is so much violence  and pain in the world"—the scene is interspersed with close-ups of h#r sUent male  companion's smirking face, and romantic  shots of EmUy tossing her hair on the beach.  Fleming's stream of consciousness style can  be humourous but there were many times  when some editing and ordering would have  helped to hold my attention.  Another question Fleming poses: "Why  does a man buy new shoes when he has  decided to kill himself?" is answered with  a life-confirming finale of polka dancing in  which the narrator interrupts to inform the  audience that her dancing was impaired by  an infected toe. New Shoes is a whimsical and self-indulgent film which, hke many  first films, tries to say too much.  Mary Daniel's Connecting Lines is simUar to New Shoes in that the narrator is  both the filmmaker and a character in the  film. As a narrator she discusses her past  and her ideas about the structure we impose on hfe in order to find or create meaning. However, she is not a protagonist, as is  EmUy. In Connecting Lines the narrator  graduaUy loses the main stage as we watch  and hsten to a parade of characters.  They sit in front of a fake train window whUe authentic landscapes of a trip  across America fiU the frame behind them.  As in a real train trip, the audience sits  back and hstens to the tales as if we too  had a scotch in hand and lots of time. And  whUe the narrator stiU figures—sometimes  as speaker and sometimes as Ustener—our  interest transfers to the structure of the film  instead of her character. We think about the  nature of storyteUing between strangers, we  think about the characters and where they  come from and what they say about American society. We think about the nature of  the human mind and its need for categories  and organization.  In some scenes we watch two empty seats  as we hear voices, and other times we see  the face of a hstener whUe someone else  speaks. Characters appear and disappear,  among them our narrator. At one point a  hstener faUs asleep as the narrator begins a  story about being on a train and watching  a film about a woman being on a train.  Both filmmakers draw the audience into  the process of filmmaking by making structure visible. But Connecting Lines is  structuraUy intriguing where New Shoes is  pedantic. Fleming insists that we step back  from her film and examine the process of  narrative filmmaking. Daniel's approach is  more subtle and approachable. Her playfulness with structure and order in Connecting Lines exemplifies her personal search  for meaning as the storyteUers echo this  continual quest through their conversations  and monologues.  Daniel's film exhibits a thoughtful process that creates layer after layer of meaningful connections. Fleming's style is free-  flowing and unstructured; she creates questions and hopes to answer them through the  natural process of her mind. The general  message of New Shoes seems to be that  there is no order or sense to the world.  To my mind, we look to art for clarity  and insights. Whether viewing art or creating it, we are constantly looking for patterns  and connections. Even the action of reject-  ...a potentially  good film in  need of a  good re-write  ing conventional forms is an act of ordering. In fact, it may not be possible to reject  the hnear, logical side of our minds without creating an unsatisfying film. If we reject form and structure entirely, hoping to  create meaning through haphazard editing,  the outcome is a potentiaUy good film in  need of a good rewrite.  However, in the last analysis it is always  interesting to see a woman tackling these  issues and creating films that are wholeheartedly dedicated to her own hfe and her  own visions. We have watched many a male  artist express his views of hfe and love on  film. It was an unusual and rewarding experience to view two female explorations into  the meaning of order, or if you hke, the order of meaning.  Meg Edwards is a freelance writer living in Vancouver.  18  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. 91 Arts  ///////////////////////^^^^^  Lauri E. Nerman  Ferron  PHANTOM CENTRE  Chameleon Records, 1990  Ferron's fifth album establishes her once  again as one of the most important and visionary songwriters of our time. After the  critical success of Shadows on a Dime six  years ago, I eagerly awaited the release of  her new recording. Long time fans and new  found fans wiU not be disappointed. That  said, if hsteners are expecting the acoustic  and minimalist sound of previous recordings, you are in for a sound with a difference.  Phantom Centre contains the lyrical  depth and density that has become the signature of Ferron's work. She quotes Marion  Woodman from her non-fiction work "Addiction to Perfection" in the hner notes: But  if you travel far enough/one day you  will recognize/yourself coming down  the/road to meet yourself.  This sums up the essence and power of  Ferron's writing: the abihty to capture and  articulate the struggle between our spirit  and the material world. Love is the cornerstone and in particular, self-love. As Ferron  states in "Stand Up": Now I can see love  the woman/and love in the man in  myself.  At first I thought the music was too orchestrated, overshadowing the power of her  lyrics. Yet after hstening many times, I  think Ferron's music is also brilliant.  One of my favourite Ferron pieces was  originaUy recorded on Ferron Backed Up  in 1978. (It is now considered a collector's  item due to Umited distribution.) "White  Wing Mercy" has been rereleased on this  album, literally a testimony to the timeless-  ness of her work:  J left my father as only daughters can  I chose to seem him as a monster of  a man  I left my mother in her frameless cage  But never could I shake her rage  This is an important album for any serious collector of contemporary music. Once  again Ferron shares her prophetic world  with us and in the process reflects our hves  in a profound and uncompromising manner.  Since words are such an integral part of her  work, it is only fair to let you know that the  CD released in Canada does not appear to  include lyrics. Ask your favourite store people about this. (Ferron appears in concert  January 27 in Vancouver. See ad this issue for detaUs.)  the jody grind  ONE MAN'S TRASH IS ANOTHER  MAN'S TREASURE  DB Rees, 1990  This album is sheer hstening joy from beginning to end. Lead singer KeUy Hogan  Murray originaUy co-founded the band to  play jazz and country covers for the fun of it.  While this is still evident throughout their  debut recording, what strikes me most is the  versatihty and seriousness of jody grind's  songwriting. "Florida Maine" is one of the  most riveting country ballads I've heard in  a long time. Murray also covers Elhngton's  "Mood Indigo" in a unique and haunting  manner. Her voice and phrasing is so powerful throughout the album that as much  as I resist admitting to the foUowing phenomenon: my feet could not sit stiU during  her classic version of Burt Bacharach and  Hal David's "Wishin' and Hopin'."  Jody grind takes its name from a world  war two expression for men who dated  "sweethearts" of overseas GIs. Most of their  songs blend new sounds with a reverence    o  for the classics. One of my favourite albums    <  in the past year. AvaUable from DB Rees,    &  432 Moreland Avenue N.E., Atlanta, GA,    $  30307. |  Alice Coltrane-Turiyasangitanada  DIVINE SONGS  Jowcol Music, 1987  I wanted to review this cassette for a long  time but hesitated because of the negative  associations I have with most new age music. H you are simUarly prejudiced, I recommend suspending judgement and Ustening  to this astounding voice and chant work.  Alice Coltrane is no stranger to the music world. She is a prolific and has an important place in jazz fusion as a keyboardist.  She and her late husband John Coltrane received a lot of attention in the early 60s  as they introduced western audiences to Indian, African and Latin musical influences.  Alice Coltrane's passion for mysticism is  highlighted in this collection of transcendental hymns (bhajans). Sung in Sanskrit, these  Anna Domino  To my dehght, I discovered that one of the  members of the band was Charlotte Caf-  fey, formerly of that fab girl group The Go-  Gos. There were less than a hundred people  in attendance and aU of us were witness to  an evening of folk-rock harmonies extraordinaire.  The point of aU this is that I wish their  record company had put the same thought  into their record cover as the Vancouver  person who promoted their show. Perfect  View is an album I ignored for about six  months due to the rather "bimbette" visuals  on the front. I would never have imagined  the level of inteUigence and insight that is  buried inside this awful cover.  The Graces are a great band specializing in a meUow, folk sound reminiscent of  chants combine the melodic with the avant-  garde. Her voice hfts the hstener to a level  of beauty and relaxation. I usuaUy play this  tape when I am feehng reflective and want  the quiet of music. There are few words to  describe this cassette except to say, whenever I play it for someone who is dismissive  of new age music, I have discovered it a few  months later in their music collection. Distributed by Avatar Book Institute P.O. Box  7434, Thousand Oaks, CA, 91359.  The Graces  PERFECT VIEW  A & M Records, 1989  Last year whUe visiting Vancouver, I had  the opportunity to see The Graces at a local club. I knew about the gig because of  a dynamic black and white poster that hit  aU the empty fences and outlets in the city.  the harmonies of Cass Elhot and Michele  Philips of the Mamas and Papas. "Tomorrow" is a powerful indictment of our society's treatment of the homeless. Ignore the  sUly visuals and treat yourself to a gem of  a record. The Graces are Gia Ciambotti,  Meredith Brooks and Charlotte Caffey.  Anna Domino  COLOURING IN THE EDGE AND  THE OUTLINE  Giant Records, 1989  Anna Domino's third recording consists  of six songs which are rich with texture and  atmosphere. Based in Belgium, Canadian-  born Domino is virtuaUy unknown in her  native country. Distribution of her material remains a problem. HopefuUy this wUl  change as more hsteners begin demanding  her work.  Colouring in the Edge and the Outline explores a personal dream-like world  in the pop vein. On a recent CBC interview, Domino discussed the importance of  pop music in reaching a mass audience in  an intelligent and thoughtful manner. Her  pieces balance an upbeat dance sound with  spoken singing.  "88" is one of my favourite songs these  days. Her complex use of keyboards and  electronic sounds complement the simplicity of her lyrics to create an intense piece.  She states:  Lost in imaginary mystery  a view that has no end  I am alone without laws of time or  gravity  and I can dream where reality can  end...  will wonders ever cease  Colouring in the Edge and the Outline is a positive testimony to being alive  in the world without sounding cliche. Contrary to her eariier work, Domino's lyrics  reflect the personal without self-confession.  It's time more people discover this powerful songwriter. Available from P.O. Box 800,  RockviUe Centre, N.Y. 11571.  A Postscript of Sorts: I am particularly interested in reviewing material by unsigned musicians in all genres. It is very difficult for me to access most of you due to distribution  problems. In future columns I want to  try and have a balance of local musicians as well as the unusual independent label material. Send me your tapes,  how we can order them, how much they  cost and bio information (a must). Send  to: Lauri Nerman c/o Sub Productions,  University of Victoria Student Union  Building, University of Victoria, P.O.  Box 3035, Victoria B.C. V8W 3P3 (no  phone calls please.)  KINESIS Dec/Jan. 91 South Africa  G  cina  M  by Gcina Mhlope  as told to Louie Ettling  transcribed & edited by Lizann Foster  Gcina Mhlope—South African praise poet, storyteller, actor, director—is featured in the film Songololo: Voices of Change which played this fall in various Canadian cities. Mhlope participated in the Vancouver International Writers Festival  in October where she talked with Louie Ettling about her childhood, her evolution  as an artist and the politics of culture in South Africa.  I was born in Hammarsdale, near Durban. My mother was from a place caUed Mount  Frere in the Transkei—she was a domestic worker—and my father was born in Hammarsdale. My mother was not married to my father—she had other chUdren in the  Transkei. It was considered a disgrace that she had had a chUd whUe working in the city.  So she gave me to my father and he took me to his wife. He was married and had seven  chUdren. God knows what the woman said when my father brought her a present—a  chubby httle baby. So there I was. And that is how I got to be hving with my father's  famUy.  I was brought up by my father's eldest sister, who was much older than him. I caUed  her Gogo, which is Zulu for grandmother. She had left her husband because he had  wanted to take another wife because Gogo had not given birth after many miscarriages—  but she did not want to share him with anyone. That was quite revolutionary in her  time. She had buUt a house not far from my father's home.  Gogo had a garden with bananas on one side of the house and flowers in the front.  One day I decided that I would play at being a teacher. I pretended that the plants  were pupils and I was their teacher and would teach them aU the things I had learned at  school. When the flowers refused to learn, I would beat them up.  My grandmother would sit me down and tell me that everything that grows has feelings and that flowers had feehngs in the same way I had feehngs. It hurt them [to be  beaten]. I never forgot that. These days when people are so concerned with the environment, I remember her telhng me that. Although my grandmother was a strong woman  and strong in her convictions, she was stiU very caring. Being with her was a lovely basis  for my chUdhood.  When I was 10 years old, my biological mother came to visit me at Easter time. I had  forgotten about her—I considered my father's wife as my mother. When she turned up,  I remember how I used to laugh at her because she spoke Xhosa ... She went away and  she probably was sad that I had acted that way. My hfe returned to normal and I didn't  think about her again untU the end of the school year in Standard Two [Grade 4].  I was very excited. I had passed and we were going away with Gogo to Port Shep-  stone. Our bags were packed and everything was ready. I was alone at home when a  white car suddenly showed up. In it was my biological mother and her madame —the  woman she worked for in Durban. They had come to pick me up. They dragged me into  the white car and 10 hours later I found myself in the Transkei.  I had been stolen. We chUdren had grown up with a fear for a white car that would  steal chUdren who did not eat their food or pohsh their shoes. It was hke the "bogeyman." My family in Hammarsdale did not know where I was. They advertised on the radio and in the newspapers—they had descriptions of me and the clothing I wore that  day. After three months, my mother told them where I was. She felt that I was her chUd.  My grandmother was heartbroken. I had been her hfe.  In Hammarsdale I had been joUy and funloving. Now I cried aU the time ... I had  to learn to fit into the hfestyle of the Transkei. There was no time for playing with  dolls and teaching flowers. There was no fancy clothes or trips to visit relatives. In the  Transkei one had to work. And probably because I didn't look hke the Transkein people  ( I didn't discuss this with my mother) my mother drUled me. Whatever the culture expected a httle girl to do I had to do weU. I had to learn how to balance a bucket of watei  on my head, to collect firewood to do aU these things properly. My mother was very hard  on me.  Because there was no hope of me going to highschool, I was terrified—girls my age  were being married off. I was told many times that certain things had to be done because of tradition. And I knew any day would be my day. I used to hsten to the horror  stories of the first night of marriage when you got raped basically. There is no other way  to describe that.  My oldest sister [my mother's chUd] had run away from her husband and come home,  to everyone's surprise. She had heard how good I was at school. She knew that my  mother wanted me married but she had saved money for me to go to boarding school.  She presented my mother with the forms that said that I had been admitted to the  boarding school and the uniforms for the school which was near Flagstaff. Within two  days of her arriving I was off to boarding school. I couldn't beheve it.  Let me just talk about my mother one more time. I've only been talking about the  bad things I remember about her. There was a young aunt of mine who told me stories about my mother and the good times in her hfe. My mother's name was Nomanina  which means "the favourite of the mothers." She was invited aU over the Mount Frere region to dance at weddings. When I heard these stories I would try to imagine my mother  srmling and happy and not angry about anything. My mother had a beautiful body and  it was easy to imagine her a httle younger dancing and being happy.  I Liked Myself, I Liked My Voice...  At boarding school I saw a traditional praise poet. A traditional praise poet is a person  who dresses colourfully and accompanies the chief/king and performs poetry that boasts  about the achievements of the tribe and its growth—about the way the king was elected  and the tribe's history. He sometimes criticizes things, too.  hlope  When I was introduced to this praise poet, I felt that he baptised me when he shook  my hand. And even though at that time I had never written a poem in my hfe I decided  then and there that I was a praise poet. And that was a turning point in my hfe. I was  17-years old. When I got back to school I felt so restless but I didn't know what to do—  it never connected that I was wanting to write, untU I sat down and I wrote my very  first poem.  When I had finished I stood up and said it out loud and it was so great to hear my  voice ... And that was the first time I hked my voice and I hked myself and I have  never stopped writing since then.  I wrote about aU kinds of things. My writing was hke therapy. I could describe things  on paper that I could not describe by talking to a person. My poetry was very personal  and my short stories were very much about my inner feehngs. I didn't particularly want  to show them to anybody. But one day, in 1977,1 decided to send a story to a magazine and they printed it and sent it back to me at school. And I saw my name in print:  GCINA MHLOPE. And I read the story with such interest hke I had never seen it before. I put it under my pUlow and ran around the whole school and looked at it again. It  was a lovely feeUng.  In 1978 I went to Johannesburg, looking for a job and for accommodation. I hved with  my sister—although I was not aUowed to because of the apartheid laws which prohibit  domestic workers from sharing their rooms with anyone. I felt very lonely because the  space was so cramped. We got on each other's nerves. I spent lots of time reading.  I finaUy got a job at a factory at Doornfontien in the centre of the city where I earned  R11.00 [about $22] a week. It was boring work but at least it was something to do. Because I was not aUowed to Uve with my sister I had to leave the room at a certain time  and come back at a certain time.  One day it was raining and I was walking toward the bus stop when I needed a toilet.  I saw this public toilet and I went inside and closed the door and began to read. It was  very cozy and very clean. For many days afterward I kept on going back there to wait for  the bus. One day I decided to buy myself a notebook and I used to write in that toilet. I  wrote my first Enghsh poem there. It was my httle study.  I later went to Uve in Alexandra township where I met other writers, which was good  because writing can be a very lonely thing. There was an organisation called PEN for  writers and when they had a conference I went and met people hke Ezakiel Mphahlele,  Eugene Skeef and Nadine Gordimer and Lionel Abrahams. It was the first time I had  met professional writers. It was from these meetings that I was introduced to the people  at Staffrider magazine. I wrote an article for Staff-rider and also had poetry published  in other magazines. People began to hear about me and wanted to know who Gcina  Mphlope was.  I started to go to poetry readings in the townships. They would have aU-night poetry  readings with the music of drums and flutes to accompany the readings. I felt so alive  there. I felt that I could incorporate what I had seen a praise poet do with a contemporary style of poetry. One day I performed my poetry, without drums or anything. I was  the only woman there but that did not bother me. I wanted to grow and become more  involved with this kind of performing. I never wanted my poetry just for publication or  to be read sUently.  [Eventually] I performed at conferences and writers workshops and at rallies hke those  held by the South African Federation of Women, which I joined. That was my introduction into the hfe of public performances—I have never thought of it as show business. I  am not a pohtician. I do not hke writing speeches. Some people wrote speeches, I wrote  poetry.  I hved in the women's hostel [in Alexandria]. These single sex hostels are the sickest thing that the apartheid system created. In this one buUding there were almost 2000  Those women will not stop fighting now.  They had to fight for their children  and now they are fighting for every child...  women. The budding was five stories high. There were five women to a room. The room  just had five beds and a single hght. It was very difficult to be a writer under those circumstances.  But I persevered because there was something driving me inside. I really wanted to  write. I used to wait untU everyone was asleep and then I would hght a candle next to  my bed and write. I used to wait untU people left on Fridays to go out or to visit their  husbands. I would stay up aU night and write. And that's how I would spend the whole  weekend. Then one day someone gave me a typewriter because they could not beheve I  wrote aU those pages by hand. I had never used a typewriter before but I sat down and  just used it. It made a terrible noise. But I didn't stop. The day Gcina Mphlope stops  writing is the day Gcina Mphlope stops hving.  In the 10 years I have hved in Johannesburg, I have found myself growing and moving  into aU sorts of things. I stiU perform my poetry but I also act on stage and direct plays.  breaking tfle   barriers  Gcina Mhlope  I have begun to write and perform chUdren's stories—traditional African folk tales that  Gogo told me. I think I am so busy because there is a shortage of women in the arts. I  would have enjoyed being directed by a woman if there were more women directors. Instead I had to become a director myself. I would have enjoyed acting in another woman's  play if there were more women playwrights. There is a shortage of dignified roles for  women. I have had to try to create dignified roles for other women and for myself.  If They Do Not Have Skills...  I really love storyteUing and I really love chUdren. StoryteUing incorporates so many different art forms—mime, singing, acting. StoryteUing also breaks through cultural barriers: everyone loves hstening to stories. And this is so important in a country hke South  Africa—a country of so many barriers. I transcend these barriers as I sit in front of poor  white chUdren. And when I stand in front of all these chUdren at the school assembly I  can feel my grandmother smUing at me.  I also use the opportunity I have at the schools to tell the chUdren that even though  the Bantu Education they receive is so inferior they should use it to get a better education for themselves. When I was at school, even though I had such a good academic  record, I only knew about 20 percent of what I should have known. And I feel that even  though protest and marches in the street are important, if we do not have any skiUs we  cannot do anything really important. We cannot take over the country and rule it if we  do not have skiUs. So at the end of my performances at schools when the chUdren ask  me questions I tell them to go for sldUs. I tell them that show business is not glamourous  ... So I tell them that they must go for sldUs and make that their weapon.  Living in South Africa in 1990 has been strange. It has been a very fast moving year.  Everything about the country is so unpredictable. One never knows what is going to  happen next week or next month. The release of Mandela and other pohtical prisoners  and the pohtical rallies in the streets of major cities were the high points. The kiUings  among Black people were some of the low points.  It is very difficult for a writer to try to see where it is going. I do not even know how  to write about it. It has been so weird. I visualize it as growing pains or teething problems. There are so many different ideologies and different ideas of how to get to the same  goal: a free South Africa. But there are more than enough people who have a good heart  in South Africa in order to make South Africa a peaceful country. People are very concerned about the chUdren and they want to ensure that the chUdren are able to have  what the adults had to hve without for so long.  The chUdren of 1990 have suffered so much. They have been to jaU and been tortured  by security poUce who sexuaUy molest them. They have seen their parents being kUled in  front of them. They have seen so many dead bodies. There is so much work to be done  to correct these things. Sometimes people think that I am being too optimistic but I re  aUy beheve that there are many people who are working to make change real. There are  people who work in very minor ways, hke the work done in literacy because the education systems faded so many chUdren.  There are people who are working to aUeviate the housing problem. There are so  many homeless people in South Africa. People seem to worry more about the elephants  than people without homes. Other people are working towards empowering workers so  that they can understand the forces that determine their work hves. They learn about  the economy and about recessions and how the fluctuations in the money markets affect  them.  It is ridiculous the way the media has portrayed the fighting among the people as being tribal. The Xhosa and the Zulu have hved together for centuries and we do not hate  each other because we speak a different language. My mother was Xhosa and my father  was Zulu. I am the product of the love between these two cultures. People realize now  that the [violence] was instigated to slow down the process of change. It was hke someone put a boulder in the way of a fast moving car. Our struggle is moving very fast. We  are very aware of the way that we have lost a sense of community.  The apartheid system divides families through things hke the single sex hostels and  the migrant labour system, where the father has three weeks of the year to visit his wife  before he [returns to work], leaving her pregnant again. How can the feminist cause work  in a situation hke that?  The situation has made people who would not normally be involved in poUtics very  poUticaUy conscious as their chUdren were taken away and thrown into jaU. ChUdren and  parents look to each other for support as they fought the system. They join organizations hke the Detainees Parent Support Committee and learn more about pohtics. Those  women wUl not stop fighting now. They had to fight for their chUdren and now they are  fighting for every chUd and that is really something ...  I find it very strange that people from so many places all around the world say that  they care about what happens in my country, but do they care about the Native people  in their own country? How can they think that they can make my hfe better when they  cannot improve the hves of the American Natives or the Aboriginal people in Australia?  I feel a kinship with the Native people in these countries. I have been reading their poetry and I believe that aU people of colour have a way of surviving. And I also think that  they find it unbehevably easy to forgive. I do not ever want to hate every white person  in South Africa. I have no right to do that. It is not true that every white person makes  every Black person suffer.  War drives people to so many lows. They cannot accept that they were wrong. It's hke  a game of soccer. It is quite a male game. And I sit late at night and wonder what would  happen if women had more power than they do. But I do not think that I wiU find out in  the next fifty years.  K'NESIS  l<|NESISDec/Jan. 91 <ssss*ss**s*********^^  Arts  Taking voice, shaking silence  by Gladys We  LANGUAGE IN HER EYE:  Views on Writing and Gender by  Canadian Women Writing in English  Ed. by Libby Scheier, Sarah Sheard  and Eleanor Wachtel  Toronto: Coach House Press, 1990  The editors of Language in Her Eye  asked women writers in Canada for their  opinions on feminism and writing: "Has  feminism had an affect on your writing? Do  considerations of race, class or sexual orientation affect how you write? Are you familiar with the various currents in feminist hterary theory?"  There were as many types of answers  to these questions as there are writers  in this book. Some wrote stories, others  wrote about the process of writing a story.  Some wrote poems, others wrote mini-  autobiographies. This collection was a place  to express their feehngs about the relationship of feminism to their hves, and the relationship of the pohtics of feminism to their  writing.  For many women, writing is a means of  self-discovery and finding a voice. However,  for many other women, writing and language is just another means of colonization  and oppression, not only by a patriarchal  society, but also by other women. One of  the major subtexts in this book is the issue  of racism. Lenore Keeshig-Tobias and Lee  Maracle write of the "loss of Native sensibility" in stories which are appropriated from  Native women and told in white women's  words.  Keeshig-Tobias prefaces her essay with  the quote: "There are two things in hfe  that must not be taken without consent.  One is the family story and the other  is a song. To take these without consent  is to steal—Akeywakeywaszee (earth Elder) Saulteaux." Maracle writes: "women of  colour are entitled to author their own sto-  ries...In the minds of some white women,  and many white men, women of colour do  not enjoy equal rights."  Anne Cameron, the non-Native author of  Daughters of Copper Woman, tells of being asked by Lee Maracle "to take a step or  two to one side. Not down. To one side,"and  to aUow Native women to teU their own  stories. Cameron equates this with her experience at a conference where "women  with tenure were standing up in their expensive clothes telhng other middle-class  white women about the problems of welfare  moms, working poor moms, my mom."  Marlene Nourbese Philip offers a broader  context for the debate on the appropriation  of voice by situating it in the context of censorship, which becomes a method of ignoring the racism inherent in the appropriation of another's words. When the Women's  Press of Toronto refused to accept certain  stories for an anthology because the writers were not part of the communities about  which they wrote, the Press was accused  of censorship. Philip notes, however, that  "the 'right' to use the voice of the Other  has...been bought at a great price—the silencing of the Other; it is in fact neatly  posited on that very sUencing." H their stories are told by others, then women of colour  are left with nothing to say.  Silencing Ourselves  The issue of self-censorship is another subtext in Language in Her Eye. This form of  censorship is visuahzed by playwright Mar  garet HoUingsworth as "a grinch, a gremlin,  a gnome on my shoulder—a httle voice that  pipes up in my ear every time I put pen  to paper: should you?—is it correct?—  how will this be evaluated?—how many  friends will you lose ?" Paulette Jiles describes feminist thought as "thought pohce," with "the obligation of worrying  about whether my writing was 'feminist  enough' or whether I would get criticized for  writing in pohticaUy incorrect ways, and so  on." Aritha van Herk warns, "Every pohticaUy appropriate position is dangerous because one can be appropriated by the position." Margaret Atwood adds, "Does it  make sense to sUence women in the name  of Woman? We can't afford this sUencing,  or this fear." And GaU Scott wonders, "But  how, precisely, does a feminist consciousness frame this movement towards the excessive (the unlawful?) without becoming  law itself?" Feminist writers must explore  this dUemma—of speaking outside a society  without creating a new society with equaUy  inviolable rules.  As I was reading Language in Her Eye,  the writers of the essays began speaking to  each other. They spoke of the voyage of self-  discovery which each of them had taken.  They spoke of the oppression women feel  in a patriarchal society. They spoke of the  oppression of racism, even in the women's  movement, and of the fear of speaking out  and being pohticaUy incorrect. However,  they aU speak out anyway, and open then-  thoughts to the reader. In their doubts  and questions, they explore the pluralistic  thought of feminists today. Language in  Her Eye is a vibrant book, full of the voices  of a virtual "who's who" of women writers  in Enghsh Canada.  There are two gaps in this book. The  first, as the editors acknowledge, is a lack  of a Quebecoise perspective, apparently due  to lack of space in the book and time for  translation. This is unfortunate, as many  Quebecoise writers are working from a  different perspective, of culture and his-  tory/herstory, and the contrast with the English writers would have been highly stimulating and provocative.  The other hole is the absence of Oriental writers. Many cultural origins were  presented. Himani Bannerji wrote about  the Indo-Canadian experience and the difficulty of translating, not just words, but entire thought patterns. Other women wrote  about being Ukrainian or Jewish and Canadian and femimst, and of the clashes of  those words/worlds. However, I would have  enjoyed reading Joy Kogawa's thoughts on  being Japanese-Canadian, or Evelyn Lau's  thoughts on the differences between traditional Chinese and Canadian cultures. StiU,  on the whole, I feel that Language in Her  Eye offers a comprehensive look at the  state of femimst writing in Canada today.  Some of the essays are academic in orientation and theory. However, most of the essays demonstrate the struggle for hfe, for  place and for recognition in a patriarchal  and racist society, a struggle in which feminists wUl see parts of themselves and their  own hves.  I feel that feminism is a process, otherwise it becomes a stagnant ideology. I was  once told, as I began the process of becoming a feminist, that there are as many types  of femimsts as there are women. In Language in Her Eye, a coUection of essays by  women on their thoughts on writing, this diversity of thought shines through. I am sure  I wiU be dipping into this book for inspiration in the future.  Gladys We is seeking her own identity as a writer. She participates in  the Women of Colour caucus at Kinesis  where many, of the issues raised in Language in Her Eye are also discussed. See  Bulletin Board for information about  the caucus' next meeting.  Heading into VIEW  by Jeanette Ashley  Vancouver audiences wUl be chaUenged by adventuresome performing arts in the upcoming Women in VIEW Festival when artists from across Canada perform at the Firehall Arts Centre and neighbouring venues Jan. 22-27. VIEW offers 76 performances of theatre, dance, music, performance art and hterary readings, as weU as a forum and a series  of workshops. This year's forum wUl investigate racism in the arts. Here's a sampUng of  some of the festival's offerings.  Gina Bastone—a real clown—is back in a workshop called "Make Me Laugh and Make  Me ReaUy Laugh." "So TeU Me..." concerns interviewing techniques, and Rita DevereU  leads the exploration of how to retrieve our personal stories. Marlene Swidzinski appears in  her one-woman show Confessions of a Polka Princess, where she examines her prairie-  Slavic origins. In Tales from a Broken Heart the audience is invited to join a group of  friends who have met every year since high school to review what has happened over the  past year. Random Acts returns with a presentation of Coffee Break Characters.  In dance, three local choreographers wUl be featured. Jennifer MascaU brings to the stage  a new solo work. Gisa Cole's Tabula Rasa has gripping music and demanding choreography. Cole also collaborates with Katherine LabeUe and Florence Lui (pictured left) to create three Uluminating vignettes bridging the gap between abuse and the courage to heal.  Barbara Bourget wUl perform her startling solo work, Impending Death.  The musical hneup includes the award-winning 35-member choir Elektra. Lori Freed-  man is back with her bass clarinet, and Secrets of Suzanne is a 20th century opera about  a woman who is a secret smoker. Shawna Dempsey appears in her performance art piece,  Mermaid in Love, a look at love, feminism and poUution. In Nenuphar, Sandra Lock-  wood explores a woman's relationship with her hfe support system. The festival's hterary readings highhght two 90 minute exchanges of poetry, plays and short stories. Reading writers from western Canada include Maria CampbeU, Susan Musgrave, PhylUs Webb  and Helen Potrebenko.  Tickets and programs can be picked up at the VIEW Box Office, #14-2414 Main St,  (875-6210) Dec. 3-Jan. 23. Gift certificates, bonus tags and super tags are avaUable. Tag  holders must choose shows and pick up tickets before the festival. Tag sales start Dec. 3  for one week. Individual ticket sales Dec. 14-19. Starting Jan. 24 the festival box office is  at the Firehall Arts Centre.  22I<JNESIS   Dec/Jan. 91 Arts  /^m^s^^^m^m^^  Changing language:  Being lost, then being found again  by Cathy Stonehouse  PROPER DEAFINITIONS  by Betsy Warland  Vancouver: Press Gang Pubhshers, 1990  take the red marking pen  and write with it  your dialect...  i beheve our survival depends on it  Proper Deafinitions is a collection of  theorograms, pieces of writing that map the  edge between poetry and theory, between  personal insight and pohtical vision. Written between 1984 and 1990, each theoro-  gram moves the reader in a radical way,  shifting the very ground we stand upon—  our learned assumptions about writing, the  words we use to name our experience.  Betsy Warland writes as a feminist  language-centred poet; her work takes off  from the premise that the way we learn to  put words together structures our experience. For Warland, a male- defined language  underhes the sUencing of women: "the masculine is not the mascuhne but the general." To challenge this is to make visible the  roots of words, the way their meaning has  changed, and to invent words and sentence-  structures that name a woman's experience  and call new patterns into being. For War-  land: "to change language/is to change everything."  To read Proper Deafinitions is to foUow  Warland's questioning resistance through a  labyrinth of spiralling words. It is an experience of being lost, then being found again.  Warland interrupts herself with hsts, wordplay and quotation, blank spaces, her 'texts  interrupting themselves to hear what is being said.' As readers we are called upon to  participate in her writing, to become conscious, for example, of articulating the word  "mother," how this feels in the mouth.  Her journey is to make visible her own  relationship to words and writing, as a les-  4T   &0* Studio ••  ■ffe - Sect ■■ 11 h 3  rlfflj (604) 980-4235  ' "IfB   261 East 1st Street  North Vancouver, B.C. V7L 1B4  >g. Trademark of Women's Work Screen  " ' it & Design Studio *  bian, an incest survivor, a white woman,  to "speak the unspoken, the taboo of [her  hfe]" and so discard the "precept that any  good writer worth his salt can write about  anything." This process of self-naming is for  Warland one of taking responsibiUty. In "a  white page" she writes as a white woman  for whom "the bottom hne is that I don't  beheve we (as women writers) can write as  naming through four previous books of poetry. She shares her vision of the lesbian  writer as: "along with other marginalized  writers, the voice(s) of the future."  Warland unravels the homophobic structures of language, the heterosexist conventions of love poetry, that conspire to sUence  lesbian experience, and reweaves them into  her own chosen shape. She describes how, in  her last coUection Double Negative, writing in collaboration with her lover, Daphne  Marlatt, became an integral part of this pro-  There are indeed  many paths  towards self-naming  Betsy Warland  a narrator or protagonist who is a person  of colour." Naming herself involves naming  who she is not. She has "finaUy come to Usten, not to take."  Through her coming out, coming into  herself as a lesbian writer, Warland calls  upon us aU as women to name ourselves,  to "become self-responsible." In "moving  parts," she traces her own path of self-  cess, to bring both lovers into dialogue. In  doing so, she calls upon us aU as women to  resist objectification.  For Warland, to claim her work as accessible to aU women, would be to claim  it as universal, a concept she resists. This  tension, between speaking to and speaking for [other women], is one of the  book's most powerful themes. She describes  how, in Double Negative, "the lesbian  body...enlarges its symbolism to embrace  any woman who is impassioned with her  own quest...for self-determination," At the  same time Warland states: "as a lesbian i  do not speak Universese."  After reading this, I wanted Warland to  write in more depth about class and language. How work or poverty shape our relationship to words, how class structure has  imprinted itself on language—for me these  are sUences too. In Proper Deafinitions.  she has chosen at times a difficult, scholarly  approach to Enghsh, with her use of dictionary definition, quotation, Latin and Anglo-  Saxon roots of words. I wanted her to examine this choice in relation to the white  European tradition of literature as a closed  space, the property of upper- or middle-  class, educated, (predominantly male) readers and writers.  When writing about her experiences of  remembering incest, Warland's language  becomes less playful, making clear that  sometimes the process of "telling it" is  chaUenge enough. She gives voice to the  brokenness, the fragmentation of repressed  memory: "that terrible nothingness...the  thick membrane of amnesia i had to pass  through."  The struggle involved in recoUecting the  pieces echoed for me the imaginative description of her Norwegian lather attempting to write a letter in Enghsh: "every word  had to be negotiated, every word had a  hfe of its own." In writing this, Warland  suggests there are indeed many paths towards self-naming, many strategies to challenge the 'deafness' of society's definition of  words, its presumed 'proper' ownership of  what we can and cannot say.  Proper Deafinitions is a rich and many  layered coUection that resists summary. As  Warland states: "It is in our difference that  we perceive each other," and to read this  book is to be challenged by her courage and  passion, invited in to find your own voice.  Cathy Stonehouse is a British writer  currently living in Vancouver.  Two poets worth a read  by Jill Mandrake  AGNES IN THE SKY  by Di Brandt  Winnipeg: Turnstone Press, 1990  THE    SPEED    OF    THE    WHEEL  IS UP TO THE POTTER  by Sandy Shreve  Kingston: Quarry Press, 1990  Contemporary smaU press poetry books  do not generaUy meet with any sort of fanfare from reviewers—in fact, a lot of new  poetry doesn't even get reviewed. There are  two reasons for this: First, for some reviewers it is difficult to review a newer poet's  work when she hasn't a lot of earlier stuff  to compare it with. It's a bit defeating to  write a 1,000 word review for 1,000 words  of poetry—you end up talking extensively  about poetics whUe almost ignoring the poems themselves.  Second, some reviewers feel that a large  amount of the new poetry is poorly written  and there is no point wasting paper (as in,  save-a-tree) on reviews that just trash somebody's work—why bother trying to analyze  poetry you are totally apathetic towards?  If it really is poorly written, as opposed to  just 20 years ahead of its time, it wUl trash  itself sooner or later.    One way to avoid writing reviews of poetry which the reviewer finds mediocre is  to focus only on poems which have a particular meaning and to concentrate on poets whose work stands out. Di Brandt and  Sandy Shreve are both fairly new poets  whose work is worth ferreting out, either  by getting their recently published books  or finding the various anthologies they've  made their way into this past decade.  Di Brandt's poetry, hke the way she  reads it, is subdued— almost restrained—  but with the angry force of unheard voices  behind it. In fact, she devotes a whole section of Agnes in the Sky to this forced  sUence (the section is entitled "if i told  even a shver of what i know/who would hsten"). Taking this further, a woman's view  of the evolution of love-language is featured  in "piecing together the alphabet of desire":  hke a chUd's cry the first k  oldest grammar torn from our  hps k made eloquent through  the years' twisting untU we're  stretched thin hke parchment  transparent if we're lucky k  occasionally luminous  To be "occasionaUy luminous" is about  aU we can hope to achieve in this hfe.  "the dead father (after barthelme)" is  about piecing together a new plan for  hving. Brandt acknowledges that Donald  Barthelme's novel The Dead Father, inspired her poem. The novel involves a group  of people who are attempting to bury the  dead father but are unable to do so, no matter how huge a hole they excavate, because  "the dead father" is an ancient idea not  person.  Brandt describes this as foUows:  getting   rid   of   the   dead   man   that  was the easy part digging uneasUy  through rubble to the fresh dirt  growing new fingers to rummage  in the earth nurture new seedhngs  This struggle to let go of oppressive systems and then try to buUd something new  is also painfuUy present in poems Uke "fathers never leave you" and "why my father  beat us (when we were httle.)" The reasonr  "So we would swaUow the Punisher."  Possibly one of the best poems in Agnes  in the Sky is "teaching in prison (for my  students at Stony Mountain)", for inmates  hving on the lonesome tiers inside, trying to  continue with snippets of formal education  as though grasping at straws, or more accurately: "the way you hsten to words/not  See POETRY page 24  KINESISq People and book in trouble  by Christine Morissette  PEOPLE IN TROUBLE  by Sarah Schulman  New York E.P. Dutton, 1990  The problem with book jackets is they  make promises they rarely keep. The cover  Ulustration may vaguely suggest the plot or  the characters, but the hner notes invariably describe a story in some other book.  Too often I wonder if, hke the urban legend of babies switched at birth, someone  switches books and covers before they leave  the printer's warehouse.  Sarah Schulman's latest novel People in  Trouble, is such a book. The opening hnes  sound promising enough:  It was the beginning of the end of the  world but not everyone noticed right  away. Some people were dying. Some people were busy. Some people were cleaning  their houses whUe the war movie played  on television.  The key people in trouble include: Peter and Kate, whose longtime relationship  is shaken by Kate's lesbian affair and her  increasing fascination with cross-dressing;  MoUy, who works in a dead-end job, has  a dead-end affair with Kate, and "tries to  keep her heart in one piece" as her friends  die from ADDS; and the gay men in New  York City whose community is changed by  this devastating health crisis. The characters connect through the impact of AIDS,  through the actions of Justice, a guerriUa  activist group (ACT-UP?), and through a  real estate mogul, Ronald Home (Donald  Trump?), who "presides over the city with  eviction notices and a strange new kind of  AU of the characters are people in trouble, yet only some of them drew my sympathy. Kate, an artist, sees the disintegration around her in visual terms, responding through her art, but not through her  heart. She plays at sexuahty, at relationships, never truly connecting to the world  around her:  ...here we are trying to have an illicit lesbian love affair...and aU around us people  are dying and asking for money.  Peter remains inert throughout the story,  sleepwalking through the turmoU in his personal Ufe. MoUy, a woman committed to  AIDS activism, takes two years to realize  she is getting nothing from her relationship  with Kate. Despite their possibihties, the  main characters seem contrived rather than  complex. Kate's adventures whUe cross-  dressing, Home and his "invented real estate," and the armageddon-style ending aU  seem caricatures, one dimensional, without  depth.  Schulman has not written a very complicated story, but she has clearly evoked  the distress of daUy Ufe with powerful de-  taU. And it is this detaU which provides  Schulman...has  clearly evoked  the distress  of daily life.  the colour, though not the substance, of her  book. She sets the disintegration caused by  AIDS against the backdrop of a city disintegrating: street people panhandle in every  neighbourhood, the homeless erect a tent  city in a downtown park, drugs and gangs  are a common sight. AU represent the diminishing value of human hfe.  Into this tableau of New York city, Schulman places the people affected by AIDS,  ordinary people whose hves are no doubt  POETRY from page 23  for the meaning but for the sound of/them  deep in the throat the way you/remember  behind these walls hunger..."  One thing Agnes in the Sky lacks which  was present in Brandt's first book of poetry,  questions i asked my mother (Turnstone  Press, 1987), is a certain type of comic relief. For example, in questions, there was a  series of six spiritual/sexual awakening poems called "missionary positions", foUowed  by the one-liner: "just kidding ma".  I'm sure. In any case, Agnes contains  some consistently good poems which are  best summed up by the author's phrase,  "prairie love songs."  The Potter's Wheel  Sandy Shreve's first book of collected poems, The Speed of the Wheel Is Up to  the Potter, is designed to be read at a  fairly quick pace. It is succinct and organized, with a language of flowing clarity. In  other words, this potter's wheel has speed.  The collection is divided into three  categories:  "AUegiances,"  about  the au  thor's friends and New Brunswick heritage; "Crumpled SmUes," work poems  upon which Shreve has buUt her reputation; and "Vanishing Point," about violence  against women and violence in general (titles hke "public execution" explain it at a  glance).  Representative verses for the first section can be found in "Distances," where the  author compares rural memories with the  present reality of city commuting:  the sterile scenery carries  no fragrance, except for the fumes  from other cars of other commuters  or a poignant blast  from a pulp miU imposed  some miles up the coast  As a member of the Vancouver Industrial Writer's Union, Shreve has written a  number of work poems, the best one probably being "White-Out." My introduction  to this and other poems by the author was  in a union newsletter almost a decade ago,  when such work poems were long-awaited  and tremendously popular. I've often wondered how many office assistants have read  this stanza with a kind of boding empathy:  the brain balks, savours four  o'clock—then veers toward fears  of permanent dyslexia  from fluorescent-lit  statistics  The situation gets worse. The boss—  clearly a one-minute-manager type—comes  in and says what an easy job it must be,  copying someone else's work aU day. The  poem's ending seems to indicate that the  best use for white-out is as a means to paint  decorative, subversive messages on one's office buUetin board.  In her final section, "Taking Back the  Night" stands not only as one of the best  poems in the book, but as an urgent and  motivating message to aU women. These five  stanzas teU us what we are doing instead of  taking back the night. Time is ticking away.  H I say that "Taking Back the Night" is  an example of a perfect poem, I'U define it  this way: some poems are technically per  fect but lack a compeUing idea—Uke having nothing to say and taking a long time  to say it. Others have brUUant thoughts behind them but the written expression is unclear. This reverts to what I was saying earlier about published poetry that ends up  not getting reviewed. I can only add that at  least people are out there writing—working  at it, trying to share their experience—  rather than, for example, zoning out for six  hours nightly in front of the television. In  Sandy Shreve  terms of how to gauge a piece of work hke  "Taking Back the Night," imagine a poem  is hke an arithmetical computation: 3 + 3  + 3 = 9. It's either the wrong answer or it's  perfect.  The poem says that there is so much  work to do, in the form of action more than  words, before we can safely relax. Let's hope  that Hnes hke these can throw a httle non-  fluorescent hght on the subject:  no time now for that  after dinner stroU  when we could breathe in the hush  of early evening air. Already  it's night, and so far  only our slogan  has retrieved it from fear  Jill Mandrake's poetry appeared in  the anthology East of Main (Pulp Press,  1989).  as unnoticed as their deaths. But Schulman notices their hves with exacting detaU.  At meetings, people's wristwatch alarms go  off, reminding them to take their AZT;  friends worry about each other when messages left on answering machines aren't returned (have they forgotten, or have they  died?); shopkeepers have lesions on their  necks, their wrists; young men walk the  streets wearing black ribbons; afternoons  are spent going to funerals of friends and  strangers; those who have died are identified  by their dates: Thomas Ho 1957-1987, Ronnie La VaUee 1954-1987, Joseph DeCarlo  1960-1982. Everywhere there is "a sincere  and famihar grief, a practised one."  It is a time of confusion and a time of  change. In People in Trouble, the main  characters are unable to transcend this  confusion, whUe the secondary characters,  those most affected by AIDS, surmount  their troubles and ultimately change.  Although not the story I set out to read,  it is nonetheless a crisp and concise view of  ordinary hves in extraordinary times.  Christine Morissette lives and writes  n Victoria.  CCEC Credit Union  Serving cooperatives,  community businesses,  & the non-profit sector.  ► Lower interest rates o  loans to societies and  cooperatives.  ► Operating loans.  ► Term deposits.  ► Chequing accounts and  other banking services.  • HI \    m  2250 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9  Mondays & Wednesdays     11 am - 5 p  254-4100  24 KINESIS Dec/Jan. 91 //////////////////^^^^^  ///////////////////////^^^^^  LETTERS  Oka: from the  other side  I would hke to respond to the letter in October's Kinesis, by Ellen Frank and Noreen  Shanahan.  Frank and Shanahan wondered why there  was not more attendance at the Oka vigU by  members of the Vancouver women's movement and the left. Also why public response is "frighteningly quiet." I have some  guesses about why and, since I hve in a  small community, removed from the Vancouver women's movement, I am not so intimidated by others' definitions of "pohticaUy correct" as a feminist Uving in Vancouver might be.  Like Frank and Shanahan I too have been  appaUed at the Canadian and Quebec government's heavy-handed approach to the  Oka crisis. However, I do not, hke them,  see this as "not a complicated issue." (Most  important issues do have some complexity,  though this is not a popular notion among  those who hke their ideology as simphstic as  possible so that they do not have to struggle with their own consciences or, heaven  forbid, admit that the other side may have  at least part of the truth.)  The way I see it, the Oka issue is complicated by the fact that the Warrior Society has involved itself. Even though they are  Native and their original cause is just, the  Warriors appear to me to be just another  bunch of macho rednecks who haven't felt  important since they were in the war.  I'm 42 years old. I remember the atrocities against women and chUdren committed in Viet Nam. Most of these men are  Viet Nam vets. Now I'm supposed to support a bunch of militaristic assholes because someone tells me the whole Oka thing  is about the Canadian army persecuting  women and kids? What about the Warriors  using frightened chUdren as shields? Do  they think the Canadian people wUl blame  only the government forces if those chUdren get hurt? Have Frank and Shanahan  wondered whether maybe the involvement  of the Warriors may not be why response to  vigUs is lukewarm? (The very name "Warriors" speaks of patriarchal, militaristic values.)  Allow me to quote a letter from the Mohawk CouncU of Chiefs at'Akwesasne that  was reprinted in the Green Mutilogue.  This letter was addressed to the Native people of Canada and it makes statements hke  the foUowing:  "We understand the...community of  Kanesatake had originaUy taken a peaceful  route to settle the dispute before they were  invaded by the Ulegal warriors society from  Kahnawake and Akwesasne...the existence  of an Ulegal force such as the paramilitary  group calUng itself the warriors wUl only  hamper matters and destroy real efforts  of settlement...The leaders for the "Warrior...Society" a paramilitary force, are not  sanctioned or approved by any Iroquois Nation government."  As for "the public in general" being  "frighteningly quiet" on this issue I have not  found this to be so at aU. I am surprised and  pleased at how many "ordinary people" are  not taken in by the government Une on this  issue and have a great deal of sympathy for  the Native people over it. This is a sign to  me that the swing to the right that we suffered through during the 80s may be reversing itself.  In support of this I would hke to tell you  that the Sechelt newspaper, The Press,  (not renowned for its leftwing views, to put  it mildly) did a survey of passersby, Native and white, during the summer. People  were asked for their reaction to the Oka crisis. I do not recaU one person surveyed who  did not have sympathy for the Native position, though some expressed reservations  about the Warriors and their wUhngness to  use violence. This crisis would have tremendous public support, the government would  be made complete fools of, if Native people would take a non-violent, Gandhian approach.  Sincerely,  Anne Miles  Gibsons, BC  Oka: for  justice, respect  Kinesis:  As citizens we wish to express our disapproval of the manner in which the Quebec  and Canadian governments have dealt with  Native peoples not only in the case of the  Oka crisis, but for many decades.  We beheve the Mohawks as weU as other  Native peoples have full rights to self-  determination as weU as to the territories  they have been inhabiting for centuries. It  is about time our society recognizes the injustices that have been committed and that  it at last respect the cultural, pohtical and  territorial autonomy that it has long sought  to deny Native peoples.  The assault by the Surete du Quebec  against the Mohawks on July 11, 1990 which  ignited the crisis was an intolerable act of  aggression in a society which considers itself civiUzed. We refuse to see our society sink into racism and we publically de  nounce the abuses of power perpetrated by  our authorities against the Mohawks and  other first nations of America. We also denounce infringements upon the freedom of  the press committed during the Oka crisis  which threaten the integrity of our democracy.  We ask that the promised public enquiry  into the events at Kanesatake and Kahnawake be convened as soon as possible;  that it be independent of the government  and that it be composed of individuals recognized for their integrity and competence.  We ask as weU that the members of this  commission have full powers to investigate  the actions of the army, the pohce and the  authorities without restriction. Finally, we  ask that this enquiry take into account the  historic roots of the problem.  We beUeve that the negotiations with the  Mohawks promised by the governments of  Quebec and Canada should take place in  a chmate of equahty which excludes intimidation by the pohce or government. It is  essential that our leaders acknowledge, in  good faith, the fundamental claims of the  Mohawk people, that they negotiate with a  sincere desire to redress the wrongs of years  of history. Our government must recognize  that the Indian Act of 1869 imposed pohtical structures foreign to the Mohawk Nation. It is imperative that the government  accept the negotiators the Mohawk community considers to be their legitimate representatives.  Finally, we deplore our government's habitual relegating of Native issues to a secondary position. Priority must be given  to many weighty and pressing issues such  as the development of James Bay and  NATO low-level flight tests in Nitassinan,  Labrador. We ask our government to adopt  an entirely new attitude to Native issues,  one that is based on a respect and concern  for true justice.  Sincerely,  Freda Guttman, Carole Beauheu  and over 250 others  Que'bec  [Ed. note: This letter appeared as a full-  page ad in the Montreal daily Le Devoir  in mid-November.]  So who  licked the  stamp?  Kinesis:  We're writing to say how much we relate  to the dog in Liz Clark's cartoon strip.  Sincerely,  Jae (hu-wumin) and  Dandehon (canine bitch)  North Vancouver, BC  Aid for  women prisoners  Kinesis:  I would hke to bring to your readers' notice a smaU group of IsraeU women volunteers, both Jewish and Palestinian, known  as 'Women's Organization for Women Pohtical Prisoners.' The group's aim is to defend the human and democratic rights of  Palestinian and Israeh women imprisoned  because of their social and pohtical activity  in the struggle against the occupation. The  first such group was established in Tel Aviv  in 1988 and the Jerusalem group in early  1989.  The latter group attempts to monitor the  treatment of women prisoners held at the  Russian Compound in Jerusalem, a prison  known for its harsh conditions and brutal  treatment of women and chUdren detained  there. It is the largest detention centre for  women from Jerusalem and the West Bank  and includes a Security Service Investigation Branch (SHABAK) which applies various pressures to squeeze confessions from  detainees.  The group has produced two reports of  conditions in this prison and of violations of  human rights both of individuals and of detainees as a group. Members of WOFPP are  present at the prison every day and have a  lawyer on call to assist them and unrepresented detainees.  AU of this is expensive and WOFPP  would appreciate any financial assistance individuals or organizations can provide. If  more information is desired please contact  me at (604) 298-9638. Contributions can  be sent directly to: Legal Aid for Women  Detainees, Account No. 707317, Discount  Bank, Branch 63, 4 Shlomzion Hamalka St.  Jerusalem, Israel.  Sincerely,  Elizabeth Briemberg  Burnaby, BC  Ange Spalding  Kinesis:  The women's community in Vancouver  has lost a proud, out lesbian—-a lover, friend  and aUy to many. Ange Spalding, who  turned 42 on July 30th this year, died of  cancer on Thanksgiving Day, October 8, at  St. Joseph's Hospital in Peterborough, Ontario where she had returned in late May of  this year to dairy farm—the Big Love in her  Ufe.  In addition to her brother Rog and many  long term friends from the Toronto area,  Ange's support team for the last 8 weeks of  her hfe included friends and lovers from the  west coast—Lamar Van Dyke from Seattle  and Vicki Trerise and Pat Hogan from Van-  Ange left an impression wherever she  went, with whomever she touched. She wiU  always be remembered for her bright and  adventuresome spirit, her strong wUl, her  love of animals, flowers, colours, httle kids,  her wonderful laugh, her total silliness two-  stepping evenings together, and her pride in  being a dyke for over 20 years.  We'd hke to thank aU of the women and  groups whose donations helped us to be  with Ange in her last days. If you'd hke to  help with outstanding debts and expenses,  please call Pat at 253-7189 for more information.  Sincerely,  Pat, VicM, Lamar  Vancouver, BC.  KINESIS Bulletin Board  VS.X\.\NNNNX\NNV\.NX\.V\N\.V^^  READ THIS  AU listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding pubhcation. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings wiU not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  BuUetin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices wiU be items  of general pubhc interest and wUl appear at  the discretion of Kinesis .  Classified are $8 for the first 50 words or  portion thereof, $4 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  pubhcation. Kinesis wiU not accept classifieds over the telephone. AU classifieds must  be prepaid.  For BuUetin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: BuUetin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information caU 255-5499.  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you too. Help plan our next issue—  come to the Writers Meeting on Thurs.,  Jan. 3 at 7 pm at our office, #301-1720  Grant St. If you can't make the meeting,  call 255-5499. No experience necessary,  all women welcome.  EVENT SBE V E N T SIE V E N  T S  WOMEN OF COLOUR CAUCUS  Women of Colour are organizing at Kinesis and we welcome all volunteers past,  present and future to our next meeting  on Mon., Dec. 3 at 7 pm at #301-1720  Grant St. For more info, please call Terri  Hamazaki at 321-0575.  VSW MEETINGS  All VSW members are welcome to attend Co-ordinating Collective meetings,  held at our office at #301-1720 Grant  St. Next meetings are Dec. 10 (5:30 pm)  and Jan. 14 (5:30 pm). Call 255-5511 for  more info.  LAMENTING THE MURDERS  "Threnody" an installation by Catherine  Perrin: a lamentation on the deaths of 14  women in Montreal, Dec. 6, 1989. Wed.,  Dec. 5, 1990, Candle Light Vigil at 7:45  pm. Exhibition opens at 8 pm Women In  Focus, 849 Beatty St, 682-5848. Exhibition runs to Dec. 14; open everyday from  noon to 5 pm.  WOMYN'S COFFEEHOUSE  Sunday Dec. 2 Womyn's Coffeehouse  with Chrystos, poet, writer, political activist and Martie van der Voort, lesbian  songwriter/singer from Tucscon, Arizona.  Sliding scale $4-8. Advance tix at Octopus Books and Ariel Books. Cappuccino,  desserts, a good time in a smoke/alcohol  free space. Cinderella Ballroom, 185 E.  Main. Doors open 6:30 pm, Entertainment at 7:30 pm. All women welcome.  Produced by Sounds & Furies. 253-7189  for info.  FILM TALKS  Cineworks invites you to an evening with  British filmmaker Gurinder Chadha at 8  pm, Dec. 5 at the Pacific Cinematheque. Chadha will introduce and discuss  her films "A Nice Arrangement" and "I'm  British But...". She will also lead a director's workshop on Dec. 8. Call Cineworks  for info, 685-3841.  VIGIL  A vigil to commemorate the murders of  the 14 women in Montreal last year will  be held on the night of Dec. 6. Call  WAVAW at 875-1328 for info.  INTL. CRAFT FAIR  Crossroads International will be hosting  a fundraising fair at Kits House Dec. 9  from 10 am-3 pm. A small entrance fee  will be charged for the fair, which features world-wide crafts, music, food, entertainment, etc. For more info, call Angela Sasso at 251-9993.  PRAIRIE VIDEO  Video In presents two evenings of mixed  video from the prairies: "Harsh Light:  Prairie Video" Dec. 13-14 at 8 pm at  1102 Homer St. Featured will be such  artists as Sandra Tivy, Celine Godberson,  and Nikki Forrest. For more info, call 688-  4336.  HORROR AUTOXICUS  Nell Tenhaaf's "Horror Autoxicus" will be  exhibited at the Western Front Gallery,  303 E. 8 Ave., from Dec. 15-Jan. 20.  This installation features computer interaction and is designed to look and act as  an oracle. Opening is Sat., Dec. 15, at  2 pm.  DECEMBER READING  The Burnaby Writers Society will be holding their December reading of poetry and  prose Sun., Dec. 16 at 1:30 pm. Featured are writers such as Mary Higgins,  Mavis Jones, Pam Galloway and Diane  Salmon. Admission is free. For more info,  call 525-7915.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Beat the January blues. Volunteer for  the Women in View Festival, Jan. 21-  27, 1991. Volunteer opportunities exist  in production, publicity, hospitality, front-  of-house, box office and other areas. For  info, call Elinor at 875-6682.  BENEFIT SCREENING  Dec. 17, 7:15 pm Latin America Connexions Benefit night at the Starlight  Theatre. "Funny, Dirty, Little War" and  "The Official Story," two award winning  films from Argentina. Tix $7. Call 737-  EXHIBIT POSTPONED  Andrea Lowe's photography show at the  Vancouver Lesbian Connection has been  indefinitely postponed. Anyone wanting  to purchase cards or photos can call 876-  3104.  PAY EQUITY SEMINAR  Wed., Dec. 5 Dr. Jane Gaskell, of  UBC's Education Faculty, will be presenting a pay equity seminar at the Maritime Labour Centre, 111 Victoria Dr.  The seminar is entitled "Measuring the  'skill' in Women's Work," and begins at  7:30 pm.    call 255-7346 for info.  FEMINIST DISCUSSION  On Sun., Dec. 9, the Port Coquitlam  Lesbian Support and Social Group will be  hosting a discussion group on "Lesbians  and Feminism" from 2-4 pm. For more  info call the Port Coquitlam Women's  Centre at 941-6311.  UNLEARNING RACISM  Weekend Workshops for Women: Feb.  8,9,10. For Women and Men: Mar.  1,2,3. Facilitated by AWARE (Alliance  of Women Against Racism, etc.). Racism  hurts all of us but its effects are experienced very differently by people of colour  and white people. Sliding scale $20-250.  Held at Camp Alexandra, White Rock.  Let us know access/childcare needs. Registration starts Jan. 3. Phone Janet 734-  8156, Mari 872-1743 or Sarah 251-4601.  Sponsored by the Unlearning Racism  Workshop Committee.  PATTERNITY  This new three-hour video installation by  local feminist video artist and historian  Sara Diamond focuses on representations  of memory, generational and gender differences and the family, through convergence of public/private histories. At the  Vancouver Art Gallery, Jan. 19-Mar. 3  COFFEE BREAK CHARACTERS  Performers/writers Nora D. Randall and  Jackie Crossland present their new work  in upcoming shows: Dec. 31 at First  Night (8:30 pm and 9:15 at the VP Library); at the VIEW Festival Jan. 24-  27, and in Victoria at the Open Space  Gallery nightly at 8 pm, Jan. 31-Feb.  3 (these shows include "Great Explanations"). Also, "Great Explanations" is  available on cassette for $11 plus $2 shipping. Order from Random Acts, 4785  Gladstone St., Vancouver, BC, V5N 5A4  (Tel: 435-2273).  OPEN HOUSE  The Women's Research Centre at 2245  W. Broadway will be holding a Holiday Open House Fri., Dec. 7 from 3-7  pm. Come and celebrate both the season  and the release of their two new publications... "Keeping on Track" and "Strategies for Change." For more info, call 734-  0485.  CALLING ALL LESBIANS  Your last chance to join the Intl. Lesbian Week Planning Committee will be  the meeting held at the Vancouver Lesbian Centre Sun., Dec. 2, at 7 pm. Call  874-8567 for more info.  WHAT DOES SHE WANT  Nov. 24-Jan. 13, 1991. An exhibition of  feminist video programs by women working in performance art, film and video,  which deal with changing family roles and  relationships, the nature of female desires  and sexuality, how media defines identity and gender; the relationship between  family history and the development of  creativity. Among the artists are Yvonne  Rainer, Martha Rosier, and Ardele Lister,  At the Vancouver Art Gallery.  WORLD AIDS DAY  Is  Dec.   1,   Focus on  Women.   Events  include:  1) A gathering, Nov. 30, Van. Art  Gallery, 8 pm. Informal evening with music, entertainment. Proceeds to local and  international women's AIDS groups;  2) Film Premiere Dec. 1. Too Close  for Comfort, Pacific Cinematheque, 1131  Howe St, 4 pm. A film about homophobia  and HIV/AIDS. Call 685-3841 for info;  3) Discussion on Women and AIDS  with international and Canadian speakers, Dec. 1, YWCA, 580 Burrard St, 3rd  Floor, 11 am-1 pm. For info on World  AIDS Day call 738-7075.  FOR BETTER WAGES  Women For Better Wages: next meeting  on Tues. Dec. 4, 7:30 pm at the Newspaper Guild Offices, #301-828 W. 8th Ave.,  Vancouver.  FUNDRAISER  Dec. 8, 8 pm. Latin America Connexions Fundraiser at La Quena. Music with  Zolty and special guests. $3 Donation,  "\                 The Vancouver Folk Music Festival &    JL^i-  '\                 Women in View Festival are pleased   \&ifc^T*&  ,\                          to present                                        UP^   K~  \ rERRON  B    A celebration of the release of her new  jMM|pnfl     rprnrd "Phnntnm Centra" Fermn  ■    returns to Vancouver for her first full-  '^BBPIflB    length concert in a number ot years.  w   ,  M     SUNDAY-8PM  w  M    JANUARY 27  JW          PLAYHOUSE THEATRE  ^^^^  ^Kf                    Hamilton & Dunsmuir  P?l                    $18 & $16 at Black Swan Records, Highlife  ."•* J|                    Records, the VFMF office, Women in View  ::§                    office or through Ticketmaster 280-4444.  .*.'M                    (service charges may apply)  •"i                     The Vancouver Folk Music Festival  B&.                    is pleased to present  ^k Ranch  £&*Xtf^il  JA Romance  |BB-^^Kllb''fll  mm?   ~M     These contemporary cowgirls, who  ^■MflSf      ODened 17 shows for k.d.lano. sinn of  Ww *** Jf •■"jj  ^Hf      open spaces, tall timberlands, and the  ^^M        challenges of qoinqshopDina for  ^Br           vintage western clothing. 1 heir  H -./               '' regressive country'' repertoi re  incorporates western swing, honky  tonk, harmony yodelling, and acoustic  rockabilly.  SUNDAY-8PM  FEBRUARY 10      (wxirjol  VANCOUVER EAST           I T^tt^t J  CULTURAL CENTRE  I                            $12 at Black Swan Records, Highlife Records,  and the VFMF office.  1                      RESERVATIONS 254-9578  26 KJNES1S   Dec/Jan. 91 ///////////////////^^^^^  //////////////////////^^^^^  Bulletin Board  SEXPERTEASE III  The Intl. Lesbian Week planning committee has space forapprox. 10 performances  of individuals or groups in their upcoming Sexpertease III event, Feb. 22 and  23. Call Mickey at 874-8567 or Mary at  254-2553 for info and/or auditions.  VENT SIG ROUPS  MOISEIWITSCH &. LAURENCE  A collaborative installation by Carel Moiseiwitsch and Robin Laurence which combines fictional and graffiti impulses. Exhibition Companion essay by Hollie Owen;  chronology by Skai Fowler. Opening night  Wed., Jan. 23 1991 at 8 pm. Exhibition  runs to Feb. 25, 1991. The Lateral Gallery  at Women in Focus, 849 Beatty St, 682-  5848. Gallery hours: Wed.-Sun., noon to  5 pm.  SUBMISSIONS  TRAUMA/SURVIVAL SHOW  The Women in Focus gallery at 849  Beatty St. is calling for submissions to  their Trauma/Survival show, scheduled to  open in the fall of 1991. This is a group  exhibition encompassing all media and  curated by Avis Lang. Deadline is Jan.  15, 1991. Call 682-5848 for more info.  ATTENTION WRITERS  Trivia, A Journal of Ideas, publishing radical, creative feminist thought in the form  of essays, reviews, translations, and experimental prose, is now accepting submissions for issue #18, Spring, 1991. The  emphasis of the issue will be on collaboration, though submissions need not be  "mited to this topic. Send two copies  with SASE to Trivia, P.O. Box 606, N.  Amherst, MA 01059. Deadline Feb. 15,  1991.  ROUPS  SELF-SUPPORT GROUP  Leaderless support group for womyn  working in helping professions (medical,  social service) who are survivors of child  sexual abuse, exploring how we deal with  our abuse while helping others and the  issues that arise in our interventions as  helpers. Preference for those already in  therapy/supervision or who have been.  872-1144.  WOMEN WRITERS GROUP  am interested in organizing a daytime  group to seriously critique our work while  creating real safety to share content and  pport process. Call Valerie 732-8927.  JOIN MEDIAWATCH  Concerned about Media Exploitation of  Women? MediaWatch, a national feminist organization concerned about the  status and portrayal of women and girls  in the media, works to improve and diversify these images through lobbying, education, and advocacy. Call 731-0457 for  volunteer opportunities and other info.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  WAVAW/Rape Crisis Centre is looking for  womon volunteers to do rape crisis work.  Training begins Feb. 20th and runs 11  weeks (Wed. 7-10 pm and Sun. 11-5 pm).  Childcare and transportation costs provided. WAVAW strives to be anti-racist,  anti-classist and anti-homophobic. Call  875-1328 for info.  CLASSIF ED  UNIQUE GIFTS  Are you one of the many having trouble  finding that one-of-a-kind unique eclectic special present for the one you love?  Come to the Lonsdale Quay Christmas  Market Dec. 1-12 and check out our  beautiful, warm and cozy hand screen-  printed shirts, buttons, and canvas bags.  After the 12th come to our studio at  261 E. 1st St. North Vancouver; 11-3 pm  Tues. thru Sats. Tel: 980-4235.  FEMINIST COUNSELLOR  Special interests: women's issues, childhood trauma, substance abuse, and internalized homophobia. Sliding scale. Karen  Lewis, MSW. Phone 254-8279.  COUNSELLING SPACE  Counselling office to share starting Jan.  1st. Available two-and-a-half days per  week plus evenings and weekends. Commercial Drive location. For information  phone Maggie at 254-2644 or Karen at  254-8279.  ACCOMMODATION WANTED  36-yr.-old lesbian wanting to find a place  with another woman to share on west  side. Call Sarah 736-4152.   FEMINIST AND LESBIAN BOOKS  Canada's largest selection in English  and French: literature, theory, spirituality, incest, film, erotica and more. Just  write for our free annotated catalogue.  L'Androgyne Bookstore, 3636 St. Laurent, Montreal, Quebec H2X 2V4. Tel:  (514) 842-4765  FARSI LESSONS  I am offering to teach Farsi (the language  of Iran) to interested students. Reasonable rates. Call 253-7673.  BOOK MANTEL  \f      Under New Management        \j  EXCELLENT SELECTION OF OVER 40,000 GENTLY USED BOOKS  Feminist • Literature • Philosophy • Poetry • General Selection  Moved to  1002 Commercial Drive  V5L3W9  I  Open 7 days, 11-7  20% discount with valid student cards  253-1099       WOMEN OWNED AND OPERATED  Constanza Silva, Terrie Hamazaki and Raven Courtenay perform Storm After The  Calm at the Women in VIEW Festival in Vancouver, Jan. 22-27. See page 22 for  more information about the festival.  CLASS IFIEDlCLASSIFIED  SHIATSU TREATMENTS  Ready to work on your stuff? do it with  your body. I work from the basis that  our bodies remember joys, sorrows, fear  and frustrations. Unexpressed, these feelings play havoc in our lives, undermining  our true potential. Using touch, breath,  imagery and body awareness, my Shiatsu  treatments can help you free unexpressed  emotions, and gain clarity. Astarte Sands,  251- 5409.  TAIKO TAPES!  And t-shirts and CDs! Give the perfect holiday gift of music and heritage  from Vancouver's own Japanese Canadian drum trio. "Chirashi" recording  tapes $10 ea; CDs $15 ea; new "Uzume  Taiko" t-shirts $15 ea (female figure,  white on black, M.L.XL). Include $2 shipping per item. Send cheque or money order to: UZUME TAIKO, 1170 E. Georgia,  Vancouver, V6A 2A8. or call 251-3908.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION  34-year-old lesbian seeks shared house or  apartment (or other women who are interested in looking for a place together).  I'm tidy, quiet, non-smoking, and vegetarian, into mediation and other similar pursuits. I enjoy living with people. I'd especially like to live in an all-women house.  Maximum rent $350. Phone 732-0792.  THERAPIST SOUGHT  Visible minority woman (woman of colour) therapist wanted to lead a group for  visible minority adult women survivors of  incest and sexual abuse. I'm looking for  someone with education and work experience in this area. Also, the leader must  have group work experience, knowledge  and sensitivity to different ethnic groups,  sexual orientation, and alternative spiritual and religious beliefs. The leader must  have a clear understanding of internalized racism, systemic racism, oppression  and individual differences. I will compile a  proposal and have an agency sponsor this  project. The earliest I could see this group  beginning would be April 1991. If this interests you or for more info call Linda at  876-3506 by Jan 4 , 1991.  A WOMAN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre: New counselling, educational and referral service on  the North Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirmative counselling, workshops,  support groups and information - for general personal growth and healing and  women's issues. Call Lou Moreau, founder  and registered clinical counsellor, 984-  8738 or 922-7930.  WOMEN'S STUDIES COURSES  Langara Women's Studies courses for  Jan-April 1991: Women's Studies 116,  an Introductory Perspectives on Women  course, on Tuesdays 6:30-9:30 pm (at  VVI) or on Wednesdays 3:30- 6:30 pm  (at Langara). 3 credits, university transferable, no prerequisites. Instructors: De-  borrah Dunne and Frances Wasserlein.  Women's Studies 274, Women and Sexuality, on Tuesdays 6:30-9:30 pm (at Langara). 3 credits, university transferable,  prerequisites are W. ST. 116 or 216 or  by permission of the program. Instructor:  Patty Moore. Registration is week of Jan  1. Call Langara 324-5511 or Patty Moore  324-5370 or 254-4810 for more info.  CASINO VOLUNTEERS  WAVAW Rape Crisis Centre is looking  for womyn to volunteer at a fundraising  casino on the evenings of Dec. 10, 11,  and 12th (5 pm-3:30 am). We will pay  honorarium of $50 to each womon. If interested please phone Sue at 875-1328  (pre ferably before Dec. 5th).  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Our all women's Caribbean beachfront  guesthouse awaits you. Beautiful, LF  owned Spanish style villa on long, secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Small tropical gardens, oceanside  pool, spacious comfortable common  eas with large balconies and magnificent ocean view. Private, large, airy guestrooms, sumptuous meals and drinks,  relaxing massages and healing crystals.  Room rates: $330 single; $440 double per  week. For reservations call our Toronto  friend Suzi, at (416) 462-0046 between 9  am and 10 pm.  TRY CO-OP LIVING  City View Co-op, a 31 unit building near  Victoria & Hastings, keeps an open waiting list for applications for membership.  Rent for 1, 2 or 3 BR apts. is $467, 589, or  683, plus a (refundable) share purchase.  To apply, send a S.A.S.E. to: Membership  Ctte, 1885 E. Pender, Vane. V5L 1W6.  Display  Advertising:  Ask us about discounts.  Phone 255-5499  KINESIS  Dec/Jan. 91       27 LitilZbbKL 4/91  SERIALS  Salute?  Never!  Subscribe?  Ever!  (But, hey, do it right now)  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership —$30 (or what you can afford)rincludes Kinesis subscription  □ Kinesis sub. only (1 year) -$20        □ Sustainers-$75  D Kinesis sub. (2 yrs) -836 □ New  D Institutious/Groups -$45 D Renewal  □ Cheque enclosed     □ Bill me Q Gift subscription