 * ^      8P66iAL COLLECTIONS  kine  ^a/H^Ano^A^-*'0'8^  FEDERAL    ELECTION  JULY- AUGUST  Vancouver Status of Women      2029W. Fourth Ave.     "736- 374B-*7-B       Volume IV   No.  35  Serials Division  Main Library  UBC  Vancouver  8,   B.C.     73-sl00755  4 |1(   11(1  "I'D HAVE LIKED TO HAVE VOTED  FOR YOU, BUT IT'S A MAN'S JOB."  - Woman to a woman, 1974  That statement is one that an unsuccessful woman candidate for the  NDP federal nomination in a B.C.  riding is still getting-apologeti-  cally-from both women and men several months after the nomination  meeting.  To us it is an appalling  statement.  But it will recur repeatedly in one form or another as  a sort of leit-motif, in both the  facts and opinions, in what I can  only call a dirge that follows.  I did not set out to compose a  dirge. At the Newsletter meeting  at which we planned the July edition I was assigned to do an article on the women candidates in  B.C. in the coming election, with  their views on several issues we  consider of vital importance to  women.  I've talked to the candidates and I have their views.  But  I just can't present them and let  it go at that.  What we have to look at is the  status of women in federal politics in Canada more than half a  century after we got the vote.  The picture is frightening.  It seems almost academic to report  that women candidates in B.C. are  deeply concerned about human rights  and child care programmes, for example, when the reality overshadowing their concerns is that there  are only 10 of them.  10 out of 110.  And the ratio in B.C. reflects the  equally bleak national scene.  I am going to take up some of your  time with the facts and opinions I  mentioned. They contain a message.  The facts will be in capital letters. They are statistics, or conclusions based on scientific research.  There is no argument a-  gainst them.  Some of the opinions  may elicit rebuttals but I think  many are facts, too. When I put  them all together I felt anger and  despair.  HALF AS BETWEEN FEMALES AND MALES, BUT  IN THE HIGHER AGE BRACKETS THERE ARE  MORE WOMEN THAN MEN.  CANDIDATES IN THE ELECTION, BASED ON  FIGURES AT PRESS TIME, WITH SOME DISPUTE IN 2 OR 3 RIDINGS:  WOMEN 137;  MEN 1073.  THE CHIEF ELECTORAL OFFICER FOR CANADA  REPORTED SHORTLY BEFORE WE WENT TO  PRESS THAT APPROXIMATELY 13,500,000  PEOPLE ARE ELIGIBLE TO VOTE IN THE 19-  74 FEDERAL ELECTION.  THE TOTAL POPULATION OF CANADA IS ROUGHLY HALF AND  "Men in positions of power intellectually know it's the right thing  for women to be in politics, but at  a subconscious or emotional level  they feel it's not appropriate." -  Joan Wallace, Liberal candidate.  THE HOUSE OF COMMONS HAS 264 MEMBERS.  THE LARGEST NUMBER OF WOMEN EVER  ELECTED TO IT WAS 6 IN 1965.  "A tremendous resource of women is  wasted in our society." - Simma Holt,  Liberal candidate.  THERE IS 1 PROGRESSIVE CONSERVATIVE  WOMAN CANDIDATE IN B.C.  "If a woman wants in, it's up to her  to push her way in." - Gladys Chong,  provincial president of the Progressive Conservative Women's Association  and national vice-president.  THERE ARE NO NEW DEMOCRATIC PARTY  WOMEN CANDIDATES IN B.C. The only good thing that could come  out of this is that it may shock NDP  members out of their complacency, out  of the view of the party as not discriminating against women because it  is socialist." - Betty McClurg, unsuccessful candidate for nomination.  "The women know the men will look  after their interests." - A male  NDP candidate.  THERE ARE 2 SOCIAL CREDIT WOMEN  CANDIDATES IN B.C.  "Women are just not coming forward.  I would like the answer."-Ted Ad-  lem, federal president for B.C.  of the Social Credit party.  "Women will not have an equal opportunity to take advantage of...  steps to power as long as they are  hampered by their own diffidence,  the disparagement and hostility of  others, or by lack of mobility due  to family responsibilities." - The  Royal Commission Report on the  Status of Women in Canada.  SCIENCE HAS FOUND NO EVIDENCE THAT  WOMEN GENERALLY ARE LESS OR MORE  INTELLIGENT THAN MEN GENERALLY.  "I think the old saying is true  that to be equal, a woman has to  be very much better." - Frances  Elford, Liberal candidate.  "Women  have to be really exceptional to  get anywhere in many areas." -  Betty Greenwell, Communist Party  candidate.  "The more women can  prove themselves to be equal, the  faster they will achieve their  goals." - Marg Gregory, Progressive Conservative candidate.  AT THE VOTING LEVEL WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION HAS BEEN VERY LITTLE  BEHIND THAT OF MEN'S.  "I think many women are apathetic,  or just plain lazy.  I was." - A  woman who joined a party association and quit after a year.  "It's women's own responsibility.  Perhaps they haven't had much encouragement.  But if you wait for  encouragement, it may be a long  time in coming." - Hilda Thomas,  unsuccessful candidate for NDP  nomination.  FOR A PERIOD OF 4 YEARS, REACHING  INTO THE FIRST 2 YEARS OF THIS  DECADE, 1 WOMAN SAT IN THE CANADIAN  HOUSE OF COMMONS.  "No country can make a claim to  having equal status for its women  so long as its government lies entirely in the hands of men." - The  Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women in Canada.  WE ARE 6 MONTHS SHORT OF THREE-QUAR- ;  TERS OF THE WAY TO THE 21ST CENTURY.  There's plenty more.  But that's  enough for the message. We've had  it before.  It is being conveyed  again because it is frightening  and not something to slough off.  Or shall we again? Either we care,  or we don't; either we shrug, or  we act.  It is obvious that political power in  this country has never been anything  but a male preserve.  For all the professed enthusiasm for women candidates,  the entrenched party hierarchies -  with some exceptions at one-level or  another, or among some individuals -  have shown no real willingness to give  any significant number of women a  chance to demonstrate their capabilities  In some instances where women are nominated they are not given a fair share  of the party budget for campaigning.  1 am in a dilemma at this point in  reference to the B.C. situation.  Kinesis is not a vehicle for any political party and does not want to be  regarded as such.  I did not mention  the Liberal party in my statistics.  But I want to be fair.  I think I can  best do this by presenting some more  facts.  7 Liberal women sought nomination  in B.C. and 4 were nominated.  There were no women Liberal candidates in B.C. in the 1972 election.  3 Progressive Conservative women  sought nomination and 1 was nominated. There were no women  Progressive Conservative candidates in B.C. in '72.  2 women sought nomination for the  NDP. Neither was nominated.  In  '72 the NDP had 1 woman candidate.  2 Social Credit women sought nom-*  ination and received it.  In '72  the Social Credit party had 2  women candidates in B.C.  2 women were nominated in '72  from other than these 4 parties  for a total of 5 women out1of 108  B.C. candidates.  Among the Liberal, Progressive Conservative, New Democratic, and Social  Credit parties, as far as nominations  are concerned, there have been advances  in two instances, no change in one,  and a decline in the other.  Let us be wary, though, in talking  of advances at whatever level -  nomination or election. Perhaps  we thought we were getting somewhere,  granted on a pretty miniscule scale,  when 6 women were elected in 1965.  1 woman was elected in 1968.  To return to the message.  It says  something else, if we will honestly  acknowledge it, and that is that we  have not been trying hard enough.  All honour to the suffragists, who  must have collapsed with exhaustion  when they got us the vote 56 years  ago.  But surely it has been  brought home to us by now that it  wasn't the end of tlie war.  Old enemies remain the enemies of today:  prejudice, obviously not limited to  men, and apathy. We fought them  before and won a battle. But voting is involvement at a very limited level and is not achieving our  goals with the urgency required.  Voices must be heard.  For the most  part now we can raise them only at  campaign meetings to question all  those male candidates about issues  that concern us as women. They'll  be quick with assurances. But what  place will such issues have in their  priorities when they are once more  safely ensconced in "the parliament  of the people?" Voices must be heard  where it counts.  Grace Maclnnis, who ran into a virtual stone-wall in trying to get day  care programmes and other forms of  help extended to women and .men, says  such matters as finance, banking, and  railways hold the prime interest of  men in power. Make no mistake:  women in power would be interested,  too, in finance, banking, and railways .  But they would also, because  of personal experience, and knowledge and concern about the experience of others, be acutely aware of  fields in which the need for action has  been disgracefully ignored.  Certainly there are practical problems  confronting women who might want to get  into politics - family ties, job security, mobility, and financial limitations.  But surely there are today  many outstandingly capable women in a  position to put themselves forward for  nomination.  If a sufficient number of  them were elected, they might be influential in ensuring that those encountering difficulties could follow  them.  So, isn't the real message that we have  to fight again?  For most of us this will  mean working with determination to see  that capable women, whose stand on major  issues we support, are considered as candidates; working again for their nomination; and, if they are nominated, finding  some extra sources of strength in working  even harder for their election.  I said that when I put my "dirge"  together I felt anger and despair.  In the March Kinesis one of our  members, writing of injustice personally suffered, quoted from  Faulkner.  It has never left a  corner of my mind and I'm going to  quote it again.  I cannot think  of anything more sustaining.  "Some things you must always be  unable to bear.  Some things you  must never stop refusing to bear.  Injustice and outrage and dishonour  and shame. No matter how young you  are or how old you have got."  I am still angry.  But I know that  resolution must replace despair.  Perhaps there are some questions  before I leave the platform and let  the candidates speak. A woman over  there?  "Yes. You've been handing out  statistics and opinions and advice  very freely. What are you doing?"  This.  On the two days a week I  have been able to spare - and some  evenings - I have been answering'  phones, compiling lists, putting  circles and dots on constituency  maps, and knocking on doors on behalf of one of the women candidates  in this election. Not, ultimately,  because she's a woman.  But because  she has not stopped refusing to bear  injustice.   We want to thank the candidates for  taking time from their exhausting  schedules to provide us with their  views.  They were asked if they'd  like to say anything about the  Women's Movement or women's position, generally, and if they would  comment on four issues that we believe are of major concern to women.  These are Human Rights, Child Care,  the Canada Pension Plan, and Abortion.  Frequent reference was made in the  questioning to the recommendations of  the Royal Commission Report on the  Status of Women in Canada and to the  opinions of the Advisory Council on  the Status of Women, which four months  ago published a summary of what has,  or has not, been done to implement  Commission recommendations which fall  within the federal jurisdiction.  In  its report the Advisory Council also  set forth, in some instances, its own an interim period of 7 to 10 years, a  Human Rights Commission should have a  division dealing specifically with the  protection of women's rights.  It is  recommending to the government, instead, that such a Commission realistically represent the female-male population ratio. And whereas the Royal  Commission called for further amendments to the Criminal Code, .as it re-  somewhat different position from original recommendations.  It has, for  example, abandoned the view that for  lates to abortion, a majority of the  Advisory Council's members want abortion removed from the Code.  General party policy statements  have been left for you to take  note of in the media. What we  are primarily interested in, for t  the purposes of this article,  are the candidates and their  views on the issues mentioned.  We are taking the liberty of using  first names. The women had such a  variety of suggestions as to how  they might be referred to (Mrs. -  Ms. - first name - and surname, with  no Mrs. or Ms. ) that we decided to  call them as we would a friend.  We regret that, although every effort  was made to get one, a statement was  not available, up to press time, fron*  one of the women candidates - VIOLET  SHARP, who was nominated by acclamation to run for the Social Credit  party in Okanagan-Boundary.  the candidates  MARG GREGORY -  Progressive Conservative -  New Westminster.  Nominated by Acclamation.  Marg has been a systems analyst for  many years and is now a personnel  consultant.  She hires for firms which want computer people, office managers, etc.  and reports that she has had no problem in placing women in good positions. She says she has never  encountered discrimination in either  her own personal job experience or in  her current work of placing others.  A statement she made is "I believe a  woman is as equal as she wants herself to be." But she concedes that  discrimination does exist in some  areas.  Human Rights Commission: wholeheartedly  supports the establishment of such a  Commission and is particularly anxious  to have it direct special attention to  rights for women in such areas as  separation matters, equitable maintenance provisions - situations  generally in this part of the law  where women are not justly treated.  Child Care: Agrees that federal  funding is needed to establish more  facilities on a cost-sharing basis.  Where facilities are- available a  woman making a thousand a month can  afford to pay.  But women in the  lower income brackets need financial  help.  Canada Pension:  One of main platforms  is that housewives - either spouse at  home - should be allowed within the  provisions of the Canada Pension Plan.  "Otherwise they are third-rate citizens. No woman - or husband - who  chooses to remain at home is a  third-rate citizen."  Abortion: Thinks it should be  removed from the Criminal Code, "But  I do not approve of abortion except  in cases where a woman's actual  physical existence is at stake."  There are plenty of birth control  methods available.  If birth control  has not been used, or has been used  unsuccessfully, then the answer is  adoption. There are numerous couples  who want to adopt children, Why  should they be deprived of them, if  they can't have them themselves?"  Thinks birth control should certainly  be taught in the home, and possibly  in the high schools.  By all means,  if it will prevent tragedies.  Although personally opposed to abortion, except in the circumstance  mentioned, Marg says that if she is  elected and the matter comes up in  parliament, she will go to the people  of her riding for a poll on the issue  and will vote as the riding majority  wishes.  She is vitally interested in all  concerns of the people the New  Westminster constituency embraces  and, if elected, plans to open a  full-time non-partisan office to  record complaints and suggestions.  BETTY GREENWELL -  Communist Party - Vancouver Centre  Nominated by Acclamation  Prior to her marriage Betty worked  for the Plant Pathology Lab. of the  federal Department of Agriculture.  She has been active in local community  organizations and civic politics for  20 years.  The immediate past president of the Hastings Community Association, she has been an active worker  for the Committee of Progressive  Electors, and has also served as vice-  president of the Vancouver Parent-  Teacher Council.  Betty says traditions in society make  it difficult for women. As noted  earlier in this article, her view is  that they have to be exceptional to  get anywhere in many fields. One of  her . particular concerns is the need  to end discrimination against women  in all spheres of economic, social,  and political life - to obtain for  women equal opportunity and equal pay  in all areas.  She wants discrimination against unmarried mothers and  their children eliminated and says  maternity leave from work should be  provided with full pay.  Speaks of  an area of discrimination against  women members of her party who might  want to get into politics. There is  still more discrimination against a  woman working in an office or profession running as a Communist than there  is against a man, whose right to run  in elections is now generally recognized by employers.  Human Rights Commission: Would agree  with the Royal Commission original  recommendation that for an interim  period special attention should be  given to protecting the rights of  women. As for representation reflecting population ratio, definitely wants  women to participate but is opposed  to tokenism.  Child Care: Agrees on the need for  more federal funding.  "Day care  should be a right for every child."  Canada Pension:  Is in favour of  equal pension rights but thinks that  eventually pretty well all women will  be working in social production.  Abortion: Should be removed from  the Criminal Code and adequate  medical facilities should be provided  to enable women to freely exercise  a right to obtain abortions.  Betty says that in the constituency  in which she has been nominated the  exploitation of women is particularly severe among the large number of new immigrant workers. They are  forced to take low-paid jobs, do  the hardest work, and are discriminated against in pension credits  and technical training.  "Immigrant  women are the chief source of sweat  shop labour for the monopolies."  Abortion: Favours removal from the  Criminal Code.  It should be a matter  between a woman and her doctor.  Doesn't  approve of hospital abortion committees -  doesn't think they are working well.  Would certainly retain "health" as a  ground for abortion, but also says  that "For whatever reasons a woman can  convince her doctor that an abortion is  needed - for example, that she has all  the children she can cope with or afford  if her doctor feels that completing the  pregnancy will affect her or the  child, then the decision should rest  between the patient and the doctor."  Somewhat concerned about the business  of repeaters. Wonders if taxpayers  should be providing this service 4,  5, or 6 times.  Frances says she was always treated as  an equal in all her experience in municipal politics and enjoyed working with  male colleagues.  FRANCES ELFORD - Liberal - Victoria  Nominated by acclamation.  Frances, a former Lab technician, has  served 10 years on the Oak Bay municipal council - six as a Councillor  and four as Mayor.  Speaking of the Women's Movement  generally, she says she recognizes  that there are still some inequities  to be corrected.  For her this is  not a top priority in itself but  holds a place with several other  issues.  She believes in equal pay  for equal work and that any woman  capable of doing what is normally  regarded as a man's job should be  given equal consiHpraM'nn  "t 5m  not a militant "Women's Libber",  but I do feel that the recommendations of the Royal Commission  report should be implemented as  quickly as possible."  Frances is optimistic about the way  things have been going.  She says  that, generally, the situation for  women is improving.  They are now  in positions they would never have  been in a generation ago.  "Men  are catching on."  Human Rights Commission:  stresses  that solutions should be sought  for problems encountered by all,  not those of women only.  Says she  can't think of any valid reason to  be brought against the original  proposal for. a special division for  a while to look after women's rights,  but now that the ACSW has dropped  this she agrees fully with its  recommendation that a Commission  realistically represent the population ratio.  Child Care:  In complete agreement  with any legislation that will  speed up the provision of adequate  and well-staffed child care facilities. There should not necessarily  be financial help for the wealthy.  If they can pay, they should.  But  sufficient assistance should be  given to the predominant number  needing it. Agrees absolutely that  more federal funding should be available.  Canada Pension:  In full agreement that  housewives, or husbands at home, should  be able to contribute, and benefit, as  per the Royal Commission's stand.  ANNE BOYLAN - Marxist-Leninist  Vancouver South  "Working class women know they will  never get anything from the Canadian  parliament except more repression,  more bureaucracy, and more rules and  regulations designed to maximize the  exploitation of the,working class on  behalf of the monopoly capitalist  class."  "We working class women know that  every time we shop for the necessities  of life - food, clothing, shelter -  that the monopoly capitalists are cutting pur hard-earned wages and are  trying to shift the burden of the economic crisis looming on the horizon on  to the shoulders of the working people.1  "Most women workers in Canada are  super-exploited, have no unions to defend their economic interests, and  meet many kinds of social discrimination.  Especially oppressed are our  class sisters from Asia, Latin America,  Africa, and other countries, who are  forced to work in Canada at miserable  wages, with the worst working conditions."  "Progressive-minded women intellectuals  and professionals should unite with  working class Canadian and immigrant  women workers and broaden the fight for  the emancipation of women to the whole  class of oppressed women.  Only under  socialism will the material basis be  laid for the complete emancipation of  women and the elimination of all forms  of social discrimination such as male  chauvinism and racism."  LEANNE AVERBACH  New Westminster  Marxist-Leninist  "I....denounce this election as a  a complete fraud, organized by the  bourgeoisie to sort out differences  among themselves as to how to best  rule the working class and increase  their profits to the maximum."  "Only when the working class as a  whole unites to smash up the capitalist state apparatus - government  bureaucracy, police, army, prisons  and so forth - and establishes its  own class rule with a state that  serves the 80% of Canadians who are  working people, and which fights to  the end for the independence of  Canada from U.S. imperialism, can  we build socialism in our country."  "Women must not be diverted by  various sectarian trends into  political dead-ends. The interests  of working class women are the same-  as those of working class men, the  complete overthrow of the monopoly  capitalist class, the overthrow of  U.S. imperialism which, aside from  the capitalist class itself, is the  root cause of the economic crisis  now facing the working class people  of our country."  "I call upon working women to reject the parties of capitalism, of  national sell-out, and social oppression."  SIMMA HOLT  Liberal - Vancouver-Kingsway  Nominated by Acclamation  Simma is, and has been for many years,  a general reporter and feature writer  for the Vancouver Sun.  She has covered every beat in the city but her  primary interests as a journalist lie  with the courts, crime, correction,  human welfare, youth, and the family.  She has completed three books, is  writing a fourth, and doing research  on a fifth.  Simma says she started her career with  the handicap of being a "token" woman.  She was told at first that she would  have to be part of the "Women's Department", although she was allowed to do general reporting.  Believes very  strongly that there should be equal  opportunities for women and men, and  that the best person should get the  job.  "If it's a man, O.K.  But if it's  me, I should get it." Women offer a  new dimension and society should be  using more of them.  Feels that more  and more women should apply for higher  positions for which they are qualified.  One day it will be said, "Why not?"  And goals will be achieved.  Human Rights Commission:  Believes in  the rights of all people, but can't  object to a catch-up programme for  women or others discriminated against.  As for representation reflecting the  population ratio, we should pick the  best people we can find and hopefully  we can find qualified women. Agrees  with ACSW statement that Commission  members should not necessarily be  lawyers.  Says "The sooner we get  lawyers off our boards and 'people'  on them, the better."  Simma is very concerned about the  civil rights of children.  Says we're  always putting the rights of adults  first, but many children get beaten  or otherwise maltreated and can  become emotionally and psychologically  destroyed as a result of this.  "Human rights for all, women and men,  children and adults, should be a  fact of life."  Canada Pension:  Fully agrees that  the spouse at home should be entitled  to provisions.  Day Care: Does not disagree with  government sharing of some costs.  But wants to see industries, institutions, companies, and unions working  on this and providing day care centres  in or beside the place of work.  "Industry and unions are rich enough."  Wants parents to have access to their  children in coffee breaks and lunch  hours to give the children a continuing sense of security.  It would be  better for the well-being of both.  Doesn't like "Big Daddy" philosophy  of the government entirely taking  care of us.  "If we don't put something in ourselves, we have nothing."  Abortion: Admittedly ambivalent but  does think it should be removed from  the Criminal Code. Thinks a woman  has a right to make decisions about  her life, but "I hate the idea of  abortion." Wonders what it is doing  to some women, to their psyches.  Perhaps some will end up in mental  hospitals full of guilt and regret.  Would like to see research done on  this. No disgrace today for an unwed  woman to have a child. Adoption  could enrich many people's lives.  But then some children who don't get  into good adopting homes end up in  prisons or mental institutions at a  very high cost to taxpayers. Would  approve abortion in cases in which it  is felt necessary, if it is a matter  between a woman and her own doctor,  who is presumably sympathetic and a  friend, someone known and trusted.  Abominates present hospital committee  system, "with its arrogance and power  over woman and its strange, impersonal  atmosphere." What is needed is an  expansion of birth control education  Don't want to be an either/or woman.  "Sometimes there are six ways of  dealing with a problem - and not any  one is necessarily entirely wrong."  IONA CAMPAGNOLO - Liberal - Skeena  Nominated by acclamation.  Iona is currently sales manager  for CHTK radio in Prince Rupert,  in charge of advertising sales for  radio and TV in the Prince Rupert  area.  She also conducts a daily  radio programme of interviews and  information.  She served as chairperson of the  Prince Rupert School Board for 5  years and has been a member of the  city council since 1972.  Iona is concerned about equal  rights and opportunities for women  but for these objectives, too, for  all suffering discrimination.  "Women's rights and opportunities  are not my top priority at the  moment - the general needs of the  people in the Skeena riding hold  a greater priority.  But as long  as I'm breathing I*'11 be working  for all against whom discrimination  exists."  "I think the best advertisement  for equality for women is for women  to do a good job in everything they  undertake. As they move into  various areas where they have not  been before, and if they function  well and fairly to'alj - women and  men - they may fill a spot in the  hierarchy in a way which will lead  to more women coming in."  Human Rights Commission: agrees  with ACSW on make-up reflecting  population ratio but is dead  against token women being appointed to anything.  They must be  qualified.  Child Care: agrees with Royal  Commission report on the need for  an expansion of federal funding  for Day Care centres on a cost-  sharing basis for building and  operation. But is very concerned  that the quality of staff be good.  Canada Pension Plan:  says that  making it possible for the spouse  at home to contribute and benefit  is fine in principle - certainly  it should be done.  But she thinks  a great deal of study is needed on  a satisfactory way of making it  feasible.  Abortion: agrees with the ACSW  majority opinion that it should  be removed from the Criminal Code.  But she believes that there need  not be so many abortions, that  abortion is dehumanizing to women  and weakens the case for their  general integrity. Much more emphasis should be put on contraception. As for hospital committees, not completely convinced  that the committee system works in  all-sorts of places.  But perhaps  there is a need for some checks  and balances.  Iona is in what she calls a male-  oriented riding and "There is no  way I could win without men."  EDITH GARNER - Social Credit - Vancouver Quadra.  Nominated by acclamation.  Edith says she gives her one hundred percent support to all the  Women's Liberation movements in  whatever form they are taking.  She says the old standard was,  "Father, the woman thou gav'st me,  she did tempt me." Women's  Liberation is saying, "Father, the  woman thou giv'st me, she does  tempt me, and she counsels me with  the wit of a woman's wisdom, and  we walk together all the days of  our life, and life is good."  Edith pointed out, with great resentment, that the receipt she got  on the filing of her nomination  papers referred consistently and  only in its wording to "he" and  "his." There was no mention of  "she" or "hers."  Human Rights Commission:  Believes  women and men should be treated as  free human beings and that the  least possible government is the  best possible government.  Says  taxpayers' money should be provided  directly to individuals in the form  of a Canadian dividend, which would  do away with unnecessary government  bureaucracy. Does not believe in  all sorts of programmes and boards  being set up.  Taxpayers' money  should not be spent on red tape and  government bureaucracy which is not  going to do the individual any good.  Child Care:  Support a certain  amount of public day care but, again,  say that federal funding should be  provided directly to the individual.  A mother should have a free choice  as to whether or not she wants to  work full-time, or part-time, or not  to work at all.  The present system  does not provide this choice.  The  dividend system would not prevent  anyone from working who chooses to  do so.  Abortion: Would recommend amendments  to the Criminal Code to liberalize a-  bortion laws to give the maximum amount  of freedom to persons in need.  "I feel  that prevention is better than cure anytime, but, in cases where abortion is  being considered, I regard it as involving a personal relationship that concerns  only a woman, a man, and their doctor.  Other approaches deprive people of human  rights."  As a general comment, Edith says her interest has always been for the welfare of people and her country.  "I am opposed to  having people's freedom shafted on any  count."  She says she has a political background  by "blood and inheritance" and is very  anxious to see more women in politics.  JOAN WALLACE -  Liberal -  Burnaby-Richmond-Delta  Nominated by Acclamation  Joan began her career as a reporter  and rewriter for the Vancouver Sun,  later turning to freelance business  writing and public relations work.  Her articles on such subjects as  industrial psychology, productivity  improvement, data processing, and  management consulting have appeared  in such publications as The Financial  Post, The Star Weekly, The Globe and  Mail, Canadian Business, and The  Canadian Chartered Accountant.  She  has been a leader in the Women's  Movement in Canada, is a past president of The Vancouver Status of  Women, and is one of two B.C. members  on the federal Advisory Council on  the Status of Women.  Joan says her mother was a feminist  and she was brought up to think that  women were just as competent and  capable as men.  But, as did Simma,  she encountered discrimination in  her newspaper work. Through involvement with the Status of Women she  became more and more aware of the  extent of discrimination women suffer, and then realized, as she thoroughly delved into the subject, that  discrimination was widespread against  men, as well as women, on such ground,  as sex, age, marital status, race,  and colour.  Human Rights Commission: Definitely  needed and representation should  reflect the population ratio. Present Bill of Rights does not ensure  justice. Has been ruled by the  Supreme Court not to take precedence  over certain federal legislation.  Particularly incensed at  discrimination in the Murdoch  and Lavell-Bedard cases.  Child Care:  In favour of full implementation of Royal Commission's  recommendations for expansion of  federal funding.  Says the federal  government has money available for  assistance within the limits in which  it is willing to share costs but  some provinces are not asking for it.  Thinks pressure should be put on  provincial governments to take action  in this area.  Canada Pension: Very much in favour  of bringing spouse at home into pro  visions. Most spouses at home are  housewives.  They work just as much  as the husband and free the husband  to go to his job.  Inequitable, too,  that if a marriage breaks up after  20 years or so, and the husband  remarries, his new wife will get the  pension benefits if he dies, while  the former wife, who contributed  labour and suppbrt for a very long  period, will get nothing. Action on  this whole issue one of my top  priorities.  Abortion:  Should be removed from the  Criminal Code. Consider it a matter  to be left to the conscience of the  woman concerned in consultation with  her doctor. Changes will not be  achieved without pressure. Women  who want the abortion laws liberalized  should be writing letters to the  Prime Minister and the Minister of  Justice.  Joan feels there is a desperate need  to get more women into government.  "The only way we are going to  improve the status of women is to  bring more women into politics,  where the major decisions affecting  our lives are made."  Says, if elected, her overriding  priority will be to represent the  people of Burnaby-Richmond-Delta and  speak out about their needs and  concerns.  "But half the constituents are women  and I would devote a proportionate  part of my time to their interests."  The election is nearly here but  it's not too late to help.  Financial contributions, personal  recommendations, and time volun- ¬a  teered for whatever Vay in which  we can be useful are all part of  an effort. And effort is the  name of the game.  B.T.  A final note. This article was  completed - except for some needed  last-minute statistics, and statements from two or three late nominees - before the national candidates' list was published. The  list shows that there are nearly  twice as many women running in this  election as in the last one - 137  compared to 71. The percentage in  relation to the total number of  candidates has risen from 6.3 to  11.3. Effort obviously has been  made. But I think most of what has  been said remains valid.  11.3 percent is not a high ratio or anything approaching a reasonable one.  In fairness, in view of some statements that were quoted earlier, I  feel note should be taken of the  fact that, while there are no women  NDP candidates from B.C. seeking a  voice in the national parliament,  there are a number of women NDP  candidates in other parts of the  country.  I hope on the night of July the 8th  we will find that, as the number of  women candidates as a whole has  risen, there will be at least a  proportionate increase in the number winning election.  B.P.  ombuds  at work  Ombuds activities  By popular demand - a partial list  of what ombudspeople are doing.  Glinda, Nancy and Gene are/were  involved separately and/or together  in the following projects:  Action for Women Conference - helping plan, speaking, leading workshops  Affirmative Action Conference (Victoria) - speaking, leading workshops  A Women's Resource Day (Vancouver)-  helping plan, speaking  Human Rights Commission public hearing, (Prince George)  Canadian Association of Statutory  Human Rights Agencies annual conference (Winnipeg)  Women in Sport Conference (Toronto)  Royal Commission on Family and Children's Law - working groups on:  Family Court Support Services; Property; Maintenance; Criminal matters  heard in family court.  Police Commission Task Force on  Women  Family Law sub-section of the B.C.  Bar Association  Production of "Woman Alive" Channel  10  Provincial Advisory Committee on  sex discrimination in the public  schools.  Presentation of brief to Royal  Commission on Family and Children's  Law public hearings.  Project on immigrant women in the  labour force (with YWCA and Multilingual Information Centre).  Advisory board of Transition House.  Liaison with Canada Manpower  APPRENTICESHOP and training branch.  UBC Senate Committee on increasing  the enrolment of women in traditionally "male" faculties.  Plus miscellaneous speaking engagements and radio appearances in addition to our day-to-day work with  individual women facing problems of  discrimination.  This is only a partial list.  Watch this space for further details,  of the Appeals Court. The judges  ruled that article 45 of the crimi- election questionnaire  (WCNC) Women want to elect politicians that are responsive to the  needs of their changing lives in  today's society. With this in  mind, we presented the following  questionnaire to B.C. candidates,  women's grops and the media.  1. Approximately one out of every  five Canadians is poor. A large  percentage of welfare recipients  are women with children. There  are>anore than 200 organizations  for the poor in Canada, led  mostly be women. What is your  proposal for remedying this  problem? Are you in favor of a  guaranteed annual income?  2. Women make up about one third of  the Canadian labour force. Approximately one qurter of these women  are mothers who are working out. of  necessity and for whom childcare is  a serious problem. What is your  plan for improving the inadequate  childcare situation?  3. Reported and unreported rapes have  increased drastically over the past  few years, nationwide. There is also  an alarming increase in the  use of violent weapons during rape.,  "Proof of credibility" laws make  rape trials humiliating for a woman  who must make her sexual history  public, while the sexual background  of the alleged rapist, on the  other hand, is considered inadmissible evidence.  Conviction of  rapists is extremely low and their  sentences are lenient.  Given this  situation, it is understandable  that the unreported rape cases  remain on the increase. How would  you change current rape laws?  4. No birth control method is 100%  effective.  Those recognized as  the two most reliable, the Pill  and the IUD, cause serious side  effects for many women. Also, it  is illegal to advertise them.  Figures in 1970 show only one out  of every 40 general hospitals in  Canada had family planning clinics  Do you favour removing abortion  from the criminal code and from  the public realm, thus making it  a private matter between a woman  and hp.r doctor, as are contraceptives .  5. A large proportion of older women,  of whom many are divorced or  widowed, find themselves with little financial security.  It is estimated that at least 11%  of Canada's 8 billion annual gross  national product is the result of  work done by women in the home.  Yet, their contribution to the  economy is neither recognized  officially in GNP calculations noi  covered by existing pension plans.  What are your proposals for  assuring financial security for  housewives? Are you in favor of  including them in the Canada Pension Plan?  6. A Large proportion of divorced  and separated men are delinquent  in making alimony and child support payments.  This leaves many  women in serious financial difficulty and unable to afford to  bring their spouses to court to  secure payment.  For many, the  only recourse"is to go on welfare. Do you favour government  collection of delinquent maintenance payments?  * Figures appear in the 1970 Royal Commission Report on the Status of Women  Ed. Note:  We would like to pose  another question:  There is no Federal legislation to  prohibit discrimination on the basis  of sex.  Therefore, women working for  banks, telephone companies, airlines,  any employer operating under federal  charter,, are unprotected. These Businesses are not bound by Provincial  Legislation. Although encouraged,  complaints to the Federal Department  of Labour have proved fruitless,  since the Department refuses to  take a stand.  Women have traditionally held low  paying jobs,are are discriminated  against in terms of advancement.  The United States has enacted an  Affirmative Action plan.  B.C.  is considering similar legislation. These Plans require that  all aspects of employment and education, including hiring, promotion, superannuation, training,  re-training, and access to jobs,  be made equally available to  both sexes.  Would you press for a Federal  Human Rights Act that prohibits  sex discrimination? Do you  support an accompanying Affirmative Action Plan to facilitate  enforcement of the Human Rights  Act?  wc n c  You will be pleased to learn that the  Federal government's Department of  the Secretary of State has funded a  communications network for women in  British Columbia and the Yukon Territory.  The six month grant which began May 15  will make it possible for urban and  rural women to more readily exchange  ideas and information and to improve  their links with the media, educational  information and governments  In order to accomplish our goals, Carol  Gordon, with a background in photojournalism, will travel throughout tb:e  province and the Yukon during the  next six months attempting to involve  as many people as possible. Karen  Richardson, with writing and organizational experience, will work with  groups in Vancouver.  The mainstay of this network will be  amonthly news packet geared to the  specific needs of the recipients.  Subsequent packets will include lists  of women's groups, lists of newsletters,  data on women's groups, reports on  specific issues, and creative materials.  As you can see we will have to depend  heavily on a constant stream of feedback from you in order to keep our  information and materials up-to-  date and relevant. We encourage  people to subscribe to women's newsletters to which our packets will be  distributed.  We invite packet recipients to duplicate, reprint and distribute materials  in these packes, where possible.  This  would include sending packets to local  media.   If you have any problems  handling you communications with the  press, we will gladly pass on suggestions we may have.  Carol's first trip is scheduled  tentatively for early July and  will include northern B.C. and the  Yukon. Late July and early August,  she plans to visit people on Vancouver Island. The Lower Mainland  and the Interior will be visited in  August.  film tour  In September, "Women and Film"  will present a province-wide  festival of films, slide/sound,  video, printed information, and  an art exhibition.  This is an invitational exhibition  open to all women artists in B.C.  The material which will go on tour  will be limited due to the lack of  Space available for transporting it,  but each town we visit will present  additional local work.  The purpose of the exhibition is to  give representation to the diverse  origins, content, and directions of  these works and to perhaps give  some focus to any cultural or social  patterns which may be inherent in  them.  Instructions for submitting artists  can be 'obtained when requesting an  entry form from:  ISIS - Women & Film  1520 West 6th  Vancouver, B.C.  There is no entry fee. All work  should be submitted before July 10th,  1974 summer Involvement programme  \  tremendous amount of power, (generated by people, by activity) is  required to further the social  changes that concern us. As a voluntary, non-profit organization,  Vancouver's Status of Women Council  must both serve and be assisted by  the community in order to achieve  these ends. Under a Federal Government Student Community Service  grant, six additional staff members  have been acquired. Throughout the  summer months, these people will be  organizing projects and expanding  upon areas of service already existing within VSW.  Primarily, the intention is to get more members, old  and new, actively involved in the  work of the organization.  It's  hoped that whatever is accomplished,  whatever is established this summer,  will carry on and will continue to  serve the needs of the individual,  the needs of the community, the  needs of Status of Women, and that  those newly involved will remain  involved.  Here are some initial plans, programmes and ideas, some concrete,  some vague. All have energy and  more energy is needed to see them  through. As you read, you might  consider where you fit in.  Research Projects: Fact-gathering  is a necessity.  This is especially true in the area of institutionalized discrimination. Women - in  the labour force, in male dominated  faculties at universities, in situations requiring legal protection  - are at a disadvantage.  This is  publicly acknowledge to only a certain extent.  Research and communication of results (to the institutions involved, to the public) is  necessary if there is to be improvement, Nancy Jackson is interested  in creating research committees, in  assisting and advising you in this.  If it's your concern, call Nancy at  the office.  orientation  Orientation meetings will continue to  be held every second and fourth Thursday of each month all through the  summer. We meet at 8 p.m. in the VSW  office at 2029 West 4th Avenue.  Our  summer workers have been developing  some terrific new projects for our  members to involve themselves with —  there is an article about those  projects elsewhere in this issue.  On  July 11 the Rape Relief Centre will  present a speaker and on July 27  Lee Grills will lead discussion on  general topics concerning the women's  movement. We want all members, new  News Service: As of May 15, the "Western Canadian Women's News Service  (WCN) came into existence. With this,  the exchange of information and ideas  between women's groups has and is to  be improved. Papers such as Kinesis  will be serviced all over the province.  Gisela Filion is the student assisting  Karen Richardson and Carol Gordon in  establishing the WCN.  Submissions of  photography and written material are  desired.  Contact Gisela if you are  able to contribute or aid in the much  needed production of news packets.  Production of Kinesis: Typing articles, editing, proof-reading, layout and mail preparation are all essential in the creation of Kinesis  each month.  It is hoped that a core  group of people could become and remain responsible for this important  technical side of the newsletter.  Experience is unnecessary - rather,  this is an opportunity to learn the  mechanics of production. There are  meetings for this purpose. By calling Terry McNeney you can find out  the details and become a member of  such a work force.  Health Programme: The female body,  in health care, in sports - a decidedly major concern. In co-operation with the Vancouver Women's  Health Collective, a health group is  being offered through VSW. With  this, women can learn more about  physiology, anatomy, birth control,  pregnancy and abortion. Also hoped  for, are a permanent health column  in Kinesis and a more extensive  health library in the office.  Bonnie-Mae Newsmall is the person to  contact. To see Bonnie-Mae as well,  are any of you interested in sports  and physical fitness? A higher degree of fitness in all of us is de-  sireable. A number of things can be  done in this regard - from establishing research and action groups to investigate the adequacy of school and  community programmes for girls, to  actually starting some group activities ourselves (hiking, cycling, team  sports). Whatever your concern, get  in touch and see what can be done.  and otherwise, to know that they are  welcome to attend any Orientation  meetings they wish. Discussion gets  lively and interesting!!  We would like to begin to make a  super effort to reach the younger  woman—namely the high school student.  A lot of teenagers have feelings and  questions about women's rights but  are afraid to ask and discuss because  of the static that gets dished out  to "Women's Libbers". We would like  to know if there are any young women  interested in attending a workshop  at our office and, learning more  about the work that the VSW does, and  Writers Workshop: Many women nesicace  to express themselves in writing -  due to lack of experience, knowledge  or confidence. The printed word is a  powerful and theraputic tool, the use  of which should be promoted. Within  a workshop situation, inspiration,  encouragement, and criticism can be  offered, creativity and productivity  can be fostered.  Such forums are  now being held at the Status of  Women's office, 8:00 p.m. Wednesday  night. Prose, poetry and journalism  are all under consideration.  There  is the possibility that a Kinesis  supplement, devoted to the seminar  products, will be published at some  later date.  Call Barbara Tomlin for  more information and come see what  you offer the workshop, what the  workshop offers you.  Art Programme: Artists are the individuals in society most concerned with  communication. As such, they are  often responsible for promoting causes.  In this case, it is the social and  historical position of womankind.  Renee Van Halm is working with a group  using silkscreen and other processes  to create posters and graphic statements. These are an excellent expression of changes already with us,  changes desired and changes to come.  This sort of production offers an  additional outlet for women artists,  as well as allowing an interchange of  ideas.  In conjunction with work sessions, Renee hopes to establish an information centre, whereby artists can  find access to details on grants and  the presentation of exhibits.  If you  are an artist with ideas, designs,  needs, make a connection with the  programme.  Unquestionably, there are a variety  of offerings, a variety of needs.  Others are already busy and involved.  The prospects for getting something  done, for creating viable programmes,  are good.  Involve yourself if you  can, the student-hired help is available to you until September 15. Take  advantage of it and call with your  questions, suggestions and committments.  how they can become involved in it,  too. We have this sneaking suspicion that there are thousands of  teen-age girls out there who just  need a bit of encouragement and then  they will be well on their way to  becoming aware of how much they can  grow, of how much work needs to be  done, and of how they can do something  about it.  It would be really marvellous if this sort of thing could  eventually grow right into the high  schools.  If you are a student or  if you know of any students who might  be interested, please contact Diana  Bissell at 736-3746.  D. Bissell we need your money  VSW published Kinesis as a service to  members in good standing. The paper  serves to keep members informed of  women's issues, to educate new members,  to provide a place for women to share  ideas and information. High school  and women's studies students have used  it as a research aid.  In addition,  many libraries subscribe to Kinesis,  thereby increasing awareness of the  women's movement in the community at  large.  Because none of our grants cover the  cost of publishing a newsletter, we  depend on your membership dues to  continue operating.  We allow an ample grace period for  members whose fees are overdue before  cutting off their subscription. However, our membership fund is now  depleted. We urge all members to  check with our office about the due  date for their membership fees.  Membership is by donation. But,, we  ask you to balance your income with  the fact that it costs approximately  $3 to $4 per year per person to print  and mail the newspaper.  Any additional donations to help  defray operating costs would be  greatly appreciated.  health hazard  II  A chemical so deadly that it can cause  birth defects, mutations, cancer, neurological damage and even death is  being used on B.C. apples and Anjou  pears as recommended by the B.C.  Department of Agriculture. What's  more, this chemical, a phenoxy herbicide called 2,4,5-TP (Silvex) used in  this case to control apple drop  cannot be washed off orppared away  as it penetrates the entire apple and  becomes bound in the pectin of the  fruit.  Our food and Drug Directorate  have NOT established a legal residue tolerance level. The FDD are not  enforcing their law in the case of  apples treated with Silvex.  Will a residue be in the apples when  bought in the supermarket? The B.C.  Department of Agriculture admits in  their Tree-Fruit Production Guide  1974 that it will. Tests done show  that it can become bound in the  pectin for over 13 weeks.  Silvex is a close relative of the  notorious 2,4,5-T found by the Bio-  neti.cs Report in 1969 to be an even  more potent birth deforming agent  than Thalidomide when used on test  animals.  Silvex has the same parent  compound, 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol, as  2,4,5-T.  The deadly tetra-dioxin  (TCDD) is an ever present contaminant of 2,4,5-TP. Just to give you  some idea how deadly this contaminant is - 42 micrograms will kill a  grown man.  In other words, one  teaspoon will kill 72,00 people.  Massive documentation ot the destructive power of these deadly chloro-  phenols are pouring in from around the  world.  Science magazine wrote of  Vietnamese mothers giving birth to  monstrous babies.  In fact, many  mothers had to be deliverately  relieved of their "bundle-like"  fetuses or they would have bled to  death.  After bein aerially sprayed  with "Agent Orange" thousands of  animals died and pregnant animals  aborted their young.  Women in Sweden gave birth to babies  born with incomplete closures of the  spine and skull and similar reports  have come from New Zealand where the  phenoxy herbicides are now banned.  Men died of lung cancer and skeletal malformations in Sweden.  In  Globe, Arizona, mothers miscarried  and girls as young as 12 have had  to have hysterectomies because of  vaginal hemorrhages.   v  Others like Dr. C. Taylor, a biochemist from Malibu,had serious  blood disorders after an aerial  spraying of the Angeles Forest  behind her home. Meanwhile, in  New Mexico, two ranchers, Mr.  Lewis Trotter and Mr. John Mayo  lost their entire herds of cattle  when the.U.S. Government sprayed  Silex to kill the Salt Cedar trees  that border the Rio Grande River.  When the veterinarian, Robert Blake  autopsied the animals he found  that every major organ in the bodies  were degenerated.  It was as if  Trotters 18 month old cattle had  DIED OF PREMATURE OLD AGE.  Will  the herbicide do the same to human  organs?  Mrs. Nettie Freedlund, a farmer's  wife in Wisconsin, miscarried after  an aerial spraying of 2,4,5-T and  so did her neighbour. Many of the  Freedlund's pigs died and pregnant  pigs aborted their young. Those  that managed to carry their young  to full term gave birth to dead  piglets.  Next year's batch of  piglets were grossly deformed and  blind. Neighbours down the road  from the Freedlunds also lost  cattle and calves were born blind  and stunted.  Some of the cows  sloughed off hugh pieces of their  intestinal linings as did Mrs.  Verna Butcher from Portland,  Oregan when exposed to the caustic fumes coming from Chipman  Chemical's Smokestack.  They were  manufacturing 2,4^-D and 2,4,5-T.  A small community in the Ozark  Mountains in Arkansas had their  drinking water supply contaminated  with 2,4,5-T after a farmer on the  hillside above the town sprayed his  rangelands. Six out of eight pregnant women in the community subsequently miscarried and one of the  babies was born seriously deformed.  Mr. Robin Warren of Nova Scotia lost  a quarter of a million acres of  vegetables over a period of three  years. And 22 calves were born dead  and deformed. Those that managed to  survive were stunted and no larger  than dogs. Mr. Warren and his wife  suffered from a thyroid condition  after the Nova Scotia Dept. of Agriculture sprayed his land with 2,4-D,  2,4,5-T and Dicamba. An epidemic  of enlarged goitres has been reported  by the Health Protection Branch in  the Prairie provinces.  I wonder if  public health officials have checked  those affected for residues of  phenoxy herbicides because they are  extensively used on cereal crops in  the Prairies and 2,4-D in particular  has an affinity for the thyroid gland.  Why are our authorities turning a  blind eye and a deaf ear to the  mounting reports of illnesses caused  by the phenoxy herbicides. Agriculture is the largest user of these  chemicals and they have found them  to be a quick, easy, and cheap  method of getting rid of unwanted  weeds and trees. Again - economics  takes precedence over risks to the  public health.  I urge every woman of child-bearing  age and pregnant mothers not to buy  apples and Anjou pears from the  Okanagan this year because there is  no way to tell which apples or pears  have been treated with this chemical.  Merriam Doucet THE ROYAL COMMISSION ON FAMILY AND  CHILDRENS' LAW RESPONDS  law commission  Jane Auxier has been asked by the  Royal Commission on Family and  Children's Law to write regarding  the article on the Unified Family  Court pilot project which appeared  in the April issue of Kinesis. They  are concerned because they feel a  number of points in the article are  erroneous.  She points out:  1.  "No attempt has been made to  consult with a good industrial architect about the layout of the building or about the use of informational  signs to minimize confusion".  This  is totally incorrect. The Commission  is using the services of both Fran  Provost, an architect previously  with Graham Brown & Associates, and  now with the Justice Development  Commission, and Beverley Nielsen, a  design consultant from the firm of  Jacobson Kaye & Associates.  In Delta,  the pilot project will be housed in  the existing Court House, a new building which has incorporated the informal atmosphere we wish the Family  Court to have - for example, there  is no raised dias for the judge,  merely a grouping of tables. There  is also an attractive court yard  opening off the court room which can  be used by the parties during a break  in the proceedings. This Court also  utilizes information signs very well.  In Richmond and Surrey, new facilities  are being built and, unfortunately,  we're running into delay with the  construction strike forcing us to  use rather makeshift quarters in  the interim. The plans for the  new buildings are anything but institutional - they incorporate a  nursery for the use of those mothers  unable to get a babysitter on court  day, attractive waiting rooms affording the parties more privacy than  they now have, attractively landscaped areas without "Don't walk on  the grass" signs, for use on those  rare days when the sun shines, etc.  And, the information signs you mention along with people to minimize  confusion. We're also hoping to  try different scheduling tactics to  minimize the waiting period so many  have to undergo - for example, have  several parties appear at 9:00,  several at 10:00, etc., instead of  the entire court list being asked to  come at one time. AlSo, with regard  to scheduling, we intend to hold  court on evenings and Saturdays, to  avoid parties having to take time  off work to attend.  2. "Representation":  First of all,  let me emphasize that court will be  a last resort in family matters.  (This hardly profits the lawyers,  contrary to your criticism). We  really feel that many of the disputed matters such as maintenance  could be resolved out of court if  someone could sit down with the  parties and go over their situation -  including, in the case of maintenance,  examining income tax returns, T4  slips, etc., to get a clear idea  of the financial picture.  If the  parties do reach an agreement, they  may not wish to got.to court at all.  The new Act provides for an agreement  between the parties to be enforceable by the court without having to  actually be made a court order.  If they do wish to appear in court,  separate legal counsel would not be  necessary - rather the family  advocate, or even the court clerk  could present the facts to the judge  and explain that an agreement has  been reached.  It is only when  agreement is impossible that legal  counsel becomes necessary.  For the  purpose of the pilot project, the  Legal Aid Society has come up with  a fee schedule more attractive to  the lawyers, and we're optimistic  that legal counsel will be retained  promptly for all those requiring it.  As far as who's entitled to legal  aid, the "test" is very wide - it  really amounts to a question of  whether paying a lawyer would be a  hardship.  The role of the Family  Advocate in this set up is primarily  to represent children in contested  custody matters or PC matters, ie:  it is now required that children have  a right to counsel in matters  affecting them.  3. Make up of the Pilot Project  Committee. Your article criticizes  the absence on the Committee of persons who had used family court.  Perhaps your point here is well  taken, in fact, I understand this  criticism was raised when the Committee was sitting.  I think all  the members were relying on their  own work experience, however, and  feel those members from SWC had  sufficient feedback from people  using family court to quite adequately  present their concerns.  4. Public Hearings: Your error was  corrected in this regard but I feel  I should expand on it.  The Commission had held hearings at various  locations on Vancouver Island, the  Prince Rupert area, the uariooo,  the Kootenays, the Okanagan, the  Fraser Valley and areas just outside  Greater Vancouver - such as the  North Shore, Burnaby, etc. Apart  from the radio and newspaper publicity  given to these hearings we conducted  a further publicity campaign by  telephone," contacting all those groups  in the area which we felt would be  interested - women's groups, Human  Resources, various groups made up of  handicapped persons, schools, public  health, etc. The large turn-outs  we had - particularly in the Vancouver  area - could seem to speak'for itself.  We certainly feel we learned a lot  from those attending.  Further public  hearings will be held in Vancouver  proper.  5.  Counsellors:  I mentioned a  part of their role earlier - to help  parties resolve some of their differences before going to court, but  in view of your remark that,  "Reconciliations are not always  commendable", I wish to emphasize  that reconciliations will generally  not be their aim.  Rather it is  conciliation counselling - helping  them to "close the book gently". A  number of the counsellors hired have  come from Probation.  Others have  been with Human Resources, and with  the Children's Aid Society.  I  think it's safe to say that all of  the employees hired were dissatisfied  with the current Family Court set  up and are enthusiastic about being  in on the ground floor in helping  change it.  Jane adds, "I hope this letter allays  some of your concerns and, hopefully,  you'll be able to share this enthusiasm.  I'd be interested in hearing  further from you."  We are very concerned by the section  of the reply dealing with representation. Acrimonious adversary proceedings in marital matters are  obviously unpalatable and often  damaging to the parties. However,  we do not like as a substitute,, the  prospect of two legally unsophisticated people sitting down with someone who is not expert in family law  (even if an expert is on call) and  working out together conditions  which may affect their legal status  and rights for the rest of their  lives. People dealing with the  court system have a right to independent ,.expert, legal advice and  representation. We disagree strongly  with the idea that a court system or  court personnel can limit that right  according to the means of the parties  and the staff's conception of what  is "good" for the parties.  new executive  On June 18, at the Annual General  Meeting the new executive committee  of VSW was elected.  The results are  as follows:  President - Roberta Schlosberg  Vice President - Nancy Conrod  Ombudswoman - Gene Errington  Secretary - Jessie Parker  Treasurer - Judith Bezeredi  Public Relations - Glinda Sutherland  Nominations Officer - Hanne Jensen  Membership Officer - Annie Howarth  Newsletter Officer - Diane E. Ryals  Members-at-Large: Bobbie Patrick,  Jo Lazenby, Carolyn Gibbons,  Reva Dexter, Nancy Denofreo,  Diana Douglas tor sexism and sex-role stereotyping,  the correction of discriminatory  practices prevalent in schools and  the teaching profession , teacher education, working with publishers, and .  the creation and implementation of  positive programmes and materials into  the system.  Concomitant with these plans the  committee hopes to widely publicise  their findings and encourage more  interest and discussion about these  issues on the part of educators,  students and parents.  To this end  the committee,welcomes from you any  ideas, recommendations or evidence  of discriminatory practices in education about which the committee  should be informed.  Several of the members expressed  enthusiasm about the future and  progress of the committee.  For one  thing the majority of members seems  to be in agreement about the nature  and extent of sex discrimination in  education. There is likely to be  little time wasted trying to convince  participants that indeed there is a  problem to be tackled.  Secondly,  the Department is prepared to immediately hire a consultant to work with  the committee to ensure that their  recommendations are translated into  action.  - Sheila Purdy  non-sexist  learning  A Provincial Advisory Committee on  Sex Discrimination in Public Education is now in existence, a welcome  result of much persistent consciousness-raising of Department of Education officials by women teachers and  women's groups in the province. The  purpose of this committee, which met,  for the first time in Victoria on  June 11th, is to advise the Department of Education on ways to eradicate  sex discrimination in the B.C.  educational system.  The committee is composed largely of  representatives from the Vancouver  and Victoria Status of Women, the  Human Rights Commission, the B.C.  Teachers' Federation, Women in  Teaching, Co-op Pre-school, and the  P.T.A.  The B.C. School Trustees  Association has yet to respond to an  invitation to send participants.  The chairperson of the committee is  J.R. Meredith, Superintendant of  Instructional Materials for the  Department of Education.  The priorities for investigation and  action have yet to be spelled out in  precise terms but will likely include  the review of curriculum materials  letters  Dear Women of Kinesis:  It has just been brought to my  attention that in your  paper you mention that the  Pedestal is published by the  Vancouver Women's Bookstore.  Please let me correct this.  The Pedestal, now called Women  Can is not published by the store.  It never has been.  It's true  however that the Ped&stal was at  one time the newsletter of the  Ancestoral Vancouver Women's Caucus.  The paper is published by an  independent collective called  appropriately enough, the Pedestal  Collective. We share the same  address because the Bookstore  was the only women's group to  kindly donate rent-free space.  I hope you will, in future issues,  be able to use this information as  we on the collective think it's  important to note that Vancouver  does have an independent Women's  paper.  In Sisterhood  Pat Smith  for the Collective  Transition House needs a monkey  wrench! Have you ever tried to  do your own plumbing repairs  .without one?? Actually, there  is quite a list of things that  Transition House could make good  use of and we're hoping that all  of you who read this will take a  good look around your house or  apartment and call us if you  have any of the material.  One thing never changes at  Transition House—there are always  kids around. They have a need  for STURDY toys, trikes and  wagons, children's records,  crayons, paints and other craft  materials, dress-up clothes,  fabric for doing hobby things  with, books and magazines.  Also needed are gardening tools,  a rollaway cot, foam mattresses,  (single bed size), clean blankets and pillows, working alarm  clocks, house fans, a chrome  clothes rack, bedside lamps, an  enamel utility table, that  monkey wrench again and an old  pup tent if anyone has one lying  aroundr-and some BUNKBEDS!  One of the dreams of the staff at  Transition House is to have their  own freezer in order to take advantage of in season vegetables  and to make bulk meat purchases.  If anyone has or knows of an  unused operative freezer please  call and we will gladly take it  off your hands. And if any of you  are handy enough with your carpentry tools, or know of someone  who is, would you consider making  lyour abilities available on a voluntary on call basis to the House?  ,IF YOU HAVE ANY OF THE ABOVE ITEMS  TO OFFER PLEASE CALL DIANA BISSELL^  AT THE OFFICE - 736-3746.  Women living in the Maple Ridge area  have formed a Status of Women group.  They are attempting to raise funds  to establish a Women's Centre to  promote educational and health programs.  They plan also to set up  a Transition House if funds permit.  The addresses of both the Women's  Centre and Transition House will be  available as soon as they are organized.  In the interim, anyone  I in the Maple Ridge area needing  information or aid can contact Amy  ' Wood, 21695 Exeter Ave., Maple  Ridge.  Since Maple Ridge is a small community, the organizers have decided  not to establish separate legal  services for women.  Instead, they  are directing their energies toward  the creation of a legal aid service  for the whole community.  They do  demand that there be women para-  leglas in attendance, as well as  a woman representative on the Board  of Directors of Legal Aid. Women  are still referred to the Women's  Legal Aid Clinic in Vancouver if  the need arises.  The group is organizing a Cancer  Forum For Women Only scheduled  for this fall.  Features include  a film, a female doctor to speak  on self-examination for signs of  cancer followed by a question  period, and child care during the  forum.  The Maple Ridge group urges all  Women's Rights Groups to compile  lists of book titles to be presented  to their public libraries so that  they can provide displays of  women's books during International  Women's Year.  A.W.  Dear Editors,  Your newsletter has improved tremendously over the past few months.  I especially enjoy the issues  exploring a single topic.  I enclose a check for membership.  Risa E. Levine  Vancouver Women's Health Collective is now publishing a  monthly newsletter containing  news items, articles and book  reviews regarding women's health.  Subscription rate is $2.00 per  year.  OUR NEWSLETTER  V.W.H..C.  4197 John Street I  Vancouver  873-3984  The North Shore Women's Centre held  another meeting in West Vancouver  on June 10th at St. David's United  Church.  25 Women enthusiastically  put forward their ideas on education,  possible political involvement, and  participation in the B.C. Federation  of Women - even considering the possibility of a North Shore Women's  Pub.  The group hopes to provide a  place where community women can join  together to learn about and take action on issues of importance to them.  Chairperson was Ms. Andrea Kiss.  Officers were elected and another  meeting was called for July 2nd at  Capilano College,-Room C119 at 7:30  p.m. All interested persons are invited to attend.  Pat Pope 926-1492 or 980-7511 Loc.242/ fine arts  WOMEN SPOTLIGHTED BY VANCOUVER  ART GALLERY  The contribution that women have made  and are making in the development of  our cultural environment has been  consistently significant, though often  unrecognized. What we have witnessed  and been a part of in the last few  years has been the real emergence of  women in all fields as a potent  force. The political nature of this  emergence, coupled with the sensationalized and for the most part  deprecating media coverage it has  received, has distracted attention  from the new directions in which  women's art has been moving.  To  remedy this neglect, the August  programme of Special Events focusses  on Women in the Arts, a series of  noon hour and evening events - performances, lectures, discussions,  and workshops - that will acknowledge and make visible these accomplishments. We invite you to participate in this exposition and  celebration of women's art.  Wednesday, August 7  12:10 - 12:50 PM  Lynda Boothby - Soprano  Thursday, August 8  12:10 - 12:50 PM  Avis Rosenberg  Illustrated Lecture  WOMAN AS OTHER, IN THE  ART OF MAN  Friday, August 9  12:10 - 12:50 PM  Evelyn Roth  SCULPTURE IN MOVEMENT  A performance of sculptural  wearables.  Monday, August 12 &  Tuesday, August 13  12:10 - 12:50 PM  Diana Eckstadt  Teresa Gillen  TRANSCENDENTAL MEDITATION  Philosophy and objectives  of SCI (Science of Creative  Intelligence) and TM ( Transcendental Meditation as related to the arts.  PARTS 1 & 2  Wednesday, August 14  12:10 - 12:50 PM  Lakshmi  Veena - Indian instrument  Thursday, August 15  12:10 - 12:50  Joan Maclntyre  Theatre, Music, Dance  Friday, August 16  12:10- 12:50 PM  REEL FEELINGS  Video Workshop  Registration : 15  Session: $2.00 per person  August 14, 15, 16, 17  8:30 PM  MARKET PLACE THEATRE  Wednesday, Aug. 14 &  Friday, Aug 16 - OUr Town, A  New Canadian revue in 2 parts  by Thomas Cone  Thursday, Aug.15 & Saturday,  Aug. 17 - The Exception and  the Rule (Berthold Brecht)  Wednesday, August 21  12:10- 12:50 PM  MICHELINE PELLERIN  French Canadian Folk Songs  Thursday, August 22  12:10 - 12:50 PM  WOMEN IN LITERATURE: A FORUM  Novelists Audrey Thomas and  Jane Rule discuss their work  with Elizabeth Komisar  Friday, August 23  12:10 - 12:50 PM  CANADIAN WOMEN ARTISTS NOW  Glen Allison  Tuesday, August 27  WOMEN'S THEATRE CO OPERATIVE  Review of popular pieces  Wednesday, August 28  12:10 - 12:50 PM  Patricia Hoy  PIANIST  Thursday, August 29  12:10 - 12:50 PM  POETRY READING  Judith Copithorne  Carole Itter  Pat Lowther  Friday, August 30  12:10 - 12:50  ANNA WYMAN DANCERS  Improvisational and  Experimental Dance  THE PERFORMERS  First to perform will be Lynda Boothby,  a soprano, who is currently studying  music in London. According to a letter  from her reproduced in last April's  issue of Vanguard, one is given the impression that between strenous voice  lessons, Ms. Boothby spends a great  deal of time learning new scores such  as Hadyn's Creation, on London's tube  system; meanwhile broadening her appreciation of the operatic virtuosos.  What she will perform at the art gallery  has yet to be announced.  Avis Rosenburg will, through a slide  lecture (with, as she notes "a lot of  slides") talk about the objective attitude which men have taken throughout  the centuries of art history towards  women.  THE WOMAN AS OTHER IN THE ART  OF MEN.  By looking at the image of  women, she will explore the concept of  "man being the ONE and women being the  Other." Women who have not had a free  hand in the creation of her own image  remains the objective extension of a  man's idea.  Evelyn Roth will present a jersey fabric  construction of 2 to 5 people assisted  by Karen Rimmer who will add her dance  ideas to the performance.  In her works,  Ms. Roth is concerned not only with  aesthetic statements but also with ecological and environmental impact, as she  very often involves recycled materials,  for example her video tape works. Recently she has performed her works at  the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam and  the University of Paris. Her future  plans include making a film of wearables  in a beach setting and a performance at  the Museum of Modern Art in New York.  Evelyn Roth  A concert on the Veena is to be  presented by Lakshmi, a Phd student  of physics at SFU. A native of  southern India where she learned to  play this Instrument at the age of  ten.  The Veena is part of the car-  matic music of southern India and  is like a large Lute and an ancestor  of the more familiar Sitar. She.  states the the Veena "is one of the  most vocal of instruments and an  expression of the nuance and the  subtle ornament of South Indian  music".  Reel Feelings, is an all-women media  collective whose aim is to change the  images of women as presented by the  media." By way of comparison they  will explore the media stereotype and  the image we have of ourselves. This  exploration will take the form of a  video workshop.  Micheline Pellerin is from Montreal  and is presently studying music at  Transcendental Meditation under the direction of Diana Eckstadt and Teresa  Gillah, two women who relate their experiences with consciousness to an artistic statement. That is believing in the  "evolution of artistic consciousness in  the individual", is achieved through  transcendental meditation and the "Science  of Creative Intelligence".  Vancouver City College.  She will give  a concert of traditional French Canadian as well as old country French  songs.  She describes the folk song as  "a mirror which reflects tradition,  culture, beliefs and tales of a  specific ethnic group".  Women in literature will be represented  by an open forum moderated by Eliza  Komisar and will provide the audience  with an opportunity to explore the.  "hazards and 'highs' of the writing  profession". Audrey Thomas and Jane  Rule will be discussing their work and  drawing from their experience as women  in literature. Among the topics to be  discussed will be the actual concept of  women's literature and Canadian literature. Works by Ms. Thomas include:  Ten Green Bottles; Mrs. Blood; Munch-  meyer; Prospero On The Island; Songs My  Mother Taught Me. Those by Ms. Rule  are: Desert of the Heart; This Is Not  For You; Against The Season; Theme For  Diverse Instruments, and a non-fictional  work, Lesbian Images.  It promises to be an exciting and  informative month. Take part and  tune yourself into what women are  doing as vital artists and individuals .  Renee.Van Halm WHY A WOMEN'S ART SHOW?  Lucy R. Lippard  In a few years, shows like this one will hopefully be  unnecessary. For the time being, however, discrimination against women pervades the art world in  subtle and often cruel forms. Women's shows serve  to point out that there are indeed a huge number of  unjustifiably unknown women artists, that they are  not inferior to male artists, and, perhaps, .that their  concerns and sensibilities, like their experiences, are  often different from those of their male colleagues.  Whenever there is a Women's show or a Black Artists  show, or any similarly "segregated" event, objections  are raised on the basis that art is art and has no  sex and color. That's all very well. Art has no sex  and color; but artists do, and there has been  unmistakable discrimination against artists of a  certain sex and a certain color. A women's show is no  more arbitrary a manner of bringing together a group  of art works than is a show of "artists under 35",  or "German Art Since 1945", or artists who paint  people or landscapes or cats or abstractions. When  you enter an exhibition you have to look at what is  there individually, no matter how vague and arbitrary  the label under which it is hanging. If you can't  enjoy good art because it is hanging with other art  by one political group or another, but you can enjoy  good art if it is hung under the imposition of a  movement or a jury or a theme or a curator's whim,  then you probably aren't enjoying art anyway.  The most obvious manifestation of discrimination in  the art world has been the absence of women's work  from major galleries and museums. A couple of years  ago even a sympathetic observer could dredge up  the names of no more than 20 women artists who  were known at all. Even other women artists had  trouble doing so. This I suspect, was as much a  psychological block on their part as a physical fact,  having to do with not wanting to be identified as a  "woman artist", a curious complaint since most of  these people were perfectly ready to assert their  femininity on all other levels. A simultaneous pride  in uniqueness and underlying inferiority seemed then  to affect the ranks of women artists themselves. Yet  once the protests and meeting's and shows began,  women's own memories loosened up to the point where  endless friends from art school who had been working  away in silence.suddenly began to surface, and  groups began to get together for consciousness-  raising, for esthetic discussion, for political actions,  to remedy the years of suppression.  Grisly tales of maltreatment and inhumanity emerged  from these sessions, including those from art school  students whose professors classically discouraged  them by saying things like "There are no great  women artists and never will be" (see Linda  Nochlin's answer to this in Art News, Jan. 1971);  "Women can't use power tools"; "Women can't be  sculptors"; or "All successful women sculptors are  Lesbians"; "Sleep with me and I'll get you into  Graduate School"; and, above all, "you'll just get  married, there's no point in spending so much time  on your work." This treatment was often handed out  by well-meaning men so conditioned that it never  occurred to them that they were making it impossible  for many women to continue working. The survivors  became understandably reluctant to identify with  other women's art (understood as inferior art), thus  encouraging the isolation which, until recently, made  so many women artists accomplices to their own  professional murders.  Nor do women art students have role models with  whom they can identify, for although some 75% of  the undergraduate student body in art schools are  women, approximately 98 % of their instructors are  male. Thus it becomes clear to these students that  women can't succeed when so few women teach,  lecture, are invited as visiting artists, or are included  in shows of such schools. Organizations like the  Women's Art Registry*, a slide collection used by  the organizers of this present show, and founded in  response to the constant comment that "there are no  women working in light, kinetics, conceptual art,  large sculpture, etc."; like WEB (West East Bag),  an international network of women artists' organizations; like the artists' consciousness-raising groups  all over the country; like Women's Centers and  *To be included in the Women's Art Registry, send four slides  (labeled with your name, titles, dimensions and media),  plus your name, address and phone number and any  biographical information you wish, to Women's Art Registry,  138 Prince St., NYC 10012. They will be used by the  organizers of exhibitions, writers, teachers, and potential  employers. If you can afford it, a contribution to cover  expenses will be much appreciated.  Women's Co-Op galleries; these are beginning to  indicate the tip of the iceberg that is women's art,  and, at the same time, are beginning to provide ways  for women who have followed husbands and families  outside of the major art centers to keep in touch  with each other.  I joined the women's movement in 1970 when a group  of artists got together as the Ad Hoc Women Artists'  Committee to picket and perform guerilla actions  at the Whitney Museum, whose staff was visiting  almost no women's studios and including almost  no women in the Annual Exhibitions. (We were  successful in raising the percentage of women in the  show that year from 4 V2 % to 22%, and to 25%  the next year; the other New York museums are  worse than the Whitney). I became involved for  endless reasons, but the most public one was the  fact that as a working critic for five years, I had been  guilty of the same lack of seriousness towards  women's work as the museums and galleries.  Although I had been an artist's wife and had had  my own infuriating experiences in that role, I  continued to go to men's studios and either disregard  or patronize the woman artist who worked in a  corner of her husband's space, or in the bedroom or  kitchen. I was, I think, unconsciously responding to  her sense of inferiority and insecurity as well as my  own (my "reputation" depended on male support,  etc.). And I was swallowing that ridiculous statement  that all women are part-time artists, whether they  are self-supporting or married or mothers.  Now, two years later, a lot has changed, but there  is still an immense amount of changing yet to be  done. One no longer hears, and expects to hear as a  matter of course, comments from dealers like "I can't  have a woman in the gallery, they're too difficult",  or "We already livve a woman", or "Collectors won't  buy women's work", or "I liked her photographs but  she was so pretty I didn't go to the studio because  it might have been for the wrong reasons". Nor does  the art press dare use the term "feminine" in a value-  judgmental context, something that once caused  many women to be literally afraid of using delicate  line, sewn materials, household imagery, or pastel  colors (especially pink!). Today the greatest compliment a woman artist can receive is no longer  "you paint like a man".  The v/ork in this show demonstrates a range of styles  and ideas that .make it impossible to pin down what  a "feminine art" would be. Yet this remains one of  the most fascinating aspects of suddenly being  exposed to so much more art by women. There is  no question that female experience, socially and  biologically, is different from that of the male.  Certain elements, such as circles, domes, obsessive  repetition, over-all or particularly textural and  sensuous emphasis, and centrally focused compositions, appear more frequently in women's work  than in men's. But until women's place in society  is indeed equalized, and extensive studies can be  made of women's work freed from oppressive conditioning, it's anybody's guess as to why.  From the "Women's Kit" 10  labour  CONCERNING WOMEN AND YOU  The 4th Annual Conference on  Women's Rights was appropriatly  held on Mother's Day weekend.  Unfortunately, this meant that  many of the Federation of Telephone Workers delegates were  unable to attend. Mother's  day is the busiest day of the  year for long-distance operators.  It also holds the record for  "reverse" charges.  Linda Shuto, B.C. Teachers  Federation gave us a stirring  address — telling us of the  frustrating attempts to get a  Women^s Studies Course included  in the Secondary School cirric-  ulum.  The "Provincial Secondary  Advisory Committee" wants a  "Peoples Studies Course" instead.  Carolyn Gibbons, Legislative  Director, B.C. Federation of  Labour, in her talk on "Women  and the Law" reminded us just how  much we need law reform both Prov-  incially and Federally.  There is  so much discriminatory legislation,  usually badly interpreted by the  courts.  One of her examples was  the infamous "Murdoch" case.  Kathleen Ruff, Director, Human  Rights Act, spoke on this progressive piece of legislation.  She hopes the Act will be proclaimed in July. (Perhaps we  should lobby our MLA's regarding this.)  Chris Waddell, Director, Women"s  Bureau, Department of Labour,  told of her work with unorganized workers, new Canadians,  and students.  Her department  provides the public with information regarding the Labour Act,  and will investigate suspected  violations.  A sparkling highlight was the  address by Jean Bezusky, Associate  Registrar, Labour College of Canada.  It is interesting to note  that while only 3% of the graduates of the Labour College are  women, (and Jean is one of them),  that she was able to get the  appointment as Associate Registrar.  When Ms. Bezusky was a student at  the Labour College, the only  female at the time, the students  has informal get-togethers in  taverns. They chose a "men 6nly"  bar. Ms. Bezusky went along, and  when they came out, this gusty 21  year old girl was sitting on the  steps reading a book by a flashlight. They changed their get-  togethers to a desegrated bar.  Jean tells me there are still "men  only " bars in Montreal.  Workshops revealed that while  many delegates wished to get more  active in their unions, many of  them felt they were ignorant of  Parliamentary Procedures etc.,  this led to the information that  many unions hold seminars and  schools giving instruction in  these subjects, and also in Shop  Steeard instruction, Grievance  Procedures, Arbitration, Collective Bargaining and Labour Law.  Courses ate also given by the  Vancouver and District Labour  Council, and the B.C. and District Eabour Council.  We were in agreement that the  "union " way was the only way to  obtain decent salaries and working  conditions.  It was pointed out  that B.C. Federation of Labour is  glad to give advice and assistance  to anyone wishing to any group of  employees wishing to organize.  The Conference voted to send a telegram to the powers that be in Quebec  protesting the overthrow of the jury  decision acquiting Dr. Morgantaler.  We agreed to ask our local unions,  to work through the B.C. Federation  of Labour for the establishment of  a Ministry of Women's Rights. We  wish them to again protest the  discriminitory separate minimum  wage rates for people under 18.  (The B.C. Federation of Labour has  been the only group to protest so  far.) We also agreed to ask our  local unions help in suggesting to  the Department of Education, that  Parliamentary Proceduar, Rules of  Order, and Public Speaking be  included in all English Courses  in our Secondary Schools.  Great enthusiasm was generated by  this conference among all delegates.  Hopefully, next year's conference  will be even bigger and better.  "I hope women in the labour  movement, and all those who  are organizing, or wish to  organize, will keep us informed of their progress.  Let us know of any newsworthy items.  Muriel Warwicker  Dr. Katie Cook's excellent resume  "What Has Been Done?", the story of  various government departments' progress in implementing recommendations  contained in the Royal Commission on  the Status of Women Report, has been  published.  Supplies have been ordered  and will be sent to you as soon as  available.  More news from directions about women  gaining full equality in the labour  force...Cassiar Asbestos have women on  staff both in B.C. and the Yukon.  In  the B.C. operation 12 women have moved up  from entry level jobs and a few have  progressed even further, working as  "dumpmen".  ...MacMillan Bloedel have  publicly stated that their policy is one  of equal opportunity in employment in  all locations; their Chemainus mill now  has two female employees, one on the  green chain and the other a trip drop  sorter (the first women in the mill  since World War 2!)  An interesting trip for me to Pemberton  was highlighted by the mill foreman at  Evans Products shutting down.the mill to  allow me to talk with 13 or the 60  persons on shift who are women.  Some  have been on the job for better than two  years. What they like most is the pay.  This particular mill foreman suggests  that women could be trained as saw  filers - anyone interested in this  apprenticeable trade training?  Sonia Blum, Coordinator, Women's  Employment in Ottawa, has left us  for a post with the Priwy Council.  Sonia has, in a very short time,  sone much to promote the cause of  women often in a very hostile  climate - we hate to see her go,  but wish her luck.-  Discussions are taking place to  determine the feasibility of recruiting and training from the  Squamish area to work in the box  car plant under construction  there - we hope this will provide  an opportunity for women in  Squamish to become part of the  labour force.  From Bob Diether, Forestry Consultant, Employment Development  Division.. There are crummy women  drivers everywhere, but only B.C.  has women crummy drivers.  domestic   work  "Liberated women deny to their domestic  or private household employees - those  who free her (the liberated woman) from  the need to stay home - the same advantages they seek for themselves. Private  household employees are among the lowest paid and least protected workers  in the labor force," says Doris B.  McLaughlin of the Institute of Labor  and Industrial Relations at the University of Michigan.  Career women who espouse the principle  of women's liberation are seeking  a better society and working conditions.  They have no interest in providing such  opportunities for women who work in their  homes. Having been a domestic day  worker myself, I can attest to this.  I  worked for a middle aged woman with a  beautiful home and no doubt her husband  had a good job. However, she was an  office worker and she complained one  day that I was making as a dayworker  almost as much money an hour as she,  an office worker.  Why should I earn less.  Is not my  job as important and meaningful as hers  She would probably argue that it took  more education and preparation for  her job. Domestic work requires hard  work and preparation.  Some day her  job may be" performed by a computer.  But people will always need to eat  and to keep their homes clean. There  will always be a need for cooks,  cleaners, etc.  So how about it gals  out there - how about equality for  the entire sorority.  Marie Cockburn n  a moral responsibility  Dr. Henry Morgentaler, a Montreal  physician, has been a defender of a  woman's right to abortion for the  last seven years. He has demonstrated that abortions can be  performed safely and without hospitalization up to twelve weeks  of pregnancy by the vacuum suction  method in his Montreal clinic.  By  defying an unjust law, which makes  abortion a crime unless it is approved by a 3-man hospital committee, Dr. Morgentaler has responded  to the needs of many Canadian women.  Dr. Morgentaler has performed abortions on women from six Canadian  provinces, those include the Mari-  times, Quebec and Ontario.  In his May 4th address to a Toronto  rally, Dr. Morgentaler said in part:  "Those who intimidate and close  down doctor's clinics offering  safe abortions to women are condemning women to die and be injured  by quacks. They carry a moral if not  direct criminal responsibility for  the suffering of women unable to  obtain medical abortions and should  be held accountable for their acts,  even if they act in the name of  the law.  Dr. Morgentaler was brought to trial  on a charge of performing an illegal  abortion last fall. A 12-person  Quebec jury found him not guilty of  the charge. The acquittal was a  victory for Canadian women and their  struggle for freely available abortion. The jurors reflected the'  widespread opposition to the abortion laws and the widespread support  for Dr. Mogentaler. The most recent  polls show that a majority of Canadians oppose these restrictive laws.  The jury's decision, however, was  overruled by the appointed judges  nal code, on which Dr. Morgentaler's  defense was based, could not be  used in abortion cases. This article protects doctors from prosecution  if the medical acts they perform are  carried out with 'reasonable  care and skill' and for the health  of the patient. Justice Dube explained his ruling against Dr.  Morgentaler by saying that if  article 45 were upheld, "it would,  in other words, allow abortion on  demand". This action is clearly  designed to keep women in their  traditional role of enforced  motherhood.  Justice minister, Otto Lang made  the statement that abortions are  too easv to get and he has asked  hospitals to clamp down on abortions, expressing concern that  some hospital committees "are  operating in a fashion that virtually  is abortion on demand". Lang  declared that his moves were having  the desired effect. He said that  some hospital committtees have begun  obeying the spirit of the law.  In  his opinion, "that abortion, except  in very limited circumstances,  ought to remain a crime".  If all  provinces followed Lang's example,  virtually no women would have access to abortion. As minister of  justice, Lang is attorney-general  for the two northern territories.  He boasts that he has made sure  that social and economic factors  are not grounds for abortions there.  In Saskatchewan, reactionary forces  are moving to further restrict the  limited number 6f abortions being  done in that province. Regina has  imposed a $150 fee above medicare for  all abortions, and the Saskatoon  City Hospital has announced that no  abortions would be performed past  the 12 week pregnancy. The Vancouver  General Hospital has imposed a 6-  months residence requirement for all  women seeking abortions.  Dr. Morgentaler concluded his address  to a Toronto rally by saying:  "Our  fight is a fight for human rights, for  freedom to choose, freedom of conscience, freedom of religion, Oar fight  will demand sacrifice, and effort,  sustained effort.  I am determined to  continue this fight until this basic  right of women to control their reproduction and to obtain abortion when  needed, in safety and dignity is  achieved. Together we shall overcome I"  The recently concluded Foulkes Report  on Health in B.C. calls for provincial  pressure on the federal government to  remove abortion from the Criminal Code,  for increased abortion facilities  throughout B.C. and increased contraceptive programs. Women can exert  pressure by writing to provincial  health minister, Dennis Cocke, to  implement the Foulkes Report recommendations and to federal justice  minister, Otto Lang, to remove abortion from the criminal code. Women  can also challenge the candidates in  the federal election for their stand  on abortion.  There are committees to defend Dr.  Morgentaler in all the major Canadian cities.  In Vancouver, the  Committee to defend Dr. Morgentaler  is working in conjunction with the  Vancouver Health Collective and the  Health-Subcommittee of the NDP Women's Rights Committee to bring pres~  sure to bear on provincial and federal  governments. The abortion issue will  also be dealt with at the upcoming  Vomen's Health Symposium on Sat.,  June 22, at the Bayview School, 2251  Collingwood.  Gisela Filion  sports  Women in Sport Conference  26 - Toronto  May 24-  Self-admittedly, women physical educators and women athletes have been  the last group to have representation  in the women's movement. Although  public awareness of discrimination  against girl and women in sport has  increased greatly, the women most  directly involved have often not  recognized these discriminatory practices as being part of the pattern  of sexism that exists throughout the  society.  Marian Lay, Administrator for Sport  Canada, in recognizing this problem  created a conference that would give  women in sport the first opportunity  to view clearly the whole spectrum  of discrimination that exists in our  country. At the same time women  from the movement were given the  chance to become acquainted with the  special problems that exist in sport.  The delegates responded in an enormously positive way to the four major  speakers. Laura Sabia (Ontario Status of Women Council) discussed the  political system and the relationship  between the sport community and other  institutions. The women's movement  as deviant behaviour and the socialization of children and athletes were  discussed by Dr. Esther Greenglass,  (psychologist, York University.)  On the final morning, we listened to  Abbie Hoffman ( political scientist  and world class middle-distance runner)  examine the role of sports women in the  women's movement. As Abbie said, "I  care about Ms. Murdoch, I care about  Ms. Murdoch, I care about the legal  and economic system that constantly  deprives women, I care about the fact  that little girls have few physical  fitness opportunities."  The daily workshops (Women in Competition, Sport for Girl Children, Women  in Coaching, Status of Women in Physical Education, Women and Sport. Media,  ETC.) developed countless recomendations  that government and private institutions  These will be in Kinesis in the near  future.  The final speaker was Marian Lay. She  spoke about her own life as a woman  athlete (having to wear long-sleeved  blouses for ten years to hide her muscles)  and why she had decided to do something  about it. Her calling of this conference  clearly activated the one hundred most  influential women in the Canadian Sport  Community.  Note: May Brown authored a conference  telegram to Mr. Lalonde, Minister of  National Health and Welfare, calling for  greater female representation on the  National Advisory Council On Fitness and  Amateur Sport. Women presently hold  two outtof thirty positions. Lalonde has  not responded to the telegrams. However,  when Joan Wallace contacted him, he  made the old claim that the government  has had difficulty finding qualified  people. Those interested should send  resumes to the Department of National  Health and Welfare, Ottowa. media action  Recently the media action group  received a letter which suggested  that the women's movement had  much more important issues to  be dealing with than the Benson &  Hedges ad (May Kinesis). Where  was our sense of humour?  We are a group of volunteers who  believe that the way women are  viewed in society is directly influenced by the images produced by  the mass media. The intangible  aspects of sexism are just as  important as the more tangible forms  of discrimination. As more women  verbalize their disgust with sexist  ads, the ads will change - just  as the stereotyped image of the  smiling, shuffling black disappeared  when it became no longer acceptable  to portray blacks in that way.  The Royal Commission on the Status  of Women describes clearly the  impact of advertising:  Stereotypes are perpetuated by  the mass media. Day after day,  advertising reinforces and  exploits stereotypes to achieve  greater sales by repeating  the idea that the "real" woman  and the "real" man use this or  that product. Although men as  well as women are stereotyped,  the results may be more damaging  for women since advertising  encourages feminine dependency by  urging women not to act but to  be passive, not to really achieve  but to live out their aspirations  in the imagination and in dreams.  Woman is often presented as a  sex object, defined as a superficial creature who thinks only  of her appearance, who sees her  self mainly in terms of whether  she is attractive toymen.  She  conforms to the beauty and youth  standards which men are said to  want of her.  In a study prepared for the Commisssion, it was  found that 89% of the women pictured  in Canadian newspapers and magazines  are less than 35 years of age. As  presented by the advertiser, women  are hardly ever associated with  intelligence, sincerity, culture,  originality or talent.  Instead,  they are depicted as being young,  elegant, and beautiful. Repetition  is a "hidden persuader" in advertising, an especially effective  tool influencing children and  young girls to aspire to constraining  models and low ideals.  MAG  women in the mass media  The way women are portrayed in most  women's magazine fiction, TV commercials, cartoons and soap operas  continues to mirror society's adamant resistance to any changes in  attitudes towards traditional roles  and stereotypes.  Such is the conclusion arrived at  recently by the authors of nine  reports on role, image, and message  published in the Spring 1974 issue  of the Journal of Communication  (University of Pennsylvania).  Since  the symposium on women in the media  published in this quarterly is of  interest to all women concerned with  society's attitudes regarding women,  I'll give a brief report on the content of the various articles.  Society's reactionary attitudes are  evident, for instance, in women's  magazine fiction.  Between 1940 and  1970 the image and role of the women  portrayed in the fiction of Ladies  Home Journal, McCalls, and Good  Housekeeping has not changed much,  according to Helen H. Franzwa.  In  her study on female roles in the  fiction of these three magazines,  Ms. Franzwa, a professor of communications at City University of New  York, found that "women were portrayed  in one of four ways:  single and  looking for a husband; housewife-  mother; spinster; widowed or divorced-  soon to remarry.  In each of these  portrayals, the one element defining  all women was the presence or absence  of a man in their lives.  Instead of  portraying women as individuals with  specific defining characteristics,  these stories presented them as  creatures who were defined by the  men in their lives."  Besides, "in 1955, 1960, 1965, and  1970, not a single married women who  worked appeared in the stories  sampled," Ms. Franzwa writes in  "Working Women in Fact and Fiction."  Now, if we turn to television, women  in TV commercials don't fare much  better. Alice E. Courtney and  Thomas W. Whipple, both of York University, Toronto, report the following in their article "Women in TV  Commercials": "...the results of the  four studies provide evidence that  women are not portrayed as autonomous,  independent human beings, but are  primarily sex-typed.  ...Moveover,  the studies show minimal improvement  during the two-year period examined.  ...Women's roles continued to change  and expand at a faster rate than the  advertisers' response during that  time period. Advertisers are lagging  far behind role changes in their  portrayal of women,"  Worse than lagging behind, we might  say. Advertisers show gross insen-  sitivity to the whole philosophy  and ideology of the women's movement,  or we wouldn't have offensive ads  such as that Benson and Hedges ad in  Canadian magazines recently.  Another researcher, Helen White  Streicher, of the Institute for  Juvenile Research, Illinois Department of Mental Health, was wondering  whether females were doing any better  in the cartoons than they were in  children's books.  Well, no, they  weren't. After weeks of watching  cartoons on Saturday and Sunday  mornings, Ms. Streicher reports in  "The Girls in the Cartoons": "Help,  save me!" is their most frequent cry,  except in the teachy-preachy variety.  ...When we come to the teachy-  preachy cartoons, girls are still  outnumbered by boys, but they sometimes have more important roles."  So, wherever you turn, it's the same  old story.  Cartoons, like almost  anything else around us, continue to  perpetuate the traditional attitudes  towards sex roles and stereotypes.  The findings of Ms. Streicher ring  a familiar bell. Divisions along  sex lines are still very much with  Summing up her findings, she writes:  "Cartoon females were less numerous  than males, made fewer appearances,  had fewer lines, played fewer 'lead  roles,' were less active, occupied  many fewer positions of responsibility, were less noisy, and were more  preponderantly juvenile than males.  Mothers worked only in the house;  males did not participate in housework.  In many activities in which  girls showed some form of skill (eg.-  cheerleading), their performance  was duplicated by a dog or other  pet."  And so it goes, always the same old  story.  That's why I wasn't surprised  at all when I came to Ann Beuf's  article, "Doctor, Lawyer, Household  Drudge." Ms. Beuf, a professor of  sociology at the University of  Pennsylvania, after investigating  sex role perception of children born  since the women's movement, found  that their perception shows very  little change.  The conclusions of Ms. Beuf's study  are as follows:   "...regardless of  the amount of attention the women's  liberation movement has attracted,  children are still learning about a  role structure which is sex-typed,  especially in the occupational  sphere.  It also tells us that children as young as four or five hold  the same kind of stereotypes about  careers that sociologists and movement women have noted in American  society as a whole.  It appears  that, as well as knowing their sex,  preschool children know the social  implications and limitations of that  sexual definition. The television  viewing data indicate that the more  children see of the world, as it is  presented by everyday cultural purveyors , the more likely they are to  apply sex stereotypes to careers."  More and more it seems to me that  attitudes towards sex roles and  stereotypes will only begin to change  concretely and positively when women  gain power.  There won't be any  equality without a balance of power.  - Eloah F. Giacomelli tv images  Caricatures are meant to be funny,  but women are no longer laughing."  The comment comes from an eighty  seven page brief presented to  the CRTC. The work of over 60  women from 14 to 65 years of age,  the brief states that women are  "mis-represented, under-represented, and discriminated against"  by the CBC English language TV  network. The group which is backed  by Women for Political Action and  the Ontario Committee on the Status  of Women monitored programs for a  three month period.  Their comments  cover all areas of. programming -  news, public affairs, variety,  sports and children's programs.  Their findings show that women are  demeaned in every area, if they  are considered at all.  "CBC TV newscasters have consistently  reported women's stories in either  a snide or a humourous way", the  brief says.  Stories about women  appear during slack news periods  or as a light note on which to  end a newscast.  Over a 2^ month  period only eight programs contained a woman as a newsmaker.  "Of 169 various human beings who  contributed to the daily history  of the planet only 11 were female,  that comes to 6.5 % female involvement in the world." The report  suggests that sufficient funds be  provided to establish a good Women's  News Journal produced and staffed  by women broadcasters.  On 22 public affairs programs, 28  men appeared as hosts and co-hosts  with only 7 women sitting in the  co-host chair.  Out of 148 guests  28 were female.  Indicative of the way women's  sports are covered is the placement of footage of Betsy Clifford's  performance in the World Cup Ski  Race after the Wexford Minor Boys  Hockey results. Yet, women bring  home the largest number (proportionate to the number of sports  in which they may participate) of  medals from World, Olympic, and  Commonwealth competition.  In the opinion of the brief writers,  the CBC should scrap most current  daytime programs and develop entirely  new ones that are "pertinent to the  lives of Canadian women in the '70's.  For example, what passes for humour  on Luncheon date comes from ridiculing women.  Petticoat Junction is*  "blatantly sexist, vicious and trite".  It "embodies and reinforces every  negative stereotype about the female  sex." Juliette and Friends features  "interior decoration for homes and  exterior decoration of women.  On  air Juliette is brow-beaten by all  the men who surround her. Their  lack of respect for her is obvious  and she is treated with the conde-  cension reserved for mindless  women." The new CBC drama series  in the making, "House of Pride",  should be rewritten.  The female  characters are a woman "who has  acknowledged at 38 that love and  marriage have passed her by", and  a sister whose emotions rule her  more than her brain". The two  producers and four script writers  are all males.  The researchers feel that commercials should be withdrawn.  They  present a world in which men have  authority and women have clean kitchen floors.  As far as children's programming  goes, the kids are not being provided with positive self-images on  which to build.  Women are still  under-represented in human, puppet,  and cartoon characterizations.  The brief was presented to the CRTC,  Ottawa, in hearings held during the  third week of February. We hope to  be able to print a follow up report  on the results.  K.S.  Women are misrepresented and exploited  in advertisements. They are stereotyped, demeaned and objectified.  They  are either perpetually shown as young,  alluring sex objects, hovering in the  background of some masculine-  oriented action, or else the female  form is used to sell products completely unrelated to it. Advertisements relentlessly exhort women to  buy consumer goods, sprays, clothes  and cosmetics in order to be "totally-  feminine and acceptable".  Men are misrepresented and exploited  too, but, until now, not in a negative way.  The man in the advertisement is driving a car, (equipped with  admiring female companion). He is  young, slim, and good-looking,  sprinting along a beach, three paces  ahead of a woman, or gazing into the  distance, puffing a cigarette, manfully.  Suddenly, there is a new brand of  advertisement aimed at men. Tucked  into the back pages of Esquire an  advertisement appears for a deep  moisturizer complete with Vitamins A,  D and E, which help, fade away facial  lines and wrinkles.  "Stroke it on  once or twice a day and help prevent  that old look", men are told. An  advertisement in Newsweek, May 1974,  introduces "Male Comfort Spray" -  indispensable for the crotch area,  and on Georgia Street a grinning 25  year-old springs out from a billboard, rakishly nude from the navel  up, arms akimbo, assuring us that  with a specific brand of underwear,  there are 430 different ways.  What does it prove? Not that sexual  exploitation of women is undesirable  and is currently being denounced by  women, but that it is profitable to  manipulate human beings and their  insecurities, and that exploitation  of men is an area previously largely  untouched, and just beginning to  blossom.  It seems that some vital point has  been missed here.  Instead of a  healthier, more realistic image for  women, the advertising industry offers  a more objectified image for men.  They, too, are being encouraged to  drift around on a cloud of conflicting and synthetic smells, and are  being more consistently pressured to  conform to a stereotype.  Presumably, we can wait with bated  breath for the day when women's  earning power warrants an onslaught  of advertisements for consumer items  which if acquired will lead, by  implication, to the acquisition,  use and enjoyment of a sexy, virile,  young man who happens to be draped  in or around said consumer item.  No one is saying that advertisements  could not serve a purpose to bring  to the notice of the consumer the  products which are available. What  is objectionable is the economic  advantage big business gains by  exaggerating and sustaining the  differences between the sexes,  creating insecurities and then capitalizing on them, playing men and  women off one against the other in  order to sell them products they  think they need.  In this way both  are induced to chase the wrong ideal  and to buy products to correct or  compensate for the alleged inadequacies.  This is all the more potent  because of the emphasis on the young,  slim, beautiful theme.  The only bright spot in this new  development of male exploitation in  the advertising industry is that it  might bring some men up with a jolt  to make the connection in their minds  with the unfair and negative image  with which women have been saddled.  Maybe, just maybe, with the exploitation of men as objects in advertisements, they will feel that since it  is uncomfortable for them and they  are annoyed at the pressure, that  women might feel like that too.  Everybody is constantly held in check  by people in their environment setting limits to the kinds of behaviour  they will tolerate. The disservice  women have done men until recently  (and I truly hesitate to lay anything  more at their door for fear of misinterpretation) is in tolerating the  attitudes toward them in advertisements.  Increasingly, women are saying what  they think - that advertisements  generally demean them, that they are  not as portrayed in them, and they do  not want to be used in that way.  In  so saying, however, they do not simply  want the pendulum to swing to the  other side and exploitation of men  in advertisements to begin where  exploitation of women ended.  Brenda Austin herstory  dr. barry  Dr. Barry, small, slim, aquiline-  featured and hot-tempered, graduated in medicine from Edinburgh  University in 1812. He entered the  British Army, advanced rapidly in  rank and served in far-flung parts  of the Empire.  Called by colleages  an unsociable little beast, he fought  several duels and flirted outrageously  with fellow officers' wives. He was  detested, personally, as much as he  wasyadmired professionally.  Finally,  he came to Canada as inspector-  general of military hospitals, later  was made inspector-general of British  military hospitals throughout the  world.  In 1865 Dr. James Barry died.  As his body was being prepared for  burial, the undertaker was shocked.  "My God!" he exclaimed in disbelief,  "he's a woman!" Not only that, but  an autopsy revealed that Dr. Barry  had borne a child. There were rumors  of a royal romance.  from:  Leading Ladies by Jean Bannerman  reproduction from the Women's Kit  st. Catherine of sienna  Six hundred years ago an Italian girl  named Catherine Benincasa built an  inner cell in her soul and, thus fortified,went out into public service  and international diplomacy.  Construction of this resource centre  deep within the core of her Self took  three years of solitary labour.  In  1363, at the age of sixteen, she  was ready to begin a career, which  was to take her from the streets  and jails of Sienna to the inner  sanctuaries of the Vatican.  Imagine  her as an ideal combination of Joan  Baez and Henry Kissinger, captivating  mobs with charismatic rhapsodies  about Peace and Love, bullying heads  of state into substituting negotiation for warfare.  As the illiterate, female, twenty-  third child of a small tradesman,  Catherine was well aware of her lack  of obvious qualifications.  But, she  argued, God had commanded her to  proceed.  Since He had created everyone - and both sexes - He was clearly  entitled to choose any agent He  pleased to carry out His projects.  His instructions were to act manfully,  doing whatever had to be done without hesitating or respecting persons,  certainly without worrying whether  society would consider such vigorous  action appropriate to one's sex.  This Concept of acting manfully  seamed useful enough to pass on with  sisterly greeting to the Queen of  Naples.  The Benincasa parents of course  expected Catherine to marry the nice  boy they picked out for her.'  boy they chose for her.  She sidestepped this destiny by announcing  her betrothal to Christ. A true  partner in marriage, she assumed her  husband's professional tasks of  peacemaking and healing, even performing a few of his favourite type  of miracle.  In a move which seems  more like identification than wifely  devotion, she acquired the pains of  his crucifixion wounds and his  legendary life-span of thirty-three  years.  Other women have claimed devine betrothals, but she must have made a  more practical companion than most  of the ecstatic fiancees in the  calendar of saints.  Catherine's primary goal was to  reform and reunite the Church, which  stank with corruption and was split  between the rival holy cities of  Rome and Avignon. Her efforts began  on a local level with prayer marathons and protest marches directed  against the papal legates. Others  who realized the need for action  but had lacked leadership joined  her.  She was proof that one could  make a committment to serve God  and one's fellow creatures without  leaving secular life. The only  cloister necessary was the inner  cell within the soul.  Some of the most distinguished of  those who had chosen the literal  cloister recognized the value of  her common sense and forceful personality. With Raymond of Capua,  General of the Dominican Order, she  engaged in theological discussions  to the benefit of both.  Campaigning prison reform and public  health, Catherine went into the  jails and reported the injustice  she found there. When the Plague  struck Sienna, she was evidently  immune, after years of gradually  increasing abstinence and subjugation of her body.  Some of the  victims whom she visited were  healed.  Others found dying bearable  because a human being stayed with  them and loved them, despite their  contagion.  Annoyed by the blundering of Great  Men, she wrote to them, pointing  out the problems to be solved and  urging immediate solution. The  obstacle of her illiteracy was  overcome by recruiting literate  disciples to whom she dictated her  amazing correspondence. King Charles  V of France was told to stop fooling  around and end his stupid war. Pope  Gregory XI required continual prodding  to take a stand. Letters proving  insufficent, Catherine travelled to  Rome, Avignon and Florence, trying to  reconcile factions and put some backbone into St. Peter's descendent.  The city of Florence especially requested her help in its difficulties  with the French papacy.  She did  avert a war and return the Pope to  Rome, though without healing the  breach in the church hierarchy. As  the scope of her influence was realized, she was in continual physical  danger from those who saw an advantage  in silencing her. When Gregory's  successor, Urban VI, called on her  for help, her letters rounded up  support from Germany, Hungary and  Sweden.  Just before her life was cut short  by illness and exhaustion, she dictated The Book of Divine Doctrine  which is said to rival Dante's  Divine Comedy as a classic of Italian  literature.  Secular, poor, uneducated, female she  made a difference to history. We can  use a saint such as Catherine of Sienna  sho urges us to act manfully and lovingly.  If you know you have to do something, she would say, for heaven's sake  go ahead and do it.  Pray for Women's Rights in Canada?  Some of us did, on April 30-> the Feast  of St. Catherine of Sienna.  Phyllis Reeve  Bibliography  Crook, Margaret Brackenbury, Women and  Religion.  Boston, 1964.  Deen, Edith. Great Women of the Christian Faith. NY, 1959.  Doely, Sarah Bentley, ed. Women's Liberation and the Church. NY, 1970.  Durant, Will.  The Renaissance. NY, 1953. thank you, grace  Long before the legislation was  passed Grace Maclnnis was pressing  for maternity benefits for working  women, to provide equal survivor  benefits under C.P.P. and living  allowances for women in Manpower  training programmes.  It is Grace  Maclnnis who has always been at the  forefront of the battle to take  abortion out of the criminal code,  and to better consumer protection.  For the most part, she has been  alone. Between 1968 and 1972, she  was the only woman M.P.  First  elected to the Federal parliament in  1965 Grace called for salaries for  home-makers and liberalization of  the abortion law in her first  speech.  But Grace Maclnnis had begun her  fight for women many years before.  She served in the provincial legislature between 1941 and 1945.  In  1943, she stated that "women should  have equal opportunity with men for  training, for work, and getting  employment as well as advancement...  equality with men must be given in  the new world."  She has been accorded international  acclaim and in 1971,  the French  magazine, Marie Claire listed Ms.  Maclnnis as one of the fifty most  important women in the world.  Grace will be taking a sea voyage  and then she says "I'll come back  to Vancouver and perhaps be able to  put my knowledge to work in a voluntary way for a good purpose.  I  would love to be able to work with  groups who are anxious to put pressure on governments to lobby for  things in a knowledgeable way."  Ombudswoman 1976?  G.S.  Vancouver Status of Women would like  to thank Grace Maclnnis for all she  has accomplished for women during  her long career.  KINESIS is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its  objective is to provide an open channel of communication between the  members of the organization and to  promote understanding about the  changing position of women in society.  PUBLICATION DATE: The first week of  each month.  COPY DEADLINE:  The 15th of the previous month.  SUBSCRIPTIONS: KINESIS is provided  as a service to members of VSW in  good standing. Membership is acquired by an annual donation.  In  determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per year  per person to print and mail.  Newsletter Committee: Kathy Sopko,  Diane Ryals, Bobbie Patrick, Monica  Mui, Jo Lazenby, Pat Evans, Eloah  Giacomelli Vivienne Hotz  Muriel Warwicker  Contributors:  Barbara Tomlin, Sheila  Purdy, Diana Bissell, Gene Errington,  Nancy Conrod, Merriam Doucet, Gisela  Filion.  Layout: Kathy Sopko, Naidu Chambers,  Terry McNeny  Graphics: Renee van Holm, Kathy Sopko  SUBMISSIONS:  KINESIS welcomes submissions from members and will  consider those from non-members.  All submissions, including letters  to the editorial committee, must  be accompanied by the writer's  name and address. Pseudonyms  will be used where requested.  Where necessar, the editorial committee will edit for brevity,  clarity and taste.  CORRESPONDENCE:  Send to:  Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 W. 4th Ave,  Vancouver 9, B.C., Telephone: 736-  3746.  subscribe!  ADDRESS  PHONE (home)_  (work)_  OCCUPATION  MEMBERSHIP DONATION $  CORPORATE MEMBERSHIP $__  RENEWAL NEW MEMBER  I wish to become a member   I wish only to receive KINESIS_  In determining your donation we ask  you to balance your own financial  position and the fact that KINESIS  costs approximately $3.00 per person  per year to print and mail. 16  July 11 - ORIENTATION  8PM - Office  July 15 - NEWSLETTER DEADLINE  July 25 - ORIENTATION  8PM - Office  - ORIENTATION  8PM - Office  August 13 - NEWSLETTER MEETING  7:30 PM - Office  August 22 - ORIENTATION MEETING  8PM - Office  Other groups will be meeting through  the summer.  For dates and further  information concerning these groups,  please phone, 736-3746.  THERE WILL BE NO GENERAL MEETINGS  UNTIL SEPTEMBER