 Vancouver Status of Women  2029 W 4th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V6J1N3  INSIDE  THANKSGIVING/ AND THE ONLY TURKEY IN SIGHT  is Vander Zalm. women and kids ask for more , . .  ... 1  SORWUC :  THE board giveTM and the board  TAKETH AWAY. MEANWHILE, MUCKAMUCK OWNER  PITS COWBOYS AGAINST INDIANS    .... 3  WEN-DO. ONLY WHEN IT'S UNSAFE TO ATTACK  ANY WOMAN WILL THE STREETS BE SAFE FOR US ... .  ...   5  WOMEN'S VIDEO AND FILM FESTIVAL .........  ...   8  FEMINISTS CALL FOR A DISMANTLING OF ALL  LAWS WHICH TREAT WOMEN AS PROPERTY - DEBRA  LEWIS ON PORNOGRAPHY . . .   . . .   11  MAKARA. WHILE IT IS DIFFICULT TO KEEP A MAG.  GOING IN CANADA/ IT'S ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO  START ONE. JOIN THE AUXILIARY    . . . m  SUBSCRIBE TO KINESIS!  Published By Vancouver Status of Women  2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C.  Subscriber Only _  Member/Subscriber  AMOUNT ENCLOSED:  °A  /  tJ}^-  KINGSIS  it-ECMAL COLLECTWW  50c  Vol 7 no^  OCTOB€R 70  Vancouver Status ojf Women  Subs are $8/year Individual (or what you can afford), $15/year Institutions. / ^e,  VSW membership is by donation. Please remember that VSW operates orv / _ 3 ,;  inadequate funding — we need member support! / '     ?•' *  Welfare Rates Protest  Makpra # Daycare % Pornography KINESIS,  October   '78  AREA  Sheila Fruman from AREA (Area Representation Electors* Alliance) was a  keynote speaker at the quarterly  meeting of VSW, held September 26  at Kitsilano Library.  AREA was formed by over 50 organizations last year to conduct an educational campaign on the merits of  area representation. At present, Vancouver is the only major city in Canada to have an at-large system of  electing representatives to city council, parks board and school board.  AREA representation would mean that  each member of city council, parks  and school boards would be elected  by a specific area, district or ward.  The major argument in favour of a  ward system is that there is more  accountability in city government if  there is a member of council elected  by and representing your own area.  Under the present system, elected  officials are supposed to represent  the whole city and none are specifically accountable to any one constituency.  Sheila Fruman argued that  councillors have used this as a cop-  out when faced with requests from  specific sectors of the community.  Fruman pointed out that Vancouver  already has a ward system, de facto.  The majority of councillors come from  the Shaugnessy/Kerrisdale area, which  also has the largest voter turn-out.  This is the part jf town which city  council exists to serve, she commented.  Voter turnout at the last municipal  elections in Vancouver was as follows:  63% from the West Side of the city,  15% from the East Side. Only two members on Council live east of Cambie  Street. Of the seven on Parks Board  only one lives east of Cambie. Of the  nine School Board representatives  only one, again, lives east of Cambie.  AREA also argues that a ward system  would break down voter confusion and  promote higher voter turn-out. Last  election, there were 117 candidates  for 26 positions : this resulted in  a voter turnout of only 36%  AREA supports 13 wards for Vancouver  similar to the old resource boards  which do represent communities.  SUPPORT  Vancouver Status of Women supports  a ward system for Vancouver. Due to  the responsibilities of home and  children, women spend the majority  of their time in their own neighborhoods. A ward system would provide  an accountable system accessible to  these women.  Furthermore, it is a known fact that  political campaigns are expensive.  Running for council in a ward system  means being known by the electorate  and being elected on the merit of  personal abilities and concerns.  Running in a city-wide election can  mean being known by the electorate  and possessing the money to run an  advertising campaign. The ward system  would therefore enable citizens of  lesser finanical means to run more  easily and effectively for council.He  87.000  KIDS  &  MOMS  ARE   NOT  WELFARE  RUMS!!  Carrying signs reading: "Welfare Bums?  87,000 Kids and Moms" and "The only  Thanksgiving Turkey is Vander Zalm",  women confronted Human Resources Minister October 2 at the MHR offices at  201 West 6th Ave.  The protesters, members and supporters of Vancouver Status of Women, demanded an across-the-board rate increase for families on social assistance to bring them up to Canadian poverty levels.  If Vander Zalm distributed his 100  million underrun from last year, the  welfare rates would almost reach the  inflation of the last three years.  Average food prices have increased  27% since 1975. Clothing by 25%. Utilities by 100% Transportation by  30%.  Where's the increase in welfare rates  for families? Since 1975 it's gone  up by 0%  Obviously flustered when confronted,  Vander Zalm described the protest  as "legit." "I know they're having  a difficult time, he said." He then  went on to say that he had some increases planned, but that his hands  were tied by the Federal government's  new cost-sharing schemes for social  services. The standard cop-out.  VSW is now pressuring him to make  a commitment to INTERIM RATE INCREASES IMMEDIATELY.  The average single mother is now  getting less than 1/2 of what she  needs to meet the poverty level.  NO INCREASE  The single mother with two children,  living in an average apartment for  $300 rent receives $492 a month. That  leaves her with $192 for food, clothes,  transportation, telephone and hydro.  She would need an extra $147 a month  to get the same amount for her dollar  that she was getting in 1975^(c  $16,000  $12,000  $ 8,000  GAIN Way Below Poverty Level  abcd23456789 10  Number of Persons  a = under 55  b = 55-60  c = 60-64  d = handicapped  LIONS GATE is PRO-CHOICE  Pro-choicers triumphed at the annual  general meeting of Lions Gate Hospital in North Vancouver, September 27.  About 1,000 members of the North and  West Vancouver Hospital Society met  to elect four members for three-year  terms to the current hospital board  of 18. The anti-choice faction had  been attempting to elect their own  slate at the meeting, as they have  been elsewhere in B.C. hospitals.  A spokesperson for Concerned Citizens  for Choice on Abortion (CCCA), Sue  Moore, commented: "We only started  signing up members for Lions Gate when  we were warned that the anti-choicers  had plans to stack the meeting. We do  really look forward to the day when  the anti-choice faction will stop interfering with the normal running of  hospitals. The people of North and  West Vancouver have already expressed  their desire to have choice on abortion. The best way to describe the  anti-choicers is as a nuisance."% KINESIS,  October   '78  DAYCARE   ASSOCIATION  IN VANCOUVER, DESPITE THE NEED FOR  DAYCARE, VACANCIES AT CENTRES ARE  INCREASING, NECESSITATING STAFF  LAY-OFFS AND CENTRES CLOSING DOWN.  MOST FULL-TIME DAYCARE SUPERVISORS  ARE PAID LESS THAN ELEVATOR OPERATORS.  ALMOST ALL DAYCARE CENTRES IN THE  CITY MUST CHARGE $20.00-$30.00  EXTRA PER MONTH TO MEET BASIC EXPENSES.  PARENTS WHO WANT AND NEED  DAYCARE SIMPLY CAN'T AFFORD IT.  IN CANADA, ONLY 5% OF CHILDREN  UNDER 3 and 16% OF THOSE 3-5 NEEDING DAYCARE ARE IN SOME FORM OF  LICENSED CHILDCARE.  WHERE ARE  THE OTHERS?  To confront these issues, the VANCOUVER DAYCARE ASSOCIATION is being  formed.  The first meeting of the  association takes place October 28  from 9:00-12:00 noon at Langara  Campus, 100 West 49th Avenue. Call  873-7483 for more details.  In June 1978 a part-time coordinator  was hired by Vancouver city to help  organize the association.  Recommendations that such an association be  set up came out of Daycare: 1977, a  report submitted to the former  Vancouver Resources Board from an  ad-hoc committee on the status of  daycare, headed by Aid. Darlene  Marzari.  Kinesis spoke with that coordinator,  Janet Currie:  "With the lack of provincial support,"  she said, "daycare is in a  crisis situation.     We are now making  a concerted effort to contact the  parents of Vancouver.     7800 flyers  have gone out - every parent with  a child in group daycare has received one.     The provincial government has to stop treating daycare as a welfare service, which,  in their terms,  means treating it  poorly."  "In December of '77, a public  meeting was held in Vancouver to  discuss daycare issues and con  cerns.     Over 100 parents,   teachers  and other came.     One of the primary concerns of this meeting was  that an association of daycare  parents be formed. "  While the goals and activities of  the association will be decided by  its members, Currie and the ten-  person advisory committee which  has been preparing for the meeting  have some suggestions:  - the funding situation of daycare  centres  - subsidy rates  - access to daycare by immigrant  families  - 24-hour daycare for shift workers  - public and governmental support  for daycare  - ways parents could offer support  to each other jfc  TRANSITION  THE COQUITLAM WOMEN'S TRANSITION  HOUSE is a reality. It will open  October 15.  The contract was signed with the  Ministry of Human Resources on Sept.  19, along with a two-year lease on  the house.  The transition house is a result of  long and patient lobbying and labour  by the Transition House Committee.  The opening of a transition house in  their area has been one of the long-  terms goals of the POCO Women's Centre. The proposal has received the support of local Socred MLA George Kerster  who was instrumental in the acquisition  of the site for the shelter.  Phone for the Coquitlam Women's Transition House is 464 2020 from 9-5.  To contact the house at other times,  call 526 4445 or 931 3444. Women and  children coming to the house will be  able to stay 30 days if necessary.  Household goods: furniture, lamps,  kitchen supplies, drapes etc are needed  for the house.H«  A.U.C.E.  For the last three and a half years,  members of AUCE (Association of University and College Employees) at UBC and  SFU have enjoyed an unusual maternity  leave clause. The clause states after  a woman returns to work from maternity  leave, she receives special payment  from the university.  This payment is  the difference between the Unemployment  Insurance benefits she received while  off work, and her normal salary.  The union and the university approached UIC independently of each other  when the first negotiations for this  clause commenced. They were given verbal assurance by UIC that the clause  was outside of UIC's jurisdiction and  therefore did not conflict with any  UIC regulation.  Then, in 1977, UIC changed its mind,  and began sending out letters to women  who had received benefits from UIC and  the university, alledging that an overpayment had taken place, and that UIC  wanted its money back because it said  that the money paid by the universities  to the women must be considered as income. Under the UI Act, any income  must be allocated to the period for  which the benefits were paid.  Of course, many women have long since  had the babies and spent the money.  Locals 1 and 2 (UBC and SFU) of AUCE  have appealed the decision of UIC to  the UIC Board of Referees and this  appeal was denied. The appeal is now  going to the Umpire of the UI Commission, and the case will be heard this  fall.*  (from the SORWUC newsletter)  A recent study by Statistics Canada,  basing its figures on the 1976 census,  has shown that once women and men have  reached the 25 - 34 age group, unemployment among men fell below the national  average to 5.1 per cent, while the jobless rate for women remained at 7.4 per  cent. In the 35 -44 age group, unemployment for males stood at 3.5 per cent,  and for females at 5.5.  In August 1978, official figures list  9.9% of all women in the labour force  as unemployed. For men, the figure was  6.5%. Triple for real figures. -iL  THIS LOVELV UEATHER. 3UST  STIMULATED MY THIRST YCK  K*JCWL£&GE-AM> IT'S SO  PRETTY AND QUIET HERE  I GOT HOMESICK AND  CAME BACK.  / VOV UNEMPLOYED TOO HUH?  \ KINESIS,  October   '78  UmiNt  decisis  JTW«  PROTEST OUTSIDE L.R.B. SEPTEMBER 21  DECERTIFIED  The Service, Office and Retail Workers Union of Canada (SORWUC) is outraged at the decision of the Labour  Relations Board to cancel its certification at Bimini Neighbourhood Pub.  The application for decertification  came only two months after the conclusion of an 11-week strike for a  first contract.  "It is incredible that the Board  would consider an application for  decertification so soon after a  long and bitter strike,"  said Ailsa  Rand, spokesperson for the union.  "There has been no period of peace  at Bimini.    The Board's approach  has encouraged the employer and  anti-union employees to keep up a  constant campaign against the  union,  rather than accepting the  contract as an established fact. "  This decision means there is no incentive for employers to accept  union organization, to negotiate  in good faith and then attempt to  make a collective agreement work.  On the contrary, it encourages employers to hold out through long  strikes, encourage scabs and hire  strikebreakers, sign a contract and  then wait for decertification to  make the contract null and void.  The union was growing at Bimini. We  expected that the division among  the employees could be overcome  during the life of the one-year  agreement, and that the next test  of the union's strength would come  with negotiations for a second  OCTOBER 4:  The Canada Labour  Relations Board throws out  the Royal Bank's appeal against the SORWUC vic-  ltory of 1977 when the  LRB ruled that a single branch of a bank  constitutes a legal  bargaining unit.  SORWUC BEATS THE  BANKS'.  contract.  The Board did not allow  us that period to rebuild and recover from the strike. When the  decertification vote was held in  July, a majority of the employees  voted against the union, SORWUC  people added.  This decision will force unions to  continue strikes until strikebreakers  and scabs are fired. It makes it  more difficult to organize an already  difficult industry, and can only lead  to longer and more bitter strikes and  less stability in collective bargaining relationships.  Local 1 of SORWUC was certified at  Bimini in January 1977.  After months  of fruitless negotiations, during  which time union membership and support went up and down, a majority of  employees voted in favour of strike.  The strike lasted from October 20 to  January 2. Although the employer  persuaded the bar staff to cross the  picket line to work, the waitresses  and their supporters were successful  in winning a collective agreement  which provided for substantial wage  increases and some say over shift  scheduling.  Throughout the history  of Bimini, employees who joined the  union have been fired and harassed  into quitting.  Those who crossed  the picket line during the strike  enjoyed the full support and protection of management. New employees  have been screened on their attitude  to unions.**  into  n  Muckamuck  New developments in the MUCKAMUCK  strike:  OCTOBER 4: SORWUC supporters in Venice, CA, distribute informational  leaflets outside the Doug Christmas  art gallery there. Christmas, principal owner of Muckamuck, has galleries in Vancouver, Venice CA, New  York and Paris. He has repeatedly  refused to negotiate with Muckamuck workers.  OCTOBER 5: Strikers learn that  Muckamuck, a restaurant specializing in Native Indian foods, has  been re-modelled inside and that  Christmas plans to re-open it as a  cowboy-style restaurant. The "new"  Muckamuck is called "Chilcotin Bar  7 Muckamuck." A substantial picket  line October 7 turned away many potential first-day customers. Contact  SORWUC now to support the Muckamuck  workers.  UBW  UNITED BANK WORKERS (UBW) is  ALIVE AND ORGANIZING ...  On November 4, the UBW is having a  benefit and you are invited. They  want to let people know that they're  up and doing.  They aim to raise  $2,000 towards UBW debts.  The benefit will be held at the  Ukrainian Hall, 805 East Pender.  Ferron and Ad Hoc will play.  There  will be a full bar, food and a  TERRIFIC AUCTION, with Sandra Currie doing the honours.  Tempting  items planned for auction: a lifetime subscription to Kinesis   (your  life is ours.'); pottery; a 24-hour  stint of childcare; a letter-writing  service (love or hate); typing; Sue  Moore's pig Herman transmuted into  ham.  All this for only $3.00 admission.  Tickets are available in advance  from the union office at 116 - 207  West Hastings (684-2834).  PEOPLE NEEDED TO LEAFLET  Local One of SORWUC is currently  conducting a leaflet campaign of  downtown offices and trust companies. You can leaflet, too.  Call  Susan at SORWUC (684-2834).** KINESIS,  October   '78  FULL UPDATE ON G.A.T.E. CASE IN SUPREME COURT NEXT MONTH  cut ^r  OFF  COALITION  AGAINST  DISCRIMINATION  "We could fill up every auditorium  in America.    If we had done so after our victory in Dade County we  could have gotten such a momentum  going that we could have wiped the  homosexual out.     That was a real  possibility.     We could have made 0  a lot of money too.     When you've Z  known that kind of power it's  easy to submit to it and use it  for your own advantage and to wipe  out a lot of things that need wip- ■  ing out. "  - Anita Bryant, in an interview with Playboy  The Anita Bryant Crusade and its supporters have launched a campaign  against the rights of large groups  of people in our society. Under the  guise of a religious campaign they  seek to undermine the hard won democratic rights and freedoms of all  people, especially those of lesbians  and gay men, women, racial minorities,  other religious groups and trade  unionists.  Anita Bryant is not just some nut who  has become the focus of media attention. She has become the focus of a  movement of repression which has  spread across the continent.  The organizations Bryant represents,  Save America's Children, Renaissance  International, Renaissance Canada,  and Citizens for Integrity, among  them, have fought against the human  and civil rights of lesbians and gay  men, the Equal Rights Amendment in  the U.S., women's choice on abortion,  daycare, desegregation bussing, sexual education in the schools.  They  have succeeded in banning books from  schools, books like Margaret Laurence's  The Diviners;   they advocate the Core  curriculum and "back to the basics"  in education.  WM  WtNttDMOtf  WENEED1060BACK  10 THE  WAS!  RRR  The campaign has drawn strong support  from the Ku Klux Klan and other notoriously racist organizations. Bryant is also openly anti-semetic. The  campaign supports "right to work"  legislation which is an attack on  working people's right to organize  into unions.  The freedom of the press  has been attacked as a result of their  campaign.  The COALITION AGAINST DISCRIMINATION  (C.A.D.) was initially organized by  a group of women in answer to a proposed visit to Vancouver by Anita  Bryant, who had already visited  Toronto, Winnipeg and Edmonton in  an effort to mobilize Canadian  opinion against the basic rights  of lesbians and homosexuals, as she  and her supporters had succeeded in  doing in parts of Florida, Kansas,  and Oregon.  The Coalition has since grown to  include women and men who are concerned not only with the rights of  lesbians and homosexuals, but of  trade unions, religious and racial  minorities and women. Money has  been raised and a media campaign is  being organized to educate the public concerning the basic rights of  lesbians and homosexuals and the  manner in which these rights are  being attacked.  The purpose of this coalition is to  organize action which will clearly  show our opposition to Anita Bryant,  not as a woman but to her politics  and to the policies of Renaissance  Canada and International. All  groups within the coalition retain  the right to co-ordinate and activate on their own individual group  levels.  ATTEND THE NEXT COALITION MEETING  at the Fisherman's Hall, 138 East  Cordova, Vancouver, on Wednesday,  October 11 at 7:30 p.m.*J*  AS  A   PUBLIC SERVlCE/HrtRRISBURG.THe MOWTHW W6W5 MAGA2|Me."wtSHeS TO iMFORMTHe OTI26NRV  about a serious and iNsiDioos MF.MACETO OUR.CHILDREN!!!! think, about it.  DO Vou lUANT HETEROSEXUAL TEACHES OR. HETEROSEXUAL POLICE OFFICERS  searching- Your. 5cm'poa&7$ For. CHEWINGGUM?   Tfc/ceri/UG Vovfi. TteuAGe DAoxrHrtKs ?  its A WELL-KNOWN FACT THATHETEROSEXUALS  \CWN»T CPHTAlNTUei*. WANTON  LUSTII'  6lB —That  l^&J *«  AND W«J TrlEY AUC ASKING US To COA//>ONB  wein. IMMORAL WAY OF UF£ >!!  * VOTE FOR THE REPEAL OF H6T€ROSEXUAL RIGHTS WEfi$?!!5®fR  Anti-Gay Socreds  The new leader of the Social Credit  Party of Canada, Lome Reznowski,  launched an unprecedented verbal  attack on homosexual Canadians, following his recent election.  Reznowski's attack on the Canadian  gay community marks the first time  that a federal party leader has  tried to make the homosexual minority a major issue.  ...This is not the first time that  the Social Credit Party has attempted to suppress gay rights".  The  Social Credit Party was among the  leading forces opposing the 1969  Omnibus Bill which decriminalized  sexual acts between consenting adults in private.  In May 1976 they  attempted to introduce a bill that  woudd make it a criminal offense  for an individual to public affirm  her or his homosexuality.  The Quebec Creditistes also led the opposition to the recent adoption of  Bill 88 by the National Assembly  amending the Quebec"Human Rights  Charter to include the term "sexual  orientation".  However, this is the first attempt  to make the suppression of gay  rights a national political platform.  The parallels with the campaign of  anti-gay crusader Anita Bryant in  the United States are striking. For  example, it is worth noting that  Robert Thompson, former national  leader of the Social Credit Party,  heads the first B.C. Chapter of  Renaissance International, a Canadian anti-gay organization which  sponsored Ms. Bryant's recent visits  to Canada.  A common denominator of the broadly  based coalitions (established throughout Canada to counteract Bryant) is  the fear that the slick, well financed promotions of Bryant, Campbell,  Schlafly, et al are, far from being  simple religious campaigns, in fact  an integral part of the new conservatism which is currently marching from  victory to victory in the United  States. That fear seems to be well  founded.  ...The possibility of a full blown  reactionary political movement emerging from anti-woman anti-gay organizations such as the so-called "Pro  Life" movement, the Stop E.R.A. Movement, or Renaissance International  and the Christian Liberation Movement  (a Canadian.offshoot of the Bryant  campaign led by Orvis Kennedy, past  president of the Alberta Social Credit League) may be suggested by the  activities of John Dolan, an extreme  right wing anti-E.R.A. organizer, who  subsequent to a very successful series of rallies said that he plans to  mount an anti-Equal Rights Amendment  campaign throughout Virginia and use  it to develop a "blossoming conservative constituency". Alyse O'Neil,  another anti-woman campaigner in  Virginia says that she hopes to lead  the people who are merely interested  in stopping the Equal Rights Amendment into the mainstream of extremist  conservative politics .*!$  (From Gay Calgary, September 1978) KINESIS,  October   '78  PO  on ABORTION  QUEBEC WOMEN OPPOSE P.Q. GOV'T  ABORTION STAND  While ignoring the demands of organized women, both within and without  his own party for free and legal abortions, Quebec premier Ren^ Levesque  has further aggravated women by recently responding to a letter on the  same subject from Maurice Cardinal  Roy, Roman Catholic archbishop of  Quebec diocese.  The archbishop had expressed his concern that should the government proceed with its plan to increase the  number of therapeutic abortion clinics  in the province from 8 to 20, the  number of women seeking abortions  would increase. Levesque defended  his plan to the archbishop, saying  the hospital committees respect both  the right to life and women suffering  from unwanted pregnancies.  The communication drew a protest  from the Coordination nationale pour  l'avortement libre et gratuit, a  group that represents 28 Quebec  pro-choice groups.  In a letter to  Levesque, the organization protested  his dialogue with the archbishop as  well as his abortion policy.  They  said that their protests and demonstrations have brought no response  from the government, and also noted  that neither the archbishop's letter  nor the premier's made any reference  to women.  The group pointed out that thousands  of Quebec women have illegal abortions  every year and doubted that many of  these women would be able to gain the  necessary approval through hospital  committees.  The wcmen also objected  to the premier's exchange with the  archbishop because of the role the  Catholic Church is taking in organizing and financing anti-choice groups.  The Parti Quebecois government's position on abortion as well as on other  issues concerning women has been disappointing, more so perhaps because of  its otherwise good record on social  legislation.  Shortly after its election nearly 2  years ago, the government raised  hopes among women and editorial  writers alike when it announced the  exoneration of Dr. Henry Morgenthaler.  A few days after that announcement,  Social Affairs Minister Denis Lazure  said it was his personal opinion that  a pregnant woman "should have the  right to decide whether or not she  wants a child."  Women were elated when delegates to  last fall's Parti Quebecois convention  voted to support a resolution to provide free and legal abortions on demand, but almost immediately Levesque  announced that his government was more  than the Parti Quebecois and was not  bound by that resolution.  Approaching the half-way mark in the  PQ mandate, it would appear that women  have no cause for hope.^e  (From UPSTREAM)  FL€CK STRIK€  Striking women members of United Auto  Workers voted earlier this month to  accept a two-year contract ending a  five-month strike at Fleck Manufacturing Company.  UAW Director Bob White told the women  that he didn't think that the monetary  gains were good "but the issue in this  strike was your right to have a union."  The contract provides for a 20 to 24  cents an hour increase in the first  year and 20 cents an hour in the second year plus a safety committee and  other fringe benefits.  But the real  victory is union security through the  adoption of the Rand Formula - something that Fleck vice-president Grant  Turner had pledged the strikers would  never get. >fc  (From UPSTREAM: Marilyn Burnett)  F€D€RAL  Hiring Policy  OTTAWA (CP) - The federal human right  commission has developed a policy  which bars federal employers from   ,  asking job applicants to pass medical  examinations or to provide basic  personal information about sex, age,  marital status, birthplace and other  details.  The policy affects all employers under  federal jurisdiction ranging from government departments and agencies to  crown corporations and institutions  such as chartered banks.  It was developed in detail after the  commission received requests from  employers for guidance on a section  of the Human Rights Act prohibiting  the collection of any "potentially  discriminatory" information on an  employment application form or in an  employment interview.  The policy becomes effective when  the employers, after receiving policy guides now being translated for  publication, have had a chance to  design and print new job forms.  The commission bars questions on an  applicant's race or color of skin,  eyes and hair.  The employer is barred from seeking  some information until after the  person is hired. This includes a  medical examination, verification of  age, marital status, documentary  proof of eligibility to work in  Canada and photographs.  Some questions are prohibited unless  they are directly related to the job.  These include height, weight, military experience outside Canada, English language proficiency tests and  membership in clubs and organizations.  And for some questions now routinely  asked the commission recommends  "acceptable" replacements.  For example, instead of asking a  woman about marital status, birth  control, children and husband's  work, the commission recommends one  acceptable question: "Are you willing  to travel or be transferred to other  areas of the province or country?"  Even that question should not be  asked unless it is directly related  to the job.  Gathering information  about the person's marriage and  family is permitted after hiring,  for tax or insurance purposes.  Commission legal counsel Russell  Juriansz said the plan may simply  result in delayed discrimination.  But he referred to a European study  in which female job candidates were  more successful when the fact they  were female was not known.jfc  Wood  &  Hoon  Prison activists BETS! WOOD and GAY HOON went to court on  October 2nd,  to have their trial date set.  It will be coming   up at the end of November, so watch Kinesis for details.  The two have been charged in connection with a hostage-taking  incident at the B.C.Pen in January 1978. Although completely  cleared at the Preliminary Hearing,  they have been indicted  directly by the state.  This is the 13th time this has ever  happened in Canadian history, which is indicative of the political nature of the trial.% KINESIS,  October  '78  W€N DO  We'd like to see it unsafe for ANYON€ to attack,  a woman alone."  Alice Macpherson  Alice Macpherson is a gold rank  Wen-Do-Ka.  She is one of the three  women in B.C. certified to teach  Wen-Do, a self-defense system for  women, developed in Toronto.  Alice has worked at the traditional  "women's jobs" - waitress, cashier,  clerk-typist.  She has also worked  as a motorcycle mechanic ("I found  the one guy in town who was so  difficult he couldn't keep help.  I got the job by default - I got  my toe in the door that way, and my  bike in, too.") Alice has raced  motorcycles, and most recently has  been working as a mechanic in the  mine at Endako, B.C.  In August, Alice moved to Vancouver  to teach Wen-Do full-time. In this  interview, she tells us what Wen-Do  is, and where she can be reached to  arrange classes.  KINESIS:    Could you tell me what  Wen-Do is?    Who developed it?    Who  is it for?  ALICE: Wen-Do is a system of self-  defense specifically for women.  It  was developed here in Canada, and it  is a combination of techniques derived from the Oriental martial arts  and practical self-defense.  The word  "wen" is a made-up word, which we  use to mean "women".  "Do" is the  Japanese word for "way".  A family in Toronto, the Paiges,  developed Wen-Do when they realized  that the martial arts were male-  oriented, not directly aimed at meeting women's self-defense needs.  So it's a local invention, a mixture  of oriental martial arts and street-  fighting skills?  Street-fighting is not an accurate  term. Most women have to fight in  the home, not in the street.  Street-  fighting implies bar-room brawls and  gangs - that's not the focus of  women's self-defense. We emphasize  practical self-defense. Wen-Do isn't  formalized in the way that karate is,  for example - in Wen-Do you wouldn't  ask your opponent to move over three  inches to the right, say, in order  to make an appropriate move. We deal  with situations women are likely to  encounter. We teach simple releases  and simple, effective attacks.  What's the philosophy of Wen-Do?  The philosophy is that rather than  it being unsafe to be a woman alone,  we'd like to see it unsafe for anyone  to attack a woman alone.  How do you go about training women  in Wen-Do?  The basic class consists of 12-15  hours of instruction. This includes  discussions about defensive living,  about the roles women have internalized, about aggression, about the law,  about verbal self-defense - in addition to the training in releases and  counter-attacks.  In the advanced  classes we teach more elaborate  techniques about how to break fall.  It also gives women a chance to  practise, to make the Wen-Do techniques a fact of our lives, and to  get it together in our own bodies  and minds. The advanced classes are  not so much different as expanded.  The first thing we always talk about  in Wen-Do classes is awareness and  avoidance of attacks. The second  thing we talk about is action (not  reaction) to attacks. This can be  as simple as running away, talking  to somebody.  Or it might be physical - such as kicking the attacker  in the knee. We teach Soft and Hard  techniques in Wen-Do.  The Soft will  cause pain but no permanent damage -  like a boot in the shins. Hard  techniques will always maim or kill.  For example, a well-aimed kick to  the knee will break someone's leg.  When I use terms like 'kick', 'hit',  'punch', I am talking about using  100% effort.  There's no room in  self-defense to poke at an attacker  and see what happens.  You Can Do It  What about women who just aren 't in  good physical shape? Can they learn  Wen-Do so they can actually use it?  As long as you've got any energy at  all, you can do it.  So much of it  deals with attitudes. One of the  things we talk about is women's  attitudes within themselves. An  important attitude is the one that  says, "Oh, I couldn't possibly hit  anybody." We say, suppose you looked  out your window one day and there's  some creep hauling off your kid.  What are you going to do? I haven't  met a woman yet who wouldn't fight  to defend her child.  It's socially  acceptable to do it. We try to break  down the attitude within women that  we're incapable of hurting, of  fighting, by asking women to think  of something that they feel is important enough to defend. Like their  own body.  Do you have a martial arts background  yourself?  When I started Wen-Do I didn't know  anything about the martial arts. Most  of the martial arts heavy-duties think  that Wen-Do is worth zero and that we  should be shut down.  It's the old  story of professionals vs. self-help.  The Paige family in Toronto, who  developed Wen-Do, all have backgrounds  in various kinds of martial arts.  Three brown and two black belts.  I  did some karate up to orange belt,  but I found then that Wen-Do was quite  sufficient.  I think it's up to the  individual to decide what's good for  the^a.  In classes, sometimes women  tell me that they've been attacked.  "Did you get away?", I ask.  "Yes,"  they say, "but I'm not sure if I  used the right techniques." I say,  "If it worked, it's right."  Tell me something about the organization and structure of Wen-Do.    Do  you have ranks?    Uniforms?   Equipment?  Do you have schools?    How many of you  are there?  We have ranks.  I'm a gold rank and  I'm a certified instructor.  I've  been doing it for seven years now and  it's still a learning process.  There  are 45 certified Wen-Do instructors  active in Canada and the U.S.  In  B.C., there's myself in the Lower  Mainland, with another woman in  Salmon Arm and another in Trail.  We don't have any schools as such.  Because it's women who are involved  with Wen-Do, there's not enough bucks  going round to support a school. We  just had our first big conference,  in Toronto last August.  It was an  incredible high. There was some  media coverage of the conference -  the straight media finds it very  hard not to be patronizing about  women's self-defense and they pre- p. 7  alice KINESIS,  October   '78  sented it as being cute. Still, we  did reach women that way who otherwise would never hear about Wen-Do.  We don't use any kind of equipment.  You can't tell an attacker to come  back later when you're properly  dressed.' We have a minimal kind  of uniform. We don't wear the  traditional karate style uniform.  For one thing, if you're a woman  you certainly don't need that belt  to hold your pants up - we've got  nice wide hips to do that.  And  the top flaps open and you need a  great big safety pin, or to wear a  t-shirt underneath.  But there are  some advantages to having an instructor being identifiable within  the group.  So we settled on white  pants and a t-shirt with a Wen-Do  symbol on it. We wear any kind of  white pants.  The Wen-Do symbol  consists of the oriental symbol for  a young woman, enclosed in a circle.  The circle refers to the way in  which doing actions with a circular  movement increases strength and  leverage - the kind of leverage  women need more than men in most  circumstances.  Where do your students come from?  The students themselves do the best  PR for Wen-Do.  I'm doing a course  in Burnaby right now and four of  the sixteen students are taking it  because friends told them to sign  up - and this is in an area I've  never worked in before.  I did a  conference at Simon Fraser University last summer, and the word has  spread from that.  What's the best size for a group?  What assumptions do you approach  the group with?    What do you put  out about your expectations?  We like groups of over ten. The  maximum size for a group is 20.  For groups bigger than that, you  need a qualified assistant.  We have a statement of intention  in Wen-Do.  It has three different  levels.  Firstly, we are not out to  change the value system of the  students. We're out to give them  techniques we think are practical  and effective.  Secondly, no group  or business of whatever kind can  have any say in what we teach.  When we teach, for example, through  school boards, they have to take it,  the whole package, or leave it.  We've had groups try to coerce us  by saying: "We don't like this" or  "Leave that out". We won't do it.  Thirdly, we present our material in  our own way. We don't leave leeway  for students to say, "I don't like  the way you do such-and-such.  It's  not correct." It's open to discussion.  We're only teaching a few techniques  out of thousands. If we changed Wen-  do every time someone didn't like a  certain technique, we wouldn't be  teaching Wen-do! We won't pull  information away from students;  but we will ask them to accept our  terms, for the duration of the  course.  It's Wen-Do we're teaching;  not something else.  You say you 're not out to change the  values of your students,  but learning  self-defense,  getting to the point  where your mind and muscle are in  shape to take care of yourself,  must  give women a tremendous sense of  power.    I see it as a dramatic CR  tool.    Do you see that process happening in your groups?  For sure, I do.  You're now living in Vancouver and  teaching Wen-Do full-time.    Could  you give us the details about where  and when you teach?   How can people  get in touch with you?  Right now I'm teaching through the  schools boards in North Vancouver,  Burnaby, New Westminster and Coquitlam.  I'm teaching at the Langley Y.  I'll go anywhere to do classes, if  there's a group of interested women.  I'm going to Lethbridge and Prince  George later this month.  If you are  interested, you can contact the school  boards, if I have a course going on  in your local district.  Or you can  call or write me.  I'm at 324-8890.  My address is 336 East 46th Avenue, _  Vancouver. *&  PARENTS of  KIDNAPPED CHILDREN  What is it? An organization of parents -  women and men, whose ex-spouse has abducted their child(ren), despite their  having legal custody rights.  It was founded by Lois Preston of  Surrey in the fall of 1975, when her  then 7-year-old son was kidnapped by  her ex-spouse and carried across the  B.C. border and the U.S. border. After  3 years of hiring detectives, following  every possible clue to her son's whereabouts , pleading with the "authorities"  - R.C.M.P., Family Court, politicians,  lawyers, etc. - Lois finally got her  son back.  For 2 months.  He was kidnapped again and today she has no idea  of his whereabouts.  After appearing on TV's Ombudsman, on  radio, and writing numerous newspaper  articles, Lois and many other parents  of kidnapped children across Canada  formed this group, whose common purpose, in addition to supporting and  understanding what each other is going  through, is to change the law governing the abduction of children, Bill  C-221, which calls for an amendment to  the Criminal Code of Canada.  Presented in the House of Commons in  October 1976 by Benno Friesen, MP,  Surrey-White Rock, this bill would  make the abduction of a child by a  parent who does not have legal custody  of that child(ren) a federal offense,  instead of a "civil kidnapping" as it  is now referred to by the legal profession and law enforcers, who say  "this is a domestic problem" and beyond their jurisdiction.  Courts are  reluctant to charge or imprison the  abductor, even when he or she has  broken court orders, caused emotional  and psychological damage to the child,  kept them on the run - from school,  the law and their other parent. Bill  C-221 would circumvent the difficulties now posed in charging a child  abductor across provincial and international borders.  No action has been taken on this bill  to date.  In the meantime, the number  of kidnappings by ex-spouses are on  the increase and divorces and separations rise.  The fact that many  parents cannot afford the legal,  investigative and travel expenses  necessary to pursue their children  should not be an obstruction in  their efforts to having their children returned to them.  Only the  parent who knows what it is to spend  night after sleepless night, wondering whether tomorrow will be the  day their children return, whether  some word, anything, arrives about  their child, can empathize with the  agony that this growing group of  people go through, sometimes for  years, waiting to see their children.  If you are a parent whose child has  been kidnapped, or who lives in constant fear that she or he may be  kidnapped by an ex-spouse, or if  you are symphathetic to the existing  problem that parents of kidnapped  children face and wish to push for  legal reform and public awareness,  contact Carol Mclnnes at 542-8642  mornings and anytime after 9:00pm,  or phone D.A.W.N. (Direct Action  for Women in Need) at 542-1631 on  weekdays. «« 8  KINESIS,  October  '78  IVideo & Film  Festival  by Jillian Ridington  " We should pay homage to Alice  Guy, and to Jane Marsh, and to  Barbara Martineau's adaptation of  the Virginia Woolf quote was longer, and contained more names of  women important to the history of  film-making.  But they went by me, because I had  never heard of them before, didn't  know how to spell them, and had  no context in which to place them.  And that fact is perhaps more important than their names would be  now.  There have been women making major  contributions producing and directing film since 1896; most of us  have never heard of them. Few of  us have seen their films.  The knowledge of their contributions, and the records of their  times, seen from a woman's perspective that they meant to give us,  have been denied to us.  If learning of their existence and realizing what we have lost were the  only reasons to hold a Women's  Video and Film Festival, like the  one which took place September  22 - 24 at the Mount Pleasant  Community Centre, they would have  been enough.  The festival served many other  purposes as well. It brought together women who have been working in film and video in felt isolation, making their contributions  despite lack of financial and cultural support, and enabled them to  meet, share their work and their  knowledge, and gain feedback and  recognition from each other.  As Martineau - who is the only  woman now teaching film production in a Canadian university  Ginger Gilcrease       ART ENVIRONMENT AT THE FESTIVAL  Ginger Gilcrease  Creatures by Ursula, Double  and Persimmon Blackbridge,  Work Day Banner by Liz Shefrin  Mrs.  H.Shipley by Liz Shefrin.  (Queens, in Kingston, Ont.) noted  during her talk on the history of  women in the media: Masterpieces  cannot be single and solitary  ...art is not a room without windows.  The art shown provided us with  many windows, through which to  see into the lives and experiences  of women from Other times and cultures. It gave us mirrors, too,  reflecting back images of ourselves  as we are, so different from the women defined by Hollywood. We saw no  one-dimensional bitches, whores,  virgins and all-sacrificing nurtur-  ers.  In C'est Pas Ma Tete Comme mon  Corps,  and The Screwing I Got,  we  saw strippers and prostitutes appraise with clear eyes the nature  of their exploitation. In Would I  Ever Like To Work,  a welfare mother spoke of her struggle to raise  children in poverty, her need to  get away from them, the anger she  feared venting on them. Before the  Time Comes,   thought drawn-out and  somewhat too agonizing, dealt honestly with the difficulties women  confront when faced with an unwant-  BARBARA HAMMER, LIZ MERSKY  BARBARA MARTINEAU  ed pregnancy. All were about women  like us, facing dilemmas most of  us confront, and making the choices  that are possible within the limited boundaries which confine most  of us.  The contrast between male-defined  images of women and our self-definitions was the theme of Paule  Baillargeon's Anastasie Oh Ma  Cherie.    Anastasie left her husband,  barricaded herself in her apartment  in order to pursue her art, and  would not let her husband in. When  the cops break down the door, she  is dressed in a man's pyjama top.  Before they take her away, she is  made over in an image they deem  appropriate. Mute and passive,  she is straight-jacketed into nylons,  spike heels, push-up bra, red satin  dress and make-up. Paule Baillarg-  eon said during discussion of the  film that the film was modelled on  things that had happened to her.  They have happened to us all.  The festival consisted of five  segments, each with a panel  discussion following. Panelists were women involved with  making the films and tapes and  women actively working on the  issues presented.  Some of those  issues - "Marriage and Motherhood",  and "Legal, Health, Violence  Against Women" were far from new  but the strength and creativity  found in the approaches to them  frequently were. Take Her,  She's  Mad,  a videotape dramatizing the  experience of a woman put away  by her husband, and Voices From  Within,  a film produced by long-  term inmates at the Bedford  Hills Correctional Facility, related the experience of incarcerated women to universal women's  experience.  There but for...  The films and tapes of Barbara  Hammer, produced on shoestring  budgets, are technically brilliant and innovative, and touch  on issues - menstruation, lesbianism - which are rarely approached with honesty. Her  works are humorous, intelligent,  non-dogmatic, and most of all,  joyous.  She projected her "Moon  Goddess" on a balloon; we sat  watching in a circle, celebrating, to p.9 KINESIS,  October   '78  WOMEN'S VIDEO AND FILM FESTIVAL (cont.)  A commentator on C'est Pas Ma  Tete Comme Mon Corps stated:  "Women can't rape; they don't  have a tool to penetrate with."  Yet a camera can be such a tool,  if used without appreciation and  understanding.  The dramatic  difference between traditional  images of women and the images  we create of ourselves lies in  the way we use our tools. Made  with respect and love, women's  films can be a powerful means of  creating greater solidarity and  understanding among women, and  of bringing an understanding of  feminist issues to women otherwise not in contact with feminists.  Perhaps it is because of this  very power that women involved  in media have such great difficulty producing and distributing  their products.  Just as many  women's institutions - Women's  Health Collectives, Rape Relief  Centres, Transition Houses - are  finding their funds cut back and  their mandates increasingly limited, so women in media are finding their access to funds, tools,  and distribution networks cut off.  Anastasie ,  though done in part  by NFB funding, is not available through the NFB, and  Paule Baillargeon has had to  stop work on her second film,  a drama about strippers, because her money has run out.  In Vancouver, the newly formed  Women's Media Collective has  been denied funding because  its membership is limited to  women - despite the fact that  Canada Council has funds allocated for a media cooperative  in B.C.  The steering committee for the festival had difficulties obtaining funds, and  lacked the money to pay expenses for the producers who  came. The final panel, on  conditions and directions of  production, addressed funding  problems.  Some tentative solutions were suggested - working  in "straight" media to provide  income and have input into  content of productions geared  to a general audience; developing a support and distribution  network.  This festival was the first  women's film festival to be  held here that has integrated  politics and art.  It was important as well because it  gave us an opportunity to  celebrate the creative energy  of women, and to enjoy the  fine work so many women have  managed to produce with so  little support, and so little  access to an audience.  Perhaps fifty years from now  another speaker will suggest  that women pay homage to  Barbara Martineau, Barbara  Hammer, Paule Baillargeon -  hopefully, their names will  be recognized.  For now,  thanks to the women who  worked on this festival,  gave these works windows,  and provided mirrors for us  all.*  Janet Beebe  Wkmkwkm  WOMEN'S 10,000 METRE RACE  Nearly 600 women participated in the  Women's International 10 Kilometre  Race September 17, a chilly but clear  day, along the Stanley Park seawall.  Not surprisingly, many of the runners  were members of sports clubs and  track teams, some from as far away  as Seattle.  But many were simply  individuals who run for enjoyment and  fitness.  Some had never attempted  this distance before.  It was a beautiful sight to watch 600  women of all ages start off on a long  race such as this; even more gratifying  to watch them finish it, most an hour  or less after the start.  Traditionally, women have helped to  organize and officiate men's races.  In this case, men officiate the race,  and cheer from the sidelines.  This  run, only in its second year and already an annual event, is sponsored  by the Alta Lake Sports Club, with  financial support from Bonne Belle.  Last year's run attracted 300 women.  LOCK OUT WOMEN ATHLETES?   WHO, US?   "On Sunday, September 17, 600 women  ran in the international 10-kilometre  foot race in Stanley Park. A good  number of them made use of the dressing room and showers at Brockton  Oval.  "A good number of them, it can also  be assumed, regularly use the Brockton Oval facilities while getting  into shape for such relatively impressive exertions as a 10-kilometre  run.  "On Friday, September 22, a notice  appeared on the door of the women's  dressing room at Brockton Oval,  announcing that it would be closed  to women every Saturday from then  until spring so that members of the  Vancouver Rugby Union (men) could  use it - not only closed from noon  to dusk every Saturday for a good  part of the year, but closed whenever the rugby union 'may schedule  games'. The notice was signed by  Len Ryan, manager of central recreation services for the Vancouver  park board."  The above appeared in the Vancouver  Sun October 2, in an article written  by Linda Hossie.  That article, and  a protest by one Kimberley Spir,  The fastest runners were given awards  according to the category they had  registered in. All categories, with  the exception of the 50+ age group,  were well represented.  The time of the overall winner, Joan  Groothuysen, who ran in the Open  Women's category, was 34:45. This  time is only 20 seconds short of the  record run in 15 similar races financed by Bonne Belle throughout  Canada and the US.  Joan will travel  to Boston in October to participate  in a run-off of winners from all  races.  Fastest runners in other categories  were: Elementary Girls - Leslie  Beckerman (41:34); High School Girls  - Gail Volk (36:43); 30-39 Years -  Judy Groonbridge (38:41); 40-49  Years - Naomi Miller (39:11.5); 50+  Years - Jean Cleator (48:05); and  Mother & Daughter - Shirley and  Juliet Smith (combined time 88:05).  Middle distance runs which are open  to the public have become much more  common in the Vancouver area during  the past year. The next race of  this kind will be the Memorial  Seawall Race, to be held Sunday,  November 5, starting from Second  Beach in Stanley Park.  A full-day  running seminar will precede the  race Saturday, November 4 at  Capilano College.*  by Janet Beebe  caused the decision to be reversed  at the Park Board's October 3 meeting.  The Park Board conceded the  fact that "more women are using (the  facility) than before".  The Park  Board had apparently agreed to let  the rugby teams commandeer the  women's change room on the basis  of a 70-year-old tradition.  Vancouver Rugby Union President Don  Kelly finds the reversal of the  decision "outrageous".  "The rugby  union wouldn't object to letting  women use the men's change rooms  if they engaged Brockton Oval for  a grass hockey or soccer game,"  Kelly says.  "I didn't know the rugby union owned Brockton Oval," says Spir.* 10  KINESIS,  October  '78  W  Michigan  Womanspirit  omyn s  Music Festiva  The Michigan Womyn's Music Festival,  held from August 17-20, was once again  a tremendous success. A reported  6,000 womyn attended this year.  The Festival is organized each year  by the We Want The Music Collective,  which bases itself in Mount Pleasant,  Michigan.  The Festival is located  near Hesperia in western Michigan, on  a 200-acre wooded site tucked into  beautiful country just below a National Forest area.  It offers womyn  a chance to share our art, our skills,  and our selves in an all-womyn, outdoor,  very joyful environment.  The job of organizing an event as  huge as this is a year-round one for  the Collective.  Sound and communications systems are a major part of the  work, and they welcome skilled help  during the Festival.  The Collective  says that all the work of the Festival  is done by womyn.  (There are some who  say they witnessed men in trucks  arriving before dawn to empty the  porta-jons.')  The Festival Collective has proven to  be very responsive to feedback from  previous Festivals, and this year  separate campsites were provided  under such headings as Chemical Free  (ie. no drugs or alcohol), Womyn With  Children, Disabled Womyn, Low-Noise,  and Recreational Vehicles.  This  arrangement worked well, from what I  saw. Parking was provided away from  the campsites, and shuttles run regularly to provide transportation between the two sites.  The campsites  were large, the feeling one of spaciousness and room to move throughout,  despite the influx of new arrivals  each day.  The days were filled with workshops,  sports, visiting (shrieks of long-  lost friends and unexpected meetings  were the order of the day), listening  to rehearsals, jamming with other  musicians, and just wandering around.  Sound checks for the evening concerts  went on all day in the stage area,  alternating with taped music reaching  to and enlivening the entire campsite.  A large tent was set up near the stage  area for craftswomyn to sell their products.  Throughout the Festival,  thousands of buttons and t-shirts  announced the pride and joy of being  womyn. For four days at least, we  were 'free to be'.  Evenings were filled with concerts  comprised of musicians and groups  from across the country known for  their womyn's music.  Included were  such performers as Meg Christian  and Teresa Trull, Woody Simmons,  Linda Tillery and Sweet Honey in  the Rock.  Others I was especially  glad to hear from (some for the  first time) were Sirani Avedis,  Therese Edell, Alive.', Linda Shear,  and Jerene Jackson and her Big Band.  Signing for the deaf was provided  for all songs by volunteer signers.  This was an inspiring added dimension to the music.  As concerts  often lasted as late as 2:00 am,  the campsites showed signs of life  all night. Womyn without tents  of their own slept under the big  tents at night when space could not  be found with friends.  The weather during the Festival can,  at the very least, be described as  awe-inspiring.  The Festival itself  was scheduled - no doubt deliberately  - at the time of the full moon.  Two  nights before the Festival began,  with site set-up proceeding at full  speed, a tornado hit the area,  drenching everyone with heavy rains  and knocking down some of the big  tents.  Correcting the damage added  heavily, to the workload of those  setting up.  On the second night  of the Festival, a severe electrical  storm - the worst in 37 years according to area residents - hit the area,  seeming to sit directly over the  campsite for several hours. Word  has it that this is the energy that  6,000 womyn can call up - we just  have to learn how to control it!  Fortunately, aside from these two  occasions, the days of the Festival  were sunny and towards the end,  exceedingly hot. Nights were cold  (be prepared for camping out), but  the full moon was splendid.  o  Prices for the Festival were very  reasonable, on a limited sliding  scale of $20-$27 for the four days,  including meals.  The womyn who  make this Festival happen work  very hard and for very long hours,  nearly year-round.  It's difficult  to make ends meet in such a huge  undertaking while keeping the  event affordable for the average  womyn, but the Collective manages  this, deficits being made up  during the rest of the year.  Food provision is still a problem  where such large numbers of people  are involved, though apparently  it was improved over last year.  Supper lineups were hours long at  times, and sometimes prepared  foods ran short.  The food was  plentiful and nutritious, though  it tended to be monotonous. However, it was only too evident what  a difficult task food provision  is, and most womyn accepted the  difficulties.  The food provided  was vegetarian; some meat eaters  brought their own food and cooked  it in the campsites.  The Health Tent was also indispensable, and the womyn who staffed it  cared for hundreds of physical and  emotional crises with dispatch and  sensitivity during the course of  the Festival.  Overall, the Michigan Womyn's Music  Festival attracts an amazing variety  arid number of womyn, with many different lifestyles represented.  It  was a learning situation and a  consciousness-raiser for many of us.  But more than that, it was a simply  wonderful experience.  Details on next year's Festival, and  on the National Women's Music Festival (usually held in June at Champaign, Illinois), are available as  early as March or April.  Try the  Full Circle Coffeehouse for info at  that time.^C  OU€DGC   F€MINIST WRITING  O  Room of One's Own  P.O. Box 46160, Station G  Vancouver, B.C.   V6R 4G5  ROOM OF ONE S OWN is pleased to announce the November publication of a landmark issue on QUEBEC WOMEN WRITERS.  It presents,  for the first time in English,  selections from  "the most important literary event of recent times ... LA  BARRE DE JOUR, nos 56/57, entirely devoted to the writings  of women." - Emergency Librarian.  Authors featured are Monique Bosco, Cecile Cloutier, Nicole  Brossard, Louky Bersianik, France Theoret, Madelaine Gagnon,  Genevieve Amyot and others.  Interview with Michele Lalonde.  This double issue  (166 pp.) was expensive to produce.  It  costs $4.00.  o  c  n  )o  QU£D€C   FEMINIST  WRITING KINESIS,   October   '78  11  PORNOGRAPHY  developing feminist  perspectives J  BRIEF ON  CRIMINAL CODE AMENDMENTS  RELATING  TO  PORNOGRAPHY  BY DEBRA J. LEWIS  With the rise of the modern women's  movement, feminists have turned their  attention to the role of the law in  maintaining sexual inequality. What  has become increasingly obvious is  that not only does the law actively  discriminate against women in certain  areas, or omit to guarantee us equality in others, but that even those  laws which purported to afford women  some measure of protection were, in  fact, only justifications of the  status quo, and protected the interests of men and not of women (for  example, rape law).  In the present  day, the law not only reflects the  historical position of women, but  is also a powerful influence on the  structures and attitudes which maintain sexism in our society.  From this perspective, current proposals to amend the criminal code  have particular relevance to women,  particularly since a number of the  areas of recommended change involve  issues of direct concern to women  (rape, pornography, prostitution and  others).  In order to analyze the  potential effects of the proposals,  it is necessary to determine exactly  what it is we want the law to accomplish, and whether various proposals  meet the criteria thus set out.  In  the following discussion, I intend  to show that the changes brought forward by former Justice Minister Ron  Basford this spring are little more  than a smokescreen, an apparently  significant change which will in  fact do little to challenge the sexual status quo.  What we want is a systematic dismantling of all laws which sustain the  position of women (and children) as  the property of men, and, as a necessary corollary, institute sexuality  as a privatized function which has a  rightful place (for women, at least)  only within the traditional ownership  relation of marriage and reproduction.  We want the law to reflect the position of women as autonomous persons,  free from unwarranted sexual and physical interference.  In the process,  we want children to be afforded basic  rights as well. Traditionally, the  law has done none of this.  Instead,  it has operated on the principle that  the rights of the family (which historically have been the rights of men)  supercede the rights of women and  children, and that sexuality must be  stringently repressed in order to  maintain this status quo.  Our position reflects neither this  traditional view, nor the simple  civil libertarian view that the  rights of the individual must be ascendent over the rights of definable  groups.  This latter position, while  providing valid perspectives on a  number of social problems, is inadequate to deal with a situation in  which the rights of individual men  have been used to oppress women both  individually and as a group.  obscenity  Nowhere is the bankruptcy of these  two apparently contradictory positions  more apparent than in the law dealing  with obscenity. While they view the  problems encountered from two very  different perspectives, both approach  the issue on the basis of the sexual  content of "obscene" material.  On  the one hand, traditionalists argue  that sex is a necessarily privatized  function which requires strict regulation to control its effects.  Counter  to this, civil libertarians maintain  that, while the content of some pornography may be objectionable to some  (including, often, themselves), the  legislative process has no right in  interfering with the individual sexual habits of its citizens. While we  have some sympathy with this latter  position, we also recognize that  pornography has institutionalized  the repression of female sexuality,  and made acceptable the use of  coercion and violence towards  women and children in the name of  individual male rights.  neither  traditional  nor libertarian  It is our position that laws dealing with pornography have unquestionably been formed by the former  perspective. As Lorenne Clark notes:  However,  the unofficial standard was  probably much simpler and more direct.    Judge Learned Hand of the  American Supreme Court remarked  offhand the appropriate test for  obscenity was to see whether the  disputed matter physically aroused  the judge, not just any judge in  his mind, but an exceedingly old,  old,  old one.    Arousing feelings  of sexual pleasure was thus the  underlying basis for holding that  material was  "obscene" or "pornographic".    This itself was grounded  in the belief that sexual pleasure  was itself bad,   "dirty" and immoral.  As feminists, we reject this basis  for the law. The law dealing with  obscenity as so based assumes that  sexual pleasure in and of itself is  a negative and corrupting influence,  and one which must be controlled in  the interests of "civilization" or  some other similar concept. However,  it is just such an attitude which  has been used to maintain the position of women as forms of property  under the ownership and control of  men. As such, "normal" female sexuality was defined solely in terms  of monogamous marriage, and reproduction, while the equally "normal"  sexual appetites of men could be  satisfied by peripheral means (pornography, prostitution, etc.) so long  as their actions did not directly  confront the general status quo.  Such behavior was permissible so long  as it did not become a blatant challenge of the system, and, in any case,  was at least in part the fault of  women who were viewed as having inordinate, dangerous sexual desires  and influences if they did not conform to the "normal" standards of  sexual and reproductive monogamy.  not sexual  Contrary to this position, and the  position that individuals should be  allowed access to whatever "sexual"  material they wish, feminists believe  that obscenity should be defined in .  a very different way than by its  association with sex. We do not believe that sexual pleasure is immoral,  decadent or threatening; rather, we  believe that it is the coercive  means which are portrayed as desirable, or the direction of sexual activity toward an inappropriate individual which is harmful and deserving  of control. We believe that the main  standard to be applied is that sexual  activity of a truly consensual nature  between equals is not obscene, precisely because it is non-coercive and  the type of activity which should be  not only condoned but encouraged. What  we view as pornographic is that which  portrays women as acceptable Objects  of violence and degradation, or that  which legitimizes sexual contact between adults and children.  In both  instances, it is the presence of coercion which is at issue - in the  former case in the direct sense, and  in the latter because such relations  between individuals who are not equals  (and hence subject to an inherent  power relationship) cannot be construed as truly consensual in nature.  Regarding the first form of pornography  that is, material which portrays acts  of violence and degradation toward  women, the following argument was made  before the Parliamentary Committee on  Justice and Legal Affairs:   to p.12 12  KINESIS,  October  '78  13  PERSPECTIVES ON PORNOGRAPHY (cont.)  A common response to criticism of  pornography is that, while it may be  revolting to some, its use by individuals does not constitute any harm if  the individual restricts its use to  the private sphere.    Yet countless  studies have shown that examples of  violence presented to us have a powerful influence on role modelling.     We  are not saying that the individual  use of pornography necessarily  to direct,  overt acts of violence  toward women, although in some  cases this may certainly be true.  What we are saying is that such  material supports the belief that  such acts are acceptable, pleasurable and desirable.     Women are  dehumanized,  mere objects for whom  no act of degradation,  humiliation  or violence is of significant harm.  A society which has been inundated  with material portraying women as  masochistic and undeserving of  protection from violence and degradation is bound to produce men  who have internalized this image  and integrated it into their practical relations with women...Perhaps the most surprising thing is  that as many men as do turn out  to be reasonable decent human  beings with some capacity for  healthy relationships with women.  But the fact that some men are  able to transcend the influences  of pornography does not change  the fact that many are not.  Another aspect'of this approach  to pornography appears in those  who would say that since pornography does not directly incite  violent acts   (and let us assume  for a moment that it does not),  but merely excites men,  the dangers  of controlling freedom of speech  far outweigh any benefits. ..But  the analogy with hate literature  toward other groups is instructive.  We would not consider an individual  who gets excitement,  sexual or  otherwise,  from vivid portrayals  of the gassing of Jews to be normal,  either in the statistical sense, or  in the sense that it is a form of  behaviour which should be condoned  or encouraged.    That a great many  men do obtain sexual excitement,  in a covert if not an overt way,  from materials portraying women as  inferior,  inherently masochistic  beings is a shocking manifestation  of the depths of our conditioning.  Similar arguments can be made against  the publication of materials which  portray sexual conduct between adults  and children as acceptable or desirable  Even assuming that such material does  not directly lead to the commission of  acts of incest or other sexual assaults  against children (and it is clear that  such acts are far from uncommon), the  portrayal of sexual contact between  adults and children in a manner designed to elicit sexual arousal reinforces the acceptability of pedophilic  acts.  drastic change  What we are proposing is a drastic  change of perspective from traditional  ideas of obscenity. As noted previously, such attitudes rested on the sexual nature of the acts portrayed ("undue exploitation of sex").  The basis  upon which judgments have been made on  the obscene nature of publications has  been the notion of "community standards"  Not only do we reject this concept as a  rational basis for the law (and this  will be elaborated upon later) but is  is one that proves to be extremely unworkable.  Our position is that the question of  "community standards" is irrelevant to  any rational judgment of the pornographic nature of materials.  Historically,  there are many examples of where  "community standards" and the laws  which enforced them were merely an  elaborate justification for the subjugation of women or the maintenance of  structures which supported sexual inequality.  For example, at various  times in Britain, the U.S. and Canada,  men were permitted to lock their wives  at home when they were not present,  to beat their wives (provided the  stick was no larger than their thumb)  and other forms of punitive behaviour  designed to maintain women in a subservient position. There has never  been any guarantee that so-called  "community standards" ensure justice  for women, even assuming that such  standards are uniform and that there  is some rational way to gauge exactly  what those standards are.  feminist  definition  It is our contention, therefore, that  the standards used to define obscenity  should be simply that the material so  classified presents a real harm to a  designated group (women or children)  and should be banned precisely because  they reinforce or condone unacceptable  forms of behaviour.  It is not conventional morality that is the question in  our minds, since it is precisely such  standards which have assisted in maintaining a system of inequality, in  which women and children were forms  of property and, as such, acceptable  targets for coercion and more blatant  forms of physical violence. We want  a law based on new standards which  would entrench the physical and sexual  autonomy of women and children within  the law.  Such a law should be based  on the following principles in establishing a definition of obscene material:  1) That the material displays or condones the actual or implied use of  physical force or coercion against  another individual.  2) That the material depicts or condones sexual contact between adults  and children.  3) That the material exploits, for  commercial purposes, the sexual activity of children.  amendments  It is from this perspective that we  can assess the proposed amendments.  It is clear that the proposal is an  attempt to satisfy the traditional  view of obscenity and those who would  want greater restrictions on that  basis.  It also, on the surface,  makes some attempt to respond to  feminist criticism, but fails to  VARYING \)IE\0S  come to terms with this perspective.  Instead of changing, in the definition of obscenity, the primarily  sexual connotations of the offense,  there has merely been a juggling of  the criteria to permit violence (and  other factors) alone to -be a rationale for censorship, as well as the  1 undue degradation of the human person". What this latter factor means,  precisely, is entirely unclear, and  can only lead to the same kinds of  subjective evaluation that has traditionally been the case.  Further,  the Committee on Justice and Legal  Affairs has emphasized that "community  standards" will continue to form the  basis of decisions on obscenity, and  that the sexual nature of materials  remains a primary (and probably the  primary) focus.  In one sense, there  has been a step forward in the recog  nition (formally, at least) of violence and degradation as factors to  be dealt with in and of themselves.  Nevertheless, the law remains primarily oriented around sexual factors  and a subjective judgment on what is  or is not immoral.  The sections dealing with obscene  materials involving children have an  -equally problematic dimension.  Few  would argue that the "kiddie porn"  business is defensible.  In fact,  from this perspective it is easier  to argue for controls on this form  of pornography than that involving  adult women. However, the application of sanctions is equally difficult, and here again we must have a  well-defined idea of what it is we  want to prohibit.  It is our view  that what is obscene about child  pornography is the promotion of sexual contact between adults and children as an acceptable or even desirable form of behaviour. We do not,  on the other hand, want to deny that  children do have sexuality of their  own, or that children should feel  ashamed of their bodies. Again, this  latter view that children are forms  of property, that sex is dirty, and  that their bodies are not their own  but held in trust (in the case of  girl children) for a future owner.  The criteria which would be important  here, in our view, are whether adult/  children sexual conduct is being  portrayed as acceptable, and whether  child sexuality is being commercially  exploited.  The provisions as currently stated, while positive in recognizing the need for control in this  area, are far too vague and generalized  to be enforced in the ways we see as  important.  mate property  Although it is our contention that  restrictions on pornographic materials be based only on the presence  of the threat or use of physical  coercion, this is not to say that we  find most of the remaining forms of  pornographic matter acceptable.  Most of this material as presently  produced portrays an image of women  which also reinforces the view of  women as the property of men, as  playthings designed primarily for  male enjoyment. However, we also  recognize that to ban all such  material would risk removing other  works of art, literature, etc. which  do not contain this view of women  and portray the sexuality of women  (and men) in positive ways. For  this reason, we restrict our recommendations for legal sanction  to those materials which pose a  threat to the physical safety of  women, and hope that once such  direct threats are dealt with,  other objectionable areas can be  changed through other tactics. j£  On Tuesday, March 7, Ms. Lorenne Clark,  Executive Member, National Action Committee on the Status of Women, appeared  before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs.  Ms. Debra Lewis, of the Vancouver Status  of Women, appeared before the same committee on Wednesday, March 1...  Clark and Lewis were thoughtful, intelligent, articulate, impassioned - and  wrong...They were wrong in that they  chose to appear before a committee  composed almost entirely of individuals  who consider most explicit depictions  of sexual activity as "garbage",  "filth", and "sick". To appear before  such a group is to legitimize it, to  legitimize a committee that welcomed  testimony from the police departments  of Toronto, Montreal and Vancouver,  welcomed testimony from the churches  of Canada, and harassed and badgered  witnesses who felt the pornography was  not harmful...  It is clear from the transcripts of  hearings that the Justice and Legal  Affairs Committee is not particularly  interested in the subtleties propounded by Ms. Clark and Ms. Lewis. They  want to stop what they see as a "flood  of filth".  If they can say that they  have Canadian feminists behind them,  so much the better. A "progressive"  movement will thus be seen to support  what is, in fact, a piece of reactionary legislation. That has possibilities - and people like committee  member Simma Holt seem to sense it.  Her public statements suggest she is  offended by almost everything outside  "doing it in the dark" - but she's  learned to manipulate to very good  effect, feminist rhetoric about male  supremacy and the abuse of women...  Obscenity laws are laws without content. Like vagrancy laws, they exist  to be used for political purposes  only, to harass unpopular groups and  censor divergent opinion...There  should be only one reason to appear  before the government on the topic  of "obscenity" - and that is to demand the abolition of all laws that  would restrict its use or distribution. To do otherwise is to ransom  our future for only the illusion of  present gains.  _ by Geraid Hannon  - from Body Politic  Few of us would argue that much of  the pornographic material on the  market today is a search for truth.  But the danger in curtailing freedom of expression for those publications is that the process leads,  almost inevitably,  to the curtailing  of freedom because freedom of expression can't be divisible.  So it may be  unfortunate that pornographic publications should be defended against its  attackers. But is is also necessary.  The Commons committee has spotted  "tendencies of thought" among Canadians which it doesn't like.  Yet it  wants to control those tendencies by  legislating against publications it  thinks encourages them.  It is venturing onto very dangerous ground.  Excerpt from a Province editorial  March 29, '78  LIBERTARIAN STAND  Some of those who advocate obscenity  laws do so because they believe that  the reading of sexually explicit materials or the watching of sexually  explicit actions will harm at least  some readers or watchers.  Others  support such laws because they themselves are offended by sexually explicit materials. The latter, of  course, does not provide an adequate  basis for obscenity laws. The former  might if there were overwhelming  evidence that sexually explicit  materials can be harmful to their  users.  But no such evidence is available. What the supporters of such  laws must favour is censorship -  and any censorship is clearly and  unequivocally harmful because it is  an infringement of one of our most  basic rights, the right of free  speech.  Indeed it is an attack on  freedom itself.  - from a brief by B.C. Civil  Liberties  free speech?  Pornography is the undiluted essence  of anti-female propaganda. Yet the  very same liberals who were so quick  to understand the method and purpose  behind the mighty propaganda machine  of Hitler's Third Reich, the consciously spewed-out anti-Semitic  caricatures and obscenities that gave  an ideological base to the Holocaust  and the Final Solution, the very same  liberals who, enlightened by blacks,  searched their own conscience and  came to understand that their tolerance of "nigger" jokes and portrayals  of shuffling, rolling-eyed servants  in movies perpetuated the degrading  myths of black inferiority and gave  an ideological base to the continuation of black oppression - these  very same liberals now fervidly  maintain that the hatred and contempt for women that find expression  in four-letter words used as expletives and in what are quaintly called  "adult" or "erotic" books and movies  are a valid extension of freedom of  speech that must be preserved as a  Constitutional right.  To defend the right of a lone, crazed  American Nazi to grind out propaganda  calling for the extermination of all  Jews, as the ACLU has done in the name  of free speech, is, after all, a self-  righteous and not particularly courageous stand, for American Jewry is not  currently threatened by storm troopers,  concentration camps and imminent extermination, but I wonder if the ACLU's  position might change if, come tomorrow  morning, the bookstores and movie  theatres lining Forty-second Street in  New York City were devoted not to the  humiliation of women by rape and torture  as they currently are, but to a systematized, commercially successful propaganda machine depicting the sadistic  pleasures of gassing Jews or lynching  blacks?  - from Susan Brownmiller's Agains t  Our Will % §§  WIS  _*=\ ■■  ft_i  f»  -4 »  BY WOMEN FOD PEOPLE  Makara was begun in late 1975 by the  Pacific Women's Graphic Arts Co-operative (now Makara Publishing & Design  Co-operative).  Produced "for people  by women", the magazine was established to provide a feminist alternative forum on the West Coast, and  Makara has done an excellent job in  that respect.  The Makara collective states: "We  are feminists who choose to publish  articles and images that adhere to  our political beliefs.     We appeal  to an audience broader than our  political base and we do it with  the hope that people will recognize their lives in our spirit and  image."    A major assumption behind  the magazine is that people, especially women and children, are  competent to interpret the world,  act upon their perceptions and  tell their own stories.  In 12 issues published over the past  three years, Makara has managed to  cover an impressive array of subject  matter.  In the words of one worker:  "We have been able to present 14  political issues in feminist terms,  to review approximately 20 books,  give critical attention to some  Canadian women artists and historical women whose stories have been  lost,  give over 30 women graphic  artists and IS fiction writers a  chance to present their images to  an audience, and enabled women and  children to tell about their lives."  Politically, Makara makes its point  without ever being rhetorical; artistically - in overall design as  well as graphics - the magazine is  simply outstanding.  fairly  large deficit  Magazines, especially alternative  ones, usually lead marginal, and  often short, existences. How does  Makara survive? In a word, with  difficulty - something which surprises some people.  There are a lot of reasons why  Makara first appealed to me.  Its  feminist orientation; a workplace  women-staffed and women-run; and  its organization as a collective.  And it was apparent from the magazine that there were people from  whom I could learn the skills that  I wanted.    At this point I was not  an avid supporter of the magazine.  I had looked at it,  rather than  read it,  and my surface impression  was that it tended to be beautiful  and into spirituality rather than  politics. ..  During the first while that I worked at Makara I sat down and pored  over the past issues of the magazine.    I was quite impressed by  the amount of work and thought  that I saw when I really started  looking.    A statement that was  often made about the collective  was that the workers were much  more political than the magazine.  I was realizing that the content  of the magazine depends not only  upon the editorial policy,  but  also upon what is received from  contributors. ..  My experience to date is that there  is a huge scope and growing amount  of work to be done at Makara, and  there are a lot of good reasons to  continue doing it.    Both the commercial work and magazine work are  important,  and one makes the other  possible,  keeping alive the flow  of feminist values and ideas amongst ourselves and into the wider  culture.  Makara got its start, along with the  Pacific Women's Graphic Arts Co-operative, with the aid of a Manpower job  creation grant. But in January 1977,  having had only a year to establish  both the graphic arts business and the  magazine, those funds were cut off  completely, and the collective was  forced to find other sources of income  in order to survive. The collective  has managed to subsidize the quarterly  Makara with the graphic arts business,  offering typesetting, layout, design  and camera work skills to outside businesses and community groups. This has  meant a major step towards independence  for Makara, but it is not enough.  The magazine operates on a fairly large  deficit, and the staff of Makara has  had to subsidize both the business and  the magazine in the form of salaries  well below the minimum wage. "We have  made that choice consciously, and it  is still alright with us not to be in  the business of making money.    But  being broke and getting broker,  collectively and individually, puts increasing pressure on the workers. "  When people work for little or no  money, the burn-out rate is necessarily high.  On September 14, the Makara collective  held a community meeting to discuss  their financial problems. Mary Schend-  linger, outlining the finances of the  magazine to those present, stated that  despite an operating deficit, business  is good and the collective usually has  as much commercial work as it can handle.  The real problem seems to lie in  the state of the economy.  Many of the  design co-operative's customers are now  facing the same financial strictures  and loss of funding that Makara faced  two years ago, in moving from a "grant  economy" to a "small business economy".  In light of this situation, the collective feels it may take another two  years to achieve full self-sufficiency.  Where does that leave the women of  Makara now?  The usual major source of income for  magazines is advertising revenue. Magazines, like other media, can only make  money if they're backed by large companies and if a big part of their ■—^ 15  THE  FUTURE OF  MAKARA   MAGAZINE  from p.14  revenue comes from advertising. Large  commercial magazines contain from 60-  80% advertising space - they essentially tell customers what they want  to hear in order to sell them products. Makara limits its advertising  space to 10% of its pages, and in  addition won't take liquor or cigarette ads, ads from large companies  who exploit workers or the land, racist  or sexist ads, ads which are graphically incompatible with the rest of  the magazine, or ads from anyone  whose politics "we (the collective)  can't live with". "I hope it doesn't  sound like big bucks get turned away  every week, because they don't.. .But  our choices about whom to approach  -  for ads are clearly  limited, "  says  Schendlinger.  Often, due to limited  time and energy to chase advertisers  down, not even 10% of Makara's pages  are given over to ads.  The collective has continued over  the past year and a half to pursue  grants from sources such as Canada  Council, but the outlook for such  funds is just not good.  The Makara collective has other needs  aside from money.  Staff is one of  them.  The group is looking for additional collective members, preferably women with skills relating to  magazine production - art, writing,  editing, typesetting, bookkeeping,  publicity and public relations,  periodical distribution, advertising and fundraising.  These are the  chronic needs.  They need a typesetter especially badly, as well as  a bookkeeper who would have an  interest in other aspects of the  magazine as well.  Sought are women  with the right combination of skill,  aptitudes, and attitudes to function  well in a collective structure.  Because of Makara's financial situation,  collective members try if possible  to have some form of alternate income or savings to help support themselves .  •promotion.  For those who cannot make this sort  of commitment, there are other needs  to be filled. The magazine collective  needs people to sell advertising space  in Makara (at a 15% commission). They  need people to pester newsstands to  carry it, to persuade libraries and  individuals to subscribe, to tell  businesses about the graphics services of Makara Publishing & Design  Co-operative, to put up posters, to  give the collective tips on fundraising and on sources of special project  grants, feedback on magazine content  and production, or anything else that  might improve the magazine and/or  their financial position. Many, many  people do not even know about Makara  - the collective needs help to spread  the word.  Most people at the meeting supported a  positive approach, concentrating on  increasing Makara's circulation and  revenue from advertising, rather than  focussing entirely on cutbacks.  Support was given to the ideas of a subscription drive and commissioned ad  salespeople.  One suggestion made at  the meeting was to create a short-term  promotion support group for the magazine, using volunteers to coordinate  HELP  THEM  &URVTVE  and carry out promotion activities,  with the help and advice of Makara  workers.  If anyone is interested in  participating in any one of these  areas, they should contact the Makara  collective at 253-8931.  The collective has also considered  making some changes in the magazine's  format as a means of saving money.  Moving from a four-colour to a two-  colour cover has been one of the  changes considered. However, this  would likely affect Makara's drawing  capacity on the newsstands, and might  even mean a drop in appeal to some  subscribers. Working with colour  possibilities also provides a challenge and a learning experience to  the magazine artists. The collective  would like some feedback on this particular issue.  Contact MAKARA at 1011 Commercial Drive.  Vancouver B.C. Their phone #: 253 8931.  We make decisions by consensus and  discussion, and we give each other  lots of room to  learn new skills,  sharpen existing ones,  and experiment creatively with our work.  Building this kind of supportive,  non-exploitive work place is as  important to us as the product  that emerges from it - MAKARA  Magazine.  We keep being surprised by the  numbers of people who make it a  point of keeping abreast with  issues and information, but who  don't know that Makara is around,  or what kind of magazine it is.  Some people think it is only an  art magazine,  or only a women 's  magazine, or only a political  magazine.    Others have read the  first issue, or one from Vast  year, and have no idea of our  evolution,  or of the variety of  subjects and formats the magazine touches upon.    Please read  the magazine as it comes out,  and read back issues too.  Chat  it up with the people you think  might like it - suggest an article or an issue or a drawing  that might please them. . .If you  know people in Canada who are  doing or might know about fine,  innovative writing and art, urge  them to contribute. $£  The collective wants to keep Makara  alive. They feel a need for Makara,  and like doing it. As one worker  says, "if it is difficult to keep a  magazine going in Canada,  it is next  to impossible to start one.     Where  there 's life,  there 's the hope of  truing changes. "% 16  KINESIS,  October   '78  international news  IRAN  NEW YORK (LNS) - Shouting "Solidarity with sisters in Iran," 200 protesters converged on the Iranian consulate in New York recently to protest both the choice of Iran as the  site for the 1980 UN International  Women's Decade Conference and the exclusion of Third World women from  the planning and direction for the  UN Decade of Women.  For the event, the Shah of Iran's  twin sister donated $1 million in  addition to offering a lush site for  the conference. "This planning conference," said one Iranian woman at  the demonstration, "is nothing more  than a futile attempt by the Shah to  cover up his repressive rule...which  violates the rights of women and men  alike."  "And besides," she added, "the Shah  is well-known for his backward and  chauvinist attitude towards women."  She then pointed toward an Iranian  Student Association leaflet containing excerpts from an interview the  Shah gave to Oriana Fallaci. "Nobody  can influence me, nobody at all. And  a woman still less," says the Shah.  "In a man's life, women count only  if they are beautiful and graceful  and know how to stay feminine..."  Iran's legal system is packed with  oppressive laws, denying women's  rights. One law, for instance, forbids, a wife from working outside  the home if the husband thinks it  interferes with the "dignity" of  the family. Another prohibits a  woman from leaving the country without her husband's consent.  Still  another illustrating that blatantly  sexist cast of Iranian law gives  two women's testimony in court the  weight of one man's.  It is for these reasons, one Iranian woman said, "that a high percentage of women have joined underground revolutionary organization."  Currently there are more than 4,000  women incarcerated because of their  political activities.  The mid-decade conference was called to re-evaluate progress made on  the goals established at the 1975  International Women's Year Conference held in Mexico City, q  - BRIGCS-  INITIATIVE  The Briggs Initiative which will be  on the California ballot in November,  would require the dismissal of any  California Public School employee  who openly supports gay rights.  The Briggs Initiative provides for  filing charges against school  teachers, aides, school administrators  or counsellors who "advocate, solicit,  impose, encourage or promote private  or public sexual acts...between  persons of the same sex in a manner  likely to come to attention of other  employees or students...." o  -WHAT BAKKE MEANS  SUPREME COURT UPHOLDS BAKKE;  AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAMS  THREATENED  New York (LNS) - The long-awaited  Supreme Court decision on the  Bakke "reverse discrimination"  case was handed down June 28, two  days before the court adjourned  for the summer and nine months  after arguments in the case had  been presented.  In an apparent  attempt to appease both sides in  the case, the Court upheld Bakke's  charge that he was the victim of  "reverse discrimination" in his  application to medical school at  UC Davis, while ruling that race  could be considered a factor in  university admissions programs.  Blacks have historically been.  In  other words, the history of  discrimination against Blacks has  come to an end.  But this ignores the discriminatory  conditions which minorities and  women face today.  For example,  though unemployment dropped from 7.8  percent to 6.9 percent in the last  year, according to official figures,  the official unemployment for Blacks  rose from 12.9 percent to 14 percent.  For Black youths in many U.S. cities,  the figure stands at well over 50  percent  Justice Thurgood Marshall, the sole  Black Justice, after asserting that  he felt the court had returned full  circle to the 19th century, noted:  Despite the compromise 5-4 decision  handed down by the court in a  tangle of supporting and dissenting  opinions, the one definite winner  in the case was Allan Bakke. And  as one speaker at a rally in New  York City protesting the decision  stated, "If Bakke won, we lost.  It's as simple as that."  By focusing almost entirely upon  the "legality" of quotas, and not  the reasons for their existence,  the court's decision will undoubtedly  provide a shot in the arm for those  seeking to dismantle the programs.  Quotas and other affirmative action  mechanisms were set up in the first  place largely because institutions  feared they would be hauled into  court for keeping Third World people  and women out. Now the Supreme  Court has told them that they won't  have to worry any more.  'REVERSE  DISCRIMINATION'  The ruling also provides validity to  the theory, implicit in the term  "reverse discrimination" that the  time has come when white men are  being discriminated against in a  fashion similar to the way in which  to top of col.3  "It must be remembered that during  most of the past 200 years the  Constitution as interpreted by this  court did not prohibit the most ingenious and pervasive forms of  discrimination against the Negro."  The decision was greeted with protests  in several cities throughout the  country. At a rally in New York City  a day after the decision was handed  down, over 300 people, gathered to  express their outrage at the court's  ruling. And the protestors vowed to  continue mobilizing to fulfill the  pledge of the National Committee to  Overturn the Bakke Decision, that:  "millions of people in this country  who are opposed to racism are not  going to let the rights of Black  people and other minorities be set  back 50 years." Or as demonstrators  at emergency rallies across the  country chanted,  "We won't go back.'  Send Bakke back!" O  -FINLAND—  Finnish children will automatically  take their mother's surname under  a bill that is expected to be passed soon. If both parents' request  that a child be given its father's  name, the child will have that  name. (Spare Rib/Off Our Backs) q KINESIS,  October   '78  17  LNS  PARIS: In solidarity with families and relatives of political prisoners in Argentina,  several hundred women dressed in black rally outside Notre Dame cathederal.  French Feminists  The rapidly expanding women's movement  in France is causing upheavals within  the French Socialist and Communist  Parties.  Feminist activities within  both parties have intensified since  the defeats in the March elections.  In May, women within the Socialist  Party formed a feminist caucus.  Caucus founder Cecile Goldet comments:  I have been working to make men understand the importance of our problems with practically no success,  either in the Socialist Party  (SP)  or in society in general.    In SP  congresses, when a man speaks,  everyone listens.     When a woman  speaks,  they all go out and smoke  a ciq  By the end of June,  the Socialist  Party feminist caucus had received  2,000 offers of adherence from party  members, and 1,000 people outside  the party pledged to join the party  as members of the caucuses.  Meanwhile, women inside the French  Communist Party have been circulating a position paper demanding that  the party address women's issues.  One of the co-signers of the position paper said: In the party,  it  is said that the working class  doesn 't exploit anyone... We say  that even in the working class,  sexist ideology is reproduced and  divides the workers' movement.^  (SEVEN DAYS info)  NATIVE WOMEN  Native American activists have banded  together to form a new women's organization - Women of All Red Nations  (WARN).  The group held its founding conference September 18-22 in Rapid City,  South Dakota. Madona Gilbert and  Lorelei Means comment here on,the  aims of WARN, in particular its  international scope.  Both women are  veterans of the 1973 struggles at  Wounded Knee; both are active in  the defense of American Indian  Movement (AIM) leader Russell Means,  who is Gilbert's brother and Lorelei  Mean's brother-in-law.  "We wish to form an international  organization of red women that includes  the indigenous Indian women of South  America,  Central America and Canada  as well as the U.S.,"  explained Gilbert. "Indian women face the problems of forced sterilization; our  children are being taken from our  families and tribes; our culture is  being destroyed;  our treaties, which  are the basis for our very survival,  are being declared invalid by the  U.S.; our young are being attacked  through the racist education system  imposed upon us; our resources are  being ripped off.    Our fight today  is to survive as a people. "  "We know that the balance of power  in the world is no longer held by  the U.S.    The third world and  socialist countries are increasing  their influence in the world community... The more we get our message  through to the people of the world,  the more difficult it will be for  the U.S.   to ignore its treaty obligations with us."  WARN is also anxious to get its message to white and third world people  in the U.S. in order to form alliances  with other groups struggling for  similar rights.  WARN organizers hoped to have 500-1000  people at their founding conference:  delegates from Indian tribes as well  as observers from non-Indian organizations. WARN invited foreign observers, and representatives from women's  organizations in Vietnam and North  Korea accepted invitations.5}*  (GUARDIAN info)  Oregon Poison  WOMEN IN OREGON LINK DIOXIN  POISONING TO MISCARRIAGES  New York (LNS) - Since the late sixties, researchers have suggested a  probable link between herbicidal  spraying and birth defects. Now,  eight women in Alsea, Oregon, a  mountain town in the western part  of the state, are charging that  they each suffered one or more miscarriages as a result of herbicidal  spraying on land and water drainages  near their homes.  In a letter to the Environmental  Protection Agency (EPA), the women  wrote that they had found "an incredibly close connection" between the  dates of their miscarriages and the  dates the herbicides were sprayed by  two local timber companies, the U.S.  Forest Service and the Federal Bureau of Land Management.  Herbicides containing dioxins were  first manufactured by Dow Chemical  and used by the Defense Department in  the late sixties to defoliate vegetation in Vietnam, which served as  ground cover for the Vietnamese  National Liberation Front. The  "Agent Orange" spraying missions were  stopped in 1970 after scientists conclusively proved that dioxin caused  birth defects in mice and rats - and  after they observed the high incidence of birth defects in Vietnamese  children born to parents exposed to  the chemical. And Vietnam veterans  are currently agitating for compensation for health problems they say  originated ten years ago from contact  with Agent Orange.  Women in Oregon were not the first  to report miscarriages following herbicidal spraying. Neddie Freedlund,  who lives on a Wisconsin farm endured  three consecutive miscarriages after  she had previously borne six healthy  children.  She, too, attributes the  miscarriages to a neighbour's herbicidal spraying campaign.  Meanwhile^ herbicidal spraying continues in national forests throughout the country and many women remain  unaware of the possible connection  between dioxin contamination and  miscarriage.  Says Dr. Norton Kalish-  man, a health department official who  knows the eight women, "I feel that  when you start spraying chemicals  and you don't know the effects, you  are taking unnecessary chances."  Implying that the U.S. Forest Service and private timber companies  prefer herbicidal spraying to other  defoliation methods because it is  cheaper, Kalishman concludes, "Unfortunately, there are those who  look at (herbicidal spraying) only  in terms of dollars and cents."j{C  Ins 16  KINESIS,  October   '78  MERCIA STICKNEY  The only woman in Canada running in  the October federal by-elections is  Mercia Stickney. Mercia,  former  ombuds-researcher for Vancouver  Status of Women,  is the NDP candidate in Richmond-South Delta.   Kinesi  Our MLAs will be gathering in Victoria  to give us, at some unknown future date,  more of the same frustrating, reactionary  government as last session.  Perhaps it  would be a good idea to remind ourselves of the efforts of certain members to redress the social balance which {  so handicaps the daily lives of women    ['Ģ  in our Province.  This is, of course, a  continuing struggle; gains once made  cannot always be counted on to last. On  April 4th, in the debate on the Throne  Speech, Rosemary Brown referred to a  statement made by Premier Bennett at  the First Minister's Conference.  He  stated that his government had recommended that there should be a reduction  of unemployment insurance payments to  "secondary wage earners" in a family.  Brown pointed out that "secondary wage  earners" is a sexist code for women  workers.  For the same UIC contributions , women are to receive lower payments than men; this is what our Premier is suggesting to the Federal government.  This is something we will  have to watch very closely.  Brown went on to speak of the struggle  for funding of the Vancouver Status of  Women.  Comparing our $75,000 grant  with the $80,000 Hospitality Certificates issued as a publicity stunt by  the Provincial Secretary, Brown enumerated the sorely needed services which  we provide (or could provide if we had  the money).  She accused McCarthy of  not having read the brief we submitted,  an accusation borne out as McCarthy,  later in the session, brought up  against us points which we had dealt  with thoroughly in the brief.  The position of women got quite a lot  of attention for a few days in April.  Barbara Wallace spoke on employment  opportunities for women, Norm Levi  and Gordon Gibson spoke in support of  VSW, and Karen Sanford spoke on women's position at the bottom of the  wage scale.  Last, but definitely not  least, Pat Jordan spoke in defense of  the Minister of Human Resources.  Jordan typifies the woman who has  "made it" and cannot see why everyone cannot do so. This leads her  to make such statements as she did  in answer to Brown's remarks on our  grant.  Jordan stated that programs  outlined by Vander Zalm were "sen- -  sitive to some of the very special  concerns that do relate to women".  She also accused Brown of fostering  a lack of self-worth in women, and  of alienating those who might be  willing to "step forth and offer  assistance" to those women in need.  Brown's reply was that Jordan "lives  in a dream world". This is certainly true of Jordan, and also of many  of her colleagues in the government.  The Social Credit Party is exclusively middle-class oriented, and  those at the lower end of the social  scale must scratch for a living. It  will be interesting to see if the  new session produces any results for us.^  spoke with Mercia about the campaign,  and about being a woman running for  political office.  KINESIS:    Why are you running in  this by-election,  Mercia?    Why is  it worth it,  for you personally?  MERCIA:  My conviction is that social  change will be brought about by  socialism and feminism.  It's necessary to have feminists in the socialist movement in order to educate men  within the socialist movement.  I see running for political office as  an educative process.  The educational  aspect is a more realistic goal than  legislative change for women.  Women's  power hasn't anywhere near the clout  we need to be able to effect substantial changes in legislation.  My strongest motivation for running  for office is this: I feel that if  anyone has a social conscience, and  the opportunity to create social  change, one essentially has a. obligation to take that opportunity. I  don't get a big charge out of being  a public figure.  Outside the political process you can  do education and lobbying.  But you  are always trying to effect action  through those people who are already  there, inside the process, the politicians.  It's as if you're standing  behind the man, trying to poke him.  I want to stress that I'm aware of  the debate around revolution versus  reform.  I have chosen to work with  the institutional political process,  I have chosen reform.  I know what  the choice means, and I've made it.  It's a pragmatic decision based on  my conviction that at this point in  time, in Canada, revolution isn't in  the realm of possibility.  If I lived  in a country where revolution was  possible (in Latin America, for example) the choices would not be the  same.  Do you receive any flak when you 're  out campaigning,  because you 're a  woman?  Out of the 3,000 doors I've knocked  on, only once have I received a  query about a woman being able to  win the riding.  No, I haven't received flak.  I've had a good response from women,  and the best response comes from  women under 35.  What's the mood of the people you 've  spoken to? What are they concerned  about?  The mood is clearly anti-Trudeau,  but that doesn't necessarily mean  anti-Liberal. People are concerned  about the economy; in particular  about the cost of living and the  state of the dollar. They're also  concerned about unemployment, although unemployment is certainly  less rampant in Richmond-South Delta  than it is in many other ridings.  The most verbal responses I get deal  with the way in which Canada simply  gives away our natural resources to  anyone who comes knocking. People  who have come to Canada from Europe,  especially, simply cannot comprehend  how we can be willing to let our  resources go out with nothing coming  back in of similar value.  Do people accuse you of being a single  -issue candidate because you 're a  feminist?  Every issue is a women's issue.  As  51% of the population, we are affected by everything that happens in our  society.  Unemployment is an issue  for women.  40% of us who have paid  employment are sole support, responsible for ourselves alone or for dependent families.  Pensions are a women's issue.  Many  of us have no pensions.  The labour  we have contributed to the functioning of society through home-making  and child-care is not credited. After  this year, we can claim half the  spouse's Canada Pension credits if  we get divorced and have been married for more than three years. But  aside from that, and for those already divorced - nothing. And the  poorest people are elderly women.  59% of single women, those widowed,  divorced, separated or never married, who are between 65 and 69,  live at or below the poverty level.  Inflation, health care, environmental, political, child-care, education  nuclear proliferation.  They're all  women's issues.  To label our concerns as single-issue is simply to  deny us the diversity of human exper  ience. >fJ  Sue Moore  FOR THAT MYTHICAL FEDERAL ELECTION...  "The Liberals to date have 12 women  across the country among 230 candidates designated so far; the Conservatives,   13 women out of 188, and  the New Democrats,  18 women out of  158 - all according to their respective Ottawa Headquarters.  The national total to date - 43 women  among 576 candidates - is about 7.5  per cent of the total.    In 1974 the  national total of women running numbered 137,  or 11 per cent of 1,209  candidates.  (Vancouver Sun, May 24, 1978) KINESIS,  October  '78  19  WHAT  LIES  AHEAD?  SHEILA ROWBOIWI responds to  AN INTERVIEW QUESTION: "WHAT  DO YOU SEE IN THE FUTURE?"  A new right could go onto the attack  based on people's fears that society  is disintegrating.  People are  frightened,cut off from one another.  There is violence in the home and in  the big cities.  Relationships breakup, and people don't rely on marriage  lasting for ever anymore.  Obviously  these are changes that are taking  place in capitalism anyway, but  people can identify them as being  caufsed by radical movements.  So the right could reassert the significance of the family, like they did  round the Queen's Jubilee, royalty as  a symbol of the nation's family. But  there are limits on how much of that  people will actually tike. Things go  wrong, like Princess Margaret!  My main concern about the women's  movement is that we must remain very  outgoing, talking in straightforward  language that makes sense to people.  We mustn't close in on ourselves and  become sectarian, with 'pure' kinds  of feminism, and if you don't fit into  them you're no good, or become too  academically theoretical.  There's always been both these tend-  ancies within the women's movement,  and the danger is that as times get  harder they could become stronger.  But there's a strong countervailing  pressure because most feminists are  in situations where they're mixing  with people who aren't feminists, so  they have to keep arguing in terms  that make sense to people who don't  agree with them.  For socialist feminists particularly,  I think it's really important that  we don't lose touch with people's  actual feelings.  If the economic  situation is hard, people will turn  in on the family and want to guard  their personal relationships and not  open up in any kind of way.  I think  you have to recognize this and be  very careful how you approach  people.  I don't mean that you shouldn't say what you believe, but you  have to respect what they are feeling.  So when you are talking about abortion  I think it's very important to place  it in relation to general choice over  fertility for women.  You have to be  particularly clear about not just  asserting one demand but putting it  in the context of women's lives as a  whole.  It's also important to recognize  what is valid in personal relationships.  I find it disturbing that  when we were originally thinking  about the family, we emphasised the  economic labour that women do in  the home.  This work was invisible, it was  always missed out by both the  sociologists and the left.  So we  stressed it.  But labour isn't the  only thing that happens to people  in families.  We also have to assert  the positive things that people  experience in the family and stress  that we want to extend the possibility  of choice.  If we don't, if we are  negative about peoples' feelings,  Mothers & Daughters  MY MOTHER/MY SELF, The Daughter's  Search for Identity.  DELACORTE PRESS, $12.95 in Canada  (due to be released in paperback  this month).  by KAY MATUSEK  I think this is a very important  book for all women to read. Some  parts of the book may be repetitious or boring; other parts will  be funny or sad; but most of all  the book will be hard to face and  an exciting revelation. It is about  the relationships between mothers  and daughters.  Nancy Friday explores her relationship with her mother and her men  to try and find her identity. She  tries to discover why it is so hard  for grown women to feel like they  really are autonomous adults and  sexual beings capable of multiple  orgasms. She looks for the reasons  women are not able to fill their  need for love or find self satisfaction from work. She traces most  of these problems, and more, back  to our relations with our mothers  - symbiosis, body-image, competition, virginity, marriage, and finally her death - but do we really  separate ourselves?  I am sure that many women will  read this book and say to themselves,  "Ah, yes, I have thought so myself  but this is very well put." Other  information may be hard to face.  But there is no way everyone who  reads this won't be forced into  thinking about themselves and their  mothers and daughters.  I was uncomfortable while reading  Ms.Friday's interpretation of how  mother/son relationships differ  from mother/daughter relationships  and I wished she hadn't tried to  analyze the similarities or differences in this book.  I am my mother's daughter. I am  also mother to a daughter. I hope,  and I'll try, to incorporate the  information gathered in this great  book so our lives may be richer.  I'm also glad I won't have to look  any further for Christmas gifts for  all my sisters.' jfc  I think the right will move in with  their version, and people will see  the left as presenting a false  picture.  The positive aspects of family life  like love and play and mutual support  are potentially about how you would  imagine socialism.  In our society  they exist only in confined spaces  and are partial and distorted.  We  shouldn't deny them but assert  how things could be better.  I think there's always a problem of  how to give value to the experience  of oppressed people without idealising  them.  When white people say blacks  have natural rhythm, it's very  insulting, but things like the Blues  have been an assertion by black  people of their oppressed spirit.  Women have been out of the area of  economic competion; although they've  had to work, they haven't had to  carry the sole responsibility for  the survival of the family.  Because  of this, I think they have been able  to develop particular ways of seeing  and feeling that are really important  for men as well.  I see feminism as  continuing these perceptions and  struggling to make these become part  of the left.  $s$*  This excerpt is taken from an interview with Sheila Rowbotham by Elana  Dallas and Alastair Hatchett.  The  full text is in Socialist Review,  June 1978  (pp.21 - 24).  The address  for Socialist Review is P.0.  Box 82  London, E 2.  Spartacus Educational  Assoc,  sells copies, at 311 West  Hastings Street,  Vancouver. 20  KINESIS,  October  A Women  and  Film Course  in  ten easy lessons  Are you bored and tired of the sexist  films on TV and don't want to pay to  see the latest commercial offerings  putting down women in various ways as  sex objects?  Then put on your own Women & Film  course: all you need is imagination,  ingenuity, and a group of women who  have a sense of fun and want to find  out about herstory on the screen.  You don't need a college degree for  this, but it does help to check  local schools, colleges and university film departments as well as  the National Film Board to see whether they would let you have their  films free of charge. There is also  the local Arts Council, Heritage  Fund or membership fees that can  help pay for the cost of rentals  if there are any.  Here is my introductory list, chosen  from those most popular, to which  you may add any you particularly  like:  GREAT GRAND MOTHERS, dir. Lorna  Rasmussen and Anne Wheeler, colour,  16mm, 38 min. available from the  NFB. Discuss this film in conjunction with the book made from  stills left over from the movie,  A Harvest Yet To Reap: A History  Of Prairie Women, published by  The Women's Press, Toronto, 1976.  RIDDLES OF THE SPHINX, dir. Laura  Mulvey and Peter Wollen, colour,  16mm, feature length, available  from the British Film Institute,  81 Dean St, London Wl, England.  Script of this film is available  in Screen, Summer 1977; also  from the B.F.I.  Reviewed in Spare  Rib No. 59, and Take One, Vol. 6,  No. 6, May 1978.  SALT OF THE EARTH, dir. Harold Bib-  erman, 1954, b/w; feature length.  Read and discuss Engel's The Origin  of the Family; alternate film:  UNION MAIDS, dir. Julia Reichert,  b/w 55 min. 16mm; available from  New Day Films, P.O. Box 315, Franklin Lakes, NJ 07417.  THIS FILM IS ABOUT RAPE, dir. Bonnie  Kreps for NFB, colour, 58 min. 1978;  has educational package for discussion by groups. Contrast with  CHAINSAW MASSACRE, reviewed in Jump  Cut, No. 14, 1977.  DANCE, GIRL, DANCE, dir. Dorothy  Arzner, b/w, U.S. 1940, 90 min.,  rental $25 available from Astral or  Kingston Films, 645 Uxbridge Road,  Hayes End, Middlesex, England.  Arzner's most complex film about  eight dancing girls struggling to  make a living.  Important for the  treatment of traditional Hollywood  female stereotypes. Reading:  Dorothy Arzner, Towards a Feminist  Cinema, by Claire Johnston, ed.,  published by the B.F.I., 1975.  WANDA, dir. Barbara Loden, U.S. 1970,  colour, 100 min, rental $50 from  Conoisseur Films Ltd., 167 Oxford  St, London W1R 2DX. Wanda is divorced, out of a job, drifts from  man to man and becomes involved  with a bank robber. Compare with  HAPPILY UNMARRIED, dir. Anne  Wheeler, NFB 1977. Reading:  "Barbara Loden Revisited", Women  and Film, Vol. 1, No. 5-6, 1974.  LE TEMPS DE L'AVANT, English version  BEFORE THE TIME GOES, dir. Anne-  Claire Poirier, 1976, NFB Montreal;  the subject is abortion. Reading:  Our Bodies, Ourselves, Boston Health  Collective, 2nd ed., 1972.  THE BLUE LIGHT, dir. Leni Riefenstahl,  Germany 1932, b/w 55 min.  Compare  and contrast with her other films,  especially TRIUMPH OF THE WILL  (excerpts) from B.F.I, or local  colleges.  Reading: Nazi Cinema,  trans. Gertrud Mander & David Wilson, with "Appendix: Documents on  Triumph of the Will and Olympia",  1974.  FILM ABOUT A WOMAN WHO...dir. Yvonne  Rainer, 1974, U.S., 16mm, b/w, 105  min. from Castelli-Sonnabend Tapes  & Films Inc., 420 W. Broadway, New  York, NY 10012. Avant-garde film  about the difficulties of communicating and an attempt to create a  new feminist cinema. The best discussion of her work is in Camera  Obscura, a Journal of Feminism and  Film Theory, from P.O. Box 4517,  Berkeley, CA 94704.  WOMEN'S HAPPY TIME COMMUNE, dir.  Sheila Page, U.S. 1972, 50 min.  colour, from Women Make Movies  (USA); and WOO WHO? MAY WILSON  dir. Amalie R. Rothschild, U.S.  1970, 33 min. colour, from Anom-  oly Films (USA).  Both very funny  films, the first about two frontier women who run away from a  strait-laced community and form  a commune; the second about an  artist who begins a new life at 60.  Alternate Choice: OUR DEAR SISTERS,  dir. Kathleen Shannon, NFB Studio  D, Montreal, approx. 50 min. colour,  featuring a Native Indian Princess  as singer. This is the conclusion  of the NFB's Working Mothers Series,  1975; all films are meant as discussion starters and serve to raise  consciousness .5}c  brig anderson's list  [rx   fz   FT  FT  Ft   FT  Ft   Ft   Ft   Ft   ft  ft  ft  Ft   Ft   ft   Ft   Ft   FT  FT  ft  ft   Ft  ft   ft   Ft   ft  ft  ft  Ft   FT  Ft   FT FT  FT  Ft   I  1 two turkeys  A feminist organization called Status  of Women  (SOW)  says that I am a sexist.  This is good news to me...  The most sexist phenomenon of our  time is the women's liberation group.  Women are its whole bag.    And a very  sad sack it is. ..Like all revolutionaries,   the militants of women 's lib  are so intense about their cause that  they fail to see that they too are  part of the human comedy, very possibly a last act that is a real thigh  slapper...  At your next meeting,  feminists,  soap Old Business and tickle one  another - cootchie,   cootchie - till  you 've all had a grand giggle,  the  way girls are supposed to.    May do  you the world of good.  -  Vancouver Province column by  Eric Nichol, October 2, 1978.  "To protect the public morals", the  Washington State Supreme Court upheld  a conviction September 28 against 5  women arrested in 1975 for bathing  topless.  The court rejected the women's argument that Seattle's "lewd conduct"  ordinance violates the Equal Rights  Amendment. "The female breasts,  unlike male breasts, constitute an  erogenous zone and are commonly  associated with sexual arousal."  Justice Hugh J. Rosellini elaborated  that female breasts "can be kept  covered in public without inconvenience since they perform no function  which necessitates their being exposed to public view."  Defendant Susan Haney commented:  "It was a beautiful day, as I recall  correctly.     Very warm.    There was a  heat wave at the time."Jfc KINESIS,  October   '78  PR€SS GANG  We   at  Press   Gang  would   like   to  extend our  thanks   to   all   those  people   who   helped  in   our  recent  move.     It was  wonderful   to   have  the   assistance   of  the   community  in   such  a   difficult  undertaking.  At   the   best   of  times  moving  a  press  is   hard,   and with   limited  funds   it  can  be   especially   so.  We   received  help   in  many   ways   -  in   construction   -   advice   -  working  at  our party/benefit   -  approximately   $1000  in  donations  -  and in   the   actual  move   itself.  We   are   finally  getting  settled  in  and would   like  you   to  feel  free   to   come  and  visit  us.  Press Gang is a feminist,   anti-capitalist printing and publishing group  run collectively by women in Vancouver.  We have two offset presses and do a  full range of printing - from leaflets  and posters,   to magazines and  books.    As publishers, we put out  non-sexist children's books,   feminist writings^,  poetry - and we have  plans  for two other anthologies,   one  fiction,  the other political analysis.  We need more women to volunteer to  work with us.     Skilled women in printing,   graphics,   design,  bindery,  editing,  manuscript reading - any aspect  of  the trade - would be preferable.  But mainly we want women who  could  involve  themselves  seriously in the  printing and publishing aspects  of  the collective,  and who would bring  their strength and energy to a feminist collective that works hard.  We are at 603 Powell Street in Vancouver.     Our phone number is  253-2554.   BCFW-   Regional Meeting  The next and last BCFW Regional Meeting (before the convention) is coming  up on Thursday, October 19. It will  be held at 7:30 pm in L4 at Britannia  Community Centre (1661 Napier Street,  Vancouver).  It is important that representatives  from each group are present.  Each  group will summarize and evaluate  their activities for the year; we  will do the same for the region as  a whole; and discuss the coming  convention with possible nominations  for the next regional representative.  At our last meeting on September 7,  some of the groups represented talked  about plans to take a more political  direction in the immediate future.  CONV€NTION  The 5th Annual Convention of the BCFW  takes place on November 10, 11, 12 &  13 (a very long weekend) at Capilano  College in North Vancouver.  See you there.' <£  •GLORIA GREENFIELD AT "WOMEN RECLAIM THE NiGHT"  Gerda Ostemeck  Women's Studies  FALL CONFERENCE - WOMEN'S  STUDIES ASSOCIATION OF B.C.  WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE ISSUES  To be held October 27-28, Friday  evening and Saturday, at Capilano  College, Purcell Way, North Vancouver, B.C.  Cost of the conference:  $1.50 for Friday panel only.  $4.00 for conference if annual  income is under $5,000.  $8.00 for conference if annual  income is over $5,000.  TO REGISTER: Write Suzan Van  Deurzen, W.S.A.B.C., 1819 Dunbar  Street, Vancouver, B.C. V6R 3M1,  or phone 684-5728, leaving all  details of registration with  answering unit.  FRIDAY EVENING 7:30-10:00pm  Panel discussion with representatives of B.C. organizations providing health care service or  information to women in the province. The topic: What are the  political implications of the  work done: for the organization  as an entity, for the women who  work in the organization, and  for the women receiving the  service?  SATURDAY 9:00am-5:00pm  Workshops on practical and theoretical issues in women's health  care: physical and emotional self-  defense; research methods; women's  health care in underdeveloped countries; healers, witchcraft and  menstrual taboos; preventive health  care; stress related illness; women  in the medical profession; and more.  Business meeting from 12:30-2:00pm.  Lunch provided for registrants; wine  and cheese for all at 4:00pm. The  conference will be followed by  dinner and entertainment - stay and  enjoy. ^C  Reclaim the Night  EVALUATED  HOW DO WE HANDLE PUNKS, PIMPS,  POLICE AND (ONE MORE TIME) THE  MEDIA???  When the evaluation of the action,  WOMEN RECLAIM THE NIGHT, was held  September 12 at the Full Circle  Coffeehouse, 18 women attended.  Here is a summary of some points  made by the women during the evening:  - The flyer lacked educational  thrust. The message of the flyer  did not demystify fear, and was  therefore not constructive.  - The march was an expression of  solidarity for women already active  in the movement.  For some, this  felt good.  For others, it seemed  we were talking to ourselves.  - The fact that the march took  place without a permit appeared  to be an added attraction, bringing a lot of women out on a rainy  night.  - It was exciting to be doing something publicly and collectively.  - Perhaps there is a time and place  for women to be outrageous, and this  was it. It may have gladdened some  people's hearts.  - A speech outlining the reasons  for the march would have been appropriate at the beginning of the  action.  - The confrontation with the cops  was a victory for us.  - The march had no focus / no effect.  - The march was not meant to be a  hate-men action. The response of  male onlookers was very hostile.  - The flyer lacked any class analysis.  Its feminist analysis was  fuzzy, somewhat anti-men.  - Women on the march had not come to  consensus about a policy of confrontation or non-confrontation with pimps,  punks, police and media.ft 22  KINESIS,  October'78  HAVE  at SFU   Theatre  midwife: n,  OE - mid (with) + wif  (wife,  woman)  1. A woman,  not a physician,  who assists other women  at childbirth.  2. One that helps to produce  or bring forth something.  In December 1929, in a small town in  Norway, there began a trial for over  50 women charged with murdering their  husbands during the previous ten  years.  Five of them committed suicide before going on trial.  Among  these was the village midwife, who  had provided arsenic to the other  women.  Her nickname: "the witch".  The story behind the trial is told  graphically in Have, a play by Julius  Hay, which will be presented by the  Simon Fraser Theatre program on  November 1, 2, 3 and 4 at 8:00 pm.  Admission is free.  In the play, which has been performed  all over the world during the past 30  years, we learn of the case of a  young peasant woman, Mari, who is  forced through economic necessity,  to marry a rich, repulsive landowning peasant, David.  As she prepares  for marriage, her mother, a widow  (like many others in the village)  takes her to the village midwife  where she learns the facts - not of  life, but of death.  The midwife, with her traditional  powers of life, initiates her into  the traditions of the village, which  all the other widows know: to survive means owning land; land is in  limited supply.  Therefore marrying  a landowning man in order to acquire  land is absolutely necessary.  Aunti Rezi, as we hear in one of the  scenes, saw four husbands buried,  leaving her a total of 28 acres of  land.  But only the other widows -  and especially the midwife - knows  why she was widowed so often.  The issues are land, oppression, and  power; the play is Have, by Julius  Hay, at Simon Fraser Theatre, November 1, 2, 3 and 4 at 8:00 pm.  The  admission is free.  Phone 298-3514  to reserve seats.Jj<  by Dorthea A'twater  -\\>A\)ES-  WAVES  is the new newsletter of the  Rights of Lesbians Sub-Committee of  the B.C. Federation of Women.  The  collective which produces WAVES  are  also members of the Feminist Lesbian  Action Group in Victoria (FLAG).  The purpose of the newsletter is to  act as a forum for lesbian issues in  B.C. and to inform member groups of  BCFW about events in other areas as  well as this province which affect  lesbians.  Send comments, letters, articles to  WAVES, c/o FLAG, Box 237, Station E,  Victoria, B.C.  q neighbourhood affair  €ast €nd Artists Association  The East End Artists Association is a  non-profit, non-funded organization  which was formed last spring by a  small group of artists living in the  Grandview-Woodland area.  "We wanted  to be more involved as artists in our  own community," said Portland Frank,  one of the original members.  "We all  live here, work here, shop here. We  use the library at Britannia.  We  work out in the gym.  Our children go  to school here.  But those of us who  show our art work end up in downtown  galleries or on the North Shore. We  want our art to be visible here, where  we live."  One of the first things the new organization did was to approach the librarians at Britannia Library about  using the glass cases and wall space  of the adult reading room for displaying art work. The librarians were  enthusiastic and the first show -  paintings by Sheila Adams and ceramic  scu pture by Persimmon Blackbridge -  was put up in June.  The library space has been criticized  as "too busy" for an effective art  show, and indeed it lacks the stark-  ness and formality of most galleries.  But that's exactly why the EEAA likes  the library.  "It's a human space,"  Claire Kujundzic commented after her  show.  "There's so many people, kids  and grownups, asking questions and  making comments.  It's really alive."  The EEAA hopes to find a variety of  exhibition spaces and would like to  hear from any local businesses interested in enriching their premises with  art displays. Any artist who would  like to join EEAA is also encouraged  to contact them.  Call 253-9789 or  253-7809 for further information.  The EEAA is open to any artist living  east of Main, but artists outside the  Grandview-Woodland area are encouraged  to use the organization to find exhibition space within their own neighbourhoods.  It's not a "professionals  only" group. People with all levels  of commitment to art, working in any  medium, are welcome.  Comments, constructive criticism and  suggestions from anyone are welcome  in their comments book in the adult  reading lounge at Britannia.  "It's not up to us to judge other  people's art," they agree.  "Everyone  has their own likes and dislikes. We  want to present a variety of work,  something for everyone."  The group doesn't want to show art  that is racist, sexist, or insults  anyone's culture, however.  "One of  the first things people notice about  this area is all the different kinds  of people living here," said Colette  French, long time Grandview resident.  "We really value that. We want to  participate in a positive way in the  cultural life of our community."  The upcoming shows at Britannia Library are:  October 16  Devor  October 30 - November 10: Fabric Art  by Persimmon Blackbridge, Claire  Kujundzic, Lark Ryan and Saeko  Usukawa  November 27 - December 11: Photography  by Wendy Davis JJC  Below:  THE WHITE LUNCH, BY  PORTLAND FRANK, EEAA MEMBER.  28: Photography  by Holly  lU»MI»ltlH»lUMnnMH»HUT#l*T*I *************-  KINESIS  October  ISSN : 0317 - 9095  October 1978 Vol 7, #9  *************  Kinesis is published monthly by the  Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of  women in society and to work actively towards achieving change.  Views expressed in,Kinesis are those  of the writer and DO NOT necessarily  reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the  Kinesis editorial and production crew  20  SUBMISSIONS: VSW welcomes submissions from the feminist community and  in particular, from VSW members. We  do reserve the right to edit, and  submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want  your work returned.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver  Status of Women, 2029 West 4th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6J IN3.  Membership to Vancouver Status of  Women is by donation and Kinesis is  mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subscriptions to Kinesis  are $8.00 per year and we would ask  members to base their donations on  this and their own financial position.  As we now have the status of a charitable organization and as we are  unable to pay for Kinesis from these  funds due to government regulations,  we will be issuing tax deductible  receipts for the balance of all membership donations over $8.00.  Please remember VSW operates on inadequate funding - we need member  support.'  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Miriam Azreal,  Janet Beebe, Lyn Buckle, Jean Faghey,  Gayla Reid, Lorri Rudland.  ADVERTISING: Kinesis welcomes non-sexist, non-racist advertising. Call Gayla  at 736 1313 for the ad. rates.  DISTRIBUTE Kinesis in your local laundromat, doctor's offices, etc. Call 736  1313 for freebie back issues  SOLIDARITY «  For information on union organizing or the  women's programme of the B.C. Federation of  Labour, please contact:  Mi  Director of Women's Programmes  B.C. Federation of Labour     ,  3110 Boundary Road  Burnaby, B.C.  V5M 4A2  430-1421  LETTERS  ff#  Dear People:  This note is in response to the  article entitled NON-TRADITIONAL  JOBS in the September issue of  Kinesis.     I would like to correct  some of the errors, and in particular apologize to women apprentices in non-traditional jobs.  What I wanted to say was that to  my knowledge at that point - in  March 1978 - there were no women  who had graduated from the W.E.A.T.  program and who were apprentices.  And not that there were no women  apprentices at all.  Furthermore, I would like to emphasize that there are a few  women apprenticing in trades such  as painting and decorating, carpentry, and electricity, etc., and  other women who are working in non-  traditional jobs but are not apprenticing.  Other errors:  - Single women get $60 a month,  not $50.  - You get a transportation allowance of $2 a day if you travel more  than 10 miles to get to school, and  not 100 miles.  Women who would like more information  about the course can contact:  The Ministry of Labour  Apprenticeship and Industrial  Training Branch  4211 Kingsway, Burnaby  (434-5761)  Prabha Khosla  KINESIS:  We are a non-profit, charitable  corporation in our first week of  operation. We are organizing a  festival of women in the performing arts to be held late in February 1979.  The project's goal is to provide  exposure of women performers to  the public, and to people in the  entertainment business. We will  be holding a weekend event with  entertainment by women performers  and, as well, teaching/participation workshops and performance  workshops.  In order to make this information  accessible to many women wishing  to participate, we are compiling  an extensive mailing list.  Could  you send us names and addresses  of individuals, groups, women's  centres, clubs, etc. who would  like to participate or promote  the festival. Thank you.  Judy Lynne for A MUSE  200 Carlton St. E.  Toronto, Ontario M5A 2L1  .   152 East 8th Ave  vancouver b.c.  m 7ii9  Wednesdays: Women and PfeN  Fridays: Women only  Doors open 8.30    First Performance  9.30  $2.50  SCHEDULE FOR THE REST OF OCTOBER  OCTOBER 11 : Janice Wadleton sings  HER OWN MATERIAL PLUS FOLK  OCTOBER 13: Bethoe Thompson, novelist  OFFERS QUIZZICAL VIEW OF THE HUMAN  CONDITION  OCTOBER 18: Joanna Cazden, singer  OCTOBER 20: Joanna Cazden again : full  OF LOVE AND WARMTH AND STRONG WOMAN  IDENTITY  OCTOBER 25: Nellie McClung, poet  OCTOBER 27: Beth Jankola, poet.  VSW DELEGATES TO BCFW CONVENTION  At the quarterly meeting of VSW,  September 27, members voted by ballot for candidates to attend the  BCFW convention as VSW representatives .  The following were chosen: Lyn  Buckle, Kathy Ellis, Betty Jeffries (an out-of-town candidate),  Janice Farrai-Sharifi , Carol Neil-  son and Debra Lewis. Lewis has since  been hired as a VSW staff person,  and will now represent VSW in that  capacity. Sandra Currie, as the meeting's choice for first alternate, will  take her place.  Another staff rep. has yet to be  nominated.  VSW Executive members attending  as delegates will be Sylvia Spring  and Susan Sanderson.  VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE  is moving to new offices at Broadway and Granville. They will keep  their old phone number : 736 6696.  October is moving month, during  which time they are holding regular  clinics out of the Pine Free Clinic,  1984 West 4th.Ave. They will be open  at the new location in November. ARTICLES BY AND ABOUT  UNUSUAL PEOPLE  WITH UNCONVENTIONAL  APPROACHES TO:  FEATURING  CANADIAN ART AND  PHOTOGRAPHY  SOCIAL ISSUES  SPORTS, POLITICS  ENTERTAINMENT  SURVIVAL  WORK, HEALTH  FICTION, POETRY HISTORY, HUMOUR  CHILDREN'S STORIES REVIEWS . . . AND MORE  ••••••••••••••••••••  MAKARA        subscription drive  YOU  CAN  HELP  US  BY  BUYING  NINE Please send me one D  ten □   more □  SUBSCRIPTIONS   FOR  YOUR   FRIENDS subscription(s) to MAKARA.  AND   HELP   YOURSELF   BY    KEEPING Canada:   $6   per  year,  institutions $10  THE TENTH ONE FREE! U.S.A.: $7.50, institutions $11.50  Overseas:    $7.50   surface,   $10.00   air;  Name  institutions $15.00 air  Address  U.S. and overseas please pay with a money    order.  Don't   forget   to   include   the   names   and $ enclosed   addresses  of  your   friends  and  the special MAKARA  message   you   want   included    in   the   gift 1011 Commercial Drive  carcj Vancouver,   British   Columbia      V5L   3X1