 Special Collections Sprier*  OCTOBER 1994       Klein klobbers Alberta...paqe 9 CMPA$2.25  ^^^  News About Women That's Not In The Dallies I  KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Oct 4 for the Nov  issue and Nov 1 for the Dec/Jan issue  at 7 pm at Kinesis. All women welcome  even if you don't have experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year by  the Vancouver Status of Women. Its  jectives are to be a non-sectarian  linist voice for women and to work  ively tor social change, specifically  ibatting sexism, racism.dassism,  iphobia, ableism, and imperialism  expressed in Kinesis are those of  >r and do not necessarily reflec  All unsigned material is the  of the Kinesis Editorial  Board.  ORIAL BOARD  n e. Ash, Ussa Geller,  Huang, Fatima Jaffer  RODUCTION THIS ISSUE  Shannon e. Ash,   Fatima Jaffer,  Saleen, Doris Maljevac, Robyn Hall,  Anik Hahn, Nancy Poliak, Lael Sleep,  Sue Vohanka, wendy lee kenward,  Miche Hiili, Leah Ibbitson,  Hilary Mason, Teresa McCarthy,  Coleen Hennig, Carmen Benn,  Arbour, Kyra Schaffer  rtising: Cynthia Low  ")at L'Hirondelle, Jennifer  le, Christine Cosby  Hition: Cynthia Low  o-ordinator: Agnes Huanc  >esetter: Sur Mehat  RONT COVER  Shabana Azmi  Photo by Shelina Velji  Photo by Shelina Velji  PRESS DATE  September 28,1994  SUBSCRIPTIONS  \dividua!:$20 per year (+$1.40 GST)  what you can afford  istitutions/Groups:  it year (+$3.15 GST)  >ership (includes 1 year  wsis subscription):  >r year (+$1.40 GST)  UBMISSIONS  d girls are welcome to make  s We reserve the right to  mission does not guarantee  i. If possible, submissions  typed, double spaced and  d and include an address,  lumber and SASE. Kinesis  >t accept poetry or fiction,  felines are available upon  request.  EADLINES  is must be received in the  jdmg publication. Note: Jul  se/Jan are double issues,  res and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  and Bulletin Board: 18th  vertising  ady): 18th  2 using Wordpe  >r4.0andanN  5. Printing by H  s Periodicals lr  Tmsidf  1974-1 V94  News  Proposed changes to immigration 3  by Fatima Jaffer  Report on abortion in BC 4  by Teresa McCarthy  Victory for Mary Pitawanakwat 5  by Agnes Huang  Oppal Commission report on policing in BC 5  by Shannon e. Ash  Features  Irish women and the peace process    8  by E. Mullan  Women and the Kleining of Alberta 9  by Anne McGrath  Interview with Yuri Kochiyama 10  as told to Agnes Huang  Take back the night—photo spread  11  Interview with Shabana Azmi 14  as told to Fatima Jaffer  Centrespread  Interview with Patricia Fernandez on the Mexican elections 12  as told to Jazmin Miranda  Arts  Three Fringe film reviews  17  by Shannon e. Ash  Review: A Thin Line 18  by Terry Gibson  Nora Patrich wins human rights award 19  by Maria Amestoy  Regulars  Irish women and the peace process..  Take back the night in Vancouver.  As Kinesis Goes to Press 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News 6  by Lissa Geller  Movement Matters 7  by Carmen Benn  Letters 20  Bulletin Board 21  compiled by Coleen Hennig, Doris Maljevac, and  wendy lee kenward  Mexico elections..  The next writers'  meetings are on  October 4 & November 1  @ 7 pm at VSW  #301-1720 Grant St  Award for Nora Patrich..  OCTOBER 1994 w^
^5
S
t
ggp^^^                fsa »   VV>«*.
^&o news vsiouldi t*e^
better news
s
o          p    r    e    s
g
o
e
Please bear with us...we have minutes
to make it to press. September is one of those
months when everything happens at once.
And we've noticed...and said before., .policy
makers have no respect for Kinesis deadlines.
Minister of Human Resources Lloyd
Axworthy is set to announce his recommendations for Social Policy "Reform" as Kinesis
goes to press. As he gears up to announce his
plans, women from women's organizations
across the country are gathering in Regina
for a national women's conference on social
policy. This one is a biggie. ..(one of those conferences where women get together between sessions to tradestories about the shortest time they
ever were given by government to prepare for
some "public consultation " or the other. Kinesis
hopes to run transcripts/summaries of some
of the keynote speeches made at the conference in our next issue.
You may have noticed the absence of
follow-up coverage on the Quebec elections
in this issue. We decided to wait till the dust
settled to talk to women in Quebec. Some of
the key issues raised in the elections by
women in Quebec (according to a flyer put
out by Federation des femmes du Quebec
(FFQ) are: rights of immigrant women; universal childcare; social programs and changes
to Quebec welfare programs; job creation;
child support payments; maternity leave;
pay equity; health services to women; raising the minimum wage; and funding to
women's organizations.
Meanwhile, a friend at the FFQ sent us
some statistics on the Quebec election results: Partie Quebecois holds 77 seats, the
Liberals 47 seats, Partie d'Action
Democratique 1 seat. Twenty-three women
were elected in all—15 for the PQ, eight for
the Liberals. In nine ridings, women campaigned against each other. Three PQ candidates lost by very, very few votes-among
them, ex-N AC Executive member Monique
Simard, who lost by 147 votes.
The poor [sic] Reform Party has had to
defend itself all last month from "allegations" that it is racist. One member who
boasted of being a part of the Heritage Front
[white supremacistgroup,] was expelled for
bragging about it...oops, we mean, because
he bragged about it and the Reform Party
found out. Our most hilarious moment last
month came when the Reform Party told the
Toronto Star that Immigration Minister
Sergio Marchi's plans for changes to immigration were "racist." Seems they thought
Marchiwasgoing to farwhen he said, Canada
needs more Europeans emigrating to Canada
(We can think of a lot of First Nations people
who don't think much of Marchi's idea either, but then they/we've been saying that
for 500 years now.) Anyway, the next day,
the Reform called for stripping away of
human rights from refugees in Canada!
Corrections:
Last issue, a very huge error got past us.
For the commentary piece on the conflict in
Rwanda by L Muthoni Wanyeki (page 13),
instead of printing the final edited version,
we printed the unedited version. A huge
apology to L Muthoni Wanyeki who put in
an incredible amount of effort writing and
re-working the commentary, and to Fatima
Jaffer who also put in a lot of work editing
the piece. Also, we have to apologize to the
Wanyeki and Pascasia Kabazaire because
the centrespread pieces were never proofread, leaving a number of errors. We're very,
very sorry.
On hilarious moments, our most hilarious moment the month before last came
when we heard REAL Women were fighting against the "cultural imperialism" of the
West/North—which was trying to force freedom of choice to have abortions on women
in the South. I think women of the South at
the Cairo conference on Population and
Development managed to ignore REAL
Women as much as possible during the ten
days in Cairo...but really, what a sweet picture. The Vaticanand REAL Womenascham-
pions of the Third World! We missing something?
To get back to immigration. ..In December last year, the-new Immigration minister
Marchi accused the previous Tory government of exploiting the facts about immigration for political gain and contributing to the
rise of anti-immigrant sentiment in Canada.
He made the comments following the leaking of a confidential document written in
1993 that found half of Canadians are intolerant of immigrants (of colour) and would
like to see more European immigration to
Canada (which half-Canadians?) He cited
forexample the Tory governments'manipulation of "certain situations" in order to
emphasize abuse of the immigration system
to deflect realities the Tories were not dealing with. Check out our story on page 3 for a
very strange (but not that unusual) journey
into The Twilight Zone, starring Sergio
Marchi.
Things we just had to share: Tlie Vancouver Sun ran a story last month on how the
Pope had to abandon his visit to New York
as well as his attendance at the Cairo conference on Population and Development in
August because of a broken leg. (We think
the Vatican did enough to subvert the agenda
of the conference without his help., but hey,
big surprise.) Anyway, the point of this little
recap is the newspaper ran the story with the
headline: "Ailing pope aborts visit to New
York," which we thought was hilarious.. .one
of those things thatmakeshavingasoftboard
to tack things on worthwhile.
Another share-worthy thing that actually came tc us through the mail was that
someone wrote "NAC speaks for me\" on
one envelope we received. We assume she's
countering the backlash stories out there
about NAC not speaking for "women" in
this country. What's even nicer is she's seems
to be doing it on all her mail, not to NAC
alone. Some of us at Kinesis are planning to
join her in her innovative campaign. If nothing else, she/we'll confuse the posties and
some of those receiving the mail...? (though,
we have to say, postal workers coming to
our door—a large number working the Vancouver East End beat are women—are wonderfully supportive anyway, and some have
ended up volunteering at Kinesis.)
It's just about October and the sun is still
shining in Vancouver. Here you have
it...another edition of Kinesis, with all the
"news about women that's not in the dailies."
Just in case you thought we didn't care
about what our dear readers think about
us..."We Do! We Do!" And we'd really like
to hear from you. If you have any comments
or suggestions about anything—the stories
we cover, the stories we don't cover, the
design...anything—then please write us a
letter or send us a fax (255-5511). We always
appreciate feedback from our readers.
This issue we had a number of women
volunteering for Kinesis for the very first
time. Welcome to Ann McGrath, Patricia
Fernandez, Carmen Benn, and Doris
Malejevac, who made their Kinesis zvriting
debuts this issue. If you want to be like them
and find out what it means to be write for a
feministnewspaper—come to our next writers' meeting on Tuesday, October 4, or call
Fatima at 255-5499.
And also welcome to our new production volunteers: Anik Hahn, and Kira
Schaffer. This issue, we were able to drag an
old Kinesis production volunteer—MicheHill,
Vancouver Status of Women's program co
ordinator—from her office down the hal!
(kicking and screaming) long enough to get
her to do a little bit of paste-up. Next issue,
we'll try and convince her to help us "burnish the flats." It's a really fun job!
If you have no idea what "burnishing
the flats" means and you really want to
know, (or if you know and want to tell us
what it means...) think about coming down
and helping out with production. Production for the November issue is from October
18-25. If you want more details, call Agnes at
255-5499.
And lastly Inside Kinesis, we wanted to
let you know that the Kinesis Editorial Board
is going on a retreat on October 15! Don't
think we're going on a retreat to get away
from Kinesis. We're really going to do serious work planning some longterm strategies for Kinesis. Marketingwillbea bigfocus
for us on this retreatalthough we are happy
to note that some women are discovering
Kinesis before we discover them. We'll keep
you up to date on any changes we make at
Kinesis in upcoming issues.
Well that's it for this edition of Inside
Kinesis. Have a good October.
We also owe an apology to Shree Mulay
and Agnes Huang for a mistake we made to
their conversation on the International Conference onPopulation and Development last
issue (page 9). In Huang's question concerning the declaration from the People's Perspectives on Population, a correction was
supposed to have been made adding the
phrase, "because it violates and contradicts
the basic principles of feminism" to thequote
at the end of the question, "there cannot be a
feminist population policy..." Instead the
phrase was tagged on to the end of the first
paragraph to Mulay's response, making her
^Thanks
Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round with
memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who became
members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in August and September:
Dora Brandes * Janet Calder * Margie Cogill * Gillian Creese * Barbara Curran * Katie
Davidman * Joanne Drake * Kathryn Ford * Kylie Goeldner * Percilla Groves * Heidi
Hendkenhaf * Amy Ho * Lorraine Kuchinka * Barbara Lebrasseur * Judy Lightwater *
Hilary Mason * Anne Miles * Lolani Moreau * Judi Piggott * Neil Power * Michele Pujol
* Joy Reeves * Nadine Rehnby * Ronalea Richards * Margot Rosenberg * Adrianne Ross
* Janet Shaw * Jeanne St. Pierre * Tandi Stone * Sheilah Thompson * Lisa Turner * Sharon
Van Volkingburgh * Sally White * Rita Wong
We would like to say a very special thank you to the following supporters who have
responded so generously to our annual spring fundraising appeal. The ongoing support of
VSW donors, as well as the support of many new donors, is crucial to the expansion of VSW's
vital services and programs in the face of continued government cuts to our funding. We are
very thankful to:
Margaret Coates * Clarissa Green * Heather Leighton * Karen Lewis * Edna Rolston
* Linda Schulz
Finally, we would like to thank the following funders whose generosity has allowed us
to complete the 1994 Edition of the Vancouver and Lower Mainland Single Mothers,'
Resource Guide:
The Law Foundation of B.C. * Legal Services Society * Ministry of Social Services,
Province of B.C. * Ministry of Women's Equality, Province of B.C. * Vancouver Foundation
Writers, writers, writers...
Kinesis needs you!
If you are interested in reporting on women's organizing,
on challenging the state and developing your skills as a
writer...
Come to our writers' meetings: Tuesday October 4 and
Tuesday November 1 at 7 pm at VSW, #301-1720 Grant
St. For info, call 255-5499.
OCTOBER 1994 News  Proposed changes in Immigration:  "Public perception" policies  by Fatima Jaffer  On October 27th, immigration minister  Sergio Marchi will table his 10-year plan for  immigration in the House of Commons. If  Marchi's plan becomes law, we could be in for  10 years of anti-woman, anti-poor, and anti-  people of colour immigration policies.  According to a report drafted by Marchi's  officials:  We can expect cuts to immigration by  50,000. Last year, immigration levels were  250,000.  At the same time, immigration officials  will actively solicit immigration from Europe,  especially business entrepreneurs. Says Marchi,  Europeans are no longer coming to Canada in  large numbers under the family class of immigrants.  We can expect cuts to the family class of  immigrants, many of whom come from third  world countries. As well, most women come  into Canada under this category;  We could see the cancellation of the Live-  in Caregivers Program (LCP), under which  domestic workers, mostly women from the  Philippines and the Caribbean, are allowed in  on a temporary basis to do live-in work, and  can apply for landed status after two years;  The Citizenship Act could be changed so  that children of refugees bom in Canada do  not automatically get Canadian citizenship.  This would violate the United Nations Convention on Refugees;  Client user fees could be charged for  English/French classes.  The 18-page report for Marchi says immigration cuts and changes in criteria for who  gets into Canada reflect "public opinion" and  cut costs. In a one-page summary to Marchi,  the report cites public perception that "the  immigration program is out of control."  But the report did not come after broad  public consultations on immigration. It was  conducted as part of the Liberal government's  cost-cutting "program reviews." Reaction to  the recommendations in the report and  Marchi's comments at the Ottawa meeting has  been swift and critical from anti-racist, women's, immigrant, refugee, domestic workers',  and other progressive organizations across the  country.  One of the criticisms focuses on the pretence at public consultation in the report's  formulation. Canada's largest women's organization says they were not invited to any  consultations until last month. The National  Action Committee on the Status of Women  (NAC) was among 200 guests invited to a  meeting in Ottawa with Marchi, billed as the  "final phase of public consultations" in his  eight-month review of immigration. However,  in a break during the meeting, Marchi spoke  with mainstream reporters about his plans,  including his decision to increase immigration  from Europe. One day later, the report with  similar recommendations was leaked to the  mainstream media.  "That shows the process was not a real  public consultation," says Fely Villasin of INTERCEDE, the Toronto Organization for Domestic Workers' Rights. Villasin says INTERCEDE had not been invited to any public consultations nor any domestic worker groups, as  far as they knew.  "The recommendations in this report are  pandering to the most backward elements in  this society," says Sunera Thobani, president  of NAC, who attended the meeting in Ottawa.  "You do not base 10 years of public policy on  public perception, nor do you violate the rights  of immigrants and refugees because of public  perception."  Thobani says NAC has written to Marchi  requesting an emergency meeting to ensure  that women's concerns are addressed before  Marchi tables legislation at the end of the  month. "Most women's, or for that matter,  immigrant and refugee women's organizations, were not consulted by Marchi."  Other criticisms focus on specific points  in the report. For women, the cuts to the  family class of immigrants are of particular  concern. "The majority of women, poor and  working class people, the ones who don't  have $250,000, coming into Canada come in  under the family class, and cutting this category will have a negative impact on women  coming here," says Thobani.  Thobani adds that it is a myth that Family  Class immigrants do not contribute to the  economy of this country, and that independent workers and business classes do. "Marchi  is essentially saying let's expand the immigration of rich businessmen, who have more than  a quarter of a million dollars, and who can  bring in their families. But poor and working  class immigrants cannot bring their families  In fact, there is no mechanism to ensure  that the money brought in by the business  class immigrants to Canada is invested in the  country. Last year, a number of cases were  brought to the media's attention. They pointed  to immigrants under this class who declared  the money in order to be accepted as landed  immigrants, but then invested the money in  other countries for a better return on their  investment.  By contrast, recent studies show that immigrants work harder, pay more taxes, use  social programs less, and that most immigrant women are out in the workplace within  three months of their arrival. As well, elderly  parents and grandparents, who come in under the family class, take care of the children,  and provide a support system for women  who go out and work.  "To define parents and grandparents as a  burden on the taxpayer is completely unacceptable," says Thobani. "It will also lead to is  the breakdown of immigrant families because  family members will not be let in. Yet they say  they are concerned about the disintegration of  family values. It's a contradiction."  It is not the only contradiction Marchi's  immigration plans make. Canada was a signatory to a UN declaration at the United  Nations Conference on Population and Development conference which said, "...all government's, particularly those of the receiving  country, must recognize the vital importance  of family reunification, and promote its integration into their national legislation in order  to ensure the protection of the unity of families of documented margins."  "Canada agreed to look at the family  reunification program at Cairo," says Shree  Mulay, who represented NAC and the Montreal South Asian Women's Centre at the Cairo  conference. "But whenl came back from Cairo,  he had done an about face, taking Canada  further away from a commitment to family  reunification."  Domestic workers were particularly  shocked at the report's urging that the LCP be  cut. In recommending the LCP be cut, the  report suggests domestic workers should not  be allowed to become landed immigrants because they "do not adjust well and the LCP is  not cost-effective."  The leaked document refers to a federal  survey that traced domestic workers five years  after they entered Canada. The study found  domestic workers had gone into work that  paid the same low wages, if not lower, than  they were making under the domestic workers program and LCP.  INTERCEDED Villasin thinks Immigration officials may be basing "ability to adjust"  on that study. "But we know that Canadian  women occupy the ten lowest occupations in  the workforce, mostly in the service sector.  Why are domestic workers being penalised  for being in that category? When they look for  work, they join the workforce, and women  are at the bottom."  "It's sexist discrimination of women's  work, and domestic workers are one class  of workers who are undervalued," says  Villasin. "Yet domestic workers enable men  and women to go out and work while their  children are cared for. This [proposal] discounts that contribution and we will definitely launch a campaign against it before it  is tabled in the House of Commons in late  October."  The Vancouver Committee for Domestic Workers and Caregivers (VCDWC) says  they will not be responding to the recom-  menda tion regarding LCP beca use they have  no intentions of defending a program that  is flawed. "There should be no need for a  special program that indentures the labour  of domestic workers," says Cenen Bagon of  the VCDWC. "Domestic workers are the  only workers whose work is in demand  who man only come into the country under  this one special program, not as landed  immigrants. It is clearly discriminatory."  Bagon says the real question is what  Marchi is going to replace the LCP with.  "Are they going to bring in the women as  landed immigrants? Are they going to cut  LCP and not respond to the demand for  domestic workers?" The report make no  mention of alternatives to the program.  Domestic workers could be looking at a  return to pre-1981 policy in Canada, where  Canada had a permanent pool of temporary domestic workers.  Criticism has also been directed at the  fact that the report fuels the "public perception" that Marchi claims the report is generated by. Dina Ladd, who represents the  International Ladies' Garment Workers  Union in the Toronto Coalition Against  Racism (TCAR) says TCAR members were  "expecting the worst [from the immigration review] becauseit's in keeping with the  ongoing escalation of the backlash against  immigrants and the poor in this country."  Ladd says the backlash has been fuelled  by media reports targeting members of the  Somali, Vietnamese, Latin American and  South Asian immigrant communities as  "welfare frauds," that indirectly have encouraged incidents such as the assaults on  Somalis by white neighbours at a housing  complex on Dixon Road in Toronto, as well  as violent attacks on recent immigrants from  Tamil. Ladd also cites the criminalization of  Black Caribbean immigrants, who are being targeted by Toronto police and the media.  "It is crucial that we focus on the attack  on the Black community in Toronto, as well  as the underlying reality of this backlash on  immigrants, which is, we have 20 percent  unemployment in this country," says  Ladd. "If we don't deal with the underlying reasons for the state of the economy,  we can't understand why they're targeting immigration and social programs."  The backlash lies behind the intent to  solicit immigration from Europe. But, says  Ladd, it was "still a shock to see [the  report] say upfront that we want more  Europeans to come to Canada. He's so  obviously pandering to the disinformation  campaign about immigrants, and ignoring the facts."  Many women say that scapegoating  immigrants for the state of the economy  by cuttingimmigrationof the poor, mostly  women, and mostly from the developing  world and therefore of colour, fits in with  the econom ic restructuring agenda of free  trade.  "The recommendations are based on  the notion that immigrants are the cause  of the economic problem, as well as 'the  problem' of social programs, not on the  correct fact that immigrants in fact contribute greatly to this economy," says  Villasin.  "It makes sense. The only things being freely traded across the borders right  now are the rich, money and resources.  An immigration policy that stop the rights  of some people to migrate freely, that  specifically attacks certain groups, fits in  with the North American Free Trade  Agreement (NAFTA), with the issue of  migration and cheap labour," says the  Vancouver Status of Women's Miche Hill.  "All these policy reviews are basically designed to promote hatred, divide  us even further, and have us fight over  cheap-labour jobs," agrees End Legislated  Poverty's Jean Swanson. "With the social  program cutbacks, they will ensure the  creation of a cheap labour pool right here  in Canada where citizens and immigrants  are being set up to compete for the same  low-paying jobs."  Many women agree it is crucial to  fight back against the right-wing agenda  of program reviews. Vancouver human  rightsactivistAlicia(Lisette)Barsallo,who  was recently released from detention in a  Peruvian jail for alleged human rights  activities against the Peruvian state, says  pressure has to be put on Marchi to stop  him from falling in with the Reform Party's anti-immigration stance. "The progressive forces need to mobilise, to form  coalitions, and push a progressive agenda  to bring Marchi back from his right-wing  position," says Barsallo. "In the end, some  little report of Marchi's should not be  allowed to undermine Canada's commitment to human rights."  Actions:  TheCommttteefor the Equality of Immigrantsand Canadians ishostinga benefit  on November 12 at Riley Park Community Centre, 50 Hast 30th St (at Ontario St).  Tentative guests include Liberal MPs Anna Terrana, NDP MP Svend Robinson, and  NAC president Sunera Thobani.  INTERCEDED postcard writing campaign protests cancellation of the Live-In  Caregivers Program without replacing it with acceptance of domestic workers as  landed immigrants. Write to: Sergio Marchi, Minister of Citizenship and immigration, Place du Portage Phase 1, 23rd floor, 50 Victoria St, Hull, Quebec Kl A ILL  For more information on actions against the proposed cancellation of the LCP, in  Toronto, call INTERCEDE at (416) 324-8751; in Vancouver, call the VCDWC at (604)  TCAR's campaign Solidarity, nut Scajiegoating protests the disinformation in the  mainstream media and the increased racist violence on the streets. TCAR's new  working group produces an informa tioral newspaper which hits Toronto's streets as  Kinesis goes to press. As part of its campaign, TCAR will hold a forum on the  criminalization of the Black community, the targeting of refugees, issues underlying  the racist backlash, such as the sta re of the econom y, restructuring, and free trade; and  workshops to devise strategies to deal with immigration proposals. For more  information, call Dina Ladd at (416) 977-1384.  OCTOBER 1994  KINESIS News  BC provincial task force on access to abortion/contraception:  Study of concerns  by Teresa McCarthy   Pro-choice groups are optimistic that  the BC government will act on many of the  recommendations made by the Provincial  Task Force on Access to Contraception and  Abortion Services, which released its report  in August.  "The Coalition is pleased that this government has finally acted on the concerns  that the clinics, women's groups, and the  BCCAC have been raising for years in regard to lack of access to abortion services  and the quality of care [by commissioning  this report]," says the BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics (BCCAC) Jennifer Whiteside.  "We certainly hope that this government  will stand strong in its commitment to providing abortion services."  BCCAC welcomes the recommendations made by the task force, says Whiteside,  because if no action is taken, the anti-choice  movement will "escalate harassment and  the level of violence to that in the US," where  three pro-choice doctors have been killed in  the last year by anti-choice protesters.  Whiteside says there has been a  "shift...[in anti-choice tactics]...from attacking property and buildings to harassing and  attacking people." She says the August 3rd  incident in which an Everywoman's Health  Centre staff member had a camera shoved  into her face by anti-abortion protester,  Gordon Watson [see Kinesis, Sept. 1994],  shows "how reluctant the courts are, how  reluctant the police have been, to protect the  facilities from this kind of harassment."  Whiteside points out that Watson  uses"identical rhetoric" to Michael Griffin  and Paul Hill, who have been charged with  the US murders, and she adds that there is a  definite link between the US and Canadian  anti-choice movements.  "Anywhere that the anti-choice can  identify that abortions are being done, there  is harassment," says Kim Zander, of  Everywoman's Health Centre Society, adding that she "hopes the BC government is  going to be as firm and as motivated to  protect women., [as the task force recommends]."  Last month in Ontario, the provincial  government, acting on behalf of abortion  providers, wonan interim injunction against  anti-choice picketting at three Toronto clinics, as well as at several doctors' homes and  offices. The injunction creates "no-go zones"  of 25 feet from doctors offices, 60 feet at  clinics, and 500 feet from doctors' homes. As  well, it bans anti-abortion signage at hospitals.  Although the Ontario ruling did not go  as far as pro-choice groups had hoped, Ontario Attorney-General Marion Boyd calls it  "an important recognition of women's privacy rights that will ensure women have  access toabortion services...[and] toapproach  clinics and doctors' offices without harassment and injury to themselves."  In British Columbia, injunction must be  sought by individual service providers and  doctors. Everywoman's Zander says, "We're  glad to see that the [Ontario] government  took the initiative to request an injunction to  protect abortion providers.  "It sends a really clear message that  anti-choice zealots and rabidly anti-women  individuals will not be able to interfere in  people's lives just because [these people] are  providinga medical service they don't agree  with."  BCCAC's Whiteside points out thatdeal-  ing with harassment is very expensive for  clinics, and that the government must address this.  "Ensuring clinics and facilities have  funds to collect the evidence needed to ensure that there is an enforcement of the  injunctions" is an ongoing problem, she says.  Harassment can also prevent the provision of abortion services in smaller communities through intimidation of potential providers. Anti-choice interference also affects  the quality of abortion services in many  hospitals, says Zander, because their interference—as in hospital board elections—  focuses attention on the question of whether  abortion will be provided, rather than how  they are provided.  Responding to the task force's findings  that half the abortions performed in BC are  done at three Vancouver clinics, Phyllis Chuly  of the provincial government's newly created Health Bureau says that, while the "demand [for abortion services is] more prevalent in Vancouver than anywhere else," this  is largely because the Vancouver area has  British Columbia's highest population concentration.  Everywoman's Zander points out that  there "needs to be healthier, holistic approach to reproductive choice and care,"  and that the "clinics specialize in a higher  quality way" than hospitals.  by Teresa McCarthy  Abortions inaccessible in  Rural BC  Half the abortions in British Columbia  are performed in three Vancouver clinics,  according to the Provincial Task Force Report on Access to Contraception and Abortion Services released in August. The task  force report, Realizing Choices, says  Everywoman's Health Centre, the Elizabeth Bagshaw clinic, and the Women's  Health Centre, all of which are in Vancou-  ; provide "comprehensive, non-judgemental services, pre and post-abortion  counselling, which includes contraceptive  counselling and first-trimester abortions  under local anesthetic...However, they are  not within reach of most women."  The report says abortions performed  at the clinics are based on US National  Abortion Federation standards, which the  task force recommends abortion-providing hospitals adopt. The task force found  that most hospitals "offer little or no counselling" and tha t the methods of anesthesia  and abortion were often inferior to those  used in the clinics.  Abortion is "not a technically difficult  service to provide," says Denise Werker, a  spokesperson for the task force, adding  that the quality of service in hospitals is  inferior "not so much in the technical aspect, but in the psycho-social aspect" of  delivery.  Werker says the task force was concerned that abortion be seen as "part of a  continuum of contraceptive choice" and  that they "did not want it to become segregated from reproductive health".  The report also points to population  concentrations; potential harassment and  lack of privacy for both users and providers; hospital abortion services that were  often inferior to that provided in free-standing clinics; and the provincial shortage of  trained staff and physicians as factors that  contributed to the unequal distribution of  abortion services.  The task force found that many Lower  Mainland and Fraser Valley "hospitals designated to pro vide abortions...are not servicing the needs of their catchment areas,'  while women across the province face in  adequate access to quality abortion services. The report calls on the Ministry of  Health to "ensure reproductive health, in  eluding contraception and abortion, are  equitably available in all regions and that  mechanisms exist to ensure that these services are sustained."  Harassment continues to be the largest barrier to equitable reproductive health  services in British Columbia. The task force  recommends "that the BC Attorney General launch a province-wide investigation  into the nature and extent of criminal har-  assmentof contraception and abortion pro-  vidersand tha the instruct theCrown council in writing to prosecute such offenses to  the full extent of the law."  Werker says "the powers-tha t-be have  to be seen as being interested in preventing" anti-abortion violence and harassment."  She points out that "the very fact that  the government mandated this task  force., .is a real affirmation of their will. ..[to  provide and improve abortion services]."  "We've always had some difficulty with  the way hospitals have dealt with abortion,"  says Zander.  She agrees with the task force recom-  menda Hon that trainingof physicians, nurses,  and other staff to provide services to the  standards used by the clinics will help improve the quality of British Columbia's abortion services.  The task force recommends that the  clinics be accredited as training sites, and  wants the government to implement regulations (such as allowing nurses to perform  simple, first trimester abortions) which could  improve quality and access.  Teresa McCarthy is a volunteer writer for  Kinesis.  Big Benefit for  Little Sisters Bookstore  7:30 pm. Thursday Oct 13  1965 Main 31  Vancouver  leadings/screenings/performances  *Kiss & TeirArcher Pechawis*  *Wayne Yung*Shani Mootoo*  *Emiiy f-aryna*Dennis Maracle*  *Karen Tuich!nsky*Rarsdcrn  Acts*Jay MacLaughhn*  all proceeds go to the  L!ttle Sister? Defense Fund  Publishers)  caii AiiOffe,  oi Delia ,  Sexual Assault  Trie most up-to-date information on  sexual assault: now to handle an assault,  prevention, we social context.  t>n>en Make You Angry?  lo be Part of an Older F<  BROOMSTICK  A Quarterly National Magazine  By For, & About Women Over Forty  1 Annual Subscription (US. Funds Only!  US. S15: Canada S20:  Overseas and Inslllullons S25:  JM        3543 18th St. *3 sliding scale available  *^* San Francisco. CA 94110 Sample Copy: $5.00  AJikA  Vancouver Pride Society  Notice of  ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING  Gordon. Neighbourhood House  1019 Broughton Street  2pm  Sunday, October 2, 1994  ELECTION  6 Board Positions for 2 year terms  1 Board Position for a 1 year term  GET INVOLVED !  BE A PART OF PRIDE f95  Memberships Available  for more info Call 684-2633  OCTOBER 1994 News  Mary Pitawanakwat:  Human Rights Win  by Agnes Huang  After a long and drawn out "war" with  the federal government, Mary Pitawanakwat  has finally been vindicated. On August 17,  the federal government agreed to pay  Pitawanakwat $200,000 in compensation for  their discriminatory decision to fire her in  1986.  Pitawanakwat'sbattleis the longest-running discrimination case involving a federal  employee. Her victory is a landmark in the  fight to end discrimination in the workplace,  says Sunera Thobani, president of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women (NAC).  "Although Mary could not be fully compensated for the pain and suffering she has  endured, the settlement is significant for victims of discrimination in the workplace in  that human rights tribunals will no longer be  able to blame the victim for the discrimination they suffered in the workplace," says  Thobani.  Pitawanakwat, an Ojibwa-Potawatomi,  started working for the Department of the  Secretary of State (SecState) in Regina inl979  as a social policy officer responsible for Native citizens' programs. During the time she  worked there, she was the only First Nations  person permanently on the Saskatchewan  SecState staff in social development.  In August 1985, Pitawanakwat filed a  complaint of sexual and racial harassment  with the Canadian Human Rights Commission (CHRC) against her employer. She complained that she was subject to excessive  monitoring by supervisors, racist and sexist  jokes and remarks, and that her supervisors  were finding fault with her work when there  was nothing wrong with her work.  In March 1986, before the CHRC had  even begun investigating her complaints of  harassment, she was fired. Her employer's  stated reason for her firing was "incompetency." But it was only after she had began to  complain about the racism and sexism at her  workplace, thather employers began to evaluate her job performance as "unsatisfactory."  Up to that point, all her evaluations had been  positive.  Pitawanakwat filed a complaint with the  Canadian HumanRights Commission charging that her firing was discriminatory on the  basis of sex and race. Neither the CHRC nor  the federal government were eager to see  Pitawanakwat's case reach the human rights  tribunal level.  Pitawanakwat had to go to the Federal  Court of Canada to get ask the federal court  to order the CHRC to set up a tribunal hearing. She had to go back to the federal court  when the Ministry of Justice tried to block the  hearing from taking place. It took over five  years after her firing before Pitawanakwat's  case made it to a human rights tribunal hearing.  In December 1992, the human rights tribunal handed down its decision. Its ruling  was only a partial victory for Mary  Pitawanakwat. The tribunal ruled that  SecState's claim that Pitawanakwat was "incompetent" was unfounded, and that the  firing was discriminatory. They ordered that  Pitawanakwat be re-instated to her job, but  ruled she should be offered a job outside of  Saskatchewan because there was too much  bitterness between the parties for her to be  employed in the province.  The tribunal also rejected  Pitawanakwat's claim of sex discrimination,  ruling that the basis of discrimination was  race. And finally, the tribunal held  Pitawanakwat partially responsible for creating the "poisoned work environment" and  awarded her financial compensation of two  "...human rights  tribunals will no longer  be able to  blame the victim  for the discrimination  they suffered  in the workplace."  - Sunera Thobani -  "Mary has waited eight years for this  'victory'. However the compensation seems  inadequate when one looks at the time  frame and suffering involved," says Janis  Walker, president of NWAC, the Native  Women's Association of Canada.  Even though Pitawanakwat has been  reinstated, her career had been put on hold  for eight years. Meanwhile, Pita wanakwat's  supervisors, who were found responsible  for her firing but never disciplined for discriminating against her, have continued  moving up the career ladder.  Several years ago, Pitawanakwat was  diagnosed as having cancer, which she says  was brought on by the stress from dealing  with her firing. "I've fought and I've  achieved my job back, but at a cost much  higher than anyone should be expected to  pay in this country," she says.  "Her couragegoing through all this  when she had only a little bit of support-is  an example for us as women and for other  equity groups," says PSAC's Turmel. "She  never gave up."  Women from across Canada paid tribute to Pitawanakwat, giving her a standing  ovation when she received the "Women of  Courage" award at the NAC annual general  meeting in June.  Mary Pitawanakwat's case has also  sparked renewed calls for reform to the  human rights legislation.Pitawanakwat says  that the federal government only has empty  rhetoric when it comes to ending discrimination against First Nations people and people of colour.  She notes the irony in her  firingPitawanakwat was fired on the same  day that then-prime minister Brian Mulroney  signed the International Proclamation of the  Second Decade for Action to Combat Racism and  Racial Discrimination. "Canada see itself as a  leader in human rightsnothing could be further from the truth when it comes to race,"  she says.  Agnes Huang is a Chinese feminist community activist and a regular contributor to  Kinesis.  years only, even though it had been six years  since her firing.  Mary Pitawanakwat continued her fight  against the federal government, appealing  the tribuna l's decision to the Federal Court of  Canada. In its decision in March 1993, the  federal court upheld the tribunal's assessment that Pitawanakwat's firing was due to  racism, but the court overtuned the tribunal's banishment of Pitawankwat to another  province.  The federal court said thatPitawanakwat  should be re-instated in a job in Regina at the  same level of the position from which she  was fired, and said that the amount of compensation should be increased. The court  directed the parties to resolve the financial  matter by either asking the human rights  tribunal (that ruled on Mary's case) to determine the amount, or negotiatinga settlement  between themselves. Pitawanakwat chose a  negotiated settlement.  The federal court ruling is important  because it holds the federal government  liable for discrimination against its employees. 'This is the first case where there has  been an acknowledgement that the government was discriminatory," says Nycole  Turmel, executive vice-president with the  Public Service Alliance of Canada (PSAC).  "It opened the door to show that there is  discrimination in the federal civil service."  This precedent-setting case would never  have happened if it hadn't been for the persistence of Pitawanakwat.  "My tenacity came from not wanting  my son or daughter to experience the depth  of racial hatred and discrimination that my  grandparents, parents and I faced," says  Pitawanakwat. "I wanted Brock and Robin  to be able to hold their heads high and not  think the government was right in saying  that their mother was incompetent."  The harassment and discrimination  Pitawanakwat has faced has resulted in incredible hardship on her and her family, her  career and her health.  Oppal Commission report on policing in BC:  Here at last  by Shannon e. Ash  The Oppal Commission on Policing in  British Columbia released its report on  September 15, over eight months past its  original deadline [see Kinesis, Mar. 1994].  TheCommission, formed inl992, held  hearings in communities across BC last  year. Women's groups were among those  who participated in thehearings [seeKinesis  June 1993]. Issues of concern included police harassment of prostitutes, immigrants,  First Nations women and women of colour, and police handling of women who  have been sexually assaulted.  The report makes 317 recommendations. Among those highlighted are:  • An independentombudsman should  be appointed to oversee how complaints  against the police are investigated.  •The use of force by police should be  regulated: chokeholds should be banned,  and it should be mandatory to report incidents where an officer points a gun, uses a  baton or pepper spray, takes part in a highspeed chase, and applies neck restraint or  uses a dog to arrest someone.  •The police force should reflect BC's  population, and thus should hire more  women, people of colour and First Nations  people.  •Community-based policing is supported.  Women's groups are beginning to review the recommendations; some have not  yet received a copy of the 700 page report.  More analysis will be forthcoming in the  next issue of Kinesis.  Meanwhile, Karen Spears, legal advocate at the Downtown Eastside Women's  Centre, says she is pleased with the recommendation of mandatory sensitivity training for police to help them better deal with  violence against women. However, she  doesn't think hiring more women as police  officers will have much effect if the system's  set-up and training remains the same.  The complaints process has been a concern for many citizens. Oppal has said that  the police have to stop "stonewalling" citizens when they make complaints. Police  often do not give explanations for their actions.  However, under Oppal's recommendation, the first level of complaints investigation would still be done by police. This  would be overseenby the independent commissioner, who, if the investigation appears  to be flawed, could appoint investigators to  re-investigate.  One major difficulty in implementing  the report's recommendations is that the  RCMP, which polices 52 percent of BC's  population, is a federal agency and not subject to provincial control. The RCMP's own  complaints system is not accountable, says  Oppal, who has described the RCMP as a  "top-heavy paramilitary organization."  Oppal has said that if the RCMP do not  respond to the recommendations, BC should  consider creating its own provincial police  force. However, Attorney-General Colin  Gableman has already rejected this option.  Shannon e. Ash is a regular writer for  Kinesis.  OCTOBER 1994 Movement Matters  listings information  Movement Matters is designed to be aj  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Mattersl  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may bej  edited for length. Deadline is the 18tN  of the month preceding publication.  by Carmen Benn  Women in Radio  and Televison  The Internationa l Association of Women  in Radio and Television (IAWRT) in cooperation with WoMedia Manila, is holding  their 26th conference in December in the  Philippines.  IAWRT, which was established in 1951,  is the oldest women's NGO focused on  women and the media, and holds United  Nations Economic and Social Commission  consultative status. Its members come from  more than 60 countries and, as such, has the  potential of influencing the attitudes of a  great part of the public as well as of decisionmakers from all over the world on issues  significant to women. Conferences are held  biennially, and have been hosted by broadcasting networks in such cities as Cologne,  Stockholm, Prague, and Washington DC.  This year's conference will be the first to be  held in Asia.  The theme of the conference is "Women,  Media, and the Changing Role of the Family  in the 21st Century," in keeping with the  United Nations' 1994 theme of "Year of the  Family." The subtheme of the conference is  "Media and Violence Against Women."  The conference will consist of plena ries,  workshops, and short training courses on  topics under the two themes, or related to  women and the media. It will also launch the  first IAWRT Television Awards, a competition of television programs by and about  women.  IAWRTisexpectingl50-200participants  from all the world's regions to attend the  conference. In particular, it is hoping to attract women producers, broadcast journalists and other media practitioners, especially  in light of the upcoming 1995 UN World  Conference on Women in September 1995 in  Bejing.  For more information, fax inquiries to  WoMedia Manila (63-2) 921-0955 or 911-  6239 or mail to 151-A Mahiyain Street,  Sikatuna Village, Quezon City, Metro Manila, Philippines 1101.  UK Feminist  Press turns 20  The United Kingdom's oldest feminist  publishing house, Onlywomen Press, is celebrating 20 years of publishing radical lesbian feminist fiction, poetry, and theory.  Onlywomen was founded in the 1970s  on the belief of its founders in the "revolutionary power of words." Lilian Mohin, a  founding member, says, "Back then, there  were no lesbian feminist presses...in this  country; very little feminism being published  anywhere in Britain. If you wanted something to happen, you went out and did it  yourself."  For Onlywomen, publishing is first and  foremost about politics. The idea was that  "We would be doing the feminist revolution  by writing and printing and publishing, and  we would be furthering it by the work we  were getting out," says Mohin.  In 1977, Onlywomen had organised the  first national conference for women in print  ing and publishing. It was held in north  London, at Rossi yn Lodge, a centre and  meeting place for a large number of feminist  groups. In 1979, after two years of planning  and only a year after they moved into their  first premises, Onlywomen Press published  Britain's first anthology of lesbian feminist  poetry, "One Foot on the Mountain."  As publishers, Onlywomen Press is distinctive, says Mohin, because while "many  other publishers publish serious feminist  books, brilliant literary work, interesting lesbian material, because the work appeals to  them, or to ma ke a profit,.. .our main concern  is to develop and sustain a lesbian feminist  culture. From the start we have organised  discussions, workshops, and lesbian feminist ethics and lesbian writing."  Because of their stated political intent,  Onlywomen Press are denied charitable status.  If you are interested in submitting poetry for the 1995 Margot Jane Memorial Poetry Prize, contact Onlywomen Press at 71  Great Russell Street, London, WC1B 3BN,  England.  Feminist Approaches  to Eating Disorders  A workshop, entitled "Feminist Approaches to Eating Disorders," will be held  on December 9th in Toronto. The workshop  will be led by Karin Jasper, who is in private  practice at the College Street Women's Centre for Health and Education and Counselling, co-author of Consuming Passions, and  an assistant professor of psychiatry at the  University of Toronto.  The workshop will look at how developmental challenges and gender role conflicts specific to girls and women in Western  society have contributed to the dramatic  increase in eating disorders among women  over the last few years. The cost of the workshop is $125. For information or to register,  contact Leading Edge Seminars, by phone at  (416) 964-1133 or by fax at (416) 964-7172.  Northern BC  Women's Resources  The Women's Resource Report is a report  on counselling and support services for  women living in Moricetown, Smithers and  Telkwa, and Fort Babine. The report was  prepared by Zoe Lambert and edited by Val  Napoleon. In addition to listing existing  services, the report includes recommendations for new and /or improved services.  The main objectives of the report are to  identify counselling and support services  available to women in the region; to identify  gaps, duplications, and barriers to access; to  investigate services in other communities;  and to find new strategies for providing  improved service.  Information for the report was compiled from numerous individual and group  interviews with women living in Fort Babine,  Moricetown/Wet'suwet'en, Smithers arid  Telkwa. As well, numerous resource people  and organizations were contacted, from  such places as Vancouver, Victoria, Comox,  Terrace, Gitwangak, Hazel ton, and Ottawa.  BC and federal government representatives  were also consulted.  The report finds that there are a lack of  counselling and support services available  and inconsistent service delivery in the Aboriginal communities of Moricetown and Fort  Babine. The report describes this lack as a  crisis situation.  As well, the report points out that Aboriginal women face barriers to accessing off-  reserve services due to a lack of Aboriginal  counsellors and culturally appropriate programming in non-First Nations agencies;  poor communication and referral patterns  between Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal  agencies; lack of transportation; and governmental jurisdictional boundaries. Service  gaps in Smithers include counselling for  battered women and counselling for children and youth who have survived sexual  abuse. The report goes on to cite services  available and to detail unmet needs of the  communities.  For copies of the report, contact Lisa  Aubrey at the Smithers Networking Centre,  at (604) 847-4798.  Update on  Thompson case  There are a number of new developments in the case of a Vancouver woman  who has been fighting concurrent criminal  cases in Ontario against her abusers—two  uncles, her mother and stepfather, and two  men for rape, [see Kinesis, Sep. 1993.]  Marie Thompson's trudge through the  legal system for redress and criminal prosecution of her abusers has developed, as she  terms it, into her own "Court Challenge  Program," launched through the mail.  Thompson has written letters to all 295 members of parliament as well as ministers responsible provincially in BC and Ontario,  providing information about her case. To  date, she has received responses from 40  percent of those contacted, 10 percent of  whom, says Thompson, are "actively involved." Some of the developments, as a  result of her letter-writing campaign are:  •Due to the negligence of the initial  investigating officers in Ontario, the Ontario  ComplaintsCommissioner is holding a public inquiry into their conduct, and are facing  a Human Rights complaint for their alleged  discrimination.  • A senior crown attorney is following  up on Thompson's allegations, employing  what is considered the top team of "specialists in multi-generational abuse" cases. The  work of this team led to the arrest of 60  people in a similar case involving another  women that covered 25 year period.  • After 11 months of gruelling work on  a case against her two rapists, the case was  closed due to a Charter of Rights technicality. No one informed Thompson. Upon her  discovery of the case's closure, she sent a  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  plea to the Attorney General in Ontario, and  the case is now being re-examined.  • A documentary video recording  Thompson's letter writing campaign, tentatively titled A Woman of Letters, is in the preplanning stages.  As well, Thompson has requested a  pardon of her Canada Student Loan default,  which bars her from applying for any future  student loans. There are indications that her  request may prove successful. Postcards  addressed to the justice minister, demanding hearings for all such appeals are being  prepared for distribution.  The Thompson campaign is requesting  help through: access to photocopiers, computers, and fax machines. As well, donations can be made to the Toronto Dominion  Bank account #97000-153691 to cover the  cost of mounting legal fees, travel costs not  paid by the Crown (ie, Thompson's partner's trip to the proceedings), and documentary expenses. At the close of the case, any  surplus monies will be given to the Positive  Women's Network in Vancouver, AIDS  Vancouver, and the Downtown Eastside  Women's Center.  To donate, for more information, or if  you have a similar story to tell (confidentiality guaranteed,) write to: Centre Point, Box  19563, Vancouver, BC, V5T 4E7.  Global Media  Monitoring Project  An international media monitoring  project has been launched following the  Women Empowering Communication conference held in Bangkok, Thailand, last February. Conference participants included in the  conference declaration an initiative that calls  for an international day of media monitoring by all countries of the world. On one  solidarity-building "ordinary day" in January 1995, women around the world will  ,monitor their news on mainstream TV, radio, and newspapers. The final report on the  action will be distributed at the UN World  Conference on Women in 1995 in Bejing.  The pilot test of the monitoring project  has already been completed in Argentina,  India, Japan, and the Netherlands, and information from these countries will be used  to finalize the monitoring kit for the actual  project.  The Canadian group, Media Watch has  taken on the coordination of the project in  Canada. If you would like to monitor the  news in January as a volunteer, contact:  Media Watch, Suite 204,517 WellingtonStreet  West, Toronto, Ontario, M5V 1G1, or call  #(416)408-2065 or fax#(416) 408-2069. If you  live in Vancouver and would like to pick up  a registration kit, call Kinesis at 255-5499.  CCEC Credit Union  LOCllflS available for..,  1 a well-deserved  vacation ^  » spring /*•  home renovations  • a car  or recreational vehicle  • reasonable rates  • flexible terms  • automatic deductions  • free life insurance on loans  • no pre-payment penalty  Try us first  OCTOBER 1994 What's News  by Lissa Geller  Feds take on  sex trade workers  Women, and sex trade workers in particular, are not impressed by recent federal  government proposa Is to crack down on street  prostitution.  The measures outlined by federal justice  minister Allan Rock last month include: allowing police to fingerprint and photograph  sex trade workers and their customers; impounding the cars of Johns; and imposing  mandatory five-year jail sentences for convicted pimps.  "Big deal," said one Vancouver woman,  who gave her name as Cyndi. "Not all of my  customers drive. Some walk and I've even  talked to guys on bikes. They can't stop people from talking to me and they can't stop me  from doing what I want."  The prospect of a five-year jail term  doesn't frighten pimps, she added. "They  just laugh when they hear that," she said.  " No one gets sea red by the government here."  Predictably, police and politicians welcomed Rock's announcement. "Those are the  things we've been saying we need all along,"  said Bill Openshaw of the Vancouver vice  squad. "We can't photograph and fingerprint hookers now, so we don't really know  who they are. Our hands are really tied in  dealing with therr."  In Canada, prostitution is legal, as long  as it happens through an "escort" agency.  The justice minister's proposals are aimed at  eliminating street prostitution. However, a  Supreme Court decision in Ontario, made  shortly after Rock announced his plans, says  that sex in a car parked in a parking lot does  not constitute an indecent act. The Supreme  Court refused to hear an appeal of an Ontario ruling acquitting a Hamilton-based  sex trade worker of committingan indecent  act for performing oral sex on a john in a car.  Another Vancouver-based sex trade  worker, who identified herself as Beth, said:  "They've been talking about making it  tougher for years, even before I started  doing this. When something else comes up,  they'll forget about it."  Alberta's new  sexual assault centre  A sexual assault centre is opening in  Calgary, thanks to the efforts of women's  groups and other organizations to secure  funding for a new feminist centre.  The old centre was closed down more  than a year ago, leaving Calgary without a  feminist sexual assaultcentre. Services were  then contracted out to other agencies by the  flinders. There was concern that services  would stay fragmented and unrelated to  feminist action to end violence.  A group of organizations, mainly women's groups, came together in a committee  to set criteria, organize public consultations, meet with the funders, and eventually, succeeded in getting the main funders,  the United Way and the City of Calgary, to  agree to using the feminist criteria, and put  out a joint call for proposals. As well, members of the committee managed to ensure  some representation on the review committee to look at the proposals. The successful  proposal, called CASA (Calgary Communities Against Sexual Abuse) plans to open  the centre by November 1st.  The new centre is a real victory for  women in Alberta, as services will be housed  The Vancouver Pride Society  — the parade people ~  would like to thank the following businesses and organizations which  helped make your parade possible. Please support them!  Pride Partners  Denman Station^ Dollar King T Labatt's ▼ MANTALK  Molson's T Riley Cafe ▼ Royal Hotel T Steele Works  Penman Street  Balloon Action ▼ Bread Garden T Clearwater Cafe  Forever Plaid Partners ▼ Slice of Gourmet  Davie Street  Antix T Baba's Baking Company T Celebrities Cabaret  D & R Clothing T Deserving Thyme ▼ Gay & Lesbian Centre  Hamburger Mary's T la di da ▼ Little Sisters Bookstore  Numbers Cabaret Y O-tooz ▼ Parkhill Hotel ▼ Rocks Cafe  Second Suit T Shoppers Drug Mart T Strutters Hair Studio  Sunshine Tanning T   Super Valu #48 T Takis Taverna  Downtown  Bonanza Books ▼ Club Vancouver ▼ Colibri Bed & Breakfast  David Gordon Shoes T Denman Fitness Co.YDufferin Hotel  14+ Consignment Clothing ▼ Habitek T Heritage Hotel  Odyssey T Shaggy Horse ▼ Vancouver Women's Bookstore  West End Guest House ▼ Women In View  Commerical Drive /Eastside  Allium Fine Foods T Book Mantel T CCEC Credit Union  Chuck & Vicky's Grocer T Eastend Food Co-op T Highlife Records  Octopus Books ▼ Vancouver Lesbian Connection  Greater Vancouver  Blue Ewe Bed & Breakfast V Gazebo Connection  IntT Lesbian Week T Lavish Productions ▼ Lexicon Magazine  Rob Joyce T Smith & Hughes Y Wild West Design  Special Friends  684-PLAY T Alan Fetherstonhaugh  BCPWA T Bill Coleman T Daniel Collins  Dogwood Monarchist Society V Easter T Gordon Hewitt  Jane Siberry ▼ Josephine's T Pat Rowley   T Quick Nickel  Robert Ivers ▼ Women's Counselling Services  together, and the centre will combine counselling, education and advocacy to end violence.  Last month, the Calgary Birth Control  Association hosted a shower for CASA,  which gathered donations of office equipment, supplies, art work, and volunteers. A  working board is extremely active in planning service delivery. Hiring is under way.  CASA welcomes support and input:  CASA, P.O. Box 61044, Kensington Post Office, Calgary, Alberta, T2N 4S6.  Funding cut for anti-  homophobia schools  Lesbian and gay rights activists are outraged by a US Senate decision to cut off  federal funding to any public school that  encourages or supports homosexuality "as a  positive lifestyle alternative."  The measure, approved in August, also  prohibits schools from referring a student to  "counselling or other services...[or] an organization that affirms a homosexual lifestyle."  One of the two Republican senators  who sponsored the bill said he was prompted  by material students brought home from  school—including AIDS education information and a book for younger children about  a lesbian couple titled Heather Has Two  Mommies—which he found "graphic and  disgusting."  "This legislation is nothing but a death  sentence for gay youth," said Al Kielwasser,  spokesperson for an educational equity  project sponsored by San Francisco's Gay  and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation.  "The question now is whether [US president] Bill Clinton will veto this hateful and  ignorant legislation, or whether he will carry  out the death sentence."  Tax Refund  The federal government has refunded a  Sa ska toon woman al most $2,500 following a  court ruling in her favour. In a case similar to  the landmark Thibaudeau case—which  would force the federal government to stop  taxing a woman's child support payments  as income—Irene Fisher received her cheque  from the government last monthafter a court  ruled it was unconstitutional for Revenue  Canada to tax her child support payments.  Fisher, who is the single parent of two  teenagers, is elated with the refund. "To us,  $2,500 is a mega amount of money. There's  so much the kids have needed for so long,  including a visit to the dentist."  Revenue Canada insists the refund does  not mark any changes in their current policy,  which taxes people who receive child support (most of whom are women) while giv-  barbara findlay  B.A. M.A. LIB  is delighted to announce  that she is now practising 1  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St  Vancouver  phone 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of  legal ser.'ices to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations ere without charge.  ing those who pay them a tax deduction  (mostly men.) "It does not constitute any  admission of any kind by the government.  It's merely an administrative act of law,"  says a Revenue Canada spokesperson.  Nonetheless, this case marks the second  time thatth,e federal government's child support policy hasbeen successfully challenged.  Last year, in a landmark ruling, the Federal  Court of Appeal found that the Income Tax  Act discriminated against Suzanne  Thibaudeau, which forced Revenue Canada  to stop taxing her support payments. However, the federal government has yet to  universalize these changes and is currently  appealing both the Thibaudeau and the Fisher  rulings.  Meanwhile, the government allows people paying child support, mostly men, to  deduct the payments from their income tax.  This measure was initially intended to encourage men to make their payments although more than 80 percent of men still  renege.  Seizure of Little  Sister's books...again  A biography of Noel Coward, an exchange of letters between British poets Byron and Shelley, and a children's book titled  Belinda's Bouquet about girls' body imageare  among the two shipments of books bound  for Little Sister's which were seized by  Canada Customs officials in August.  Janine Fuller, who manages the lesbian  and gay bookstore in Vancouver, says this  seizure is particularly galling. "Most of the  books have no sexual content and a civil  liberties trial to determine whether the seizures are constitutional is only months  away."  To Fuller and other members of the gay  community, the latest seizure is a clear attempt on the part of the government to  harass the bookstore. "Customs appears to  be seizing books solely on the basis that they  are addressed to Little Sister's," says Fuller.  Some of the seized books are freely available  in other bookstores on the Lower Mainland  while some, including Pat Califia's Macho  Sluts, have already passed adjudication by  Customs. "This is the fifth time they have  seized [Macho Sluts.] We've gone to the highest level and it is considered admissible.  There's no reason why we should have to  keep going through this kind of harassment."  Little Sister's and the BC Civil Liberties  Union filed suit against Canada Customs in  1990 asking the BC Supreme Court to agree  that the book seizures constitute an infringement on their rights to freedom of thought  and expression under the Canadian Charter  of Rights and Freedoms. The court date has  been postponed several times, mostly at the  request of government lawyers, and is currently set for October.  MUNRO • PARFITT  LAWYE R S  quality legal services in a  woman friendly atmosphere  labour/employment,  human rights,  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  OCTOBER 1994 Feature  Northern Irish nationalist women:  25 years of resistance  by E. Mullan   The nationalist communities in the North  of Ireland marked 25 years of resistance to British occupation this August. Mary Nelis, Kate  Marley, and Marie Mulholland, Northern nationalist women, spoke recently at a meeting in  Galway, in the Republic of Ireland. A report of  their talks are given below. Next month Kinesis  looks at the peace process in Ireland.  Dramatic change is taking place in Ireland. On August 31, the Irish Republican  Army stated it would stop its military campaign to end the British presence in Ireland.  In the cease-fire announcement the IRA said  "we believe that an opportunity to create a  just and lasting settlement has been created."  The cease fire is not an end to the war in  the North. British military harassment of  nationalists may have eased but the troops  have yet to go home. Far from halting their  activities, loyalist paramilitaries threaten to  expand their campaign of terror in the Irish  Republic to the south. The cease-fire is one  step in a peace process that started years ago,  and it has a long road ahead.  This past summer marked 25 years since  the deployment of British troops in the North  of Ireland. A nation-wide campaign called  "Time for Peace—Time to Go" marked the  anniversary with a series of events, pressing  home the point that a British withdrawal  from Ireland is central to any peace process.  Northern nationalist women speak out  One week before the cease-fire, people  pack into a meeting room in the Imperial  Hotel in Galway, a city on the west coast of  Ireland. They have come to hear women  from nationalist areas of Belfast and Derry  talk about their experiences under British  occupation.  The meeting's organizers, part of the  "Time for Peace—Time to Go campaign,"  are pleased with the turnout. One of effects  Df the partition of Ireland is that people in the  South can feel far removed from the "troubles" in the North. This meeting is part of an  effort to begin to break down the artificial  divisions created by the border. Those present  heard first-hand accounts of what the last 25  years has meant for women living on the  frontline.  Mary Nells  Mary Nelis is a Sinn Fein councillor  from Derry. Nelis' story is a reflection of the  changes thathave takenplaceover the last 25  years in the lives of Northern nationalist  women. She says these women's lives "have  been a form of war, by being born into a state  from whichnationalistsare totally excluded."  They are doubly excluded by the institutions  of the Catholic church which have no place  for them as women, she adds.  Before the civil rights movement, Nelis  says she passively accepted the role set out  for her as a working class Catholic woman.  In the late 1960's, inspired by the Black  civil rights movement in America, northern  nationalists took to the streets to demand  reforms. The Northern Irish state, which  was created with the partition of Ireland in  1922, was built around discriminationagainst  nationalists/Catholics. Theelectoral rigging  of local councils meant that in a city like  Derry, where nationalists outnumbered unionists by 36,000 to 18,000, unionists could  still hold 12 out of 20 seats on the local  council. (Unionists support a union with  Britain and are primarily Protestants.)  Nelis describes how the civil rights  movement demanded universal franchise in  local electionsand the redrawingof electoral  boundaries, an end to discrimination in em-  ployment and housing allocation, the removal of sweeping police powers, and the  disbanding of the sectarian police force, the  B-Specials.  The Northern Irish state did not produce these reforms, and the civil rights movement met with greater and greater repression. In August 1969, the B-Specials and the  Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC)—Northern Irish police—attacked a national ghetto  in Derry called the Bogside. Local people  barracaded their community and successfully defended themselves in what came to  be known as the "Battle of the Bogside."  Nelis says one of the first blows struck  for women's liberation in the North was  during the Battle of the Bogside "when I saw  rows of women lined up filling milk bottles  " NEXT Tlfe cAH B B£ THE...      |  eRiriSlf  SOLbM "  which had been liberated from a local dairy.  They stood there reading a recipe of how to  make Molotov cocktails. Before that they  had only ever filled bottles with holy water."  In Derry and in Belfast, wherehundreds  of Catholic families were burned out of their  homes, British troops were deployed on the  streets. At first they were welcomed by many  na tionalists. When reforms still did not come,  and the army increasingly acted against the  nationalist community, the mood changed.  People moved from seeking reform to demanding an end to British rule.  On August 9, 1971 the British government introduced internment and hundreds  of nationalists were arrested and held without trial. Nelis describes how, after internment, "the civil rights movement tried to  hold the centre in a non-violent way."  The civil rights movement called an  anti-internment demonstration for Sunday,  January 30, 1972. British troops repeatedly  fired on the march and 13 people were killed.  "Not only did they murder people on Bloody  Sunday but they murdered the non-violent  civil rights movement as well," says Nelis.  In 1976 one of her sons was arrested and  ended up in the H-blocks of Long Kesh  prison. She would eventually have three  sons in the H-blocks. Nelis became a driving  force in the Relatives Action Committee,  formed to campaign against the appalling  situation in the prisons, which culminated in  the 1981 hunger strike by republican prisoners. Ten hunger strikers died. "The hunger  strike was a turning point in Irish history,"  says Nelis.  The aftermath of the hunger strike saw  thedevelopmentofSinnFein'selectoralstrat-  egy and the strengthening of its base in the  nationalist working class. (Sinn Fein is the  republican political party.) Like many other  Northern nationalists, Mary Nelishas moved  over the past 25 years from asking for reforms todemandingan end toa state founded  on discrimination.  "Keeping the peace equals keeping the  status quo. Making peace means being actively involved in changing the nature of the  state," she says. "I can tell you the British are  leaving. That means nothing. When they go  the real struggle begins."  Kate Marley  Kate Marley, who comes from the besieged nationalist community of Ardoyne in  North Belfast, spoke of the years she spent,  visiting her husband during his time as a  prisoner in Long Kesh prison. Now she visits one of her sons in the Kesh. "It's really  hard to bring up a family in these circumstances," she says.  "Keeping the peace  equals keeping  the status quo.  Making peace means  being actively involved  in changing  the nature of the state."  - Mary Nelis -  As a republican family, the Marleys  have faced constant harassment from the  Royal Ulster Constabulary and the British  army. When Maf ley was eight months pregnant with her youngest son, she was pushed  over the top of a chair by British soldiers  during one of many army raids on her home.  She says she had seven British soldiers  screaming in her face, while her four children were held under house arrest in another room.  Marley describes how in 1987, three  weeks after the birth of her youngest son, her  husband Larry was shot to death in front of  her by loyalists. The ordeal did not end  there. The family was under seige by the  RUC for four days before Kate Marley was  able to take her husband's coffin from the  house to be buried.  The harassment did not end with her  husband's death. The RUC and the army are  at her door constantly. Last year the RUC,  backed by British soldiers, arrested Marley  and took her off in an army jeep. She was  eventually charged with tampering withher  electricity meter. Seven months later the RUC  closed the case due to lack of evidence.  Marie Mulholland  Marie Mulholland also comes from a  small nationalist enclave in North Belfast  called the New Lodge Road. She says that  "both the New Lodge and Ardoyne have a  history of severe sectarian attacks" because  they are "pockets of nationalist streets in  large loyalist confines."  Mulholland tells the audience what  those attacks are like: in 1976 a couple one  street over, both 21 years of age, and their six  month old baby were burned to death in  their home in a petrol bomb attack.  Mulholland says as a result, "my mother  basically had a nervous breakdown."  She says she could give a long litany of  horror stories like this, but she wants to talk  about where to go from here." After 25 years  of just trying to survive, we have to live for  the vision again," she says.  In terms of the current peace process,  Mulholland stresses that the backbone of the  struggle in the North is women. Without  women's strength, the struggle could not  have been sustained for 25 years.  "We have none of us any assurance that  when we get a united Ireland, women will  get their freedom," she says. Irish people  from North and South need to build "alliances of the dispossessed" to guarantee human rights and civil liberties for everyone on  this island.  Glimpses of that vision can be seen in  the work Mulhol land has done with women  from both republican and loyalist communities in Belfast. Three women's centres from  different areas of the city applied for a small  government grant. The Downtown and the  Shankill Road women's centres got funding  but the Falls Road women's centre was refused on the grounds it was a "republican  front."  The women from the Shankill Road, a  staunchly loyalist area, saw that the programs offered by the Falls centre were the  same as in theirs. "The Shankill women  turned round to the Falls women and said  'this isn't on. This just isn't on'," says  Mulholland.  Then, in what Mulholland calls one of  the most courageous things she's seen done  in 15 years of community work, the Shankill  women called a press conference to demand  funding for the Falls women's centre, and  they held it on the Falls Road. The Falls  women's centre got its funding.  Out of these events the Women Solidarity Network was born, an umbrella group  which Mulholland says "does not claim to  supress differences in order to work together.  We accept differences."  She says the Shankill centre has been  holding Irish language classes for the last  two years and this fall will offer an Irish  history class. These are radical acts in a  loyalist community, which does not see itself as Irish.  She says these are small movements,  and not without risk. "It is much too dangerous for these women to speak on a platform  like this," says Mulholland.  Fighting for a new Ireland  After the meeting, a group of us go  downstairs to the hotel bar for a drink. Mary  Nelis is asked what it's like being a woman  and a Sinn Fein councillor. She laughs and  says, "It may be the only party in the world  where when you're elected you get a bouquet of roses and a flack jacket."  Republican activists like Nelis are under threat of loyalist assassination. Increasingly, women have been the targets of death  squads, just for being Catholic, or thought to  be Catholic. (Recent killings include a woman  seven-months pregnant shot dead in front of  her five children, a pensioner, and a Protestant woman who was tortured and killed  because she was thought to be a Catholic.)  Although the Protestant paramilitaries  have always claimed their violence is a reaction to IRA violence, they have refused to  halt their campaign despite the cease-fire.  Despite threats and intimidation, Nationalist women continue to fight for a new  Ireland where their rights are recognized.  Their strengthanddeterminationmeans that  their voices will be heard.  E. Mullan recently returned from Ireland and  often writes about news from Ireland for  Kinesis.  KINESIS  OCTOBER 1994 Feature  Alberta's economic and social restructuring:  De-Kleining  Alberta  by Anne McGrath  Alberta's premier Ralph Klein has been  presented to the Canadian public as a hero by  the business world and the major media. He  is credited with being tough, shrewd and  unafraid to make difficult decisions. He has  been feted in business circles from Bay Street  to Wall Street and featured on the cover of  several Canadian magazines and newspapers. His philosophy has been to hit 'em  hard, hit 'em fast and don't blink.  Under Klein's premiership, Alberta has  become the nation's leader in a radical experiment in reducing the role of the state. In  essence, Alberta is defining what may well  become the new terms of governance in  Canada.  The 1993 Deficit Elimination Act commits the Alberta government to eliminating  the $2.4 billion provincial deficit within four  years. In this first year, the impact has been  devastating; clearly, Klein's four-year-period  will result in a complete economic and social  restructuring of Alberta.  With the encouragement and support of  Reform Party MPs who represent Alberta in  the federal parliament, the Alberta government has determined it can eliminate the  deficit, without increasing revenues, by instituting massive spending cuts. These cuts include:  • a $238 million (12.4 percent) cut in  education  • a $749 million (18 percent) cut in health  care  • a $206 million (15.8 percent) cut in  advanced education and career development  • a $328 million (18.3 percent) cut in  family and social services  • a $121 million (30 percent) cut in environmental protection  • a $87.9 million (48 percent) cut in  municipal assistance  The speed with which the cuts are implemented and the depth of the cuts have left  many of us reeling and it makes it difficult to  absorb the impact and rally opposition. The  relentlessness and the viciousness has left  many of us gasping.  When thousands of high school students  across the province walked outoftheirclasses  in protest last September, it was a breath of  fresh air to witness such honest outrage at  the dismantling of public education. The  response of the government was brutal. The  premier threatened to invoke truancy legis-  schools have no resource teachers for special-needs children.  Thecuts to health care have left Edmonton with one less hospital, and two hospitals  in Calgary areclosed.Theobvious life-threatening human crises that arise from the clos-  ingof hospita Is and the closing down of beds  in the remaining hospitals have been dismissed by the premier as publicity stunts.  There will be no hospital service in downtown Calgary after the Fall. And this is just  the first year of this four-year deficit cutting  program.  The people most affected are those who  can least afford any decline in services. In the  past year, one-third of those who rely on  social assistance were cut off completely.  Recipients of special disability pensions, such  as the Assured Income for the Severely  Handicapped (AISH), are being reviewed  and cut backor cutoff. There are no alternate  sources for income for those cut off from  lation against the parents of the students,  including jail time and $500 fines.  ECS (or kindergarten) has been cut in  half and parents are expected to pay about  $600 to send children to ECS this year.  English as a Second Language classes have  been scaled back drastically, and many  Labour/Le Travail  Journal of Canadian Labour Studies  Labour/Le Travail is the official publication of the Canadian Committee on  Labour History. Since it began publishing in 1976, it has carried many  important articles in the field of working-class history, industrial sociology,  labour economics, and labour relations. While the supply lasts, new subscribers may purchase sets of the journal at a special bargain rate of $250.00  (28 issues, 9082, reg. $338).  Subscription rates (outside Canada): Individual $20.00 ($25.00 US); Institutional $25.00 ($30.00 US); Student/Retired/Unemployed $15.00 ($20.00 US).  MasterCard accepted ormake cheque payable to: Canadian Committeeon Labour History,  History Department, Memorial University, St. John's, Newfoundland, Canada, A1C 5S7  Articles are abstracted and indexed: America: History and Life; Alternative Press Index; Arts and Humanities Citation IndexTM; Canadian Magazine  Index; Canadian Periodical Index; Current Contents/Arts and Humanities;  Historical Abstracts; Human Resource Abstracts; PAIS Bulletin; PAIS  Foreign Language Index; Sage Public Administration Abstracts.  social services. The non-profit community  agencies that used to fill some of the gap  between government programs were cut 15  percent last year and expect a similar cut this  year after years of bare-bones budgets.  Besides severe reductions in social services, unions estimate that the deficit-cutting  programs will eliminate hundreds of thousands of jobs. In the health care field alone,  there will be an estimated 50,000 jobs lost.  All public employees, including teachers  and health care workers, are also talking 5  percent wage rollbacks. Labour legislation is  being changed to reduce the role of unions  and their ability to organize and bargain.  Restructuring in Alberta extends beyond these devastating cuts in social services. Privatization has reached fever pitch  and the government is eager to sell off any  and all assets to the private sector. All liquor  storesha ve been privatized. Telephone service and some health care are now private and  there are plans to privatize jails and public  utilities. Besides the elimination of unionized jobs and the deterioration of services,  privatization has other implications. In the  case of the liquor stores for example, the  unionized workers lost their jobs and were  replaced by low wage workers, the prices of  beer, wine, and liquor increased and the  atmosphere and decor in many of the stores  became more threatening, more racist and  blatantly sexist.  As is often the case with severe economic measures, some groups are being  singled out as scapegoats. Efforts to disband  the Alberta Human Rights Commission have  directed hatred against gays, lesbians, immigrants, people of colour, and people with  disabilities. Young people have been identified by many politicians as another group  responsible for social unrest, and there is an  increasing level of hysteria about youth crime  and gangs. The emphasis on gangs has the  effect of targetting both young people and  immigrants. The premier has been vocal in  his support for capital punishment and has  singled out young offenders as candidates  for hanging. At the same time, gun owners,  especially in southern Alberta, are organizing to oppose any tightening of gun control  meansures.  Fighting back  Opposition to the restructuring is increasing as Albertans begin to recognize that  it will widen the chasm between rich and  poor and hurt groups such as women and  children. But so far, the opposition has not  been strong enough or united enough to  Privatization  has reached fever pitch  and the government  is eager to sell off  any and all assets  to the private sector.  seriously lessen support for Premier Klein.  Several unions and community groupshave  begun meeting to try to form a Common  Front Against the Cuts and to explore alternatives. Community Action Teams (CATs)  are being formed across the province to  educate people, confront the politicians and  work together in a united way that breaks  down the separations between all the differ-  entgroupsbeingaffected.ManyoftheCATs  are using a game developed by the Common  Front called Politicians Pursuit to meet with  their local MLAs. The launch of the Common Front is scheduled for November 1st  under the theme "Defend the Rose."  The national media have concentrated  on the Klein image and wondered whether  or not he can do it. There has been little or no  national attention paid to the depth and  impact of the cuts and the lives of those  affected. It is critical that people from other  provinces look beyond the images of Klein  and the shallow messages and realize that  Alberta is being used as a model. Because if  the answer to the question "Can he do it?" is  "Yes," then other premiers will be anxious to  follow the path. The Communications Plan  for the much delayed federal Social Policy  Review makes mention of the Alberta experience and notes that the reactions of  Albertans to the cuts will be instrumental in  determining how they handle the federal  cuts to social programs.  There is growing recognition within Alberta that united action is necessary if we are  going to have any impact on this government's multi-pronged, deep and rapid attack on the programs we have built. The  Reform agenda that is trampling through  Alberta will have to meet with growing  opposition that increases in skill and unity.  Support from people from the other provinces will be critical to the success of the  resistance in Alberta and will help to stem  the tide from ravaging the rest of the country-    *   Anne McGrath is a Calgary-based feminist  activist, the Prairies Regional Coordinator for  Oxfam Canada, and a participant in the  Common Front, which is organizing against  the Klein cutbacks.  OCTOBER 1994 Feature  Interview with Yuri Kochiyama:  A contagious movement  as told to Agnes Huang  Yu ri Kochiyama has been a political activis t  in the United States for over 30 years. She has  worked with the Black liberation movement, the  struggle for Puerto Rican independence, the  Asian American activist movement, and against  the incarceration of political prisoners in the US;  During the 1960s, Kochiyama worked closely  with Malcolm X and the Black Panther Party.  Currently, Kochiyama is actively involved in  campaigns supporting two Asian American prisoners in the US—DavidWongandYu Kikimura.  Yuri Kochiyama was in Vancouver for the  first time in Jidy toparticipate in the 18th Powell  Street Festival, an annual celebration of Japanese-Canadian arts, culture and performance.  Agnes Huang:Yuri, inPassion For Justice,  the documentary about your work as an  activist (directed and produced by Rea Tajiri  in 1993), you stated that, although you had  been aware of racism when you were in your  twenties and living in the Southern US, you  were not politically active. How did you  come to be political, to become an activist?  Yuri Kochiyama: It took a long time.  When I was [in my twenties,] I was apolitical. I was so [consumed] with this whole red,  white and blue Americanism, that I didn't  see all the wrongs that America was doing to  peoples of colour. In fact, I didn't even know  anything about the history of Africans who  were brought here as slaves. I didn't know  anything about the Chinese and the building  of the railroad, orhowChicanoswere treated  and [how their] land was taken away. I  didn't know anything about Asians in general. And although I went through being  evacuated, uprooted and incarcerated during World War II, it took until [1960, when]  I was 40 years old and we moved to Harlem  [to become politicised.]  Huang: What were some of the influences that encouraged you to be an activist?  Kochiyama: Before going to Harlem, I  met one political leader. That was the well  known Daisy Bates, who was the president  of NAACP (National Association for the  Advancement of Colored People). [In 1956,]  Bates led the nine Little Rock children in  desegregating Central High School [in Arkansas, through community sit-ins]. So in  1956,Ikeptmyeyesonthepaperandreadall  the things that were happening in the South.  I was a little bit aware, but that doesn't mean  that I was going into activism.  It wasn't until I went to Harlem, joined  a civil rights group—a very middle-of-the-  road civil rights group called Harlem Parents Committee—that I became politically  aware. And then, because our family didn't  know anything about Black history, we enrolled the whole family in the Freedom  School, which coincidentally was almost  across the street from where we lived. Back  then, the issues were everything from getting [street] lights on every corner to having  the sanitation department pick up the garbage in Harlem, which they weren't doing  regularly.  I think the major [political action] was  in 1963, [when there was] a citywide boycott  [in the struggle] for quality education.  Huang: As a young Chinese-Canadian  woman myself working here in Canada as a  political activist in the 1990s, I still have only  a cursory knowledge about the history of  Asian-Canadian or Asian-American activism. Can you talk a bit about Asian American activism—when it began, how it has  grown, and what the movement is about  today?  Kochiyama: Well, I think the Asian  American movement began with the fight  for ethnic studies [in colleges and universities] in 1968 and 1969 and, simultaneously,  with the fight against the Vietnam war. Peoples of colour worked together back then  and it was really a wonderful feeling to feel  [our] commonality.  As far as Asian Americans [activism  today], I think what's good is you see so  many new Asian American faces, all these  new young people. There's an organization  called CAAV (the Committee Against Anti-  Asian Violence) in New York, [which] has  been monitoring all the Asians who have  been victims of violence. CAAV has been  able to really attract a wide range of young  Asians...who have become so dedicated. It's  really good to see this kind of thing happening. We need it.  where people began thinking just of themselves because, economically, things were  getting tougher, rents were going up, college  tuition was getting higher. All these things  make it harder for students to maintain some  kind of activeness in the struggle.  Huang: Could you talk a bit about  women in the movement. In most progressive and liberation movements, it is usually  men who are highlighted as the "leaders" of  the movements. Yet we know women have  also always been at the forefront of most  movements and do a lot of the work. Who  would you say are the women who are and  have been the leaders in the progressive  movements?  Yuri Kochiyama  Huang: How do you see political activism being different in the 90s from that in the  60s?  Kochiyama: There's a different aspect  [today]. The atmosphere has changed. There  are many reasons for this. A lot of it has to do  with how the government felt they had to  divide all of us...I don't think communities  of colour work together as we did in the late  60s and early 70s. There was a time where we  all supported the Black Panther Party, the  Young Lords, Wounded Knee, political prisoners in general. It's not happening like that  so much now.  There is polarization. [The uprising] in  Los Angeles in 1992 [brought to the surface  that] there were all kinds of negative feelings  betweencommunitiesof colour, feelings that  we really do not understand each other.  There's not the kind of interaction and dialogue among peoples [of colour]. [With]  things like the heavy immigration from Asia,  there were people who felt Asians were  coming in and were going to take away jobs  that might have gone to Blacks and Puerto  Ricans.  [The polarization] could also be the result of the continuing of COINTELPRO (the  US government's counter-intelligence program that was used to spy on political activists in the 1960s and 70s.) I don't think  COINTELPRO ever stopped [its activities]  against, not just peoples of colour, but also  [white people] who are [deemed] radicals.  Then again, a lot of people [of colour]  were also getting bought out, getting good  jobs. Even on the university campuses, there  isn't the kind of activity there was in the 60s  and 70s. There came the "Me" generation,  Kochiyama: There have been so many.  Asians have had their inspiring women too.  I want to mention the Asians first. I feel that  someone like Au Quon McElrath from Hawaii who has been a union organizer is one  of the most dynamic leaders. Sadly, today, if  you mention her name, so many Asians  don't even know who she is. She's no youngster. She must be getting to her high 60s or  70s now. There's Gracely Boggs of Detroit,  [who] has written several books with her  husband James Boggs, who is well known.  She was the most in-demand speaker when  the Asian movement began, and one of the  things she always used to say when she  spoke was that the movement must create  the new woman, the new man, the new  child, the new society.  Then, at the Unity 94 conference [held  in Atlanta, Georgia in July], there were two  women on the panel, one wa s Winona Duke,  the American Indian woman from Minnesota. She's doing a lot of environmental  work. She's with White Earth, [an environmental group in Minnesota], and she has  been speaking all over the country. Then  there was Delores Huerta of the Chicano  movement. She worked alongside Cesar  Chavez [who died last year but will always  be] famed for all the work he did in the  farmworkers movement [that Huerta] has  been so instrumental in keeping...alive.  In the Black movement, there are so  many I wouldn't know where to begin. We  could go all the way back to Harriet Tubman,  who freed so many Blacks from slavery; and  Sojourner Truth and Ida B. Wells, and Mary  MacLeud Bethune; Assata Shakur...[who] is  almost like the counterpart of a Malcolm X;  Queen Mother Moore; May Mallory;  Kathleen Cleaver and Safyia Bukhari, who  were Panthers; Ella Baker who was active in  the civil rights movement...there's just any  number of Black women who are considered key leaders in the movement. Women  Ixave been at the forefront of the struggle and  people should recognize them.  Huang: Could we talk about coalition  building. Our struggles as people of colour  and First Nations people are very much  linked toourexperiencesofracism,classism,  colonialism and imperialism. In Passion for  Justice, you said there are issues for all people of colour to come together around and  it's also important for us to build coalitions  from across our communities through the  work towards dealing with these issues.  What do you see as some practical stategies  for building coalitions?  Kochiyama: I think one of the important  issues of today that all peoples of colour  should come together to fight against is  homophobia. So many people think in terms  of racism and classism and even [sexism]  without thinking of what has happened to  lesbians and gays, how they've been derogated for so long.  I think [while] each struggle has to continue autonomously, we certainly have to  work together because the enemy is the  same. If we cannot realize that, we will  always be floundering. I think an aspect that  has been forgotten—but which came out  over and over at the Unity 94 conference—  [is that we need people of colour to be  activists]. [Unity 94 was the first conference  bringing together African-American, Native American, Asian-American, and Hispanic journalists. The conference was held  in July in Atlanta, Georgia.]  There was a time when we did not have  third world journalists, but now that we do,  we [need] journalists who arenot only capable writers, they also have to be political, to  be socially aware and to be able to speak for  their own peoples' struggle. It's not just  about colour, it's not just community of  colour; it's also—like, in the case of lesbians  and gays—that we have to have writers and  journalists who can give the correct perspective on these struggles. We have to have all  kinds of peoplecoming together, and maybe  if we could see things differently than in the  past, where it was so narrow, things could  change.  Huang: In Passion for Justice, you said,  "the movement is contagious and it is the  people in it who pass on the spirit." Why is  the movement contagious?  Kochiyama:]t is the people that make the  movement contagious, and constantly, there  are people in the movement that inspire,  that motivate, even though some of these  people may not even be here anymore.  I see all these young people, people like  you, and see thei r enthusiasm, they're just so  keyed up—I mean, here it is opening a new  world to them. I think that constantly new  people will be coming into the movemnt  and they will carry forth the struggle. I don't  think we ever ha ve to worry that the struggle  against injustice in this country, or in any  country, will ever die because there will  always be enough people who are concerned  about these issues. The movement is contagious.  Agnes Huang is a Chinese feminist activist  working in community media in Vancouver.  Thanks to Eileen Louie for recording the  interview, and to Leslie Komori, Linda  Hoffman, and Diane Nishi of the Powell  Street Festival for setting up the interview.  And thanks to Sur Mehat for transcribing this  interview. Feature  Take  Back the  Night  Vancouver's 1994 Take Back the Night rally and march last month took the cake for  size, enthusiasm, and just sheer noise.  More than 2,500 women showed up for the annual march through downtown  Vancouver, the largest the event has ever attracted. Noticeable were the numbers of  young women. As well, for the first time ever, there was a large banner, on which was  painted the name of one of Vancouver's high schools.  Women hit the streets and took back the night for the first time in 1978 to protest  violence against women on the streets.  As is traditional in Vancouver, the annual march was organized by Vancouver Rape  Relief and Women's Shelter. While the march in Vancouver usually takes place on a  Friday night, this year it was held on Thursday, September 22. Organizers say that was  done to ensure the women took to the street in Vancouver on the same day as in 43 other  towns and cities across Canada.  Also notable this year was that there were 15 Take Back the Night demonstrations  in British Columbia alone, says Rape Relief's Mary McAllister. Last year, there were 12  such marches held across BC.  dancin1 in the streets  All photos by Fatima Jaffer  OCTOBER 1994 Mexico  After the Elections  as told to Jazmin Miranda   Jazmin Miranda was in Mexico during  the Mexican elections, which took place on  August 21st. Miranda is a latina feminist  and a Vancouver-based freelance journalist. She spoke with Patricia Fernandez  shortly after it was announced that the  conservativeparty (PRI: Institutional Revolutionary Party) had won the Mexican elections. Fernandez zuorks with the group,  Fronteras Comunes, Mexico (Common Borders-Mexico). She is the keynote speaker at  the conference Putting a Face on Global Restructuring: Women Examine the Consequences, on October 21-22 at the University  ofBC in Vancouver.  Jazmin Miranda: Could you tell me a bit  about your background in activism?  Patricia Fernandez: I studied sociology  in the Catholic University in Peru many  years ago. I began working with women in  Peru before coming [to Mexico,] doing health  work with women and their children, using  the struggle for [the promotion of] breast  feeding as a starting point, but [in that it is]  a woman's right, not an obligation.  I left Peru eight years ago to live in  Mexico. I continued working on these kinds  of issues and action as part of [a] research  [project] with a group of women. As I became familiar with the place and culture, I  [worked with other] groups of women. I  have worked with women for ten years,  withina local/national framework.. .inPeru,  up to the local/national/international level  and an increasingly high profile. [This] goes  hand in hand with the process our peoples  are going through. [It's] not like an island—  being islands and remaining islands has been  part of [traditional] women's work—but  rather as part of that recovery of autonomy  and sovereignty, rescuing, opening ourselves  and integrating ourselves into other spaces,  into what a community means, with other  actors, female and male—in a social context.  [In the process,] I have been enriching  my analysis, a discourse which is linked to  my daily, domestic life. I have a strong commitment on a personal level to my daughter,  my family, to Silvia my mother. The articulation of action and discourse get enriched  through our practice, and they enrich what  my life as part of a couple could be at any  given moment—how to love, who to love,  who loves me. I have a whole-world view  which is not contingent on this initial vision  of creating islands but rather of articulating  a large playing field for action and passion.  This I bring to my daily project for life,  action, work, politics.  Miranda: Could you tell me a little about  the work you do in the group Fronteras  Comunes, Mexico (Common Borders-  Mexico)?  Fmtandez.-FronterasComunes, Mexico  works [on] gender issues. We have very  close ties to some of the companeras in the  groups Mujer a Mujer (Woman to Woman).  [These] are two groups with different struc-.  tures because Mujer a Mujer is a group of  women and Fronteras Comunes is a mixed  group. But we have similar goals.  I [was] the only woman [in Fronteras  Communes] until very recently. When I be-  . gan working with [the group,] I implemented  a process of including a gender perspective  with the hope that this would replace the  outlook that the companeras themselves had,  so that the work with women wouldn't just  be done by me.  Now, when I evaluate the content as a  result of the various situations in which I  have found myself with women, it makes  me reflect on how my work fits [into] my  public or personal spaces—my working life  in the external sphere with grass roots  women, and my domestic space. In the outside world, I carry on a discourse, an activity, a struggle. But [in] my private space, I  exercise power and yet suffer—I am the one  who satisfies, who makes sure that such and  such a situation comes out right. [My family]  knows that "mama" is keeping a sharp eye  on order, tranquillity, and satisfying the  household's needs—"household" in a symbolic sense, meaning the work.  So, as I began to reflect on this, [I realize  I have] two options: I can either take on my  domestic role as a mother responsible for her  children and go on running their lives, soothing, consoling, how can I put it, like giving  into them without motivating them, rather  than being a driving force. And that [balance] is interesting for me as a person.  In all the spaces [lam in,] the conclusion  I draw is that men are, in general, at a  different stage than women. This is not something new; it is historically corroborated.  Right now [this is the case] on the levels of  Fernandez.WeW, one example is that we  work with women in the maquiladora industry. [Editor's note: Maquiladoras are cheap-  labour factories in the Free Trade zones in  Mexico] industry. We give guidance to  women activists who are working inside the  factories on the northern border [of Mexico,]  as well as to women in the unions which are  located in Mexico City—women in thedress-  making sector, teachers, or women working  in social security.  In the maquila sector, for example, our  work is concrete; we work to prepare the  annual workshops organized in the border  zones. In March, the third [series of] workshops for maquila workers washeldinCiudad  Juarez Chihuahua. This is methodological  work, to get grassroots participation, to get  the women to participate and [to give] them  support [and] confidence, because this is a  sector where the women don't come out to  meetings, where there is no "permission"  from the employers allowing them to go to  events. Then [we do] the post-event preparation, [putting together] the results and  evaluationas a record that the woman workers can read in a practical manner.  Another outcome from this workshop  was the idea for a campaign to dignify or  honour the women in the maquila, which  was [set for] June 27th. Here in Mexico City,  "I am a political innovator, but not under any  party banner. Trying to overthrow a 67-year-old  system with a regular, common political campaign seems a trifle laughable."  discussion, debate, reflection, and identity—  my reflections are about certain alternative  spaces. The question is, how [do we] build a  democracy if the thoughts and ideas of men  and women are not parallel, are not on the  same frequency?  Miranda: Have you raised this with the  group?  Fernandez: I am thinking of doing it in  writing because [verbal] discussions quickly  get muddled up by passion, by subjectivity,  by too much emotion. Subjectivity is not  valued as much as objectivity, because of the  male gender's response [which is usually]  an immediate pragmatic, prompt response.  Women, on the other hand, tend to respond  subjectively—a little bit of history is always  with us, which we call on to construct both  the present and the future.  Miranda: Can you give me an example  of what happens?  Fernandez: One example, [which] may  seem like a very banal example but is very  real, is [that when] there is a meeting, I have  to be on top of the meetings we have scheduled. If I don't call [everyone,] the meetings  would not happen. They are reminded by  my call [that] they have to come to a meeting.  If I don't call, they would wait until  "Mummy" takes on this overseeing function. This seems like a very banal example  but it's very real.  Miranda: Can you tell us what your  group does at the grassroots level?  the few of us got together to promote this  campaign. We wrote a press bulletin [that  was] sent to the media. It was published in a  feminist supplement which comes out in La  Jornada, called La Doble Jornada, which has  committed itself to publishing the information. So, what we achieve is raising the  consciousness level among urban society,  creating a space in Mexico City so that the  "problem," which [is situated] far away up  there on the border, isn't seen as something  so distant, as if it were in another country.  The border area [is often seen] as another  country [which] has served to keep it marginal, distant, [detering people from] having  to adopt a more committed, sensitive position of more solidarity so that we include it  in our demands. Now, even the RedMexicana  de Action An ti-Libre Comercio (Mexican Anti-  Free Trade Network) has taken up the demands [of maquila workers] but only because of pressure from the women in the  north who have been pushing for it. These  are the things we are articulating and setting  in motion.  We are also creating space—not only at  the regional level, which stays there like an  island—in a wa y tha t [ the concerns of maqu ila  workers] can be linked up with [those] of  women from different regions in Latin  America. Women from Central America [are  getting involved] because the Maquila system is there too. Women from the United  States have also [linked up.] [These] women  who work in the [US] Maquilas aren't white.  Women from Canada have taken part too—  not many though. But we are doing this so  that the work with women at the grassroots  level can be articulated more and more by  [women at the grassroots.] We, as organizers, are like companions or facilitators so  that [if,] at any given moment, they need  support, we are there.  Miranda: In your work with people from  the USA and Canada, do you encountei any  problems with respect to cultural differences?  Fernandez: With regard to Canada, I  haven't noticed it so much.  We do have strong disagreements with  the women from the USA—not with all of  them, because women of colour have a sense  of identity which is closer to ours. I am  referring not just to Latinas, but also to Afro-  American women or Asian women, and  Chicanas.  The basic problem I sensewith the white  women is a sort of attitude of a resistance to  getting close, a fear of discovering things, a  way of projecting themselves. There is a lot  of fear and a lot that is the product of their  culture—internal culture or the internal imperialism of the system [in which they live].  Miranda: There was a revolution in  Chiapas in Mexico by peasant rebels who  call themselves Zapatistas on January 1st  this year. We don't hear much about the  continuation of the struggle in Canada, but  we know it's an ongoing, powerful struggle.  What is your impression of what is happening in Chiapas?  Fernandez: Ever since this historic situation arose, I thought it was a reaction [to  Mexico's repressive governmment] of one  sector in Mexico. [But it is] not necessarily  [happening because] Chiapas is special—it  could have been in Oaxaca or Guerrero. It  just happened to be Chiapas.  With regard to the armed movement  taking into consideration other experiences  of armed movements and struggles which  have started out this way, this is more a  strategic movement than a visceral one. It is  like the majority of the armed movements  that have taken place in Latin America. I'm  not belittling it for that, but it was very  strong [at first] but then suddenly got lost in  the craziness, in the pursuit of "isms." The  isms were trying to monopolize the struggle  instead of keeping the clear idea of the people's struggle.  The Zapatista Army's strategy for the  struggle is not necessarily going to get results in a week or even a month. It's a long  process. The demands have arisen from one  specific region because it had to come from  somewhere. But the revolution won't be  made just in Chiapas, nor just by the people  of Chiapas. It will need a complete articulation in all sectors, all regions, on a  countrywide level, so that a really intelligent  revolution can take place. It's not going to be  a call to arms which will go out, because  [that] would mean heavy costs, as has been  the experience in other places on our continent.  Several sectors in Mexico [are] waiting  for someone to say, "Now!" or for the signal  on how to join up with these forces. The  appearance or emergence of this struggle  was intelligent. It happened carefully [and Interview with Patricia  Fernandez  was] planned, [from deciding] the time to  start the uprising, to how to do it, whom to  rally, whom to address, whom to call. The  official, extra-official, national, international  world and civic society was taken into consideration.  Work must now be done on articulating  other sectors that are ready to join in this  struggle. I say "sectors" not because this is  not just an indigenous struggle—there is abject poverty in Mexico City, poverty among  25 million inhabitants. That's not a poverty  which is compatible with a certain level of  survival, because that poverty affects 40 million inhabitants—it is spread throughout the  entire country, in an urban marginal zone,  and a rural marginal zone which is increasingly enflamed [where] Indigenous women  are [maintaining] subsistence economies at a  bare-survival level.  There are many sectors who say nothing  is happening in this country but I am not of  that opinion. I think something is going to  happen and in a way that makes me afraid  because Mexico isn't a country like Nicaragua, with 12 million inhabitants, or El Salvador. There are 75 million people here and if  this country catches fire in an unprotected,  unthoughtway—with the strategy that exists  now and if it is not put on a better footing in  a systematic way—there could be very unfortunate consequences.  Miranda: What do you think of the August 21st election results?  Fernandez: When theelection campaigns  began, they were seen as a moment of hope  becuae they used the traditional forms of  political struggle. But these traditional ways  are concentrated in party proselitism. I don't  want to be a political renegade. On the contrary, I am optimistic. I am a political innovator, but not under any party banner. The  Revolutionary Democratic Party (PRD),could  have done fundamental work. Trying to  overthrow a 67-year-old system with a regu-  lar,commonpoliticalcampaignand launching a candidate with placards, posters, and  TV ads seems a trifle laughable. The [Editor's Hote.Tnstitutional Revolutionary Party]  PRI has ruled Mexico for 67 years. The PRI  won the August 21st elections this year  fraudulently, as many times before.]  On the other hand, there is a huge  crisis in alternative organizations which  can't be solved by an election. Those alternative sectors are [the ones] which back  change so, if not them, who? But these  alternative sectors have arisen under a particular system, so called "democratic." I  differ with [definition] because [in their  democracy,] there is no equality between  men and women. As long as this doesn't  exist within a system, it won't turn out in  the least bit democratic.  This [inequality] is a big responsibility  for all those alternative systems: unions,  peasant cooperatives, urban movements,  networks or NGOs, which have large popular participation, but at no time have we set  ourselves to reflect openly and publicly to  say what our role is. We have watched  history arrive, we have accepted what happens, but [the attitude is] "pass by me  however you can and don't touch me." We  are using a repetitive discourse, almost,  almost a pamphleteering discourse, denouncing and giving statistics, and recounting disasters on the level of what effects  neo-liberal policies have had on our peoples.  This disjunction continues to be an  impediment to our regaining credibility  among a large social base. And that is  connected with the response from Chiapas  on January 1. This tells us that the social  grassroots, the social movements need new  leadership [in order] for [us to] get back to  democracy, [a democracy] with equality between thosewho make up these movements—  men, women/children, old people.  [The relationship between men and  women is crucial] because this is the most  political relationship in terms of being able to  uphold or undermine the system. Because if  not, the year 2000 will roll around and there  will be new elections, and the PRI will again  say, "The people voted for me." You can ask  grassroots people in many sectors and they  will tell you, "I voted for the PRI, because  they put water in, because they give me  tortillas, because they give me milk." Those  are basic necessities, and it is a kind of populist proselitism which the [PRI] are going to  keep ondoing [so that,] when the timecomes,  they can keep people quiet because people's  consciousness has not been raised in many  sectors at the social grassroots level.  Miranda: How do you see the PRD as an  opposition to PRI?  Fernandez: The PRDcan have many supporters but not a clear-cut [political] line. The  PRD is not a political party, it is a political  movement [with support from] PRI dissidents, as well as from parties that have Maoist or Leninist lines. Nevertheless, it has not  served to revive plurality nor to respect diversity. That could have been a good step  towards moving from being a political movement towards being a political party.  It is a party which reproduces the same  old schemes, the structures of inequality between men and women, which at times is  much more fucked up than in other reactionary parties. Women who are on their party  comm ittees, women who in parts of the country [ serve] as representatives of the Women's  Secretariat, have to fight really hard just to  have the minimal resources to take part in  some activity. They have to work there with  representatives who make fun of their work  and who get mad—as if to say, "Crazy old  women, what are you doing at these activities?" There exists this terribly macho way of  thinking in this supposedly progressive  party. This supposedly alternative opposition political party is reproducing those  schemes and remembers women when it's  time for the electoral campaign, like all [political parties] do. They remember to add  them to their lists—30 percent women [added]  to their ranks, [thanks to their participation]  in women's struggles—but it's not with any  real egalitarian consciousness or respect for  diversity and, in fact, leaves many sectors by  the wayside.  Miranda: What do you think the PRD  will do, now that they have lost the elections?  Fernandez: What could happen is that  everyone goes back to "barracks," to get  depressed, reflect, lament, or to take up the  sword and say "On to other things," and  then to come out just before the year 2000  and wage an election campaign [that is] just  like that of the majority of the other parties.  The other [possible scenario] would be  that the PRD [would] disappear. [That has  happened] in countries in South America,  specifically in Peru. What has happened to  the left wing political party? It's disappeared.  We know from historical experience how, in  our countries, processes have a tendency to  come apart in other spaces with similar results.  In Mexico, there is great despair at the  grassroots social level with the leadership.  We are part of this system and until there is  an eradication of these processes and a  revival of some other kinds of values so as to  achieve power, we are going to have the  same scenarios.   Thanks toMagaly Varosfor transcribing and  to a volunteer who translated the interview.  Patricia Fernandez Feature  Interview with actor/activist Shabana Azmi:  Agent for change  as told to Fatima Jaffer  and Shelina Velji  Shabana Azmi is one of India's best-known  actors. She has worked in both alternative and  mainstream cinema in India. Her roles in alternative cinema deal with the status of women in  Indian society, as well as caste and class oppression. The women she portrays are always empowering, despite the abject conditions they live  in and the oppressions they endure.  She has also appeared in Western films,  such as City of Joy, Madame Sousatska, and  Immaculate Conception. She is active with an  anti-poverty organization thatworksin theslums  of Bombay, and has campaigned for minority  rights and communal harmony among India's  diverse cultural and religious groups. In September, Kinesis spoke with Azmi who was in  Vancouver for a five-day retrospective of some of  her works. Her visit also included Tumhari  Amrita, a play performed in Urdu and Hindi,  and a community forum with the South Asian  women's community.  Fatima Jaffer: Could you tell us how you  came to act in the films of directors such as  Shyam Benegal, Aparna Sen, Satyajit Ray—  directors who make films of progressive  political and social significance?  Sliabana Azmi: It was as simple as being  in the right place at the right time. I'm a gold  medalist from the Film Institute in Bombay.  Ankur [1974] was my first film, and it also  marked the development of Parallel [alternative] cinema in Hindi. Before that. Parallel  cinema had only existed in Bengali. Because  Ankur went on to become a big success  commercially and artistically, it opened up  the field for other such films to be made.  Since I was available, I was given the chance  to be in these films. I think I was extremely  fortunate.  In Parallel cinema, you get absolutely  no money whatsoever, so it meant giving up  a lot of the money [one can make] from  commercial cinema. It also meant taking a  risk in terms of your image. When I decided  to do Ankur, a lot of people from the film  industry advised me it really is a destructive  choice to make because Laxmi [her character] is not the pure, wonderful, stereotypical  Indian woman. [Her husband has left her]  and she has the baby of this other man and  she's also shown stealing. It would place me  in the role of the adultress and would ruin  my chances in commercial cinema. But I felt  strongly about it, and went ahead with it.  Jaffer: Then la ter, you became successful  in commercial Indian cinema?  Azmi: I did it simultaneously. I figured,  early in my career, it would be of value to be  a "star" because the distributors would buy  the [Parallel] films I worked in, and hopefully I would be able to persuade a bit of the  audience from the commercial cinema to  also see the [alternative] films.  Jaffer: The roles of women you play in  mainstream cinema as opposed to Parallel  cinema are quite different. Women in the  Parallel films are empowering even when  they are victims, while those in commercial  cinema tend to be passive, silly, somewhat  negative stereotypes of women. Do you find  that acting in commercial films compromises you in terms of the roles you want to  play?  Azmi: Not anymore. That happened. ..in  the early period of my career. You see, I'm  convinced that if you [want to affect] change  in society and you're attempting to do it  through cinema, it has to be within mainstream cinema. If you're going to try to do it  through the Parallel cinema, you're preaching to the already converted.  Within the constraints of the mainstream, I have tried to play characters who  domorethanjustrunaroundtreesandlook  glamorous. As long as [a role] is not making  sexistdiscriminatory[statements,]theneven  if it's not terribly profound and meaningful, I'm comfortable doing it.  Jaffer: Could you talk a bit about the  film Cify of Joy? There was much controversy around this Hollywood film, which  also stars Patrick Swayze. We know there  werenumerousdemonstrations in Calcutta  Jaffer: So I understand how people could  feel bitter about fabricating this reality for a  film in a context where people are living the  very real, harsh reality of slums...  Azmi: Yes, but that's what happens with  movies all the time.  Jaffer: That doesn't make it right.  Azmi: All of us are sisters in solidarity  and we feel strongly about these issues. We  know the problems and [to get to] the  solutions...the first thing we have to do is  avoid knee-jerk reactions.  Shabana Azmi and Fatima Jaffer  around the making of the film. You may  have heard that the SAWAN (the South  Asian Women's Action Network) demonstrated against the film here in Vancouver,  in solidarity with people in Calcutta.  Azmi: Did you picket the film before or  after seeing the film?  Jaffer: Before.  Azmi: I think it's wrong that you participate in a picket without knowing for  yourself whether you agree with [the reasons for the protest.]  Jaffer: We listened to people we trust.  When we hear that there are protests in  India and why, we can choose to show  solidarity without having to experience the  reasons for the protests ourselves. One of  the things we heard was there was a problem around how the director didn't ask to  use existing slums but instead built slums  for the shooting of the film.  Azmi: Yes, absolutely.  Jaffer: They spent a lot of money in a  place where there's very little money and  didn't spread the money around to the  people whose lives they were using as a  backdrop for the film.  Azmi: No. When you're constructing  that slum over there, you're doing it on a  piece of land that is vacant so the person to  whom the land belongs gets the money.  The people who are building that slum get  the money. A lot of employment is being  generated, employment to people who are  from Calcutta.  [You ask, why didn't they use an existing slum] What you would be doing is  invading people's lives, not respecting their  privacy, expecting you have the right to go  in because you are the people with money.  That's a completely wrong reason for picketing the film.  Jaffer: But after making the film, they  dismantled the slum. People didn't move  Azmi: Of course not.  Jaffer: The other reason I demonstrated  is we face racism here, we are third world  people in a first world country. When we see  a hundred films made about South Africa,  about India, by the West, portraying the  white saviour of the third world, we cannot  ignore the imperialist context we live in.We  have a right to protest.  Azmi: I didn't think that was what City  of Joy was about. I thought it was about  interaction, about the white man learning  about the Indians [who] have a completely  differentwisdom that guides them. [Thereis  this white doctor who is] stunned by the fact  that the West, with all its concern for the  individual and individualism, in a sense  dehumanizes the person because he lives for  nobody but himself.  Then he goes into the slum and finds,  my goodness, here is this riksliawalla [bicycle-taxi driver] who almost doesn't exist for  himself. He lives for his family and [what he  is able to earn] will determine whether the  family is going to live or eat or die. He's  stunned by that because it's something that  he hasn't seen.  Jaffer: We live in different contexts and I  feel differently about the right of a white  man to go over to India, or all over the globe,  when he comes from America, a place where  he can see every day for himself a harsh  reality he helps create for Black people, for  Aboriginal peoples. He doesn't have to go to  India to "find" his humanity, to live...  Azmi: You make the film that you're so  concerned about. Film makers are here to  make money. The reason a big American  star is [cast] is because it is the only way you  would get enough money to make this expensive film. Otherwise nobody is interested in making a film about the slums of  Calcutta.  Don't [judge] this film by saying it isn't  that film. In fact, in most such situations—  and I should know, I work in the slums—  change rarely happens if there is no outside  influence. To my mind, having a doctor  from Bombay come into the slum would  have been just as invasive as having an  American doctor. There would be the out-  sideelement but then, it'salso an interaction.  [We learn] a real value of each other.  - Jaffer: You've played a lot of roles of  women who are marginalized in a number  of different ways. Have you ever been asked  to play a lesbian? Would you?  Azmi: I haven't. It would depend on the  part. I would not grab the part because it's  lesbians I want to focus on. I would take any  part if I found the part challenging.  Jaffer: Say, a scenario like two women  living in a village together defying society,  facing specific oppression from men because they are lesbians...?  Azmi: Oh yes, sure. That would be about  marginalized people and I would be happy  to represent [a lesbian], provided I found the  script interesting and believable.  Jaffer: There hasn't really been much on  lesbians or gays coming out of India that  overtly deals with homosexuality. At the  sa me time, we know there a re a lot of Indian  lesbians working in India to get these issues  brought into the mainstream.  Azmi: Actually, [thefilm]Mandi slightly  deals with it... [Mandi takes a complex look  at the lives of prostitutes in a small town.]  There were overtones but it wasn't really  focused.  jaffer: There was a homoerotic sensibility, a sensitivity that came out between the  two women...  Azmi-.Oh yes, inMandi, it was definitely  more than just ordinary friendship.  Jaffer: Was that the director's intention?  Azmi: Yes. He gave it to us and let us  play it to make what we could of it.  Jaffer: Later in the film, it turned into a  more maternal affection between your character and the "younger" woman...  Azmi: Yes. But that too, I think, can also  happen in a situation like that. Ultimately  you know you have to let this person go free.  How do you come to terms with that loss?  Perhaps only by developing a kind of maternal feeling. I think that happened quite naturally, as we played it.  Jaffer: You're known as both an actor  and an activist. Could you tell us a little bit  about the work you do in the slums?  Azmi: I work with an organization called  NivarahaqSurksahSamiti [the Right to Shelter of Slumdwellers.] It started as an umbrella organization of many smaller groups  in 1980. It became a group by itself. I got  involved with it through a film that Anand  Patwardan made called Bombay City.  Demolitions [of slums] used to bother  me a great deal but, like everyone else, I  thought that was the only solution. Bombay  Cify brought sharply into focus that demolitions serve no purpose—they only create  worse slums out of already existing slums  because, if a slum has water and electricity  and you demolish that, then people move  five kilometers a way where maybe they don't  have water and electricity. They don't go  back to the village because there's nothing in  the village for them to survive on.  Unless we start providing employment  in the villages so that people don't have to  migrate to the city in search of work, there is  no way we're going to be able to [stop]  slums. As well, the city benifits by the slums  because it's the slum dwellers that provide  all the services to the city...from the boy who  brings your newspaper in the morning to the  fellow who gets your milk, to your driver, to  the bai [woman] who looks after your children when you are attending all your Fancy  Do's, to the bank clerk.  Nivara basically works for in up-grada-  tion of slums, the need to fight prejudice  OCTOBER 1994 Feature  about slum dwellers, the need to give them  the basic civic amenities, and also mobilize  them politically.  We do it in different ways. NiVara has  confrontationalist positions with thenational  housing policy, builders, government, etc.  On the other hand, because we have professional architects and people like that, we're  also working on low-cost housing. We also  have a journalist, a film maker, and social  workers. We [also provide] informal children's education, have a vocational guidance  centre and a medical camp.  Our office is in the slums and it's a  completely voluntary group. All the money  [ for the work] comes out of our own pockets.  We look upon ourselves as catalysts for  change. In all the negotiations with the governmental municipal cc« Derations, the slum  dwellers accompany us so that [we're] not  negotiating on their behalf. In the process,  they get empowered. They know that the  chief minister is there for them, they're not  there for the chief minister, which is a reversal of how they look at authority.  We found in our work that, although it  takes longer to mobilize women, once you  have mobilized them, you get tremendous  change. In fact, we have been fighting for the  government to give people alternative land,  [and to get them to put the land] in the  woman's name. That empowers the woman.  Otherwise, men beat up their wives and leave  them and get married again. But because the  right to the house is the woman's, it makes  her position much stronger.  Basically, we question development  models and say, "What is the yardstick of  progress? Whose progress is it, and at whose  cost?" It cannot be the progress of few at the  cost of many. And [we also say] that blindly  following the big-is-beautiful syndrome of  the West has been disasterous for developing  nations. We have to Iook at our indigenous  models of development.  [Creating] the room for dialogue for alternative development gets done through a  centre my father runs called Mijwa Welfare  Centre, which is in a tiny village in Asingur,  where he was born.  Jaffer: How do people deal with you  being Shabana Azmi the actor as well as  Shabana Azmi the activist?  Azmi: lam sensitive about how I become  the focus of attention rather than my work. It  negates all the work that the group is doing.  But it's inevitable. The way we tackle it is to  use it to our advantage. Nivara has a lot more  access than other groups [to those] we want  to negotiate with, even the defense minister,  if need be, because I have access to him  directly.  But then, in our press releases and the  ground work we do, I maintain a low profile  and we only talk about Nivara. There is never  any mention of me unless it is at a demonstration or at a big occasion where we need  attention to be focused.  One would hope for greater sensitivity  in the way it's projected in the press. It puts  me in an extremely vulnerable position. For  instance, when I am in the slums, I don't  know who is taking photographs of me or  who is standing beside me. There's this [municipal] cooperator we are fighting because  he is trying to de-house slum dwellers... [There  would be a story saying] "Muslim Shabana  Azmi has Muslim underworld connections  in the slums" or some such thing. [The story]  does not mention that I was speaking [on] a  Nivara platform. We have never had a problem with identifying any of our slums as  Hindu or Muslim. So it becomes a direct  attack on me and Nivara is nowhere in the  picture. You can imagine how the press will  grab something like that, saying, "My god,  there's a communal situation [developing]  over here."  Jaffer: There was a story recently in the  Western media that said you were attacked  by Muslim fundamentalists for kissing South  African president Nelson Mandela.  Azmi: Firstly, I didn't kiss Mandela;  Mandela kissed me. I had gone to Cape  Town to give him an award. [After accepting] the award, he kissed me on one cheek,  then on the other. The photograph was  taken [so] it seems as though he's kissing  me on the mouth.  The first mischief was created when  that photograph was sent [out to the media.] It was also done to discredit Mandela  in a sense...by the West, in a society on the  brink of change. It's not an accident. The  photographer knew that Mandela hadn't  come anywhere close to my lips. Yet, that's  the one he sent out.  It's the press who's responsible for the  whole controversy because, after that photograph [was taken,] nobody made any  remark. Fifteen days later, a guy who knew  that his shortest way to fame is to use the  words "anti-Indian" and "un-Islamic" together, with an actress, sent the story out.  Instead of ignoring it, a newspaper put it in  a box. Then all the media picked it up. There  were lots of letters [of support] from people  saying, "How dare he speak in the name of  ances in the past that require redress in the  present times. This becomes the means for  political mobilization. That is the game being played over there and everybody has to  pay the price.  Communal harmony cannot be  achieved by just shouting slogans like "Hindus and Muslims are brothers, and let's  express solidarity." Communal harmony,  we have found, can be achieved only by  relating it to issues of social justice. This is  why, in the 25 or so slums in which we work,  during the riots when all of Bombay was  burning, not one single slum we worked in  had any incidents of violence. That's because of the work that we've done before the  riot had actually taken place whereas people  rush in after the riots take place. We underline the value of holding intermediary  dialogue between groups with conflicting  interests before it can develop into a communal sitaution—and a communal situation is  engineered, it just doesn't happen.  Jaffer :\ believe one of the political sparks  for the riots was the Mandal Commission  [which attempted to address the caste bias  "Communal harmony cannot be achieved by just  shouting slogans like 'Hindus and Muslims are  brothers and let's express solidarity.' Communal  harmony can be achieved only by relating it to  issue of social justice."  Islam? Mandela is old enough to be  Shabana's grandfather."  But do you think the Western media  mentioned that? I was on BBC, and it was  made to seem as if I was going to become  the new Salman Rushdie [the Muslim author who's gone into hiding due to fundamentalist threats on his life.]  We know Islamic fundamentalism is  the new enemy of the West after the fall of  the Soviet Union. Also in India, there is  definitely a conspiracy to project only the  intolerant fundamentalist view of Islam.  The first thing the newspapers should have  done is say "Who is this man calling Azmi  un-Islamic and how does he earn the right  to speak for Islam?"  After this, some organization we'd  never heard of said: "Within three days, if  she does not apologize for this un-Islamic  act, we will burn her effigies." It was frontpage news in all the newspapers. I said,  "Have you bothered to check whether this  organization exists? I could sit in my house  and write in the name of any organization.  Have you found out how long it has been in  existence, what its membership is, etc?"  Three days later, nobody went to check  whether they had actually burnt my effigies, because [the media's] work had been  done. So it really is a major conspiracy, not,  Islamic fundamentalism.  Jaffer: Could you tell us a bit more  about your work against religious fundamentalism. I imagine that, in your work in  the slums, you come in contact with Muslims and Hindus who live side by side.  Azmi: Fundamentalism attacks women's rights first because women are looked  upon as the izzat [honour] of the community and so, raping women is like raping the  izzat of the community. So women are the  first targets. Fundamentalism also immediately leads to forcing women back into the  pardah [segregation/veil], forcing women  into seclusion.  Now, communalism is basically a political and ideological method to mobilize a  mass following. It's for political reasons  because history is used as political rhetoric,  as a catalogue of real and imaginary griev-  with affirmative hiring and educational policies.]  Azmi: Again, the media had a strong  role to play in the Mandal thing. We were  only talking about 80,000 jobs [whereas]  caste discriminations have existed for so  many years. It is one small attempt to try and  redress some of that. The fact is that, by now,  every single state in India has accepted the  recommendations of the Mandal Commission. Again, it was a conspiracy of the media. [There is] total silence now that everybody has accepted those recommendations.  Jaffer: You probably move in some quite  progressive circles. What is your impression  of the resistance to some of this rightwing  political organizing in India?  Azmi: Firstly, it was really the [Muslim]  fundamentalists who had spoken out for the  rights of the Muslims [all along.] So when  the Muslim liberal, who had kept away,  suddenly said to its community that, "On  SalmanRushdie, this should be your stance,"  or "On Shabana, that should be your stance,"  the Muslim turns around and says, "But  where were you when I was being killed in  Mulyana? Where were you when my wife  was being butchered in Burandabahd? You  were nowhere around and now, how do you  earn the right to tell me what to do. I will  listen to the fundamentalist because he's the  one who helped me [when] I was in trouble."  It is because the Muslim liberal did not  participate in the Babri Masjid debate that it  got highjacked by fundamentalists, both  Muslims and Hindus. [Babri Masjid was a  mosque in Ayodha, India which was razed to the  ground in December 1992. It was followed by  planned pogroms of Muslims led by right-wing  Hindus.] Whereas the liberalsfrom both communities should have also been involved in  this dialogue. Who gives them the mandate  to speak on behalf of all the Muslims? There  has been a lot of soul searching [since] Babri  Masjid and an understanding that, unless  we get involved with the community, we're  in deep trouble.  Because of this, there is a circle which  has formed which calls itself the Muslim  Intelligensia. For the first time, they went out  into the slums and were actually there for the  people when they were endangered. They  are focussing attention more on the need for  education, literacy, and employment, and  finding that it is more or less the same needs  that the Hindus have and that we have to  work as an integrated force. Because this  group is making its presence felt, there is a  new-found confidence emerging within the  community.  As well, there is a strong Hindu secular  voice that has been questioning that, if Muslim fundamentalism and Sikh extremism  are considered anti-national, how can Hindu  fundamentalism hide its face under the garb  of being "national."  If India is to exist, then she must do so as  a mosaic and not as a melting pot where all  individual identities get submerged.  Jaffer: You marched in the Take Back the  Night march in Vancouver last night. What  was your impression of the event?  Azmi: I felt good but it is culturally  different. Because of the expressions of solidarity, there was a lot of good cheer, whereas  we don't see good cheer, so to speak, in a  march. There's more emotion, more anger  and it's far more serious. Here there was a lot  of clapping and cheering and music.  But I was glad to be at the march. I feel  strongly thatnetworkingand support groups  are important. Making women available for  each other is the strongest thing we can do in  terms of actually giving help, because women  feel isolated when they are in violent situations. It is difficult in India because, where  does a woman go? There aren't enough shelter homes. Most women find it impossible to  leave their children—they would have the  double burden of their young children [and  not having a place] to go. They do not go  back to their maternal homes because they  endanger the position of the younger sister  [from finding a husband.] There is constant  pressure from the maternal home to keep the  marriage alive. The natal family has to continue to guarantee support even after [the  daughter] gets married...so she knows she  can go back to some place. Often times,  parents send a girl back to a violent situation  rather than taking her out of there.  Jaffer: I imagine you get an appreciative  reaction from the women who watch your  films in India. What about the men?  Azmi: When the film Arth was made, [in  which a woman divorces her husband because of his infidelity,] it raised a lot of  hackles. The distributors would not touch  the film because they said a film where an  Indian woman does not take her husband  back after he's apologized to her, won't run  a day.  The director and I had to dig our heels in  and say, "We're going to keep this [plot] no  matter what. Finally [the film] got released  and became a big commercial success. It also  became a critical success, which means that  people were not even aware of the change  that was taking place in society where more  people were articulating what the character  Pujah feels in the film.  After that, I became a role model and  had hordes of women walking into my house  expecting me to change their lives, women  who no longer were relating to me as audience to actress, but in real sisterhood. And  men would be hostile.  Now I feel that there is a shift, a change  at least among the urban classes. Men are  realizing it is of greater value to appear  liberal and feminist than like a male chauvinist, at least on the surface. So there is some  pretence of allowing women their freedom.  Jaffer: That rhetoric happens here too. It  makes you wonder what they've got cooked  up.  *  Azmi: [Laugh] Maybe it is a delaying  tactic.   Fatima Jaffer is a Kenyan-born South Asian  feminist whose early feminist consciousness  was sparked by the films of Shabana Azmi of  the 70s and 80s. Thanks a zillion to Leah  Ibbitson and Sur Mehat for transcribing.  OCTOBER 1994  15 20th anniversary  cz7f h.acjE out or-f\L  inzm   aLLrum  Ik  Three Handmaids in brilliant red  robes (Ofbrian, Ofmichael, and  Ofgerry) inspired from Margaret  Atwood's A Handmaid's Tale - and  their supporters travelling from  government office to government  office in Vancouver on May 4,1990,  delivering a set of demands protesting funding cuts to the federal government's Women's Program. From  Kinesis, June, 1990.  This photo was part of a photo essay  on poverty which bordered a provincial suppliment on 11 years of Social  Credit government in BC. It was also  the month EXPO '86 opened in Vancouver. The photo-essay sought to  illustrate that poverty defies neat  catagorization - that poverty also  means you have no choices, no expectation and almost always no hope  for change in the future. From.  Kinesis, May 1986.  Ada and Precious White at Trout Lake  Pow Wow 1993. From "Traditional  Indigenous medicines: An urban Indian's perspective" by Cease Wyss. The  article was part of the first Aboriginal  Women's suppliment ever in Kinesis,  which was guest-edited by Viola  Thomas. From Kinesis, Dec 1993/Jan  1994.  From "Grenadian Women: A  Challenge to Imperialism'' by  Dionne Brand, on her encounters with and analysis of women  activists, farmers, and from  NGOs in Grenada. From Kinesis,  Mar. 1984.  (CKVU photo) In June 1983, community groups and women's organizations picketted CKVU to demand  the television company apologize  for comments made by Doug Collins  on air. Collins advocated rape in  condemning the activities of the  group Media Watch. In August,  CRTC (Canadian Radio, Television  and Telecommunications Network)  Finally censured CKVU. From  Kinesis, Sept. 83.  Domestic workers protest in Vancouver on January 12,1998,  against new regulations imposed by  Immigration Canada in December  1991 that require prospective  domestic workers to have the  equivalent of a grade 12 education  and six months training in live-in  care. From Kinesis, March 1998.  AM photos are from the Kinesis  photo files unless otherwise noted,  Women at a conference in Vancouver  November 1984 organized by the BC  Task Force on Immigrant Women.  About 100 poeple attanded from as  far away as Nova Scotia, who were in  town for a meeting of the National  Immigrant Women's Conference  follow-up Committee. From Kinesis,  Dec 84/Jan 88.  OCTOBER 1994 Arts  The Fringe: Vancouver's theatre Festival:  Cornucopia of creativity  by Shannon e. Ash   HOLY MO  Company: Potluck Productions,  (BC/ Alberta)  Written by Lucia Frangione  September, 1994  When I reached the theatre I was greeted  by the sight and sound of a roomful of people  banging kitchen utensils together, at the behest of a woman on stage; another woman  sat, back to audience, playing guitar and  humming on a kazoo. I asked the woman  next to me if the play had started early, or was  my watch wrong? "Oh no," she said. "This is  just playtime."  That spirit of play isn't just a preview,  though, it permeates the whole of Holy Mo.  Three women—Lucia Frangione, Marie  Anderson, and Renee Joshi—under the guise  of characters Lollie, Bufoona, and Guff, get  together to put on a show, an anachronistic,  loving, goofy retelling of the story of Moses.  Out of a beautiful wooden side show cart,  they make their stage. With a good deal of  rhymes, songs, and puns, they set the scene:  "heebee" slaves are oppressed by their  "Sphinx" masters, led by the king, Rambo  (Bufoona does a convincing Sylvester  Stallone). The slaves must work in junk-food  factories.  In the show's most pointed piece of social commentary, a Sphinx sits and whines  about the ungrateful and backward immigrant heebees, while a heebee slave does  heavy labour at the end of a rope held by the  Sphinx. (However, I wondered if using the  silly-sounding word "heebees," derived from  the Biblical text's Hebrews, was problematic,  given the context of a historical reality of anti-  semitism.)  When Mo finally gets the word from  God (or, "I am"—played by Bufoona and  presented as gender-neutral), via the burning  jukebox, the audience is encouraged to join in  the chant: "We're rollin' on out, we're cookin'  up a plan, we're stirrin' up the people, and  we're gonna kick some can!"  The inventive humour in this piece is  non-stop. Follie, playing Mo, steps out of  character at one point to complain about the  death of the firstborn Sphinx children, as the  final means to convince Rambo to free the  slaves: "Why do the babies have .to die?" "I  don't know, that's the way the story goes,"  says Bufoona. "You should know, you're  playing God," retorts Lollie. Bufoona frets: "I  don't understand my character's motivation."  Holy Mo is fun, but there are serious  moments, particularly near the end. This may  be a wacky revision of the Moses story, but  it's also a reverential one, suitable for the  (non-dogmatically) religious as well as the  agnostic.  THE HAPPY CUNT  Company: The English Madhatters Theatre  Company, UK  Directed by Erika Patterson  September, 1994  The title of this performance piece certainly drew people's attention, and left some  media tiptoeing around it. For the record, The  Globe and Mail printed the full title, The Vancouver Sun did not. Directed by Erika  Patterson, a Phd student in Victoria, The Happy  Cunt was inspired by the analysis of the  English language by US radical feminist philosopher Mary Daly, author of Pure Lust,  among other works.  Hag and Nag, played by Deb Pickman  and Diana Dent, are the characters presenting this theatrical version of Daly's work to  an audience where those who have heard  of Mary Daly, let alone read her work, are  no doubt in the minority. I suspect they left  not any more enlightened, though perhaps  perplexed and superficially amused.  Hag and Nag are a clownish pair, with  dirty faces and tattered clothes (Hag, wearing a breastplate, made me think of Madonna mudwrestling). Hag and Nag brandish flashlightsat the audience, howl, travel  to the "land of wild women" by flapping  their arms, and blow bubbles, which represent words freed from the "rule of the  fathers."  Tke Happy C^i\v\\  |Graphic: Fiona Smydi|  WARNING  English Madhatters Theatre Company  Billows of dry ice and loud, jarring  horror/sci-fi music, and the occasional siren, made me want to howl. (Granted, I was  wired on coffee, and the theatre seating  made an airplane seem spacious.)  Clever wordplay abounds, using  Daly's various words for patriarchy and its  ills: "stag-nation;" "sado-society;"  "cockocracy;" "potted passions." Various  derogatory words for wome—bitch, cow,  and of course cunt—are reclaimed.  But their presentation, however interesting the words themselves—and some of  Daly's words rival post-modernist language  for self-important obscurity,—is not theatrical. They seem to hang in the air without  a sensible dramatic (or comedic) context to  back them up.  Afewmomentsdo worica scenewhere  women are overwhelmed with giving, running about providing for others; a Betty  Boop routine which ends with a giggle  descending into a retch/groan; and the  sign of the Cross revised to "Amazon,  Mother and Holy Crone" accompanied by  grabbingeachbreast and thenone'scrotch—  perhaps particularly amusing to ex-Catholics, a group which includes Mary Daly and  myself.  Alas, these moments are in the minority. I appreciate the power in mocking patriarchal concepts, but The Happy Cunt too  often lapsed into incomprehensible ridiculousness. Be-Dazzled I was not.  FRANKENSTEIN'S MOTHERS  Company: Foursight Theatre,  Wolverhampton,England  September, 1994  Foursight Theatre has returned to the  Fringe circuit with another pick-of-the-Fringe  (at least in Vancouver) show. Frankenstein's  Mothers, which explores the lives of Mary  Shelley, her mother Mary Wollstonecraft  (author of A Vindication of the Rights of  Women, one of the first Western feminist  texts), and Shelley's novel Frankenstein, continues Foursight's tradition of historical biography of women.  This is the third year Foursight, based in  England, has come to Vancouver. Since their  1992 tour [see Kinesis Oct. 1992], then-member Naomi Cooke has left to pursue work in  Winnipeg, and there is a new joint artistic  director, Sue Pendlebury. Pendlebury, Jill  Dowse (a founding member, and the other  co-director), and Lisa Harrison worked in  collaboration to produce Frankenstein's  Mothers. Foursight member Kate Hale, who  appeared as Elizabeth I in last year's comedy Bloody Mary and the Virgin Queen, is on  sabbatical.  The idea of doing a piece on Mary  Shelley first came up almost three years ago,  when Foursight was researching another  piece, says Jill Dowse. It was then they  discovered that Mary Wollstonecraft was  also the mother of Mary Shelley. Connecting these two women's lives, and then connecting the novel Frankenstein, drove the  show's creation.  "It's so m uch about wha t connects us—  to our parents, to our nurturers, to the things  we create, whether it's artistic creativity, or  literally giving birth to another human being," says Dowse.  Sue Pendlebury adds that another factor in wanting to dramatize the novel was  that it is very different from the image in  film and popular culture.  The collaborative process began with  independent research by the performers, the  director (Ruth Ben-Tovim), the writer (Cath  Kilcoyne) and the composer (Laura Forrest-  Hay). The performers then started working  together "on the floor, usingimprovisation,"  says Sue Pendlebury, and then brought the  writer in; Kilcoyne took a large role in creating the text, within which the performers  formed the visual and physical aspects of the  play.  Frankenstein's Mothers features a complex and accomplished use of movement,  music, visual imagery and text.  The play begins with the music of violin, viola, and accordion, played by the performers, and the words "Imagine if...,"  wherein we begin to learn a little of Mary  Shelley's history.  It was a rainy night in Geneva in 1816  when Mary Shelley, her husband the poet  Shelley, and the poet Byron, agreed to each  write a ghost story. In the play, Mary Shelley  (Pendlebury) struggles with her creative  voice (personified by Jill Dowse). After a  dream of her dead child reborn—she had  lost her first child days after its birth,—her  imagination reveals to her the germinal scene  of Frankenstein. But her daily life—taking  care of a husband, household, and child—  stymies her writing even as her history becomes fuel for the story. When her half-sister  commits suicide, in her pain the creative  voice becomes overpowering.  The connections between Shelley's life  and her novel are repeatedly made. The loss  of her mother (played by Lisa Harrison) at  the age of 12 days and her subsequent lonely  upbringing, are related to the monster's par-  entless'wanderings. The child William, who  is killed by the monster, is linked to Shelley's  struggles with her own child William.  It was a rainy night  in Geneva  in 1816  when Mary Shelley,  her husband  the poet Shelley,  and the poet Byron,  agreed to each write a  ghost story.  But while "life influences art" may not  be a new revela tion, what is more interesting  is how the novel is prophetic of Shelley's  tragic experiences—including the death of  her son—to come.  This prophecy was the "seed," says  Dowse, of wanting to make the creative  voicea separateentity. "How did youknow?"  cries Shelley near the end of Frankenstein's  Mothers, which concludes with the creative  voice's words: "I exist alone, on my own  terms."  Shelley's creative voice is both her beloved companion and a source of distress, a  power which brings her "monstrous  thoughts."  By personifying Mary Shelley's creative  voice, Foursight was able to give a voice for  the monster, something over which they  struggled. Dowse thinks it was very important to let the monster speak, as he does in the  novel, because Mary Shelley identified with  the monster. "It's the part of the novel which  she found easiest to write, which had the  least revisions by her husband. It's quite  interesting that [this] section is..shrouded  [within other layers of narration;] she's  shrouding herself in a way, but there she is  in the middle of it."  I found Frankenstein's Mothers compelling; for all its thoughtful stylistic complexity, it also had scenes of emotional intensity,  ranging from the grief of loss to the expression of love. It does require keen attention,  and it was necessary to read the program  notes giving historical background to have a  full understanding.  What's up for Foursight in the next  year? Kate Hale will be returning and Jill  Dowse will take her sabbatical. Their next  show will be about Boadicea, the first-century warrior queen who led the tribes of  ancient Britain in a revolt against the Romans. The historical records on her are much  skimpier than those on Mary Shelley but  then, as Dowse points out, with fewer facts,  "themore liberties youcantake/'Pendlebury  says a* general theme of women in war,  politics, and power may take shape.  Shannon e. Ash is a regular writer for Kinesis  whose creative voice has been sulking but  promises to perk up if she starts paying it  more attention.  OCTOBER 1994  KINESIS Arts  Review: The Fringe: Vancouver's Theatre:  Walking a  thin  by Terry Gibson  A THIN LINE  Produced by Axe of Rebellion,  Vancouver, BC  Written by River Light  September, 1994  AThinLine, written by Vancouver-based  River Light and performed by Shaira  Holman—as Cel, a psychiatric patient preparing to go home—is a bold, ambitious  multi-media production, leavinglittledoubt  of the potential of the Vancouver theatre  company, Axe of Rebellion.  Using thea tre and video and a few props  on the stage—a plainsinglebed, small dresser  with clothes, and a suitcase—they successfully create an environment where the audience could actually bridge the distance between Cel's non-verbal cues and physical  fragility, to her multi-layered collage of  memory, thought, and feeling. Through distortion of some screen images (of her lover's  visit), we experience the fog in Cel's mind,  her confusion and, later, a constant replay of  singular memories, until the "proper" moment freezes on the screen, leaving an indelible mark on the minds of some audience  members.  In her challenging role as Cel, Shaira  Holman, at times, was truly compelling.  Prepared to heed the warning that the  play contained some graphic content, and  having read one promotional summary of  the play, I expected A Thin Line to be a fierce  and potent trek through some sort of "stereotypical" healing process. When I went to  see the play, I still wanted something unique.  The lights dimmed. Words flashed on  the screen too quickly in the darkened room  for reading and note-taking. The next slide I  processed in only a second—a close-up of  someone's wrist, being propped up by the  other, submerged in a cool stream with a  trickle of reddening water.  After some background noises, including a door slamming hard, 1 wasn't surprised to meet institutionalized Cel, head  shaved and shaking visibly, displaying the  inaccessible presence of any woman stuck in  such a place (I've been there).  In the gripping scene that follows, Cel  digs out some pills from the corner of her  mouth (held there disolving/while under a  nurse's scrutiny), clutches them in her hand  and studies them, with an ambivalent expression on her face. I could almost hear the  indecisive scream in her head: "Do I? Don't  I? Do I? Don't I?" sense her conflict, pitted as  she is, albeit with little resistance, between  the doctor's authoritativeness and what she  really wanted to do. When the incessant  mental volley becomes intolerable, she collapses sobbing, grinds the pills on the floor  with a cup, and scatters the residue all over  the room in a wholly believable scene.  What follows then lost me. My attention  wandered as a flurry of heavy issues are  introduced: slashing; incest; prostitution;  parenting; and the power dynamics of psychiatry, from privileges awarded or denied,  from abuse within walls that are supposedly  erected to ensure our "safety," to the ulti  mate signs of power—who has the "keys" to  leave, who gets locked up? When humour is  introduced, it did not seem to provide much  relief from the onslaught of painful information.  While the story flowed quite easily, and  the progression of events made sense, its  momentum towards the finish was too quick  for me. For example, Cel conducts her own  debriefing from the mental brainwashing in  the institution, makes her resolution to leave,  gets to a payphone—unharassed by the staff,  who are present 24 hours a day—and somehow manages, (metaphorically perhaps?) to  find the "keys" to get out. If you see A Thin  Line expecting it to be "a humourous lesbian  mystery drama" as its been billed some places,  you will be disappointed.  And iff you see A Thin Line expecting to  view the success story of a woman who  comes back from the depths of hell and  understand the process of how she gets there,  you will be disappointed.  If you see the play with no expectations  and more of an interest in its form than its  content, it is a fascinating study of in the fine  line between the flexible and the constricting  and a multi-media ride through perception,  time, and the many complexities of the mind.  Terry Gibson is a student who has been  through the psychiatric system and survived.  Little Sister's and Flygirl  present the Canadian Book Launch  of one of the most provocative lesbian authors writing today  Public Sex  The Culture of Radical Sex  by Pat Califia  Thursday, October 20  Studio 16  1545 W. 7th Ave.  8:00 pm  JOIN US IN AN EVENING OF CELEBRATION OF THE WORK OF  ONE OF OUR FAVORITE AUTHORS. ALL PROCEEDS WILL GO  TOWARDS THE LITTLE SISTER'S DEFENSE FUND.  All tickets $5.00  Available in advance at Little Sister's Bookstore  or at the door.  For more information, call 669-1753  Don't miss this historic event!  Do women really lust after  waifish figures and hot sex?  Probably not.  Room of One's Own wants to  know what really makes your  heart go thump in the night,  what you secretly want so  much that you ache, what  you've shouted for  but never gotten. Short  fiction, poetry, and creative  documentary  (to 3,000 words), of previously unpublished work for a  special issue. Include SASE \  plus postage for replies. \  Deadline Jan. 31, 1995. I  But then what. . .  Persistent Desire  a special issue  coming out summer 1995  Room of One's Own, PO Box 46160,  Stn. D, Vancouver, BC V6J 5G5  get your own oob\  off our backs  a women's newsjournal  Join us for our third decode of news, reviews,  commentaries - the best in feminist Journalism!  subscribe today  11 issues a year $19  Contributing $22  Canada, Mexico $20  Overseas, all airmail: US $28, UK* 16  Trial sub: 3 Issues for $5  NAME   oob,2423 18th Si.NW,Wash.DC,20009  Introducing Amplesize Park's  own line of clothing  New hours:  Mon, Tues, Thurs 11 -6  Fri 11-7  Sat 10:30-4:30  Closed Wed & Sun  Quality consignment  clothing  Size 14... plus  Amplesize Park has moved to:  1969 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C.  Sarah-Jane (604) 251-6634  OCTOBER 1994 Arts  Vancouver Artist Nora Patrich:  Recognition for struggle  by Maria Julia Amestoy  "Since forever almost,  I pierce the water of the sleeping volca  noes,  looking for coloured stones,  small glitters and small consolations;  postponements of the question  that realigns metals,  and that may perhaps combine anew  fire and water,  in another semblance of a beginning  like that which obliges us  to move in a spiral,  looking for an imaginary centre,  the navel of love,  where difference shelters  its reason to continue  or its motive."  —by Beatriz Mazliah, Humo vitae  Without a doubt, for Vancouver artist  Nora Patrich, who has received this year's  Mosaic award for the defense of human rights,  the award is recognition of that imaged centre where her love for humanity rests.  This awarding of the Mosaic award to  Patrich signifies much more than recognition  of the work of one individual; it represents  recognition of our La tin American communities in Vancouver, of a people who have  suffered violations of human rights and have  responded by defending them.  State terrorism, and its instrument(s),  dictatorship(s), continue to be the most dra-  maticexpressionsof a politicalera marked by  arbitrary actions, pain and inhumanity. People who love humanity, such as Nora Patrich,  reject such terrorism as incompatible with  civilization and human dignity.  On receiving the award, the Vancouver-  based painter, in the journal Mundo y Familia  [world and family,] said "I am tremendously  happy because in spite of the fact that our  WOMEN'S WOEK  SCR E  N      PRINT  Making a Postive Impression  [ for Our Community Since 1984!  (604) 980-4235  • Women Owned & Operated-  Latin American community is a small part of  the general community, a large number of  people are known for their work in various  areas to help and serve others. And I'm referring to everyone.. It is the work of everyone,  because alone I would not have managed to  accomplish anything. I remember the people  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Service  • Piano and Harpsichord  luning  • Repairs and  Reconditioning  • Appraisals  with whom I work, capable people with  progressive ideas, with the force of the  spirit. But my first thought was for those  companeros [people who struggle together,] who work defending human rights  in our Latin American countries, and on  whom falls the difficult task of doing this  in secrecy. And I thought of those who continued on the path offering their lives in  return for their ideals; and today, they are  the voice that is listened to by those of us  who share their ideals and continue believing that happiness is based on a life of dignity and respect."  The defence of human rights has been  one of the most important commitments  fought for in a global society suffering from  the wounds that result from impunity for  inhumane action and the denial of responsibility. Lack of information and fear have  kept our people in submission, since they  allow one to hold up an enemy that does not  exist, thus concealing the true dangers.  These same people come together today  to spea k of sharing affinities as well as differences, in order to bind together our cultural  rights, and to root out ignorance as a factor  shared by the cruelest dictatorships.  Violations of human rights are manifested in various and degrading ways. Being  able to express oneself freely is a human  need. So denial of this freedom is a violation  of human rights, but so is not being able to  feed one's children, dress them adequately,  give them medical care, educate them, and  offer them the options that life could present.  Many Latin Americans have come here  fleeing from injustice, pursued by "social  creditors," and hungry for a new society  where humanity is not devalued. Today,  Latin America needs the truth without tear,  and to live without fear in the future, it is  necessary to defend our human rights. Today, we are a people who do this work,  fueled occasionally by means of popular  victories, such as the recognition of this work  by women in our communities such as Nora  Patrich.   Maria Julia Amestoy is. a Vancouver-based  member of the Women of Colour and First  Nations Women Political Action Group.  1 oinking albioutt wriiieg lor Kinesis /    ©  1 Ira ere s a cleaclline.      @  "BuC a ms Kinesis..."  © •255-5499'  EastsicIe DataGrapITics  1460 Commercial Dmve  teI: 25^9559 Fax: 255^5075  Now in Stock!  Art Supplies  1995 Date Books  Quo Vadis, Dayrunner, Brownline  Union Shop  CaII or Fax ang1 we'U sen<J you our MONihly flyER  of qREAT officE supply spEciAls.  Free NEXT'dAy dElivERy.  OCTOPUS BOOKS  1146 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C.  253-0913  An alternative bookstore in the  east end for new and used  books by local and international women authors as well as a  large selection of cards and  feminist magazines.  new and  gently used books  Fei  Philosophy - Poetry  Native - General  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  .    (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  OCTOBER 1994 Letters  /C/nes/s loves receiving mail. Please  get your letter to us by the 18th of  the month.  If you can, keep the length to about  500 words. (If you go way over, we  might edit for space.)  Hope to hear from you very soon.  Love,  Kinesis  In Defence of  the 99 Steps, Parti  Kinesis:  The National Action Committee on the  Status of Women's (N AC) annualgeneral meeting held in Ottawa in June adopted The Federal  99 Steps, authored by Vancouver Rape Relief  and Women's Shelter, as a "framework working paper" for NAC's work on ending violence  against women. As pointed out in your AGM  report, [see "As Kinesis Goes to Press," July I  August 1994] there was a lively debate on this  resolution.  A Round Table was organized by NAC in  1992. The Federal 99 Steps resulted from the  need, identified by Rape Relief and the NAC  Violence Committee, for NAC to develop a  comprehensive policy framework on ending  violence against women. Discussions took place  at the last two AGMs, and a draft document  was made available and discussed extensively  at the 1993 AGM. The NAC executive also  voted on the document, and adopted it at the  NAC executive meeting prior to the 1994 AGM.  The Federal 99 Steps is a very important  document, and despite the need for ongoing  consultation, NAC is better off today with its  adoption than we would be without it. Rape  Relief is to be commended for the work involved in authoring The 99 Federal Steps, which  is based on the work of many women's organizations commited to ending violence against  women.  Sincerely,  Sunera Thobani  President, NAC  Toronto, Ontario  The Editorial Board responds:  We appreciate you taking the time out to  clarify the process leading up to the i4GM, where  the document was adopted as a framework working  paperfor NAC's policy on violence against women.  The Editorial Board chose to have Kinesis'  Fatima Jaffer, who attended the AGM, devote the  column to her report on it. Her comments are based  on her reading of the document, her attendance at  the AGM, and conversations with women involved in the process before and during the document's adoption.  In Defence of  the 99 Steps, Part II  Kinesis:  I am writing in response to your editorial  {see "As Kinesis Goes to Press"] in the July/  August issue of Kinesis.  I disagree with your description of The 99  Federal Steps, the document written by Lee  Lakeman of Vancouver Rape Relief and Women's Shelter.  I was excited to be part of the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women's  (NAC) annual general meeting. I was especially pleased to be there when NAC adopted a  policy on violence against women. I was disappointed then when The 99 Federal Steps did not  passaspolicy,butwasinsteadaccepted merely  as a "working paper." Another year goes by  and NAC still lacks policy on violence. Meanwhile the federal government pretends to be  doing something about it and the largest organisation of women in the country is not able  to respond to them.  Kinesis' description of The 99 Federal Steps  as "with a myriad omissions, inaccuracies and  other omissions" is inaccurate and unfair to its  author and to the organisation presenting it.  The 99 Federal Steps is full of recommendations  directed at the federal government that reflect  the experience of grass roots activists in rape  crisis centres, transition houses and women's  centres across Canada right now. Clearly, it is  based upon the experience of many women  over the past 20 years. It is that experience that  shapes the recommendations so that they are  practical and realistic for the federal government that could lead to genuine social change  for women in Canada.  But, women voted against The 99 Federal  Steps because it lacked the input of several very  specific constituents of women including rural  women, isolated women, young women, old  women, etc. I don't know how it is possible to  reach all those women, that is, rural women. I  doubt that they would be as articulate in their  recommendations to the federal government  as the author of The 99 Federal Steps.  I am anxious to see the results of NAC's  grouping of women across Canada this year to  create a new proposal for policy. To go another  year without one would put NAC further behind than it already is on violence.  Julie Linkletter,  DisAbled Women's Network  Vancouver, BC  The Editorial Board responds:  We agree it is crucial for NAC to have a policy  on violence against ivomen. The resolution at the  AGMalso made noteofparticular groupsof women  whoseconcerns were inadequately addressed in the  document, and a commitment by NAC to seek  funding to enable those ivomen to have greater  input intoaNACpolicyon violence against women.  Kinesis' quality  disappoints!  Kinesis:  I have just received my September issue of  Kinesis and, while I was hoping for something  different, I'm afraid this issue is of the same  quality of most of the issues this past year.  I first began to buy Kinesis because it was  good. It reflected my views and informed me  about issues that I was interested in. I've been  watching the past two years and it seems that  with each issue, the quality of Kinesis goes  down.  Typos I can tolerate, having been a Kinesis  volunteer myself, I can understand how easy it  is to miss a mistake. The articles are usually so  poorly written that they are irritating to read.  Names are reported incorrectly. For example,  the first name of the anti-choice thug you refer  to on Page 6 is Gordon, not George. The graphics are sometimes terrible, they look as if they  were drawn on a napkin during a production  break.  I do understand about working with a  shoe-string budget and relying upon the work  of volunteers. Of course the finished product  will be different than one with a generous  budget. But there must be some standards.  Regretfully,  A. Alisa Nemesis  Vancouver, B.C.  The Ed Board Responds:  We appreciate your comments and regret you  no longer feel Kinesis meets the standards of the  feminist newspaper you have supported for so long.  Guest Authors of special  interest to Kinesis Readers  Gioconda Belli  This award winning Nicaraguan  poet will participate in two  Festival events including The  Poetry Bash.  Carmel Bird  A native of Tasmania, Ms. Bird  looks at what life is like at the  "End of the Earth" in her short  stories and novels.  Brian Fawcett  His latest book, Gender Wars, a  provocative commentary on  today's sexual politics will join  noted Vancouver feminist  Frances Wasserlein in a  discussion of sexual life and  gender politics in the 1990's.  Alison Leslie Gold  An American writer whose  new book is a fictional portrait  of James Joyce's schizophrenic  daughter will participate in  three events.  Liz Lochhead  This Scottish poet and  playwright will participate in  several events including  The Literary Cabaret and  The Poetry Bash.  The Vancouver International  Writers  (& Readers)  Festival  October 19-23, 1994  Granville Island  Information 681-6330  Monique Proulx  Join this Quebec author of  novels, short stories and  screenplays (including Le Sexe  des etoiles) for the Authors  a la Carte brunch.  Rosie Scott  A highly acclaimed New  Zealand-born, Australian based  poet/playwright, Ms. Scott will  join the Festival for three events.  Jane Urquhart  The best selling author of Away  will participate in several events  and will share her insights into  the "restless weather of the  human heart".  Sheri-D Wilson  Former ballerina, actor,  performance artist, playwright  and poet will jo;n in an evening of  words and music at this year's  Literary Cabaret.  Eve Zaremba  The creator of Helen Keremos,  the first lesbian heroine of  detective fiction, will join with  other crime fiction writers  to participate in three  Festival events.  '..'/I'M  4.  Tickets are available at Amber Books, Blackberry Books, Duthie Books, The Granville Book Company, Octopus Books, UBC Bookstore and Women in Print.  Or call Ticketmaster at 280-3311  Festival Programs are now available at all Greater Vancouver bookstores, libraries and Community Centres.  OCTOBER 1994 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum of 50 words. Groups, organizations and individualseligible for free  space in the Bulletin Board must be,  or have, non-profit objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Note: Kinesis is published  ten times a year. Jul/Aug and Dec/  Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact nameand telephone number  for any clarification that may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over  the telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the goods and services advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of  the information provided or the  safety and effectiveness of the services and products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301 -1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6. For more information call 255-5499.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  the Writer's meeting on Tues Oct 4,8pm at  our off ice, 301 -1720 Grant St, Vancouver. If  you can't make the meeting, call 255-5499.  No experience is necessary, all women  welcome.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Want to get more involved but not sure  where to begin? Join us—become a volunteer at Vancouver Status of Women. VSW  volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise  funds, answer the phone lines and help to  connect women with the community resources they need, organize the library and  other exciting tasks! Come to the committee  meetings: Finance/Fundraising, Mon Oct  17, 6 pm. The next volunteer potluck and  orientation will be on Thurs Oct 20, 7 pm at  VSW, 301 -1720 Grant St. For more info, call  Jennifer at 255-5511.  POLITICAL ACTION GROUP  The next Women of Colour and First Nations  Women's Political Action Group meets once  a month. For more info please call Miche at  255-5511.  VIDEO & FILM SERIES  Our Stories is back! VSW's annual video  and film series is planned for the month of  Nov. Want more info? Just call, 255-5511  and ask for Miche.  CALLING ALL WOMEN!!  Wanna get in on the action? The Women  and Social Policy Review Coalition is preparing for an action around the federal  government's social policy review. We are  inviting any and all women'sgroupstocome  Bellydancer by SKY Lee  The Words I Know by Cathy Stonehouse  Press Gang Publishers invites you to celebrate  two new books hot off the press!  Wednesday, October 26, 1994  7.-30 pm  at The Heritage Hall  3102 Main Street, Vancouver  Author readings, refreshments and Jun! Free admission.  [For more information call Delia 876-7787]  Press     Gang     Publishers  and join us on Sun Oct 16 at the Downtown  Eastside Senior' Centre at 509 East Hastings  St. for a day of banner making in preparation  for a planned day of action in late October.  We will have the materials, all you needto do  is bring along some friends and your imaginations! If you are interested in joining us give  us a call at 255-5511 for more info.  LESBIANAS FEMINISTAS  ElCuarto Encuentro de Lesbiana Feministas  de America Latinay el Caribe se realizara en  Agentina en marzo de 1995. El encuentro es  solamente para mujeres latinoamericanas y  caribenas. Para recibir mas informacion  manda un sobre estampilladocon tu direccion  a Cuarto Encuentro, PO Box 776 Stn P,  Toronto, Ont, M5S 2Z1.  LATIN AMERICAN LESBIANS  The Fourth Latin American and Caribbean  Lesbian Feminist Conference will be held in  Argentina in Mar 1995. The conference is  open to Latin American and Caribbean  women only. For more info, send SASE to  Cuarto Encuentro, PO Box 776 Stn P, To-  ronto, Ont, M5S2Z1.   SEXUAL HARASSMENT  CONFERENCE  The 10th annual CAASHHE (Canadian Association Against Sexual Harassment in  Higher Education) conference: Shades of  Gray: Shedding Light on Old Struggles and  New Dilemmas will be held Nov 16-19 at the  Banff Springs Hotel in Banff Alberta. The  conference will be a forum for the exchange  of ideas, training and professional development for sexual harassment advisors. For  more info, call Shirley Voyna Wilson at (403)  220-4086 or fax (403)284-0069.  BIG SISTER BASH  The 3rd annual Big Sister Dinner Auction  Dance is being held at the Big Bamboo Club  on Fri Oct 14. Tickets from $10-20. For more  info, call 873-4525.  SEXUAL ABUSE WORKSHOP  The Courage to Heat. Essential Techniques  for Helping Survivors of Childhood Sexual  Abuse will be held on Oct 17 in Victoria, BC.  The conference, sponsored by the Athabasca  University Educational Enterprises, is an  intensive.practical workshop led by Ellen Bass  for counsellors, therapists, psychologists,  crisis line workers, and women's shelter  workers. For more info, call 1 -800-561 -5789  or fax (403)675-6467.  HALLOWEEN PARTY  The Radical Women in Seattle are holding  their annual Halloween party on Sat Oct 29  at New Freeway Hall, 5018 Rainier Ave S,  Seattle, Wash. For rides or childcare, call  (206) 722-6057 or 722-2453 two days in  advance. Wheelchair accessible.  SINGLE MOTHER'S CONFERENCE  The YWCA 16th Annual Single Mother's  Conference, A Family: Solo Mums Thriving,  will be heldfrom Oct 14-15. Thisconference,  a series of workshops and networking sessions, is a place to come together and network, learn new insights, gather information/  resources, meet new friends and learn that  we are not alone. Registration fee is $35  (includes childcare). For more info call the  YWCA at 683-2531.  GLOBAL RESTRUCTURING  Putting a Face on Global Restructuring:  Women Examine the Consequences, will be  held Oct 20-21 in Vancouver. The programme  includes workshops that examine the effects  of restructuring on Aboriginal women, on  women's work and issues of sovereignty and  democracy. Fees rangefrom $10-50.Participation is valued more than your money. For  more info, call 822-9171 or fax 822-9169.  FARM WOMEN'S CONFERENCE  The 1994 BC Farm Women's Conference,  Farm Women Entrepreneurs, Women Outstanding in their Fields, will be held from Oct  20-22. The conference will be held at the Inn  at the Water on Vancouver Island. Registration: $160 includes all meals, accommodation and taxes. For more info, call Anthea  Archerat 746-4637, Heather McWilliam338-  8239 or Bev VandenDungen 748-4034.  WORKSHOP ON VIOLENCE  Match International and the Indian women's  organization, Karmika, are organizing Asia  Regional Workshop on Violence against  Women, an excursion to meet with women's  groups in New Dehli and Bombay Oct 21-25.  Participants will join women from eight Asian  countriesto discuss violence against women.  Cost $3150. For more info, contact: MATCH  International Centre, 1102-200 Elgin St, Ottawa, Ont, K2P 1L5 or call (613)238-1312.  CONFERENCE FOR  YOUNG WOMEN  Young Women Planning Change, a conference for young women ages 13-19, will be  held from Oct 28-29 at the Winfield Easter  Seal Camp. The conference, sponsored by  the Vernon and District Women's Centre and  the Ministry of Women's Equality, focuses on  raising awareness about the difficulties facing young women today and guiding them in  planning a positive future. For more info call  542-7531.  ARTIST SHOWING  Cherie Aitken's My Works, a series of pen .  and ink images, will be shown from Oct 1-14  at the Vancouver Women's Bookstore, 315  Cambie St. For more info, call 684-0523.  Co-op Radio 102.7 FM  Autumn  Oct 14- 30th  Programming Highlights:  Air  Lift  Women & peace Monday October 24, 6-9pm. Women Visions  hosts this special which will look at the work women have done locally and internationally in the hope for peace.  the big lie Tuesday October 25, noon to 5pm. Those who control  the media work very hard at shaping the way we think, the corporate agenda is  presented as the only reality. This program will present some critical perspectives on  the post-Reagan, Thatcher and Mulroney world. What changes? Learn to love your  cage.  World Majority Women Tuesday October 25, 7pm-12am.  Tune in for programming dealing with the impact of global re-structuring on women  of colour in the so-called Third and Fourth Worlds. Plus great music from women  around the world.  TUNE IN CALL UP . . . AND JOIN . . . 684-8494  OCTOBER 1994 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  LESBIAN DINNER/DANCE  Hot Flashes Women's Cafe presents the  Seventh Annual Lesbian Dinner/Dance on  Sat Oct 15 at Crystal Gardens, 713 Douglas  St, Victoria. Performers will include Sharon  Costello, Sue McGowan, & Carol Weaver.  Tickets available at Even/women's Bookstore - dinner/dance $30 or dance only $12.  For more info call Jenny at 474-6085.  WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  Douglas College in New Westminister is  offering aseries of free workshops for women.  Some of the workshops offered include: Issues Facing International Students ThurOct  13 from 12-2pm, Responding to Criticism  Tues Oct 18 from 12-2pm, Breast Self-  Examination Oct 19 from 12-2pm, Learn  About PMS Oct 26 from 12-2pm, Test (and  Math) Anxiety and Test Prep Thur Oct 27  from 10-12pm, Job Search Skills for Women  Nov 8 from 12-2pm. For more info call 527-  5148  MAXINE GADD  Maxine Gadd will be reading poetry at Black  Sheep Books (formerly R2B2), 2742 West  4th Ave on Fri Oct 7 at 8pm. Admission is  free. For more info call 732-5087.  NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS  The Vancouver Society of Immigrant and  Visible Minority Women invites you to a  workshop, Serving on Boards and Committees of Non-Prof it Organizations. This workshop, will look at the structure and roles of  non-profit organizations. It will take place on  Sat Oct 15, 8:30-1 pm at Public Legal Education Society, 900 Howe St. Workshop is  free. For more info call, Surjeet Sidhu at 731 -  9108.   3 BUTCHES AND A FEMME  Bordercrossed Babes presents readings by  dyke writers, featuring Nadine Chambers,  Percy Lezard, Karen X Tushinsky, and from  San Francisco Chea Villanueva, Sat Oct 8 at  8pm at the LOTUS, 455 Abbott St. Sliding  scale admission $3-6. Limited child-care  subsidies available on first come first serve  basis. For more info, call 253-4621.  LAW CLASSES FOR SENIORS  The People's Law School is offering free law  classes for seniors. The first class, Federal  Benefits For Seniors will be held on Thur Oct  6 from 10:30-12 at Barclay Manor, 1447  Barclay St. To pre-register call 689-0571.  The second class, Seniors Benefits—Am I  Getting Them All? will be held at Champlain  Heights Community School, 6955 Frontenac  St, on Wed Oct 12 from 12:30-2pm. To pre-  register call 257-8315. Both locations are  wheelchair accessible.  BENEFIT FOR BETTY BAXTER  Support the Betty Baxter Campaign Debt  Benefit and have brunch with Bill Richardson,  self appointed Poet Laureate of Canada and  winner of the Leacock Award for Humour, at  Milestones Restaurant, 1145 Robson St, on  Sun Oct 2 at 10 am. Sponsored by the  Vancouver Centre New Democrats. Tickets  are $30 and available at Little Sisters or by  calling Neil Monckton at 669-3975.  KARATE tor WOMEN  ■.wum-MiMihTsaaa  Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm  Fitness, serf confidence,  serf defense  ASK ABOUT BEGINNER GROUPS  nraPl 734-9816  PROPERTY RIGHTS CLASS  The People's Law School is offering a free  law class on Property Rights In A Relationship, on Tues Oct 11 from 1:30-3pm. Classes  will be held at the 411 Seniors Centre, 411  Dunsmuir St, Vancouver. Topre-registercall  684-8171 loc 7.  MATTERS OF THE HEART  Presentation House presents Lee Dickson  and Laura Letinsky, two contemporary Canadian artists who have linked recent projects  tocreate two exhibitions dealing with Matters  of the Heart. This exhibition will be on display  at Presentation House, 333 Chesterf iedl Ave,  North Vancouver, until Oct 23. For info, call  986-1351. ___   WEAVING OF MEMORY  Weaving of Memory, an exhibit of the traditional Mayan textile and painting of Zoila  Ramirez and Alejandro Ruiz will be showing  from Oct 12-Nov 12 atthe Pitt Gallery, 317  W.Hastings. Opening night Wed Oct 12 at  8pm with Mayan Prayer Ceremony at 8:30pm.  Mayan Cultural Night on Sat Oct 15 at  7:30pm with Q'Jom Tze Marimba Group  Theatre. Also on Sat Oct 22 at 9pm is the  Anti-Columbus Indigenous & Popular Resistance: Bhangra & House Rave. All events  are Free.  BOOK LAUNCH  Press Gang Publishers invites you to celebrate two new books hot off the press: Belly  dancer by SKY Lee and The Words I Know  by Cathy Stonehouse Wed Oct 26 at 7:30pm  at The Heritage Hall, 3102 Main St, Vancouver. Admission is free. For more info, call  Delia at 876-7787.  OLDER LESBIANS DISCUSSION  M.O.B. (Menopausal Old Bitches) invites all  older lesbians to the VLC for an afternoon  facilitated discussion on aging, ageism and  other issues which wef ace, or are starting to  think about. Sun Oct 23 from 1-4pm at the  VLC, 876 Commercial Dr. Free. For more  info, call 999-4609.  HALLOWMAS CONCERT  Ruth Barrett and Cynthia Smith perform a  Hallowmas concert at La Quena  Coffeehouse, 1111 Commercial Dr, on Thurs  Oct 27 at 8pm. Barrett and Smith are internationally known fretted duclimer players,  singers and songwriters. Cost is $4-8, call  253-7189 for tickets and reservations.  CONFERENCE ON HIV/AIDS  The 3rd Canadian Conference on HIV/AIDS  and related issues in Aboriginal Communi-  f/eswilltakeplaceDec5-7inToronto. Through  workshops the conference's goal will be to  emphasize the inclusion of all Aboriginal  peoples, and embrace traditionalfamily structures and values in addressing HIV/AIDS  issues. For more info, call 1-800-559-1472.  HAGS, CRONES & MENOPAUSE  Hags, Crones & Menopause, a workshop for  women dispelling myths about menopause  and aging in a safe and supportive environment will be held on Fri Oct 14 from 7:30-  10pm and Sat Oct 15 from 10-4:30pm. Open  to women of all ages, but particularily for  older (whatever that means to you!) women.  For lesbian-bi-het womy n. Taught by Pat and  Sharon, feminist wiccan teachers. Cost is  $45-100. A few work exchanges available.  For info, call 253-7189.  SOCIAL POLICY REVIEW  Lesbians and gay men wishing to look at the  federal government's social policy review  are invited to a meeting Sat Nov 19. For  location and more info, call the VLC at 254-  8458 or the GLC at 669-1187.  SENIORS & SOCIAL PROGRAMS  Seniors are invited to a strategy meeting to  save social policies Sat Nov 5 from 9:30-  3pm at 411 Dunsmuir St, Vancouver. For  more info, call Ellen at 254-6207.  LITTLE SISTERS BENEFIT  A big benefit for Little Sister's Bookstore will  be held Thurs Oct 13 at 7:30 pm at the Video  Inn, 1965 Main St. Feature artists include  Archer Pechawis, Emily Faryna, Dennis  Maracle, Karen Tulchinsky and more. There  will also be a premier showing of two new  video works by Shani Mootoo and Wayne  Yung. All proceeds goto Little Sister's Defense  Fund. For more info call Delia at 876-7787 or  Andrea at 872-9516.  ^TBOOKSTORE ^  VANCOUVER  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  JRS:  VDAY - SATURDAY  M- 6PM  315CAMBIEST.  VANCOUVER, B.C.  V6B2N4  TEL: (604) 684.0523  HOI  MO  10 A  WOMEN  IN PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  3566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC  Voice   604 732-4128  Fax       604 732^129  10-6 Daily ♦  12-5 Sunday  Discounts for  book clubs  Special orders  welcome  Bed & Breakfast  A  Memorable  Escape  Centre Yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of Canada's beautiful, natural  Gulf Islands     .  5 acres of forested foot paths  trails with ponds  ocean and mountain views  Decadent Breakfasts  Hot Tub  A private retreat  (604) 537-9344  Mail: R.R-#2, S-23, B-O, Ganges. B.C. VOS 1E0  GROUPS  EAST-SIDE LESBIAN YOUTH  The East-Side Youth Drop-in for lesbian, gay  and bisexual youth and their friends will be  held every Thurs at Britannia Community  Centre, 1661 Napier St. This is a safe, confidential, non-threatening environmentto discuss issues, build support and meet people.  If you are between 15 and 25, want to get  involved or get more info, call Jason or Trish  at 253-4391.  JUST OUT!  Mature lesbians: are you starting or continuing the coming out process? Are you looking  for friendship and support? Come out and  join usfor lunch, and help us plan some social  activities. Call Geri at 278-8497 (evenings).  POSITIVE WOMEN SUPPORT  The Positive Women's Network will begin  hosting a facilitated support group this fall. It  will be a chance for positive women to get  together on a regular basis, connect, and  sharetheir experiences of living with HIV. For  more info, call Bronwyn at 681-2122.  NORTH SHORE SUPPORT GROUP  Now That You Know\s a safe and supportive  group for parents of gays and lesbians who  want to talk to each other and break down  barriers thatthey might be experiencing. For  more info, call Family Services of the North  Shore 988-5281. You must be a resident of  the North Shore to attend. Sliding fee scale.  VOLUNTEERS NEEDED  Eastside Youth Drop-in, a multi-cultural youth  group composed of lesbian, gay and bisexual youth, is looking for facilitators to,  reflect its multi-cultural heritage. If you are a  First Nations lesbian or a lesbian of colour  please consider volunteering for us. We need  your help. Call Trish at 253-7414.  Kinesis is looking for a part-time Advertising  Co-ordinator who is creative, energetic, well  organized, responsible, and has good person-to-person skills and is aware of feminist  issues and values.  DUTIES INCLUDE  ♦soliciting new advertising accounts and  maintaining the current advertising base  • invoicing all accounts  Wage based on percentage of  advertising revenues per month  DEADLINE OCT 10, 5 PM  JOB STARTS OCT 17  Women of colour & First Nations women are  encouraged to apply. Affirmative action principles will be in effect for this hiring.  301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5Y 2L6  Tel: 255-5499   Fax:255-5511  Kinesis is looking for a part-time Distribution  Co-ordinatorwhoisenergetic, wellorgainized,  responible, has good interpersonal skills and  is aware of feminist issues, has access to  vehicular transportation.  DUTIES INCLUDE  •maintaining statements and records of  sales and collecting payments  •picking up & delivering Kinesis to mailing  house and in-town distributors  •relaying information to the Editorial Board  Wage based on 10/hrs per issue at$15/hour  DEADLINE OCT 10, 5PM  JOB STARTS OCT 17  Women of colour & First Nations women  are encouraged to apply. Affirmative action  principles will be in effect for this hiring.  Kinesis Hiring  301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5Y 2L6  Tel: 255-5499   Fax:255-5511  OCTOBER 1994 Bulletin Board  GROUPS  LUNCHES FOR POSITIVE WOMEN  A reminder to all members that Positive Women's Network is hosting brown-bag lunches  for members in the drop-in every Tues from  12-1:30pm. It's a great time to meet new  members, and reconnect with women you've  met before. Bring your sandwich, we provide  beverages and cookies. Call 681-2122.  VLC  Vancouver Lesbian Connection's groups currently running are on Fri at 7:30pm: Over 30's  Support Group (1 st & 3rd), Lesbian Avengers  (2nd & 4th); Sat from 6-9pm: Lesbian Writers  Group (1st & 3rd) and on Sun at 7pm the  Youth Group. New Coming Out groups starting this fall. For more info and to register, call  254-8458.   FREE LEGAL ADVICE  Law Students' Legal Advice Program (LSLAP)  is offering free legal advice to those who can't  afford lawyers. LSLAP will hold 20 clinics  throughout the lower mainland on a variety of  subjects including small claims, landlord-tenant disputes, welfare & UIC claims. LSLAP  also has specialized clinics for First Nations  persons, women, seniors, Persons with AIDS,  and Cantonese speaking people. For more  dates and location, call 822-5791.  TEEN MOM DROP-IN  Eastside Family Place now has a drop-in  space for teen moms on Mons, between  3:30-5:30 pm. Free snacks and coffee available. Located at 1661 Napier St (at William &  Commercial, just off Granview Park).  CUSTODY SUPPORT GROUP  A custody support group is looking for women  who are interested in establishing a support  group for women going through custody battles. If you are interested, call 591-7087.  WOMEN'S DISCUSSION GROUP  A women's discussion group on the environment, feminism, and sustainability would like  to encourage interested women to get involved. Meetings are generally held monthly.  For details, call 255-5763.  CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE  PALS—Protection Awareness for Little Angels—is holding its next meeting Thurs, Oct  20, 7:30pm. at Killarney Community Centre,  Room 5,6260 Killarney St, Vancouver. PALS  is a group interested in raising awareness  about child sexual abuse and its prevention.  For more info, call Kathy Boyce, 431-1977.  Trivia 20  Ruthann Robson  Linda Nelson  Daphne Marlatt  Harriet Ellenberger  Rena Rosenwasser  Lise Weil  Michele Causse  Anne Dellenbaugh  Betsy Warland  Susanne Harwood  Leah Halper  Barbara Mor  I. Rose  SUBMISSIONS  WOMEN'S CRAFT FAIRE  The Women's Craft Faire will be held on Dec  3 or 4 from 11 -5:30pm. It will be an evening  of lesbian entertainment. The Faire is inviting crafts womyn to rent tables. For more  info, call Sound & Furies Production at 253-  7189.  LESBIAN AND GAY ARTISTS  An independent researcher is writing a review article compiling an annotated bibliography of publications by lesbian and gay  artists in Canada. If you have an exhibition  catalogue, periodical article, book, self-published pamphlet or other publication please  send copy and/or info to Caffyn Kelley c/o  Gallerie Publications, 2901 Panorama Dr,  North Vancouver, BC, Canada V7G 2A4, or  call (604) 929-8706.  QUEER SUBMISSIONS  Queer Glances, Queer Moments, an anthology of lesbian and gay short stories, is  currently accepting submissions for an anthology of short stories (750-1000 words) by  lesbians and gay men. The book will be an  album of snapshots that reflect the spectrum of lesbian and gay life experiences. For  more info and submission guidelines write  #1002-1340 Burnaby St, Vancouver, BC,  V6E 1R1. Submission deadline is Mar 31,  1995.  CALLING PINAY LESBIANS  We are a group of Pinay lesbians working  towards our visibility. We want you to be a  part of this groundbreaking work. If you have  written stories, essays and poetry or have  illustrations, drawing, or graphics; comics,  journal writings, etc. we want to hear from  you. Deadline is Jan 31, 1995. Send submission to SisterVision Press, c/o Pinav, PO  Box 217 Stn E, Toronto, Ont, M6H 4E2.  Include name, tel# & address.  WOMEN'S POETRY  West Coast Women and Words presents  their 1994 Poetry Contest for Women. The  theme is Women Moving (e.g. self or belongings in space ortime). Prizes include up  to $150 and publication in spring '95 edition  of W&W newsletter. Deadline is Dec 15. For  more info, call (604) 730-1034or write West  Coast Women & Words Poetry Contest,  219—1675 W8th Vancouver BC V6J 1V2.  LITERARY ARTS MAGAZINE  Possibilitiis: Literary Arts Magazine is currently inviting writers to participate in a  special issue of book reviews which will be  launched in Feb/95. Reviews of short stories, poetry, brief essays are also welcome.  Please submit in triplicate with short bio by  Dec 5 to #109-2100 Scott St, Ottawa, Ont,  K1Z 1A3. For more info, call (613) 761-  1177.  Box 9606  No. Amherst, MA  01059-9606  ly^pns  conne  ...provides reliable sews and analysis  about development and a  Latin America.  "Latin America Connexions  is a fine jouraaL lively,  informative, very impressive.  It will prove valuable to those  who hope to understand what  is happening in the region."  -Noam Chomsky  For a one year subscription  please send $10 to:  LATIN AMERICA CXMWEXIONS  BOX 4453, MPO  VANCOUVER, B.C. v6b 3z8  New NFB Films  The National Film Board will premiere three new films by women at the 1994 Vancouver  International Film Festival. Hands of History, directed by Vancouver Aboriginal filmmaker  Loretta Todd (pictured above) and Keepers of the Fire, by Victoria-based Metis writer and  filmmaker Christine Welsh will be shown together on Mon, Oct 3 at 7pm. Both Loretta Todd  and Christine Welsh will be in attendance. The films will be shown again on Thurs, Oct 6  at 2pm. Also being screenedforthe first time will be Motherland: Tales of Wonder, directed  by Helen Klodawsky on Thurs, Oct 9 at 7pm and on Mon, Oct 10 at 12 noon.  All showings will be at the Pacific Cinemateque, 1131 Howe St, Vancouver. Forfurther info  call the NFB at 666-7761.  SUBMISSIONS CLASSIFIEDS  ABSINTHE  Absinthe's next issue (winter 94) will focus on  First Nations people's writing, stories, interviews, art, and more. The focus will be on  works created and edited by First Nations  people. Inquiries and contributions should be  directed to the circle of editors, c/o absinthe,  PO Box 61113, Calgary, Alta, T2N 4S6.  ART '95  An international art competition which offers  $55,000 in prizes and awards and exibition in  New York's Art 54 Gallery. Categories include Painting, Drawing, Watercolour, Pastels, Mixed Media, Printmaking, Sculpture,  Illustration, Miniature Art, Computer Art,  Icons, Photography, Holography, Clay,  Glass, Fibre, Jewelry, Wood, Metalwork,  Enamel and Furniture. Judging will take place  in May 1995. Deadline for info requests is  Dec 16, call (914) 623-0599 orf ax (914) 623-  0611.  CLASSIFIEDS  COWGIRLS 'N GHOST TOWNS  Winter holiday for lesbians. Come this winter  to sunny and warm Arizona. Travel by van  with a small group of cowgirls like yourself to  see Arizona's Old West, ghost towns, Spanish mission, Native American ruins, spectacular scenery, and the cultural legacy of  Mexico, Arizona's southern neighbour. Tour  includes accomodations in upscale or historical hotels, horseback riding and cook-  outs, Sedona jeep tour, and "Welcome to  Arizona" reception with local lesbians. Eight  departures Nov-Feb. A special invitation is  extended to Canadian lesbians. Out'n Arizona Dept 85285. Tel: (800) 897-0304.  LYNN MATHERS MSW  I am a registered social worker and therapist  in Maple Ridge/Abbotsford. I have a general  private practice working with individuals, couples, families and groups. I have experience  with addictions, grief, sexual and physical  abuse, infidelity, pregnancy loss and general  life concerns. Fee: $70-$86 per hour. For  appointment call 463-3026 or 852-4818.  SHIATSU   /ITH A DIFFERENCE  For pain relief, stress management or as a  complement to therapy, Astarte's focus on  body-awareness will help you gain insight  and tools tofurtheryour healing process. Call  Astarte Sands 251-5409.  LESBIAN WRITERS' RETREAT  Lesbian Writers' Retreat, Nov 1-30 on Salt  Spring. An unstructured self-led retreatfor4-  8 lesbians. Each woman will have her own  room and desk. Common kitchen and living  room. Approx. $325 each to cover accommodation. For more info, phone or fax Judy  at 598-6034 in Victoria.  ART THERAPY  Art Therapy is a non-intrusive, creative process using visual images to access the unconscious and safely express emotions. Providing a tangible and self-esteem enhancing  record of the healing journey, it can even be  fun. No art experience needed. Call Valerie  Laub, DWATI, certified art therapist at 683-  2531. Accessible fee.  OCTOBER 1994 * What kai. 16 coioux\...  Jook 20 usaxi. to corns, out...  ^bfian± 7 continent 1....  Oi ai inuaiaauiz a± tns   li/nhle. LrLack cvizs.4,   0% tns. LsatfiEZ jaak.£.t..  C~an ue tnailza to uoux favoiitz hsxion fox $22.50...  cJfna comjp.LbfnE.nti. uoux cohu of -J\in£±L±...  Send $22  far  rsary T-shirt  tt£t Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6  a*'* ******       \99*  Support your  feminist newspaper  D Cheque enclosed     If you  $1.40 GST  D BH! me  D New  D$36 + $2.52 GST     D Renewal  Institutions/Groups   □ Gift  □$45 + $3.15 GST     □ Donation  subscrij  Free to  Orders outside Canada add $8.  Vancouver Status of Women Membership  (includes Kinesis subscription)  □$30+$1.40 GST  Postal <  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Worm  #301 -1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6