 Kinesis benefit  coming up September 6.  Put that at the top of  your fall engagement list  8 All those questions  you've been wanting to  ask SORWUC about the  Muckamuck strike  Z Forthe right to choose,  we're going to hang in  there a little bit longer  ■ O It was a feminist  print media conference  and Kinesis, naturally,  was there.  3 The B.C. Fed of  Labour's conference on  sexual harassment was a  tremendous success  ■ ©  Colored Girls is  enuf to delight  Vancouver feminists  4 Terrace hosts the first-  ever Northern Women's  Festival, and women  come from all over the  north  ■ ■   Women + Music =  Powerful good times at  the Vancouver Folk  Music Festival  " Moving Out: an open  letter to all Vancouver  feminists and trade  unionists  ■® Is the women's  movement an exclusive  club for the correct-  liners only?  Cover: Dianne Crosby at home on Saturrta Island with  three of her four children. Photo xerox by Maggie  Shore.  SUBSCRIBE TO K/Af£S/S  Published 10 times a year by Vancouver Status of Women  1090 West 7th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V6H 1B3  Subscriber  Member/Subscriber  Institution  Sustainer  $10  By donation  $20  $50  Name  Payment Enclosed  Phone  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding —we need member support!  -news about women that's not in the dailies. 2    Kinesis August'80  LOCAL MOVEMENT  For our right to choose, we'll hang in there a little bit longer  By Kinesis staff writers  I can't believe we're doing this again.  Rosemary Broan, NDP MLA for Burnaby-Edmonds,  speaking at the July 11 pro-choice rally  organized by the Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion. The crowd, 300-strong,  which had crammed into the Robson Square  Media Centre, couldn't believe it either.  The {irst time I spoke on the right to  choose on abortion,  Brown commented, I was  o{ an age when I could have needed to make  that choice far mysel{. Mow my daughter is  that age.  I){ I have to come back when my  granddaughter is o{ childbearing age, I  will come.  So, suggested the applause which  greeted this statement, will we all.  Rafe Mair not elected to make opinions law  Target for the demonstration of pro-choice  strength were the recent anti-choice statements dropping from the mount of provincial health minister Rafe Mair.  Rafe Mair has also been vaguely chattering  about ^ome birth counselling programs he'd  .latfe to set up. Nancy Walker of CCCA commented, he wants to chip away at our rights  but pre{ers to do it while we're not looking. This meeting was to let Mair know  we're awake and watching.  I don't care what Ra{e Mair thinks,  Brown  explained, that's his personal, private  stupidity. What I do care about is his attempt to in{lict that on us -- he has no  right to do that. He was not elected to  make his personal opinions the law. He  does not have that right and he needs to  be reminded constantly that he does not  have that right.  Referring to the hospital board battles  which have become a tedious characteristic  of the abortion struggle in this province,  Brown said: We have to be prepared to  carry this battle through, board by board.  I{ the battle takes farever, we have to be  in there farever, tired and old as we may  be.  Choice on abortion, Brown stressed, must  never be allowed to leave the hands of the  woman. No level of government can be permitted to regulate that choice. I'm not  going to let it out o{ my hands, and you  mustn't,  she concluded.  Personal and moving comments on the struggle  came from Alice Ages (speaking for the  British Columbia Federation of Women) and  Dr. Lorena Kanke (from the B.C. Medical  Association). I got pregnant in the {i{-  ties,  Ages told the crowd, when I was supposed to be a virginal school teacher...I  Nancy Walker, CCCA spokesperson, at July rally  aborted mysel{.. .it wasn't nice, It wasn't  pleasant and it wasn't {air.  I worked in hospitals when abortions were  not legal, Dr. Kanke told us, and I saw  women die.  I don't want to see that happen  again.  On behalf of the Vancouver YWCA, Mary Mac-  Donald affirmed the pro-choice position of  the oldest women's organization in this  city. Ours is a pluralistic society, Mac-  Donald pointed out, and as such, it must  allow a woman to deal with an unwanted   "  pregnancy in a way that is consistent with'-"'  her own personal philosophy. The YWCA has  stuck to its pro-choice position even _  though it hasn't always been easy — in  many cities in Canada, it has led to their  funding being threatened.  Our federal abortion law, with all its  ambiguities, came under general attack  from the speakers. Spokesperson for CCCA,  Nancy Walker, pointed to the result of the  uneven application of the law: the poor,  the rural and the young woman is still denied her right to choose on abortion.  We made a serious mistake in 1969 in accepting that legislation,  B.C. Fed of Labour  representative Maureen Headley reminded the  meeting. We should never have settled far  THAT POSTER HAS A RIGHT TO BE THERE  In Vancouver today you can get a $2000 fine  or two months in jail for postering.  The new by-law amendment — section 85-A  of the Street and Traffic By-Law — prohibits the placing of posters on street  furniture, light standards and telephone  or hydro poles. Both the individual and  the organization she or he is postering  for will be charged.  Vancouver Sun columnist Linda Hossie comments: Whatever the Intent behind the poster by-law, the e{{ect is to discriminate  against the city's less a{{luent community  and church groups, artists and political  organizations --in short, anyone who  can't a{{ord a two-minute spot on CBC television, quarter-page ad in a daily newspaper, or a two thousand dollar fane.  More than eighty community groups, including  Rape Relief, the Health Collective and Vancouver Status of Women, have formed a coalition to combat this asinine by-law.  With a beautiful poster carrying the banner THIS IS A POSTER, IT HAS A RIGHT TO  BE HERE, we are making improvements to  the street furniture, the light standards  and phone and hydro poles.  The pro-poster coalition has lobbied City  Hall, without success. At least six people  have now been charged under the by-law.  The first trial date is set for September  16.  For the campaign to repeal the by-law to  succeed they need the support and help  of many people. Legal research, court  costs and possible fines will all have to  be paid.  This is a fight we do have to win. The bylaw could have a serious effect on the  life of the local women's movement. Imagine  March 8 without any posters.'  And what will you do if your pussycat goes  missing?  Strike a blow for free speech  Strike your own blow for freedom of speech.  Phone 681-7654 or 872-8212 and find out  when the next organizing meeting is happening. Pick up some posters and post them up.  Send a cheque to the anti-poster coalition  — make cheques out to 'Ad Hoc' and mail  them to 2250 West 4th Ave, Vancouver B.C.O.  hal{ a loa{.  We're going to have to put out brush {ires  {or a while at the hospital level, Headley  went on, but I would pre{er not to spend  the next 40 years o{ my Ufa electing {emi-  nists to hospital boards.  It's time to put people like Rafa Main, out  o{ business   far good,  Headley stated.  But  until we have that legislation changed,  fights with the Rafe Mairs of this world  are inevitable,  she concluded.  Lions Gate Meeting: sign up by August 14  On to action plans. Maureen Diamond, on behalf of the North Shore Association for  Choice on Abortion (NSACA) reminded North  and West Vancouver residents over 19 that  AUGUST 14 IS THE DEADLINE FOR APPLICATIONS  for membership in the society which elects  members to the Lions Gate Hospital board  September 17. Due to poor pro-choice turnout last year, anti-choicers won all five-  hospital board seats up for election. Make  sure it doesn't happen again.  Memberships in the hospital society cost  $6.00 and forms can be obtained from Lions  Gate Hospital, from the North Shore Women's  Center, 205 - 3255 Edgemont Blvd. —  987-4822. Or phone NSACA at 988-3649.  Sandra Letts of Surrey told the gathering  that the deadline for registering as a member of Surrey Memorial is also drawing  near. Hard work last year by the Abortion  Repeal Committee (ARC) was successful in  scuttling the anti-choice threat.<>  Surrey Memorial: sign up by August 24  Date for the annual general meeting of  Surrey Memorial has been set for September  24. To vote at that meeting, you have to  be signed up by August 24 at the latest.  Citizens of Surrey and Delta who are over  ■ 19 are eligible for membership', and cost  is only $1.00. You can obtain membership  forms from the hospital (13750 - 96th Ave.,  Surrey). Or you can call the Abortion  Rights Committee at 584-9622 (an answering  service) and they will get back to you.O  Pro-choicers triumph in Richmond  The annual general meeting of the Richmond  Hospital Society recently proved a triumph for the right to choose forces.  This year, two pro-choicers were elected,  along with only one anti-choice candidate.  Last year, three anti-choicers were elected to the 11-member board.  Had the anti-choicers swept the elections,  it would have meant an anti-choice majority on the Richmond board, and an end to  therapeutic abortions there.O  Lower Mainland doctors  denounce anti-choice bids to  take over hospitals  One hundred and seventy-four Lower Mainland doctors have formally protested the  take-over of hospital boards by the anti-  choicers.  The letter, sent to The Vancouver Sun,  called on all concerned citizens to join  their local hospital boards and to vote to  preserve the functions of hospitals serving the needs of all the people in the  community.  The letter points out that the ?ro-Li{e  Society is stacking our hospital associations in order to elect their spokespeople  to the hospital boards with the sole intention o{ stopping all abortions.  The doctors say, We abhor the endeavours o{  this single-issue group and {eel that such  pressure organization takeovers can only  compromise the very complex running o{ all  other aspects o{ our medical health care  ' stitutlonS.O Kinesis August'80   3  ACROSS B.C.  Fed of Labour's sexual harassment conference was huge success  A highly successful conference on sexual  harassment on the job was sponsored by the  B.C. Federation of Labour from May 30 -  June 1. Approximately 100 people attended  the sessions, organized by the Federation's Women's Committee.  Included in the conference material was  the recently released report of the Women's  Committee and the Women's Research Centre  Sexual Harassment In the Workplace.  The  report provides the first available B.C.  data on the issue, as well as investigating the occurrence of harassment from the  experiences of women in the workplace.  Following general sessions on Friday night  and Saturday morning, the conference moved  into workshops of about 15-20 in order to  facilitate the sharing of experiences and  discussion of possible solutions. The  workshops were particularly successful in  providing the opportunity for participation in the formulation of recommendations  coming out of the conference. Women from  outside the Vancouver area, or those in  unions with a minority of women, found the  workshops exceptionally useful. One.delegate noted that perhaps the most important  aspect of the conference was the breaking  down of isolation which many women who are  attempting to deal with such issues often  face.  Although the conference was not mandated to  make policy for the convention, recommendations from the workshops were reported to a  plenary session on Sunday, and will be  passed on to the Federation for consideration. Recommendations from the various  workshops displayed a considerable amount  of consistency. Areas noted in the recommendations included reaffirmation of the  Fed's 1978 sexual harassment policy; the  negotiation of contract language designed  to protect employees from harassment by  employers, clients or customers; and educational programmes within unions to combat  harassment from worker to worker. In addition, the importance of developing strong  Elaine Bernard  women's committees within unions and of  organizing unorganized women workers was  also stressed.  The conference also raised a number of  problems which women face on a day to day  basis within their unions — the shop  steward who will not take a complaint seriously, or worse, is a harasser himself.  Elaine Bernard  Nevertheless, despite -the fact that the  problem of sexual harassment is inconsistent  ly dealt with in the trade union movement,  the conference provided an important step  toward bringing the problem into the open  and exploring solutions. The Women's  Committee of the B.C. Federation of Labour  is to be commended for taking this step.<>  Keeping women at home no matter what  By Debra Lewis  Once again, there is clear evidence that  provincial government policies are designed to ensure that women remain within  marital situations, no matter how intolerable .  This time, the culprit is the B.C. Housing Management Corporation, the body  responsible for public housing for families, seniors and handicapped persons in  the province.  The offending policy is stated in a statement dated April 15, 1980 entitled  Application far accommodation to aid  marital separation.  The intent of the  policy is to refuse acceptance to a spouse  who applies for admittance to B.C. Housing while still living in the family  home. The policy reads:  "Applications for accommodation are  sometimes received from persons wanting housing accommodation because they  are separating from a spouse. When the  application is made, the applicant is -  residing in the family home. The need  that is being reflected, therefore, is  not necessarily due to the inadequacies  or affordability of the accommodation.  "Provision of accommodation for one  spouse without the other having full  knowledge and agreement could be seen  as aiding one party only in a marital  separation.  "The Commission cannot be seen to assist  in a marriage breakup by the provision  o{ accommodation far one spouse wishing to separate {rom another."  The implications for women are obvious.  Frequently, economic factors are a major  barrier for women who want to leave an  intolerable situation. B.C. Housing may be  one of the few affordable types of accommodation available, especially in the current  rental housing crisis. Forcing a woman to  leave the "family home" before being eligible may leave her no alternative but to  remain in her situation.  The policy dovetails neatly with other  areas of provincial government action to  preserve the family, whatever the cost to  the women involved. Current Ministry of  Human Resources policy states that a woman  cannot apply for welfare for herself and  her children until she has established a  residence other than the home she has  shared with her husband. The housing policy  puts up an effective barrier to ensure that  she will not find such alternate space.  She may well be caught in the middle,  with no place to go.  VSW and the Welfare Information Service  would like to contact women who may have  been affected by B.C. Housing's policy.  Anyone with further information should contact Debra at 736-1313 or the Welfare Information Service on Thursdays from 1-4 p.m.  at 255-3183. O  Indian people want  accountability for funds used  for apprehended children  Indian people demand accountability for  federal funds transferred to the province  for care of apprehended children.  This is what Rose Charlie, of the Indian  Homemakers, told human resources minister  Grace McCarthy at the annual conference of  the Indian Homemakers Association recently.  McCarthy, along with other government representatives, was taking part in a panel  discussion on the apprehension of Native  Indian children by her department.  Rose told McCarthy:  Provincial government  representatives must explain the Acts  which empower them to apprehend and/or  adopt our children to non-Indians. We want  to know what {inancial agreements have  been made with the faderal department o{  Indian A{{airs far services rendered. We  want to know how accountable the province  is to the department o{ Indian A{{alrs,  Indian people, and to other faderal departments  far the millions o{ dollars which  are trans{erred to Hie province far child  care services.o  FRA sections held to be  unconstitutional in B.C. Court  The B.C. Court of Appeal ruled July 3 that  certain sections of the B.C. Family Relations Act are invalid. This decision upholds the Supreme Court ruling of last  October 22.  The parts of the Family Relations Act that  give a provincial judge the power to determine custody, to rule on occupancy of the  family residence and to keep one parent  away from the family home are unconstitutional.  For our readers using last month's 12-page  guide to the Family Relations Act — do  not worry. This new ruling merely upholds  the Supreme Court decision which was considered at length in those pages. Our mat-r  erial is not outdated in any way by this  new creak in the ponderous legal machine.O 4    Kinesis August '80  ACROSS CANADA  Terrace hosts Northern Women's Festival  By Pat Cathers/Northern Times  The first ever Northern Women's Festival,  held June 14 and 15 at the Hart Farm on Ka-  lum Lake north of Terrace, brought together  about 200 women and over 50 children from  distant points like Mackenzie and Stewart  as well as from every community along the  Yellowhead Highway in Northwest B.C.  The festival, funded through a special  grant from Secretary of State in Ottawa  and supported through generous donations of  supplies and food from many businesses in  Terrace and Kitimat, was a celebration of  womanhood — a weekend when women could  relax in the sun and share with others  their skills and experience.  Three sessions of workshops covered women's  involvement in health, nutrition, the martial arts, first aid, massage, astrology  and the tarot, sexuality, childbirth and  children, employment, native rights, rape  and the law.  A display of arts and crafts by women included machine embroidery by Elvia Blaire  of Terrace, photographs (A Synonym o{ Solitude)  by Celia Law of Kitimat, water-colours by "Sam" (Claudia Perry) of Hazelton,  stained glass Kay Ehses of Terrace, and  quilting by Angela Rowe of Terrace.  The bookstand from Vancouver Women's Bookstore did a thriving business, and a display by Aspen,  the newsletter of -the northern women's communication network of Prince  George's Women's Equal Rights Association,  attracted interest from those keen on contributing to it.  In the evening a salmon bake and entertainment in music, song and skits, brought  everyone round the campfire for relaxation  that continued long after darkness closed  in.  According to the evaluation sheets handed  in, most women chose to attend the festival because of its lakeside setting, its  workshops, and its promise of all-woman  participation.  Although there were some problems with  childcare arrangements, the festival went  off without a hitch.  Looking forward to next year's  Festival organizer Carol Bell of the  Terrace Women's Resource Centre commented  afterwards that she is looking forward to  attending next year's celebration when  everyone else has arranged it!  She was  helped primarily by Sher Morgan, and committees headed by Mary Margaret Smith-  Sneed and Elizabeth Murdoch. Art work was  done by Maryanne Weston..  Bell said such a festival could be organized by any community with a group of  committed women, whether they had a women's  centre or not. She suggested that next  year the festival might be held in the  Bulkely Valley or Hazelton areas. <r>  August 2: Women took back  the night across Canada  The August 2 action, Women Take Back the  Night, developed as a result of a mandate  given members of the Canadian Association  of Sexual Assault Centres at their recent  national conference.  Women Take Back the Night actions are being coordinated across Canada on the evening of August 2. In each region, the  marches begin at 10:00 p.m. In Vancouver,  the march will move through the working-  class neighbourhood of the east end around  Britannia Community Centre. (Because this  event takes place at press time, watch  for a fuller report in our September/  October issue. )  The conference of the Canadian Association  of Sexual Assault Centres, held recently  in Winnipeg, brought together 100 women  representing 34 sexual assault centres from  across Canada. It was a closed, working  conference where member centres exchanged  information, shared work experience and  formulated policy to build a basis of unity  for the work against sexual assault.  Two themes emerged during the conference:  Taking Care of Ourselves and Sexual Assault  Centres as Alternatives. Taking Care of  Ourselves provided a focus for discussion  of tools for working together — constructive criticism and self help groups, for  example.  Sexual Assault Centres as Alternatives occasioned discussion of alternate sources to  traditional funding, along with ideological  perspectives in relation to service. Law  reform, pornography, incest, battered women  and self defence were among topics raised.  The relation of men to the anti-rape movement was also examined.  Policy on abortion, pornography  Policy arising from the conference states  that the Canadian Association of Sexual  Assault Centres supports:  *the efforts of member centres to provide  safe abortion information and to take  action to abolish abortion laws from the  Criminal Code;  *the development of a feminist'perspective  on pornography by member centres for use  in public education; the organization of  boycotts by member centres of all products  that promote degrading images of women  and children;  *the right of clients to remain anonymous;  and the right of each member centre to  autonomy. <>  It's about time: B.C.'s farm and domestic workers win elementary labour rights  By Morgan McGuigan  Labour minister Jack Heinrich introduced  legislation July 9 which extends labour law  coverage to domestic and farm workers. After  years of fighting for this right, farm and  domestic workers are now covered by the  Minimum Wage Act.  But it's not enough, and here's why:  Mary Brookes, president of the British Columbia Domestic Association comments, Although it is a step {onward to have domestics  included under labour standards legislation  it appears {rom Mr. Heinrich's statement  that the regulations o{ the act may sever-  ly limit the e{{ectlveness o{ the legislation in providing protection far domestic  workers.    There will no n.estrlctlons on  how much room and board domestics can be  assessed.    We are a{rald that, because o{  this, the real wage o{ domestics will not  increase, despite our inclusion under the  minimum wage provisions.  In addition, there will be no overtime pro^-  visions for domestics, although everyone  else in the workforce must by law be paid  time-and-a-half after eight hours work in  a day. We do overtime every day,  Brooks  stated, some domestics don't even get a  day o{{.  The minimum work day for a live-in domestic,  the BCDA points out, is ten hours a day.  Another provision in the new legislation  removes the necessity for employee and employer to make special application for an  employee to work more than 40 hours a week  as long as both parties agree. This makes  it much easier for employers to insist on  overtime.  Good catch-up legislation, but further  provisions are needed  Heinrich stated that other regulations will  be added later, making some adaptations to  the minimum wage for farm and domestic work.  A farmworker hired to hoe a field, for example, will get the minimum wage while a fruit  picker will be paid on piece work as usual.  But the piece work rates, to be established later, will be equivalent to the minimum hourly wage.  Provisions of the act include:  * an extension'from 16 to 18 weeks of  guaranteed maternity leave with services  and benefits protected. Also, an addit  ional six weeks with the recommendation  of a doctor.  ■ * licensing and bonding of farm labour  pool contractors. In addition, the onus  is put on the farmer to ensure that the  contractor he or she is dealing with is  licensed. If the contractor is not, and  later defaults on wages — which has happened in the past for some workers'  entire season of work — the farmer becomes liable. Also, the contractor must  pay the workers weekly and within 72  hours of the pay period.  * increased notice to be given an employee who is laid off, depending on the  length of time with the firm. This does  not include layoffs due to plant closures.  * a guarantee of three weeks holiday after  five years work.  * a new Employment Standards Board with  the power to order rectification and compensation for financial loss if the act  is violated (previously this could only  be done through the courts).  Five years ago, this legislation would  have been progressive,  said the Secretary-  Treasurer of the B.C. Federation of Labour, now, it's just catching up. o Kinesis August'80   5  ACROSS CANADA  Ad campaign doesn't ad up to  equal pay for Ontario women  you've got a right to equal pay far doing  substantially the same work as a man. In  {act, you've got a law.  Don't all laugh at once. That's the headline of an ad that's been going up in Toronto's subways and into Ontario's media  recently. Sponsored by the Ontario Ministry of Labour, the $500,000 campaign is  an attempt to dry-clean a rotten piece of  legislation.  In 1974, the Ontario legislature introduced  a law requiring equal pay for "substantially the same work." The worst thing about  this concept is that it's of no use whatsoever to women in female ghetto jobs. You  can't compare typing with driving a truck:  the tasks are not "substantially the same."  So the traditional wage gap widens.  Toronto's Equal Pay Coalition has been  pressing for tougher legislation. They  want equal pay for work of equal value.  Equal value means that dissimilar jobs can  be compared.  It means that secretaries  cannot be paid less than janitors on the  grounds that their work isn't comparable.  Ontario's Labour Minister Robert Elgie says  he's having trouble finding a way to measure accurately the relative value of different jobs. Better get on with it, Elgie.  Because women's groups are planning to  make equal value legislation an issue in  the next provincial election, expected this  fall. O  Left penniless after 46 years,  farm wife wins her share  A claim by Annie Yaremko for a share of assets in the Manitoba family farm on which  she worked for 46 years has been settled  out of court.  Her common-law husband all those years, one  Edward Mensch, died in 1978. He left all  of his assets to the Manitoba Crippled  Children's Fund. Yaremko was virtually  penniless.  She took her case to Court of Queen's Bench  where her lawyer compared her situation  to those of farm wives Marie Rathwell of  Saskatchewan and Irene Murdock of Alberta.  The court finally awarded Yaremko a share  of the estate: $200,000. That amounts to  about half of what Mensch left.<>  Anti-nukes gather in Darlington  About one thousand people gathered at the  site of the proposed Darlington nuclear  plant near Brownville, Ontario, on June 7.  Over half the people at the demonstration  were women. There were Feminist Party of  Canada members, Witches Against Nuclear  Technology members, women who form part of  the predominantly female Darlington task  force, active feminists, and women who  simply realise that nuclear power is the  most life-endangering invention of the  world to. date.  But despite strong feminist presence in the  movement, not one speaker addressed nuclear  power as the ultimate death dance of the  patriarchy, or even as a product of the  military-industrial male establishment  that can be used violently against anyone  who threatens business as usual.  Rosalie Bertell, a cancer researcher and  dedicated non-nuke activist from Buffalo,  New York, did speak about stillbirth,  spontaneous abortions, and .other effects  of radiation — the ones that statistics  don't document because they haven't caused  deaths yet.  "Yes," Bertell answered later in an interview, "nuclear power is clearly a feminist>  issue. The male establishment that has  produced this has never had to nourish  life.  The neutron bomb is a good example.  It is designed to destroy "only" people,  not buildings.  Rosalie Bertell concluded: "nothing will  change until women take to the streets.  Life as usual has to stop." O  Broadside excerpt  Widows of war veterans finally  get a break  Starting October 1, more than 1,500 widows of war veterans will finally begin  receiving pensions of about $185 a month.  The new law, given royal assent in the  Senate July 17, extends benefits to more  widows and dependent children.  Under the old legislation, widows of injured veterans were entitled to a pension  only if their husband had' been disabled  by 48$ or more. Now, to qualify, your  husband has to have been impaired by only  5%.  Long-time campaigner for better pension  provisions, New Democrat Stanley Knowles,  says that abandoning the 48$ rule is a  step in the right direction.  In other pension news, Federal Health Minister Monique Begin says that the Canada  Pension Plan will be amended to allow the  incomes of spouses employed in family  businesses to be considered pensionable  earnings.  "This could make as many as half a million  Canadian women eligible to make contributions to the public pension plan," said  Begin.O  Women MPs unite to demand  Indian rights for Indian women  All of the 23 women MPs and senators in  Parliament have formed a cross-party coalition to demand Indian rights for Indian  women.  It is the first time that women in  Parliament have ever dropped party affil- •  iations to unite in defence of a feminist  They called for an immediate halt to the  application of that section of the Indian  Act under which an Indian woman loses her  status if she marries a non-Indian man.  (Indian men who marry non-Indians do not  lose their status; rather, their non-Indian wives gain Indian status through marriage . )  "I'm deeply moved that women MPs have joined together and shown they care," said  Mary Two-Axe Early, a 68-yearr-old disenfranchised Indian woman from the Gaughna-  waga reserve, near Montreal. Two-Axe Early  has long been an eloquent advocate of Indian rights for Indian women, and has worked within the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women (NAC).  The battle has been going on in the courts>  for many years. In 1973, Jeannette Lavail  went to the Supreme Court of Canada, claiming that the Indian Act contravened the  Canadian Bill of Rights. She did not win  her case. But the struggle continued, culminating in Sandra Lovelace's appeal to the  United Nations in July. Lovelace is a Mal-  iseet Indian from the Tobique Band in New  Brunswick. She lost her status when she  married a non-Indian.  On July 17, Indian Affairs Minister John  Munro agreed to impose a moratorium on the  section of the Indian Act (12, i, b) which  denies Indian women married to non-Indians  their rights. He says it's now up to the  500 Indian Bands across Canada to ask Munro to introduce the moratorium.  In a response to a question from Flora MacDonald  in the House of Commons July 7, Prime Minister Trudeau said he thinks Indian leaders should be given a maximum of two years  to agree to eliminate this part of the Indian Act.O  UIC for fishermen's wives; but  squid-jiggers still high and dry  Women who work with their self-employed  fisherman husbands can now collect unemployment insurance. The new rule comes  into effect this month and is a result of  a ruling by the Canadian Human Rights Commission which found the government guilty  of sexual discrimination by paying only  the husbands.  This policy reverses a 1957 ruling denying  women those benefits. It means that wives  who fish with their husbands can collect  UI between November 1 and May 15 of each  year.  But there's still no UIC for women who  work on the shore — as squid jiggers.  The government has also announced that it's  no longer going to deny maternity benefits  to teachers during the summer months. This  follows a Supreme Court ruling early in  July which stated that 11 Manitoba teachers had a right to maternity benefits un-  - der the unemployment insurance program.O  Saskatchewan celebrates  women's history: 1905-1980  The Women's Division of Saskatchewan Labour, in cooperation with Celebrate Saskatchewan, has put together a travelling  display trailer: "Saskatchewan Women, 1905-  1980. The display highlights the contributions women have made to the development  of that province.  Cathy Krueger, project coordinator, spent  time digging through archives, contacting  women's groups and talking to individual  women. Two booklets as well as a historical map have been developed as a result and  will be available to people touring the  display.  Lorraine Blashill, a freelance writer from  Saskatoon, wrote and produced a slide-tape  show that depicts a fictionalized account  of four generations of Saskatchewan women.  The trailer is now travelling across Saskatchewan. If you're in that province this  summer, check out its schedule- O  Dimension beset by Revenue  Canada  Publishers of Canadian Dimension have been  stripped of their charitable tax status  for being "too political." Contact their  defence committee at Suite 801 — 44 Princess St, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3B 1K2.  Briarpatch, a Saskatchewan publication cut  off from funding support by the provincial  government there when it emerged as one of  the main voices of the anti-uranium lobby,  has survived its first year of independence  Support them with a sub: $8:00 a year from  1409 — 10th Ave, Regina, Sask. S4P 0E2.O 6    Kinesis August'8  LABOUR  Moving Out: an open letter to feminists and trade unionists  Dear Sisters:  The- decision that we in AUCE currently face  — whether to merge with another labour  organization or to remain independent —  is one which concerns all feminists and  trade unionists.  The people who say that the AUCE debate is  part of a broader strategy and struggle  are right: it is and it has to be. What  is the most effective way to fight for the  needs of both organized and unorganized  working women? How can we best work toward a democratic trade union movement?  These are the questions that are central to  the present discussion and the questions  that will continue to be aaised in the women's movement, whatever course the AUCE  membership chooses. Those of us who, as  socialists and as feminists, advocate merger with CUPE and affiliation with the  Canadian Labour Congress, do so because  we believe that this is the plan of action  that will, result in the greatest gains for  both AUCE members and for women workers  In general.  Debate has become increasingly heated  During the past few months, discussions of  the options for AUCE's future have become  increasingly heated, and the supporters of  different positions increasingly polarized.  We are writing this letter because it is  essential that none of us loses sight of  the objectives we all share. Let's be  sure that we understand where and why we  disagree and not be trapped by false assumptions about each other's position.  Like those who oppose merger, we recognize  the historic failure of unions to take up  women's struggles, the problems created by  bureaucratic leadership and the need for  rank and file democracy. We believe in the  principle of equal pay and recognition of  the work that women do as central to women's struggles, in the vital importance of  organizing the unorganized, in the right of  women to organize themselves into caucuses,  committees, and conferences at all levels  inside the labour movement.  And we do  recognize that AUCE has made gains  in these areas: major breakthroughs in maternity benefits, increased seniority and  benefits for temporary workers, paid two-  hour lunches for carrying out unions business, a democratic constitution, and some  of the best wage rates for women clerical  workers in Canada.  AUCE has also adopted excellent convention  resolutions in support of abortion demands,  childcare, self-determination for Quebec and  against sexual harassment.  We do not believe that there are fundamental differences between our feminist objectives and those of the people who want AUCE  to remain independent. Differences only  appear when it becomes a question of the  policies and practices necessary to achieve  these objectives. In short, our disagreements are about the strategy  for feminists  and trade unionists at this time.  AUCE has made an important contribution  We believe that AUCE (and SORWUC) have made  an important contribution to the struggles  of women workers over the past few years,  but we do not believe that these two unions  are solely  responsible for the major changes  that have taken place in the Canadian labour  movement around women's issues: the emergence of women's committees in unions, strong  pro-choice positions on abortion, the first  conference on sexual harassment and the  fight for affirmative action. These, we  think, are the result o{ the work o{ the  women's movement as a whole.  Over the last few years we have seen: thousands of women workers unionized within the  CLC; successful organizing drives in some  of the most exploited sectors, like CUPE's  organization of private health care; the  formation of women's committees which  fight for the priority of women's demands  in contract negotiations, for women's participation in running their unions, and for  the availability of resources to organize  other women workers.  Consider, for example, that since 1978 the  major growth in trade union memberships has  been in white and pink collar members:  BCGEU experienced a 35$ increase, the Communication Workers Union grew from 5,000  (1976) to 23,000 (1980), and CUPE has been  growing at the rate of 1,000 a month in  1979. These are all CLC unions.  The current drive in B.C. by the Canadian  Farmworkers Union, a CLC affiliate, is directed at a group of immigrant workers who  are in majority women. Last year, major  strikes by CLC women won support from unionists all over the country: Fleck (UAW);  Blue Cross (UAW); Radio Shack (Steelworkers); Bell (Communications Workers); CUPW.  The strength and militancy of public sector unions is clearly on the rise.  The CUPE convention (where over 50$ of the  delegates were women) was from all reports  one of the most militant labour conventions  in the last years; as a direct result of  the convention, CUPE delegates led the  fight for CLC support for CUPW, and for increased rank and file participation at CLC  conventions, at the 1979 CLC convention.  In B.C., CUPE, the BCGEU and the B.C. Federation of Labour mobilized to support  CUPE strikers in the Nelson/Kootenays  strike in order to defeat forced joint bargaining; the RNABC strike threat and militancy won long-overdue wage increases for .a  longer confined to a handful of feminists  and progressive organizations. It is becoming general. What better time for AUCE  to join its forces with those of CLC women? With our history and principles we  can only strengthen and provide leadership  for the struggles to come.  The massive participation of the Quebec  labour organizations in the demands for  daycare, paid maternity benefits and equal  pay, and of the British trade unions in  the present abortion struggles (60,000 feminists and trade unionists in the streets)  are examples of what can be achieved by a  strong, united, feminist movement that  carries our experience' into the traditional "houses of labour."  AUCE's 2,500 workers have a crucial part  to play in this process because of our  history and experience of organizing ourselves as working women — a history and  experience we would like to share with  other workers in Canada's largest public  sector union, CUPE, and larger labour organization, the CLC.  The vital question for us is this: where  will self-organized women workers have the  biggest impact?  We are convinced that feminists inside "the  house of labour" can provide a real leadership in building women's committees, focussing labour's attention on key women's  struggles and strengthening the ties between organized and unorganized women workers, and linking the feminist movement outside the unions with women organizing inside the CLC. It is really important for  Norma Dvorsky/Makara  grossly underpaid and essential group of  women workers; and BCGEU and CUPE have  been mobilizing against pension cuts.  In Saskatchewan, CUPE activists organized  a women's caucus before the last provincial CUPE convention to insure that women's  and lesbian and gay issues were taken up.  And the last CUPE convention adopted an  action program which included building coalitions with feminist, community, teachers,  parents and daycare groups to fight service  cutbacks.  This has already resulted in big demonstrations in Ontario and Saskatchewan. The last  CLC convention adopted the inclusion of  sexual orientation as a contract item.  A recent conference organized by the B.C.  Federation of Labour's Women's Rights Committee examined sexual harassment in the  workplace and recommended the formation of  women's committees, steward education and  the need for the unions to discipline male  members who harass women. The Steelworkers  and the women's movement in Ontario have  backed the affirmative action campaign to  get women back into Stelco. The list goes  on .... These examples demonstrate the  impact of increased rank and file activity  inside the CLC, whatever position the  leadership might hold.  V/e think that these facts show unmistakably  that the struggle for women's issues is no  this to occur so that women from both the  public and industrial sectors — UAW, USWA,  IWA — can resist attempts by employers to  force us into and keep us inside an underpaid "job ghetto" ("let women do women's  work"). And this resistance will be enormously strengthened by the women's movement outside the unions raising issues and  mobilizing support for them.  With inflation running at over 105?, with unemployment rising and the recession deepening, attacks on the jobs and living standards of working people are growing more  frequent and more severe. And women are in  the front line of the resistance to these  attacks.  Unorganized women need support  Women on welfare, clerical workers in the  private sector, restaurant employees — all  need the strength of the whole women's  movement and the entire labour movement if  they are not to be victimized in the process.  The AUCE-2 strike at SFU showed that the  reverse is also true: the Industrial Inquiry Commission accepted the claim that  some union wages should be compared with  those of unorganized workers. We cannot  allow ourselves to be divided along lines  laid down by employers, or stand aside from  the struggles of the majority of women > Kinesis August'80    7  LABOUR  workers in the labour movement.  There is yet one other reason for AUCE helping to unify women's struggles at this  time. And that is our own ability to survive.  We do not underestimate the determination  of our members to struggle. But we do  question whether we have the resources  to  defend ourselves against the attacks that  lie ahead. The traditon of "volunteering"  for union work that has played such a large  part in AUCE's history effectively excludes  the involvement of working mothers, for  instance, when they are'faced with three,  four or more meetings a week. Yet this is  what is required of people in a situation  where resources — money to pay legal expenses, specialized research, and so on —  are scarce. We have been able to provide  little union education or information about  the struggles of other workers for our  members, or build a strong steward system,  because of the pressure of work on union  activists. Yet it is only in this way  that we can guarantee the full and informed  participation of every union member.  We want the gains of AUCE defended while  joining the Canadian Labour Congress. To  do so, we believe that we should set conditions for a merger with any existing  CLC union and that, if these conditions  can be met, they should be written down in  a formal letter of agreement.  If we fail  to obtain any of these conditions, then  we should fight to be admitted on our  terms to a CLC union and win support in  that fight from rank and file members of  CLC unions. We believe that this is a  fight they would fully understand and support.  We do not  support merger at all costs but  only on a basis that would provide the  best of both worlds: AUCE gets the resources and organization links we need while  maintainly a publicly agreed level of  autonomy. We see this as particularly important in such areas as: our right to  maintain ourselves as a provincial local,  to control our own staff, keep our existing contracts and the right to negotiate  future ones, and to opt into those programs that the union in question provides.  Up to this point, we are convinced that  the process of considering affiliation  and merger has been democratic within AUCE  and that it in no way constitutes a "raid."  To characterize it as such is to misunderstand the union democracy that AUCE members support: the right to {all debate  and vote by all members on issues a{{ect-  ing their own organization as workers .  It was on this basis — and for many of  the reasons outlined in this open letter  — that the AUCE convention of April 1979:  "Resolved that AUCE attempt to affiliate  with the CLC and that if AUCE is not sue-,  cessful in attaining affiliation intact  as AUCE, then a Special Convention shall  be called to further discuss terms of affiliation with the CLC."  Such a convention took place in April 1980  and voted to put the entire issue to a  referendum ballot of the membership in a  number of stages to allow debate and self-  criticism. We are now in the second stage  of this process, following the members' "■  decision to vote for affiliation with an  existing labour organization.  We have found the debate so far extremely  useful and consider that we were wrong at  the time to criticize the number of stages  and the length of the process: we need  Kenworth: RCMP escorts trucks across CAIMAW s  legal picket line  By Jill Wight  In the early morning hours of Sunday,  June 29, the Canadian Kenworth moved 18  trucks out from behind the Canadian Association of Industrial, Mechanical and  Allied Workers (CAIMAW) picket line operating at the Burnaby truck assembly plant.  The trucks had not had proper safety checks  and many of their running lights were not  working. They were escorted from the premises by the Burnaby RCMP, who had also arranged clearance so the trucks didn't have  to stop at any weigh scales on their way  to Edmonton.  On July 3, CAIMAW responded to this action  by setting up a picket line at the Burnaby  RCMP offices, as the RCMP had acted as "an  ally to the employer" in assisting trucks  to cross the legal picket line. Representatives from CAIMAW, the UFAWU, and CUPW  spoke in support of the struggle at Kenworth, and were united in their condemnation of the actions of the company and  police. Other supporters present included  SORWUC, Working Women Unite, Vancouver  Status of Women, and various groupings of  trade unionists and progressive-minded  individuals.  The strike at Kenworth is now in its third  month. The major issue is for equal pay for  work of equal value for the seven women  data processors in the CAIMAW certification. At present their base rate is not on  par with the production workers despite  the fact that their job requirements and  experience are much more stringent than  for those who work in the plant (all but  two of the 350 workers in the plant are  men). This is clearly an issue of discrimination against women. The workers and  staff at CAIMAW are determined they will  win this struggle.  Working Women Unite on Kenworth strike  Working Women Unite has issued the following statement on the Kenworth strike:  Members of the Canadian Association of  Industrial, Mechanical and Allied Workers  (CAIMAW) are still on strike to win equal  pay for work of equal value for the seven  women who work as data processors.  Starting wage for the data processors is  $1.26 less per hour than starting wage  for the plant workers who are only asked  if they have a mechanical aptitude. Data  processors are required to have two years  education and work with hazardous video  display terminals.  The wage differential is clearly a case of  discrimination and an attempt by management to keep women's wages lower than  men's. It is also an attempt to prevent  the unionization of 100 other clerical  workers who work at Canadian Kenworth.  Working Women Unite, a member group of the  B.C. Federation of Women, has been doing  support picketing on the Kenworth line at  Kitchener and Burnaby. We picket once a  week on Wednesday morning from 6:30 to  8:00 a.m. We would like to see more women  on the line; rides can be arranged. Contact  Anne MacDonald at 254-4114 for more  details. <>  this time.  If the process goes through the third ballot and brings up the question of merger  to a CLC union, we would like to see a  Special Convention to debate and decide  negotiating principles and give a mandate  to the negotiators. And finally, we would  like to see another convention decide how  any agreement to merge should be ratified  or rejected.  Finally, we do not see merger and affiliation as-the "liquidation" of the principles  upon which AUCE was founded and for which  it has fought. Rather, we imagine the impact of hundreds of public sector women  actively engaged in helping unorganized  private sector sisters unionize. We imagine the impact of thousands of workers on  the first picketline of bankworkers. We  imagine the impact of a demonstration of  thousands of trade unionists for abortion  or against sexual harassment. And we  imagine a feminist conference of several  thousand CLC rank and file delegate women  from all over the country. It is only  when working women make a real struggle  for their needs inside the trade unions  that we will create the basis for a mass  movement of working women.  Yours in sisterhood,  Carol Knight AUCE Local 2  Joan Meister AUCE Local 2  Sara Diamond AUCE Local 2  Michele Preston AUCE Local 6' O  Working Women Unite  sponsors debate on both sides of  AUCE's affiliation question  The question whether to remain as an independent feminist union or to join with the  CLC  will have important implications for  feminists organizing in trade unions and  women working in all sectors of the labour  force, particularly those in female ghetto  occupations — clerical, service and retail — which are largely unorganized.  For as long as the patriarchy exists, women will have to make decisions about  whether to work within their own structures, forming their own strategies, or to  form alliances with men to accomplish mutual goals.  The struggle to better our wages and working conditions, to win respect for who we  are and the work we do is essential to  the liberation of women.  We need to know and understand the labour  bodies and the labour movement, and how  they can work for and against us — whether our association with them is as independents, affiliates or members.  Working Women Unite is sponsoring a public  forum on the problems facing women and unions, with specific reference to the  choices now facing AUCE.  Tuesday evening, 7:30 p.m.  August 26, 1980  Teamsters Hall  490 East Broadway  Vancouver <r>  New Publication checks out  Canadian human rights  Canadian Human Rights Reporter is a monitor  of the developments in human rights  throughout Canada. It provides the complete  text of all provincial and federal decisions, a calendar of pending decisions, and  comments from experts in the field. The  March issue contains an article on Sex  Discrimination and how boards of inquiry  have dealt with it under human rights  legislation. The April issue discusses  affirmative action programs. The Reporter  is published monthly and costs $50 a year.  Address: 91 Langley Ave., Toronto, M4K 1B4.   . , $L 8    Kinesis August '8C  LABOUR  All the questions you've wanted to ask about Muckamuck  By SORWUC  The Muckamuck strike is in its third year.  The union has managed to raise over $36,000  for strike pay. Many people in and around  the feminist and left movements have given  of their time, energy and money to this  strike. Lately a number of questions have  been raised about different aspects -of  the strike. The following is an attempt  to deal with the most common ones.  A brief history of the strike  The strike at the Muckamuck Restaurant  began June 1, 1978. The management had behaved in a despicable fashion before and  after certification, thereby causing the  strike.  Some of the grievances which led to the  staff approaching SORWUC were:  - No job security, fired for minor reasons or phoney excuses.  - No scheduling rights, people waited at  home every day to see if they were going to  be called into work.  - Unpaid staff meetings on their day off.  - Minimum wage.  - No grievance procedure.  When the staff joined the union, four were  fired and three more were harassed into  quitting. Attempts at negotiations and complaints to the Labour Relations Board  proved fruitless, causing the majority of  the employees to decide in favour of strike  action.  The strike has now been going on for more  than two years. Violence inspired by the  scabs has been a continuous factor. The  Labour Relations Board has spent 14 of the  26 months considering scab applications for  decertification. The first two were rejected after endless dithering while the third  was eventually withdrawn by the scabs  themselves.  In spite of a number of assault charges  against scabs, only one was ever heard in  court. There have been assault charges  against four picketers; two more were found  guilty and they were given no sentence.  The police are either unresponsive to picketers' complaints, or downright abusive.  This leads to a bizarre situation where  there is no police protection for assaults  against picketers, while if the picketer  ever accidentally brushes against a scab,  we are charged with assault.  In October '79 we laid an Unfair Labour  Practice Complaint before the Labour  Relations Board asking them to force the  employer to bargain. We also asked the  Board to order an end to slander of the  Union and to order scabs to cease harassing pickets.  This was done after much internal discussion in the Union. People who have experienced the Labour Relations Board are aware  that like any other government bureaucracy,  the Labour Relations* Board has a dual view  of the laws it is supposed to enforce —  what is all right for management is not  all right for workers. We ultimately decided to lay the complaint anyway.  This was done in October '79. By January  '80, the Labour Relations Board had done  nothing. The scabs applied for decertification and the Labour Relations Board  said that that took precedence over any  complaint. They investigated the decert  and then set a hearing date for March.  After the first day of the hearing the  scabs asked for and were granted an adjournment to May. In May they withdrew  the complaint.  The Labour Relations Board then moved with  Left: Ethel Gardner started the union drive and was fired the day  Muckamuck received notification of certification to SORWUC.  Right: Vikki Peters was squeezed out of her job after two years of  service as a bartender when the Muckamuck was certified.  Owners gave hours to so-called 'professionals' (non-Indian).  its usual efficiency and dispatch. The investigating officer kept trying to call  Jane Erickson regarding negotiations.  Eventually she agreed to meet us July 2.  On the morning of July 2 she called from  California to say she couldn't make the  meeting.  This is the third such farce she has  staged in the last two years. In combination with forcing the scabs to keep applying for decertification, management has  successfully stone-walled negotiations.  Why is SOR WUC organizing in the  restaurant industry, anyway?  The restaurant industry naturally fell  into SORWUC's basic criteria to organize  the unorganized. It is a generally unorganized industry which employs large numbers of women.  The overall working conditions in restaurants are appalling. The grievances of  workers at the Muckamuck are common  throughout the entire industry. In any  industry a transitory work force usually  reflects unbearable working conditions  and this industry is no exception.  Most women work in a restaurant at some  point of their wage-earning life, but  often view the work as a stop-gap. They  think they'll do this until some real  work (i.e. something with more reasonable  conditions and hope for better pay) becomes available to them. The exhausting  working conditions and low wages drive  them out of this type of work.  It is not because professional food industrial workers lack knowledge, training  and skills that they are not granted decent  working conditions and wages. The lack of  respect or value placed on work involving  the preparation, serving and cleaning up  of food is strongly associated with  "women's work".  Unionization has proven effective in  bringing status and recognition of skills  in other industries. It is understandable  that workers in this area would look to  unions for protection and just payment for  their work.  Why aren 't there more strikers?  It's not true that there are no strikers  picketting. At present there are four  strikers doing regular picket duty, and  others on a more casual basis. Remember,  this strike has gone on for over two years,  picketting seven days a week (that's 35  hours/week to cover). It is unrealistic  to expect to see a striker on each shift.  Some strikers are working out of Vancouver (though they keep in regular contact  with the office and are up to date on the  strike). Others, who are single parents,  have had to find other employement, as  they can't live on $100/week strike pay.  Most strikes involving small units have  few if any strikers left on their lines  after a number of months have passed.  Why has Russel Means counselled  withdrawal of support for the strike?  There was a telegram in support of the  scabs in the window of the Muckamuck  from Russell Means of the American Indian  Movement (AIM). In May, Ted Means (Russell's brother) held a press conference  in Vancouver, also in support of the scabs.  Means' first appearance on the scene was  in June 1978 (just after the strike began). He was brought here by management.  At that time he talked to the strikers.  He wanted a co-op formed, an idea which  died quickly. The strikers did not feel  Means was against them as he pointed his  finger at the owners and said you treat  these people properly.  Russell Means has taken actions in the  past that have shown he was prepared to  fight for Native rights. If he had deficiencies, a lack of courage was not one of  them. Unfortunately, in this strike-issue  he has done no research and has disregarded his usual caution when speaking  outside the U.S.  The recent public statements that Russell  and Ted have made were issued without  ever once contacting any of the strikers  or the union as to their side of the  story. They talked only to the scabs.  When Ted Means was in town recently, Nat  Girvan, a striker, tried to speak with  him more than once — and Means refused  to talk at all. Also, the media (Vancouver Province, the Sun, CBC) did not pick  up the press release. The brothers know  nothing of the political climate in  Canada or B.C.  West Coast AIM members have walked the  picket line and donated prizes for the >  Pat Davilt/An. LABOUR  Kinesis August'80   9  strike fund raffles. Also, according to  AIM members here, both Russell and Ted  are in contravention of AIM policies.  When AIM members make statements to the  press, the policy is that they are to  check with the local AIM movement to see  where they stand on the issue. AIM members here were not even aware that Ted  was in town, or that Russell had sent a  telegram. Also, as one of the strikers  has said, the scabs have to go as far as  South Dakota before they can find a  Native organization that will support  them.  Where is the support from Native groups?  We have recent letters of support from the  Vancouver Indian Centre and the United Native Nations. In April of this year, when  management put a sign in the window saying the Union of B.C. Indian Chiefs (UBCIC)  supported the strikebreakers, the UBCIC  lawyer threatened to sue and the sign was  promptly removed. Wayne Clarke, the Administrator of the Vancouver Indian Centre has  walked the picket line, along with other  people from the Centre. In a recent letter  to SORWUC, Debbie Mearns (President of the  Indian Centre) told the strikers she  admired their dedication in this complex  issue.  Why have we not asked the government to  impose a first contract?  Firstly, the Board will only consider a  Section 70 (first contract imposed), if  the union has completely lost the support  of the bargaining unit members, and if the  strike has been unsuccessful in putting  economic pressure on the employer.  Both of these things are far from true  at the Muckamuck. We have proven time and  time again that we maintain the support of  the majority of the original Muckamuck  workers, and the picket line has been successful in cutting business at the restaurant by about 805? (remember the long lineups that the Muckamuck used to have).  Secondly, a government-imposed contract  generally includes clauses that are the  standard in the industry — and in the  restaurant industry, a union shop or  union hiring clause is not standard. Without a strong union security clause, we  will most probably be facing a decertification attempt in the first year of the  contract.  What's to prevent decertification if you  ever do settle this strike?  There are, of course no guarantees. We have  learned important lessons from Bimini's  and by looking at the history of organizing in the Cannery Restaurant and the Only  restaurant. All three of these were certified, went on strike, won a contract, then  were decertified. This was true for the  Only in the 1930's, the Cannery in the  early 70's (again last year when they certified and started over) and for SORWUC with  Bimini's in 1977-78.  It is clear to us that we must not only  have a union shop, but union hiring. People  must be hired by the union, not management  hiring someone and us forcing them to join  the union. This is one of the main demands  being put forward by the bargaining unit.  Also the Labour Relations Board must be  dealt with in a much more aggressive and  forceful way. Their power is tremendous!  By allowing employers to stall, they ensure  workers will be harassed and fired from  jobs, and bargaining units lost out of fear  and intimidation. During this strike we  have learned how to document our cases so  as not to be put off and are focussing a  more public spotlight on the board's operations by involving as many people as  possible.  At Bimini's we went back to work when the  contract was agreed to but not yet signed.  This left us open to continuous violations  of the agreement by management, with no  recourse on our part. The major problem  was we couldn't get rid of those employees who scabbed during the strike (mostly  male). This contributed to a feeling of  powerlessness on the part of the women who  fought and won the strike. This is another  major demand of the bargaining unit at  Muckamuck that all people hired during the  strike will be fired.  The most important way to prevent decertification is a strong active bargaining  unit, that uses the union and builds it.  There is no question that the Muckamuck  strikers are strong, expert union members.  During this strike they have had to use  every skill available to any union person  to carry on this struggle. There is no  doubt that they will continue to struggle  once they are working under a union  contract.  How many workers has the union got to  go back to work if they win?  Normally, there is a high turnover in restaurants in the ordinary course of two  years. One would reasonably expect that  few people who worked there in March 1978  would still be working there if there had  been no strike'.  As it is, the experience of the strike has  been a toughening one for the strikers and  it is likely that most of them will go back  to work if there is a union contract. The  actual number is uncertain depending on  what jobs and or other prospects they have.  Who goes back depends on when the contract  is signed.  The main point is that after two years,  there is still a bargaining unit playing an  active role in the strike and in making  decisions. Even the Labour Relations Board  has confirmed that three times.  Why doesn 't SOR WUCpick something it  can win?  We didn't "pick" the Muckamuck workers. They  chose SORWUC (after careful consideration)  and almost the entire bargaining unit  joined the union.  Anyway we have  won! Over and over again.  There is no ultimate grand battle between  the forces of good and evil with a decisive  victory for the right side. It is a process.  We have won at each new stage and we will  keep winning, but the struggle never ends.  Even with a contract, there are no guarantees. The history of organized labour in  Canada is a series of losses or draws with  a gradual improvement of living standards  •^11 along.  Why should we keep picketting?  The only thing workers own is their labour.  The only power they have is withdrawal of  their labour. The picket line is the basic  tool of the strike, every victory stems  from our successes on the picket line.  A picket line in a service industry can  never be completely effective. The strikers  labour is replaced by scab labour. Supplies  are carried in, and some customers continue  to cross.  From an economic point of view, it is better  if small numbers of customers cross — it  increases the owners' costs because supplies  and staff must be available. In any case,  there will always be a few scabs around.  There is no other way to keep up the economic pressure except by the picket line.  On occasion people passing the picket line  have suggested the place should be blown  up. Even if this was possible, it's stupid.  We would then have to picket it all day to  keep construction workers from fixing it.  If the restaurant was destroyed, where  would our strikers go back to work? The aim  is decent jobs, rather than no jobs at all.  What's next?  As long as there is a bargaining unit, we  will keep picketing. We will keep trying to  negotiate. When we get a contract the unit  will keep trying to enforce it. When the  contract expires, we might have to strike  for the next one.  If all the strikers decide to quit, the  whole union quits. The strikers must decide,  For as long as they decide to fight, the  union must fulfill its moral and legal obligation to provide all the necessary support.  The Labour Relations Board has called a  hearing on the union's unfair labour practice complaint. It is set for August 5, 6,  7. Anyone and everyone is invited to attend  for all or part of this hearing, o  Retail, Wholesale and  Department Store Union wins  equal pay settlement  Members of the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union Local 580, employed  by Macdonalds Consolidated Limited, Lucerne Foods Ltd. and Empress Foods Ltd.,  have voted to accept a new one year agreement. The new one year agreement makes a  major breakthrough in the {ood industry in  Canada by providing wage equality in the  workplace {or men and women,  said John  Squire, Provincial Representative of the  Retail, Wholesale and Department Store  Union.  Entry level wage rates far all men and  women, clerical, packers and warehouse will  be $11.15 per hour e{{ectlve April 1,  1980.  Hope{ully In the 19%0's other working  people will see the end o{ this wage  inequality that has been practiced by so  many employers In Canada,  said Squire.  The new one year agreement provides a one  dollar per hour wage Increase, other minor  adjustments and a 10% per year increase in  pension benefats far our retired members .<>  Alcan pays more to man doing  same job as a woman  you don't hire a married man with two kids  without creating opportunities far him.  This is how a Vancouver Alcan Products  sales manager defends his hiring of a male  sales administrator at $160 more a month  than a woman who had held the same job for  26 years.  Noel Dowie, tne Alcan sales manager, tried  to explain to human rights officer Val  Embree why a man with two kids constitutes  such a hot item for promotion. Customers,  he said, seemed to prefer male sales administrators to women. Distributors can  communicate better with a guy, he explained.  They can swear at a guy but they can't at  a woman.  The case is currently before a Human Rights  Branch board of inquiry. The Branch is  arguing that salary levels must be based on  the work an employee is doing, not on his/  her promotion potential. O 10    Kinesis August'80  MEDIA  Feminists have words for you, from sea to shining sea  By Kinesis staff writers  With Upstream  as host, representatives  from twenty women's publications across  Canada gathered in Ottawa from June 26  to 29 for a feminist print media  conference.  Vancouver's feminist print media was represented by Janet Beebe from Kinesis, and  Margo Dunn and Janice Pentland-Smith from  Room o{ One's Own, a feminist literary  journal. Press Gang was unfortunately unable to attend.  It was an extremely valuable meeting in  terms o{ personal contacts alone,  comments  Janet Beebe. We all had a great deal o{ individual knowledge and skills to share, as  well as a lot o{ common ground to cover.  It was particularly valuable having French-  language {eminist publications well represented because the language barrier tends  to cut o{{ even the most ordinary type o{  communication that might happen between  publications.  Old-time survivors at the conference included the Canadian Newsletter o{ Research  on Women and the Toronto Women's Press,  plus Images, the newspaper from the Koote-  nays. Along with Kinesis,   these feminist  media concerns have been around since 1972.  New magazines and journals were also in  evidence. The women from Hysteriacame  with  their volume one, number one. A general interest feminist magazine from Kitchener,  Ontario, Hysteria's  first issue includes  items on the Feminist Party of Canada, on  the birth of domestic science in Canada,  along with an interview with Press Gang's  Pat Smith, and a profile on the Toronto  Women's Writing Collective.  Healthsharing,  from Toronto, was another  high-profile newcomer. This quarterly magazine focussing on women's health issues  first appeared in November 1979.  La Vie En Rose,  from Montreal, which had  just published its second issue, provided  further evidence of new energy. With the  perspective that no issue is not a woman's  issue, they hope to offer opinionated  journalism lacking in Quebec in general.  Branching Out, Upstream both folding  For Branching Out  of Edmonton and for Ottawa's Upstream,  this conference was to  be their last. These extremely fine and  widely-read publications are in the process of folding. Upstream  distributed its  final issue at the conference, and the  last Branching Out  rolls off the presses  in August.  Most conference participants only learned  of Branching Out's  decision to cease publication at the conference. It struck a  depressing note and underlined the hard  times ahead for all feminist print  ventures.  Status o{ Women News,  the newsmagazine published by the National Action Committee,  is also in suspension, due to a change in  funding priorities. At the moment, NAC is  hard in pursuit of extra funding resources  so they can keep their Status o{ Women  News  going.  The initial rationale for delegate select  tion was to approach publications which  were not connected to academic institutions. This unfortunately meant that  Atlantis, Canadian Women's Studies,  and  the International Journal o{ Women's  Studies  did not attend. On the plus side,  the editor of Tightwire,  a publication by  women at the Kingston Penitentiary, was  able to come to the conference.  The Maritimes were an underrepresented region. Other than Atlantis,  which is a  women's studies journal produced at Acadia  University, Wolfeville, Nova Scotia, the  Maritimes does not have a feminist publication at the moment, although one is in  the planning stages.  The region was represented by Gail Walsh,  editor of a weekly newspaper, who writes  a women's column for her own and other  weekly newspapers. Walsh comes from New  Brunswick. It is really regrettable that  Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Prince Edward Island were the only provinces without a delegate.  Workshops for the conference were a mix of  skill-sharing seminars on topics including  promotion, distribution, advertising and  investigative reporting, and meetings  which focussed on process and ideology.  One theme which developed in the workshop  on editorial policy was the question: does  broad-based have to mean "watered-down"?  Fireweed women thought that this was true.  After their second issue, they felt the  L. to R.: Janice Pentland-Smith from Room of One's Own and  Phil Masters of Broadside at the print media conference.  need to become more politically defined,  changing their motto from women's to  feminist literary journal.  Branching Out went through the same process with its content. Sharon Batt, editor  of Branching Out,  explains: The {irst {ew  years we published Branching Out we aimed  far a farmat that would appeal to the  'average woman' and to faminists, too. We  deliberately did not concentrate on {eminist issues, reasoning -- correctly —  that to do so would alienate potential  readers who were not active in the women's  movement., .faminists were inclined to look  bewildered, bored or scornfal.  She concludes, eventually, we revised our objectives to make the content distinctly {eminist.  In my opinion this editorial shlfat  resulted In a more coherent, exciting magazine. It did not bring us signifacantly  more readers.  Janet Beebe pointed out that it's important to use accessible language, to make  the steps that will politicize non-feminist  readers. Bev Whitney of Tightwire  agreed  that accessible language is important. She  says she has to translate feminist rhetoric before prisoners can relate to what's  being said. Kinesis,  for example, is available in Kingston. But it's not read by  prisoners, because of its feminist jargon.  The Women's  Press  delegate, Margie Wolf,  stressed that it's important for us not  to accept the assumption that we can never  get beyond the converted. She cited the  experience of the Women's  Press,  in presenting uncompromised content in an accessible way. One example she used was  the successful sales of Everywoman's Almanac,  which the press has managed to get  into such mass paperback outlets as Coles  But Sharon Batt of Branching Out pointed  out that there is a distinction between  bookselling and newsmagazine selling: the  latter asks the reader to subscribe to an  ideology.  Almost every publication present used the  term 'collective' to describe their working groups. It seemed important to discuss  collective process because the stability  of a working group often depends on good  process. Upstream's final issue, in which  they evaluated their collective process,  especially prompted this discussion.  It became clear in the discussion that  each group, for various reasons, operates  slightly differently from the next.  Marcia Braundy of Images  initiated discussion of constructive criticism as an  ongoing method of group process work within collectives. Braundy outlined the value  of criticism in helping avoid walls built  from lack of communication, and the danger  of developing assumptions based on unspoken political beliefs.  Esther Shannon of Upstream,  in an effort  to provide an abbreviated definition of  'collective', outlined the principles of  Upstream  as: horizontal structure; consensus; dialogue; criticism; accountability  to the collective and skill-sharing.  The Fireweed representative outlined that  membership requirements of a minimum of  eight hours work a week, a two-issue participation and advance notice of withdrawal from the collective are ways in which  that publication has endeavoured to solicit commitment from members.  Janet Beebe and Margo Dunn agreed that the  conference sometimes ran into cross purposes with the concerns of newspapers and  journals emerging as different. Journals,  for example, tend to be more preoccupied  with aesthetics — whereas newspapers realize that (with newsprint) there's only  so much you can do with design. This is  not to say that newspapers aren't emerging  with fine design work: Manitoba Women's  Newspaper,  and the revamped Calgary  Women's Newspaper  are two obvious examples. But the priorities for journals and  newspapers are often not the same.  For example: if, like Kinesis,  or Yukon  Status of Women's The Optimist,  you're  publishing on newsprint, without typesetting, the kinds of concerns you have  around layout and design are by their nature quite distinct from the concerns of  typeset journals such as Hysteria, Fire-  v)eed, Healthsharing  and Room o{ One's Own.  Domination of centralist voice  Also significant was the fact that most of  the journals — all of them, in fact, except for Room o{ One's Own,  are published  in central Canada. The journals at the conference may have been in a minority, numerically, but in workshops they tended to  take up a lot of air time. The upshot of  this was a dominance of the centralist  voice. Janet Beebe comments, Perhaps this  could have been better dealt with by having  newspapers and journals meet separately {or  some o{ the time to talk about specifac  needs and directions.  The conference raised other concerns of  importance to feminist media. One was: how  do we establish regional links?  Gail Walsh, from Dalhousie, Nova Scotia,  spoke to the issue of developing regional  links in the Maritimes. Much of what she  says applies to other regions of Canada,  as well. I{ a term has to be used at all  to describe the Maritimes, it should be  that o{  'traditionalism',  Walsh said. In  developing {eminist communication networks  in the Maritimes, we have to contend not  only with the isolation o{ women in rural  areas, but also with the dominant, aggressive, traditional politics In an underdeveloped economy. > Kinesis August'80  MEDIA  Obviously, the woman who lives In the Marl-  times has to be determined, committed and,  dare I suggest, middle class, to have any  access to real {eminist communication at  all. She also has a better opportunity l{  she lives in a Maritime city -- most prominently Halifax, St. John's, Fredericton or  Moncton. Even there, the chances o{ discovering alternative {eminist reading are  dismal indeed.  Walsh pointed out that the absence o{ a  {eminist newspaper in the Maritimes is certainly not because women have not tried to  create one.  In Halifax an attempt was made  In 1974 with a newspaper entitled Pride  and Prejudice.  It {aided a{ter two issues.  Equal Times, a monthly newspaper, was  started In Fredericton In 1975 and published {or a year. It cited "rising costs  o{ printing and typesetting and depleted  energy" as reasons far making it "next to  impossible to continue publication".  The problems facing ventures were, Walsh  explains, integrally related to the {act  that theln. readership was select, small,  and in many instances, poor.  The greatest  need,   she stressed,   is for a regional publication.  It must address the issues which  concern women not only in the larger centres but in the small, isolated communities as well. This, by necessity, requires  a concurrent,  ongoing consciousness-raising process in those areas.  There was an attempt to prepare a pilot  edition of a new Maritimes newspaper in  time for the conference, but the energy  factor made that impossible. But, Walsh  concluded, the weaving of a network of  feminist communications is underway in  the Maritimes, and is proving a "totally  exhilarating experience".  Sande Copeland, of the Whitehorse-based  publication, The Optimst,  explained how  her publication copes with regional needs  in the Yukon. As part of her job, the resource person of The Optimst  travels from  region to region. She gathers news from a  designated contact person in each women's  centre through the Yukon. Band Chiefs (very  frequently women) are often willing to act  as contact persons for their area. The  Optimst  is printed in Whitehorse and then  distributed by all established regional  contacts.  There was some additional discussion of rotating the production of a paper. The Australian feminist publication Rouge  was  cited as a working model of this concept.  It rotates production for each issue: one  issue is written and produced by feminists,  for example, in Hobart, Tasmania; the next  comes out of Brisbane, Queensland. The  actual printing is done centrally in Sydney, New South Wales. Rouge  has been publishing for about a year, receives no government funding and has already accumulated an impressive subscription list of  7,000.  Does bi-lingualism work?  Another question raised was, does bilingual-  ism work? Different feminist publications  take different approaches. The Status o{  Women News  offers all of its content in  both French and English (a turn upside down  and around and away you go in the other  language approach). Canadian: Women's Studies ,  which publishes different articles in  each language, offers a precis of the contents in the other language, but does  not translate.  Christine LeMoine of Ves  Luttes et Ves  Rires Ves  Femmes,  pointed out that bilin-  gualism depends a lot on context. Even a  publication's title will to some extent  determine its readership — depending on  what language the title is in. And carrying a few French articles does not equal  bilingualism. Ves Luttes et Ves Rires  has  decided that English-speaking women can  contribute to their journal, but that the  authors themselves are responsible for  translating their own articles into French.  This is because translation is a time-  consuming activity. Furthermore, the policy of translation assumes that issues of  interest to English readers are of equal  concern to French readers. This is not always the case: Francophone and Anglophone  priorities can be significantly different.  The general feeling of the conference was  that bilingualism hasn't really worked so  far in feminist publications. But as one  delegate put it, perhaps we shouldn't each  be trying to be all things to all people.  Jannick Belleau, who worked with Upstream,  felt that bilingualism is not far today.  She had thought that feminists might be  the ones to overcome that.  A conference highlight was the lunchtime  address by Bev Whitney, the editor of  Tlghtwire.  She spoke about the publication  and about the concerns of women inside  Kingston Pen: The hardest problem far women In prison is faeling isolated {rom  seek any farm o{ government {undlng.  Images  and Prairie Woman  also voiced their opposition to government funding.  Numerous feminist publishers do receive  mostly inadequate injections of government funding. Atlantis, Room o{ One's Own  and Women's  Press  have Canada Council support. Funds from the Secretary of State  went to Upstream,  help to support OISE's  Canadian Newsletter o{ Research on Women  — and subsidized this conference. The  Calgary Women's Newspaper gets some  monies from the provincially-controlled  casino revenue in Alberta.  One alternative to the government funding  scramble is to start a business to carry  your publication. Upstream,  which supported their paper with a typesetting  business, said that it was a good way to  Bev Whitney from Tightmre.  events outside; it's a dl{{erent reality  Inside. Out oppression, she said, is right  down in black and white.  It's called  Directives .  A  feminist paper for prisoners, she emphasized, must move slowly.-Most women in  the prisons come from a male-controlled  context, and have conservative outlooks,  Whitnejr explained.  Four women work together to produce  Tightwlre.  The product is reviewed by  three male officials prior to printing and  is subject to censorship during that review. Following administrative approval,  Tightwlre  is forwarded to the Queens  Printer and returns to the office collated and bound. The staff then types the  mailing lists and distributes the publication to its approximately 750  subscribers.  Subscription costs are not received directly by the production staff but have  enabled those women to requisition furni-  ture and sundry items for the Tightwlre  office. Future plans include transferring  feminist publications received at the  prison on to microfilm.  A conference highlight was a discussion of  the economics of feminist publishing.  Government funding was nominally discussed, although many of the publishers  present were against any form of government funding, based on bad experiences  with it in the past. The Northern Woman,  a paper from Thunder Bay, Ontario, for  example, resolved November 1979 not to  create alternate funding and to provide  skill development for women. But it makes  for a double workload. !-'akara  (no longer  publishing) likewise used their graphic  arts business to finance their magazine.  Moe Lyons of Dumont Press suggested that  although this is an option, people who do  it are forced to make a lot of compromises and have to become integrated into  the capitalist marketplace to survive.  There is also the issue of undercutting  other workers who might be trying to  unionize, by choosing to work for rock-  bottom wages. And when we try to do two  jobs at once, our political activities  will begin to come last. Lyons also noted  that typesetting is not only a very crowded market, but is fast becoming obsolete  (at least in terms of the equipment we  feminists can afford to buy).  Janet Beebe took a closer look at that  marketplace, and what it means for small  publications like ours. Even though there  will always be a great demand far low-  cost printing, the skyrocketing cost o{  paper and photographic materials is making  the supply o{ low-cost printing less and  less a reality.  Technological advances are causing great  changes in the printing industry, which  are going to bene{it primarily large-volume publishers, by streamlining the process {rom typesetting to printing. As the  industry changes,  {ewer shops will be interested in doing the kind o{ camera-  ready, work we need done.  We may soon {ind that our camera-ready  copy is unwelcome in union shops.  The printing unions want to alleviate high unemployment among their members by eliminating printing jobs which are not union-  produced {rom start to {Inish. Those o{  us who now save money by doing our own  paste-up and typesetting may {ind it more  di{{icult.  Beebe told conference participants that we  should question the values and assumptions  we might be making because we stand in the  shadow of big business. Take, for example,> 12    Kinesis August'80  MEDIA  the idea that "bigger is better". As publishers, she said, we are justlfaed in  wanting to expand our readership. But I do  question here how well-read are the papers  we already print. Vo we know? From an ecological point o{ view alone, is an expansionist ethic In and o{ HseZ{ a worthy  aim?  Another example is the concept of 'fresh  news'. Mass media, by its own every-hour-  on-the-hour example, impresses on us the  importance o{ up-to-date coverage. We, too,  push ourselves against the deadlines and  hurry to {ill our pages with the latest  details.  But, contrary to the common belie{ that  'old news is no news' an 'old' piece o{  infarmation does not lose its use{ulness  to us simply because it has been around  far awhile. I think particularly o{ the  valuable contributions to theory -- not  easily categorized as  'news' — which have  appeared on our pages over the years  (community debates and controversy included).  In light o{ these kinds o{ issues, Beebe  concluded, we as {eminist publishers must  learn to evaluate our work according to  the needs o{ the community we serve, and  according to our own values, rather than  those o{ mainstream publishers.  The final discussion session of the conference focussed on information sharing  and the possibility of starting a new version of the Feminist News Service. Weary  campaigners amongst you will recall that  the Feminist News Service (FNS), headquartered in Waterloo, Ontario, operated in  Canada between 1974 and 1976. You will  also recall the news service which operated out of Vancouver Status of Women in  those same years — the Western Canadian  Women's News Service — headed by VSW  staffer Karen Richardson.  At the conference, almost no publication  felt that a resurrection of the news service was feasible in terms of time, or  money. Because we all publish relatively  infrequently (monthly to quarterly) it  seemed that a simple exchange of subscriptions and reprinting privileges would  suffice.  Instead, a series of cooperative projects  were suggested: the formation of a central  graphics pool, exchange of writer contact  lists, another conference, a resource  manual for feminist publishers, and joint  purchase of available circulation mailing  lists.  The finest feature of this conference was  the opportunity it provided to make contact with sister feminists across Canada  who are working alongside us in print  media. We're especially grateful to Upstream  for making that possible.<>  Here's what to read next: resource guide to feminist print media  An excellent and comprehensive "Periodicals and  Resources Guide" (1979) is available for $2.00 from:  Resources for Feminist Research  Department of Sociology, OISE,  252BloorSt.West,  Toronto, Ont. M5S1V6  Atlantis—A Women's Studies Journal. Subscriptions  $7.00/year (2 issues), $12.00 institutions, add $3.00  for overseas. Correspondence to: Atlantis, Box 294,  Acadia University, Wolfeville, N.S. Submissions of  material invited. Interdisciplinary journal of critical  and creative writing, in English or French.  Broadside. (P.O. Box 494, Station P, Toronto, Ontario  M5S 2T1). A monthly newspaper produced by a  Toronto-based collective. "In many ways Broadside  is a review: a review of the arts, a review of the news;  all filtered through a pro-woman screen." Subscriptions: $8 per year, institutions $12 per year, outside  Canada add $2.  Calgary Women's Newspaper. Published monthly by  the Calgary Status of Women Action Committee for  the benefit of all Alberta women. Focus on regional  coverage. Subscriptions: $5 per year from 320-5th  Avenue S.E., Calgary, Alberta T2G 0E5.  Entrelles. Revue Feminist de I'Outaouais.  "L'Entrelles se veut un lieu d'echanges et de debats,  de rencontres et de discussion, une tribune que se  donnent les femmes de I'Outaouais pour se  connaitre et se comprendre." Abonnements: une  contribution de $5 est la bienvenue. (CP. 1398, Succ.  B., Hull. P.Q..J8Y3Y1.)  Femmes d'ici. La revue mensuelle "L'AFEAS" apres  onze ans disparatt pour faire place a Femmes d'ici,  nouveau format, orienatation plus globale et  s'adressant a toutes les femmes canadiennes-  francaises." (180 boul. Dorchester, Suite 200,  Montreal H2X 1N6.10 numeros par an. Abonnement:  $5.  Fireweed. a women's literary and cultural journal.  (P.O. Box 279, Station B, Toronto, M5T 2W2.) Fireweed is a quarterly of poetry, fiction, drama, essays,  reviews, photos and graphics from a feminist  perspective. Although it is Canadian oriented, it  contains work from American and British women,  and is progressively extending its scope to reach the  international feminist community. Subscription  rates are $10 ($15 for institutions); outside Canada  add $2 postage.  Healthsharing. A Canadian magazine on women's  health. (P.O. Box 230, Station M, Toronto M6S 4T3). A  20 page quarterly which began in November 1979.  Women Healthsharing is a feminist collective which  came together in late 1978 to do research, writing  and advocacy work on women's, health  issues... Healthsharing needs articles, graphics,  news from your part of the country... and feedback. Subscriptions: individuals $5.00; institutions  $10.00.  Hysteria. (Box 2481, Station B, Kitchener, Ontario.) A  new feminist quarterly with a thematic format.  Subscriptions $5 for individuals, $10 for institutions,  $20 contributing.  Images. Kootenay Women's Paper. (Box 736, Nelson,  B.C.) A collectively produced women's paper which  features thematic issues often built around rural  concerns. Independent of outside funding,  subscriptions are $4 (35$ for back issues).  La Vie en rose. Un nouvel projet, inserte de 24 pages  au coeur du Temps Fou. "La Vie en rose prouve une  fois de plus que le feminisme est loin d'etre triste et  sterile, que les feministes sont bien vivantes en  entendent le rester." Abonnez-vous au Temps Fou,  4329 Henri-Julien, Montreal. $6.00.  Des luttes et des rires de femmes: Tribune d'echange  et de liaison des femmes. (CP 687, Succ. N,  Montreal, H2X 3N4). Produit par un collectif de  femmes, La revue se veut un lieu de debats,  d'analyse et d'information sur la lutte specifiques  des femmes. 5 numeros par an. Abonnement  individuel: $7.00. Abonnement de groupe ou destitution: $18.00. A I'etranger, ajouter$5.00.  The Manitoba Women's Newspaper. (477 Webb Place,  Winnipeg, Manitoba R3B 2P2). A newspaper  produced to meet the need for a communications  network among women and the many women's  organizations in Manitoba, to provide information  about events, conferences and issues of concern. 10  issues per year. Subscriptions: $10/year.  th.e-f[eWSpapep  The Manitoba Women's Newspaper  447 Webb Place QiiUcrlih&  Winnipeg, Manitoba dUU&W «**  R3B 2P2  (1 yr) 10 issues at $5.00.  Please enclose cheque or money order.  Name   Address _  City/Town .  Postal Code _  Phone      Northern Woman Journal. (316 Bay St., Thunder Bay,  Ontario P7B 1S1). Regional women's newspaper.  Subscriptions: $4.50 (6 issues); free to one-parent  families and senior citizens; $8.50 institutions.  The Optimist. Feminist newsletter published 6 times  a year, primarily on affairs of the Yukon. Subscription: $3.00. (302 Steele St., Whitehorse, Yukon Territories Y1A 2C5).  Prairie Woman. A Newsletter of Saskatoon Women's  Liberation. Monthly, $4/year. P.O. Box 4021,  Saskatoon, Sask.  Resources for Feminist Research/Documentation sur la  recherche feminists. (RFR/DRF). (Department of  Sociology, OISE, 252 BloorSt., Toronto, Ontario M5S  1V6). A Canadian journal for feminist scholarship,  RFR/DRF includes book reviews, review essays,  bibliographies, special review sections and other  types of publications as needed. They focus on  research and teaching by publishing this periodicals  and resource guide, conference papers, works in  progress, Canadian theses, and new courses in  women's studies. Addresses are given wherever  possible to facilitate communication among people  working in the various disciplines. Subscription  rates: Individuals $12 ($15 outside Canada; students  and low-income Canadians $7; institutions $25.  Room of One's Own. A Feminist Journal of Literature  and Criticism. Subscriptions: $7.50 Canadian, $8.50  other; $12.00 institutions. Quarterly. Accepts short  stories, poetry, critical essays, etc. of feminist  orientation. Inquiries to: Growing Room Collective,  P.O. Box 46160, Station G, Vancouver, B.C. V6R 4G5.  Tightwlre. Published by the prisoners of the Prison  for Women, Box 515, Kingston, Ontario K7L 4W7. Bimonthly. Subscription rate: $4.00 for 6 issues. O  THE SPRPK  BDCK5TCPE  Progressist books and  periodicals to better  understand what's happening  in Canada and  in the world Kinesis August'80    13  MEDIA  Women's Bookstore celebrates its seventh birthday  By Christine De Long  They didn't have a cake. Crackers and  cheese, Okanagan Red and apple cider, many  women and a lot of laughter, they did have.  It was the July 12 open house celebration  of the seventh successful year for the  Vancouver Women's Bookstore at 804 Richards  St.  The Women's Bookstore was brought into being early in 1973 when both the Women's  Centre and A Woman's Place — the only two  women's centres in Vancouver — were shut  down for demolition. The closure found  several remaining hardy souls who, armed  with knowledge that feminist literature  was available but unmarketed in Vancouver  and convinced that a reading audience large  enough to sustain them existed, brazenly  struck forth and opened shop on Richards  Street.  They were right.  Seven years of smoothly running a collectively structured small business on a volunteer basis, Monday through Friday, noon  'til five, is not a bad track record!  But it's even more than a 'feminist' bookstore . It has a library in the back ({ree  books) which they stock with donated books.  They will pay cash for your books if the  subject matter is appropriate. The bookstore also serves as an information centre  for people from everywhere. Due to a listing in 'Gaia', a publication available in  Europe, Britain and North America, they  regularly function as an information  centre for people from all parts of the  world.  Books sold in the shop have been reviewed  by collective members. (They tried simply  going on the word of non-members, but have  found that unsatisfactory. ) Books from  small presses which would be refused shelf  space by mainstream bookstores get full  exposure at the Women's Bookstore. All  Press Gang titles are'carried.  A selection of feminist recordings are  available and are taped for the customer's  listening pleasure before purchasing. Most  of the music is out of California, but the  Canadian content is kept as high as  possible.  The markup on books is the same as the  markup in other bookstores, but they attempt to curb the markup on records which  Christine De Long  exchange and customs rates would make  exorbitant.  Profits are put back into stock or are  donated to Women's Groups.  And in their eighth year?  Compiling their next catalogue to send  out to their mail-order customers constitutes one of their first priorities.  Exploring the concept of collective  organization is another priority for  the membership of ten. And perhaps finding a new home.  The Women's Bookstore attracts all kinds of  people. The membership is made up of women  active in the feminist community and women  who simply love women and books.  It is, finally, a very private affair between a woman and a book. You'll recognize  that peaceful atmosphere the moment you  walk in. o  Comments on Kinesis this month  Responses to VSW's rejection at City Hall,  are still coming in. Here's a cheering  and typical example:  I understand your funding application to  city council was denied because of your  support of abortion rights and rights of  gay people. I strongly disagree with that  decision and hope that the enclosed cheque  will in a small way help to make up for  the lost funding. Congratulations on your  past efforts to support these rights and  best wishes for future efforts.O  The Radical Reviewer simply filled my heart  with joy. Good on those women!O  Please continue the Radical Reviewer at all  cost. It was wonderful. To read those  well-written reviews and articles on books  which to me have been a total inspiration  was incredibly exciting. <o>  Please cancel my subscription. I have, for  a long time been disenchanted with your  constant emphasis on abortion and the sexual side of the women's movement. Being a  businesswoman, I would prefer to see more  emphasis placed on the economic struggle  all women still face today.O  Crime Against Women: how feminists took on a snuff movie  B> Jillian Ridington  A Crime Against Women   is the video-story  of a group of women who protested against  The Slasher,  a "snuff movie" being shown  in a Rochester movie house in October,  •1977. Ads outside the theatre depicted a  woman being slashed with scissors. The  film showed a dagger plunging into a  pregnant belly while blood poured out and  over the woman's body. The women had a  confrontation with the manager and got the  film shut down.  The tape confronts the basic inequality  between the powerful and the powerless in  American law, and addresses the stupidity  of regulations about "obscenity". Under  Canadian law the same thing could conceivably happen. Section 159(8) of the Canadian Criminal Code states:  any publication a dominant characteristic o{ which is the undue exploitation o{ sex, or o{ sex and any one o{  the fallowing subjects, namely, crime,  horror, cruelty and violence shall be  deemed to be obscene.  Violence by itself is not considered to be  obscene. Sex by itself is. Despite numerous briefs, and several aborted amendment  attempts, the criminal code retains this  definition.  No charges were laid against the producers  or distributors of the film nor against  the theatre manager. The film was "not  obscene" in the eyes of the law because  no genitalia were exposed. The women were  charged with "criminal mischief of the  third degree" for spray painting on the  theatre building and breaking a window and  slashing a poster. The police stated, We  can't condone violence under any circumstances .  A Crime Against Women  also forces us to  confront another important issue: How far  do we fight? Once we have taken a stand,  crossed a line we can't retreat over, do  we fight until we have no more money, no  more energy, no resources left, to fight  other battles, to work on other fronts?  These women did their best. They organized  defence committees. They got good, strong,  feminist lawyers. They aroused public support. They knew their issue was valid,  that the film represented the kind of  imagery that contained pornography full  of the most extremely degrading and abusive images of women that pervade our  society. In a sense, to allow it to continue would have meant backing away from  the confrontation its makers had engendered. To allow it to stay on would have  been to say, yes, pornographers,  violators o{ women -- you have the power and  we admit our powerlessness.  The demonstration had to happen. But beyond that, how  far could they take it?  The tape allows us to get to know and understand the women who are "the accused".  Martha Gever, who made the tape, is one  of them. She takes us back to before the  demonstration to see the women becoming  aware, being confronted with violence  against women, becoming feminists, becoming involved to the point where their  presence at the demonstration seemed mandatory. We see them find greater strength  working together in their own defence.  Then we watch — painfully — as we see  their strength and resources sapped by  the long judicial process, the endless  delays, the ongoing need for funds. We regret that in the end they decide to plead  guilty to a reduced charge and to pay a  $100 fine rather than to keep fighting  the charges, appealing, carrying it as far  as possible, trying to establish new precedents. We regret, but we understand. To  continue would have persecuted and prose  cuted them, murdered their spirits slowly  but as surely as the knife sundered the  belly in the film. In this system, they  could not have won. The power to win was  not theirs.  This realization made me incredibly angry.  The feelings of victimization, of overwhelming vulnerability, that I had faced  when researching pornography last year  filled my mind and my body again. That research had made me understand in a very  deep and frightening way that pornography  is a means of social control. It is intended to remind women that they are victims in  this society, and that women who are not  protected (read controlled) by a male owner are fair game and must be taught a  lesson. The videotape tells of other women  confronting those same realisations. The  understanding is an important one, for it  gives the knowledge that women and men who  do not want to exist in a society where  those of the opposite sex are by definition  enemy aliens, must work together to radically and completely change the power  structure. That knowledge goes beyond class  differences, differences of opinion about  dogma or strategy, to a place where there  is only one line — the one between victim  and victimizer.  A Crime Against Women  is an important document. It should be seen by women's studies  students, and by anyone who seeks to understand the real impact of pornography —  which should be all of us. Because it was  obviously done on a very limited budget,  the film is technically imperfect. That is  part of its message; it is a scream from  the dark slit that is all that the powerless are allowed.  A Crime Against Women.  Black and white  videotape by Martha Gever. Rochester,  New York, 1979. 5A minutes.  From Video Summer 1980    O 14    Kinesis August'80  INTERNATIONAL  Struggle against rape unites  movement in India  The battle against rape has become a major  rallying cry of India's growing women's  movement following a recent Supreme Court  decision acquitting two policemen who had  been convicted by a lower court in the rape  of a 16-year-old woman while she was in  police custody eight years ago. The policemen had admitted to having had sex with  the woman, Mathura; but the Supreme Court  held that sexual assault in police custody  does not constitute rape.  Mathura, at the time of the assault, was  living with a young man named Ashok, her  employer's nephew.  On March 26, 1972,  Mathura's brother Gama, a labourer, complained that Mathura, a minor, had been  kidnapped by her employers and Ashok. Gama,  Ashok, Mathura and her employers were  brought to the police station at about  9:00 p.m. for questioning. When everyone  started leaving an hour and a half later,  Constable Ganpat grabbed Mathura and  ordered everyone else to leave. Mathura  was first raped by Ganpat and then molested by head constable Tukaram, who was  reportedly too drunk to rape her.  Mathura finally managed to get out and  tell her brother and friends, waiting outside, what had happened. Soon an angry  crowd gathered and threatened to beat up  Ganpat and burn down the police station.  The two constables were tried but acquitted of a rape charge by the Sessions  Court.  This did not come as a surprise because  assaults on lower castes and poor people  are common inside police stations. The  decision in Mathura's case seemed to be  particularly influenced by the fact that  she was living with someone without being  married. The judge concluded that it  was quite likely that such a "girl" would  willingly "surrender her body to a police constable."  The Bombay High Court reversed the decision of the Sessions Court and sentenced  Ganpat and Tukaram to imprisonment of  five years and one year respectively. Then  they went to the Supreme Court, which  reversed the High Court verdict by focussing on one section of the rape law and  interpreting it to give free licence to  policemen.  Following the acquittal, women's organizations across India took up the issue  and organized mass demonstrations in a  concerted effort to build an intensive  campaign against rape. Mathura's supporters attempted to point out that there is  no such thing as establishing resistance  inside a police station. The Court commented: "It would be preposterous to suggest that although she was in the company of her brother, she would be so overawed by the fact of the appellants (the  policeman) being persons in authority and  that she was in the police station, that  she would make no attempt to resist." The  fact that rape of poor peasant women by  landlords and by the police is a rather  common occurrence adds to the implications  of the Supreme Court judgment.  In Delhi, women's groups launched a week-  long program of protest culminating in a  mass rally and demonstration on March 8  1980, International Women's Day. This  campaign included the presentation of a  memorandum to the Prime Minister, the Home  Minister and the Police Commissioner, a  seminar on the question of rape, a press  conference and the performance of a number  of short street plays in colleges, hospitals and resettlement colonies. But these  efforts to evoke public sympathy and consciousness about the sexual harassment of  women failed to sway the Supreme Court,  which rejected demands for reopening the  case.  Writing for a New Delhi monthly news service, Monica Juneja observed that in  Mathura's case, as in other, "the notable  feature is the attempt on the part of the  government to justify the action of its  officers by proving that the women were  'of loose moral character.' Linked inextricably with the power structure, rape  is used as an instrument to suppress democratic struggles, especially in the rural  areas.  The hope lies in women building  their own organizations to spearhead struggles for their rights."  According to Juneja, the coordination and  cooperation between various women's groups  in a campaign surrounding Mathura's case  is a definite advance for the women's  movement in India.<> LNS  English prostitutes oppose any  legalization proposals  English prostitutes are strongly opposed  to any moves to legalize prostitution. "We  don't want to be nationalized and we do  not want assembly-line sex," said Selma  James, a spokeswoman for the English Collective of Prostitutes. Rather, commented James, the government should be looking  at ways of making more jobs available to  women, so that they don't have to work,  as prostitutes to bring in a living wage.O  Australian feminists crying out for choice on abortion  Repressive abortion bill goes down to defeat in Queensland, Australia  A staggeringly repressive abortion bill was  defeated in Queensland, Australia, in late  May on its second reading. Over 3,000 women demonstrated as the bill was being  read — an amazing achievement for Queensland, where demonstrations of more than  three people are illegal. A report from  Australia:  The Queensland ruling coalition (National  and Liberal Parties) is notorious as the  most reactionary of all the Australian  state governments.  It has become infamous  for banning feminist, left-wing and aboriginal marches; for witholding funds from  women's refuges and aboriginal housing  and medical schemes; for giving legal and  free reign to police surveillance and harassment of individuals. The present government is maintained by gerrymandering,  and the Labor 'alternative' is in disarray.  Significantly, the state Labor Party is  led by a man who also sits on the executive of the 'Right to Life.'  However, challenges are being made to the  right-wing leadership of all the parties,  most recently over the abortion issue.  Last year the government foreshadowed  legislation to restrict abortion to imminent danger of death or suicide. Exposure  to rubella would not be considered sufficient grounds for abortion, and rape and  incest would be considered only after a  police investigation.  Any woman not deemed in danger of death  would be liable for three months imprisonment for even seeking an abortion, and  would face three years in prison for inducing her own miscarriage or making  "false statements about the cause of her  pregnancy."  The bill proposed sentences of 14 years  (maximum and with hard labour) for referral and seven years (maximum, with hard  labour) for the woman herself.  Protest meetings and actions were carried  out by feminists all over Australia, and  public feeling ran strongly against the  bill, though this has had little effect on  the Queensland government in the past.  The Australian Medical Association strongly opposed the bill.  On the second reading, 19 government members crossed the floor to vote against the  bill. Only a late technical move to make  it a private member's bill instead of a  government bill prevented the government  from being defeated. It was, as the paper  the Sydney Morning Herald noted the next  day, "a glaring exhibition of coalition dis<  harmony", and has thrown into doubt the  future of the right-wing stranglehold  over Queensland. O  Spare Rib  U.S. Supreme Court upholds  Hyde anti-abortion amendment  On June 30, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld  the Hyde anti-abortion amendment.  The decision was widely viewed as setback  for the women's movement, a staggering  blow to all poor people and an extension  of a trend of attack on social programs.  The High Court ruled by a slim 5-4 margin  that the federal government cannot be required to pay for medically necessary abortions for poor women.  In essence, the majority held that since the federal government did not create poverty, it need not  alleviate poverty's impact. Some 2.6 million women of childbearing age who receive  Medicaid are potentially affected by this  decision.  The court reversed a January ruling by Federal District Judge John Dooling in New  York City that restrictions on federal  funding of abortions violated the constitutional rights of poor women.  The case, Harris v. McCrae, was a nationwide class action suit considered by many  to be the most serious legal challenge to  the Hyde Amendment of late. The amendment,  initiated by Rep. Henry Hyde (R.-Ill.) and  first enacted in 1976, prevents the federal funding of abortions except where the > Kinesis August'8  INTERNATIONAL  life of the mother is endangered by pregnancy or childbirth, or where victims of  rape or incest have "promptly reported  (these incidents) to a law enforcement  agency or public health service."  Although the Supreme Court's decision dealt  strictly with Medicaid funding, many activists charged that it was the opening of  a drive to strip abortion of its seven-  year-old legal status. At a Los Angeles  press conference, Patricia Goldsmith of  the Reproductive Rights National Network  (R2N2) charged, "This is only the first  step in the so-called 'prolife' movement's  plan to eliminate abortions for all women,  for any reason."  Two hours after the justices had revealed  their decision, protestors were marching  in front of the Supreme Court denouncing  the ruling. About 20 women dressed in  black judicial robes carried a banner  which read: "If men got pregnant, abortion would be sacred."  Nation-wide protests were held in the U.S.  July 10. More are planned for October 28.  The Centre for Constitutional Rights and  the American Civil Liberties Union called  on "every woman and man who believes in  human freedom to mobilize politically and  devote themselves to defeating the anti-  abortion movement in every arena and.  assuring that no poor woman is denied an  abortion."  One for our side in Toledo  On the plus side, abortion foes were dealt  a stunning blow in the Toledo, Ohio primary early this summer. The election saw  the defeat of an "Akron-style" anti-abortion ordinance by a two to one margin. An  "Akron-style" law is an anti-abortion  law introduced at the City Council level,  aimed at closing down local abortion clinics, o  Equal Rights Amendment fails  to win Illinois majority  The Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), which  would give U.S. women legal equality with  men for the first time, went down to defeat in the Illinois legislature at the  end of June. The bill must pass in three  more states before it can become part of  the U.S. constitution..  The National Organization of Women (NOV/)  had mounted a tremendous campaign in Illinois. A NOW rally in early May drew 50,000  supporters to Chicago. But the ERA supporters could only muster 102 of the necessary  107 votes in the legislature. The amendment backers withdrew the bill and plan to  resubmit it later in the legislative session. NOW president Eleanor Smeal promised, "We'll dig in and be very active  this summer in national and local elections ." O  (Guardian info)  Reports from Copenhagen: the  UN mid-decade conference  Here are some early reports from the United  Nations Mid-Decade Conference on Women,  held in Copenhagan July 14 — July 30.  They have been prepared by a team of journalists known as the International Women's  Information Service (IWIS). A proposed  international media network, the future  of IWIS is one of the items on the agenda  in Copenhagen.  In our September-October  issue, Kinesis will bring you an update.  Objectivity explodes  By Jill Severn  COPENHAGEN July 12 — In the two days of  press briefings that proceeded the opening  of the UN World Conference on Women, the  press has shown that its 'objectivity'  is indeed a myth.  The usually impassive facade of the press  corps fell by the wayside during the first  morning when Brian Wilder, a reporter for  the Associated Press asked if sexual equality, which he described as a western idea,  wouldn't be disruptive to the cultures of  the less developed countries.  He was roundly booed by his colleagues, and  rebutted by a fellow journalist who rose  to say that malnutrition and disease were  very common in the less developed countries  too, but no one was suggesting that to combat them would be culturally disruptive.  This, is not the sort of interchange among  journalists that one expects at a press  briefing. And it was only the beginning.  On the second day of briefings, apartheid  and the status of Palestinian women — both  subthemes of the conference — were on the  briefing's agenda. After a speech given  by an Egyptian woman on the status of  Poor women in Natagalpa, Nicaragua, learning to read. The new  government is launching a nationwide campaign against illiteracy.  Palestine, an Israeli journalist demanded  that the speaker address the injustices  perpetrated against women by the Arab culture. What about female circumcision?  What about the child brides and women being  sold for three camels and two monkeys?  His questions were a thinly-veiled attack  on Arab culture, not designed to elicit  information so much as to turn the discussion away from Israel's role in the problems of women in the Palestinian refugee  camps. It was a tactic that backfired.  Several journalists joined the debate, and  the chair lost control of the meeting to  the sudden war among the press corps.  There was a lot of shouting, unfortunately  not translated by the beleagured translation staff. And above the din the Israeli  journalist kept shouting: "How many camels  do you think you're worth?"  At the Mexico conference, five years ago,  the press leapt on any departure from the  parliamentary procedure as a 'proof of  women's lack of emotional control.  Any reporter who even implies such an idea  in the course of covering the Copenhagen  conference ought to be struck by lightning  for inexcusable hypocrisy. <>  Latin American women gather  By Anita Anand  During its pre-conference seminar held between July 11 and July 14, the Latin American Women's Group unanimously called for  the nomination of the Mothers of the Plaza  De Mayo in Agentina for the Nobel Peace  Prize.  Ever since 1977, these women have met together every Thursday outside the main government offices in Buenos Aires to protest  against their missing relatives, and to  demand an answer from the government as  to their whereabouts.  One of them, Noemi Esther Ginauti De Mol-  fino, 54 years old, was abducted in Peru  at the end of June and is now presumed to  have been murdered.  The Latin American Women's Seminar — the  first formal meeting of feminist and women's groups at an all-Latin-American level — also supported calls for "equal  work for equal pay", proposed by Brazilian  women, and for the "right to information  about and access to contraceptives."  Ifegenia Gomez, represenatative of the  fourth congress of Brazilian women labourers, told the seminar of the special situation of exploitation of women workers in  her country. Women industrial workers in  Brazil recieve on average just over half  a man's wage for the•same work.  Mexican women reported that in their country there are more than 700,000 illegal  abortions every year, which results in the  deaths of some 100,000 women each year.  In Peru, where the influence of the church  is especially strong, women have been  pushing for the full application of the  "population policy", which was passed by  • the government in 1976, but which has not  been implemented through the health service and the hospitals.  In September last  year, following a massive campaign which  was supported by women's groups all over  the world, the women of Peru managed to  get the government to renew this service  — which provides access to contraception.  "Women in Struggle", a Peruvian women's  group, spoke of the need for international  solidarity with Peruvian women workers.O  Brutallife under apartheid  condemned by South African  By Njambi Mathu  COPENHAGEN, July 14 — The brutal realities  of life under apartheid in South Africa  were discussed here today. Notalepula  Chabuku, a South African who has fled to  the U.S. showed journalists what a passbook looks like, and explained how the oppression of black people works on a daily  basis.  "It's hell when you have to live as a sixth-  class citizen in your motherland," said  Chabuku, pointing to her passbook which  does not indicate her nationality. "This  book has destroyed many black lives in  South Africa," she added.  She pointed to the absurdities of apartheid  — the fact that Asians are fifth-class  citizens because they have longer hair;  the fact that Japanese are classified as  honorary whites, and thus first-class citizens, for trade purposes.  South African women's first target is apartheid, and Chabuku is proud of her sisters'  record in this fight. She recalls the time  in 1956, when 20,000 women converged on  Pretoria to protest against the pass laws,  which had been extended to women.  "While the march could not change the laws,  it showed a determination on the part of  women to continue their resistance against  apartheid. They can call us dogs, but  we will never accept to be dogs," she  said.  There are humiliating laws against black  women, such as the fact that they are classified minors for life.  "A fully grown-up  woman has to get a 16-year-old boy to make  a police statement for her because she's  regarded as a minor," Chabuku explained.  More fundamentally, there is the way in  which apartheid has reduced women's economic productivity and their social and  political roles, thus increasing their dependence on husbands or male relatives.  Their is the cruelty of women not being  allowed to visit their husbands in the  urban areas. Some wives see their husbands  for just two weeks a year. There is financial insecurity, too, with many women  in the towns being forced by the lack of  opportunities to work as domestic helpers  to rich white families.  Chabuku sees women's role in the struggle  for independence in Southern Africa as  crucial. But she is dismayed by the paltry  number of women in determining roles in  newly independent African countries. O 16    Kinesis August'8C  MEDIA  Colored Girls' rainbow is enuf to delight Vancouver feminists  By Christine De Long  We sat in the second row of Vancouver's  City Stage theatre eagerly awaiting the  unfolding of Ntozake Shange's For Colored  Girls who have Considered Suicide When  the Rainbow is Enu{  to be brought to life  for us by seven black women less than ten  feet away.  Ninety minutes later and just the other  side of catharsis, we were led into a small  dressing room where the seven women were  changing from their rainbow-hued leotards  into their street clothes. High on their  work and happy to see us, they gave us  their time, attention and respect. 'And  they told us they were not part of the  women's movement.  However their work and Shange's writing  speak for themselves.  Ntozake Shange (pronounce that "Tozacky  Shangy"), was born Paulette Williams in  Trenton, New Jersey. ("I was privileged,  smart, light-skinned. I.ry parents protected me from being colored" ) began working  on For Colored Girls in Berkeley during  the summer of 1974.  From women's studies at Sonoma College,  her study of dance and "the acceptance  of the ethnicity of my thighs and backside" came a clearer understanding of  her voice as a woman and as a poet. Thus  Colored Girls  emerged.  The title comes from the central poem of  the piece, "One." Shange explains that  she became "smitten" by her own language  and decided to make that phrase the title  of her work from there on.  The seven poems explore the realities of  seven nameless women. The poems, dance and  music (Shange calls it "choreopoetry")  were worked and re-worked by Shange and her  fellow dancer, Paula Moss. The first performance took place at a women's bar, the  Bacchanal, just outside Berkeley, in December of 1974.  The next step was performing Colored Girls  at the Riverbea Summer Festival. Director  Oz Scott saw it, and offered to assist in  staging it for a New York audience. They  moved to East Third Street in New York and  worked with Scott's innovations. Then they  took it down the street to De Monte's bar  where a hit was born.  The last step to the top was Booth Theater  on Broadway in September 1976, where Colored Girls received the critics' blessings.  Shange comments: "Those institutions which  I had shunned as a poet — producers, theatres, actresses and sets — now were essential to us."  The seven women who bring us Shange's work  on City Stage do not consider themselves  "actresses". Rather, they are "women,  telling women's stories" — stories that  cut across racial difference, touching,  revealing women's universal experience of  pain at the hands of men.  The central themes are love for men who  damage you, and the succour of women's  love for one another. This, then, is the  rainbow — women loving one another, the  rainbow which is 'enuf.  "Don't tell them you're in love; tell 'em  you're in heat," wise-cracked the woman  in orange, Love Eli. Well, we all laughed  at at that one. But it took three months  of working with the choreopoem to get  past the tears.  "Quit it. I want to love you."  For the women in the dressing room, this  summed up their feelings towards men. And  while the men labour to catch up with the  women, what do the women have? One another.  Shange emphasizes the importance of making  the choreopoem meaningful to the experience  of her audience. When in Brazil, with col  laboration, she translated it into Portuguese; when in London, she wanted (but, I  gather, did not get) a West Indian cast,  and when in Jamaica, she encouraged the  company to use their own colloquialisms.  In Vancouver there were no script changes  made. However, a major alteration was  made in the stage directions. Formerly,  the choreopoem was presented as a series  of poetry recitations. Here, the women  stayed onstage throughout the performance.  The result emphasized the intimacy of the  circle of seven women revealing their  most secret, most humourous, most painful  secrets.  '.'/hat about having male directors for a  piece of theatre so emphatically female  in content?  Shange considers herself "too intense"  and says she "was glad a man directed it  because he brought out the anger, tenderness and deprivation," and because "this  play could have had a woman's sense of  vengeance."  Charles Grey, the Vancouver director of  Colored Girls  says: "At first, I thought  it must be directed by a male, then —  it didn't matter. It could have been very  hard, hard-edged, but it's not your gender,  it's your profession.  Sandra Sealy ("the lady in red") and Jennifer Killam ("the lady in purple") were the  ones with the impetus. They approached  Grey with the idea of producing the play  here in Vancouver, and Sealy became associate producer.  Sealy and Killam are members of the Vancouver Black Arts Theatre, which began  two and a half years ago with the production of Don't Deny Me  — a collage of poetry and movement with a more straightforward political message.  The Vancouver production of Colored Girls  opened in March of this year. Funded from  Grey's pocket, the play proved itself and  the cast received their cut of the profits.  For the July run of the play, the women  receive a guaranteed wage.  Will the Vancouver version of Colored  Girls  travel? The cast would like to, but  it doesn't seem probable at this time.  What's Shange doing these days?  She has left Broadway and is...  picking up the pieces o{ days spent waitin  far the poem to be heard  while you listen  i have other work to do.O  By Morgan McGuigan  Morgan McGuigan went with Christine Ve Long  to check out Colored Girls {or Kinesis.  Here is a play where for one of the first  times, a black woman attempts to explain  to us what it is like to be young, black  and female in North America. It takes us  through the adventures, mistakes and horrors of black women's experience, and  leaves us in the end gasping with wonder.  As Shange wrote:  sing a black girl's song  bring her out  to know hersel{  to know you  but sing her rythms  carin/struggle/hard times  singer her song o{ Ufa  she's been dead so long  closed in silence far so long  she doesn't know the sound  o{ her own voice  her infanite beauty.  This play is beautiful. The words. The  women on the stage, hugging each other,  holding each other, as women do. The powerful joy of women so positive in the  midst of horror. We recognize it: abortion  ("once I pregnant and ashamed of myself");  rape (it's not the stranger we are led to  expect, but the friend we dance with).  When I saw the play, I loved it completely.  It was only later that I began to see  some of its flaws. There was a huge emphasis on men, on men's lack of gentleness.  All through the talk about men, the women  are surrounded by six other women!  It's  a heterosexual play, although all women  have experienced some of the events described. All women can relate to the marvellous poem, "somebody nearly walked off  with all my stuff," because this whole  society works to take away all women's  'stuff'. Men merely help that process  along.O  The World of Margaret  Laurence is coming to town  After a very successful run of The Women  o{ Margaret Laurence  in May this year,  Presentation House will present several  more women-oriented shows this Fall/Winter.  By popular demand The Women o{ Margaret  Laurence will return for a longer run  starting October 2.  During a short three-day run, Norma  Edwards dazzled Vancouver audiences with  her portrayals of the five women from the  Manawaka novels. Many people, who had not  been able to see the show were left disappointed, so Presentation House is pleased  to be able to restage it this October 2 to  October 18.  Pauline Carey, another Toronto-based  actress, has also found her metier in the  one-woman show format with a new play  called Charlotte.  Charlotte is a portrait of Charlotte  Bronte, the world-famous author of Jane  Eyre and the sister of Emily Bronte. The  play is a dramatic presentation of the  life, inner struggles and turbulent personality of this extraordinary woman and  great writer.  Charlotte  is the revealing study of a woman born into an age of feminine oppress  sion. It will offer audiences another  perspective on the struggle for equality  women have been waging throughout his-.-  tory. The play will be performed in the  Presentation House Studio Theatre from  November 18-29  Another production of interest to women  will take place in the Studio Theatre  November 3 to 8 when Theatre Energy presents The Girls Will Be Out in a Minute —  a docudrama about the women of the  Kootenays .O Kinesis August'80    17  CULTURAL WORK  Women + Music = powerful good times at the Folk Festival  By Cole Dudley  Though the rain poured down on Saturday  (day two of the Festival) and my spirits  were dampened, I decided to give it a try  and ventured down to Jericho Park to enjoy  the Folk Festival.  So, with my kid rubberized, plastic under  my arm and my umbrella poking people I  struggled onto the site and fought with  the program and the rain, trying to get  my bearings. I was compelled by the power  and the volume of the music at Stage 2  and went there, finding myself in the  first feminist workshop of the day — Still  Ain't Satisfied — listening to Sweet Honey  In The Rock, along with Betsy Rose, Cathy  Winter, Ferron, Holly Near, Robin Flower,  Nancy Vogl and Laurie Lewis. There they  were singing and talking to us in the rain  and it was a wonderful feeling; and that  feeling persisted throughout the Festival.  It made a difference knowing those women  were there singing for us, telling our  side of the story.  The next workshop I attended was called  Three Women, featuring Rosalie Sorrels,  Terry Garthwaite and Bobbie Louise Hawkins.  What marvelous stories they had to tell!  At this point the rain chose to come down  again but Terry and Rosalie in song and  Bobbie Louise in prose warmed us up with  their exciting tales of women.  Organized child-care is needed  This year the festival people set up a tent  for the children where many performers took  their talents and entertained the kids. It  was great; the first step in the right direction. After listening to all the announcements over the week-end of lost children and parents, it seems apparent that  some kind of organized child care is needed at the Festival.  One of the performers in the Kids' Tent was  the amazing Odetta, enjoyed by my son  because she said {unny things to the kids!  I had intended to leave my son there and go  elsewhere but I got trapped by the crazy  antics of the Flying Karamazov Brothers  and the delightful stories of the Folktell-  ers. A red star goes out to Peter Alsop and  Nancy Vogl, the only feminist performers to  make it to the Kids' Tent. Too bad there  weren't others; we have to start when  they're young!  Nuke mentality symptomatic  I finally got away, though, just in time  for the anti-nuke workshop — Hell No We  Won't Glow. By then the rain had stopped  and there was some promise of sun, and the  baby ducks swam by, and Jim Page sang his  anti-Shah song, and Holly Near talked with  us. She reminded us that the pro-nuke mentality was just a symptom of a more far-  reaching disease that feeds on racism,  sexism, classism, etc. She begged us not  to give up our other struggles but to take  our Nuke awareness into the other areas of  the fight. Then we sang, laughed and hoped  together.  Thus ended the workshops for Saturday.  Being a bit damp, I went home to dry out  making it back to the festival in time to  hear Sweet Honey In The Rock in their  evening concert. They were stirring with  voices like liquid velvet and songs of  struggle and strength. I came away inspired.  While introducing themselves, one member,  Evelyn Harris, chastised Charles Barber  (the MC) for his patronizing compliments  about the group. She told him that when  you're strong about something you either  are or you ain't,  so you don't need adjectives to describe what you are. We are  black and we are women.  The power is in  the simplicity. It was good to have Sweet  Honey at the festival. I went home feeling satisfied.  Sunday bloomed bright and sunny, and the  need for child care became apparent as my  son grew more interested in running around  in the sunshine than listening to stories  and songs.  Then came the workshop I had been waiting  for, A Good Woman's Love. It was even  better than I had hoped; the audience was  voluminous. The women on the stage were  intimate with us, talking and singing of  how we love each other and men; and all  the illusions were down. They spoke of  feminism and sang with a feminist perspective, glad to bring it to the festival and  share it with all women, left, right or  middle. The workshop ended, or would have  ended, with Holly Near (and all of us)  singing and signing Something About The  Women. It was overwhelming the power of  our passion. We would not sit down, go  away, or stop clapping until the women  performers came back. And they did, singing with us a rousing chorus of Fight  Back. Even the man lounging in front of me  throughout the concert, sat up and took notice then.  Lots of political workshops this year  There were a lot of political workshops at  the festival this year. Don't Get Married  Girls was a workshop with a feminist man's  perspective. Peter Alsop and Leon Rossel-  son presented it in a very entertaining  but sensitive way; we laughed but the  serious intent was well established.  And so the day went on and ended with a  good old union workshop and everyone in  high spirits. Towards the end the generator exhausted itself, but that didn't stop  the festival. The audience just moved in  closer and the performers sang louder and  everyone joining in with The Union Makes  Us Strong. And we felt it by then.  By the time of the evening concert, I was  quite sun-burned and generally burnt out,  so it passed me by somewhat. Two events  stood out quite clearly, though. First was  Robin Williamson booed by a group of women  in the front for his singing of some very  sexist erotic songs. Me. a chauvinist pigl  I've never been called that befare,  was  his response. The shining light of the  evening was Holly Near and Co. being introduced as the first feminist band to perform at the Vancouver Folk Festival. We  are being heard and proving the workshop  title of last year, Women + Music = Power.  O  Alice in Additive Land is a sexist, pro-industry bad trip  Alice in Additlveland was recently developed by Health and Welfare Canada for use  in an educational campaign to inform consumers about food additives. The script  and accompanying slide show were designed  as teaching aids for nutritionists, home  economists, and educators to promote the  use and value of food additives.  Judy Wasylycia-Leis, the Federal Women's  Organizer for the New Democrats, analyses  the sexist, pro-industry bias of the show:  The central theme of the show is the education of Alice — cast as a "dumb blonde"  — by the Professor and Ulysses, the laboratory rat. Alice is the innocent, ignorant, well-intentioned but unknowledge-  able female consumer. The chief 'authority  figures, the Professor and Ulysses, are  both male.  Alice asks all the questions; these male  authorities and their entourage (including  a token female scientist) give all the  answers. Alice is "confused"; the Professor  and his rodent side-kick are knowledgeable, authoritative and "scientific" — as  well as intolerably patronizing. The central theme of male authority and female  receptivity is reinforced through other  images and techniques throughout the show.  Ulysses greets Alice (but not the Professor) with "Hi ya, sweetheart"; the Professor tells her, "Follow me, kiddo"; and  introduces Ms. Cyclamates with the words  "Isn't she a sweet young thing?"  Other minor but significant female characters are used to make particular points  in "catchy" and presumably memorable ways.  The banning of cyclamates is represented  in a classic sequence paralleling the  prosecution of a woman for prostitution  (complete with male judge handing down  the sentence). The image of the "Responsibility Team" of Food Manufacturer and  Health Protection Branch is one of Papa  and Mamma pulling little Alice along between them.  Show adopts tone: all the world's a chemical  The overall tone of the show is one of re-  'assurance about additives — once you get  to understand them, you will really like  them. People sometimes think that 'chemi  cal' means unnatural,  or even dangerous.  Everything in the world is chemical. All.  {oods are chemicals.  Perhaps most contentious of all is the statement that  Scientists don'i consider additives scary.  Emphasis is placed on the role of additives to prevent food poisoning, maintaining the value of food, or improving its  quality and colour.  No mention is made of additive dangers  Mo mention is made of the drawbacks of  using additives — such as substituting  Tang for orange juice or white mushy bread  for stone ground whole wheat bread. No attempt is made to talk about the risks associated with a chemical such as Red Dye #2,  banned in the U.S. as a cancer-causing  agent but allowed in Canada as a food colour for no other reason than to provide  consumer "appeal". Nowhere is there a discussion of Canada's centralized, automated food processing and distribution  system, a system which requires a lot of  additives to preserve food that must be  stable for three months or to create food  that is more a product of a chemical engineer than a farm field. Many additives are  used as a convenience to industry or for  marketing purposes, not because the intrinsic merit of a food is improved. The  show completely ignores these issues.  This show, with its inherent sexism and  dangerous innuendos, will receive nationwide circulation. Protest to the Hon.  Tfonique Begin, Minister of Health and  Welfare, Brooke Claxton Bldg., Tunney's  Pasture, Ottawa, KlA 0K9.O 18    Kinesis August'8C  MOVEMENT DEBATE  Has the women's movement become a club for correct-liners?  By Marg Verrall  This article was written with help, encouragement and input {rom Janet Beebe.  The idea to write it started with conversations between us over our concerns about  the direction o{ {eminism.    We hope that  other women will use whatever farums are  available to express their opinions on  these issues.  March is an important month for the women's  movement because March 8 is International  Women's Day. Because of the parade on the  8th, the first week of March always generates a lot of discussion, from "why do you  need a day to yourselves, anyway?" to  "what kind of shape are we in this year?"  This year, Gloria Greenfield and I were  gleefully plotting "The March 9th Show",  and finally the day arrived, the entertainers ready to carry away on the waves of  their music all the hard-working feminists  and humanitarian sorts who would come to  see the show.  Well, the show went on, but the three weeks  to follow were among the worst in my memory. That's why I want to tell you the  story as it happened to me.  I do believe that the personal and the theatrical are political — and this show generated a hot debate that has raised far-  reaching issues for those of us trying to  work together in the women's movement.  Reaction to the March 9 show is ongoing  Reaction to that show is ongoing.  People  are still coming to me and, whether or not  they saw the show, are letting me know how  it affected them and how they feel these  days in relation to the women's movement.  In that sense, the show was a good one.  In the spirit of constructive criticism, I  wish to begin by self-criticism. As emcee  of the show, I felt I could have said a lot  more that would have better explained the  nature of what you were about the see and  why we chose what we did.  The Women's  Building Committee (for whom the variety  show was a benefit) gave us the freedom to  choose, and each of the entertainers donated her time and music out of support for  the Women's Building and a joy of entertaining.  In explaining my own material, I could have  given more background to the songs that I  danced to, and explained why I play with  female and male roles the way I do. Little  did I know just how much explanation was  lacking.  Finally, having been given the job of emcee  and entertainer, I should not have participated in working on technical problems that  day, and I should have looked for more help  with stage direction. In short, I felt  the role of emcee was unfulfilled because I  took on too much. This is a lesson in life  I learn repeatedly; it sneaks up in different forms each time.  I chose my music with the audience in mind,  l attempted to envision the after-eve of  the parade, and who would be there. I attempted to entertain and bring a talented  variety show together, and to produce something different.  When the show opened, the pressure was tremendous. It always is, at Show Time, but  this show had technical wrinkles- right up  to curtain time. This, coupled with the  knowledge that we were playing for feminists, was enough to make any amazon faint.  In the back of my mind was the recollection  that there had been negative response to  my type of theatre after a show I'd done  a year previous.  "No better than a drag  queen," so I'd heard. Apparently some  people feel it is anti-feminist to come on  stage in a lacy white dress, or "poor drag"  to wear a tuxedo and dance to a man's voice.  My response is that I create these characters out of myself, and make them mine. This  is not to repeat what has been shown before,  but to bring back music and stories that  I love with a new strength, and from my  own perspective.  In the front of my mind was the excitement  of bringing you a show and the knowledge  • that out there were many who knew and loved  the acts they were about to see.  By half-time, I was aware that all was not  well, as reports filtered back to the  dressing room. Well, as they've always  said in the performing arts, "a pie in the  face comes with the job." Above all, no  matter what happens, the show must go on.  I was, however, taken aback as I sat onstage poised to open the second half, to  feel a "tap-tap" on my shoulder and be  asked to announce a meeting following the  show to discuss reactions to the politics  of the show. Thank the Cosmos that I  could say, "Go see Gloria." I understand  and welcome "criticism and the strong feelings attached. I listened to a constructive criticism delivered a few weeks after,  describing rage and feelings of denial  that I didn't make the announcement as requested. I announced instead that I would  be glad of future meetings, but please,  not that very night. We were tired and  had to undo sound equipment after the show.  Overriding my understanding of those who  wanted to meet that night was a rage of my  own that the opinions of some could be so  important as to disrupt the show to such  an extent at the expense of my energy at  that moment, and at the expense of those  who were fully enjoying themselves. No, I  didn't*want those who were upset to creep  away in the dead of night, their feelings  of oppression as women once again buried  inside. But I did want them to understand  the effects of their method of criticism.  It was not constructive.  It became worse for me as the next few  days passed.  I heard that people had talked loudly in the audience as the show went  on, saying, "Oh, no, is she going to dance  again?" Meaning me. This was overheard  by people who were trying to enjoy the  show. It was the most undermining energy  I've ever performed for.  I do many types of shows. Some are so  "politically correct" they leave no room  for judgment. But what can I do as a feminist who is stirred by romance and rainbows, and who was born with the spirit of  Fred Astaire in my feet? Could you not  enjoy the dance?  I'm well aware that Kay Jackson was most  heavily criticized, and that the allegations of racism, classism and sexism fall  onto her acts. I'm not trying to deny the  many emotions that her dances created, but  it is very important for me as a feminist  to say that I just don't see it as racist,  classist or sexist. I've seen Kay dance  before. I've known her for several years,  and admire her talent, wit and imagination.  I don't think it is automatically racist  for a white woman to portray someone from  another culture.  To say that Kay's portrayal of Carmen Miranda is "insulting and in-  authentic" and that "no Latin American woman has ever dressed or acted like that"  is to make a blanket statement about how  third world women dress, act and think.  Within the women's movement I think that,  while attempting to analyze things politically, we must be careful not to speak on  behalf of people we have never met, nor to  make the assumption that other people see  things as we do.  The fact that Kay's act had sexual overtones also raised a lot of negative reaction. The display of sexuality in theatre  is tricky, and the Carmen Miranda dance  has less than subtle sexual overtones. But  I see this act in the spirit of Mae West  and all those bold and sexy heterosexual  women who have taught men most of what  they know.  These women should feel supported by.the women's movement — they do  a lot of the work that brings about definite change.  (That such a characterization can also be seen on a totally innocent  level was brought home to me the day after  the show when I asked a four-year-old what  part he liked best. "Oh, the one with the  bananal", he said.  The allegation that Kay's 50s characterization was classist is probably what confused me the most. I think that it went  over people's heads that Kay was portraying herself.  So, politically I disagree with that political analysis of her act — and I think  it is important to recognize that we are  talking about somebody's reputation, and  about Kay's relationship to the women's  movement, and about Kay as a woman who  chose to entertain for International Women's  Day.  For weeks after the show I was in conversation with women about, their reactions,  negative and positive. I must say that I  I've heard from many women that the nature of the criticism that ensued is what  most disturbed them.  Yet when I reported  the positive feedback that I had been receiving I was told more than once that it  was my imagination if I thought that anyone enjoyed the show. That's why I'm telling this story. Dynamics from within the  movement have surfaced through the show and  I feel it's time to look at them.  I'd like to say that the women's movement  lies deep within my heart, and I'm in contact with a great number of people who are  in it, out of it, and have extensive opinions about it. I have talked to women  ecstatic to have seen something a little  different in this show; women who have  felt ostracized because they have male  children; women who have been ousted from  collectives for holding unpopular opinions;  women who won't call themselves feminists  any more, and women who say they never  will. What is it we're doing wrong?  I'm concerned about our narrowness  I'm concerned about the narrowness of our  vision. Too many women feel they have  been relegated to, or chosen to be on,  the fringes of the women's movement. Too  many women feel they would never be acceptable to members of the women's movement.  Let's talk about political correctness. All  of us have reason to work at and analyze  our politics, but the way this concept is  being used is turning many women away from  feminism. In trying to discover the "perfect" direction we are rejecting diversity.  Yet differences can challenge us, and without them, we are going to stagnate. By-  judging on another so severely, we can  only lose the very strength and growth we  are trying to create.  One of the primary objectives of the women's movement has been to create safe  spaces for women. And we've done it. We  began with a few women's centres, and CR ► Kinesis August'80   19  MOVEMENT REPORTS  Children playing at the play  I saw and enjoyed very much the performance by Lilith at the Robson Square Media  Centre recently.  I am moved to write because of an incident which happened during  the second play which disturbed me very  much.  Although there was daycare provided, most  parents chose to bring their children into  the performance itself. I think this is  fine.  I certainly think that children  should be encouraged to share experiences  with adults. And most of the children  were as well behaved as one could wish anyone to be.  However, during the second play a few children, tired and bored, began to play down  in front of the stage. We asked them to  sit down and be quiet, but they simply  ignored us and ran away. One little girl  in particular was so disruptive that Reno,  one of the players, said afterwards that  she cut most of her long speech where she  was on the phone to the suicide prevention  centre.  This is a real shame, both for  the audience and for the players.  I think that people who bring their children to events where there is a possibility  that the children may become disruptive  should take it upon themselves to sit near  enough to take them out if need be.  In a more ideal society, perhaps, all adults will feel responsible for all children; but as it is now if a stranger picked  up a misbehaving child and took her or him  to the daycare, the child would be terrified. And speaking to the child does no  good, because she or he knows that you are  not the parent. Besides, I don't want to  miss part of the show because somebody  else's child is disrupting things. My child  is sitting quietly on my lap. If he were  not being quiet, I'd bloody well take him  out — and fast.  Anyway, the plays were wonderful, and the  Women's Building Committee are to be thanked for bringing such a wonderful event to  town. I wish we as an audience would  accord such wonderful performers the  respect they deserve.O  By Nan Gregory  C.O.M.B.A.T. Q  When we are oppressed, exploited or taken  advantage of — when we face threats,  frustrations and anger in our jobs, our  families, from men, pornography, rape,  etc. we react. We fight, we make ourselves heard. We scream, we rally, we boycott we demonstrate. We do something!  When it comes to issues, concerns, complaints, dissatisfaction that we come  across at the local woman's bar; whether  it is about sexism (beauty pageants/best  buns contests) or violence — we tie our  hands, we keep our mouths shut, we close  .our eyes, we rationalize (it hasn't hap- ^  pened to us personally). For fear of being  VERRALL   concluded from p. 18  groups in which women could discuss what  it meant to be a woman. Now we have a  large network of services and support.  So, why then are so many women afraid of  being judged unfavourably by feminists?  Some of it comes from a social tradition  that says women can't help each other; but  a lot of it comes from the attitude we  convey which says: what's good for us is  good for every woman — which implies "I  know and you don't know what's good for  you."  The network we have created, and the number  of women's events that take place in Vancouver provide us with many opportunities  to discuss and debate these kinds of  issues.  Let's do it.O  humiliated, kicked out or barred.  Why are we so immobile?  For a lot of us the women's bar is the centre of our social and personal lives. It  is the place where we go when we want to  see our friends, when we want to find a  lover, when we want to dance with women  and express ourselves as lesbians, when  we are feeling sad and/or lonely. Where  v/e go to relax after a day of work, where  we come out of the closet and where we go  when we're simply bored or restless. A  women's bar in our culture, our community,  means survival for a lot of us.  Because it means survival it is hard for  us to state our positions when we encounter conflicts with management. It is hard  to take a position against incidents that  happen to friends or that we hear about.  We feel and are powerless because there is  only one bar in town which does not provide us with any framework in which to  make ourselves heard.  You say: what do you expect from a bar  whose managers claim to be non-political?  We say: we want to be heard! We went access to a public telephone on the premises  (to call taxis, ambulances or police,  etc. ). We want some kind of control over  ways in which brutality and violence are  dealt with and over length of time and  reasons that people are barred.  We want to be heard and to make ourselves  heard we need your ideas, support, personal testimonies of incidents and complaints, inspiration and energy. Come to  the meeting at Britannia Community Centre,  August 19 at 7:30 p.m. (Ask for room at  the office.  In Sisterhood,  C.O.M.B.A.T. Q.  (Committee of Meeting Brutality (and  Sexism) at the Q.) O  y Danyele Leroux  Julie Maas/WIN  Next year in Vancouver:  organizing for the 1981 Lesbian  Conference  Organizing for the 1981 Lesbian Conference  has begun in Vancouver. The projected  dates for this event are May 16, 17 and 18  of 1981. The last conference was held in  Toronto in 1979, and Winnipeg was to be  the host in 1980 but had to withdraw earlier this year.  The purpose of the conference is at least  twofold. We believe it is important as  Lesbians that we have ways of bringing us  together, to share our joy and our pain;  and that we also find ways of analysing  and fighting the oppression we encounter  in this society.  We are now at the fund raising stage. During the forthcoming year there will be an  event each month to raise a projected sum  of $14,000. A portion of this money will  go to subsidize low-income and rural women to attend this conference. The New  Moon dance held in July was the first of  a long and hopefully successful series.  Anyone interested can come to 45 Kingsway  every second Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. and  take part in our organizing meetings.  For more information, call the Lesbian Information Line at 734-1016, Thursdays,  7:00 to 10:00 p.m. and Sundays, 7:00  to 10:00 p.m.  The AUGUST FUNDRAISER WILL BE A SALMON  BAKE'TBA at press time. O  By the Lesbian Conference Planning Committee  Don't throw your movement  past out with the trash  The Women's Movement Archives  is now  three years old.  The Women's Movement Archives possesses  material from the earliest point of the  current women's movement. It stretches  from sea to sea and much of it is irreplaceable. Newspapers, newsletters and  movement documents from both Western  Canada and the Atlantic Provinces are on  file and Quebec (French and English) is  also represented. There is a section for  photographs and news clippings. As well,  plans are being made to capture the experiences on a personal level of those individuals who were instrumental in the development of women's liberation during  the late sixties, and the collective her-  stories of groups presently functioning.  In 1980, it is particularly hard to find  anything more than a few years old. There  is a limit to how much one person can rescue from the feminist garbage cans. This  is very sad. A document is something more  than a sheet of paper; it is a very alive  piece of herstory. Must we allow our  daughters to suffer the same mistakes as  ourselves because we neglected to provide  a continuity of ideas? Keeping "useless"  pieces of paper is never a waste of time.  Nothing, nothing which relates to our  movement should be thrown away. There is  never any excuse for women's newspapers  and every other group to not keep a record  of their progression from various flyers  to minutes of meetings.  There are several women called ISIS, based  in Geneva and Rome, who are part of the  International Feminist Network. They take  their time very seriously as they understand the need to build an international  documentation centre to be used by everyone. The process of communication does not  lie in one collective in one city or even  one country. If we refuse to dwell on the  past, then let us think of the future. The  Women's Movement Archives is the link to  all time.  Specifically lesbian herstory will be forever buried. What little exists now consists of hopeful conjecture. It is the  fear of oppression and the shyness of  self-expression which makes that invisible veil so heavy. If need be, the Women's  Movement Archives would go underground,  file by file, to protect records of the  growing movement. Access to everything  donated by lesbians is strictly limited.  The Women's Movement Archives is an organized archival collection outside of  patriarchal institutions. Its existence  is stable and is maintained through consultation with other archivists. The  Women's Movement Archives will have a  long future.  Help yourselves — and the Archives. Send  your old leaflets, notes, anything at all.  Do not doubt its value. The history of  our movement is built on many levels.  Documents and theoretical essays will not  do it alone. The past is with us now because many women saved or published their  journals. Your letter to a friend will be  our future. Everything speaking about and  to feminism is precious to us all.  By Pat Leslie  The Women's Movement Archives  P.O. Box 928, Station  Q.  Toronto,  Ontario,  Canada O 20    Kinesis August'80  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  HIROSHIMA DAY, AUGUST 8 at 7:30 p.m. in  front of the old courthouse, Georgia  and Hornby.  Speakers, music and candlelight ceremony sponsored by the Coalition for World Disarmament.  PROTEST NUCLEAR WARHEADS AT C0M0X on Saturday August 9 cars leave Horseshoe Bay  on the 10:30 ferry, calvalcade leaves  Nanaimo from Northbrook Mall at 12:15  for protest in front of armed forces  base at Comox. Bring a picnic.  AUGUST 10 IS PRISON JUSTICE DAY. There will  be a 24-hour vigil in front of Oakalla  at Royal Oak and Kingsway in Burnaby.  It begins at August 9 at 8:00 p.m.  LIL PICNIC Sunday August 10, at Trout Lake.  Gather at noon at the 18th Ave end. And  bring your own picnic. Women and children welcome.  WOMEN IN A MAN'S WORLD. The YWCA is sponsoring a series of discussions at the  Vancouver YWCA, 580 Burrard St.  August 26: Real Estate  Panel starts at 7:00; coffee and dessert  at 8:30. Cost is $5:00 per session.  YWCA OUTDOOR CLUB FOR WOMEN has the following events planning for the rest of the  summer:  August 16 — Day hike to Mount Strachan.  August 30 - September 1 — Hiking and  canoeing trip to Nitinat Triangle.  Membership is $45 a year, which covers  instruction, equipment use, special  trip rates and discounts. Call Clasina  at 683-2531 for more information.  GAY UNITY CELEBRATIONS include the following of interest to lesbian women:  Friday, August 8 : Gay U.B.C. and Vancouver Gay Community Centre concert at  8:00 p.m. at BJ's.  Saturday, August 9 : Vancouver Gay Community Centre and SEARCH dance at BJ's.  WORKING WOMEN UNITE is sponsoring a public  forum to debate AUCE's affiliation issue. Tuesday evening, 7:30 p.m. August  26, Teamsters Hall, 490 East Broadway.  GROUPS  DEALING WITH an alcohol problem? Help and  and support is available from GAY AL-  AN0N. For information and referral, contact SEARCH — 689-1039 or Al-Anon at  688-1716.  TASK FORCE ON OLDER WOMEN sponsored by the  NDP Women's Committee has set up the  following public hearings:  September 12, 13  September 26, 27  October 10, 11  October 24, 25  November 7, 8  November 14, 15  November 21, 22  November 28, 29  December 5, 6  For more details;  NDP constituency  — Prince George  — Cranbrook  — Terrace  — Kamloops  — Campbell River  — North Vancouver  — New Westminster  — Vancouver  — Victoria  contact your local  office.  DO YOU WRITE SONGS? Are you a woman? Are  you in B.C.? Does your music have feminist content?  I want to put together and publish a feminist songbook containing music written  by B.C. women.  If you have songs you  want published or if you want more information, please write to: Shelagh  Wilson, Surge Narrows, B.C. V0P 1W0.  SHARING OUR SILENCES. I am preparing a review of Tillie Olsen's silences for the  second edition of The Radical Reviewer.  I'd like to hear from local women writers,  to see what keeps us from our desks. Contact C.T. Sand, 3545 St.Catherine's St.  Vancouver V5V 4K9  VANCOUVER STATUS OF WOMEN  invites you all  to a SURVIVAL BENEFIT for  its publication  KINESIS  on  SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 6th  at  The Swedish Hall  1320 East Hastings Street  8:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m.  AD HOC will be playing  and copious refreshments will be sold  FREE CHILDCARE  TICKETS:  $5.00 for the employed  $2.50 for the underpaid  Please pre-register for childcare by calling Joan at VSW: 736-1313  Tickets are available at VSW, 1090 West 7th Ave.; Ariel Books; The Women's Bookstore;  Octopus Books; MacLeod's Books; Spartacus Books; SORWUC and CAIMAW offices, etc..  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a year by Vancouver  Status of Women. Its objectives are to enhance understanding about the changing position of women in  society and work actively towards achieving social  change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned  material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial  group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 1090 West 7th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V6H  1B3.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is by  donation. Kinesis is mailed monthly to all members.  Individual subs to Kinesis are $8.00 per year. We ask  members to base their donations on this, and their own  financial situations.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right to  edit, and submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want your work returned.  DEADLINE: 15th of each month.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe, Janet Berry,  Cole Dudley, Judy Finnigan, Penny Goldsmith, Morgan  McGuigan, Helen Mintz, Gayla Reid, Janice Pentland-  Smith, Diana Smith, Joey Thompson, Lezlie Wagman,  Cat Wickstrom, Joan Woodward.  STATUS OF WOMEN  • monthly newspaperK/nes/'s  • speakers bureau  • programmes for women working  in  the  home  • assertiveness training  • consciousness raising  • legal referral service (authorized by the Law  Society of B.C.)  • research library  • briefs on issues of concern to women  • volunteer training  • monthly   programme   "Talking   Law"   on  Co-op radio  VSW's offices are open to the public from  9-5:30 p.m. Monday to Wednesday and on  Thursday from 9 a.m. to 9 p.m. We encourage  you to drop in or call us at 736-1313.  KINESIS TAKES A BREAK in August. We'll be  back with a special double issue to be  prepared in the month of September. So  remember: September 15 is the next deadline for your copy. Happy holidays!  WEN-DO, Women's Self Defense:  Classes can be arranged for groups  of 10 or more women. For information, contact Wen-Do West, 2349 St  Catherines, Vancouver. Phone 876-6390.  SINGLE PARENTS GROUP FOR VANCOUVER EAST is  being organized by Single Parents  Group, c/o Britannia Community Centre,  1661 Napier Street, Vancouver V51 4X4.  Phone 253-4391, local 57.  SETTING UP A TRANSITION HOUSE? Any group  interested in setting up a transition  house please write to the newly-formed  Society of Transition Houses of British Columbia, Box 213, Port Coquitlam,  B.C. V3C 3V7.  LESBIAN DROP-IN meets every Wednesday  night at the Vancouver Women's Bookstore, 804 Richards at 8:00 p.m.  LESBIAN INFORMATION LINE (LIL) is open to  calls two nights a week. Thursday and  Sunday, 7 — 10 p.m. Call 734-1016.  DROP-IN FOR YOUNGER LESBIANS meets each  Thursday night, 7:30 — 10:00 p.m.  1501 West Broadway.  LESBIANS OVER 40 meet Monday night at  the Women's Bookstore, 804 Richards,  at 7:30 p.m.  WOMEN'S STUDIES AT LANGARA offers a credit  course, Perspectives on Women, starting  in September. Call 733 3529 for details.  WOMEN IN TRADES ~ First national conference will be held.in Winnipeg, Man.,  September 26, 27, 28. For details, con-  tact Peggy Bleeker at 254 3312.  Congratulations, Nance'.