 o  K.JULY/AUG. 1990 Lesbian/Gay Games Listings  CMPA $2.25 Kinesis welcomes volunteers  to work on all aspects of the  paper. Call us at 255-5499.  Our next News Group is Tues.  July 31, at 3:30 pm at Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant St. All  women welcome even if you  don't have experience.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE:  Rhoda Rosenfeld, Joni Miller, Nan cy Pollak, Christine  Cosby, Sonia Marino, A. Ali-  sa Nemesis, Helena Petkau,  Andrea Lowe, Maggie Roy,  Sandy James, Joanne Walton,  Chris Meyer, Sudesh Kuar, Susan O'Donnell, Tarel Quandt,  Faith Jones, Winnifred Tovey  FRONT COVER: Based on a  photo by F. Cara  EDITORIAL BOARD: Gwen  Bird, Christine Cosby, Nancy Pollak, Michele Valiquette,  Terrie Hamazaki  CIRCULATION AND DISTRIBUTION: Rachel Fox, Jenni-  nstone,   Cat   L'Hiron-  nn McDonald  I  OFFICE: Jennifer Johnst<  Cat L'Hirondelle  Kinesis Is published 10 times  a year by the Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives  are to be a non-sectarian feminist voice for women and  to work actively for social  change, specifically combatting sexism, racism, homophobia and imperialism.  Views  expressed   in   Kinesis  are those of the writer and  necessarily reflect VSW  ■  SUBSCRIPTIONS: Individual  iubscriptions to Kinesis are  $20 per year or what you  can afford. Membership in the  Vancouver Status of Women  is $30 or what you can afford,  includes subscription to Kinesis.  SUBMISSIONS: Women and  girls are welcome to make sub-  nissions. We reserve the right  to edit and submission does  not guarantee publication. If  possible, submissions should  be typed double spaced and  must be signed and include  an address and phone number.  Please note: Kinesis does not  accept poetry or fiction contributions. For material to be  returned, a SASE must be included. Editorial guidelines are  available on request.  ADVERTISING: For information about display advertising  rates, please contact Kinesis.  For information about classifieds, please see the classified  page in this issue.  I  DEADLINE: For features ai  reviews: the 10th of the  month preceding publication;  news copy: 15th; letters and  Bulletin Board listings: 18th.  Display advertising—camera  ready: 18th; design required:  12th.  Kinesis is produced on an  IBM PC using PC TeX and  an LC-800 laser printer. Additional laser printing by East-  side Data Graphics. Camera  work by The Peak. Printing by  Web Press Graphics, Burnaby  BC  0B0r  It's not even law yet, and women are dying 3  First of all, Rosalie Tizya lays a basis for understanding Aboriginal  self-determination 13  Film makers and their five minutes 21  INSIDE  fftion law sows death, confusion 3  Daycare—or babysitting? 3  Meech: another dead Canadian lake 4  Women and the free trade brush-off 5  NAC, NAC, who's there? 5  iftttf \pHcmrW more 7  fassiou  DisAbled Women: collective courage 9  by Bridget Rivers-Moore  South Africa: land, power and privilege 11  as told to Louie Ettling  Women are dying in El Salvador 12  by Nell Twomey  First of all 13  by Rosalie Tizya  artz  7lt»ll Be a Gay time 19  Sweetie: witnessing the unsaid 20  by Shelly Quick  Five Feminist Minutes: in review 21  by Susan Edelstein  Txi Whizz 22  by Millie Strom  Movement Matters 2  What's News? 6  Commentaries  by Debby Gregory 8  by Anne Innis Dagg 10  Making Waves 17  by Lauri £. Nerman  Letters 23  Bulletin Board 25  compiled by Donna Dykeman  Kinesis is indexed in the  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index, and the Alternative  Press Index.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of  Women, 301-1720 Grant St.,  , B.C. V5L 2Y6  Kinesis is a member of the  Canadian Magazine Publishers  Association.  Second class mail #6426  ISSN 0317-£  KINESIS Movement Matters  Movement  matters listings  j information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of sperial interest to the women's  movement. Submissions to Movement Matters should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double-spaced on eight and a half by  eleven paper. Submissions may be edited for  length. Deadline is the 18th of the month  preceding publication.  A conference to  honour the work  of Audre Lorde  Women in Boston are planning a fall conference based on the work of Audre Lorde.  Entitled "I Am Your Sister: Forging Global  Connections Across Differences," the organizers envision four days of workshops and  cultural events accessible to women of all  ages, class backgrounds, ethnicities, colours,  sexualities and abilities.  Examples of planned workshops include  Eye to Eye:" self- defined communities explore their own angers, vulnerabdity and  powers; "From a Land Where Other People Live:" Indigenous women from different  continents will teach how to look at life from  their standpoints.  Audre Lorde is supporting the work of  the multi-racial organizing committee. The  conference is scheduled to run from October  5-8. At present, donations are being sought  by the organizers. For more information, or  to make a contribution (cheques payable to  "I Am Your Sister") write to PO Box 269,  Astor Station, Boston MA 02123  Correction  In our June issue ("The common denominator is anger"), one of interviewer Terrie  Hamazaki's questions was edited. It should  have read: "Could you tell me about the  Philippine Women's Centre?"  In the same issue, we mispelled Lorri  Rudland's name for the second time.  Social Change Tool  for the 90's  This quarterly subject index to over  200 alternative publications will be  an invaluable tool In your efforts to  bring about social change.  So ask the folks at your library to  subscribe to the Alternative Press Index,  If they don't already.  Libraries: $110/year  Individuals and movement groups: $30/yea  Directory of Alternative & Radical  Publications: $3  For more information write:  Alternative Press Center  P.O. Box 33091  Baltimore, Maryland 21218  Women and Words:  lots of words in  lots of places  West Coast Women and Words sixth annual retreat/school for women writers is  taking place in the Vancouver area this summer. West Word VI is an opportunity for  24 writers from all over Canada to get together with one of three instructors, skilled  women writers and teachers in their own  genres, to experience two weeks of intense  learning and growth in their craft.  This is a residential program, with a maximum of eight students in each workshop  group, working in either the genres of fiction, poetry, or creative documentary.  West Word organizers state that one of  their main goals is to provide an interchange  among a broad diversity of women in terms  of region, age, ethnicity and culture. Sharing their work with each other in a supportive environment has been one of the major  benefits of the retreat according to former  students.  Participants in the program are selected  mainly on the basis of samples of their work,  which are anonymously submitted to a local  feminist writer in that genre for selection.  This year's students have already been chosen for the July 29-August 11 program, but  several events in connection with the school  are open to the public and free of charge.  Claire Harris, poetry instructor, reads at  the Native Education Centre, 285 East 5th  Avenue at 8 pm on Saturday, July 28. This  event is sponsored by the Congress of Black  Women.  On Tuesday, July 31 at 7:30 pm all three  instructors read from their work: Claire  Harris (poetry), Sandy Duncan (fiction),  and Heather Menzies (creative documentary). On Friday, August 3 at 7:30 pm former West Word instructors Beth Brant and  Dionne Brand read from their work. The final event is a panel discussion on the subtle forms of racism in writing, chaired by  Claire Harris on Saturday, August 4 at 2  pm. These last three events are being held  at the West Word campus, the Canadian International College at 2420 Dollarton Highway, North Vancouver.  For women interested in the program and  perhaps applying in the future these public events offer an opportunity to meet this  year's staff, students, and instructors. All  enquiries regarding Women and Words or  the School are welcome. Call (604) 872-8014  or write Women and Words at Suite 210-640  West Broadway, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1G4.  [taffle and Benefit in June were a grand success. Under the guiding  hands of Terrie Hamazaki, Gwen Bird and Christine Cosby, volunteers and supporters of  Kinesis raised over $1,500. Many special people helped out, but none as special as the  evening's entertainers: Doreen MacLean, Nora D. Randall and Sue McGowan.  Our thanks to everyone who flogged tickets, baked or sold goodies, staffed the kitchen,  or cleaned up:  Colette Hogue • Maggie Roy • Tarel Quandt • Chris Meyer • Linda Choquette • Debra Woods • Orion Woods • Rachel Goddu • Tekla Hendrickson • Lisa Schmidt • Sandy  James • Ali-sa Nemesis • Cathy Stonehouse • Candice Harrison • Birgit Schinke • Jan  Altshool«Pam Whittaker • Susan O'Donnell • Jan Berry • Faith Jones • Ginger Teskey •  Jennifer Johnstone • Winnifred Tovey • Liz Clark • Esther Shannon • Marsha Arbour •  Bonnie Waterstone • Janet Geary • Noreen Shanahan • Chantal Phillips • Donna Dykeman • Cat L'Hirondelle • Sonia Marino  Special thanks go out to Jean Caha, who supplied and operated the sound system for the  evening, and Lauri Nerman for the swell background music. As well, thanks to La Quena  Coffeehouse for entrusting their facilities to us.  The Kinesis raffle was such a great success because of generous donations from the following sponsors: East End Food Co-op, CRS Food Distributors, Uprising Breads Bakery,  the Vancouver Folk Music Festival Society, Celebration '90—Gay Games III and Cultural  Festival, Astarte, Vancouver Writers' Festival, Women in View, and the Ridge Theatre.  As usual, we have some changes to report and some hellos and goodbyes to make.  With our next issue, our classified ad rates will increase to $8 for the first 50 words, and  $4 for each 25 words thereafter. We haven't raised our rates for many years and it was  time. Ads which have already been booked will be honoured at the old rate.  Andrea Lowe has joined the Kinesis staff as an editor-in-training. She's already done  time here as a volunteer writer and proofreader, so we know she's got word-fever and probably all sorts of other obsessions too. Hello, Andrea.  Bonnie Waterstone is leaving town! Bonnie has been on staff at the Vancouver Status  of Women since last September (she organized the excellent series "Gathering Strength,  Gaining Power"). Although her job description never said anything about Kinesis, Bonnie has not only been a writer of fine reviews, but a supportive, helpful co-worker to Kinesis staff— the sort of woman you learn from. She'll be missed, and she won't be forgotten.  About that book you're reading, Bonnie ...  Also leaving Kinesis is Cat L'Hirondelle, our bookkeeper and circulation manager. Cat  has been on VSW's staff for over a decade and, while she's been phasing herself out gradually, it is hard to imagine the office without her. For one thing, there won't be as much  purple and black. For another, we'll no longer have the benefit of those years of careful attention and thoroughness. Cat has made an outstanding and largely unrecognized contribution to the newspaper's viability and we really can't thank her enough. So thanks, eh?  V  We   Are  I    S    I    B    L    E  Ageful Women's Letters  •  Art  •  Reports.  Poetry • Ideas • Announcements • Visions  Box 1494  Mendocino,  California 95460  Annual Subscription  $12-U.S. funds  Sample Copy: $3.50  -Combining Our Own & Web of Crones-  *»«  Please mail my subscription for 1 year (4 issues) to:  Name: _______    City or Town: _  Code:   .Phor  □ Individual $12 (Personal cheque onl  D Group/Library/Institution $24  (USA: odd $2 Cdn or US funds  [_] New O Cheque enclosed  □ Renewal [J Bill me  ir: add $3—International Money Orders Only)  \t $10 are lax deductible  Return this card and your cheque to:  WOMEN HEALTHSHARING  14 Skey Lane, Toronto, Ont. M6J 3S4  Canada's only feminist health magazine  lost all their core funding in the last federal budget ... and needs your help.  Healthsharing, an independent voice on  women's health issues, must now rely on  the support of subscribers and donors. If  you're not yet a subscriber, join up.  And if you care about women and health,  feminist-wise, send along some bucks.  Your body will thank you.  (P.S. Donations are tax-deductible.)  ; KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  News  Abortion  New law sows  death, confusion  by Joni Miller  Barely a month after passing  through parliament, Canada's new  abortion legislation has left one  woman dead, another recovering  in hospital and the women of  Canada in a state of mass confusion. The bill (C-43) is not yet officially law.  "Before C-43 many women were  unclear on their rights," says Marg  Panton, a staff worker at Everywoman's Health Centre in Vancou-  ... they're fearful that they have  no rights."  Barb Heston of Planned Parenthood concurs, "There's a lot of  concern out there. For now, we're  telling women that there is no  change."  C-43 is awaiting approval by the  senate. Pro-choice activists hold  out some hope it will be quashed  (by anti-choice Senators) but most  believe it will go through. In the  meantime, pro-choice groups will  be "frantically lobbying" senators  and MPs.  "Many believe abortion is now illegal...  they think there is now no clinic."  ver. "Now the misunderstandings  have increased ten fold."  Hilda Thomas of the BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics blames  Justice Minister Kim Campbell for  her role in passing the bill "She  told us we didn't understand the  law because we weren't lawyers.  How does she expect a pregnant  teenager to know her options?"  Yvonne Jurewicz, 20, of Toronto  died this June after a self- induced  abortion. The last such death in  Canada was documented in 1974.  Four or five months pregnant, Jurewicz lost consciousness due to  blood loss after puncturing her  uterus with a coathanger. She died  alone. It is haunting that in a  major urban centre, this young  woman knew of no one to turn  to for help—but she knew about  coathangers.  Feminists in Vancouver laid a  wreath and burned candles in  silent protest outside of Kim  Campbell's office to mark the  death. Women also gathered in  Toronto.  Another woman in Toronto  was rushed to hospital after her  boyfriend attempted a home abortion, apparently with her consent.  The boyfriend has been charged  with practising medicine without a  license.  "Very little is known about this  woman," says Norah Hutchinson  of Canadian Abortion Rights Action League (CARAL). "It should  have been front page news—  instead we got a small story buried  in the back of the Globe & Mail."  "There is a general sense of  panic out there," says Kim Zander of the BC Coalition for Abortion Clinics. "Many believe abortion is now illegal. Women are calling asking questions about the law.  They think there is now no clinic  Anti-choice groups are busy doing their own lobbying. They consider C-43 "too liberal" and are  anxious to see it die. It is anticipated that these groups will  be bringing "malicious, mischievi-  ous law suits" against doctors and  other individuals.  Justice Minister Campbell has  claimed the new law is necessary  to guarantee women equal access  to service.  "We've had eighteen constitutional lawyers review it [the law],"  says Hutchinson. "They say this is  not the case." C-43 recriminalizes  abortion but allows for it in cases  where a doctor believes continuing the pregnancy would damage a  woman's physical, mental or psychological health. Otherwise, abortion would become a crime punishable by up to two years in prison.  "It's actually easier for us," says  Grant Roberts, an administrator  at Vancouver General Hospital,  "the onus is off the hospitals to  provide screening."  Certainly, the new legislation  leaves women vulnerable to the  commitment of individual doctors. In June, all eight doctors in  a Calgary clinic announced they  will stop doing abortions. This  leaves women in Alberta with one  other choice—the Royal Alexander Hospital in Edmonton. The  clientele at the Morgentaler clinic  in Winnipeg are already 80 percent women from Alberta and  Saskatchewan.  Heston (Planned Parenthood)  says she knows of no BC doctors  who have reneged on their decision to provide abortion services  to women. "I've heard doctors say  'I don't care—let somebody try to  take me to court,"' she says.  Once the law is enacted, however, "We may see a few physicians  quietly withdraw." Such decisions  may be largely economic. Doctors  may be afraid of ending up with  huge court bills.  "I'm furious that doctors are  not fighting back," says Norah  Hutchinson of CARAL. Of approximately 50,000 doctors in  Canada, only 800 perform abortions.  So far, the Family Practice  Clinic in Bellingham, Washington reports no increase in Canadian abortion patients, but this  situation bears monitoring. The  surgical daycare unit at VGH  and Everywoman's Health Centre are continuing to operate at  their usual levels. Everywoman's  reports an increase in inquiries  from doctors on behalf of their patients. VGH experienced an initial increase in anti-choice picketing, which has since tapered back  to a 'normal' one or two demonstrators a day.  "We really monitor the demonstrators," says Panton of Everywoman's clinic, "when they think  they've had a victory, they get really obnoxious. So far, that hasn't  happened."  "Availability of doctors has always been a problem at the clinic,"  says Hilda Thomas "we had hoped  to increase the number of procedures, but this is uncertain now."  i«:  At the memorial for Yvonne Jurewicz in Vancouver June 18  The pro-choice movement plans  continued action. In Nova Scotia,  abortion rights activist Dr. Henry  Morgentaler is on trial. Charged  with performing abortions outside  a hospital, Morgentaler is using  the courtroom as a forum for exposing the limited abortion care  available to Nova Scotia women.  Elsewhere, pro-choice groups  are laying plans. A major strategy  session for pro-choice coalitions is  planned for July in Ottawa.  "One thing this law has done is  boosted our support," says Zander of the BCCAC. "Many people  have come forward willing to help  "We're going to see more  women in the streets," predicts  Hutchinson of CARAL.  Babycare—or day sitting?  Daycare—or babysitting  by Tarel Quandt  The Social Credit's Daycare  Support Program, a childcare initiative announced in June 1989  is being referred to by some  as the "chain-the-other-foot-to-  the-ground project" for women.  The program is an attempt to  alleviate the provincial childcare  demand by encouraging women  to establish their own unlicensed  childcare services—a job which  has low pay, low status, high stress  and no benefits.  Pam Fleming of Front Line  Advocacy Workers (FLAW) says  that unlicensed childcare is not  a positive form of employment  for women. She says because the  Daycare Support Program promotes unlicensed services, women  who participate become "unglori-  fied babysitters."  Fleming further notes that this  program fits neatly into the So-  cred's corporate agenda of privatization by moving childcare services from the public sector into  the private sector.  "What we want is universal  quality childcare," says Fleming.  She explains that that means accessible, standardized childcare for  everyone, not the government's  view of universal childcare where  "every woman should have the  right to choose daycare among unlicensed childcare providers."  The Ministry of Social Services  and Housing developed this $1  million project to ensure quality  childcare in the informal sector,  says Dean Gronsdahl, an information officer for the ministry. He  explains that MSSH beheves the  program creates choices for families in need of childcare since it  supports care provided by famiUes, friends and neighbours which  is convenient and flexible.  The program works hke this.  Money is allocated through grants  to non-profit organizations around  BC. These groups establish childcare training programs, recruit  participants and create a registry  of caregivers' names for parents.  Upon completion of training sessions, participants can provide in-  home childcare services.   The majority of the grants have  been awarded and training programs have begun, but so have the  problems.  The coalition End Legislative  Poverty (ELP) is highly critical  of the program, especially its impact on welfare and working poor  women.  As ELP spokeswoman Jean  Swanson explains, single mothers  with children over the age of six  months must be looking for work  in order to be eligible for next  months' welfare cheque. If women  choose not to enroll in the training and consequently not to provide childcare services, their actions could be interpreted as refusing a job opportunity. This creates  a system which can force women  into a situation that they neither  want nor can cope with.  Women on welfare who do become childcare providers can not  expect   to   make   much   money.  See DAYCARE page 4  J  KINESIS NEWS  Meech—another dead lake  Exclusion and confusion  by Nancy Pollak  The Meech Lake Accord—  the constitutional amendment designed to bring Quebec into the  "Canadian family"—sickened and  collapsed for the same reason  many families do: daddy's authority just doesn't cut it any more.  A text book model of top-down,  male-centred, racist and exclusive  decision-making, the Meech Accord was never well-understood,  let alone accepted, by the majority of people in Canada. Perhaps  this was because the 1990 Fathers  of Confederation were lying.  Presented as a means to keep  Quebec in Canada by recognizing  the province as a distinct society,  the Meech Lake Accord was in  fact much more. In the months of  exhausting reporting on the confrontations among the 11 male  politicians doing the deal, virtually nothing was heard of the  threat to social programs, immigration and public spending posed  by the Accord.  Virtually nothing was heard of  the people of the Yukon and North  West Territories, whose chances  of ever gaining provincial status  were close to nil given the Accord's  terms.  And virtually nothing was heard  of Native people's rage at once  again being excluded from constitutional talks and denied recognition of their distinctness.  And still, the silence continues. Although it was the concerted action of Native people,  working through a single MLA  in Manitoba, that triggered the  Accord's collapse, the mainstream  media saw only Brian Mulroney  and Clyde Wells, the dueling first  ministers.  (Worse still, Mulroney characterized the tortuous week-of-the-  premiers in June as a meeting  which satisfied the concerns of  women, Native people and northerners.)  Nothing could be further from  the truth.  Immediately after June's closed-  door sessions in which the premiers scheduled further constitutional meetings (after Meech  passed), women's groups condemned the process.  "The decisions are still being  made by middle-class white men in  Ottawa," said Judy Rebick of the  National Action Committee on the  Status of Women (NAC)."The crisis is going to happen again."  There were also harsh words  from Ethel Blondin, Liberal MP  for the Western Arctic and a  Native spokeswoman. Angered by  Quebec's refusal to consider changing the Meech Accord to recognize Native people's distinctness,  Blondin said: "We feel our 53 Aboriginal languages and our cultures  have equal status with Quebec's."  Native groups were able to  deep-six the Accord with a relatively easy procedural move,  thanks to the federal government's  cliff-hanging fetish. Time ran out  on the Accord, mirroring how time  has run out on Native people's patience at being excluded from constitutional talks.  While exclusion was one factor  in Meech's demise, confusion was  certainly another.  "The media and all three pohtical parties [Conservatives, Liberals  and New Democrats] denied peo-  migration becoming a provincial  matter—how  immigrant   women  could  be  discriminated  againist  further.  "'And no one was given a  chance to understand the impact  on federal-provincial cost-sharing  agreements."  Woman's eyewitness account of Meech  pie access to what Meech Lake was  all about," said Ellen Woodsworth  of the Vancouver- based Women's  Economic Agenda. "No one was  given a chance to understand the  impact  there  would be on im-  Under the Accord, provinces  were given the right to opt  out of national shared-cost programs. Feminists' major quarrel  with Meech Lake Accord lay here:  Meech Lake meant the end to na  tional standards for existing social  programs, and the demise of hope  for any new ones—such as daycare.  The shift in spending powers  promised by Meech would have  affected a wide range of programs, including health care, welfare, pensions, post-secondary education and job training. "The effects on the poor and the working poor would have been devastating," said Woodsworth. "Meech  would have affected the very backbone of difference between being  Canadian and being American."  Even with Meech gone, being Canadian has changed. Many  Quebec nationalists, (including  feminists) view the failure of  Meech as more fuel in the drive  for an independent Quebec. (The  Accord's passage would Ukely have  had a similar effect.)  The anti-French theme in anglophone Canadian society, never far  below the surface, has been given  a fresh, shameful airing. And so-  called western separatists, buoyed  by Ottawa-bashing and happy to  see Quebec go, will make the  most of national disunity. In BC,  the federal government has sometimes been the only brake on the  privatization-mad Social Credit.  With Vander Zalm now arguing  for a distinct status for BC, too—  i.e. less federal influence—the future is less than rosy.  Thanks, dad.  DAYCARE from page 3  Swanson cited an example that a  woman might only make $42 per  month after welfare deductions.  As Swanson comments, "This is a  slave childcare program—so that  women can work for slave wages."  Working-poor women who cannot afford Ucensed childcare or  get subsidized childcare also suffer because of this program, says  Swanson. Since there is this so-  called option of unUcensed childcare, they are stuck using services  with which they may not feel comfortable. However, famiUes with  higher earnings can be choosy and  opt for Ucensed childcare.  As Swanson points out, this program develops a two-tier childcare system: inadequate services  for welfare and working-poor famiUes, and quality services for the  middle and upper classes.  Swanson says the program hurts  children too, because of the difficulties monitoring the quality and  safety standards of unUcensed services.  The ministry addressed some  of these concerns, in early June,  in response to a critical letter  from ELP. Minister Norman Ja-  cobsen says that "employment and  training opportunities are based  on a person's vocational aptitude and interest ... Recipients  will not be required to use daycare arrangements that do not  meet their famiUes' needs." And,  while the ministry has no intention in withdrawing welfare deductions, some women will be eUgi-  ble to charge the government for  food, toy, equipment and utiUty  expenses. The ministry however,  ignored the request for accessible  Ucensed childcare for everyone.  Commenting on the minister's  letter Swanson says, "The united  concern of FLAW, ELP, women's  centres and the city have extracted  these three concessions which will  give us some ammunition to fight."  Now, any social worker pressuring a woman on welfare to provide childcare services and any  working-poor women uncomfortable with the offered services can  say no.  Karen Norman, of the Western Canada Family Daycare Association, has been involved in  family childcare education for the  past eight years. She understands  the concerns raised by FLAW  and   ELP   but  as  a  proponent  of family childcare—Ucensed and  unUcensed- -she sees the program  as "a step in the right direction."  Meager as it may be, Norman  considers this program important  since it can help educate caregivers  about family childcare. Also, says  Norman, it provides funding for  some women's groups to provide  the training.  However, Norman has criticisms too. Training programs will  not be consistent among communities since no guidelines have  been implemented by the government. Also, says Norman, the Uttle money which has been awarded  through grants has not been allocated fairly among BC communities.  Norman notes that the communities most targeted by the government for this program have a high  population of SSH chents. It appears that, in these cases, the program design is to get welfare recipients to provide cheap childcare for  other financially insecure famiUes.  Any woman feeling pressured  by her social worker to parti  ipate in this program can call  FLAW/ELP at 321-1202 for  information about her rights,  Ask for Jean or Pam.  Gran's cmttee  releases report  by Kinesis Writer  The report of the Advisory  Committee on Community-Based  Programs for Women was tabled  in the BC legislature on June 21  and is now under review by senior bureaucrats and the provincial cabinet.  Also reviewing the report are  members of the BC and Yukon  Association of Women's Centres  (BCYAWC) who will be displeased, yet not surprised, that the  report makes no mention of core  funding for them.  In fact, the report appears to  say relatively Uttle about support  for women's community organizations and concentrates mainly on  how government can clean up its  own act.  For example, the report advises  each ministry to build into new  poUcies a means of assessing the  impact on women, and to maintain  statistics by gender. As weU, min  istries are asked to develop pohcies, programs and deUvery structures which are "gender sensitive"  and don't create unintended barriers to women.  It further recommends that  Gran be appointed to the Treasury  Board (the arm of cabinet with  real clout), and that the province  show leadership by ensuring equal  representation of women in senior  management within the public service.  The report also calls for increased funding to sexual assault counselhng services, transition houses, parenting skiUs programs and language training services to immigrant women.  Highest on the committee's Ust  for new money was daycare and  Gran has promised a planning  committee to develop daycare programs.  The BCYAWC will release its  assessment of the report sometime  in July.  4 KINESIS NEWS  ////////////////////////^^^^^  The free trade brush-off  Here comes Mexico  by Susan O'Donnell  As the effects of the Canada-US  free trade agreement (FTA) continue to sweep the Canadian economy, women factory workers are  getting the biggest brush-off. In  the textUe and clothing manufacturing industries alone, more than  34,000 women lost their jobs in the  past year.  Many of those women were recent immigrants to Canada. "It  is traditional in the garment in  dustry that the workers are immigrants," said PhylUs Webb of  the International Ladies' Garment  Workers Union (LLGWU). She estimates that 95 percent of the  12,000 garment workers in BC are  n and newcomers to Canada.  Webb and other industry union  officials are bracing themselves for  an additional spate of job layoffs.  The federal government is now  studying a scheme which will encourage garment manufacturers to  ship out pre-cut materials to man  ufacturers in Third World countries, bring the garments back  to Canada, label them "Made in  Canada," and export them dutyfree. Under the FTA, products  made in Canada or the United  States receive duty-free treatment.  During his winter 1990 tour of  the Caribbean, Brian Mulroney  announced the new scheme under the guise of promoting trade  between Canada and the Islands.  Union organizers have long held  that the losers in these types of  trade deals are always the workers,  who are non-unionized and unprotected by minimum wage laws and  labour standards.  ILGWU's Webb said that opposition to the new scheme will start  with protests in Montreal in early  July, followed by Toronto, Winnipeg, and eventually Vancouver.  The Canadian garment industry  is largely concentrated in Quebec,  which has 80,000 industry workers. Among the most exploited are  the 30,000 non-unionized workers,  mostly women, who sew garment  pieces at home.  In general, the country's manufacturing sector, has been devastated by free trade. The latest  Statistics Canada figures revealed  that 165,000 manufacturing jobs  have been lost since the deal came  into effect in January, 1989. Most  analysts predict that many of the  job losses will be permanent, reflecting a fundamental shift in the  economy away from manufacturing which is labour-intensive.  Among the manufacturing industries the hardest hit are textile  and clothing manufacturers, which  lost 43,000 jobs, 80 percent held  by women. The food and beverage  makers industry, in which women  also predominate, lost 32,000 jobs.  The grim statistics were no surprise to union organizers who pre-  NAC, NAC, who's there?  by Donna Cameron  In May, I attended the annual  general meeting of the National  Action Committee on the Status  of Women (NAC). The meeting  was held in HuU, Quebec—just a  river crossing from Ottawa—the  first time the AGM had been held  outside the capital. This may seem  a small point to any other organization but to the largest women's  organization in the country, any  change is big change.  There has been a whole language set up around the NAC  acronym. There are NAC-watch-  ers, NAC-activists, the NACers  and the ex-NACers. This year we  even had retiring NAC-dignitaries!  So let me step back and tell you  a bit about NAC—from a NAC-  watcher and a NAC-hopeful.  NAC was founded in 1972 by 30  national women's groups. By 1977  there were 130 members, in 1984  there were 280 and in 1989 there  were 590. 1990 numbers are down  sUghtly—in part because of internal dissension but mainly because  of recent government funding cutbacks and the inabiUty of groups  to stretch the scarce dollars even  further.  NAC represents the hope of  feminist   women's   organizations  that there can be a national poUtical voice for women. We really  want to speak in a unified manner  on issues important to us—and it  is difficult to admit there may be  more than one 'correct' view to a  woman's issue.  The structure of NAC was set in  1972 and there have been few substantive changes since then. There  are seven table officers, five members at large and 13 regional representatives for a total of 25 on  the executive. This large and often unwieldy group is also a working board. Each executive member is expected to take on a large  volume of NAC issue work, chair  one or two committees, travel to  Toronto for board meetings at  least 4 times per year, as weU as  keep up with the tasks her position dictates (treasurer, regional  rep. etc.).  The problem with this structure is that there are no built-  in means for sharing the work  load within the regions or among  interest groups the women are  elected to represent. Hence the  term NAC-burnout, or burned out  on NAC.  For the past four years, Organizational Review Committees  have been working on  ways to  See NAC page 6  lfflpi?  mm*  1 :?**  0,-V  Fashion statement at NAC's AGM; T-shirts courtesy of  Newfoundland v  dieted in 1988 "that free trade  would result in massive plant closings and layoffs in the manufacturing sector. The areas that have suffered the most damage are Ontario  and Quebec.  In BC, the garment industry has actually experienced a  growth-35 manufacturing plants  have opened up recently, a phenomenon attributed to investments by Hong Kong entrepreneurs who are moving their money  out of the British colony. ILGWU's Webb points out that most  of the new jobs pay minimum  wage. Contractors stiU form the  bulk of the industry, and not one  BC contractor is unionized.  Other sectors of the economy  have also been stung by the  free trade "restructuring", forcing  union organizers to seek new tactics to minimize the damage sustained by their industries. For example, under a unique agreement  just signed by the 40,000 member Communications and "Electrical Workers of Canada and the  800,000 member Communications  Workers of America, both unions  will work together to force their respective poUticians to respect the  rights of workers in the other country.  The agreement between the two  unions was signed to tie the hands  of "stateless corporations searching the world for the lowest wage  market." One BC example of this  process, accelerated by free trade,  is the recent Canadian Airlines decision to re-route calls from its  Richmond, BC office to a new office in Tampa, Florida.  The Florida workers are a  non-unionized workforce earning  a salary significantly below the  wages of the unionized BC telephone reservation clerks. Local  union officials fear the loss of a  third of the jobs in the Canadian Airlines office, although no  layoffs have occurred since the  May announcement. The BC office  presently employs over 300 workers, mostly women and the women  are fighting management's decision. Their slogan: Don't Tampa  with our jobs.  PhylUs Webb predicts the situation for women will worsen if  the US foUows through with its  proposal for a free trade agreement with Mexico. In June, the  two countries started an 18-month  series of discussion and negotiations to solidify an agreement.  Canadian poUticians, fearful of  being left out of the negotiating  process, are scrambUng to become  part of the deal. Union organizers  are also very worried about the effect of a U.S.-Mexico-Canada free  trade pact.  The average wage in Mexico is  60 cents an hour, with some sectors rising as high as $1.20. Canadian and US businesses would also  be drawn to Mexico's relative lack  of labour laws, lack of health and  safety rules or environmental standards.  KINESIS      July/Aug. Across Canada  \XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX\\XXXXXXXX\\XXXXXX\XXXXXX\X\XX\X\XX\X\\\X\X\XXXX\\\XXXXXXX>^C*NxV^^  ^5^^x^^XX<^X^^  \^^xxxSS^^^5x<ixxxx>^^^^  Sexual abuse  by a "helping"  professional  An Ontario court has given a  clear message to doctors who have  sex with their patients: if you only  get caught once, you won't lose  your professional Ucence.  In June, Ontario's Divisional  Court returned a Ucence to practice to an Ottawa psychiatrist who  admitted having sex with his patient, a 30-year-old woman who  came to him for treatment of  depression and anxiety resulting  from previous sexual affairs. The  doctor's Ucence had been eariier  revoked by the province's CoUege  of Physicians and Surgeons.  In their decision, the judges said  Ucenses should be revoked only  "for repeat offenders and the most  serious cases." They instead suspended the psychiatrist's Ucence  for three months.  by Kinesis Writer  Sexual relations between professionals—doctors, law yers, teachers—and their patients, cUents  and students, are "a blind [sic]  spot in the Canadian psyche," said  Patricia Marshall, a spokeswoman  for the Metro Toronto Action  Committee on Pubhc Violence  Against Women and ChUdren.  Marshall said these relationships constitute sexual abuse; in  this case, the judges failed to understand that the relationship between the psychiatrist and the  woman could in no circumstances  be considered a consensual one.  Helping professionals can overpower their cUents mentally by  virtue of trust; a woman who is violated in this way suffers as much  as a rape victim.  Hookers denied  freedom of  expression  The Supreme Court of Canada  upheld the constitutionaUty of the  country's anti-sohciting law in a 4-  2 judgment on May 31. The law,  passed in 1986, makes it illegal for  prostitutes and customers to communicate or attempt to communicate in pubUc places for "purposes of prostitution." The maximum penalty for breaking the law  is 6 months in jail and a $2,000  fine.  The Supreme Court found that  the law does indeed violate the  right to freedom of expression  as guaranteed by the Charter of  Rights and Freedoms. However,  the majority (four male judges)  ruled that this violation was a justifiable and reasonable Umit on  that freedom, as provided for in  the Charter.  As Chief Justice Brian Dickson wrote: "The effects of the  legislation on freedom of expression are not so severe as to  outweigh the government's pressing and substantial objective...The  curtailment of street solicitation  is in keeping with the interests  of many in our society for whom  the nuisance- related aspects of so-  Ucitation constitute serious problems."  (Justice department studies investigating the impact of the law  have concluded that it has been  ineffective in lessening the "nuisance" caused by soliciting.)  This decision wdl mean more  hardships for prostitutes. With the  law upheld, proponents of even  more rigid controls wdl be seek  ing changes. PoUce chiefs, for example, are asking for the right  to fingerprint, photograph and impose a minimum prison sentence  on those arrested. IronicaUy, prostitution itself is not illegal.  The two dissenting votes were  cast by Justice Bertha WUson and  Justice Claire L'Heureux Dube,  the only two women on the six-  member bench. Wilson argued  that imprisoning people for exercising their constitutional right to  freedom of expression is not an appropriate method of dealing with  the social-nuisance issue.  Working poor  women—more  and more  and more  The number of working poor  women increased at five times the  rate of their male counterparts  between 1971 and 1986, according to the first major Canadian  study on working poor women recently released by the Canadian  Advisory CouncU on the Status of  Women (CACSW). Between 1971  NAC from page 5  change the inner workings of  NAC, to make it more representational, more responsive to regional issues, less central-Canada  driven, to set priorities, to make  Unes of accountabUity evident and  workable—indeed, to make NAC a  feminist national voice for women.  It doesn't sound too difficult to  me. But you know what we get?  Reports, committees, resolutions,  discussions and a division in the  women's movement which helps no  one but the anti-feminist right-  wing conservatives. Some part of  a deep paranoid mind says, maybe  is no accident, maybe, just  maybe that is the agenda.  WeU, if that's the case, it's  working. If we don't find a way out  of this quagmire we are very likely  to explode this organization with  bulging committee report documents, read by burnt-out committee members.  This year the AGM focused  on another proposal for organizational change, this one prepared by  the BC Working Group, a loosely  formed group of women who simply want to see enough change in  the organization to allow voices to  be heard from coast to coast to  coast. The report was an amalgamation of analyses written by BC  groups over the course of the 1989-  90 year and was presented by Debra Lewis.  The document itself was innocent enough: suggestions for working together with other women's  organizations, setting priorities  and establishing a long range  plan for NAC. It also suggested how NAC could work to  become truly representative of  women in Canada, particularly of  women who have been tradition-  aUy excluded, including Aboriginal women, women with disabih-  ties, women of colour and immigrant women, lesbians, poor and  working class women, and geo-  graphicaUy isolated women.  It would seem to me, and probably any other person who simply wanted to just get the work  done, that these principles could  simply be accepted by everyone in  attendance. Not so. Another NAC-  ism rears: the Friendly Amendment; the device which takes up  more time and creates more problems than anything else—a simple  vote No would be less stressful.  The friendly amendment is a  way of saying "I would hke to  change the wording and perhaps  even the meaning of the resolution," or "I would Uke some time  at the microphone to talk in front  of these 300 women." So a great  deal of time at the three day conference is used up hstening to  women suggest friendly amendments to the resolutions brought  forward. (Dare I say time wasted?)  It's not that aU the amendments  are worthless. It's just that they  could easily be accomplished by  speaking to the writers of the resolutions before the meeting begins to see if the wording could  be improved. In the case of the  BC Working Group proposal, the  paper was sent to member groups  months ahead of time for just such  input yet almost no response was  received.  After hours of discussion, the  seven Principles of Organizational  Change as a Direction for NAC's  Future Work, along with three  friendly amendments, one procedural motion, three amendments,  and one motion were passed. Un  fortunately, the actual substance  of the document—the recommendations and the implementation  plan were not even discussed because someone clearly opposed  to change called quorum (which  we lacked), and the discussion  stopped.  And so for another year the  matter wUl be studied, written  about, talked over, and next year  at the AGM, similar matters wUl  be brought forward for discussion.  AU that being said, it is also  true that the work done in the  name of NAC is top notch. There  have been briefs and position papers written on every subject affecting women; NAC was instrumental in the fight-back campaign  to pressure the Conservatives to  re-instate funding to women's centres. NAC has a working and visible presence on Parfiament HiU:  representatives of the organizations regularly meet with top civU  servants, MP's and cabinet ministers.  There is no doubt that the  work done is prolific and of  high quality—but think how much  more prolific it could be if every member group felt they had a  voice in the organization, and we  began to effectively use the expertise the feminists in this country  have to offer.  This could be the year that  changes NAC. The top priority issue for 1990-91 is Violence Against  Women. We have come back to the  grass roots; we have been changed  by the Montreal murders. Some of  us forgot just for a moment what  we were fighting for; we got caught  up in the poUtical rhetoric; we  spread ourselves too thin and now  \t is a year to remember that our  very survival depends on a strong  women's voice. We remember that  each of us is as vulnerable as our  sister standing next to us.  Judy Rebick is the new president of NAC, the spokeswoman  for the organization, an unpaid, almost full-time job. She is a grass  roots woman and speaks from  the heart. She has been active in  the pro-choice movement for many  years, participating in the Ontario  Coalition of Abortion Chnics.  During her first speech as NAC  president Judy said:  "The women's movement of the  90s is a different colour than the  women's movement of the 60s.  We are many colours, we are  middle-class, working-class and  poor women together, speaking  French and EngUsh and many  other languages. We're young  and old, able-bodied and disabled, lesbian and heterosexual, Native and non-Native. The  women's movement has changed  its face, and now our challenge  is to change our organization to  reflect this change."  What she said is true. NAC  must reflect this change—but we  mustn't spend so much time looking at our reflection we forget  to look around and see the waUs  crumbUng. More than half the executive is new this year and that's  good. It's definitely time to disregard the "it's always been done  that way" dinosaurs and look at  the new and vibrant ways of working. Quite clearly we must change.  I say we—I guess I truly am a  NAC-hopeful.  Donna Cameron is NAC's  Regional Representative for the  South Central BC and lives in  Penticton.  and 1986, the number of working  poor women increased by 160 percent (to 230,000) whUe the number  of working poor men increased by  28 percent.  The report, Women and Labour Market Poverty, focuses  on wo men who, despite working fuU-time, part-time, or seasonally in the labour market, had incomes below the Statistics Canada  poverty Une.  The report shows that working poor women, in general, are  worse off than working poor men  because they experience job segregation and discrimination as weU  as lower wages and more unstable  employment.  It also reveals that women increasingly work part-time, with  nearly 28 percent doing so involuntarily.  "This report gives disturbing  new evidence of the feminization of working poverty," said  Glenda Simms, CACSW president. "Working poor women cannot earn enough money to support themselves and their famiUes,  no matter how hard they try—and  they try very hard. This is true  even where there is more than one  earner in the family."  Through interviews with women  across the country, the report also  reveals the deep sense of frustration working poor people experience when they struggle to make  ends meet and earn a decent Uving through their own efforts.  "Most people beUeve that anyone who is wUling to work can  earn a decent Uving," said Simms,  "but the reality is not so simple.  Women's poverty is worsened by  divorce and separation. Their dual  roles as mothers and homemakers  Umit the type of paid jobs women  are offered and can accept. This  reinforces the existing pattern of  economic and social disadvantage  for women."  CACSW calls for government  action on wage improvements  through pay and employment equity initiatives, more job training,  more pubUc sector employment,  and increased unionization, especiaUy for low-wage workers, as weU  as, welfare reform, better chUd-  related benefits, enhanced earnings supplements for single mothers, and enforcement of chUd support and maintenance payments.  Source: Globe and Mail  KINESIS  July/Aug. 90 /////////////////m^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  Health  Lupus: knowing  more in order  to blame less  by Rita Anastassiou  A young woman coping with adolescence  and its typical turmoU is one thing. A young  woman battling a major, hfe threatening Ulness, which can kill within five to ten years,  is another. Such was the situation of Marie  Storis (not her real name) who found herself, at the age of 16, attempting to justify  her fatigue, sudden seizures, and abnormal  body aches and pains as something more serious than laziness or lack of rest. In fact, it  was neither.  It was lupus. Even in our information-  oriented society, the mention of lupus often receives a blank stare. Unless one has  a friend or relative afflicted by the sickness,  most people know Uttle about it. Yet it is  beUeved that as many as 50,000 people suffer from lupus in this country and since  the symptoms vary so much, many more  could be affected and not know it. It can  take years to pin-point the real cause of the  arthritis-like condition, the skin rash, the  seizure, or the heart condition. With Marie,  it began as an epdeptic seizure one night.  Her doctor first diagnosed "stress" and later  epUepsy. Only after a neurologist ran an array of tests did Marie learn she had lupus.  Lupus affects mainly women. Nine out of  ten lupus patients are women between the  ages of fifteen and forty-five. Why so many  women? There has been some speculation  about the role of female hormones in the  formation of the disease, but few certain an-  Lupus is a disease of the immune system;  in the body of a lupus patient, the antibodies needed to fight disease multiply too  quickly and then turn against the body itself. Since the entire body is at lupus' disposal, it is difficult to be specific about  where it wUl strike.  No wonder lupus is called the "great imitator." Besides an overall fatigue and sensitivity to the sun, most lupus patients develop unique symptoms. It's not unusual  for a woman to first be told she is simply  stressed or has a vivid imagination.  There are very few medical explanations  and certainties about lupus. It might be  hereditary in some cases, but not in most.  It cannot be cured, but it can go into a  long remission. Symptoms could flare up today, or they might not appear untU a week  later. Lupus has a wide range of symptoms, and a wide range of body parts to  choose from: skin, joints, blood, brain, internal organs. The symptoms? Nausea, rashes,  fatigue, hair loss, weight loss, and others.  When the disease is concentrated in the internal organs, it can be fatal. It strikes very  quickly and very suddenly.  Why this happens is unknown. Marie suspects that her years as a bulemic might have  put her body under too much stress, but  then she is not sure about anything. Living with the unknown is part of her struggle. It's a bit hke playing hide and seek in  the dark with a powerful enemy. Marie Uves  day by day, avoiding stress as much as pos-  This publication is regularly indexed in the Canadian Women's  Periodicals Index.  The index is a reference guide to articles about women printed in  more than 80 EngUsh and French periodicals, for use by researchers,  lecturers, students and anyone else interested in women's studies.  This alphabetized hardcopy of a comprehensive computerized index  is produced three times a year by the Canadian Research Institute for  the Advancement of Women, and is available on a subscription basis.  For more information, please write:  Canadian Women's Periodicals Index  University of Alberta  11019-90 Avenue  Edmonton, Alberta  CANADA, T6G2E1  "After a Hard Day it's Nice to Come Home to a Friend" by Sima Elizabeth Shefrin  sible, since fatigue and worry can bring on  a seizure. So far, there has been no cure for  it, even though it is far better controlled by  medication, vitamins, cortisone treatments,  and a healthy hfestyle.  For a whUe, Marie chose to deny the existence of lupus in her Ufe, and pretended she  had epUepsy. She stopped taking her medication until the seizures became very frequent. She felt frustrated with her doctors  and specialists, since they had very few answers but quite a few don'ts: Don't go out  in the sun, don't drive, don't have chUdren,  don't have a drink, don't work. As a result,  she withdrew into a private world of loneU-  ness and depression.  Many people took this as laziness. After  aU, she looked fine. ExternaUy, she appeared  healthy, even vibrant, and her disabihty was  invisible. Yet, Marie did have seizures, many  of them in public places hke maUs, restaurants and other peoples' houses. One seizure  in the shower led to second degree burns.  She now takes her medication and would  Uke to become more involved with control-  Ung her Ulness. Talking about lupus and not  denying its reality has been a positive step.  Marie is reading about lupus and wUl now  admit that she is affected by lupus in her  eryday Ufe. She has been hurt by friends and  relatives who have told her "to snap out of  it", or to "go out there and get a job." She  beUeves that educating people about the in-  sidiousness of lupus might help create more  understanding and less blaming.  Lack of information, as weU as fear can  create false impressions. Certainly, victims  of lupus don't need further victimization.  Information about lupus does not abound,  but there are books out, as weU as a Vancouver Lupus Association where more information can be obtained. The Sun is my  Enemy by Henrietta Aladjen is about the  personal experiences of a woman who found  herself unexpectedly diagnosed with lupus,  and her efforts to find a cure for her disease. Lupus; The Body Against Itself by  Paul Sheldon is another useful book. Hopefully, these resources wUl help some women  to take their chronic, puzzhng symptoms seriously, and to insist on being retested for  lupus. And lastly, information might shed  some Ught on the very private, brave world  of women with lupus.  DIVA  A QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF SOUTH ASIAN WOMEN.  INFORMATIVE  ANALYTICAL  FEMINIST  FIRST ISSUE: APRIL 1988  INDIVIDUALS SUBSCRIPTION: $18.00  SUPPORTIVE SUBSCRIPTION: $35.00  INSTITUTIONS SUBCRIPTION: $40.00  d CONVERT TO S EQUIVELANT.  IF OUTSIDE CANADA, ADD $6.00:  SEND MONEY ORDER/CHEQUE T  DIVA   253 COLLEGE ST. UNIT 194  TORONTO, ONTM5T1R5  CANADA  (416)750-4007  KJNESIS     July/Aug. 90 Commentary  .\V^XX\X\XX\N\\\X\\\\\\\\\\\N\\\\\\^^^  lit's time:  A long, hard look at gov't funding  by Debby Gregory  Now that government funding for women's centres has been at least partiaUy  restored, showing the power of our galvanized protest, it seems a good time to take a  long, hard look at some of the implications  of government funding for women's services.  There are some interesting arguments on  both sides of the "Should we be taking government money?" question, which touch on  both the pohtics and the practicalities of  feminists as providers of women's services.  Those who argue for government funding  generaUy foUow two Unes of argument: As  women we deserve it, and as women we need  it. We deserve it because government funding represents our tax money and should  represent women's concerns. We need it because women haven't enough money to run  women's services, and because the individual and corporate men who do have the  money don't give it to us. We need it because women's needs won't otherwise be  met in society as it is currently structured.  I don't buy the "It's our tax money" argument, because I think it presents a false  picture of who "we" are. If women make 60  percent of what men make (and women of  colour even less) and women make up the  majority of poor people, then we presumably don't pay as much income tax as men.  Currently we don't pay as much sales tax,  either, since we spend most of our income on  food and housing. It's only "our" tax money  if "we" are middle-class professional women.  While many of us are, we do not make up  the majority of women and should not presume our experience to be the defining one  for women in general.  Another problem with that argument is  its underlying assumption that the government is or could be "ours." Feminists have  spent years documenting the various ways  in which the state functions as the embodiment of patriarchal power. We may aU  have different ideas about the nature of the  pect these services.  I don't mean to imply that we should  close down. I only mean that closure threatens them as much as it threatens us. For  them to incorporate women's services into  the structure of social service ministries or  to contract it out elsewhere would cost them  far more than it does now. They give us a  pittance and it makes them look as though  they are doing something about women's  second rate status. What if we called their  bluff?  ... feminists have been sidetracked into doing  the government's work... and conned  into doing it on the cheap  state, the nature of patriarchal power, and  the kinds of relationships we notice between  them, but to sweep aU that analysis aside is  to undermine the very foundations of feminist theory. It leaves us with a very shaky  basis for self-determined action or reflection, and contributes to the dependent position from which we confront the government.  I find the argument from need more convincing. It is certainly true that women's  needs—for sexual assault centres, transi-  "Mightn't it be better to let others provide  services to women, whUe as feminists we  tackle the underlying violence and exclusion  which cause the need for those services?"  Possibly we'd answer that question by  rejecting the need for aU- or-nothing solutions. In the short term, maybe our best  option is to take the money and use the  time it buys to work out long-term strategy. If that strategy doesn't include plans  for ehminating dependence on government  funding, I think feminism wdl not survive  in our women's services organizations. The  government gives us so Uttle money, with  so many strings attached, we are not really  empowered by it, but tied up in knots.  If feminism is reduced to providing services made necessary by men's neglect and  abuse of women, funded by men, we wUl  never really change the underlying patriarchal structures which produce that neglect  and abuse.  Next, we could reassess what we are doing and why. Are we just providing ourselves  with jobs, social opportunities and band-aid  solutions to the problems of institutionalized male violence? Are we really working  to end male supremacy and not just to manage the consequences? Third, we could look  at activities and forms of organizing that  don't require funding, which in our quest to  get funding we've possibly neglected. Last,  we could ask ourselves the hard question,  OPEN YOUR HOME  TO THE WORLD  tion houses, women's centres, and women's  periodicals—are not being met by mainstream society. Indeed, it is mainstream  society which produces those needs. It is  equaUy true that with rare exceptions,  women have not been able to sustain 'po-  UticaUy correct' feminist community-based  self-help projects without government funding.  What I see when I look at women's  services is women working incredibly long  hours in impossible conditions for no pay or  low pay, getting enormous satisfaction out  of their interpersonal interactions and out of  the obvious good they are doing, whUe what  they do is never enough, never complete,  and never permanent—in other words, typical women's work. At the same time, government offices run on budgets many times  fatter than aU the women's centres in the  country combined. They can't even conceive  of the conditions women work under and  would never work under such conditions.  I think in our desire to meet the needs  of women, feminists have been sidetracked  into doing the government's work for it, and  conned into doing it on the cheap. We can  set neither the terms nor the amounts; we  spend inordinate amounts of time and energy focussed on the application processes;  we stiU have to do other fundraising; and  our feminism has been inevitably eroded  because we are continually assessing ourselves through patriarchal eyes. Feminism  itself has been subtly redefined as providing services for women, rather than ending  patriarchy.  So do we have to choose between tainted  funds and no funds, between maintaining a  dependent relationship with the patriarchy  and losing our women's service organizations? It would feel great to be able to tell  the government to take their money and  jack it. How could we get to that point as  a position of strength rather than as self-  destructive posturing? Let's just consider  what would happen if we closed down: I  wonder if the government wouldn't have to  set up new sexual assault centres and transition houses, because after feminists' long  hard work, communities have come to ex-  Maureen McEvoy ba ma (Cand.)  Counselling  Psychology  Areas of expertise:  sexual abuse, relationships,  sexuality, depression, ACOA  Do typos turn you into  a raging monster?  There is a vocation for  you - proofreading  Kinesis.  Please call  If you want to host a swimmer from Melbourne  or for that matter an entire soccer team from Dallas,  we want your number!  There are thousands of participants coming from around the world to  Vancouver for Gay Games III & Cultural Festival who are in need of  accomodations. If you have any available space and welcome the  opportunity to host an international guest, give us a call! You only need to  supply the space. For further information or to register your home, call:  Housing Co-ordinator (604) 684-3303. Gay Games III & Cultural  Festival - August 4 to 11,1990.  CELEBRATION '90  KINESIS News  /^^^^^^^^^j^^^  DisAbled women meet:  Collective courage and purpose  by Bridget Rivers-Moore  DisAbled Women's Network: DAWN  Canada put on a magnificent event in  Toronto the weekend of May 25-27, a conference entitled Self -Image Symposium 1990:  Who Do We Think We Are? DAWN got  funding for a research project in 1988, which  resulted in the publication of four groundbreaking position papers on self-image, violence, mothering, and employment, as issues  for women with disabilities. The Self-image  Symposium was envisioned as a place to  present this research to other women with  disabihties and also to able- bodied women.  (These papers should be required reading  for anyone in the women's movement, and  are avaUable through DAWN.)  The conference was DAWN's largest  gathering to date, drawing 200 women of  aU ages and many different disabiUties from  every province and territory.  Picture 50 wheelchairs and 100 walkers  heading to five different workshops on three  different floors at any one transition time.  In addition to simultaneous translation into  French and Enghsh, we had simultaneous  American Sign, Quebec Sign and oral interpretation.  For many participants, simply getting to  the conference was a feat in itself, involving  hours of pain, indignity and inconvenience.  One woman had her tire flattened by a careless airline attendant and had to wait three  hours (after traveUing for seven) to get it  fixed.  The conference was held in a hotel chosen for its accessibihty. And the experience  demonstrated that the current model is entirely inadequate, based on the assumption  that only a few token people with disabilities wUl choose to take access at any one  time. The services were aU there, but more  than 10 users at once caused the system to  grind to a near standstiU.  This was a momentous occasion: nobody  could have foreseen the logistical problems  untU so many disabled women were gathered under one roof trying to foUow a tight  agenda. After the opening plenary, nothing  ever started on time, because no more than  three wheelchairs at a time could fit in an  elevator!  Workshops were divided into five general areas of interest: health, employment,  mothering, abuse and self-image. Topics  faUing outside these categories included self-  defense, government programs, institutional  Uving and legal issues. There was also time  designated for caucuses: disabled lesbian  issues (lesbians only), working with lesbian women (for heterosexual women, introduced as everything you wanted to know  but were afraid to ask), new reproductive technology and one for HIV- positive  women, women with AIDS, and women  wanting to know more about AIDS.   In her opening remarks, Catherine Frazee  laid out some not so startling statistics  about average income. According to the  most recent StatsCan figures, the annual income ladder starts with white, able-bodied  men at the top ($32,000) and ends with disabled women at the very bottom ($9000).  Disabled women are not only paid the  least when they work, but they are the most  unemployed and most unemployable group  of Canadians. (Many persons with disabiUties are effectively given disincentives from  seeking employment such as being cut off  •••••••••••••••••••••••*  For many participants  ... getting to the  conference was a  feat in itself  ^••••••••••••••••••••••*i  long- term disabihty benefits.) Many disabled women are counselled by medical professionals not to have chUdren on the sole  basis of their disabihty (regardless of its  significance to bearing or raising chUdren);  women in institutions have been subjected  to involuntary sterUizations and to drugs  which ehminate menstruation (for the convenience of attendants not having to deal  with the mess).  Even more horrifying than any of these  pictures are those relating to abuse. We  know that one girl in four is sexuaUy abused  by the age of eighteen. That figure is twice  as high if we refer specificaUy to girls and  women with disabiUties. And at the same  time, such women and girls are not considered sexual or even attractive.  The status of women with disabihties is  clear: they are at the bottom of the heap,  they are not valued by their society. What  does aU that do to one's self-image?  Yet this conference on self-image was the  most empowering event I have ever been to.  (It was my privUege to participate in the capacity of attendant and note-taker.) I would  hke to Ulustrate this sense of empowerment  by describing the workshop entitled Suicide:  Thought About It Lately?  To my knowledge it was the first workshop of its kind ever held among lay people. Suicide is a very heavy topic, taboo in  the public sphere, not acceptable as food  for discussion. Thirty women came to the  workshop (compared with seven for one I attended on mothering—which was also very  inspiring). It was very carefully introduced  and structured so that women would feel  safe to talk about their feehngs. The tradi-   tional model of suicide counselling is based  on the hope that tomorrow wiU be a better  brighter day, which is decidedly not the re-  aUty of disabled women. (Remember those  statistics?)  Women were asked to think about what  DAWN could do as an organization to make  more assistance avaUable to women considering ending their hves. The idea was expressed that if women had permission to  talk about and explore suicidal feehngs, suicide itself might not be necessary.  It was a powerful discussion. When one  woman posed thoughts or plans of suicide  as a solution to a potentiaUy unbearable  situation caused by her degenerative disease, another countered that a cure might  be found in the foreseeable future. Someone  else pointed out that our culture is obsessed  with prolonging Ufe and has lost sight of the  place of death in the hfe cycle; that Inuit  elders would decide for themselves when it  was their time to die, an accepted and respected part of their contribution to Ufe.  A deaf woman said that she felt suicidal because although she could speak, she  was extremely isolated and could not accurately portray her feehngs in a hearing environment. What saved her was learning sign  language, getting to know other deaf people  and discovering deaf culture.  A lot of the women in the room had considered suicide; a number had attempted it.  Most felt that they were stopped by dependents or responsibihties: somebody or something that needed them. There was also  a distinction made between a serious bid  to check out and a cry for attention, and  women were clear which of these they had  attempted. Many women said that for them  •••••••••••••••••••a-****-  It felt... liberating ... to  repossess and bite  into that forbidden fruit  *••••••••••••••••••*••***  it took more courage to hve than it would  to kill themselves. It was acknowledged that  there is a difference between the deliberations of a mature woman and a teenager,  and that a disabled Native girl would be trebly at risk.  Suicide prevention centres must be alerted to these risks, as weU as to the special circumstances of women with disabilities, and  they must be fully accessible. The north is  particularly UI-equipped. In the Yukon, a  person in need of counselling can be told to  caU a therapist on a Zenith telephone number!  The workshop made no attempt to bel  definitive, but rather was seen as the beginning of a discussion to be continued in  DAWN's newsletter and elsewhere. There|  was a general sense of a need for openness  for permission to own and discuss feehngs  around suicide and be heard by our peers  and for support and counselling.  At the end, we were left with very practical advice in the event of a friend announcing her intention to commit suicide: get her  to agree to put it off a specified length of  time, keep her talking, visit if possible, and  get therapeutic help.  Response to the suicide workshop showed  that merely holding such a workshop was  itself empowering. It provided a forum for  women to share thoughts and feehngs, and  break down the isolation imposed by the  taboo which prevents disabled women from  even talking about their experiences. It felt  very Uberating and powerful to be able to  repossess and bite into that forbidden fruit.  This was made possible by the courage, caring and concern that went into setting the  stage for a safe, honest and supportive dis-  cussion in the workshop.  It was not a perfect conference. The  agenda was too full and too tightly scheduled. (The suicide workshop was one of  three I went to in a single day, as weU as  the plenary.) A couple of workshops just  didn't happen, because we were aU to exhausted at that point to do any more (and  the traffic jams in every artery didn't help).  In some ways the conference reflected the  differences in this country exemplified by  Meech Lake: Francophone and Aborigina  women were not given Ml voice and hear  ing; women from the north were marginal  ized by southern chauvinism.  Yet it was a very impressive conference  There was only one workshop actuaUy  titled Self-image but the theme was  dressed in every discussion, and the genera  feeUng was one of collective strength, self-  confidence and empowerment. What better  result could one ask than to come out of a  self-image conference feeUng strengthened?  DAWN has set itself some ambitious;  tasks. Almost every workshop made rec  ommendations for ways in which DAWN  could better address the issues of concern  to women with disabiUties and educate the  public (including the women's movement  about their needs and goals. The energy  the sense of common purpose, the wUling  ness to tackle difficult and controversial is  sues that were evident at this symposium  indicate that DAWN is equal to these tasks.  DAWN's position papers may be obtained by writing to DAWN, 10401 Fin-  layson Dr., Richmond BC V6X 1W8  ••••••••••••••••••••***  Disabled women... are  the most unemployed  group of Canadians  •••••••••••••••••••••••  KINESIS     July/Aug. Commentary  ^x^55n^n>^^xx^nx>^^^^  A call to adventure  by Anne Innis Dagg  A few years ago I was lying awake in  my smaU tent in a campground in northern British Columbia. Four of us were on  our way to a two-week canoe trip down the  Yukon River. It was two in the morning, the  air crisp and stiU.  Suddenly, I heard the sound of a man  running toward our tents. The heavy footsteps sounded nearer and nearer untU they  were right beside me. Then the man leapt  into the air and beUy-flopped onto my tent,  smashing it and landing heavUy on my  chest. He immediately scrambled to his feet,  gave a wUd shriek into the night and ran  Risking, in safety  One book hypothesizes  that perfume and  hairspray will attract  grizzlies but does not  mention shaving lotion  off. I spent the rest of the night in a state  of shock, occasionally trying to puU the  flattened tent around my face to keep out  mosquitoes.  In the morning, when we discussed this;  attack, one of the other women said that,  she,, too, had had a similar experience. She:  had wanted for years to spend a summer hving off the land. One July she found an area,  in Quebec where this seemed to be possible,  but before she could settle in, two drunken  men spotted her and chased her away. She  decided that day to give up her dream.  I recaUed the previous summer when a  canoeing partner had left me in the lurch at  Carmacks, halfway down the Yukon River.  Our rented canoe was paid for and I desperately wanted to finish the trip to Dawson City, but I was afraid to do so alone. I  had seen too many men on the river, either  alone or in groups, to feel that I would be  le.  I've thought about these incidents a great  deal. Men, by their potential for violence,  scare women away from the wUderness.  Women who do dare to travel alone often  carry guns to protect themselves against  men. Robyn Davidson did so when she  crossed the AustraUan desert by camel;  Anne LaBastiUe does when she hikes in  American forests. But the very idea of carrying weapons and being prepared to use  them in order to enjoy the quiet and beauty  of the wUderness is obscene.  One solution to this inequity for women  is to have outdoor areas reserved, for perhaps a month each summer, for women only.  This could be monitored by the local pohce  or wardens; traveUers on distant rivers and  hiking trails already must sign in with such  authorities before each trip so that if there  is an accident, help is eventuaUy available.  The task, then, would be to encourage  women who love nature and the wUd to consider taking a wUderness trip. This would  involve publicizing to women, who have  been taught the dangers of a walk alone  in the park, what wonderful adventures exist in wUderness areas. Hundreds of books,  some recent ones Usted below, describe journeys women have taken into wUd areas either alone or in groups.  The task would also mean counteracting  reports from the media implying that the  wUderness is no place for women. One such  campaign centres on menstruating women,  who are warned in books and brochures  that they wUl be targets for bear attacks,  even though there is no evidence for this.  (Two women who were menstruating have  been kiUed by grizzlies, but these women  had food in their campsite; men have also  been kiUed by grizzlies. One book hypothesizes that perfume and hairspray will attract grizzlies, but does not mention shaving lotion.)  Women who love nature wUl have to begin rethinking the cultural myths of the  dominant culture. WUderness trips have  long been considered for men as religious  or holy quests during which dragons wUl be  slain. Such a quest begins with departure  from the known, continues with the voyage through the unknown (marked by the  obstacles of rough waters, brutal portages,  group dissension, and rainy weather but  also the pleasures of new vistas, wUdlife observed, exhaustion overcome, and joyous camaraderie), and finishes with the return to  the famihar in an enUghtened state.  In a journal article (1985), Karen Warren  points out that this metaphor has Uttle rele-  ^  70  c?53-/jo?y  ®<^^^-'  VANCOUVER^  WOMEN'S  BOOKSTORE  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C. V6B 2N4  (604) 684-0523  July 21st is our 17th Anniversary  15% off all stock  Hours: Monday-Saturday 11:00-5:30  -sary  V\%&   ^j\  WE ARE PROUD TO     / "^  BE A SUPPLIER FOR: I  liEE  261 List Street. North Vancouver. B.C.  vance for women. She notes that each stage  of a woman's journey is a direct contradiction of the popular quest model. A woman  rarely hears a call to adventure; she is more  hkely to feel compeUed to stay home by her  family and friends and by society's subtle  disapproval. During the wUderness adventure itself, in which women at present are  usuaUy accompanied by men, she is hkely to  be confused by the idea of slaying dragons.  Does this involve carrying a canoe when  it offends her male companions to see her  struggling with the weight? Does it mean refusing to cook, since this is seen as a stereo-  typically female art? Or does it mean cooking more than ever, as her share in making the trip a success? Does it mean obeying commands issued in a miUtaristic manner when shooting rapids, or does it mean  trying to work out a better way to negotiate the currents and rocks?  Warren concludes that women should  evolve a new heroic as metaphor, rather  than the quest model. She writes: "A heroic  based on bonding with the natural world  rather than conquering it may be the foundation of a new metaphor for outdoor adventure experiences for men and women  alike." She values women's emphasis on  merging with nature and their attention to  spirituality and sociaUty.  WUderness experiences are too strenuous  to ever attract more than a few sturdy adventurers, but the wUderness to these people is the most wonderful thing the world  has to offer.  I want these people to be not only men,  but also women, who can canoe or hike  alone or in smaU groups without fear of attack from men.  When she returns home after her adventurous trip, a woman is confused further.  She has been independent and aggressive in  the woods, yet her friends and family may  not fancy her being independent or aggressive back in the city. It is much more problematic for her than for a man to transfer  the skiUs she has learned in the wUderness  to her everyday world. Finally, the model of  the heroic quest ends with the creation of a  hero, which is a tradition often unknown to  Reading List  A   Girdle Round the Earth, by Maria  Aitken, London: Constable, 1987.  Rivers Running Free: Stories of Adventurous  Women, edited by Judith Niemi  and  Barbara  Weiser,  Minneapolis,  MN:  Bergamot Books, 1987.  The Blessings of a Good Thick Shirt, by  Mary Russel, London: CoUins, 1986.  "Women's outdoor adventures: myth and  reality," by Karen Warren, Journal of Experiential Education 8, 2: 10-14, 1985.  0 KINESIS  \d'ddeme$$  \0omerv  VJe- ara, offacina  spporrunHies W iCtomerv -Yo  experience, -Vt& tcmaerr>ess toother in a. &t£e-  A.**o6p*ere,.~ftese. "Trips will  be? c&p^raMoiss of  reatonyrg Our  ^*A<zc*cnS. WHK +*e Qu^. a*d eac!>^  C^er. CM qco.\ is to fas om-s&.bV^ -te as, *a«u, icorven. as  Peas.b^. iOz, pr*^ &y»9*e*&, -r*bi*FertaWba,ft^  gsteiai*^ «*k cMAwfi,,skill dfe^pwetr- - .slidfrU  ■K&<sax&. an.0 Ciwr^ayvfcnsKip _ —>        7 "3  QxXra, C*r ard  pW*u irx. 4ru2> \Ooc3a idVk U$\  For info, registration, or to help out, call or write us at: V.O.V. Box 549, Tofino, BC  VCR 2Z0 (604)725-3230 Attn: Carolyn May or Catherine Berry. Donations of Ume,  money, and equipment are greatly appreciated. //////////////////^^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  International  Land  The basis of  all power  and privilege  as told to Louie Ettling  We have Mandela out. We have the  African National Congress out. We  have the world cheering. But we have  our people dying in the squatter communities. We have people sleeping in the  bushes. In the rain. We have children  crying for food.  I want you to think about that. Put  yourself in our shoes. What would you  do? Wouldn't you commit yourself fully  to fighting the hardships that we fight?  -Vanessa Mathews  Vanessa Mathews is a representative of  a Black squatter community at Disa River,  Hout Bay, near Cape Town in South Africa.  She visited Vancouver at the end of AprU to  speak at a conference in Victoria on Forced  Removals as weU as the Vuka! provincial  highschool conference (on Southern Africa)  in Vancouver. On tour with Vanessa was  Josette Cole, the director of the Surplus  People's Project (SPP).  The Surplus People's Project was estab-  Ushed in late 1979 as a national research  project to investigate the issues surrounding  forced removals in South Africa, The SPP's  founders beheved there was a need to focus  attention on the systematic seizing of land  from Black people, and the entire process of  dividing South Africa along ethnic Unes in  order to preserve apartheid.  As Vanessa and Josette speak publicly  and in an interview with Kinesis, the reality of daily Ufe in South Africa unfolds with  a clarity often numbed by the main-stream  media's portrayals of "winds of change" or  "violence in the Natal province."  Josette Cole: It is important to realize  that, at this particular point in time, there  are up to nine miUion people in the country that are threatened with forced removal  and particularly threatened under what is  called "The Prevention of Rlegal Squatting  Act," which affects people in rural areas and  on farms.  The issues that gave rise to the squatter situation is obviously rooted in the  apartheid laws since the NationaUst Party  came into power in 1948. And [this situation] was entrenched by the Act of Union in  1910 and the Land Act in 1913, later consolidated by legislation. It has resulted in  great hardships in our region, particularly  for Black women.  The struggle has fundamentally been for-  the right to land, housing and democratic  control. There are some communities in  Cape Town where people have been shot  over the last weeks [of AprU]. Their houses  have been buUdozed, people have received  eviction notices, which means they can be  removed any time. There is a lot of insecurity. Through hard work and weU-thought  through strategies, some battles have been  won and some land gained back. But there  is and wiU be bitter struggle around the is  sue of land. It is the basis of aU power and  privUege in our country.  In the Cape Town area alone there are  400,000-500,000 people who hve in squatter areas, a conservative estimate. Certainly  80 percent of aU Black people, classified as  "African" Uve in informal houses, mostly  outside of what is known as "controlled  squatter areas." Disa River is one such community.  Vanessa Mathews: I want to teU you  about Disa River, but you have to know that  Disa River is just one of thousands [of squatter communities]. The situations for some of  these communities are so tragic that even I  can't bear to go there. The pohce kick your  door in any day. If you have a bread knife,  they say you have a weapon. If you own a  radio battery they say you've stolen it.  Disa River is one of the oldest and  most significant squatter communities in  the Cape. It's in a very fertUe vaUey of Cape  Town, called Hout Bay. There are a number of very rich miUionaires Uving there,  but right in the heart of the area are many  people Uving who are underprivUeged, staying in bushes, in make-shift houses. Many of  them have been forcibly removed elsewhere,  but they have come back home because Disa  River is where they belong. Many of our  people are from the homelands: women and  chUdren who cannot Uve where their husbands are working because of the laws.  Our oldest residents are Mr. and Mrs.  Anthony. He's about 90 and she 80. They  are really Uke our father and mother, or  greatgrandparents. He came to Cape Town  in the 1910's. He used to be a farm labourer,  then a law was passed that forced Blacks  out of this area. But Mr. and Mrs. Anthony  stayed on.  Women of the Diepkloof squ,  our property. Many people suffer from TB,  skin diseases and health problems because  of having to Uve so unhealthily.  After the 1976 uprising, we became more  poUticized. We went to court, lost our case  to stay on the land and just fought back.  This has continued time and again. In about  1987, notices were put up aU over the place  that we had to move. Just notices. This was  done by a bank company, a subsidiary of  Trust Bank. They claimed to be the land  owners. We had never heard of them. We  had no taps. We paid no rent.  A number of things were done. We went  to the press. We said [to the bank] "Who are  you? Come nearer. Let's speak to you." We  were so shocked. We decided that we would  rather go to jail than be removed. JaU would  be a roof over our heads.  The court summons came out in '88  and our case started this February. We explained why this was our land, how we had  kept it neat and tidy, we collected our own  We were told we had wasted the  court's time. I got up and swore.  We all walked out.  They could never have a good home from  that time on. By a "good home" I mean a  home with the basic necessities, hke electricity and water.  The problem is that, even though one can  legaUy own the land one has hved on for 30  years [according to a recent law], there is  no way of 'proving' that the Anthonys have  Uved in Disa River for about 40 years. It remains white words against black ones. And  the courts seem to beheve who they want  to beUeve. The houses have been buUdozed  and our people have buUt and rebuilt our  homes.  There was the "Dompas," a pass which  Africans were required to carry. Those without it would be arrested, jailed, fined. So  people would just move deeper into the  bushes. We could never stay peacefuUy on  refuse. We have stabiUzed it. Our shacks are  neat. The Anthony's had been there for the  required 30 years. But we realized that the  courts were not our courts. The judge was  very verkrampt [narrow and conservative].  Nine of our people witnessed. The judge actually said loudly and clearly that we had  no place in the court. They said that we  couldn't have extra witnesses because we  wouldn't be able to afford it.  We brought in a German nun, retired,  who was with a family and worked with us  for many years. She was not beheved. She  was crying. Mr. Anthony was brave, though.  We decided to at least make a pohtical  statement. Mrs. Anthony was very sick, too  sick to witness. They tried to use it against  us that this great-great-grandmother wasn't  on the stand, as if it proved our, Ues! We  were told that we had wasted the court's  near Soweto  time. I got up and swore. We aU walked out.  The Anthony's and all of us worked for  aU our hves for our land. The only hope left  was an appeal. We started demonstrations  and marches. I woke up in the middle of the  night, waiting for poUce dogs, very anxious,  hearing my father coughing, looking at my  kids.  They tried to buy us out. Oubaas [old father] Anthony said, no way, we won't take  money for our land.  There is no alternative. The other  squatter communities are even more overcrowded. The courts have cost us. For me  it was a headache. We are poor. We had io  find money for taxis to the courtroom, and  for food when we're there. At some point  I saw woman feeding her baby sugar water  or coffee. The mothers were too independent to ask for milk. So we had to organize  around that. Eds would end up in hospital  with gastro.  But we were firm. People were staying  away from work to be at the courts. There  would be no food for supper ... and then  people think that sanctions would hurt us.  What can hurt us more than these laws?  Since this interview in April, Kinesis  has learned that the Disa River appeal  did not go through. However, the Cape  Provincial Administration is proposing  to 'allow' Disa River to exist as an  historical squatter community, with the  condition that the established residents  ensure that no new squatters join them.  This proposal would put Disa River in  the position of playing watchdog for  the government, and would also divide  the squatter communities from one another. Disa River and the SPP are carefully scrutinizing the implications of  such a deal.  The situation has further intensified because white property owners in  Hout Bay and areas such as Noordhoek  are organizing to prevent Black people  from gaining official residence in those  regions. Anti-apartheid forces are extremely busy resisting these and other  moves, determined to make housing an  issue in the National referendum slated  for December 16, 1990.   KINESIS  July/Aug. 90 SSSk. International  El Salvador  Women dying in war  by Nell Twomey  We won't abandon this building because it is ours! We won't abandon the  streets because the streets belong to us!  And we won't abandon the struggle because later history will be our judge."  —Febe Elizabeth Velasquez, speaking  shortly before her death.  Women must become aware of the  role they can play in these historical times ...to integrate ourselves as  mothers, sisters, companeras, daughters, to [be] in the front row ...to fight  for the unity of all women.  —Norma de Herrera  At 2:30 in the morning of October 31,  1989, a bomb blast shook the headquarters  of Co-Madres (the mothers' committee of  the disappeared) in San Salvador, the capital of El Salvador. It kiUed a woman and her  4-month-old baby, an international worker  and a man.  Later that day, a second bomb exploded  in the doorway of the crowded lunchroom  of FENASTRAS, a major Salvadoran trade  union federation. The bomb turned a protective outer steel door into deadly flying schrapnel which fataUy wounded Febe  Elizabeth Velasquez, Salvador's top woman  union leader and FENASTRAS General  Secretary. Nine others were kiUed, including a 15-year-old girl, and 38 wounded in  the massacre.  These miUtary-initiated bombings precipitated the November 11th offensive by  the guerrdla army of the Faribundo Marti  National Liberation Front (FMLN). It  proved to be the biggest counter- offensive  in the history of El Salvador's 11-year-old  civU war, which has already claimed 70,000  Uves.  During the government-led offensive, the  women's movement suffered tremendously  with the deaths of its members and the loss  of two prominent leaders: Febe Velasquez  and Norma Virginia Guirola de Herrera,  founder and President of IMU, the Institute  for Research, Training and Development of  Women.  The loss of Febe Elizabeth Velasquez's  leadership was a deeply-felt blow for the  One childcare centre  and two sewing  workshops were  ransacked  trade union movement and the entire Salvadoran women's movement. And the tragic  events of October 31 marked an intensification of government repression against aU  grass-roots women activists in this country.  Six offices of women's groups were gutted  by government aerial bombing of San Salvador. One chUdcare centre and two sewing  workshops were ransacked, and two other  chUdcare centres were temporarily shut.  Many women activists are now in exile, jaU  or in hiding.  Febe represented the women's garment  workers union in FENASTRAS. She started  work at age 13 sewing communion gloves in  a San Salvador factory. She advanced to the  Levi-Strauss jeans factory where she began  organizing women workers, and at the age  of 28, became the first woman leader of a  major trade union in El Salvador.  Sarahi MoUna, who survived the FENASTRAS bombing, accompanied the dying Febe to the hospital. Sarahi is a member of CoFENASTRAS, the 5,000-strong  women's membership of FENASTRAS.  "Our companera Febe was a truly combative woman and didn't want to die," said  Sarahi. "On the way to the hospital, the  ambulance ran out of gas and we had to  switch to a pick-up truck. The companera  was looking at me and crying, and at one  moment she gave me her hand and pressed  mine, but then she lost strength.  "We have felt Febe's loss very greatly,  but we must continue forward, working so  that the trade union movement wUl rise  up again through us...the women. Because,  why not say it, Febe showed us that women  can work equaUy with men, and even rise  above them."  While Febe Velasquez rose to power as an  influential orator in the traditionaUy male-  dominated trade unions, Norma de Herrera  pioneered activities in the growing women's  movement. She organized the 1987 Women  and Peace Conference at the National University attended by 300 women. She helped  to develop IMU into a women's resource  centre, and at the same time opened CAL-  MUS, the Centre of Legal Attention for  Women.  The 42-year-old writer and scholar was  murdered 12 days after the death of Febe  during the miUtary bombing of the marginal  neighbourhoods.  "Norma was aiding the civiUan population in San Marcos where people were  wounded from hehcopter and plane attacks," explained new IMU President Nora  Garcia. "She was giving out medicine, when  the army captured her the morning of  November 12 and took her to Quartel El  Zapote. Her body appeared in the morgue  of the general cemetery, her face destroyed  by close range gunshots."  Norma's 23-year-old niece, Tanya Valen-  tina Parada Guirola, was also killed during the offensive. Tanya was an engineering  student in charge of IMU's consciousness-  raising puppet show.  "This has hit me so hard. I've had enough  of war," said 31-year-old Garcia. "Everybody has suffered a lot. Now, when one says  we have to have dialogue and end the war,  it's no longer just a slogan, but it's coming  from everybody's heart."  After Norma's death, IMU changed offices and rescheduled a Retreat for Women  Writers and a ChUdren's Peace Camp. Despite the repression, IMU wUl go ahead with  plans to open a Casa de la Mujer, a meeting  centre for women and production site for a  women's magazine.  During last faU's offensive, the Salvadoran military also targetted CONAMUS,  the National Coordinator of Salvadoran  Women. All the medical equipment from  Salvador's first and only cUnic for battered  and raped women was confiscated during an  army raid. The miUtary stole office equipment, machines for the women's radio program, medical suppUes and caused $8,000  in damage to the chnic. It justified the raid  by accusing CONAMUS of being an FMLN  front group.  "Our work is legitimate," said the  CONAMUS spokesperson. "If this is subversive, then all the women's groups in the  world would be prisoners as weU." CONAMUS, formed in 1986, has carried out pio  neering work around rape and domestic violence. It plans one day to open a battered  women's shelter.  Despite the recent renewal of US aid to  El Salvador, (suspended since the murder of  four Jesuit priests in November), Salvador's  "If this is subversive,  then all women's groups  in the world would  be prisoners as well."  long history of having one of the worst human rights records in the Western Hemisphere continues.  This is particularly true in the eastern  countryside and home of AMS, the Association of Salvadoran Women. AMS is the  largest peasant women's association in the  country with more than 3,000 members  forming 100 committees in the heavy conflict zones of Morazan, Usulutan, La Union  and San Miguel provinces.  To avoid being identified by government  security forces, the two AMS representa-  ture and files were also stolen making information difficult to re-create in an organization with a majority of members who don't  read or write."  Despite these severe attacks against  women's organizations, three mother's committees, CO-MADRES, CODEFAM, and  COMAFAC, (the Christian Mothers' Committee) have maintained a strong role in  supporting women during the months since  the offensive. "What motivates us as committees of mothers is our mission to stop  violations of human rights," explained 55-  year-old CoMadres leader Apolonia Sofia  Alas EreamUla, whose daughter and neph<  were murdered by death squads in 1980.  Apolonia was severely beaten and jaUed  along with other CoMadre's members when  the Treasury PoUce raided their office in  November. Soldiers stole $400,000 worth of  office suppUes and medical equipment destined as hospital donations. Bombs have destroyed the CoMadre's office three times  since 1980.  "Visiting the hundreds of new poUtical  prisoners captured since the offensive keeps  us going," explained 46-year-old Guadalupe  Mejia, CODEFAM vice-president. Her organization provides physical and psychological care for 50 chUdren of prisoners and assassinated people. The chUdren were sent to  temporary shelters after a number of threatening phone calls.  Febe Elizabeth Velasquez and her sons  tives interviewed had permed their hair  and wore make-up and city clothes. Changing appearance is a common form of self-  defense for activists in El Salvador. They  described an intensive aerial bombing campaign which, since the offensive, has taken  a serious toll on the civiUan population and  been largely ignored by the outside world.  Neither feel safe to visit their families in  the countryside. "In Morapala and Usulutan in December, 10 women were arrested  and jaUed for 20 days by the Sixth Brigade."  AMS re-opened a city office in early  March, hoping to re-establish contact with  its dispersed membership. After a miUtary raid during the offensive, AMS women  are starting from scratch. "The National  Guard took everything. Sewing machines,  typewriters, the refrigerator, stove, couches,  photos, even our clothes," explained an  AMS representative. AU brochures, litera-  The underlying motivation for these  women's struggle and indeed, for the entire Salvadoran conflict, is hunger. Hunger  for food, for freedom and for democracy.  "We've had [extremely high] inflation due  to the new ARENA economic pohcy of freeing prices," explained one activist. "A can of  powdered milk for my baby, which used to  cost 30 to 40 colones, now costs 60 colones.  Gasoline prices have risen from 9 to 12  colones."  Marina Judith Pena of the Salvadoran  Women's Association sums up the situation  this way: "Salaries are staying the same, and  thousands of public employees have been  laid off. The situation of women is much  worse than it was before November. What  compels us to keep working is our desire for  our chUdren to Uve in a free, democratic,  and just society, which we are certain we  can achieve."  , KJNES1S IRST OF ALL  by Rosalie Tizya  First of all I'd like to lay a basis. Unless you have that basis it's  always difficult to understand how Indian people think. The  country that I come from is called Uuntat, in the Arctic, north of  the Arctic circle. There are several tribes within the nation that  stretches from Alaska to the North West Territories. In all the  history in my nation, the Gwich'in nation, there is no story of us ever  coming across any ice bridge to what we call this Great Island that  you call North America. We were always here. We may have gone  to China, I don't know. In the traditions and the oral history of my  people there is no story. We have stories of people like Ghengis  Khan who travelled far and wide thousands of years before  Columbus was conceived. So the reality breaks from the history that  children learn in the school today.  I also want to explain the importance of the oral tradition. It ought not to be demeaned as myth. The Indian people, and we are not truly Indians in the Indian sense  of the word—in my language we are aU Dingji-chu, what you call Aboriginal, indigenous  Indian people. Our origins are such that our people—our ancestors, our grandparents—  say to us that we were placed in our territories by the creator to care for and protect  our lands for the future generations. When he placed us in our territories he breathed  Ufe into man and out came the spoken word, and therein hes a commitment to speak  the truth and that is the fundamental principle of the oral tradition and it ought not to  be demeaned. I could write a thousand pages and each word could be a he and have no  more substance to it than one snowflake in all the passage of time. Yet I can speak to  you—to a place in you so deep—a place that speaks to your heart that it stays there forever. That's the power of the spoken word.  e importance of this is that when we are taught in our tradition, we  £ don't write things down. We have to Usten very, very carefuUy with our  |f. hearts and mind and whatever is put into us never, never leaves. We  f; make it our own power, as you must do today. If there is ever going to  sjjv: be any action on any principles that you beUeve in, you must have the  g$%filqi03$f, power to do it. And so the responsibiUty is to Usten with your hearts.  Now 2300 years ago in Persia, when the Greek empire broke away, an intellectual  revolution began on that Great Island. The three fundamental thinkers of the time-  Socrates, Plato and Aristotle—formed a hne of thought that UteraUy revolutionized the  world and the consequences of much of the thinking of today came from that era. When  the Greek empire fell and the Roman empire rose up, the Roman jurists who first wrote  down the law had to figure out how the law was going to be fulfilled or carried out. In  studying the Chinese and the Indian systems they had emperors, kings, and queens. So  this is what the Roman empire evolved. The law in Europe was vested in the kings and  queens of Europe and, you say, what has this got to do with Aboriginal rights?  Doreen Jensen and other women of the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en at BC Supreme  Court,   September 1989  After several centuries of basing survival on intellectual thought—separating out  the spiritual aspects of Ufe—life became a bit of a bore for the people and so they created souls for themselves in the formation of the Roman CathoUc church. The term  'sovereignty' first was coined by the pope, the head of the church. If the kings and  queens of Europe want to speak to god, they are to speak through the pope. And if there  is something that god has for them, he wUl speak through the pope in the form of what  they call papal bulls. It's not the pope with horns charging at us—papal bulls are Uke  paper written with instruction on them.  In 1491, there was a Pope Alexander the Sixth who came out with a papal bull for the  king and queen of Spain: Queen IsabeUa and King Ferdinand. In that papal buU he says:  "You are to go into the islands (he splits the world in half, east and west, and he gives  them the west). You are to go into the oceans and to find some islands and some lands  and you are to bring the non-Christian people to Christianity."  So Queen IsabeUa and King Ferdinand find this guy that's wandering around Spain  unemployed, and they give him three ships and sail him across the ocean blue—  Christopher Columbus. He sails for the East Indies but he bumps into San Salvador.  There are the Arawak people, he calls them Indians. He looks over the land and he has  a friend back in Genoa in Italy called Amerigo, so he says: "I'm going to make him famous," and he calls the land America.  see next page  In 1989, Rosalie Tizya spoke these words at a gathering sponsored by the BC  Human Rights Coalition in Vancouver. She works at the United Native Nations.  In BC and other parts of Canada, Native people are compelling non-Native people to wake up to the reality that they are on Indian land, and that Indian people  never consented to be governed. At present, the Gitksan and Wet'suwet'en people  of northwestern BC are engaged in a precedent-setting land title action which the  BC Supreme Court will rule on later this year. This case is the first to advance  questions of Aboriginal title based primarily on the evidence of the people themselves. For more information about the case, or to make much-needed contributions to legal expenses, contact the Office of the Heridatary Chiefs of the Gitskan  and Wet'suwet'en, #405-553 Granville St., Vancouver BC V6C 1Y6  KINESIS     July/Aug. 90 - ithin the Great Island we are happUy, merrUy continuing our Uves and  all of a sudden new human beings have come to our shores—something  Uke Close Encounters of the Third Kind. These new human beings,  when they arrive, arrive very sick, malnourished and lost. The people  on the east coast and later on the west coast take pity on the people on  these boats, bring them in, bring them back to health and aUow them to  Uve among their people.  Thus when Spain discovers what they caU the New World, the EngUsh get into the  act, and the French and the Dutch. What they ready want to do is claim aU of the land  for their countries. The people who land on the east coast of what is now caUed Canada  are the French and the EngUsh. These people are in no condition to conquer the Indian  people [so] what is established over in Europe soon after to prevent the European countries from fighting over our lands is what they call "title." The ownership of the land  would be obtained in one of two ways: by conquering the non-Christian peoples and  thereby dairning their territories, or by getting the consent of those people to Uve in  their territories.  This was an agreement among the European nations themselves. The French and the  Enghsh, not being able to conquer the Indian people and discretion being the better part  of valour, chose the process of taking the consent of the non-Christian peoples to Uve in  their territories.  But we found after many years our  way of thinking was too different  because the international principles  of the Indian nations are peace,  friendship and respect  So the first time we see a compact between the European nation  and an Indian nation is in the 1600's. The Haudenosaunee Confederacy (what you know as the Six Nations) and the Enghsh came to an agreement known as the Gus-wen-tah or the Two  Row Wampum. How they explain this agreement is they said that for many years we sa  down with the Enghsh to see if we could Uve together, if we could integrate.  But we found after many years our way of thinking was too different because the international principles of the Indian nations are peace, friendship and respect. Our philosophy says it is our obUgation to the creator to care for and to protect our lands for  future nations. There is no written law that that is an obligation of ours. We proceed  to do that by hving in harmony with nature and by striving to hve in harmony with aU  mankind.  So it is reflected in the Gus-wen-tah that the Haudenosaunee intended to find another  way of hving together. The Gus-wen-tah is a belt that has two rows of purple beads paraUel to each other with three rows of white beads in between. One row of [purple] beads  represents the Haudenosaunee people: their land, their government, their laws. The other  [purple] row represents the EngUsh nation with its laws, its government and its people.  The Haudonesaunee say that these two rows never meet , and that is because the EngUsh wUl not govern for the Indian people and the Indians wUl never govern for the EngUsh. The three rows of white beads in between represent that we wUl hve side-by-side in  peace and friendship and respect.  So the first compact was never one in which an Indian nation or a confederacy said  to the EngUsh: "Yes, you wUl govern us and your lands will be our land." No, we wUl  Uve side-by-side and the land we wUl share. Now that same agreement exists on the «.  west coast. When I did this workshop in Kamloops an elder came up to me afterwards  and explained the BC flag. The flag is split in halt the top has the Union Jack, and the  bottom has the sun and blue for the rivers. We wiU Uve side by side as long as the sun  shines and the waters flow. Never an agreement to be governed by anyone.  The next important event was the French-English war of 1752. Both the EngUsh and  the French seek affiances of the Indian nations on the east coast and the majority aUy  with the Enghsh for a singular important reason: the EngUsh promised to protect the  lands. At the end of that war in 1759 when the French surrender on the Plains of Abraham, several forts were buUt from Ottawa through Detroit territory. "Ottawa" is not just  the capital of what is now called Canada—they are Indian people. Detroit is a nation of  Indian people—it's not a motor city and the man I'm going to talk about, Pontiac, is not  a General Motor's car. He's one of our fearless leaders and should be respected as such.  The Indian nations had aUowed the British to buUd forts in order to win the war.  Pontiac went to the EngUsh and said: "Now you've won the war—get rid of the forts."  The Enghsh said no. So Pontiac sent runners throughout the different nations on the  east coast and they formed a confederacy and proceeded to destroy aU those forts on Indian lands.  In the colonies on the east coast many of the legislators, the colonial leadership, became concerned that Pontiac's destruction of their forts and the Indian nations allying  with him were Uke an omen of their own loss. They felt if this happened other Indian  nations would unite and drive them into the Atlantic ocean. They couldn't win a war  against the Indian people so they recommended to the EngUsh crown a different way—a  pohcy that they'd always had.  The Royal Proclamation in 1763 by King George the Third became the basis on which  the EngUsh would settle title with the Indian people. If you read the Royal Proclamation  it basicaUy says that the EngUsh crown would obtain the Indian title through the consent of the Indian nations in an assembly of their people. That partly caused the American Revolution because there were land grabbers in those 13 colonies. The Enghsh had  «et a boundary Une of the Allegheny mountains and the Mississippi river, and called aU  mat territory Indian territory, they told the colonists: "You can't go beyond those mountains untU we get the consent of the Indian people for you to settle there." There was a  revolution. England lost and the 13 colonies formed the United States of America.  iyg|&ujjgfc.^ hose that were loyal to the British crown moved north into what was  ^^p$~ caUed British North America. Out of the Royal Proclamation, [which]  JP&5&& is Canada's first constitution (there was no "canada" then), over 80  IjjiJjjjirH treaties were concluded with several of the Indian nations on the east  l$ih. coast and 13 on Vancouver Island. That aUowed the British then to  SS bring people over from other countries to settle. The key to their claim-  3 ing of title to this land in international terms [was] that they had to  $ have effective occupation of it.  With the conclusion of those treaties, the colonies which formed in Canada on the  east coast were Upper and Lower Canada, Prince Edward Island, New Brunswick and  Nova Scotia. In 1864 the Nova Scotia legislature authorized its governor to talk with the  other colonies about unity. They feared an American invasion. The result of that was the  British North America Act—which legaUy formed Canada as a nation in 1867.  Therein the lie begins.  The Indian nations up 'tU this point are treating with the Enghsh crown: with Queen  Victoria and her predecessors. When Canada forms as a nation, what is significant about  the British North America Act is that it does not carry Indian consent. No Indian nations were invited, no Indian nations were told, no individuals were informed. In 1980  when I held workshops in the community they had never heard of the British North  America Act. I'm sure there are many Indian and Inuit communities today where that  stiU remains the truth.  So these colonies which formed this nation called Canada did so without the consent  or the knowledge of the Indian people and they perpetuated a he. When they looked to  the west—they had this motto of stretching Canada from sea to sea—they saw on the  Prairies more Indian nations, many that were more powerful or as powerful as those in  the east. Canada, being a young nation without an army, without a pohce force and with  very httle money, was already in a deficit. They couldn't launch an Indian war. They  looked to the United States and it was at war with the Indian people and the war was  costing something Uke 20 miUion dollars a year or half a bUUon overall. So they opted for  treaty making—the process of obtaining Indian consent.  They looked to the Prairies in the north and sent out Indian agents who were originally diplomats of the British Crown to go and make treaties. Now if you go to these areas there are a number of treaties—number one to eleven. If you talk to the old people,  some of whom were present as chUdren in that process, they have an entirely different  view of what it was aU about.  One of the elders from Hobema says when they [the agents] came, the people who  spoke on the Indian peoples' behalf told them: "Look, you see that mountain over there?  That's not ours to give you, the land we cannot give because it's not ours to give. It belongs to the creator. Those trees and the animals we can't give you, they're not ours to  give. But this is what we'll do. That mountain, that rock, represents our faith and we  wiU treat you in good faith. The animals represent our sharing and our kindness and we  wiU treat you with kindness." And as they went down the different elements they made  their commitment to treat.  The British, the Canadian government, offered them medicine, education and other  things. Now in this process of treaty-making, the commitment the Indian people made  was an obUgation never to break it. That obligation stiU stands today. It is not simply a  piece of paper you can tear up. The obligation they made is a spiritual one, to the creator, that they'd never break their word. The money that changes hands every year, the  five doUars, does not represent 5 loonies—it represents a spiritual obligation on the part  of the Canadian crown to maintain its obUgations.  Those Indian people didn't know that Canada existed. They beUeved that they were  treating with the EngUsh crown. The Indian agents that came forward in the name of  Canada under the instructions of the government went forward in the name of the English crown, misrepresenting the whole process on the Canadian side.  So in 1980, when the people in the Prairies go to England to meet with the Queen,  to discuss the treaties and to find out why it is that Canada is interfering with the Indian peoples' relations to the EngUsh crown, to the utter dismay of the elders, they find  the Queen has no power. A Uttle Prime Minister called Joe Clark could Uterally tell the  Queen not to meet with them and she would have to do what Joe Clark says.  No Indian nations were invited,  no Indian nations were told, no  individuals were informed  They had been hed to in the most devious way. So the treaties are stiU to be honoured. The Indian people to whom the treaty is an obligation say the land we have now  we never gave up and aU those rights which were never put on the table in the treaty remain Aboriginal rights. They never consented to be governed by Canada. The Canadian  government to this day continues to maintain that he.  In 1871 when BC joined confederation, they didn't tell the Indians either. The Terms  of Union do not carry the consent of the Indian nations of BC. They weren't even informed. I'm not surprised to find the Gitksan Wet'suwet'en in a court. Don't be surprised if you find every other Indian nation in court either because aU of these things  were done in isolation of the Indian people. In aU of the subsequent legislation which  formed there was no room for the Indians because they'd never been part of those discussions, see next page There is no consent evident anywhere in Canadian history, in all your milUons of  books, in aU the fihng cabinets, in aU the bureaucrats' heads—there is no Indian consent.  Evidence. The Canadian government can't produce that kind of evidence. What  they're saying in court is that we've acquiesced—if I wear this shirt I've agreed to become white. This shirt: it's a shirt it's not Indian or white. A TV is not Indian or white;  it's a TV. It's not even human. They're saying if we watch TV we are white and we've  agreed to become part of the Canadian system. While everybody is on Indian land. Does  that make you Indian? They haven't said much about that.  So it wasn't enough for them that they couldn't kill off the Indian people. Genocide  was outlawed in international law, thanks to people who beheved in human rights, the  anti-slavery society, the LeveUers in England—and Indian people are certainly human.  WeU, as far as human rights go, we are human. What the Canadian government opted  to do if they couldn't physically kUl off the Indian people was to kiU us off spiritually—  alcohol.  You know, they brought in diseased blankets—smaU pox, influenza and TB. Indian  people died like flies. Every nation has a story, the graveyards tell the story of the epidemics. So it didn't require buUets or gas ovens. Germ warfare began a long time ago.  They're saying if we watch TV we are  white and we've agreed to become part  of the Canadian system. While everybody  is on Indian land. Does that make you  Indian?  When it came to rehgion the government gave the missionaries full freedom to destroy  the Indian customs and traditions, and they did it with eager minds. They taught us  there is a heaven and there is a heU and if you love the land too much and if you exercise  your customs and traditions we are going to go to heU. But if they Ued to us, they stiU  go to heaven. Indian people love the great spirit [and] many of them gave up their religious practises—yet stiU many continued.  When it came to education the Indian parents said: "No, you're not going to take our  chUdren away from us. If you do that, when they come back, we wUl not know them."  So [the government] changed the law and made it compulsory. Parents were faced with  jaU or fines if their chUdren were not put in these schools. The schools were not Indian  schools, many of them were run by the churches. In the residential schools, many in BC  and aU over Canada, the chUdren were not taught Indian traditions or our values or language.  These schools were intended to make Uttle Europeans out of Uttle Indians. When [our]  language was spoken the chUdren were punished. Any conflict was resolved with violence.  There was tremendous abuse—psychological, emotional, physical abuse. Today when you  see on the skid rows of the nation Indian people drowning their sorrows with a bottle of  booze, don't be surprised if they've come out of those schools. When you're told you are  savage!  What I appreciate the most about my upbringing by my mother was that she would  train me in a way. She'd say: "Rosalie, you're slow." It wasn't good or bad—it was me.  When I work, I work slowly. When I do something I do it slowly. It isn't good or bad,  it's the way I am and I appreciate that so much, not being judged for what I am, but being aUowed to be myself.  So what does a chUd do when someone says they're savage? How do we absorb that  as not being good or bad? The education system teaches chUdren that they are good or  bad, it doesn't teach them that they are human beings. The chUdren in the schools who  resisted that were punished. So we reap what we sow—you reap the anger, you reap the  frustration and the rage and that violence today.  The Indian Act. They weren't satisfied to destroy the souls of the Indian people. They  used the Indian Act to set up reserve lands and band councils so they could control the  process of enfranchising Indian people so that we become Canadian citizens. Those reserve lands are not traditional Indian territories—they are tiny httle pieces of land you  can't even spit on. They forced the Indian people to be dependent on the Canadian government and that's what the government still wants today. They wUl put more money  into welfare on the Indian reserves than they wUl into economic development because  they want the souls of the Indian people.  In BC when the Indian people rejected aU government funding in 1975 you know  who the first people on the reserves were? The welfare people, telhng the Indian people: "Take your welfare back." The Indian people were saying: "No, we don't want your  handouts." The Indian agents didn't want to be seen controlhng the people on the reserves so they put chiefs and councils in there and those chiefs and councils have no  power to make decisions—they're told what to do and if they don't do it their money  gets cut off—and they're told how to do that too.  <& hat's why there's a cry for Indian self-government today. They're fac-  feT ing their own people, many of whom don't have running water. They  iS«& can't make decisions in their own homes. The chiefs and councils are  1fi|£ paralyzed—their option is self-government. WE want to make our own  v*' decisions. H we want medicine, we want the power to buy it, not have  Health and Welfare send us film projectors because that's what they  S^; have money in their budgets for.  The Indian agent, after he's made a decision, can go home to his famUy and watch a  hockey game—who takes aU the crap on the reserve is the chief and councU even though  they didn't make the decision.  The fight isn't over yet. It's only just beginning. When you make a decision to oppress  people what you do is increase their resistance, you only make people stronger when you  try to take their humanity away.  You haven't seen anything yet. We've only just begun.  s KINESIS ///////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  ARTS  by Lauri E. Nerman  Tone Dogs  ANKETY LOW DAY  C/Z Records  Working at an alternative radio station  gives me the opportunity to hear a variety of new music from independent labels.  These record companies deserve attention  and acknowledgement as they continue to  promote "riskier" artists. C/Z records continually produces albums that faU into this  category.  It is therefore not surprising that the  Tone Dogs debut album is the latest product from C/Z. The Tone Dogs hail from  Seattle. Band member Amy Denio, vocalist,  producer and multi-instrumentalist is at the  forefront of the new music scene in North  America.  By day Denio is the programming office  supervisor for Muzak in Seattle. The balance of her time is spent performing with  the Tone Dogs and her own quartet: The  BUly Tipton Memorial Saxophone Quartet.  This all women band was formed in 1988  and is named after a female saxophonist  who led her hfe as a man in order to be accepted in the music world.  The Tone Dogs are a difficult band to categorize which is at the root of their power.  The variety of sound on this album is truly  astonishing. Some of the pieces are jazz-  influenced whUe others are "rock-oriented"  incorporating rehgious sounding chants, a  cow's moo and electronic interludes.  Part of the album was recorded in De-  nio's driveway and it is her haunting voice  and lyrics which compliment the band's expansive sound.  Ankety low day jumps off the turntable  with new sound and direction. HopefuUy  your favourite specialty record store wUl order it for you. If all else faUs order direct:  C/Z Records, 1407 E. Madison, #41, Seattle WA, 98122.  Queen Latifah  ALL HAIL THE QUEEN  Tommy Boy Music  Dist. by Polygram  Rap is one of the most difficult musical  forms for me to write about. My experience  as a white woman with aU the privUeges  that brings me in our society is very different than that of women of colour. I have  very Uttle experience with the language and  culture of rap.  What I have observed is the astounding  speed at which rap has crossed over into the  dominant culture. Rap is big money in the  record industry and has eUcited more controversy than any form of music in decades.  The press focuses on the question of language (so-called obscenities) as do many  conservative groups. Little has been written  about the sexist depiction of women by most  of the male artists. As weU, women rappers  who are attempting to address these issues  are not weU supported or known.  Enter Queen Latifah who is taking the  rap world by storm with her debut album.  Her songs are affirming and address is  sues around drugs, teenage pregnancy and  racism. Her single "EvU that Men Do" is  a powerful indictment of sexism. "Ladies  First" is a combination of soul, jazz and reggae and includes the talents of three other  women rappers. It has been called the 90s  version of Aretha Franklin's "Respect".  Latifah's interest in rap began in 1985  when she was the star forward on her high-  school's basketbaU team. During lunch hour  she would practice performing rap with a  group of friends in the washroom. Latifah acknowledges the importance of having  more women involved in the production and  behind the scenes of rap music. For her it is  not enough that there are women rappers as  most of them are just imitating their male  counterparts. All Hail the Queen is an important album, an example of herstory in  the making. It is a bold and daring record  which deserves our attention.  Sinead O'Connor  I DO NOT WANT  WHAT I HAVEN'T GOT  Chrysalis Records  Sinead O'Connor has foUowed up the success of her debut album, The Lion and  the Cobra with an equal and at times  more powerful record. WhUe The Lion and  the Cobra played with the edge of a punk  sound, this work foUows more of an acoustic  edge. The power of any of O'Connor's work  is her voice which is highhghted in a gentle,  strong way.  She has achieved critical acclaim for the  single "Nothing Compares to You" although  I consider it to be the weakest track.  It is quite poppy and definitely the safest  song on the album. The balance of the  songs are highly personal and chronicle  her struggles with motherhood and fame.  "Black boys on mopeds" is a harsh look at  Thatcher's pohtics and how they have affected the working poor. In the chorus she  states:  these are dangerous days  to say what you feel is to  dig your own grave  'remember what I told you  if you were of the world  they would love you  There is so much I Uke about this album.  However, if I were to choose one aspect to  highhght, it would clearly be O'Connor's  writing. The level of intelUgence and insight  into her world and ours is invigorating.  Queen Latifah  Two Nice Girls  2 NICE GIRLS  Rough Trade  Two Nice Girls are actually three women  who describe themselves as a 100 percent  Austin, Texas production. Laurie Freelove,  Kathy KornUoff and Gretchen PhilUps have  performed together for the past four years.  Although this album was released over a  year ago it has received Uttle press or coverage on the West Coast. This has been one  of my favourite albums this past year.  In their Uner notes the Girls thank a  variety of artists for inspiration. The Ust  is eclectic, ranging from Joan Armatrad-  ing, Ellen McDlwaine, the SUts to Throwing  Muses.  Their cover of Lou Reed's Sweet Jane  is breathtaking. If you dig back into your  musical memories you wUl remember that  the Cowboy Junkies' version of this song  received a lot of attention two years ago.  The Girls' version buries the Junkies with  their subtle harmonies and inclusion of Joan  Armatrading's Love and Affection into the  chorus. They premiered this piece three and  a half years ago and it spurred their popularity. IronicaUy the Junkies' version was released whUe the Girls were stiU in the studio.  I love this album for a variety of reasons.  First, it sounds Uke they had a great time  making this album. It is upbeat, uplifting  and extremely funny. I also find it refreshing to discover an album that is woman-  identified and doesn't pretend to be otherwise.  One of my favourite pieces is "I Spent My  Last $10 on Birth control and Beer." The  speaker states:  My life was so much simpler  when I was sober and queer  But the love of a strong hairy man  has turned my head I fear  And made me spend  my last ten bucks  on birth control and beer.  Two Nice Girls are refreshing and talented. They also have a brand new EP out  titled Like a Version. The advertisement  states "Madonna isn't from Austin Texas".  Check them out.  0     2  F     M  VANCOUVER   CO-OPERATIVE   RADIO  LOCATED   AT      337   CARRALL   STREET  OMEN  TAKE THE AIRWAVES  Women Do This Everyday Monday 7:30 pm  The Lesbian Show Thurs. 8:30 pm  Rubymusic Friday 7:30 pm  Women of Note Sunday 10 pm  6  8  4-8  4  9  4  KJNESIS  Ju,y/Aug.9 sasssssss**^*^^^  Arts  Women isolated among women  In the navy  SCUTTLEBUTT  by Jana L. WiUiams  Vancouver: Press Gang PubUshers, 1990  by Frances Wasserlein  As I began to read this novel I wasn't  sure why Press Gang PubUshers would be  putting out a book about a woman's US  Navy boot camp experience, and I wasn't  sure I would find such a book very interesting, even though it was about women. In  the end I knew.  Press Gang needs to pay attention to the  financial bottom Une. And the women who  make the pubUshing decisions know there is  a good market for books directed at a specificaUy female audience. Some of that market  is in Canada, and it is also in the United  States. A good read seUs, no matter which  side of the border. And this is a good read.  For many women, Scuttlebutt wUl awaken memories of their own experiences as  women isolated among women, in institutions, schools, in the armed forces. For others, the novel offers a gUmpse at women  seeking education and employment, women  without privUege looking for a way to make  their ways in the world.  Scuttlebutt is about the first 10 weeks  in a young woman's Ufe in the US Navy.  It's about the way that WAVES are made.  It's also about friendship and love among  women, about community buUt in the very  different world of a women's barracks on a  naval station in Maryland.  I was surprised to realize, about 100  pages in, that the book takes place almost completely inside that cocoon. Weston, R.D. (that's how women seaman  (sic) recruits are addressed and refer to  themselves—by last name and first initials)  joined the navy because she wanted training  as a photographer and knew she couldn't afford art school. She joined during the Vietnam War. The outside world, the news and  television, doesn't intrude into this piece of  women's world. It is a world constructed  within and limited by the regulations and  rules of the US Navy, rules which are intended to produce women who fit the mold,  women who Mow orders, who dress properly, who know how to mirror-shine their  oxfords, and never, never touch another  woman. The friendship which develops between Weston and Taylor as they sit on the  counter in the washroom after lights out is  the most closely examined. That Taylor is  a Black woman, and Weston white doesn't  have much to do with the intensity of their  friendship—untU Weston finds out she cannot protect her friend from racism.  Scuttlebutt is a novel about discovery.  Weston discovers herself and other women.  As the weeks unfold she learns what it  means to be placed in authority, she learns  about power. Toward the end of her 10  weeks Weston is surprised by herself, and  led to reconsider aU her previous relationships with women. (I won't teU you the  story.) There are places where I wasn't sure  why something was included, but in the end,  Roberta Weston's story is told just Uke most  women's Uves are Uved, in smaU, perhaps  insignificant moments, moments which can  change us forever. Moments when someone  cares for us, when we care for another. Moments when we learn something, or are surprised by ourselves into reconsidering what  we thought we knew.  There is no pretense in this book to deep  ideological or philosophical introspection or  analysis. What the novel presents is a piece  CROSSLAND CONSULTING  Personal Management  Services for Artists  Individuals  Grant and Proposal Writing  Career Counselling  Bookkeeping Services  * FIRST CONSULTATION FREE*  By Appointment Only  Jackie Crossland  682-3109  _—     FOR  Feminist  THE0RY&  ITERATURE  parTacus  BOOKS  311 W. HASTINGS ST. VANCOUVER  V6B1H6 TEL. 688-6138  AINESIS  HERE'S TWO  John and Laurie are only  two of the many volunteers  needed for Celebration '90 -  Gay Games III & Cultural  Festival. They know Vancouver is hosting the largest  multi-sport event to happen  anywhere in 1990! But they  can't do it on their own - they  need your help now! From  collecting tickets at the  Literary Gala, officiating at  an athletic event, or carrying  the flag at Opening  Ceremonies - Celebration '90  needs you! So if you have the  time and want to make a difference in your community  contact (604) 684-3303.  Gay Games III & Cultural  Festival - August 4 to 11,  1990.  Be Part of the   £££j^  Celebration!     celebration 90  of the culture of working-class women, poor  women, women whose decision to join the  miUtary makes sense in the context of their  Uves.  I'm white and middle-class, I thought  about joining the US Air Force because I  wanted to go to medical school and the  armed forces seemed hke a good place to do  that. My father, who was a veteran of the  United States Air Force, told me in no uncertain terms that no daughter of his was  ever going to join up, in exactly the same  tone of voice he used when he told me I  couldn't seek a job in an envelope factory  during the summer break between grade 10  and 11, in 1963. He expected me to be privUeged, I was raised to marry someone with  it, and then to profit by it. It was another 12  years before I figured out what was wrong  with his picture.  This novel is about women whose fathers  may have been far less genteel drunks than  mine. Women who were themselves clearer  than I about the possibiUties from which  they might choose. Perhaps my colour and  class privUege make me the wrong person  to review this book, because in some ways I  read it as an outsider. But at the same time,  I'm grateful to Jana WiUiams for taking the  time to carefully tell the story of her experience in boot camp. She doesn't sensationalize, she doesn't preach, she just tells it.  And the story has the loud ring of authenticity to it. The "real" world doesn't infringe because boot camp is a world all its  own. For some young women, boot camp did  nothing to offset the racism and heterosexism that enclose our Uves. And for others,  boot camp was a way on—a way to reach  out for and claim dreams.  Random Acts presents  Cinderella Ballroom  (near Main St.) Arts  /^^^^%^m*^m  The games:  If 11 be a gay time  by Kinesis Writer  If you Uve in Vancouver it wUl be hard to  miss Celebration '90 —Gay Games III and  Cultural Festival. From August 4-11, more  than 10,000 lesbians and gay men from all  over the world wUl be arriving to participate in athletic, social and cultural events.  There wUl be unequaled opportunities  to absorb culture, fresh air, sports statistics and newspaper coverage focused on lesbians. There may be too much from which  to choose, but what the heck. If you haven't  ^ned up to participate, or ar-  iged to take a week off work (or a week off  Ufe), see what you can do and start working out a schedule. Everybody is welcome  to participate.  The Cultural Festival begins before the  athletic events with the Lesbian and Gay  Film Festival, a play at the Vancouver East  Cultural Centre, Dancelebration, Artcele-  bration '90 and plays at the FirehaU Theatre (see BuUetin Board for more detaUs).  Souhdc  The Sound & Furies Womyn's Coffeehouse wUl be a place to relax in the midst  of the Games. Located at the WISE Club,  1882 Adanac St., S&F wUl run August 5-9  from 5 pm on, with food served untU 7:45,  and entertainment from 8 to midnight or so.  Somewhere to go to sit quietly and figure  out what you'd do next, or what you just  did.  Organizers Pat Hogan, Jackie Crossland  and Jean Caha envision a smoke and alcohol free venue for women to meet and so-  ciaUze. Each evening entertainment wUl be  offered by local and visiting performers. At  time of writing, Connie Kuhns, Lovie Sizzle and Frances Wasserlein are Uned up for  stints as MC's, and AYA!, Sue McGowan,  Lovie Sizzle and Andrea Kohl are some  of the local performers expected. Toronto  singer/songwriter Cate Friesen, San Francisco's K.C. Frogge, and lesbian comedian  Sally Sheklow from Eugene, Oregon wUl  grace the stage at the WISE HaU along with  others. Tickets wUl be on a shding scale ($3-  $10), avaUable at the door.  Look for Sound & Furies' program at the  end of July, and consider purchasing raffle tickets to support the coffeehouse (the  prizes include 2 passes to the WestCoast  Women's Music and Comedy Festival in  Yosemite). H you want to perform, submit  a demo tape, or to get additional information contact Pat Hogan at 253-7189.  There wUl be art exhibitions, readings and  panels, musical and performance events at  venues all over town, dances and coffeehouses and plays and discos and concerts.  The Opening Ceremonies on August 4 in  BC Place Stadium wUl be a highlight of the  whole week. Just think, thousands of athletes, hundreds of voices in massed choirs,  the amalgamated Lesbian and Gay Bands of  North America (you can see them again on  Wednesday), and thousands of spectators  cheering them all on. There wUl be the requisite number of "big names," but the sheer  quantity of queer folks, with their friends  and famiUes in tow, wUl be outstanding.  From Monday the 5th to the foUowing  Saturday, athletic events wUl be held inside  and out aU over Vancouver. UnUke the previous two Gay Games in San Francisco, almost half the registered athletes (49 percent, to be exact) are lesbians. And those  women wUl participate in every kind of  event, ranging from Equestrian to Darts,  from Croquet to WrestUng. In aU, 29 sports  wUl be avaUable. (Think of something it's  possible to call a sport and it's probably  on the hst.) The official Gay Games Program, complete with venues and times, wiU  be avaUable around town after July 25th.  Can you resist the notion of a 100  team voUeyball tournament? How about  ice hockey exhibition games, four days of  track and field, a three day women's squash  competition, plus slowpitch, fastpitch and  physique competitions. Women wUl be diving from high boards, swimming butterfly,  playing water polo, racewalking, marathon  running, and wheeUng the 10K PhysicaUy  Challenged course around Stanley Park.  If aU of this seems too much Uke hard  work (even as a spectator) then consider the  Words Without Borders Literary and Book  Festival to be held at the SFU Downtown  Campus in Harbour Centre, beginning with  the Literary Gala Sunday at 8 pm and ending Friday afternoon. There wUl be everything from poetry readings to discussions of  lesbian erotica to panels on censorship and  other pohtical issues.  A remarkable set of lesbian writers wUl be  on hand, including Nicole Brossard, Makeda  SUvera, Chrystos, Jane Rule, Beth Brant,  Sarah Schulman, Minnie Bruce Pratt,  Dionne Brand, Dorothy AlUson, Daphne  Marlatt, Betsy Warland, Barbara Wilson,  Sky Lee, Seni Seneviratne, Maya Chowdhry  and Shahidah Janjua. Alison Bechdel (a  dyke to watch out for), Nora D. Randall and  Lovie Sizzle wUl remind us of what is funny  about our Uves. And Kitty Tsui, Chrystos and Anne Cameron wUl present a panel  called "CUt Lit- -Lesbian Erotica." But be  warned, the rooms at SFU Harbour Centre  are small—get tickets early!  Tuesday evening, the Commodore Ballroom wUl be the site of a mixed dance organized by the Vancouver Lesbian Connection. Rumours of the Big Wave from Seattle and Vancouver's Bolero Lava wiU play  for your dancing enjoyment on that great  horsehair sprung floor. GAYLA! A Celebration of Women's Culture is on stage at the  Orpheum on Friday night. Kate Chnton wUl  MC an evening of entertainment by Vancouver's Heidi Archibald with the Blatant  Blues Band, and Japanese-Canadian drummers Katari Taiko, from New York City,  Betty (a zany trio of cabaret style performers) and home-town favourite, Ferron.  Saturday, August 11 is the Closing Ceremonies at the stadium. The sight of us aU together wiU no doubt bring goosebumps and  thrills: at having given our communities and  the world such a remarkable week, such an  open celebration of being lesbian and gay.  Most athletic events will be free  to spectators; consult the program for  details. Cultural events and Opening/Closing Ceremonies require tickets  and advance tickets are recommended.  Order through Ticketmaster (604) 280-  4444> or contact the Gay Games office  at (604) 684-2637.  Maya Chowdhry  KINESIS  Jul  ily/Aug. 90 19 ss**s******^^^^^  Arts  Filming of a Family  Witnessing the unsaid, unseen  SWEETIE  a film by Jane Campion  by Shelly Quick  H the maxim "We choose our friends but  our family is thrust upon us" fiUs you with a  mixture of reUef and despair, you must not  miss Jane Campion's feature film Sweetie.  After directing only four shorts, this New  Zealand-born director has created a cinematic tour-de-force which captures the angry tenderness a browse through the family  photo-album might evoke.  The screenplay was co-written by Campion and Gerard Lee and is largely an exploration of family dynamics and dysfunction  with a focus on the interplay between two  sisters. What makes the film more entertaining than painful is its grotesque flavour.  Campion pursues her themes with a relent  less and sometimes brutal eye for the absurdity of truth. When Sweetie's sister Kay  (Karen Colson) is questioned about her reluctance to admit that Sweetie (Genevieve  Lemon) is her sister, she rephes: "She was  just born, I didn't have anything to do with  it". Kay's summation of sisterhood is so absurdly truthful you could laugh and cry at  the same time.  In Kay and Sweetie we see opposites,  women who would have nothing to do with  each other if they didn't share the same  parents. Kay appears to be a quirky mystic  who looks for meaning in dreams and tea-  leaf readings. Sweetie plays the role of an  egocentric sensuaUst who concerns herself  with more corporeal matters. As the story  unfolds, however, we begin to wonder how  much influence each sister has had on the  other. Both women spin around the same  family axis and whUe Sweetie exploits and  terrorizes her relatives, Kay tries to hide  from them and quietly acquiesces to her  parent's demands.  As an audience we are never sure what  is at the root of this family's unhealthiness.  The movie begins with Kay talking about  her fear of trees. She imagines that someone might be watching her from behind fo-  Uage or that roots from trees may burst up  and split the concrete that has been laid  for the foundations of homes or sidewalks.  When her lover Louis (Tom Lycos) plants  an anniversary tree in their backyard, Kay  clandestinely uproots it and aUows it to die  in her closet.  This fear of trees may be a metaphorical voicing of Kay's fear that her family wUl  push its way through the concrete barrier  she has tried to buUd between herself and  them. It may signal that her mind is repressing something—possibly a memory of  incest. In the movie's most chilUng scene we  watch as Kay catches a glimpse of Sweetie  H ■. JbFIJM    Hk  ^^^^r^^^Oi^^ J^HLV    ^^H  1 as                                                                           • ^  ■               mJkm                Mr  /   f  bathing their visiting father. No words are  spoken as Sweetie drops the soap and then  reaches for it below the surface of the water. Their father, who is perfectly capable of bathing himself, remains motionless, j  The scene forces the audience to reconsider |  what has been, up to this point, a clever,  grotesquely funny exploration of family dy-  StiU, I can't say decisively that Sweetie  is a film about incest. There is no neat Uttle explanation given for this bizarre collection of characters. Campion has clearly rejected the role of "director-as-god." When  asked about her film, she has rephed, "If  really hard to say what it's about because it  sort of begs that question." Everyone in this  movie, including the director, has a Umited  point of view. What is unsaid and unseen  becomes as important as what we witness.  One of the most dehghtful distortions in  the film comes from the other side of the  camera. The cinematography in Sweetie is  unusual and works weU to unsettle the audience's feehng of being an omniscient viewer.  Close-ups only partiaUy reveal what they  are focusing on, so that we are forced to  watch feet and bodies without the benefit of seeing facial expressions. Sometimes  we hover above the subject matter and  sometimes our vision is partiaUy obscured  by doors or walls. In a very real sense,  Campion and her cinematographer Sally  Bongers have used the camera as an active  participant in the film's narrative.  Campion has successfuUy broken the  rules of mainstream cinema without forfeiting artistic integrity. Her transgressions  are not gratuitous in the way that those of  many male "alternative" filmmakers often  are. Campion uses her alternative methods  to largely entertaining ends. In short, this  is an absurdly grotesque, cuttingly tragic,  thoroughly enjoyable film about the poUtics  Df family.  Genevieve Lemon (Sweetie) and Karen Colson (Kay)  DR. PAULETTE ROSCOE  NATUROPATHIC PHYSICIAN  FAMILY PRACTICE  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  11 E. BROADWAY AVENUE  VANCOUVER, B.C. V5T 1V4  873-1991  m      CARDS #-« |fr^,  avrecords is  Vfljpheapt  OCTOPUS EAST  1146Commercial:;: 253-0913  PURCHASE AT A COOP LIKE OURS.  0 ^^   Stationery & Office Supplies • Artists' Materials • Copying • Facsimile • Electronic Publishing  ^^5?    1460 Commercial Drive • Ph 255-9559 • Fax 253-3073  -KINESIS    July Arts  ,*2^^*^%2%2*2^2%m  Vancouver films premiere:  Five Feminist Minutes  by Susan Edelstein  To celebrate the 15th anniversary of Studio D (the National Film Board's feminist  studio) 17 finalists were chosen out of 240  applicants to create a "five minute feminist  film."  "We asked Canadian women to tell us  what was on their minds and in their  hearts," said Studio D's Rina FraticeUi.  Vancouver was the source of three of the  17 films, and those three premiered in late  May.  "The idea was to prompt people intc  talking about [sexual abuse in the family],"  said Kim Blain. The end result is a frank,  but eloquent examination of very disturbing subject matter.  New Shoes  New Shoes: An Interview In Exactly  Five Minutes, by Ann Marie Fleming  demonstrates how documentary film processes are as manipulative and voyeuristic  as other media processes.  The film presents the viewer with a white,  l Blaine and Lorna Boschman  Family Secrets  Family Secrets by Kim Blain and Lorna  Boschman is a semi-fictional account of a  woman's memories of sexual abuse. Blain  and Boschman have done independent film  work in the past, but this was their first  major collaborative piece. The blending of  styles and techniques resulted in a thought-  provoking, professionaly-crafted film.  The opening scene leads you into an endearing vignette of a young girl fishing with  her grandpa. The dead calm of the lake surrounds you, and you become seduced by the  rich cinematography. Suddenly you're jolted  middle-class woman who casually recounts  the story of a love relationship gone wrong.  As the story unfolds the woman discloses  various accounts of violence and harassment  she encountered as a result of attempting to  end an engagement.  Fleming manipulates the viewer away  from the story by injecting footage of a  fairy princess/bride leaping around in sarcastic ecstasy. Had the interviewee bought  into the idea of finding prince charming? In  retrospect, she remembers that even the engagement diamond on her finger possessed  a huge flaw. As you're steered away from  the idea of happUy-ever-after, this soured  Sook-Yin Lee's first attempt at film making  is a powerful, multi-layered piece  out of this tranquil setting by the disturbing memories of sexual abuse.  "The viewer is lead on just as the chUd  was. You're set up," said Lorna Boschman  in a recent interview. Things may appear to  be "normal" on the outside, but inside lurk  deep secrets.  As the film progresses, the discourse of  sexual abuse takes on a generic quality, allowing the viewers to position themselves in  the memories. Optical printing techniques  were used to create distanced facial reflections instead of having actual footage of the  three characters' faces. The mother, daughter, or grandfather could be a part of manj  people's past, and the effects make it diffi-  cult to distance yourself from the issue.  e takes an even uglier turn. Her possessive ex-fiancee attempts to murder her—  he shoots her in the back—and then commits suicide. As the detaUs are disclosed we  are informed that the man has shot his head  off. Brain matter has splattered everywhere  and the interviewer, Fleming, lets out a belt  of nervous laughter.  Fleming said the inappropriate response  was dehberate, not flippant. It was meant  to Ulustrate how people are often unsure of  how to react to something as catastrophic  as death.  As the symbolic watch ticks on, we are  reminded of the orchestration involved in  making this five minute documentary. Flem  ing reminds the woman that only seconds q  are remaining in the interview and the 'new |  shoes' haven't been discussed. (I won't give g  away their significance.) The closing mo- §  ments echo the inappropriate response of <I  the laughter sequence: viewers are inten- -|  tionaUy left squirming in their seats, under- J  going the distancing reaction that can typ-  icaUy accompany a difficult emotion.  Escapades of One  Particular Mr Noodle  Escapades of One Particular Mr Noodle by Sook-Yin Lee is Lee's first attempt at  film making and is a powerful, multi-layered  piece.  The film is based on Lee's summer job  as a ten foot tall walking noodle advertisement for a pasta bar. The job became a sociological experiment in comparing forms of  racism and aUenation. Her noodle persona  made a point of never talking, and by grunting or making animal noises she avoided  being a gender specific noodle. In an interview, Lee talked of how this experience  of 'being different' reminded her of certain  chUdhood incidents. As a Chinese-Canadian  growing up in a white neighbourhood, she  experienced the insensitive teasing she received from other chUdren. The desire to  look white and blend in was a fleeting chUdhood desire.  Growing up with the influence of two different cultures forced Lee to create a space  for herself. Unable to speak Chinese fluently  was a part of this reality. Mr Noodle, a noodle standing tall among people,  Lee's personal experience of difference.  The film takes a comical approach to  some very difficult issues. At times you get  so caught up in the escapades of this loiter-  Anne Marie Flemini  ing noodle you almost forget the aUenation  being discussed. At these points Lee gently  manipulates the viewer back into the cross-  cultural realities she is portraying.  As the film ends, we are left with Lee  speaking in broken Chinese to her neighbours, two young Chinese boys. The boys  speak no EngUsh, but the three are nevertheless communicating and enjoying eachl  other's company. The boys seem to portray  the reverse mirrored reflection of cultural  blending.  This fall, Vancouverites will have the  opportunity to view all 17 Five Feminist Minutes.  Watch for the date and  KINESIS  July/Au9.. >s*s$ss***s$******^$^^  Arts  A real Fruitcake  Taking menopause to the cleaners  by Millie Strom  Exaggerated red curvy lips, reminiscent  of comedian LuciUe BaU, brighten the stage  via the wave-length of Vancouver performer  Txi Whizz. Her one-woman show, Forbidden Fruitcake, brightens the future of  women approaching that dastardly, unspoken stage of their hves—menopause.  Txi (pronounced "Chee") Whizz is a 46-  year-old clown. "I hesitate with that word,"  she says, "because the tradition of clowning that exists in Europe is not understood here." Whizz explains that in Northern America, "clown" conjures the image of  a Ronald McDonald, a figure dealing with a  commercial situation, not the human condi  tion. But on the European stage or circus,  clowning possesses a subtle, pohtical content. Traditionally, clowns—or fools—in the  European court could speak the truth and  not end up in jail as an ordinary citizen may.  Whizz has incorporated her clown, comedy and theatre background, the accent  of her grandmother (a Pohsh immigrant)  and a personal issue, into a performance  that flips the dial from the cold rinse cycle back to the hot hfe cycle. Whizz brings  menopause out of the closet and into a  laundromat. She recently performed at the  Great West Coin Laundry in Vancouver,  launching a Great Trans-Canadian Laundromat Tour.  Although the off-beat location has lured  extra media coverage for her, it's the content that doesn't get fluffed and folded  away. Her stage personna is Trudy Fruitcake, a neighbourly 49-year-old laundromat  employee. She is the proud owner of an  unatrophied vagina and asks her audience,  "You mean I was takink such good care of  it aU des years, but that finally I'm gettink  a trophy?"  Trudy begins by telhng about her husband deserting the family. All that was left  was his umbreUa but Trudy loses it on a bus.  Her buxomly figure is transformed via a musical strip-tease into an accordion player de-  Uvering a torch song dedicated to the umbreUa: "I wonder who holink you now,  wonder who holink you tight, I hope she's  treatink you right."  Not just the accent and song, but the syntax of words give Trudy vitality. Trudy's research on menopause leads her to find that  there are only two books about it in the U-  brary. After she phones the menopause hot-  Une, she realizes her hot flashes are a sign  of entering a rites of passage. By not ingesting hormones, Trudy refuses to accomodate the medical profession's attempt to induce a youthful eternity. Instead, one could  fry eggs over circus-days flames devoured  by Trudy: "I Ukink the rites of passage, I'm  Ukink these hot flashes."  And Whizz is glad she has aUowed her  hormones to shift. The passion and success of Trudy Fruitcake has rippled not only  older female audiences, but she has quite a  young foUowing as weU.  One side of the effect of the show, in her  personal Ufe, was that her companion and  partner moved out. But Whizz is excited  about soloing because it gives her Ucense to  cook up her flaming red-head for audiences  locally and in CaUfornia and New York this  summer.  Whizz was born in New York and named  Barbara Gross. She is the eldest of three  daughters and began her career at the  New York Shakespeare Festival. Later she  founded Abrakadabra Theatre Company  and toured Europe for nine years. She finally settled in Vancouver in 1981 and  founded Fools Theatre. Her name changed  to Barbara Hannah when she married, but  later she wanted her own name—Txi, and  then Txi Whizz.  Trudy Fruitcake first emerged at an Expo  performance. Forbidden Fruitcake was developed on a Canada CouncU Exploration  grant. Whizz's application stated that the  development of the show was a better option than hormonal replacement therapy.  She had learned that some cultures view  the menopausal woman as an elder—a respected position, unhke the dominant culture's portrayal of older women as outdated and useless.  Although Whizz's appearance and comedian fever resembles LucUle Ball, Whizz's  work encompasses a scope that HoUywood'  clown never came near. Whizz comments  on the feminist perspective underlying her  work: "This piece presents a clarification  of information, and presents choices for  women. Trudy has the spirit that she can  deal with anything and the logic to think  for herself."  Whizz says that a clown's job is to reflect  the human condition, but first one must experience it. "Women have experienced the  human condition at its most trying. But  we've learned more from our position than  from a position of power." Director and  actor June Keevil who directed Whizz in  Fruitcake, says "A show should not be didactic. It's easy for the clown, Trudy, to act  out and get away with it. It's a celebration."  Whizz feels she has spent most of her  adult Ufe trying to address the general imbalance that exists for women. "Working in  a profession that is hard for women, Uving  in a world that is hard to women, and now  at a time that is perceived to be a woman's  useless stage, demands risks."And that has  been difficult for Whizz. Perhaps her background in jugghng and riding a unicycle has  taught her how to balance it aU.  Whizz has two chUdren, Adad, 18 and  Kefi, 14. Both her son and daughter have accompanied her on the stage. In fact, Whizz's  daughter was toilet-trained on a European  stage. Her unorthodox approach to parenting leaves her critical of the educational system. She claims it does not prepare people  for parenting. "Courses in decision-making,  crisis resolution, and family participation  should be part of our education."  Whizz has a determination, hke Trudy,  to make both her career and motherhood  work. She claims it was easy to raise a boy  because the world is equipped for them. But  raising her daughter, Whizz had to rethink  everything she told her. She wanted to pass  on things that would help her in her Ufe. Her  daughter began menstruation when Whizz  stopped hers. The invention of Trudy Fruitcake aUowed Whizz to "pass on the torch."  That's one hot tampon.  Ipook^mrtel  UNDER NEW MANAGEMENT  Excellent selection of over 40,000  gently used books  Feminist • Literature • Philosophy «  General Selection  Discount  with this ad  Tues.- Wed. 10 am - 6 pm  Thurs. - Sun., 10 am - 9 pm  Closed Mondays  Poetry  20% discount  with valid  student cards  1444 Kingsway, Vancouver, B.C. V5N 2R5  879-2247  WOMAN OWNED AND OPERATED  Trudy Fruitcake, aka Txi Whizz  2l\ir>bbl J July/Aug. ////////////////^^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  Letters  Grave  miscarriage  pf justice  Kinesis:  I would Uke to call your attention to a  grave miscarriage of justice. The issue I am  addressing is wife battering.  My name is Sandra Carey (nee Deagle).  On September 7, 1989 in Surrey Provincial  Court, I hstened in horror to a man convicted on two counts of assaulting me, and  then handed a $500 fine. It was pointed out  to me by Crown Counsel that I was just a  witness to them, not a victim. He further assured me that he had bent over backwards  for me just to lay these charges. After the  sentencing, a different Crown Counsel advised me not to complain about the sentence: "we were lucky to get a guilty verdict" and "we shouldn't be seen to be questioning the Judge's decision". WeU, I am  questioning it!  The government spends, what they perceive is an excessive amount on Health and  Social Services for treatment and housing  for victims of violence. The burden on the  taxpayer is increasing steadily due to this  "slap on the wrist" pohcy foUowed by the  Courts. This leniency virtuaUy guarantees  the continued growth of this disease.  The pain, suffering and damage inflicted  on the victims and their Uves continues for  years, whUe the perpetrator is given a clear  message that for a paltry amount of money,  he has the right to victimize woman after  woman. No therapy is mandated, no jaU  time is sentenced to impress upon him so  ciety's lack of acceptance of this terrorism  and violence.  In a civiUzed society one would assume  that both sexes have the right to Uve a  free and safe Ufe. This no longer applies in  Canada, if it ever did. I object strenuously  to this ienient sentencing that is employed  aU too frequently. I ask that you assist me  in bringing pressure to this issue, and this  case. Non-activity always helps the aggressor, never the victim. He is now free to do  this again, as are so many others Uke him,  they are constantly released by the Judicial  System of Canada.  Sandra Carey  Surrey, BC  Misinformed,  but still  wondering why  Kinesis:  You quite rightly mentioned in your Corrections column last month that my letter  "Why Pay to Protest" (AprU, 1990, Kinesis ) was misinformed. Apparently, because  of the location of this year's march, at the  last minute the International Women's Day  Committee was told they did not have to  buy a permit.  The point was that they were, again, wUling, as they have been in previous years, to  hand over a large sum of money to be allowed to march. The issue I'd hoped would  be addressed was why we should even consider paying to protest governmental injustices.  Renee Rodin  Vancouver, BC  ommmimirjiimenm..  presents  Celebration  of Women's Culture  Kate Clinton ▼ Heidi Archibald  Katari Taiko ▼Betty  Ferron  Friday, August 10th, 1990 7:30 pm  Orpheum Theatre, Vancouver BC, Canada  ,j» TICKETS AW1UBLE AT ^Bum^tmrmmtt (604)280-4444  fjSSSf OR Celebration '90 TICKET use (604) 68-CAHE5 (604) 684-2637  ££ftrik     $22.25/$12.25/$7.25 Tickets subect to service ciurce  Non-disabled  women have a  lot to learn  Kinesis:  Dear DisAbled Women's Network Canada,  Thank you for inviting me to participate  in an exceUent conference. Though I have  known about DAWN for some time and  have worked recently on projects with individual members of DAWN, the conference  gave me my first real exposure to your organization. It also gave me an opportunity to  meet more of the many impressive women  who are DAWN members.  I have come away from the conference  full of admiration and enthusiasm. It is an  important achievement to bring together  women with so many different disabihties  from aU parts of Canada. Listening to both  formal and informal discussions, I felt how  keenly the women attending wanted to be  together, to Usten to each other, and to  forge a common poUtical voice. There is a  wUUngness to work together and a sophistication of analysis among the DAWN members that is exciting.  The workshops I attended were extremely interesting. The workshop on reproductive technology was exceUent. I heard  very thoughtful presentations on employment, and institutional hving, and in all the  groups the discussion was Uvely. The participants contributed in very personal and insightful ways to discussion and the formu  lation of recommendations. I learned a lot  and I was very interested and moved by the  experiences which women recounted and the  analysis of them which they offered.  Non-disabled women have such a lot to  learn about women with disabiUties and  from women with disabiUties. In addition to  your primary goal of providing a network for  women with disabiUties, DAWN also provides a way for non-disabled women to make  contact with women with disabilities and  to begin to learn from you. I was heartened by the attendance at the conference  of Judy Rebick from the National Action  Committee on the Status of Women and  Christie Jefferson from the Women's Legal  Education and Action Fund. Their interest  in DAWN may mean that issues of women  with disabiUties wUl take a larger place on  the agenda of women's organizations.  I was also pleased to be there as a Board  Member of the Canadian DisabUity Rights  CouncU with Yvonne Peters, the National  Coordinator, because the CDRC has an interest in working closely with DAWN on legal strategies which wiU advance the equality of women with disabiUties.  I have organized some conferences myself  and know how much work is involved. I also  know how much work is involved in starting a new organization and bringing it to  DAWN's level of development. I congratulate you and DAWN for the important work  you have done.  I have sent a copy of this letter to Nancy  Lewand at the Department of the Secretary  of State. Your funders should know that  your work has an important impact.  Shelagh Day  Vancouver, BC  (T  VOICES FOR THE  WILDERNESS  August 4th-6th, 1990  Gordon Lightfoot  Holly Arntzen  Long John Baldry  Blue Rodeo  Bob's Your Uncle  Bolera Lava  Jim Byrnes  David Campbell  Andrew Cash  The Dots  Fatala  Stephen Fearing  54 - 40  Gary Fjellgaard  Bill Henderson  Paul Horn  Paul Hyde Band  Paul Janz  Bud McGregor  Margo Kane  Loreena McKennitt  : the Mt. Currie Rodeo Grounds, 30 minutes north of Whistler, BC  Sue Medley  Metropolis Dance Co.  Nyetz  Lorraine Segato  Joanne Shenandoah  Penny Sidor  Skywalk  Sound Tribe  Spirit of the West  Terri Lynn Ryan  Willie Thrasher  lan Tyson  Barney Bentall & the  Legendary Hearts  Northern Bear Clan  Dancers  Chief Ruby Dunstan  Miles Richardson  Native Elders &  Spiritual Leaders  and many more!  FREE Camping. ChUdren  under 12 FREE. Seniors over  60 FREE.  Traditional drum & dance  groups, native elders &  spiritual leaders, AND special  children's entertainment!  Tickets ARE limited.  Sold out last year! Tickets at  all Ticketmaster outlets. (280-  4444)  •Earlybird tickets until June  30th: 3 DAY ONLY = $35  •Regular priced tickets:  1 Day Pass = $20; 2 Day Pass =  $35;  3 Day Pass = $50  (*plus Ticketmaster service  charges)  Other Vancouver outlets:  Black Swan Records, Highlife  Records, Mountain Equipment  Coop, Western Canada Wilderness Committee, Coast  Mountain Sports, The Chiefs  Mask, Taiga Sports.  Victoria Outlets: Sierra Club,  WCWC.  Whistler Village Outlets:  Jim McConkey Sport Shop,  Whistler Resort Association.  TAKE THE BUS! REDUCE  TRAFFIC & POLLUTION!  Stein Festival Express tickets  ($30 round trip from Vancouver) at Ticketmaster!  Tickets:  280-4444  For more information call:  STEIN VALLEY  FESTIVAL  Garbage-free Event.   No Alcohol or Drugs.   Proceeds to the Stein Valley Tribal Heritage Park.  l\liNbjl J     July /Aug. 90 Bulletin Board  US*-* ,W  A SMALL PRICE TO PLAY  For as little as $5.00* you can be part of the world's largest  multi-sport and cultural festival to take place in 1990!  During August 4-11, Vancouver will host exciting celebrations with Opening and Closing Ceremonies, GAYLA! A  Celebration of Women's Culture, Dancelebration, 29 sporting events and much more!  For details, contact the Celebration '90 Office at (604)-684-  3303 or write to 1170 Bute Street, Vancouver, BC V6E 1Z6  Be Part of  the Celebration!  Gay Games III  and Cultural Festival  CELEBRATION '90  AINES1S  Coming to Vancouver during the games  T^y The best of  "^i contemporary  gay and lesbian films!  screen  August 3 to 12,1990  At the Pacific Cinematheque,  1131 Howe Street  For more information call 684-ARTS /////////////////M^^^  ////////////////////^^^^^  BULLETIN BOARD  READ THIS  All listings must be received no later than  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Listings are limited to 50 words and  should include a contact name and telephone number for any clarification that may  be required. Listings should be typed or  neatly handwritten, double-spaced on 8 1/2  by 11 paper. Listings will not be accepted  over the telephone. Groups, organizations  and individuals eligible for free space in the  Bulletin Board must be, or have, non-profit  objectives. Other free notices will be items  of general public interest and will appear at  the discretion of Kinesis .  Classified are $8 for the first 50 words or  portion thereof, $4 for each additional 25  words or portion thereof. Deadline for classifieds is the 18th of the month preceding  publication. Kinesis will not accept classifieds over the telephone. All classifieds must  be prepaid.  For Bulletin Board submissions send  copy to Kinesis Attn: Bulletin Board, 301-  1720 Grant Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L  2Y6. For more information call 255-5499.  VENTS  EVENT SIE VENT SiE V EN T S  VSW/KINESIS ON VACATION  The offices of Vancouver Status of  Women and Kinesis are closed during the  month of July. We'll be back in August.  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis? We want to get involved  with you, too. Come to the news group  meeting and help plan our next is-  sue.Tues. July 31 at 3:30 pm at our office, #301-1720 Grant St. If you can't  make this meeting, call Nancy at 255-  5499 to arrange another time. No experience necessary.  HERMANAS/SISTERS  An International Perspective on the  Struggle for Women's Rights, July 6-  8, at Harrison Hot Springs. This issues' symposium of the Harrison Festival of the Arts will present workshops  on women and poverty, war, and human  rights abuse in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean. Speakers include  Rosario Ibarra de Piedra of Mexico and  Rosemary Brown, Nora Patrich and Lee  Maracle of Canada. Cost: $40, including  reception, refreshments and lunch. Info  and registration at 796-3664.  ART EXHIBIT  Carole Itter—Assemblage, and Sandra  Semchuk—Photographic Sequences. At  the Contemporary Art Gallery, 555 Hamilton, until July 14. Informal talk with the  artists Thurs. July 5 at 8 pm. Call 681-  2700 for more info.  ANCIENT CULTURES • HOLLY ARNTZEN  ALLEN DOBB • SANTIAGO  ROY BAILEY • THE BIRDOGS  S SPECIAL GUESTS  WOMEN'S HEALTH. GLOBALLY  The Third International Women and  Health Meeting will be held in Manilla,  the Philippines, on Nov. 3-10, 1990.  The theme this year is "In Search of  Balance Perspectives and Global Solidarity for Women's Health and Reproductive Rights." The conference is being organized this year by women's organizations in the Philippines. For more information, contact Celilia Diocson in Vancouver (604) 464-7899.  RORY BLOCK  Brings her show of gospel hymns, folk and  country songs and Delta country blues to  the Van. East Cultural Ctr., 1895 Venables, Aug. 28 at 8:30 pm. Tix $10, reserve through 254-9578.  THIRD ANNUAL GALA  Victoria Status of Women and Hot  Flashes Cafe are gearing up for the social  event of the season. The 3rd annual Lesbian Dinner Dance, Sept. 29, will feature  Key Change. Tix on sale Aug 1 at SWAG;  all out-of-town tix must be purchased before Sept. 14. Dinner/dance $30, dance  only $12. Mail cheques/money orders to:  SWAG, #320-620 View St., Victoria, BC.  "GYASAGO"  (The Way It Began): A trickster/clown  journey into Canadian history. The Van.  East Cultural Ctr. and United Intercultural Theatre present this re-exploration  of the Canadian past using Native Tricksters, European Clowns, Storytellers, and  music. Written and directed by Alison  McAlpine. July 4-14, Mon.- Sat. 8:30  pm, 2-for-one Wed. matinee at 2 pm. Tix  $10-12. Call 254-9578 for more info.  POETRY READING  Claire Harris, award winning poet from  Alberta, will read from her work Sat.  July 28, 8 pm, at the Native Education Ctr., 285 E. 5th Ave. Sponsored by  the Congress of Black Women. Admission  free. Call Women & Words, 872-8014 for  more info.  WOMEN & WORDS  In conjunction with West Word VI, instructors Sandy Duncan, Claire Harris,  and Heather Menzies will read their work  Tues. July 31, 7:30 pm. Former instructors Beth Brant and Dionne Brand will  read on Fri., Aug. 3, 7:30 pm. A panel  on Racism in Writing will be chaired by  Claire Harris Sat. Aug. 4, 2 pm. At the  Cdn. International College, 2420 Dollar-  ton Hwy., North Van. Admission free to  all events. More info at 872-8014.  DRAWING THE LINE  This interactive photography exhibit that  explores issues of censorship and lesbian  sexuality opens Fri. Aug 3, 8 pm, at the  Western Front, 303 E. 8th Ave. Viewers are asked to comment and 'draw the  line' where they put their limits regarding  sexual imagery. A Kiss & Tell production  by Persimmon Blackbridge, Lizard Jones,  and Susan Stewart.  POWELL STREET FESTIVAL  This 14th annual two-day celebration of  Japanese-Canadian culture and heritage  will take place Aug. 4-5 in Oppenheimer  Park (400 Block Powell St.) This year the  festival will emphasize the theme of the  community's active role in its natural environment. Call 682-4335 for more info.  BENEFITTING ALL  A panel discussion on strategies for Lesbian and Gay Family Benefits. To be held  Wed. Aug 8, 7:30-10 pm at the Robson Square Media Ctr. Auditorium. Admission $3-6.  BOYCOTT SHELL  Join the next demo against Shell, a  company that still does business with  apartheid in South Africa. Wed. July 18  at 4:30 pm at the Shell Station at Arbutus and W. Broadway. Call 866-1465 for  info.  THE FOLK FESTIVAL  Vancouver's 13th Annual Folk Music Festival runs July 13-15 at Jericho Beach  Park. Hundreds of performers including  Frank Chickens, Kathryn Tickell, Sheila  Gostick and Ranch Romance. Tix available at gate, at usual outlets or call 604-  879-2931.  RANDOM ACTS  In community with Celebratibn '90 Gay  Games III, Random Acts presents "The  Fairy Princess and the Princess Fool",  written and directed by Nora Randall and  Jackie Crossland. At the Cinderella Ballroom, 185 E. 11 (near Main), Aug. 5-10,  8 pm. Tix $10, pay-what-you-can Aug.  10. Reservations at 682-3109.  GAY GAMES DANCE PARTY  The Van. Lesbian Ctr. presents a dance at  the Commodore Ballroom, Tues. Aug. 7  at 8 pm. Live bands are Rumors of the Big  Wave and Bolero Lava, with an appearance by Lovie Sizzle and music by Holly.  Tix $10-20 sliding scale, at Celebration  '90, VLC, Women's Bookstore, Little Sisters. Childcare available offsite by calling  254-8458 before July 17.  VOICING, CREATING, CHANGING  The BC/Yukon Society of Transition  Houses is holding a women's art show/benefit Aug. 17-24 at Women in Focus  Gallery. All welcome to attend and explore the themes of change, power, celebration and creation. For more info, call  Pamela at 669-6943.  WOMEN IN TRADES  A weekend social gathering Aug. 18-19  with kayaking, BBQ, and camping out on  the Sunshine Coast. All women interested  in trades, technologies, and blue collar  work are welcome. For more info, call Valerie at (1) 886-8704.  WEST COAST EAGLES HEALING  RETREAT  with Shirley Turcotte. September 27-  30, 1990 on Gambier Island. A retreat  designed for survivors who have already  done some work around sexual abuse issues. The cost of $350 includes food, accomodation and transportation. For registration or further information call Penny  Warded at 875-0779.  MARY KELLY: INTERIM  Mary Kelly's work has long been considered pivotal within feminist art and  theory. "Interim 1984-1989" is a re-  evaluation of representations of female  aging through imagery, text, and sculpture. Until July 30 at the Van. Art  Gallery.  REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES  July 9 meeting, 6:30 pm. Vancouver Status of Women, #301- 1720 Grant St. For  those preparing briefs for the Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies. Phone Catherine Martel, 255-6554  for information.  "MIXED MESSAGES"  A show by artists Claire Kujundzic and  Debbie Bryant. At the Van. East Cultural  Ctr. Art Gallery, 1895 Venables, Aug. 1-  Sept. 4. Gallery hours 10-6 daily and during events.  WOMEN'S FESTIVAL  West Kootenay Women's Association  Women's Festival. Saturday & Sunday  August 18 & 19, 1990. For more information please write to 507 Hall Street,  Nelson, B.C. V1L 1Z1 or phone 352-9916.  WOMEN AND THE EARTH  Day-long gathering raising ecological  consciousness/re-membering the Sacred  Feminine. July 21, Discovery Theatre,  Plaza of Nations. Starhawk, Judith Plant,  Gloria Nicolson, music, poetry, dance,  film and much more. Tix $15-25 sliding  scale, at Ariel Books, Circling Dawn Organic Foods, other outlets. Call 731-2378  for more info.  GROUPS  PLAYROOM VOLUNTEERS  Volunteers needed for the Mount Pleasant Family Centre to supervise children in  a playroom setting. Those interested may  bring one child of their own between 1-5  years. Call Louise or Helen at 872-6757,  Tuesday through Friday.  FRINGE FESTIVAL  The 6th annual Vancouver Fringe Festival, taking place Sept. 6-16, is seeking energetic volunteers. Public Relations, Box Office, Technical Assistance,  and more. Call Una O'Connell at 873-  3646.  TO YOUR HEALTH  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective needs volunteers. An opportunity to  be involved in women's health issues.  Please call 255-8284.  Gay Games III and Cultural Festival  DANCELEBRATION!  August 9 & 10, 8 pm»Commodore Ballroom  Ticket information 280-4444  KJNESIS      July/Aug. 90 25 Bulletin Board  ^^^^5^^^  ^5^^^^^^^^^^^  GROUP SIG ROUP SIG ROUP S ■SUBMISSIONS  SUPPORT GROUP  Support Group for Womyn Healing  from sexual abuse. Leaderless, non-  judgemental, confidential, supportive atmosphere. Prefer womyn who are in  or have done therapy. Meeting Tuesday  evenings. Leave first name message 251-  4233.  LESBIANS WITH CHILDREN  Weekly support group at Vancouver Lesbian Connection, 876 Commercial Dr.,  Tuesdays 9:30-11:30 am. Break isolation,  discuss the issues (custody, access, rela- i  tionships), have a coffee. Free childcare at  Eastside Family Place. If possible, please  pre- register for childcare through VLC,  254-8458, or Susan, 254-9164.  WOMEN IN TRADES  Meets the last Saturday of each month,  2 pm, in LI of the Brittania Comm. Ctr.  Library, 1661 Napier St. All women are  welcome.  MEDIAWATCH  National feminist organization concerned  about stereotypical, degrading, and violent images of girls and women in the  media. Works to improve and diversify  these images through lobbying, education, and advocacy. Monthly volunteer  meetings held: call Kristin Schoonover,  731-0457, for info.  GAY GAMES SOCCER  The largest gay soccer event ever held on  Mother Earth invite you to attend. Volunteers needed for site hospitality, equipment handling, scorekeeping and officiating. Aug 4-11, 1990 at Strathcona Park,  Van. If you'd like to feel the earth move,  call soccer co-chairs Francie and Melanie  at Celebration '90, 684- 3303.  SOUNDS &. FURIES  is Jean Caha, Jackie Crossland and Pat  Hogan. With VLC, they are creating a  womyn's coffee house during Gay Games.  Food, cappuccino, relaxing atmosphere,  smoke/alcohol free space, women entertainers, operating from approx. 5-11:30  pm at the WISE club, Sun. Aug. 5 -  Thurs. Aug 9. More volunteers and performers are needed - can you help? Call  Pat at 253-7189 for more info.  DISABLED LESBIANS &. GAYS  A support group for lesbians and gay men  with any type of disability will start in  July. Come talk about being gay in the  disabled community and being disabled  in the gay community. Group meets last  Monday of each month at Stanley Court,  West End Community Ctr., 870 Denman  St. (689-0571). Next meeting: July 30,  7:30 pm. For more info, call Dan Guinan  at  BC  Coalition  of the  Disabled,  875-  ©oafi.  (0  The Official Program of the Gay Games, detailing times and location of  sporting events, will be available around town after July 25th. Cultural events  and Opening/Closing Ceremonies require tickets and advance tickets are recommended. Order through Ticketmaster (604) 280-4444, or contact the Gay  Games office at (604) 684-2637.  JULY 28: Registration for athletes begins at the West End Community Centre,  870 Denman St.  JULY 31-AUG. 18: Artcelebration  '90, a juried exhibition of works by visual  artists in the Vancouver area at the Vancouver Community Arts Council Gallery.  Free.  AUG. 1-11: Evenings and matinees of  one-act plays including Radclyffe Hall  and The Well of Loneliness by Australian Sara Hardy. Fire Hall Theatre, 280  E. Cordova St.  AUG. 3-10: Lesbian and Gay Film Festival opens for eight days at the Pacific  Cinematheque, 1131 Howe St. Opening  gala on the 3rd. (See ad pg. 23 for details)  AUG. 4: Opening Ceremonies in BC  Place Stadium in the evening: the parade  of athletes, the roar of the crowds, the  choir singing. Too much fun.  AUG. 5-11: "Let the Games Begin:"  7 days of sporting events begin Aug. 5th.  Most events welcome spectators at no  charge; where admissions apply, tix cost  $5 or less. Venues will be listed in the Official Program due on July 25.  AUG. 5-10: A gala Sunday evening to  kick off the Literary Festival and Book  Fair which runs for 5 days at SFU's downtown campus, 555 W. Hastings St.  AUG. 5-10: The Fairy Princess and  the Princess Fool, is performed at the  Cinderella Ballroom (see details pg. 18.)  AUG. 5-9: Sound and Furies Womyn's  Coffeehouse: nightly entertainment and  goodies at the WISE Club, 1882 Adanac  St. Tix at door.  AUG. 6: San Francisco's City Swing  Band and the SF Tap Troupe take over  the Commodore Ballroom tonight, 870  Granville St.  AUG. 7: The Vancouver Lesbian Connection's mixed Dance at the Commodore,  (see details pg 25)  AUG. 8: In the Orpheum, the Lesbian  and Gay Bands of America offer an  evening of music and entertainment.  AUG. 9-10: Dancelebration! In the  evening, contemporary dance at the Commodore featuring Canadian dancers and  dance companies.  AUG. 9: Rise Up! The Vancouver Men's  Chorus evening concert including Ronnie  Gilbert and Roy Bailey.  AUG. 10: The International Festival  Chorus, hundreds of singers from all over  the world, come together at the Celebration '90 Centre in an early evening concert. 870 Denman St.  AUG. 10: Gayla! A Celebration of  Women's Culture in the Orpheum  tonight. Featuring Ferron, Kate Clinton,  Heidi Archibald, the New York trio Betty,  Katari Taiko and others.  AUG. 11: Closing Ceremonies in BC  Place Stadium.  CALL FOR VOLUNTEERS  We need your help! Gay Games III and  Cultural Festival will be the largest multinational, multi-sport event in the world  this year. From collecting tickets at cultural events, helping out at the soccer  tournament or assisting in the media centre, there's still plenty left to be done.  Don't delay—the deadline for volunteering is fast approaching. Call (604) 684-  3303 to volunteer.  RANDOM ACTS WANTS YOU  Thank you to all the women who auditioned for "The Fairy Princess and the  Princess Fool". Now we are looking for  volunteers to work on the production for a  few hours or a few weeks of your time between now and Aug. 10. We need women  to work on sets, costumes, tix, postering, cheer leading etc. Call Jackie at 682-  3109.  KARATE FOR WOMEN  Self defense, fitness, confidence. All  women's karate club seeking new members. Shito-ryu karate taught by a female black belt. Tuesdays & Thursdays, 7  pm, Carnarvon Community School, 16th  & Balaclava. Observers welcome. Call  Joni: 734-9816; Rose: 737-0910 or Monica: 872-8982.  SUBMISSIONS  ARTISAN'S MARKET  Everyone is welcome to join in this celebration of gay and lesbian pride at the  Celebration '90 Artisan's Market, Aug. 8-  11. Come and sell your jewelry, pottery, t-  shirts, photographs, paintings and more.  No food products please. Send slides and  photos of your work or call for more info  to: Queers in Art, 1170 Bute St., Vancouver, BC, V6E 1Z6 682-6023 (FAX 682-  3046)  SORROW & STRENGTH:  THE PROCESS  A conference for the adult survivor of  childhood sexual abuse and the professional helper will be held Apr. 11-12  1991 in Winnipeg, Man. If you are interested in presenting a paper or leading a workshop, please contact: Sorrow  & Strength Coordinating Committee, 160  Garfield St. S., Winnipeg. MB, R3G 2L8  (204) 786-1971.  COMMISSION ON REPRO TECH  The Royal Commission on New Reproductive Technologies will be conducting  a public consultation process beginning  in Sept. 1990. To be invited to appear,  groups or individuals must submit a short  brief or position paper by July 31 to  PO Box 1566, Stn. B, Ottawa ONT KIP  5R5 or call   1-800-668-7060  (toll-free).  MANITOBA HISTORY PROJECT  Seeks women and men who were actively  lesbian or gay in our province before 1970,  to help us record our (varied!) past. Confidentiality assured. If you, or someone  you know, can help us, please write: Box  1661, Winnipeg, MB., R3C 2Z6, or phone  collect, (204) 488-7642.  WOMEN IN TRANSITION  The B.C./Yukon Society of Transition  Houses is interested in receiving submissions related to the theme of women in  transition for an art show to be held at  Women in Focus, August 17-24. If you  are interested in either submitting work  or volunteering, contact Pamela at 669-  6943.  LESBIAN/GAY MEMORABILIA  A memorabilia exhibit is being prepared  for Celebration '90 honouring the first 2  Gay Games. This exhibit will then travel  to all future Gay Games sites. If you have  any buttons, medals, t-shirts, posters,  pictures etc. from past Games, please  send with a brief description of its history  to: Metropolitan Vancouver Athletic and  Arts Ass'n., 1170 Bute St., Vancouver,  BC, V6E 1Z6. All materials must be received before Aug. 9 and cannot be returned.  TALES OF SEDUCTION  A new anthology by the lesbians who  brought you "Dykeversions". Now accepting submissions for a seductive,  sexy and humourous fiction and non-  fiction anthology. Send short tales of  your best seduction, best line(s), most  bizarre approach, or the seduction you're  still waiting for to: Tales of Seduction,  Women's Press, 517 College St., Suite  233, Toronto, Ont. M6G 4A2. Deadline:  Feb. 28, 1991.  INSIGHT '90  Edmonton's 3rd annual Women's Film  and Video Festival, Oct. 19-20, will focus on Canada and Australia. Organizers  invite submissions from Canadian woman  directors, producers and writers. Films  and videos of all lengths and genres will  be considered. Entries must be received  by Aug. 10. For more info contact: INSIGHT, 9722 102 St., 2nd floor. Edmonton, Alta, T5K 1X4 (403) 424-0724.  CCEC Credit Union  Serving cooperatives,  community businesses,  & the non-profit sector.  ► Lower interest rates on  loans to societies and  cooperatives.  ► Operating loans.  ► Mortgages.  ► Term deposits.  ► Chequing accounts and  other banking services.  • Il3       Jk   m  W AM A  2250 Commercial Dr.  Vancouver, B.C. V5N 5P9  254-4100  A'NESIS  July/Aug. 90 ////////////////////^^^^^  ////////////////////^^^^  Bulletin Board  WANTED; LESBIAN ROOMMATE  To share bright 3-bedroom suite in West  End with one other. $325/month includes  heat and hydro. Would suit working person or mature student. I have a cat—one  more would be fine. Phone 685-8930.  ACCOMODATION NEEDED  for Sept. 1 or earlier (shared is preferred).  Very responsible, quiet, working, nonsmoking lesbian, mid 30s. Have 2 cats  now and if acceptable 1 dog not presently  with me. Call 255-5957.  BOOKS FOR SALE  by Anne Innis Dagg. The Fifty Per Cent  Solution: Why Should Women Pay for  Men's Culture? $8.; Harems and Other  Horrors: Sexual Bias in Behavioral Biology $6. or $12; Camel Quest: Summer  Research on the Saharan Camel $12. Add  $1. for postage and handling. Otter Press,  Box 747, Waterloo, On N2J 4C2.  TRY CO-OP LIVING  City View Co-op, a 31 unit building near  Victoria Si Hastings, keeps an open waiting list for applications for membership.  Rent for 1, 2 or 3 BR apts, is $467, 589, or  683, plus a (refundable) share purchase.  To apply, send a S.A.S.E. to: Membership  Ctte, 1885 E. Pender, Vane. V5L 1W6.  MOVING TO VANCOUVER  Lesbian, 30, artistic, into personal growth  and self-exploration, working n the helping professions, likes painting, photography, creative movement, meditation and  quiet holistic living. Would like to correspond with other women late 20s or 30s  with similar interests for friendship. Will  possibly be moving to Vancouver in Sept.  or Oct. I'm also interested in shared accomodation with a woman with similar  interests, for fall. Contact Sea Connor,  5946 Rue Jeanne Mance, Montreal, Quebec, H2V 4KA.  SALTSPRING RETREAT  Watch the deer browse as you relax on  the deck. Cozy up to the wood stove  and dream a little (wood provided). Escape to Saltspring Island for a weekend  or a week. Fully equipped women's guest  cabin in a country setting. Close to sea,  lakes and hiking trails. $35 single, $50  double. Special rates for week or month.  Call 653-9475 or write Gillian Smith, C85,  King Rd., RR1, Fulford Harbour, B.C.  VOS 1C0.  SEEKING ROOMMATE  Roommate wanted to share 2 bdrm.  townhouse in lesbian positive environment. For more info please call 298-1670.  SHIATSU TREATMENTS  Ready to work on your stuff? Do it with  your body. I work from the basis that our  bodies remember joys, sorrows, fear, frustrations. Unexpressed, these feelings play  havoc in our lives, undermining our true  potential. Using touch, breath, imagery  and body awareness, my Shiatsu treatments help you free unexpressed emotions  and gain clarity. Astarte 251-5409.  RECOVERED BULIMICS WANTED  Interested in telling your recovery story? I  doing research for my Master's thesis  at UBC and need individuals who would  like to participate in several interviews  and follow-up sessions. Call Laurie Truant at 224-6110.  CLASSIFIED  PEACEFUL RETREAT  Bed and Breakfast located on Salt Spring  Island. Close to Fulford Harbour and  Ruckle Park. Cozy rooms with private entrances. A comfortable setting for women  in a feminist home. Phone Maureen at  653-4345 for info and reservations.  WOMEN'S   GUEST HOUSE  Didn't make it this winter? Never fear!  Villa de Hermanas, our beautiful spacious beachfront guesthouse in the Dominican Republic is available as a private  home May - October. Stroll our long, secluded beach, relax by the pool, sit on  shady balconies and enjoy the shimmering  ocean view—on your own or with friends.  The temperature is wonderful; the price  perfect. Reservations: call our Toronto  friend, Suzi, at 416-462-0046 between 9  am - 10 pm.  SURVIVORS GROUP/LESBIANS  This is a support group for women who  have been sexually abused as children. In  a safe atmosphere we will work on healing  the child and look at ways that we have  survived and honour our strength and  courage. We will integrate and accept the  positive skills we have learned and let go  of the negative and self-destructive ways  we have used to survive. The group will  consist of journal work, inner child meditations, individual sharing, group exercise  and affirmations. The group will begin in  September. There is a sliding fee scale.  Limited group size. For information call  Miljenka Zadravec, 251-1958.  FOR SALE  Ticket to Montreal for July 5. $150. o.b.o.  Call 984-0084 to leave message. Also  looking for woman to drive to Montreal  on or around July 7.  COUNSELLING FOR LESBIANS  I am a lesbian feminist counsellor with extensive experience working in the area of  sexual abuse and incest. I work one to one  and in groups on coming out issues, homophobia, self-esteem, assertiveness, and  provide support and information. I work  with women on issues/problems with sexuality, sexual expression and barriers that  inhibit arousal and pleasure. I work with  couples on issues of codependency and  intimacy. Within a feminist frame-work,  I work with dreams, guided visualization,  inner child connection, family geneology,  photographs and journal work. I have a  sliding fee scale. First half hour is free.  For information call Miljenka Zadravec at  251-1958.  Mary Brookes, Betty Baxter, and Coreen Douglas—key organizers for the Gay Games—  look forward to seeing you there.  CLASS IFIEDICLASSIFIED  SUMMER SUBLET  July 17 - Aug. 27 (or August only) $1200  inclusive. Fully furnished 2 bedroom main  floor of house on quiet residential street.  Bright, spacious, attractive. On Inverness  (vicinity of Knight Si 18th) Please call  873-6646 (after 4 pm).  KITS JERICHO BEACH  Eclectic feminist is looking for a female housemate to share a furnished 2  bedroom townhouse in a converted heritage house. All appliances, including microwave. Fireplace. One and a half bathrooms. View of the mountains. Balconies  off both bedrooms. Off street parking.  Occupancy August 15, 1990. $650. per  month. References required. Phone 731-  5412 (h) 666-3745 (w)  READ LESBIANEWS:  Monthly events, information, ideas from  Victoria's lesbian feminist community.  Sample issue/back issues $2 each. Yearly  subscription (mailed in plain lavender  wrapper) $18. Cheques to Debby Gregory, LesbiaNews, PO Box 5339, Station  B, Victoria B.C. V8R 6S4.  HOUSEMATE WANTED  If you are a gay woman searching for  a relaxed, non-smoking, communally-  minded, lesbian household with reasonable rent and fabulous housemates ...  then look no further! Our rented Kit-  silano house features: two well-behaved  cats, stained-glass windows, a fireplace,  a washer and dryer and plenty of room  for living. We are well situated, close to  Jericho Beach and to bus routes. Rent is  $300. per month, not including utilities.  Available August 1st. For more information phone 737-0910.  HOUSEMATE WANTED  To share with out-of-town occasional  user. Top floor spacious suite in character  house featuring balcony, view, own room.  Near Parker Si Victoria. $400. pm 254-  4748. Available Sept. 1  ACCOMODATION  CELEBRATION 90  Bedroom Si kitchenette units for rent to  women on a nightly or weekly basis during Gay Games. Character home in Commercial Drive area. Reasonable rates 1-  886-4584 Evenings.  GQ&& ^ffiefoHftfeng?»ri» Ctfwu&A*tflkjj  KINESIS  July/Aug.90      27 PRUCtSSINfi CENlftE -  ■ , b.c.  Published 10 times a Tear  by Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant St., Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2Y6  □ VSW Membership -$30 (or what you can afford),-includes Kines  is subscription     i  □ Kinesis sub. only (1 year) -$20        □ Sustainers-S75  □ Kinesis sub. (2 yrs) -S36  D Institutions/Groups -$45                           newal  □ Cheque enclosed     DE  Address  Postal Co<)>