  -KiMEJiS—  TORIES WIN, WOMEN LOSE  by Emma Kivisild  As the polls closed on September 4th, west coast residents  turned on their radios to the  depressing news of a Tory majority already confirmed. The  momentum of Brian Mulroney  and his 'Blue Tide' continued  across the prairies until they  finished with 211 of 282 seats,  leaving the Liberals with 40,  "the NDP with 30, and independents with one.  The new Conservative government, that people voted for  because it would bring "change"  has an overwhelming parliamentary majority. Provincial  NDP President Gerry Stoney  speculating to the Province  on possible abuse of such  power, commented "they won't  govern, they'll rule". The  need for progressive opposition on the federal level is  greater than ever.  Mulroney represents a swing  to the right and for British  Columbians still reeling from  Social Credit slashes, his  policy decisions become woefully easy to predict: cuts  to social services, regressive labour legislation and  erosion of human rights.  The morning after the election  the news already began to  bear out these predictions,  reporting that Mulroney was  likely to act soon on street  soliciting (outlawing it),  and capital punishment (a  free vote in Parliament).  Mulroney has pledged to create  jobs by "freeing up" the  private sector. He has a  history of labour relations  that includes outright closure of company towns. He has  promised an increase in military spending, and we can  expect more Canadian government support for American  intervention in the Third  World, and support for U.S.  arms buildup. In the Bennett  style, Mulroney hopes to make  Canada more accessible to  foreign investment.  There are those who put Mulroney to the left of most  Progressive Conservative  party members, saying that  his reasonableness will  temper the more extreme elements of his party. One can  only wonder just how far  right the P.C.'s go...  It would be wise for feminists to prepare for the worst.  In our last issue, Kinesis  published policies of the  parties on several women's  concerns. The Conservatives  are against choice on abortion, and propose repressive  legislation against prostitutes.  On other questions they made  promises - pledged federal  Update on Kinesis and VSW  . re-evaluation of  ation copes with  The Vancouver Status of Women will begii  staff priorities this month as .the <  a drastic personnel reduction.  A federal grant for $63,500 confirmed in June (from the Secretary of State's Women's Programmes) has enabled the group  to stay in existence, but represents a severely reduced annual budget. Staff, Board, and volunteers will be working  together to come up with ways a much smaller staff (now down  to four, including Kinesis) can maintain some of VSW's services, and continue working on research, lobbying and organizing.  The Secretary of State grant will come up for review at the  end of March 1985.  VSW continues to publish Kinesis. Federal funding provides  the paper with one full-time staff member, and advertising  revenue has enabled another woman to be hired part-time. A  Canada Works grant for the summer and early fall, focussed  on increasing circulation and advertising, has already been  extremely successful. Please support our advertisers — they  support us.  All readers who returned the Reader Survey included with the  July/August issue — thank you ! We have received over 200,  and will be tabulating the results this month, to appear in  the October issue.  Kinesis cover price will be going up to $1.50 on October 3rd.  Subscription price will increase to $15.00. Renew now at the  old rates .' (see back page)  A postal strike may prevent us from publishing in October.  Writers, photographers, artists, and interested readers,  please note ! Upcoming supplements will focus on Education  (October, already under way), Racism (December/January), and  Rural Women (February). We welcome/encourage/need input  these areas. If you have articles, photos, graphics, new  ideas you would like to submit, the deadlines are as follows:  Education - September 17th; Racism - November 16th; Rural  Women - January 11th. Call Kinesis  at 873-^5925.  money for day care and transition houses; proposed halfhearted pension reform; said  they would work toward equal  pay and affirmative action  and would put gender in the  hate propaganda section of  the Criminal Code.  Over the next four years, we  will see if any of this policy,  already inadequate, is actu*-  ally implemented. Given the  history of overall Conservative policies, we won't expect too much. We can prophesy only that economic 'recovery' will in all likelihood affect only corporate  profit margins and reductions  to social services will create  the same hardship for women  that we have already experienced in British Columbia in  the past year.  However, in the face of this  bleak picture, there is some  cause for hope - even celebration. The good news, of  course, is the strong showing  of the New Democrats. The  Liberals collapsed under the  P.C. sweep (like the anomaly  they are, quipped one NDP organizer), but the NDP held on  strong, even doubling their  vote in Ontario. For a few  giddy moments there was talk  of them forming the offical  opposition.  The continuing strength of the  NDP indicates that support for  this party is coming from a  long term grass roots commit-;  ment rather than a nebulous  urge to see a different face  in power. It was encouraging  to see that progressive voters are not swayed by trends,  even of the P.C. magnitude.  On a local level, the victory  of Margaret Mitchell in Vancouver East epitomized the  party's strength - voting  based on performance. Running  against Liberal Shirley Wong  and P.C. Jack Volrich, Mitchell  swept the riding. Of her  victory Mitchell said, "This  has interesting implications  for feminist issues. Volrich  was associated with pro-lifers  and with Socreds. I think  people do remember when he  was mayor of Vancouver, and  his attitudes towards social  at that time."  Mitchell and other vocal NDP  M.P.'s like Pauline Jewett  and Svend Robinson were instrumental in B.C.'s stemming  of the Tory Tide. For women,  this means that we will continue to have representatives  in Parliament who at least  have some understanding of  women's issues, and are open  to feminist input.  As we look at the prospects  for the next four years, this  sort of Parliamentary support  offers a source of crucial  optimism -.  Vancouver prostitutes and supporters occupied Christ  Church Cathedral in late July to protest the recent  injunction against West End hookers. See story p. 3. 2   Kinesis   September'84  MOVEMENT MATTERS  IMJIDE  Across Canada 4  INTERNATIONAL  Peru % 5  Nicaragua 6  Vaginal Health  8  Bankworkers organize      10  Rural women 11  Peace 14  ANTI-AUTHORITARIANISM  Nonviolence   - ■ - - 15  New security service 16  Anarcha-feminism 17  How to complain    18  ARTS  Gay film festival 20  New Woman Press 21  Jazz in Vancouver 22  Still Sane 23  Mythologies 24  Joy Zemel Long 25  Feminism: both sides 26  Publications in Review 27  Rubymusic 28  Barbara Higbie 29  Letters 30  Bulletin Board 34  -KMWJiJ-  EDITORIAL GROUP: Jan DeGrass, Linda Grant,  Isis, Emma Kivisild, Barbara Kuhne, Claudia Macdonald, Helene Rosenthal, Rosemarie Rupps,  Cy-Thea Sand, Connie Smith, Michele Wollstone-  croft.  CIRCULATION/DISTRIBUTION: Jan De Grass, Judy  Rose, Joey Schibild, Vicky Donaldson, Hanna  Postnikoff, Margaret McHugh.  ADVERTISING: Punam Khosla, Jill Pollack  OFFICE: Judy Hopkins, Suzanne Kredentser, Ruth  Meechan, Jane Leggott, Karen Hill, Cat L'Hiron-  delle, Maureen Garety, Meredith.  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE: Libby Barlow, Jan De  Grass, Michele Edwards, Susan Elek, Marion  Grove, Nicky Hood, Judy Hopkins, Isis, Emma  Kivisild, Barbara Kuhne, Sue Mcllroy, Claudia Macdonald, Evie Mandel, Grace Scott, Lily Shinde,  Michele Wollstonecroft.  KINESIS is published ten times a year by Vancouver Status of Women. Its objectives are to  enhance understanding about the changing position of women in society and work actively towards  achieving social change.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of the writer  and do not necessarily reflect VSW policy. All unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis  editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status  of Women, 400 A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C.  V5Y1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status of Women is  $20/year (or what you can afford). This includes a  subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions  to Kinesis are $13/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We reserve the right  to edit, and submission does not guarantee publication.  n Periodical Publ  Second class mail no. 6426.  Calgary  Street Wbmen Organize  Vancouver prostitutes have been fighting  escalating street violence and repressive  legislation by organising on the street.  Whores across Canada face the same issues.  In a move predicted by Vancouver's Alliance for the Safety of Prostitutes (ASP),  ■other municipalities are following this  city's lead in enacting legislation to  force prostitutes from certain areas. Halifax City Council recently passed a recommendation for an injunction even more  Feminism   fit  in the Ukraine  The relationship between ethnicity and  feminism will be examined at the Second  Wreath conference, to be held in Edmonton  during the Thanksgiving weekend (October •  5-7, 1985). Organizers have planned the  conference to mark the 100th anniversary  of the founding of the women's movement  in Ukraine.  As a lead-up to the conference a commemorative banquet will be held in Edmonton this  December. The banquet will honour early  Ukrainian feminists, as well as credit  contemporary women for their role in enriching Ukrainian community life in Canada.  Additonally, a national lecture tour will  be lauched this, fall to celebrate 100  years of the Ukrainian Women's Movement.  ■The Ukrainian Women's Movement was founded  in Western Ukraine in December 1884. One  of its foremost proponents was Natalia  Kobrynska (1851-1920). It was Kobrynska's  journal, Pershyi Vinok  (The First Wreath),  that became a leading forum for disucssion  of women's issues in the late nineteenth  century. Many of the topics raised in  the journal, such as daycare facilities,  education, and communal kitchens, are as  relevant today as they were a century ago.  The Second Wreath conference will explore  issues raised by the early women's movement  in Ukraine, and place these issues in the  present-day context.  For additional information please contact  the Second Wreath conference organizing  committee, Second Wreath, 11517-95A Street  Edmonton, Alberta, T5G 1P6.  sweeping than that brought down by B.C.  Attorney General Brian Smith in June of  this year. Smith's ruling named certain  prostitutes and banned them from Vancouver's  West End. Prostitutes would be banned  from the entire city  of Halifax.  In Calgary, although the situation for  women oh the street remains relatively  calm, two local lesbian feminists, not  street women themselves, have set up a  second chapter of ASP. With funding from  a federal agency, the two women brought  ASP founders Sally de Quadros and Marie  Errington in to Calgary to do "street  strolls", and establish contacts. The  new group will continue that work, publish  a bad trick sheet, and begin advocacy  work with street women. They are also in  contact with a woman who maintains a  series of rooms in downtown Calgary for  street kids, where they can get two hot  meals a day, in a non-judgmental supportive  atmosphere. Her rules - no drugs, no alcohol, no stolen goods - have yet to be  broken.  The two chapters of ASP will be exchanging  news and information on a regular basis.  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Tuning and Repairs  854 East 12th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C. V5T2J 3  876-9698  -VANCOUVER-  WOMEN'S BOOKSTORE  Now available in paperback:  Outrageous Acts and Everyday Rebellions   $9.95  Bluebeard's Egg   $4.50  Second Words   $12.95  Greenham Common: Women at the Wire   $10.50  315 Cambie Street  Vancouver, B.C.  V6B 2N4    Ph: 684-0523  Mon-Sat 11:00-5:30  KINESIS apologizes  for  the following errors  and omissions.  In the July/August issue, the front page  hooker photo should have been credited to  Charlie Fidelman, and the graphic on Page  11 was  done by Terri Robertpn.  In the August Election Extra the name Anne  Thompson  should read Ann Thomson.  *BP  •Mi  , PLANE JANE CONSTRUCTION September'84   Kinesis   3  ACROSSBC  ASP in  god's house  by Marrianne van Loon  On July 21 and 22 Vancouver  hookers and supporters occupied Christ .Church Cathedral to  protest a recent injunction  (Kinesis  July/August '84) and  to pressure for the decriminalization of prostitution.  The injunction, brought down  by provincial attorney general  Brian Smith this spring, is  objectionable for several  reasons. It names specific  prostitutes as public nuisances, and anyone who the  police deem to be soliciting  west of the city's Granville-  Street can be arrested and  thrown in jail for up to two  years, if unable to pay a  $2,000 fine. The onus is on  the accused to prove her innocence, and it comes down to  the word of the police officer  against the word of the prostitute.  The Alliance for the Safety  of Prostitutes (ASP), which  sponsored the occupation, has  documented many recent cases  of police harassment and brutality, in addition to the  violence which hookers must  face from tricks, pimps, and  some residents. Now that prostitutes have been forced into  a small, poorly lit, industrial area, ASP expects violence  to escalate. Vancouver has  also been unusually pimp-free,  but with the severe competition for space, pimps will  probably become a more serious  problem as well.  The occupiers were successful  in attracting media attention  to the situation. As well,  they met with congregation members to discuss the problem  and possible strategies.  ASP plans follow-up actions  for the future. For more in- .  formation.contact ASP, P.O.  Box 2288, Vancouver, B.C. V6B  3W5  Lesbians to  open space  The Vancouver Lesbian Connection met Aug. 9 with a number  of lesbian/gay women's groups  to get feedback about plans  to open a lesbian centre. The  response to the general idea  was positive and time was  speiit talking about the next  steps.  The group has decided to do a  survey of groups to see exactly what groups would want in  such a space to facilitate  more detailed planning.  They also need to create a  range of funding strategies  to complement the exsiting  series'of dances at the Capri  Hall. They welcome any ideas  and energies that anyone has  to offer.  For more;information, call  873-5804, or 251-6046.  96 day occupation ends at PIXJC  More than 70 people have taken turns  occupying the David Thompson University  Centre (DTUC) library since April 26.  DTUC was closed down by the Socred government. The political pressure exerted by  the occupiers forced the Social Credit  government to open campus doors for the  summer school. And the occupiers provided  Kootenay residents with the fighting  spirit to organize the summer school in  the first place.  The summer students, many of whom have  participated in the ongoing struggle  against the government's refusal to reopen  the campus, witnessed a major betrayal on  July 18, just two days before the school  was set to open.  The occupiers celebrated their 84th day  inside the library, then marched out to  the cheers of local residents. They had  been assured that the province, via Selkirk College, a former co-administrator  of DTUC, was handing the keys for the  library to the city of Nelson. But several  had a niggling reluctance to vacate the  ^premises until they saw the keys in Nelson  Mayor Louis Malio's hands, and they  became suspicious when normally friendly  campus security guards warned them they  couldn't get back into the building for  anything once they had left. It didn't  make sense if the city was gling to take  When the occupation supposedly.-ended,  Selkirk College and .the province said  they did not intend to hand over the keys,  and had never intended to do so. It was  all a mistake, they claimed, and despite  widespread publicity over the terms of  the occupation's conclusion, they said  they were unaware the city expected the  keys.  The occupation resumed, and nine days  later government negotiators came to the  library. They agreed to leave the library  intact, begin immediate negotiations for  a city lease on the building and agreed  to leave almost every piece of equipment  on the campus for a year.  Meanwhile, campus security guards took  pictures of crowds at DTUC demonstrations.  They watched and reported on who entered  and left the library. They noted who  attended a string quartet concert at the  campus chapel. Sometimes the feeling was  that of getting an education under armed  guard.  The DTUC fight, the 96-day occupation  and the summer school have become a  symbol of the resistance in B.C.  -Images  Solidarity sponsors People's Commission  Solidarity Coalition is sponsoring a People's Commission  which will travel the province  seeking advice on what social  and economic policies would  best serve the needs of British  Columbians. The Commission will  then prepare policy recommendations which will be released in  a public report.  Clear, consistent policy alternatives will give Solidarity  Coalition and others opposed to  the government's legislation a  viable program to put forward.  Such a program will allow us to  set our own agenda and to go on  the offensive in the fight  against the government's program.  This process of policy development will succeed if groups  present their concerns and  ideas to the People's Commission when it comes to their region. Everyone will be welcomed  and encouraged to make presentations at the hearings. Presenta-  Vancouver lesbians and gays marked the beginning of Gay Pride Week .in  the International Year of Lesbian and Gay Action with a march through  the West End.  Banners,  floats and costumes were the order -of the day.  tions may be written or oral.  The hearings will be informal  and non-adversarial in nature.  Hearings begin in Kelowna on  Sept. 14. The Commission will  visit Nanaimo, Terrace-Smithers  Fort St. John, Nelson, Chilli-  wack, Prince George-Fraser Lake,  Kamloops, Cranbrook, Victoria,  and finish in Vancouver on Dec.  15. They will be in each of the  eleven regions for two days,  usually a Friday and a Saturday  For more information contact  the Solidarity Coalition in  Vancouver, 6th floor, 686 W.  Broadway, 873-6322.  CFU gets in  at Hoss Farms  After a struggle with the Labour Relations Board, the Canadian Farmworkers Union has  been certified at Hoss Farms  in Langley.  The mushroom farm had fired 11  women for union involvement.  CFU immediately began picketing, including a secondary picket at the Fraser Valley Mushroom Grower's Co-op nearby.  The LRB ruled the secondary  picket illegal.  In August the union was finally  instated at the farm after a  hearing before the LRB. The  women were rehired and received  back pay. "'"' 4   Kinesis   September'84  i£ROSSCA»M>A  by Maureen Trotter.  In mid-June, the Canadian Council for International Co-operation sponsored a conference on  Women and Food Production at  the University of Guelph. The  conference featured women from  several third world countries:  Zimbabwe, Nicaragua, Bangladesh, Upper Volta, and St.  Vincent. The conference emphasis was on development in the  third world, so most of the  participants were from the  many non-governmental organizations (NGO's) involved with  development.  Marie Burge of the National  Farmer's Union in P.E.I., gave  the keynote address. Burge  identified the accumulation of  capital as the root cause of  the exploitation of food producers. In a capitalist system  ownership of the means of production' is in the hands of  multi-national corporations -  Women discuss  food production  chemical and machinery companies, for example. Many Canadian  farmers do not own their land,  barns, or cattle. They are  'workers' who give their labour  for the profit of others. Forty  -five percent of Canadian  family farms have one or more  family members working off the  farm at waged labour to help  meet the rising costs of maintaining or improving life on  the farm.  Women are the exploited of the  exploited. Internationally it  MP loses harassment case  Toronto woman Kristina Potapczyk was awared $1,500 as  the victim of sexual harassment by Liberal M.P. Allister  MacBain (Kinesis  March '84)  In a 65-page decision released in August, a three member  Human Rights Commission tribunal rejected Potapczyk's  allegation that Mr. MacBain  hounded her to take a job she  was unqualified for because  he wanted to make her his  mistress in Ottawa. But the  tribunal found that "the  touchings and physical intimacy of Mr. MacBain constituted sexual harassment," and  "were humiliating and an un  warranted instrusion upon her  sexual dignity as a woman."  Potapczyk told reporters she  was elated and satisfied with  the outcome of the case,, calling it a moral victory•  In a veiled warning to other  employers, the tribunal said  it recognized that the case  does not have "the same hallmarks of overt sexual advances and propositioning" of  other sex harassment complaints, but illustrates the  "more subtle, yet persistent,  sexual discrimination that a  multitude of women across  the country have had to endure without redress."  -Globe and Mail  is estimated that women work  about 66% of all hours worked  and head 33% of all households.  Yet women receive 10% of the  world's income and 1% of the  world's property.  Women in most countries have  traditionally assembled, prepared, and preserved food for  their families, along with doing household tasks and childcare. Women also produce 50-  80% of all food eaten in the  world. Their labour generally  provides food for local consumption, usually on subsistence type small plots of land.  In contrast, the men often  produce food for trade or cash.  In third world countries it is  the men who are often away  from home working in the big  sugar or coffee plantations  producing luxury crops for export to rich countries. (In  spite of the myths, both the  U.S. and Canada are net food  importers).  Development agencies often aim  their programs at men with an  emphasis on large, scale, mechanized operations.where the  people have no control over  large tracts of land, no money  for fuel or parts and where  repairs are unavailable. This  leaves the women at home with  an even bigger work load, to  produce what they can with  fewer resources.  The conference heard from the  women from the third world  about their problems: lack of  resources; heavy work loads,  and in some countries culturally imposed systems of restrictions on women. In some  areas of Bangledesh for instance, women are not allowed  to go out of the home during  daylight hours. Lack of job  opportunities, low pay and  lack of status mentioned by  third world women are aspects  of oppression shared by all  women of the world.  We also heard how some of  these women have been organizing to create changes in their  lives. I would have liked to  have heard more than we did -  each woman was limited to 10  minutes. The rest of the time  was spent in small 'working  groups' which, in my case,  were unproductive and largely  irrelevant to my concerns.  Only 20 or so of the 200 in  attendance were Canadian food  producers. I was disappointed  there weren't more farmers,  fishers and hunters, and that  the structure did not foster  the development of networks  between the Canadian and third  world food producers at a more  grassroots level.  The second national farm ~t£jggp:  women1 s conference is being  planned for next year in the  Maritimes. Perhaps it will  ' provide a more appropriate  fo :um for establishing networks and devising strategy  for change for Canadian women  at least.  Maureen Trotter is a B.C.  farm-  woman.  Porn and the Election  Will their legislative promises work?  by Regina Lorek  Before I watched the televised  debate on women's issues by  Turner, Broadbent, and Mulroney; I had no idea what they  were offering women in regards  to getting rid of pornography.  I vaguely heard that it was  supposed to be an issue in  this election, but I had been  reading the papers and watching  the news, and I had'nt noticed  any discussion of pornography.  In the debate, Eleanor Wachtel  asked Broadbent and Mulroney  if they would add the word  "gender" to the hate propaganda law in order to deal with  violent pornography. They both  responded in one word-"yes".  Turner later also said "yes",  and added that he would look  into strengthening the obscenity law to "get rid of this  iilth". End of debate on pornography.  My first response to this was,  "oh, shit". Strange response  for a woman who has been working to get rid of porn for  years. It looks so good on the  surface - all three leaders  will support a law that could  eliminate pornography. This is  not the case.  The question was specific to  violent  pornography. Who will  define violent  pornography? \)  Will a rape scene that depicts  a woman as enjoying it be considered violent? Will Snuff,  where a woman is dismembered,  but there is no explicit sex,  be considered pornography?  I understand that in fighting  to get rid of porn, we have to  start somewhere; and extremely  or overtly violent pornography  is a good place to start. More  people respond with horror to  the news, and I hadn't noticed  any discussion of pornography,  spread of a nude woman wearing  bobby socks and holding a  teddy bear.  But there is very little porn-  ograpny that doesn't either depict or encourage violence  against women. I am afraid that  all the women who have worked  so hard on reform will be satisfied if the men in government  agree to get rid of what the  government defines as violent  pornography. I am afraid that  the pressure will be off the  men in power, and the women  who are still working to.get  rid of all pornography will  be out there by ourselves.  Secondly, I doubt that the hate  propaganda law will be very  effective in fighting pornography. The .word "race" has  been in that law for years  and in Alberta, Jim Keegstra  still managed to teach hatred  against Jews to his high school  students; and he has kept the  courts busy for a long time  arguing about it. A lot of  pornography is very racist,  and the government hasn't used  the hate propaganda law against  that pornography either.  I am also afraid that passing  this legislation will mean  that a lot of women will spend  a lot of time trying to make  this  law work - working on  committees set up by government, arguing compromises  that will get rid of one porn  video, but not the next, and  not all of them. Will a few  women then be in the position  of deciding which pornography  is o.k. and which isnrt? I  want it all gone.  I think that the lobbying work  done by women's groups over  the last two years has been  very valuable. I haven't always agreed with the legal  reforms these women were fighting for; but I think the campaign exposed the government's  unwillingness to enforce laws  that were already in place;  laws that could  be used, at  this  time, for the benefit of  all women.  I think that we need to keep  the focus of our fight on getting rid of all  pornography.  We need to keep throwing it  out when men bring it into our  homes, we need to keep pressuring men to stop buying and  using it, we need to keep up  our pickets, our boycotts, and  we need to invent new tactics  to stop the men who profit  from the sale of pornography -  including the government.  Regina Lorek is a member of  the Vancouver Rape Relief and  Women's Shelter collective. September W   Kinesis   5  INTERNATIONAL  Priorities:  Domesticas'  Union and  Healthcare  by Beth Abbot  • Life expectancy for Peruvians is only  56 years. Infant mortality averages  130 per thousand births, and 50% of  Peruvian children under 15 years of age  are malnourished. Women suffer a high .  incidence of maternal death in childbirth  due to malnutrition during pregnancy.  • Amnesty International has condemned the  Peruvian government for "unchecked  violence" in attempting to eradicate a  growing guerilla insurgency. Peruvian  President Fernando Belaunde Terry's only  response has been to accuse Amnesty of  having "communist ties". ~$|Pi§!§  • Military expenditures account for 30%  of Peru's national budget. Ronald Reagan  has recently requested a 5-fold increase  in military aid to Peru, for the purchase  of high-technology counterinsurgency  Q'^'uCWMP|i"~|l-ni' *- * '  e The annual inflation rate in Peru has  reached 130%. Meanwhile, the National  Government is continuing drastic social  service cutbacks. Unemployment andundej^  employment are estimated at 60% of the  labour force.  photo by Beth Abbott  a de Leche program in Lima.  It is within this framework that Per  women are organizing and working together  for social and political change. During  a recent visit to Peru, I had an opportunity to explore different facets of  the women's struggle there. Two activities  stood out in particular: efforts by  one of the largest groups of women employees, the domestic workers, to organize  their own union, and the struggle of  women to provide decent health-care for  themselves and their families.  More women work as domestic workers  ('domesticas') in Peru than engage in  any other single occupation. Not unlike  their sisters in North America, Peruvian  domesticas work very long hours, and are  faced daily with sexual harassment,  exploitation of their labour, and racial  insults. The average monthly wage of a  domestic worker is equivalent to $17.00  U.S. (For comparative purposes, a Peruvian  teacher earns ten times this amount.)  The majority of domesticas are young  campesina (peasant) women who migrate  from the.Sierra (the rural mountainous  area of the Peruvian Andes) to the larger  coastal cities. Many of these women  speak native languages, and must learn  Spanish to survive in their new surroundings. The isolation of the individual  woman and the lack of real employment  alternatives compound the domestic  worker's low bargaining power.  Adelinda Diaz is a former domestic worker  who has devoted the past 18 years .to  organizing unions for women in Lima.  Adelinda was one of 12 women founders  of the Domestic Workers' Union of Lima  in 1973. The union keeps a scrapbook of  press clippings about their organizing  activities dating back eleven years. A  look through this scrapbook reveals a  struggle of great significance for  Peruvian women.  Numerous articles deal with the injuries  to domesticas inflicted by their employers for supposedly "unsatisfactory service". Occasionally such mistreatment  has resulted in death. Other articles  show the response of the media to  periods of growth in support of the union.  Portrayals of domestic workers as  untrustworthy are common during these  media backlashes.  Yet significant progress has been made  since the Union's formation. This year,  a union office and meeting centre was  opened in downtown Lima. (Previously,  union gatherings were held in open parks  or in private homes). A slide-tape show  addressing the problems of young women who  migrate to the city for domestic work is  used to educate domesticas and to promote  the Union. Workshops held in diverse areas  of the city have made inroads toward gaining support from some middle-class women.  Adelinda Diaz spoke at a recent seminar  held in a wealthy residential district of  Lima which explored the issue of "women  exploiting women."  The Union is clearly gaining recognition by  an increasing number of domestic workers,  and has begun to make links with domestic  workers' organizations in neighbouring  countries. For example, representatives  from Peru attended a recent conference in  Colombia, sponsored by that country's  '.  .dom'estllc union. Peruvian domesticas-are  heartened by recent success in Bolivia  where the central union federation has  given formal recognition to the Bolivian  domestic worker's union, and are looking  forward to similar advances in their own  country j  Adelina Diay, organizer, Domestic Worker's Union of Lima.  WOMEN AND HEALTH  The availability and quality of health  care a Peruvian woman receives depends  both on her position in society, and her .  location in the country. While good health  care is certainly available to those living  in urban areas and having the ability to  pay, this happy, situation does not extend  to the poor and those living in rural  areas.  The exclusion ot many women from the  'formal'' job market renders then ineligible for many health benefits. And  despite an official government policy  of providing services to pregnant women  and infants, the budget and personnel  assigned to carry out this objective are  most inadequate.  continued next page 6   Kinesis   September '84  INTERNATIONAL  by Ann Thomson  It's been five years of hard work and  achievement since Nicaragua rose up  against the dictator Somoza, and the FSLN-  the Sandinista National Liberation Front-  led victorious troops into Managua to set  up a revolutionary government.  I was one of thousands of visitors to  Nicaragua this summer for the anniversary  celebrations in m'id-July. What I learned  is how, despite many hardships, the goals  of the revolution continue to be advanced.  A beautiful land of green mountains, huge  lakes, and active volcanos, Nicaragua has  a population slightly larger than^B.C.'s  but occupies only one-seventh the land  area. Its revolution has had several unique  features.  One has been the massive participation of  vomen, who were 40 percent of the armed  struggle against Somoza, and who today  hold innumberable posts of responsibility  in the FSLN government and in society.  We have much to learn from these sisters.  Nicaragua Today  Still Changing  Another has been the joining of the revolutionary movement by many priests, nuns  and missionaries. The Nicaraguans and  Salvadoreans are in the forefront of the  moral shake-up affecting Christianity  today. So when we get worried by the Moral  Majority and the Pope's visit - as we  should - remember their left-wing counterpart is growing throughout the world, and  it has the example of victory in Central  America to lead it on.  Space does not allow me to describe all  that I saw in Nicaragua. Instead, I will  try to present the overall context of the  moment. While I was there, three major  campaigns dominated the news.  i  el F. S. L. N. es el Partldo  --^''ĢiigiJl W-vJfegg^iP *  "The FSLN is the party of the workers", billboard in Managua  Peru from previous page  Healthcare and other social ser  heavily concentrated in the Lima area,  to an extent beyond that indicated by  the city's size. Two-thirds of all Peru's  medical specialists, and 70% of all nurses,  are located in the capital, which has  one-quarter of the country's population.  In rural areas, therefore, health services  are poor; in remote communities, they are  almost non-existent.  Even in Lima, healthcare resources are by  no means equally distributed among the  city's population. This situation, however, has begun to change as Lima's  recently-elected progressive government  is providing unprecedented levels of  funding and personnel to the public  health sector. Initiatives taken by the  municipality include the "Vaso de Leche"  (glass of milk) program, which provides  daily milk for pre-schpol children and  pregnant women. Presently 200,000 children  are participating; the goal is to involve  one million children by the end of 1984.  The Vaso de Leche program's most important  element is its community focus, with local  women recruiting volunteers, setting their  own schedule, and publicizing the service.  The municipality also funds health education activities, through which community  leaders, most of them women, are trained  in various aspects of public health such  as nutrition, immunization, and sanitation.  Through these programs, Lima's city government is counteracting the detrimental  effects of social service cutbacks initiated by the National government. The  Vaso de Leche program has attracted  international attention as a successful  example of practical, community-based  healthcare.  LOOKING FORWARD  The Domestic Workers' Union and the women  of the Vaso de Leche program are examples  of a small, but very dynamic effort by  Peruvian women to take charge of their  lives. As with other progressive movements  in Peru, these women are faced with hostility from a right-wing government, and  right-wing media. As well, women must  confront the added problem of machismo,  which is materialized in all aspects of  Ufa for Peruvian women. A report in  Change magazine (September 1981) states,  "Feminist analysis in Peru will turn on  many of the same themes as it has in other  countries with advanced women's movements,  but the contents will respond to the  specific experiences of growing up  in conditions of specifically Peruvian  male dominance."  Certainly the struggle of women in Peru  is an arduous one. No one knows this  better than the participants themselves.  Yet there exists tremendous energy for  the work in front of them. In the determined words of Adelinda Diaz, " We are  moving ahead"   First, the war against the CIA-trained  counter-revolutionaries (contras). Second,  the on-going agrarian reform. Finally,  preparations for the first national  election ,since the revolution, set for  November 4, 1984.  All for the War Front -  all for the combatants  This slogan appears everywhere in Nicaragua  - on banners stretched across the entrance  to barrios (neighbourhoods) and at major  intersections, on rally platforms, office  walls, billboards. It announces the resolve  of the people and is matched by the rifles  and uniforms seen at every gathering.  People's Revolutionary Army (ER) troops  are augmented by both conscripts and volunteers into the reorganized militia, the  SMP - Military-Political Service. Men  and women in these uniforms are found  everywhere. Off duty, they stroll the  streets with family and friends, board  busses as paying passengers, join line-ups  to buy soft drinks from street vendors,  hitch rides along the highway. On duty,  they guard factories, plantations, construction sites, government buildings. Only  their military gear distinguishes them  from other Nicaraguans, for as one woman  told us,"We are all soldiers here."  Each week, hundreds of Nicaraguan troops  set out for, or return from, the war front.  Nicaragua's army consists almost entirely  of foot soldiers and artillery. It has no  air force and no army, although it hopes  to obtain some fighter planes soon.  It is battling attacks financed by the U.S.  Congress, which include the maintenance  of aircraft carrier fleets blockading the  Atlantic and Pacific coasts of Nicaragua,  and a ring of six naval and air bases at  either end of Central America. Three Nicaraguan ports have been bombed and spy  planes fly regularly over the country. An  international scandal broke out last April  when the CIA was proved to be responsible  for mining the Port of Corinto.  CIA-trained troops, consisting of refugees  from Somoza's notorious National Guard  and other mercenaries, operate from guerilla camps in Honduras and Cost Rica. They  are misrepresented in Newsweek  and on  North American T.V. as "rebels" trying to  "restore democracy" in Nicaragua. In fact,  they are invaders. During July, 1984, 4500  of them crossed into northern Nicaragua,  raping and murdering peasants, workers,  teachers, before fleeing back into Honduras.  However, in over two years of combat, the  contras have failed to capture any Nicaraguan territory. As hired guns, they are  no match for the FSLN troops who are  inspired by passionate love for their country and for its first defense, the revolution.  Inevitably, the war is biting deeply into  the struggling Nicaraguan economy. Aside  from the costs of "financing its own military, the tiny nation was faced with damages inflicted by the U.S. and the contras  in 1983 alone of $128.1 million (U.S.)  Daniel Ortega, co-ordinator of the FSLN  government, reports that the cost of those  damages equalled 31 percent of the nation's  exports.  The people have had to tighten their belts.  Health care and other social welfare programs - the pride of the revolution and  continued next page . September '84   Kinesis   7  INTERNATIONAL  areas in which extraordinary advances have  been made - have been cut back. Staple foods  are rationed, and there are shortages of  such items as cooking oil, soap, toilet  paper, powdered milk, toothpaste. In part,  this is due to U.S. pressure on its allies  and on international banks to block credits  for Nicaragua.  Canada is also at fault. Ottawa refuses to  open an embassy in Nicaragua, thus joining  the diplomatic blockade of the revolution.  Canadian aid has thus far been shamefully  meagre. One way to help is to write letters  and pass motions through our unions, churches, and organizations calling on the  Canadian government to open an embassy  and send aid to Nicaragua, and to demand  that the U.S. end its intervention in  Central America.  The National Agrarian Reform  During July, 1984, in ceremonies across  Nicaragua, land titles were handed out  to 12,000 families. This year, alone, the  land trasferred to individual farmers and  cooperatives will equal the total of the  previous four years. By the end of 1984,  50 percent of the peasantry in Nicaragua  will have benefitted from the agrarian  reform, and 2.4 million acres of land  will be owned by those who work it.  Where has this land come from? In part from  Somoza, whose family was by far the largest  landowner "in the country. Those holdings  were taken over by the FSLN and some of  them are still being distributed. Of  the 1,300,000 acres to be handed out in  1984, nearly a third is being taken from  those who can best afford it - the big  , landowners. Their share of the nation's  Tools for Peace,  Music for Nicaragua  Canadians visiting Nicaragua have discovered that the process of rebuilding is  cultural as well as physical. A network  of Popular Cultural Centres has been established, offering classes in theatre, music,  folkdancing, poetry, and painting. According to a member of the Teocoyani Theatre  Troupe, "In Nicaragua, we say that culture is the artistic rifle of the revolution, a weapon against the invasion from  the United States. And I'm not just talking about a military invasion. It's a cultural invasion as well."  In recognition of these needs, a group of  Canadians involved in cultural activities  have formed Music for Nicaragua, in conjunction with the 1984 Tools for Peace  campaign.  They are aiming to collect  musical instruments and sound equipment  for use in Nicaragua, to be sent on a  boat leaving Vancouver next November.  Volunteers are needed to collect these and  other financial donations for a boatload of aid to Nicaragua. Collection starts  in Sept. Final collection date—November  26.  NEEDED: medical supplies, sewing machines,  wood and metalworking tools, agricultural  equipment, musical and sports equipment,  audio-visual and tape equipment and supplies, office equipment and supplies etc.  DONATIONS URGENTLY REQUESTED  ; and i  iterial  Tax receipts for donati  above $15.00.  Contact your local committee.  For address  write: .  Tools for Peace  2424 Cypress St., Vancouver  V6J 3N2  733-1021  Tools for Peace, Victoria  Ph: 386-5695  cultivated land is being cut back to  eleven percent of the total jg about a  quarter of what they claimed before the  revolution.  I was impressed by the continuing extension of the goals of the revolution, exemplified by the agrarian reform. Particularly so, in the face of the economic crunch  the country is facing. Furthermore, the  land is being taken from those who form  the right-wing opposition, and whose participation in the elections the FSLN has  been working very hard to win.  To elect is a right of the People  So read a sign on a float in the anniversary parade in Esteli. One of the first  towns to be liberated in 1979, Esteli  celebrated the revolutionary triumph on  July 16 - three days ahead of Managua. The  float was a flat-bed truck carrying a  dozen Nicaraguans with placards on the  theme of the upcoming November elections.  Some had a droll humour; most were informative. Estili's celebration had a joyous  and homey touch to it, characteristic of  this mountain town that, fought heroically  against Somoza.  MILITARY  JUNTA OF  El SALVADOR  included the demand that a dialogue and  the vote be extended to the leaders of  the contras.  The FSLN has refused to meet these outrageous demands, although it engaged in a  dialogue with the right-wing parties for  months, working to persuade them to  guarantee the democracy of the elections  by running in them. Tension mounted as  the deadline for registering candidates,  July 25, came nearer.  On July 23, Ar'turo Cruz, a Nicaraguan  banker who resides in the U.S. returned to  Managua and announced he would run for  president. In an attempt to form a  coalition of the opposition parties with  him at its head, Cruz tossed out the  first plank in his program: after his  election, there will be an end to the  shortages. He did not say how this would  be done. Quipped Barricada,   the daily  paper of the FSLN, at least with Cruz  there should be no shortage of toothpaste - or toothpaste smiles.  But instead of rallying around Cruz,  the opposition parties did enter the  elections - a victory in itself for the  FSLN. On my last day in Nicaragua, I  graphic by S. Karian/LNS  POPULAR  GOUT OF  NICARAGUA  On taking power, the FSLN promised elections in 1985. First it had other priorities, such as teaching the 60 percent of  adults who had never been to school how  to read. A democratic election requires  an educated electorate. Beginning with  the Literary Crusade of 1980 and continuing today, a massive education program  has, among other achievements, reduced  illiteracy to 14 percent.  In February of this year, the elections  were moved to November 4, 1984 - two days  before the elections in the U.S.  The political parties of the rich, which  predictably oppose the FSLN, have full  democratic rights in Nicaragua, as do  other centre and left parties. At present  the government consists of a Directorate  of the FSLN, and a 45 member Council of  State. Delegates to the Council are selected by the unions, by the opposition parties, and by popular organizations linked  to the FSLN - including AMNLAE, the Association of Nicaraguan Women. They are  distributed according to a formula that  gives the majority to the working and  peasant classes.  In November, the Nicaraguans will elect  a president, vice president, and delegates  to a new, 90 member Council of State.  Delegates will be those candidates of the  various parties that get the highest regional vote - much like the system in  Israel, and similar to the system in Canada.  From the start, the right-wing opposition  parties have threatened to sabotage the  elections by refusing to participate in  them. Knowing they have little chance with  the voters, since their only program is to  return the country to the wealthy, they  have sought to smear the elections as  undemocratic. They drew up a list of conditions for entering the elections, which  read in the three daily papers that the  following parties had entered candidates in the November contest.  The Democratic Conservative Party, the  Independent Liberal Party, the Social  Christians, the Nicaraguan Communist  Party, the Socialist Party, and a far  left party, Frente Obrero.  The seventh party will be the FSLN. Its  candidates are Daniel Ortega for president - one of the leading commanders of  the insurrection - and Sergio Ramirez  for vice president - a writer and member of the present FSLN Directorate, '  and.one of the Group of Twelve prominent Nicaraguans that publicly endorsed the guerillas two years before  the victory.  Much thought went into the new Election  Law, which is designed to make the  ballot casting corruption-proof. Independent bodies from all Nicaraguan  classes and parties will scrutineer at  every stage, and foreign observers are  welcome. At the end of July, a four day  holiday took place to enable all Nicaraguans to register for the vote.  On July 19 this year, 300,000 Nicaraguans assembled in Managua to celebrate  the fifth anniversary of the Sandinista  revolution. Among the chants were many  sayings.of Sandino, the guerilla leader who fought against the U.S. Marines  and was assassinated by the Somoza  family in 1934. One of the most popular is "Only the workers and peasants  will go all the way!" As I raised my  voice with them in the Sandinista  HYMN, I was deeply moved by the modesty, courage, and unflinching determination of this revolutionary people.  Ann Thomson is a teacher and activist  in Concerned Citizens for Choice on  Abortion.     ...... ejispl^t 8   Kinesis- September^  HEALTH  Vancouver Women's Health Collective  Orientation Evening  The Vancouver Women's Health Collective will be  holding an Orientation Evening to acquaint women  who are interested in working at the collective with  various aspects of the work we do.  If you want to work in our Resource Centre; become  a diaphragm or cervical cap fitter; do research in a  health area that interests you, or participate in a  health discussion group then find out how at the  orientation.  Sunday September 30 7-10 p.m.  Britannia Community Centre,  Family Room.  If you are unable to attend yet  would like to become involved or if  you need childcare call 736-6696.  Feminism, Socialism  Anarchism  new books, magazines  buttons & newspapers  SPARTACUS BOOKS  upstairs 311 W. Hastings St.  ph: 688-6138  eolteetive  LESBIAN  INFORMATION LINE  Need Information?  Want to Talk?  Contact LI.L—(604) 734-1016  Thurs. & Sun. 7-10 p.m.  or write 1501 W. Broadway,  Vancouver  Pr"_^| CANADIAN ADVISORY COUNCIL  mSlik ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN/  i^J  CONSEIL CCNSULTATIF CANADIEN  DE LA SITUATION DE LA  Everything you wanted to know about  wemen and numbers but... .couldn't be  bothered looking for   Now, available at the Western Regional  Office Of the CANADIAN ADVISORY COUNCIL  ON THE STATUS OF WCMEN 5 YEAR  STATISTICAL PROFILE OF WOMEN IN CANADA,  1979-1984  Over 250 pages of statistics related to  wanen & work; waten & education; women  & the law; women & society; women &   Write or bring in your interest area  and see what we have to offer   L0CATTON:     P.O.Box 11144,  1800 - 1055 W. Georgia,  Vancouver, B.C.,  V6E 3P3  HOURS:       8:30 to 4:30  Monday to Friday  Inside Women  by Robin Barnett  Are you one of a majority of women who  will have a vaginal infection at some  time in her life? Are you a woman who will  have recurring vaginal infections? One who  gets only temporary relief from the medications the doctor prescribes? Many women  leave their doctor's office without understanding what they have or how they got  it.  Was it sexually transmitted? Maybe  you are a lesbian who is nervous about  discussing how you might have gotten a  vaginal infection from your partner.  In our self-help workshops at the Women's  Health Collective we have been drawing  on the experience of the women's health  movement and our own observations to  understand how to prevent,  treat and  hopefully cure vaginal infections and  related problems. Our focus emphasizes  how the vagina is suppose to work - what  is a healthy vagina - so that when infection occurs we can figure out what the  cause may be.  Then we can decide how to  best treat ourselves.  The vagina is usually a wonderfully  efficient, self-maintaining, dynamic"  environment. Before the advent of the  inexpensive, plastic speculum it was  clouded in mystery and thought of as  accessible only to the medical profession.  The speculum allows us to examine our  own vaginas. We can use our fingers and  sense of smell to examine our own  secretions.  Understanding how our body, or in this  case our vagina, defends itself against  infection can help us stay healthy. Sometimes vaginal infections can be transmitted through sexual and intimate contact and at other times they arise spontaneously because of imbalances in the  vagina. It is possible for us to figure  out what is happening in our vagina and  to cut down on or eliminate recurring  vaginal infections.  The vagina is a cavity in the body much  like the mouth cavity. They are both open  to the outside air and have similar  mucous membrane linings that stay moist  from secretions. Neither is sterile.  Several protective systems keep the  vagina healthy and clean. The most important of these are the acid balance  and the cervical mucus.  I  I  A healthy vagina is usually slightly  acidic (it registers about four to five  on the pH scale that runs from one,  most acidic, to 14, most alkaline).  Acidity prevents many different kinds  of bothersome bacteria and other microorganisms from flourishing.  "Friendly" bacteria called lactobacilli  or Doderlein"s bacilli keep the vagina  acidic. If it weren't for the lactobacilli, the vagina might always be a sugary,  alkaline breeding ground for infections.  The cells of the vaginal wall store sugar  in the form of glucose; droplets of  fluid form on the walls of the vagina  and mix with dead cells which are sloughed  off, releasing the glucose. Bacteria,  fungi and protozoa (microscopic one-celled  animals) love to feed off that sugar.  The lactobacilli thrive on sugar, too,  but unlike these other organisms, they  convert the sugar into a weak acid called  lactic acid. This acidity kills off many  of the "bad" organisms.  Another important protective system is  the cervical mucus. The cervix is the '  base of the uterus that extends into  the vagina. The endocervical canal leads  from the cervical opening (os) up into  the uterus. Glands located in this canal  secrete mucus. This mucus is thicker than  the vaginal secretions and also bathes  the vaginal walls, washing away dead  cells and debris. It helps moisten and  lubricate the vaginal walls, thereby  protecting them from damage, and it  "plugs" the cervical opening to defend  the sterile uterus from the invasion by  micro-organisms.  If you check regularly you can get to know  your own mucus and what is normal for you.  Normal vaginal discharge has a mild, pleasant odor and fluctuates between a clear  egg-white consistency and a milky white  paste, depending on where you are in your  menstrual cycle.  The cervix and the amout of mucus secretions are affected by hormonal changes in  the menstrual cycle. However, some women  have heavy secretions throughout their  cycle and other women say they have very  little secretions at any time of the month.  Generally mucus right around the time of  ovulation has been described as being  like egg whites - clear, very stretchy  and slippery. Not all women get this type  of mucus at mid-cycle. For some women it  will be more like smooth hand lotion, with  a slippery feeling of lubrication.  Even though the ecology of the vagina is  constantly changing, the arrival of a new  microorganism, even sexually transmitted,  isn't enough to start an infection. There  are many conditions that can make your  vagina more - or less - susceptible. Some  of the following might be examples of why  some women get them or have recurrences.  Cervical mucus is slightly more alkaline  when you're most fertile, right before  ovulation. And during menstruation your  vagina is at its most alkaline because  the bloood that flows through the vagina  is a sweet, alkaline medium. The menstrual  flow can be a cleaning process for the  vagina because the blood can bathe the  vagina as it flows. Or it could be a  sugary food for infections. Also right  before or right.after menstruation the  vagina may be drier than at other times  because the cervical mucus has formed a  thick plug at the opening of the cervix. ''•'Seftemt&'Sr'Kmesfs 9  HEALTH  At this time in a woman's cycle, the mucus is not bathing and lubricating the  vaginal walls. Dead cells from the vaginal  walls will not be washed out by the mucus,  but will stay and can provide sugars to  feed infections. Some women find that  symptoms of infections escalate during  or after their periods.  Pregnancy is also a time when women may  tend to suffer from infections. Hormonal  changes are causing more sugar to be  stored in the vaginal walls, increasing  alkalinity. Also some women develop abnormal Pap smear results while pregnant  because of the changes in the cells. Hormones, like the Pill, can also have similar effects. Women who take them may be  prone to cervical inflammations and  vaginal infections.  graphic by Terri Roberton  During and after menopause is another  period of hormonal changes. There are  lowered levels of estrogen and thus lower  levels of glucose in the cells of the  vagina. There may not be enough glucose  in those cells to support lactobacilli  and maintain an acidic vaginal environ-  Antibiotics are often prescribed for  vaginal infections. The problem is that  in the process of wiping out the bad  bacteria, the antibiotics also kill off  the good bacteria the lactobacilli. So  after finishing the antibiotics, the  vagina may be too alkaline and harbour  infection.  The vagina is also influenced by the presence of semen, although the effect is  transitory since most of it runs out  immediately. Semen has an alkaline pH  and introduces other living organisms,  including sperm, into the vagina.  The natural ecology of the vagina can be  changed by any kind of condition or foreign object which gets into the vagina.  Douching, for example, dries out the  mucus membrane lining and can irritate  or damage the vaginal walls and upset  the acid balance. The vaginal walls can  also.get irritated in reaction to the  chemicals that go into perfumed, com-  The natural ecology of the vagina  can be changed by any kind of  condition or foreign object which  gets into the vagina.  mercially prepared douches. Frequent douching can also erode the mucus plug that acts  as the protective barrier to the uterus.  IUD strings may cause an inflammation of  the cervix where the string lies on the  cervix. The string can act as a wick for  bacteria to travel on, descending from  the cervix into the vagina or ascending  from the vagina to the uterus.  Anything that scratches the vaginal walls  can cause trouble by providing bacteria  or viruses with safe harbour and feeding  grounds. You can scratch yourself with  anything from a fingernail to a plastic  tampon applicator.  No tampon should be left in too long  because it can breed bacteria. On the  other hand, changing tampons too often may  cause irritation. Tampons can, especially  super absorbent types, absorb the mucus  lining. This robs the vaginal walls of  the protective moisture they need and interferes with the washing process. Also  change your tampon immediately after  swimming in a chlorinated pool or whirlpool. Tampons absorb the chlorine which  kills all bacteria in the vagina, including the lactobacilli. At the same time  the sweet menstrual fluid could feed an  infection.  The vagina and cervix can also affect each  other. Or, one may indicate that there is  something" happening with the other. A red  cervix can indicated that a vaginal infection is present and is irritating the  cervix. The effect that a. vaginal infection  can have on the cervix is not always detected by the naked eye, but can be seen  by looking at a Pap smear through a microscope. Some cervical abnormalities may  mean a predisposition to certain infections.  Redness on the cervix is a frequent, and  usually harmless phenomenon that can be  caused by a variety of things. A woman can  watch her cervix regularly to determine  if the redness is temporary or related  to her menstrual cycle. If it is cyclical  the redness will disappear after a few  days. If the redness persists, it may  mean a number of things.  A red area around the os is often just  the lining of the cervical canal. The  lining, which is made up of columnar cells,  sometimes extends out onto the face of the  pink cervix which is made up of squamous  cells, forming an inner red circle. The  rim where the two types, of cells meet is  similar to the place where the lips of  the mouth meet the facial skin..  Redness in connection with an unusual  discharge, spotting or bleeding from the  inflamed area of the cervix, or pain, may  indicate that an infection is present.  Even if redness is not visible on the cervix, an abnormal Pap smear result may indicate an infection was/is present; that  a viral (warts, herpes) outbreak occurred;  or that a repair process after an infection  or irritation was/is in process. Once the  problem is identified and cleared up, the  abnormal Pap result may return to normal.  Scarring on the cervix from giving birth  or from tears which sometimes result from  the metal instrument used to hold the cervix steady during an abortion can make  a woman more prone to redness on the cervix because the scarred areas on the  cervix provide a place for bacteria to  grow. Bacteria could also inflame the  glands in the endocervical canal and  cause inflammation on the cervix.  Also vigorous vaginal penetration by fingers or penis could irritate the cervix  and possibly the vaginal walls.  Sexual  assault can also be damaging to these  areas. . ".  It can be helpful to think of the cervix  as a kind of "skin." Just as our skin  gets bruised and irritated so can the  cervix. Sometimes just as we apply remedies to our skins, we may want to try to  apply some to pur cervix.  Just as our skin gets bruised and  irritated so can the cervix.  The foods we eat can also affect the  vaginal balance. Refined carbohydrates  and sugars can increase the level of sugar  in the bloodstream as.well as make our  system more alkaline. Though the link has  never been scientifically proven, many  women and women's health-care practitioners  believe that cutting out sugar cuts down  infections. Since the cells in the vaginal  wall contain sugar that is released as  the cells are sloughed off, it's possible  to have an overload of sugar in your system  Diabetes, pregnancy and the Pill also  increase the amount of sugar stored. Drinking huge amounts of fruit juices or eating  a great deal of fruit can also increase  the level of sugar in the bloodstream.  Make sure your diet is balanced. Intake  of coffee and alcohol could be depleting  your system of B vitamins needed for  general- health and resistance. Some people  link a lack of vitamin A with abnormal  cervical cells and mucus linings. If you  take the Pill then you could have a folic  acid deficiency which could also mean  abnormal cervical cells.  Stress and anxiety and lack of sleep can  lower your immunity and may even lower  vaginal acidity.  The right clothes can also mean the difference between an organism flourishing  or dying. A hot, moist environment encourages infections. So keep yourself as  cool and dry as possible. Always wear  cotton panties or panties with a cotton  crotch and make sure your pants are loose  enough to permit the vaginal area to  breathe. Avoid tight jeans and synthetic  fibers.  Never borrow someone else's towel. Although it happens rarely, a used warm  towel can harbour infections.  Wash your external genital and anal area  regularly, especially after having sex  (even if it's the next day). Wiping the  lips of the vagina is sufficient to  cleanse the cavity. Wash with plain water.  If you need to use soap, avoid scented  soaps and bubble baths, and always rinse  yourself well after washing. Avoid washing  the anal area before the vaginal area  with the same washcloth>.':-A£ways wipe yOur  anus from front to back so that anal bacteria won't get into the vagina or urethra. Don't vaginally insert—anything  that's been in your anus without carefully washing it first. Try to make sure  that you and your sexual partner(s) are-  clean. Wash your hands! Ask your part-  ner(s) if they have any infection or if  they have had contact with anyone who .  has.  For detailed information about particular  infections, viruses and cervical problems  and their treatment (Western drugs and  alternatives) there are many pamphlets  and books at The Vancouver Women's  Health Collective, 1501 West Broadway,  73( -6696. ^PJ^Z^^S^.^,.       ^+^SM  K  ,':V..v,~,V;'Y! \V/mW«A'aBffitV  liB  Of* *jhl*> Mp   nPCHt 10   Kinesis   September'84  LABOUR  by Sharon Knapp  The Bank of B.C. has recently fired 32  full-time clerical workers and management  staff and cut back on part-time hours. A  few weeks ago those remaining were told  they had to take ten days off without pay  in the next sixteen weeks: in effect, a  ten percent pay cut. The Bank has assured  them that there will be no more staff cuts  for this fiscal year which ends in October,  but not that full-time positions won't h  reduced to part-time status, (with the loss^  of wages and benefits such as paid sick  and holiday time that this entails.)  This scenario is being repeated in various forms throughout the industry. What is  happening in the structure of banking that  is suddenly making this possible? Customers  are already used to the first signs of  these changes - those little banking  closets, the 24 hour "Money Machines"  that have sprung up all over town. Accompanying these machines are reduced banking hours: fewer Saturday and late Friday  night openings.  Soon the consumer will feel the next step  in what is really a process of centralization and specialization of banking services. Local branches will no longer offer  a full range of customer services. Clients  will be directed to the branch that offers  the service they need. Some Will handle  only personal loans, others will deal in  mortgages, commercial or student loans  only.  The Banks want to cut back on staff expenditure. Like other corporations, the  trend is towards intensive investment in  fixed capital - which translates into  choosing technology over people. Centralizing and specializing their services  allows them to achieve this goal. When  they can split the many complex procedures  that are performed by one job category  into a series.of simple, self-contained  actions that can be performed by machines,  or failing that, by part-time employees  at terminals performing a single repetitive task, management has achieved two  things. First, they have succeeded in  eliminating several skilled full-time  positions, and second they have managed  to de-skill all the work that is performed, and can accordingly pay less.  Like other corporations,  the trend is towards intensive  investment in fixed capital —  which translates into choosing  technology over people.   Faced with these attacks on their working  conditions, women in the finance industry  are organizing to fight back before it's  too late. Mary Jean Rands and Jackie  Ainsworth have been working in the industry and in the Bank and Finance Workers  Union, Local 4 of SORWUC (the Service,  Office and Retail Workers Union of Canada)  since 1976. Currently, they are in the  process of withdrawing their local from  SORWUC to form an autonomous union around  the principles they feel will make their  next organizing drive a success. Despite  the serious situation in the banks today,  they find some aspects of it more favourable for organizing than they were in  their first drive in 1976-77.  Mary Jean and Jackie are using the issue  of the union as a catalyst to unify bank  and finance workers across the industry  around the above concerns. Kinesis  spoke  with them in July.  SORWUC has always come out in favour of  geographic locals which contain women  who work in a variety of industries and  occupations,  such as daycare, restaurant  and office workers in one local. Since  you've been in SORWUC since 1976 and now  O  rganizing  the Banks  the issue of occupational as opposed to  geographical locals is one of the main  reasons for your split,   is this something  new on your part?  M.J.: In the first several years of SORWUC  there was only one local, until we began  organizing the banks in '76, when we  formed the Bank Workers local. There was  always disagreement in SORWUC about  whether...there should be occupational or  industrial locals or just geographic locals.  There are those of us who felt,  and still feel, that it's basic to trade,  unionism to organize around occupational  or industrial lines.  Our objective as bank workers is to bring  together bank workers from different banks  and other financial institutions, generalize our problems and experiences, and organize around them. It's really true  that the kinds of things we would want to  fight for in union contracts tend to be  the same. In terms of having the power  to win concessions from our employers, who  are really big, profitable, and obviously  anti-union corporations, it's really important to be able to mobilize workers  throughout the industry. It's not enough  to have people organized in small units of  one branch here, another branch there...  J.: I think the success of our first organizing drive had a lot to do with the  fact that we were bank workers who were  doing the organizing, we were bank workers  who formed the union, and that controlled  the union.  Your position on bargaining unit automomy  is the same as your attitude towards occupational locals - that there 's more  strength in numbers.   Can you tell us what  you see are the strengths of master, bargaining,  as opposed to the bargaining  unit autonomy which SORWUC still supports?  M.J.: Bargaining unit autonomy means  that each branch (which is what the Labour  Relations Board has ruled is the basic  bargaining unit) has its own individual  collective agreement, and its own organizing strategies and goals. It seems to us  in our industry that this really weakens  working women by putting us in a position  where we have a unit of five or ten or  twenty people against this enormous employer.  J.: When the union says that it's going  to be master bargaining and have a master  contract, it actually takes a lot of pressure off the individual branches...because they can turn to the employer and  say, "Look, you can't just try to get to  us as individuals in this branch, or get  to us as an individual branch, you're  going to have to deal with us as a  group." So in the same way we say that  a union means that you don't have to go  to the employer as an individual, we're  saying that we shouldn't have to go as  one small branch to the Bank. Ultimately,  the best for us would be to be able to go  as bank employees in the industry to  what would essentially be an Employers  Council, but even a fall-back position  of being able to go as a group of branches  of one bank would give us a lot more  power.  What's your organizing strategy going to  be for the next year?  J.: We're trying to encourage some sort  of debate around what sort of organization we do need. Previously, we have  tried to convince people to join the  union. Right now, we're not doing that  as much as trying to raise the whole  debate, about whether we need a union,  and if we don't need a union, what do we-  need in order to defend ourselves against  what's happening now?  M.J.: We know now because of the confidential report from the Bank of Montreal  that was leaked to us that the Bank of  Montreal is planning to cut their staff  by 10-13% in B.C. in 1984. We don't know  what the Bank of Commerce target is, or the  Royal's, but I bet it's something similar.  When you look at what the Bank of B.C. has  just done, it amounts to the same thing.  But rather than cutting 10% of the staff,  they've cut 10% off everybody's hours...  Where I work, the bank is trying to get  the employees to think what's happening  there is the result of particular things  that are happening to the Bank of B.C.  that management has no control over. So it's  important for us as Bank of B.C. workers  to know that the same thing is happening  in the Bank of Montreal...  ... if we don't need a union  what do we need in order to  defend ourselves against  what's happening now?   One specific thing we're doing more thart  we have in the past, is talking to lower  level management and first line supervisors  who are, in many cases, the people who are  really having their jobs eliminated by all  this specialization. During our last campaign those people really did the bank's  dirty work for them. They were active in  intimidating clerical workers and making  it really difficult for us to organize the  union.  Now, the actions by the banks have meant  that they are losing the loyalty of those  people. Quite rightly! Why should people  be loyal to an institution that's demoting  them, transferring them without their consent or agreement, cutting their wages or  freezing them? At the same time, the banks  are making them responsible for customer  service while they're making it impossible  to give good customer service by cutting  back on staff. We're talking to lower level  management people in the hopes that we can  convince a lot of them that they would in  fact benefit from clerical workers organizing, and there's no reason for them to take  the banks' side against us.  Banks used to be -known for the transiency  of their employees because the hours were  long,  unpaid overtime was the norm,  salaries are low.  Now, people are hanging  onto their jobs because there 's nowhere  else to go.    Do you think this will be an  asset in'your organizing?  J.: Yes, all those things are basically  the same. There's unpaid overtime, hours  are long, the pay is lousy, but for the  first time in a long, long time, the workforce is really stable. There's virtually  continued on page 30 September'84   Kinesis   11  COUNTRYWOMEN  L  lvmg  on the Land  Canadian f armwomen work an  average of 101 hours a week.  Farm work is stressful and women  are often isolated from basic services,  but they still enjoy their  chosen lifestyle.  by Maureen Trotter  Well, it's town day tomorrow so I'd better  get this written if I'm to post it tomorrow. Between housework, two pre-school  children, the garden (canned the rhubarb  finally yesterday), work on the roof of  the new barn, the regular chores and a  couple of interesting new books, I've  managed to do everything but write. But  I promised myself this was the week. My  weeks go from Wednesday town day to the  next Wednesday town day and today is  Tuesday!  It is hard to define 'rural women' and  harder still to talk about rural women in  the interior of B.C., as not many studies  have been done in B.C. The best known is  the Northern B.C. Women's Task Force's  'Report on Single Industry and Resource  Communities'. Although these women are  living in an urban setting, lack of  access to services and opportunities  presents many of the same problems faced  by rural women. Families living in rural  areas but working in cities are another  rural group (the acreage owners). The  group studied the most in Canada is the  rural food producers, the farmers. But  even this classification is hazy because  many farmers have family members working  off the farm and conversely many rural  families who work in town also have large  gardens and a few animals.  Then there are the hired farm workers,  often immigrant women who come from the  cities to work in the fields of the Fraser  Valley and the orchards of the Okanagan.  The Canadian Farmworkers Union is organizing the Fraser Valley workers to change  their appalling working conditions.  We know the most about rural farm women  across Canada. The National Farmers  Unions and the Concerned Farm Women in  Ontario both published good studies in  1983. We know farm women work hard and  have little leisure time. Generally they  bear and raise children, do most of the  household tasks, sometimes including  feeding hired help and doing their laundry.  They also keep the account books, pick, up  parts and supplies, and perform a share of  the farm work, usually the gardening and  often the feeding and watering of livestock  Some women are involved in all aspects of  farm labour, from milking cows, operating  and maintaining equipment and cleaning  barns, to building and repairing farm  buildings and fences, doctoring animals  and on and on. And sometimes farm women  work off the farm at waged labour. And so  we have the 'triple day.'  On the average, farm women spend 53 hours  a week doing housework and child care,  29 hours per week on farm work, and 19  hours in the wage labour force - a total of  101 hours. While many women, myself included, enjoy and value the diversity of tasks  and the vast range of skills developed to  do it, there is no denying that farm women carry a heavy workload, which generally  is not afforded much recognition or status.  Until recently, farm women could not be  paid for the work they did and therefore  were not eligible to pay into the Canada  Pension Plan or collect benefits upon  retiring.  Women's labour has remained a hdden cost  of food production. The exploitation of  this labour has been essential in maintaining the federal government's 'cheap  food policy', in effect since World War  II. Canadian family farms are increasingly  experiencing rising input costs and declining profits. They are pressured to  expand their operations, requiring more  land, bigger machinery and higher debt  loads, leaving them at the mercy of fluctuating interest rates. Eight-six percent  of Bruce County, Ontario farmers surveyed  said they were worse off financially than  they were in 1976.  Forty-five percent of Canadian farmers  have a family member working off the farm  and re-investing that income to keep the  farm viable. The true value of the labour  of all family members needs to be calculated to reflect the actual^ost of food  continued  next  page  xumsa^*\y3BBDOL  ®*^TMm%m%m*>**m3m.*  vfoxaSM*»y|F?Py> * »■»-* ^ -TMfr *-fjftA< September *84   Kinesis   13  12   Kinesis   September 1S4  i  COUNTRYWOMEN  production in order to make changes in  government and marketing policies which  determine the price paid to the farmers  for their food.  Within this economic system women sometimes  experience additional discrimination. Banks  are often reluctant to give loans to farm  women and salespeople, and buyers sometimes will not deal with farm women. Women  are beginning to organize for these changes  for example, the Women for the Survival  of Agriculture in Ontario.  The legal status of farm women is not protected in law. In divorce proceedings, how  the farm is divided is left to the discretion of the judge. It is not considered  a family asset and the woman must show  how much she contributed to the farm by  her labour and/or financially. Her contribution of housework and child care is  not considered farm work. It seems,  mostly, that the decisions handed down are  reasonably equitable, but in the case of  Murdoch v. Murdoch in Alberta this was  far from true. After 25 years of marriage,  working at everything her husband did as  well as contributing financially, Mrs.  Murdoch was awarded no property at all  and $200.00 per month.  It is helpful to have the farm in joint  ownership and at least 65% of farms in  Ontario are now jointly owned.  Health is another hidden cost of food  production. In the NFU's study, 47% of  families reported health problems related !  to the farming environment, including such  things as allergies; hearing, back and  respiratory problems; accidents; chemical  related complaints and stress.  Farm women are underrepresented in media  articles across Canada. Less than 1% of  women's coverage in 1980 dealt with agricultural women although 6% of the female  population work on registered farms and  Ai  y lif estyle is not  without disadvantage, but I prefer  where I am. There is a wildness  here, hard to describe, miles of  dusty rutted roads, and many  people who live beyond the phone  and hydro lines as I do.  many more of the 12% of rural women also  produce food on a smaller scale. When  commercials portray farm women it is usually an unrealistic image that is presented of some idyllic setting from years  gone by with the women as bystanders or  serving the men who are relaxing out of  doors. Farm women are rarely seen  doing farm work and are often pictured as  being unintelligent, old-fashioned and  unambitious. Farm women's self-esteem  suffers as a direct result. More and more,  accurate media coverage is necessary to  counteract the negative image.  Contrary to popular myth, farming is one  of the most stressful occupations in  North America. The weather, the fluctuat  ing market prices and interest rates, all  factors beyond the control of the farmer,  cause the most stress. Financial worries  due to the economic squeeze create extra  stress. Lack of leisure time is stressful  as well.  There is an additional list of stress  factors that farm women share with all  rural women. The isolation and loneliness  of rural women and the distance to services causes stress. The lack of access to  employment opportunities, educational  institutions, recreational and cultural  activities, quality day care and medical  care causes hardships for rural women.  Transportation, commuting time, and the  cost of gas are all maj.or obstacles for  As well as the physical symptoms of stress  (sleeplessness, muscle tension and so on)  other effects of stress are marital tension and breakdown, alcoholism and drug  abuse, wife battering, child abuse and  depression. These problems can remain  invisible in isolated settings and services to deal with them are often inaccessible and inappropriate. Police and service workers are reluctant to travel out  to rural women who cry for help. These  issues are ones I would like to study  further.  Although I see some of my neighbours working out full time to subsidize their  farms and getting further behind, and I  know of alcoholism, drug abuse and wife  battering, I also hear about the satisfaction of women who enjoy the work they  do. The NFU study showed over'80% of  respondents were satisfied with their  lifestyle. My lifestyle is not without  the disadvantages listed, but I prefer  to live where I am rather than in an  urban area. The countryside of the Cariboo is beautiful. There is a wildness  here, hard to describe. There are miles  of dusty, rutty roads and many people  Quesnel Women's Resource  by Maureen Trotter  The Quesnel Women's Resource Centre started when a couple of rural women friends  without phones saw a need and began meeting in the Safeway parking lot.  At different times women in Quesnel have  met as support groups to share specific  concerns. There is a Transition House,  and have been women's church and service  groups, a business and professional women's  group, a program for isolated and housebound women, women's institutes and sororities, but in 1981 there was no group  concerned with the issues of the women's  moement, or concerned with researching  and meeting local women's needs.  A number of women connected through the  social services, continuing education, and  college networks began talking about  possible alternatives. At those first  meetings, we had only a vague idea of what  we wanted. We knew we wanted a space for  women to meet together, first of all, to  break the sense of isolation felt by rural and housebound women. We wanted a place  where whomen could be counselled and  supported by other women, where the social oppression suffered by all women was  addressed, and where women were encouraged  to stand up for themselves and their  rights. We wanted resources and space  available to women to organize around  concerns of particular interest to them.  We wanted a place where many issues and  diverse activities would be supported  and co-ordinated. We heard Secretary of  State had money for Women's Centres. It  seemed like a good opportunity.  We opened as a drop-in and referral centre  in the summer of 1981. and received $5,000  for six months. We conducted a needs  assessment of local women and discovered  that childcare, transportation and employment were the three major problems  - in that order.  The women of the resource centre are an  amazing mix of urban and rural"*women, professional and homemaker, some in their  20's and some in their 50's, a few native  and East Indian women, but largely white  women. There are now 100 members. Our  space is a large but gungy basement on  the main street of Quesnel.  A small but beleaguered building committee  work with co-ordinator Marilee McLean  towards our dream of having our own  place, a place which would ensure a space  for women in Quesnel, no matter what the  state of government funding. Long term  plans include buying a lot and building  a log structure through several work  bees. A number of women at the centre have  building experience so this should be a  feasible alternative.  Our structure is the traditional Board  of Directors with committees made up of  Board members and regular members. We hold  meetings twice a month of the general  membership where the Board members and  other working members gather to exchange  information, making decisions, and so on.  The paid co-ordinator is responsible to  the Board. Making process accessible and  more clearly documenting our policies are  important goals for this fall.  An early focus of energy for the centre  was the licencing of our childminding  centre, the Strawberry Patch. After  COUNTRYWOMEN  who live beyond the phone and hydro  lines, as I do.  There also seems to be a sense of self-  reliance as well as a caring for and  co-operation with neighbours (which may  be essential to one's survival if someone  finds herself in a ditch at 40 below  some winter) not found In cities and  towns. I feel strong and confident in my  ability to provide for myself and my  family.  I have learned a tremendous amount since  I moved here six years ago. I learned to  enjoy solitude and to be comfortable  being alone. I've learned about trees  and the forest industry, about growing  and preserving vegetables, fruits and  herbs. I've learned about farm practices,  about domestic and wild animals. I've  learned carpentry, and one of my most enjoyable activities is building, farm  buildings and a large, solar, stackwall  house I'm still finishing. I've learned  basic plumbing and wiring. And I've  definitely learned about children.  But more than anything, I've learned about  social responsibility and taking power  to make changes. And so I've learned  about women and our issues and about the  peace -movement and I've acted on that  knowledge. I've learned to teach, to  write, to speak, to work with groups.  Many of these things I would not have done  had I remained in the city. My life is  immeasurably richer than it was before I  moved to our slowly developing subsistence  farm. The quality and values inherent in  our life in the country are sometimes hard  to define but they are why rural farm  women want to live where we do.  KINESIS is planning a supplement on rural  women to appear in the February,  1985  issue.  We welcome articles, photos, graphics and news.  Deadline for submissions is  January 11th.  Phone Kinesis at 873-5925.  Associations  and Resources  Associations  Women for the Survival of Agriculture;  R.R. #1, Winchester, Ontario K0C 2K0.  Women in Support of Agriculture;  R.R. #3,  Summerside, P.E.I., C1N 4J9.  Women of Uniform;  Box 186, Hussar, Alberta,  T0J ISO.  Canadian Farmworkers Union;  4730 Imperial,  Burnaby, B.C. V5J 1C2. (organizing the  Fraser Valley).  National Farmers Union  (organizing the  Peace River District of B.C.) 137 Scott  St., Winnipeg, Manitoba R3L 0K9.  Concerned Farm Women;  Box 457, Chesley,  Ontario N06 1L0.  Resources  Women & Agricultural Production^ Resources  for Feminist Research, Department of  Sociology, Ontario Institute for Studies  in Education, 252 Bloor St., W., Toronto,  M5S 1V6.  The Farmer Takes A Wife; Gisele Ireland,  Concerned Farm Women, Box 457, Chesley,  Ontario, NOG 1L0.  The Employment Practises of Farm Women;  National Farmer's Union, 137 Scott St.,  Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3L 0K9.  Women in Rural Life; The Changing Scene;  Minister of Agriculture and Food, Ontario  Government, Parliament Buildings, Toronto,  Ontario.  Rural Women; Their Work,  their Needs and  their Role in Rural Development;  Council  on Rural Development Canada, Ottawa,  Ontario (Council is no longer in existence).  Centre: rural feminism in action  leaving meetings exhausted from having  to scream to be heard above hordes of  pre-school children for several months  (it seems to be a rare woman in Quesnel  who is over 25 and does not have chilren)  we applied for and got Vancouver Foundation money. The Strawberry Patch can handle 16 children, 18 months to school age  or birth and up, if the mother is on the  premises. Heaven for us mothers I  After our first Take Back the Night cere- .  mony, we developed a Take Back the Night  committee, which quickly divided into two  - Women Against Pornography, and a Battered Women's Committee. The Porno Committee has laid a complaint with the police  about two locally available video tapes  and have asked them to lay charges. We are  working on a city by-law, and are planning  follow-up on an ignored request to local  merchants to stop their sale of pornographic magazines.  The Battered Women's Committee has published a pamphlet on battering and support  available locally. They have been attempting to work with Amata Transition House,  supporting their work, but also trying to  change their constitutional by-law which  states that a woman contemplating an abortion cannot stay at the house. We have  been trying to be low key about this conflict, but recently the issue hit the  news media. As a consequence, the Pro-Lifers and the feminists are rallying supporters for the expected showdown at the Transition House Annual General Meeting this  month, when both parties will try for  positions on the Board.  It is interesting to note that the Catholic  Women's League also dominates the School  Board, and refuses to allow family life  courses, among other things, into the  schools. That may be our next fight.  We have an International Women's Committee,  which organized a large celebration in  conjunction with International Women's  Day, with a focus on local immigrant women.  We hope some ongoing organizing of immigrant women will result in further activities by immigrant women. Our largest immigrant population is East Indian.  The Women's Centre worked briefly with  some Native women in both Carrier arid Chil-  cotin to help them organize a group of  their own which now meets at the Friendship Centre and has a focus on reviving  native dance, crafts and culture.  This fall we are planning a "Celebration  of Women" to honour the local women who  have attained national acclaim, or have  achieved in several areas, as a positive  way to enhance the status of women.  The programming committee organizes an  impressive list of workshops and classes,  including assertiveness training, peer  counsellor training- for volunteers, self-  awareness classes, and series on women and  the law, health, and aging. We advertise  in the Continuting Education bulletins  which go to every house, and charge a  nominal fee or no fee at all, as most of  the instructors volunteer their time.  Support groups formed or forming at the  centre include: Survivors of Sexual Abuse;  Lesbian/Gay; a Separated Men's group; and  a Teen Support Group. Women from the  Centre have sparked the formation of two  community groups, the Quesnel Peace Action  Group, and a Mothers (and others) Against  Drunk Driving.  The Women's Centre has had a lot of media  coverage, and most of the community is  aware of our existence and our work, but  we find it expedient to keep as low a  political profile as possible (it's not  always possible!) Quesnel is a small  conservative community, and it is important for us not to alienate ourselves. We  want to remain a possible option for women,  We find it desirable to encourage new  women to become involved and learn about  and take action on issues along with more  experienced activists.  It has been the experience of some feminist groups in the north that their politically radical stance has ostracized them  from their community. Their power, their  options, and the possibility of new members to replace burnt out or moved away  women were lost, and the group collapsed  in on itself. It's a fine line we tread,  and now without its disadvantages. However, it's where we are at this point in  our evolution. To be available to women  in need, the service component is very  important to most women at the Centre.  We have some, limited, contact with other  women's groups, usually regional contact.  We look forward to contact with other  groups, as we sometimes feel isolated and  ignored here. The desire to share with  others is what prompted this article -  an account of hardworking feminists keeping  the women's movement alive in the interior  of B.C.  wm,:*L.      »■       n-iy.   err.   a.   a^.,^  iffffiP  SOmSkpi 14   Kinesis   September TJ4  PEACE  Nuke    ||  Free  Ontario  The Campaign for a Nuclear-  Free Ontario demonstrated at  the offices of Ontario Hydro  company on June 11, resulting  in about 50 arrests for trespass. Three women were held  overnight for refusing to  identify themselves, and a  fourth woman, Joanne Young,  spent a week in jail before  having charges dismissed and  being released. Trials for the  others are scheduled for August through October.  Two other people were arrested for breaching the peace  during the court appearances  the day after the action, and  one of them, Abie Wiesfield,  held for one week-on non-payment of a fine from a previous  civil disobedience conviction.  Other minor harassment arrests  are still being made in Toron-  -Nuclear Resister  Birmingham WONT Camp for Peace  and Justice  Vancouver Peace  Centre to Meet  Sept. 18th is the date of the  first general meeting of the  Vancouver Peace Centre Society  to support the establishment  of a permanent home for peace  in our city.  Our goal is the creation of an  information and communications  centre for disarmament and  world peace. To help achieve  this, please come prepared to  let us know what part you want  to play.  The meeting will include:  • a report on the proposal for  the establishment of a world  peace institute in Vancouver  by 1986.  o a screening of the National  Film Board production "No  More Hibakusha".  • an update on the society's  activities.  The gathering will also be an  opportunity to become involved  in special events, fundraising  and membership activities.  The general meeting will be  held on Tuesday, Sept. 18th  at 7:30p.m. at the S.P.E.C.  building at 2150 Maple Street.  The Women's Encampment for a  Future of Peace and Justice  opened in July for a second  season of community education  and outreach, protest and resistance at the Seneca Army  Depot near Romulus, New York.  Seneca is a major nuclear  weapons storage facility and  transshipment point for nuclear weapons going to Europe.  At an opening ceremony at the  Depot gates on July 14, about  100 people gathered to plant  a rose bush, share matzoh,  the bread of oppression, and  the "water of life". Five  women scaled the fence and  were given ban and bar letters.  On Monday, July 16, the 39th  anniversary of the first nuclear weapons test in Alama-  gordo, New Mexico, twelve women crossed the fence during  a morning action. Later in the  afternoon, women wove a large  web and seven women wove themselves together before crawling under the main gate. At  this point, a long-time counter-protester announced she  was protesting the lack of  security at the base and  climbed under the fence behind the others. Altogether,  17 women received ban and bar  letters, including the counter protester, and two were  cited for re-entry. Their  trial is set for August 3.  Late in July, a college professor from Minnesota doing  research on Matilda Joflyn  Gage, a 19th century feminist  in the Seneca Falls area,  dressed up as Gage and crawled  under the depot fence. Sally  Roesch-Wagner was released  with a ban and bar letter.  Other major actions were planned at the encampment in August, but no news had been  Pentagon  harvests death  On July 12, Jan Kuenning was  sentenced to one year in  federal prison for pouring her  blood on a pillar of the Pentagon last Good Friday, and  for blocking one of the entrances. She had refused an  offer of probation, claiming  she could not put her conscience on hold.  "It is' my preference to go  out and pour blood as soon as  possible," Jan said, "for the  Pentagon must be named again  and again for the bloody char-  nel house that it is." The  judge replied, in part, "You  cannot express your views with  blood. It is only your religious conviction that the Pentagon is murdering people." Jan  answered, "Justice is no longer served by my remaining silent. This is blood that cannot be washed away in spite of  repeated attempts by the Pentagon to wash those pillars.  The harvest of the Pentagon  is death...My sense of the  injustice being done is what  compells me to speak out."  Letters can be sent to Jan  Kuenning, D.C. Jail, 1901 D.  St. SE., Washington, D.C.  20003. ",    , _     .  M  -Nuclear Resvster  Women weave web at plant  Fifty women and children marked May 24, International Wo-  ment's Day of Nuclear Resistance, with a walk to the  Sanders Associates plant in  Nashua, New Hampshire, where  they concluded a celebration  by weaving 13 of the women  within a web of life on the  steps of the plant. Sanders  has a joint contract with  General Electric for the Army  and Navy's Integrated Electronic Warfare Systems (INEWS),  Women plan conference to prevent nuclear war  What brings Republican Representative Claudine Schneider  together with Representative  Geraldine Ferraro (Dem) - and  Helen Caldicott, Shirley Chis-  olm, Matina Horner, Gloria  Steinem, Bishop Marjorie Mathews, Mario Thomas, Barbara Jordan, Billie Jean King and Joanne Woodward?'.  They're joining 240 other women  leaders in the halls of the U.S.  Congress on Sept. 12th to  launch a united women's effort  to prevent nuclear war.  This will be the first National  Women's Conference to Prevent  Nuclear War. Its purpose is:  • to gain visibility for women  - and underscore their role  in ending the nuclear arms  race -, through nationwide media  coverage  • to create a strong conviction  among all women in the U.S.  that this is a top priority on  their personal agenda,  as well  as on the national agenda  • to develop a comprehensive  foundation of knowledge about  nuclear weaponry and provide  women with new tools and skills  to increase their influence in  the public arena  •to validate women's perspectives and viewpoints, thereby  encouraging each woman to be7  come informed and involved in  preventing nuclear war.  which protects tactical and  strategic nuclear bombers on  their missions.  The 13 women, members of the  New Hampshire Womyn's Peace  Network, were arrested and  charged with disorderly conduct and trespassing. They  were taken into custody, stripped of shoes, glasses, jewelry  and all but one layer of clothing before being arraigned in  the garage of the police station from which the public and  press were - excluded. Objecting to the scene, the women  held hands and turned their  backs on the judge. Several  hours later, they were released with a June 2 trial date.  For ten hours until their release, supporters vigiled in  the lobby of the police station.  At their trial, the women,  defending themselves, insisted that the court wait while  they formed a circle, discussed and reached consensus  on various points. Disorderly  conduct charges were dropped  midway through the first day.  While the many policemen involved testified, the women  repeatedly insisted that they  be referred to as "women" and  not "ladies" or "girls" as  some witnesses did. The women  were eventually convicted and  served seven days in jail.  The women plan to initiate  more direct action against  weapons manufacturers in the  future. For more information,  contact the New Hampshire  Womyn's Peace Network; Box  311; Concord, JM 03301.  -Nuclear Resister September '84   Kinesis   15  ANTI-AUTHORITARIANISM  Nonviolence  Women and  the Dream  by Carole Milligan  There were thousands of us. Sitting on  top of the Seneca Army Depot fence, that  hot sultry August day, an incredible calm  came over me. There were thousands of women representing all corners of the globe,  all there for the same reason - the dream:  a future of peace and justice.  That calm was generated by these women  and other women I had met and heard about*  Hundreds tumbled over the Seneca Army  Depot fence that day. The Seneca action  was one of hundreds of actions that are  going on world wide. Women are making  their concerns/feelings heard. Many,  like the women at Seneca, through civil  disobedience. At last count there were  over 400 peace camps around the world and  the majority of people who support them  are women.  While sitting inside the Seneca compound,  waiting to be processed and given a ban and  bar letter, I thought of a woman I had met  about a year previously, from Mauritius,  off the south east-coast of Africa. This  woman belonged to an organization determined  to change the laws on marriage through the  government. Laws based on the Muslim religion. This same organization was struggling  for the exploited working woman trying to  change intolerable unsafe/unhealthy working  conditions. They didn't stop there, they  were also setting up health collectives  for women.  More recently I heard of some Grenadian women after the United States intervention.  They held their ground when the military,  as instructed, tried to break up their  Easter Sunday church service because there  are to be no large gatherings in Grenada.  The men left at the military's insistence  but the women stayed.  Conciously or unconciously, the women at  Seneca, the women in Mauritius, the women  in Grenada, are actively participating in  ipating in activities that  will bring about socij"  change.  They are protesting and persuading, they are practicing non-cooperation and they are  interveneing in  a cultural  structure.  All of this  fits into  Authoritarianism,, according to the dictionary, means blind submission to authority,  to those in power* Many of us blindly submit to 'leaders' who pvofitjmm Women's -  oppression, who continue to pile up nuclear weapons, who pollute tfi&jmgpth, and ,  perpetuate poverty in the name of profits and productivity* -t^  We can blindly submit, blinded-over and over again by our own feelings of powerless-  ness and despair. Or we can open our eyes. Look around. We'-WtM^see many strong movements for peace and justice.  We will see that those who have power have no right to  take that power from us, and we will see the threat which this realization poses to  them. Political movements such as feminism, anarchism, and nonviolence are all threat-   "  ening to those who would rule.  In Canada we see just how threatening the new Canadian  Security Intelligence Service (on this page) will be. But we are not givi^^Mj, .we are  working steadily with our hearts and our minds to change nob just the, world'out there,  but the world.we live in day to day. THis. is why articles on nonviolent civil disobed*-  ience and feminism and anarchism are included in this section. Just as there is authoritarianism, there is anti-authoritarianism, an opening of eyesy^and a return of the  to live as we choose, not as someone else tells its.  '.'•• -      what some i  in and tha  dole:  ely participating  Nonviolence as a means of social struggle  is not new. The suffragists, Emma Goldman,  Lucretia Mott, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton,  to name but a few, all used forms of nonviolent strategy. But nonviolence has only  begun to be developed in a conscious way  in the last several decades. Mohandas  Gandhi (1867 - 1948) marked a watershed in  the development of nonviolent struggle. He  was the "first to combine a variety of  tactics according to a strategic plan in  a campaign of explicitly nonviolent action,  and the first to conduct a series of.  campaigns toward long-term goals."  In December 1955, Rosa Parks refused to  surrender her seat to a white passenger in  Montgomery, Alabama. She was part of the  movement of Black people to end racial  oppression. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.,  "attained national prominence as a spokesperson in the   (civil rights) struggle,  demonstrating that nonviolence could win significant victories, not only in India,  but  also in the U.S.,  despite racial violence  and intimidation." * Later anti-Viet Nam  protesters used nonviolent actions to  change government decisions.  Throughout history conflicts have been  solved by war. Now, I feel, we have an alternative to this pattern of war and warring,  and that is nonviolence. Martin Luther King  described nonviolence as a way of seeking  full social, personal and political freedom  in a manner consistent with human dignity."  Nonviolent actions take in everything from  speechmaking, picketing, petitions, vigils,  street theatre, marches and rallies to  nonviolent interventions, such as sit-ins,  occupations, obstructions, of "business  as usual" in offices and creating new  social orders or parallel governments.  They include a'ctive non-cooperation such  as not paying taxes, withholding rent or  Nonviolence has to be tried,  for our children, for our friends  and lovers, for the earth.   utility payments, civil disobedience,  draft resistance, and fasting. Non violence  does not mean turning the other cheek. It  means actively participating to create  change. It doesn't mean that no one will  get hurt, but that many won't.  Nonviolent theory is becoming a way of  life for many women. It incorporates  i conflict resolution, constructive criticism  and consensus as part of an ongoing way of  exercising this theory. But the heart and  soul of nonviolence is participation and  input of ideas and expressions by many.  We learn how to confront situations that  are intolerable, situations such as the  construction and deployment of horrendous  weapons - weapons, the like of which we  have never  struggling .  being    j  lands  seen before. We are  against native peoples  forced from their  either through weapons testing, using  the land for export  crops, or other forms  of imperialism. As  we are con- 16   Kinesis   September '84  ANTI-AUTHORITARIANISM  Canadian Security Intelligence Service  The purpose of the CSIS is to collect .. .,  analyze and retain information  (on) activities that may on reasonable grounds be  suspected of constituting threats to the  security of Canada." (Section 12(I)  ).  The words "on reasonable grounds" axe  an example of the many vague phrases  throughout the Bill, which allow for wide  discretionary power on the part of the  CSIS. Its targets are those "suspected"  of "constituting threats to the security  of Canada."  The word "suspected"  allows  targets to be chosen on speculation or  suspicion, NOT on evidence. The target  becomes guilty until proven innocent.  "Threats to the security of Canada" are  defined in a four part definition. Three  and a half parts of this four part definition describe threats to the security of  Canada as internal dissidence of Canadian  citizens and immigrants. The remaining  half is given over to espionage. This  makes it clear that the CSIS is primarily  concerned with protecting the Canadian  New name, same game, more power  by Zoe Lambert  Have you ever wondered if your phone might  be tapped or your mail opened? Have you  ever felt like you were being followed?  It was probably your friendly RCMP officer  protecting you from threats to Canada's  security. But no longer!  Legislation to create the Canadian Security  Intellignece service (CSIS) has been  passed! This bigger and better spy agency  replacing the secret service section of  the RCMP, will be even more able to protect Canada from threats to security.  But, what are these threats? Why has this  power been extended and who is the CSIS  really protecting?  Bill C-157, legislation to establish the  CSIS, was introduced in the House of Commons by Solicitor General Robert Kaplan in  Nonviolence    continued from page 15  cerned fbr other women and we are actively  involved in opening doors to enable all to  healthy, well informed decisions about our  daily existence.  Nonviolence, in the way it is being used  by many women's groups around the world,  is in its infancy. I feel nonviolence can  be a long term strategy for social change  with the proper input from those that ark.  involved. Nonviolence has to be tried, fox  our children, for our friends and lovers,  for the earth. It will take strength, it  will take determination, it will take energy  it will take collective thought; it is the  only viable alternative that is acceptable,  to many of us, at this time.  * New Society Publishers, Why Nonviolence?  This article has hardly touched on nonviolence. I challenge you, the reader,  to do further research. Readings that are  available t/'^f*^'*'*  Conquest of Violence,  Joan Bondurant  Revolutionary Nonviolence,  Dave Dellinger  Politics of Nonviolent Action,  Gene Sharp  A Barbara Deming Reader,  Barbara Deming  Reweaving the Web of Life: Feminism and  Nonviolence,  Pam McAllister, ed.  Strategy for a Living Revolution,  George Lakey  A Manual on Nonviolence and Children,  Stephanie Judson, ed.  Write New Society Publishers,  4722 Baltimore  Avenue, Philadelphia^ P.A.  19143 and ask  for their list of publications.  May 1983. (See Kinesis,  July/August '83)  Due to opposition from provincial Attorney  Generals, lawyers' groups, civil libertar:  groups, the Conservatives and the- NDP,  Bill C-157 was withdrawn in November 1983.  Following minimal revision of the legislation, it was re-introduced as Bill C-9  in January 1984.  Bill C-9 was pushed through Parliament  despite opposition from the Conservatives  (who defended the RCMPs glorious, scarlet  uniformed image by advocating that the  secret service should remain in the capable hands of the RCMP) and dedicated filibusters by NDP justice critic Svend Robinson. Bill C-9 received final passage on  June 28, 1984.  The Secret Service section of the RCMP  has wanted to separate itself from the  RCMP since the 1950s, but has been prevented from doing so by the rigid RCMP  hierarchy. The Royal MacDonald Commission  Report, which looked into the RCMP wrongdoings of the 1970s, opened the door for  this separation to occur. The legislation  to establish the CSIS was based on only  vv NOT TO WORRY.  Canadians can be assured that they rest in the  forefront of the trends towards internal  oppression with a security service that is even less  accountable to its government than the CIA.  ONE Of the 285 recommendations of the  MacDonald Commission Report. That recom-  medation was to create a civilian agency  with a specific mandate, hence the introduction of Bill C-157 and subsequent Bill  C-9.  In its new form as the CSIS, the Secret  Service has not only achieved autonomy  from the RCMP, but has also secured increased power and control. This is provided by the wide mandate', broad powers,  and minimal accountability to Parliament  outlined in Bill C-9.  state from the Canadian people, NOT from  external espionage.  Once a "threat to the security of Canada"  has been determined, the CSIS may apply  for a judicial warrant against "the per-  cn or class of persons" (Section 21   (2E))  targetted. This warrant allows the CSIS  to open mail, tap phones, install and maintain, bugs, have free access to all government files, medical records, lawyers  records, banking records, residences,  cars, safety deposit boxes, etc. The  judicial control of warrants is misleading.  In 1982, of 1,170 requests for wiretaps  applied for under the Official Secrets  Act and the Privacy Act, NOT ONE WAS  REFUSED..  The accountability of the CSIS to Parliament takes the form of the Review Committee and an annual report by the Director  to the Solicitor General. The Review  Committee, composed of Privy councillors,  has no direct power over the CSIS. Members  of the Review Committee will be sworn to  secrecy. This will prevent any leaks and  ensure that the government will not be  faced with embarrassments like those  suffered during the inquiries into the  RCMP Secret Service action in the 1970s.  The annual report to the Solicitor General will contain only that which the  Director wishes it to contain. Thus  continued next page September'84   Kinesis   17  ANTI-AUTHORITARIANISM  Feminism  and Anarchism  by Isis  Anarchy. For most people, the word conjures  up images of urban terrorism, bombs,  Direct Action, revolution, violence, fanaticism, and chaos. In the fears of most  people, feminism hardly fares any better.  The fear and hatred which both anarchism  and feminism engender is not all that  they have in common. Anarchists believe  that no one should have power over anyone  else. Feminists believe that men as a  class should not have power over women,  but most extend this analysis to include  opposition to racism, classism, homophobia,  and other systems of oppression. The  result is that in this respect the two  often amount to the same thing.  PopVLAR   AJISCOMCEPflON  OP A   TYPICAL.  FeM.NIST.  Anarchist Emma Goldman said, "There is  no greater fallacy than the belief that  aims and purpose are one thing, while  methods and practice are another." Feminism  too knows that we must live the changes  POPVUAQ.  /MISCONCEPTION  OF TYPICAL ANARCHIST \  In practice however, there are obvious  differences between anarchy and feminism  - the most obvious of which comes from  working in a radical movement which is  mixed, and one which is all women. The  anarchist movement has tended to be male  dominated. Historically, most of the  anarchist heroes - in itself a contradiction in terms - have been men, though  there has been room for women like Emma  Goldman. It is probably true that Emma  would have made room for herself in any  movement. And she was ridiculed for her .  concern about women's issues, such as  birth control, while the popular (male)  anarchist movement focussed its attention  elsewhere. The problem for male anarchists  seems to be putting their theory into  practice.  There has, however, been a great deal  of interplay between anarchism and feminism, and between anarchists and feminists.  Over the years, the women's peace movement  has been an excellent illustration of  we wish to make on a day-to-day ba:  - the personal is  political,  create real change if we don't change  ourselves. Feminist methods of organizing  reflect this philosophy. Groups tend to  be small, local in nature, and run by  consensus. Anarchism, with its foundation  in individual freedom and participation,  frequently uses the very same process.  Feminism begins its analysis at the level  of the individual woman's experience,  while anarchism starts with the experience  of the individual.  On the other end of the continuum, from  the personal level to the political, feminists see the opposition as the patriarchy, while anarchists see it as the  state. Given that "the state" (used by  anarchists in a sweeping sense to mean  all authoritarian systems) is male dominated, these, again, are almost the same  thing.  Emma Goldman  CSIS continued from page 16  provisions to make the CSIS accountable  are ineffective.  The passage of Bill C-9 has created a monster called the CSIS. The CSIS is able to  justify targeting ANY Canadian citizen  or immigrant due to Bill C-9's extremely  vague definition of threats to the security of Canada. It has wide powers to  investigate, surveille and harrass its  targets.. Its targets will be Canadians  who practice legitimate dissent and legal  advocacy. Its aim is to control and suppress any ideology which challenges or  threatens the ideology of the Canadian  state. The only real control on the  CSIS is its budget which remains a secret.  This legislation is nothing short of  totalitarian.  The Canadian CSIS is only one example of  the mounting rise towards state control  intimately connected with increased militarism and the prevailing rise of the  right. Canadians can be assured that  they rest in the forefront of the trends  towards internal oppression with a security service that is even less accountable  to its government than the CIA.  For more information write: P.O.  Box 1718,  Station A,   Vancouver,  B.C.     V6C 2P7  Further reading:  Ah Unauthorized History of the RCMP,  Brown, Toronto: Lorimer  Men In the Shadows, John Sawatsky, Toronto:  Totem Books  RCMP vs the People, Mann and Lee, Toronto:  General Publishing  graphic by Isis,  this. The first few decades of this century  were a lively time for both movements.  In very simplistij^^erms,  the time wetffe fighting'to:  women, among other^«th±rigs  radicals were organizing?  came, the'first *^S|war?  mov.^^^t divided;-^ko^e to  theSplr effort, and^fther  pea^SI The Womett.V8j§|||ern  for Peace and Freedom was  1915 by ra<|ieal feminists  theWpc^m^ies were.lfron  feminists' of  the vote for  while other  |||bour.  Then  |||£ women's  become part of  to work for  tional League  founded in  who realized  |||i$ be fighting.  The anarchists were also a part of antiwar activities. Many anarchists and feminists knew each otnel^^bcially as well  as politically, -andi|||j|.te naturally  influenced each other.^Feminist anti-war  organizing was a lot less threatening to  male activists than work on the issues  which are clearly seen as women's issues,  such as rape and battering. Although it  is seldom acknowledged, these anti-war  activists were able tQ5'Jg|bhange information and support each o|plir, and so contribute to the strength of the overall  anti-war movement. Many of us do know  each other socially as well, although it  is easier now for radical feminists to  isolate themselves from all men. Anarcha-  feminists hope this situation will eventually disappear, although they see  autonomous women's organizing as necessary, given the current inequality of  power between the sexes.  The connection today between the feminist  and the anarchist movements is more explicit than in the earlier days of women's  peace work. The creation of anarcha-femin-  ism is in itself an acknowledgement of  this connection. Often at women's peace  camps and other actions there are women  who are familiar with anarchism and  anarchist organizing, and some who even  define themselves as anarchists or anarch-  feminists.  Not all feminists are familiar with  anarchism and not all support it. The  same is true of anarchists regarding  feminism. However, there is still much  that we can learn from each other. Anarchists have a long tradition of actions  and thought which can be inspirational to  feminists in our struggle, while feminist  recognition of women's oppression and the  need to change personally and globally  to end it is a useful and necessary contribution to the anarchist movement.  If you want to find out more about anarchism and anarcha-feminism, The Open Road,  available at local radical bookstores or  from Box 6135, Station G, Vancouver, V6R  4G5, is a good place to start. Other  suggestions include anything by Emma  Goldman, Anarchism: The Feminist Contribution Connection  by Peggy Kornegger,  Feminism as Anarchism by Lynne Farrow,  and Anarcho-Feminism: Two Statements,  all  available through Black Bear, 78.\A Crofton  Road, London SE5, England. 18   Kiiw: is   Septen!«»er "84  Media sexism:  START COMPLAINING!  September '84   Kinesis  MediaWatch complaint forms are available  to the public in both French and English  languages. MediaWatch is a National  women's organization angered by the mis  representation of  in Canadian media.  by Tova Wagman  The impact of media imagery and symbolism  in our culture is overwhelming. We are  constantly being bombarded with media  images of women that are sexist, exploitive, and degrading.. When we see a program  on television that really offends us,  like the coverage of women's events in  the recent Olympic games broadcast, we  see how subtle some-of the sexism can be.  MediaWatch had several complaints during  the Olympics. Most of them referred to  the announcers referring to women as  girls and young ladies. This kind of  sexism is unfortunately common yet degrading to women.  When we see this sexism, we may get angry,  sad, and may even tell a friend. Then  what? Often that's how far it goes. The  program continues, or the ad gets reprinted. People continue to watch, and  everyone is happy. Well not quite. Certainly the station is happy, but what  happens to us who have to see this every  time we turn on the television, or read  a magaz:  Many times it seems futile to complain or  take action against sexism in the media.  Often when you do call a station for  example, you get transferred from department to department. No one wants to take  responsibility. There are, however, ways  iplain that often provide positive  results. The following includes a list  of strategies that tell you where and  how to complain, information on MediaWatch  and our complaint forms, a brief analysis  of the kinds of images coming out i  the media, and a complaint form success  story.  Where and Row to Complain  I. Letter writing:  Writing letters as a form of complaining is good for complaining about  things like: store window-displays  (send a letter to the store and to a  newspaper editor), American and Canadian media, school boards, etc. Make  certain your letter is written in the  proper letter format as this holds  more credibility. It doesn't have  to be, but it's very helpful. In your  letter, say what you're complaining  about, why, and what could have or  could be done differently. You may  want to include what you're going to  do. i.e,: I have read Chatelaine  magazine for twelve years,  and if  this ad continues to run, I will  reconsider renewing my subscription  in the fall."  Sign it, get a copy, and  send the original off. Try to get a  few people to complain with you. If  you're complaining about print media,  get a copy of the ad/article to send  with the letter.  2.  Phone Calls:  If it's a local ad/article/program, etc.  you're complaining about, you can  phone and let them know what you think.  Recently a Vancouver printing press  stopped the printing of a Red Hot Video  catalogue because several people  called and protested. Just like letters,  the more people who call, the better.  Note the time of the call, the person's  name, and what they say to you. This  could come in handy later if you want  to write a letter or article about the  complaint as another strategy.  Complaining in person is good because  you're right t,here to speak your mind.  If you walk by a store that sells porn  or has an offensive mannequin display,  you can go right in and ask to speak  to the manager. If the manager isn't-  there, tell the clerk what you found  offensive. You may leave a note for  the manager to call you or get her/his  number.  4.   Demonstrations:  Demonstrations are a good act:  complain about something that has been  going on for a long time unchanged.  Along with others you can get your  point across and make your obj  known to the public through media  coverage. If you find something offensive in your community, call other  community or women's groups you think  might be interested in protesting with  you. For example, when Doug Collins  suggested MediaWatch and its "army  of snoops" be raped by the Russians  on CKVU television last summer, we  called, among others, the Russian  dty centre. His comment insinuated  that Russians are rapists. When organizing a demonstration:  -Be clear what you're demonstrating  against.  -Think about what you want to get  across to the public.  .-Get together and work with others  who've organized demonstrations befi  -Notify the media through press releases  or by phone.  -Know before who in your group will  talk to the media.  -Have identifiable marshalls to keep  people together.  -Have petitions or printed materials  (song sheets, leaflets, etc.) ready to  hand out.  -If you're organizing a march, print  up a map of the route of the march to  hand out (preferably beforehand).  -Be organized and loud with your  protests.  5. MediaWatch Complaint Form:  MediaWatch complaint forms can be used to complain  about any Canadian media. The complaint has a great  impact on advertisers specifically, as one complaint  (in their estimation) represents approximately  forty-four consumers. Therefore, if ten people complain about the same ad, that's like 440 people  complaining, and in that case the ad will most likely be removed. The complaint works well for all  media as long as it's Canadian.  It forces the  broadcasting and print industries to be accountable for their sexism. The complaint is sent to  different places depending on the kind of media:  a) All ads from all media go to the  Advertising Advisory Board in  Toronto (AAB).  b) TV/radio broadcast complaints go  to the Canadian Association of  Broadcasters (CAB).  c) CBC radio and TV go to the CBC.  \ d) B.C. and other Canadian press councils receive print content compla:  Take action while the program or ad is  being shown, heard, or published. Keep  it current. Make sure your name and address is on each complaint form and is  legible. Identify TV and radio sources by  their call letters i.e.: CKVU,  not  channel 9.   Include what you find offensive.  What do you see, read, or hear that contravenes the guidelines on sex-role-stereotyping? A general statement like "that  program was disgusting" will not get much  consideration, but "that program was  disgusting because the woman was always  naked and being watched by a man..."  will. Pick up copies of the guidelines  from MediaWatch, or call and we'll be  glad to send you copies.  An important thing to remember when registering complaints is, you're not the  only person responsible for doing something about the offensive material. The  ad agency, the publisher, tv station,  etc. all had something to do with distributing the content for public consumption.  Somewhere along the line after you  plain, someone will have to take respon  sibility. For example when MediaWatch  presented briefs to the CRTC on Pay TV  warning that undefined and unregulated  "adult" programming would open the  way to pornograghy on home television, the CRTC did nothing in  the way of restricting the materials on First Choice/Premiere Choix  pay television. Now the responsibility lies in their hand to do  something about mOvies like Vice  Squad, Private Lessons, and Playboy Fridays. They have had to  iinesis ^^^^  19  this is Offensive,  Insulting,  and Degrading to  WOMEN  propose new regulations on sexually  abusive programming, and are trying to  get a new clause into the Broadcasting  Act passed by Parliament in order to  back up this regulation. We need to  pressure governments and agencies to do  something about media which offend and  exploit women.  Images of Women  (1982),  published by the  Task Force on sexrol-stereotyping in  the media, set out guidelines for the  media to follow and gave them a two year  period in which to improve their portrayals of women. This two year period is now  coming to an end, and will be reviewed  in the spring of 1985. There will also be  hearings in the near future to determine  the renewals by the CRTC of CBC and CTV's  New Media Themes ■  The kinds of images coming out now in the  media seem more offensive than before  (although that's hard to believe). We're  seeing the "New Woman" who can be a  mother, wife, housekeeper, and executive.  Of course she has time in her busy schedule for exercise class, and to; relax and  read the paper (as in the billboard of  the new Province tab that was out a few  months ago). The media is now saying  "sure we'll show women working, but you  still have to clean the house,  take care  of your husband and the children. "  Another common theme we see in the media  is incest. Women are either being dressed  as young girls, or young, girls are shown  dressed as older women. An example of  the latter is Harper Bazaar's "Tiny  Treasures" which show six year olds with  makeup on and their nipples showing,  thus implying what they mean by "Tiny  treasures. "  Lesbians are rarely portrayed in the  media and if they are it's for the male  viewer. Fairly recently, we have seen  the "Double your pleasure girls." One  might ask whose pleasure is being referred  to in the ad. Most if not all media is  heterosexual. Alternative lifestyles are  rarely presented and if so, never in a  realistic way. This is not new, but the  lesbian theme is a recent one.  The media insists we diet, look young,  thin, and helpless. Calvin Klein gives  us women who are starved and androgynous  looking. Nothing wrong with a breast  exposed right? Wrong I Women are too  frequently shown in states of undress.  The viewers are always assumed to be  male. These images do not celebrate the  female-body, they exploit it.  licenses. Complaints are crucial now as  they go into the CRTC's files and become  part of the stations' records (including  radio stations). These complaints represent the only evidence of public disapproval of sexism in the media to the CRTC.  There are endless messages of media  sexism to complain about. For example,  MediaWatch received an ad for Western  Boot Liquidators and complaints from  sixteen people in Edmonton. The ad shows  a young girl standing sideways wearing  ,only a hat, boots, and underwear. MediaWatch sent off the ad, and complaints,  with a note expressing the need for action against the ad. We received the  following letter from the Advertising  Advisory Board: "We agree with the  complaint completely ...  in fact,  it's  being turned over directly to the  Advertising Standards Council for handling under Clause 15.  The ad probably  will not appear again anyway as it seems  to have been for a special sale.  However,  this kind of complaint is still valuable  because it provides an opportunity to  contact the advertiser and work towards  ensuring this kind of message isn 't  used again.  The- Edmonton Sun and the  Canadian Daily Newspaper Publishers  Association are being advised too. "  You can achieve success in getting media  changed or removed through complaint  action.  When complaining remember:  - the more people that complain about  the same thing the better.  - always make sure you include your name  and address and that it's readable.  - include a copy of the ad, article,  picture, etc. with the complaint, unless it's a billboard.  - if you see media that deserves praise,  praise it.  If you would like information, complaint  forms, or want to read a complaint to  someone, and get feedback, contact  MediaWatch at 873-8511 or write us:  MediaWatch, 209 - 636 West Broadway,  Vancouver, B.C. V5Z 1G2  If you're interested in becoming part  a women's action group to fight media  sexism, contact Tova Wagman at the  above number or address. 20   Kinesis   September '84  ARTS  Feminist film makers create counter-cinema  by Brig Anderson  The Pre-Gay Pride Week Film Festival was  sponsored by Pacific Cinematheque,  assisted by Women In Focus,  the Goethe Institute,  and S.F.U.  Films made by women in the 80's about androgynous and lesbian women are more complex, assured, and subversive than those  made more than a decade ago when the first  International Women's Film Festival took  place in New York. Since then a coherent  body of feminist film practice and theory  which provides a definite break with popular Hollywood film tradition has developed.  Feminist film makers are engaged in the  creation of a counter-cinema that challenges and subverts dominant cinema's patriarchal ideology, has definite links with  avant garde film, and opens up non-commercial conditions of production and distri-.  bution which are consistent with feminist  practice.  Counter-cinema deconstructs the mainstream's  narcissistic,- fetishistic and voyeuristic  desire to look at sexually stimulating  The Image Of DORIAN  GRAY in the Yellow Press  history - a "visual analysis of fascism  as exercised on deformed, institutionalized people."  Loosely based on Oscar Wilde's novel, Dorian Grey is the story of Dorian, who is  hired by the glamorous female president of  a multinational company, Dr. Mabuse, to  be an androgynous international sex symbol,  and actor in a television soap opera series.  Mabuse closely follows audience ratings  throughout the world, which are instantly  available through talking robots.  Dorian's consequent wild excursions into  a depraved underworld satirize the greed  and hysteria of the mass media which enslaves those who create its images. Dorian  is made to fall in love with Andamanda,  fantastic ruler of a colonized people who  "visual analysis of fascism as  exercised on deformed,  institutionalized people"  are sentimentalized in a wonderfully surrealistic opera set by the ocean. However,  their off-screen romance ends in Andamanda's  death when she is accidentally knifed on  stage.  Dorian in turn kills his/her oppressors  by knifing Dr. Mabuse and the company directors (who have turned into cocks) in a  ritualized blood bath. Ottinger says of  Dorian that she deliberately deconstructed  our gender expectations of him by confusing  his sexual identity, and making him appear  the androgynous hero, in contro 1 of his/  her destiny.  This was a demanding film to sit through,  both intellectually and emotionally. Ottinger uses voice-over, Fellini-like visual  metaphors, and unexpected juxtaposition  of sound and image to create a richly  fantasized, esoteric, Utopian world.  The Australian short film, Farewell To  Charms   (1979) has a feeling of camp or gay  sensibility not unlike some of Andy Warhol's'  movies, showing a menage-^artrois of three  somewhat self-parodying, stereotypical  a film by Ulrike Ottinger  scenes, and offers instead a kind of detached passion as the viewer examines her  feelings rather than allows herself to be  emotionally manipulated into a reactionary  catharsis.  Production and distribution of feminist  films also involve directors in money  raising ventures and in travelling with  the films to work with audiences to affirm,  explain and legitimate the not always  easily accessible subversive aesthetics of  avant garde/feminist film practices.  Director/producer Ulrike Ottinger from  st Berlin was present at the screening  her film, The Image Of Dorian Grey In  Yellow Press,   (1984, 150 min. 35 mm,  colour, German with English subtitles).  Ottinger says the film is the last of a  trilogy including Ticket Of No Return  (1979), which deals with a wealthy .female  alcoholic and her poor friend and Freak  Orlando  (1981) which deals with freaks in  lesbians: the romantic wistful femme Cicely  and her "vivacious but suicidal Emma" being  seduced by the "bionic bike dyke Stretch".  More a spoof than a satire, this film is  a light-hearted statement that lesbians  can have fun playing with identity crises.  The camera work shows a knowledge of avant  garde techniques: effective use of sepia -  a delicious brown and white - to show  Cicely pining in traditional roles; alternating with advertising shots of the cosmetics to which Emma is addicted; a knife  stuck in green grass is followed by the  motor bike paraphanalia; Cicely repeatedly  'Ģ peeling off a rubber face mask ("what it's  like to be each other"); in sepia again,  ering Emma's infidelity.  On Guard  (Australia, 1982) uses the thriller format, the concise, suspenseful plot  of a television whodunnit. Four women who  are also lesbians conspire to sabotage the  computer which stores the results of.ten  years' medical experiments about fertilized  frozen ova.  On Guard  priorizes two feminist issues,  lesbianism and birth outside the uterus,  by incorporating them in familiar film  techniques of straight narrative. The team  trains for the actual sabbotage as for  climbing a mountain so that female bodies  in strenous movement are part of the visual  pleasure. Apart from a weak guard, men don't  figure in the film, and are explicitly denounced as using government money that  should be used for promoting welfare and  social programs.  Director Susan Lambert reveals the realities  of lesbian relationships in showing the  conflict of a lesbian mother, who has not  yet come out to her ex-husband or co-workers  being helped to make that decision through  her political work. When one of the women  loses a diary and later complains of having  too much to do, her confidante listens and  also stands her ground, showing how women  can be both autonomous and supportive. The  women's humanity is contrasted with the  sterile, empty backdrop of factory and"  computer room.  All of Our Lives overlooks poverty  by Brig Anderson  All Of Our Lives  (directors Laura Sky and  Helene Klodawsky, financed by the Department of Health and Welfare, available  through the National Film Board, 35 min.,  colour, 16 mm) is a new feminist documentary in the NFB tradition of portraying a  social issue, in this case, women's response to aging in Canada. As Yvone, a  64-year-old wife and mother from Sudbury  explains: "...our work, which has been  meaningful to society, has never been  recognized. For 44 years I worked in the  home and I will never get a pension for  that."  Is anger a sufficient response to the inequities of aging in Canada? The women  who attended the Mature Women's Network  screening didn't think so. Letters to  various departments including the Prime  Minister would help, they said, but they  wanted more direct action. Many wanted to  form a group to explore low-cost housing,  others wanted to fight for homemakers'  pensions. Challenging attitudes and values  is essential in an aging population like  Canada's, but about sixty percent of older  women already face poverty and neglect.  As well as stressing organizing, the film  points to solidarity and friendship between women as antidotes to the isolation  and loneliness experienced by old women  when families grow up, husbands die or  divorce, and life styles change from comfortable to frugal. All Of Our Lives  shows  us Helene and Hilda, both in their eighties,  who have found new interest and meaning in  life by sharing their house and their time.  Women who have suffered devasting divorces  may find it hard to reach out to other  women, but it is happening. Unfortunately,  the smiling, well-groomed women i.n.All Of  Our Lives  point eloquently to the absence  in the film of the poor and very poor women who form the bulk of Canada's older  population.  The one truthful shot of a very old emaciated woman dying of cancer is not enough  to uncover the dynamic of repression that  forces mature women to look and act attractive, well-behaved and docile.  By interviewing mostly well-educated,  healthy women, the. director serves to reinforce the class values of the bourgeoisie  and collapses the politics of aging back  into itself. September'84   Kinesis   21  REVIEW  New Woman Press  by Jackie Goodwin  New Woman Press is a small two woman press  in Wolf Creek, Oregon, owned and operated  by Ruth Mountaingrove and Jean Mountaingrove  Much of what they publish is poetry and  music by Ruth Mountaingrove, who began as  a poet and branched out into writing songs  and music. She has published a book of  poems under her former name, Ruth Ikeler;  a songbook, as Ruth Mountaingrove; and has  recorded various cassettes of her songs.  For Those Who Cannot Sleep,  by Ruth  Ikeler/Mountaingrove; Turned On Woman  Songbook,   by Ruth Mountaingrove; Celebrations  and Ruth Mountaingrove Sings  by  Ruth Mountaingrove; Myth Of The Kore  and  A Winter Solstice Legend,   by Shekhinah  Mountainwater; We Come With Our Voices  and Rain Upon Dry Land,  by Carolyn   Wsjjm  McDade with friends.  -All from New Woman Press, Oregon-  New Woman Press sells cassette tapes  produced by many other women as well;  tapes of'music, storytelling and women's  spirituality. These tapes vary in production quality as well as artistic merit.  Some of them are produced in a studio and  are quite clean while others are home re-  graphic by Terri Roberton  corded and very rough. This review will  discuss tapes and books that make up a  large percentage of the New Woman Press  catalogue.  New Woman Press began with the mimeographing of some of Ruth Mountaingrove's songs  and $909.00. Ruth began as a poet, writing  from her personal experience and feelings.  Her long poem, For Those Who Cannot Sleep,  a recounting of her own Saturn Return, is  reminiscent of the poems of Pat Lowther.  Mountaingrove is more overtly self-indulgent and less dynamic than Lowther. She  holds back where she could have more impact if she carried the image through, but  the gut level emotion is clearly evident  and ^any woman who has undertaken an  attempt at self-discovery will identify  with the Sentiments expressed.  For Thoser.Who Cannot Sleep will not calm  you down or relax you so you can sleep,  but you will feel the honesty of the writer.  The images are often quite disturbing and  the poem is probably not as hopeful as  the poet intended. The conclusion comes  too soon, but as a major undertaking it  definitely speaks of this one woman's  experience in a way that can be shared  with other women.  The Turned On Woman Songbook  is a collection of 27 original songs by Ruth Mountaingrove. The book includes lyrics and a  melody line as well as guitar chords, and  a story about how each song came to exist.  Ruth Mountaingrove will' write a song about  any experience in her life; the cutting  . of firewood, watching a friend get a  haircut, the desire for land owned by  women.  Unfortunately, many of her songs about  mundane events are just that, - mundane.  For example, the haircut song relates  to the freedom of a haircut, and the introduction to the song talks about the  spiritual significance of a haircut, but  the song does not give any real appreciation of either of these ideas.  The lyrics of many of the songs are simplistic, and some of the music is dull  and unimaginative.  In the introduction  to the songbook Ruth states that she is  attempting to write women's folksongs  because none exist. These* songs are definitely something that women could sing  around a campfire, especially if songsheets  were passed around, but most, of them aire  not folksong material; While a few have  nice tunes, many of them are not particularly musically interesting. .  Also available from New Woman'Press are  cassette recordings of Ruth Mountaingrove  singing her songs. Ruth Mountaingrove  Sings  is a cassette of 18 songs from the  Turned On Woman Songbook  and Celebrations  is a collection of songs for Equinoxes,  Solstices, menarche and menopause. For an  individual tape you could request Ruth to  sing any 12 songs from the songbook, personally for you.  These tapes are not produced in a studio  so the sound is very much the home recorded quality. The music itself is uneven.  Some of the songs are better than others,  though the singing is never very good.  It is nearly impossible to sing along  with Ruth since it is extremely difficult  to sing as high as she does. These tapes  should never be examples of how the music  in the songbook could sound, although  they provide a relationship with the songwriter .  The cassette tapes by Shekhinah Mountain-  water are very enjoyable. These are taped  chants, ritual music as well as stories  for women. The Winter Solstice Legend is  a "new myth for the birth of light, to  replace the patriarchal Xmas tale." Mountainwater is a musical and lyrical storyteller and her style is hypnotic and enchanting. Her stories are based on visions  she receives as well as other ideas and  research. As well as the myth is a carol  she wrote, "Rejoice, Rejoice", and a  discussion of myth and birth myths in general.  The story telling and the singing is delightful. Shekhinah Mountailwater is not a  trained singer, but her singing voice is  clear and simple if not sophisticated. The  Mountainwater is a musical and  lyrical storyteller and her style is  hypnotic and enchanting.  discussion, while a little stilted and  formal, is reasonable and informative. The  spirituality is accessible and understandable to most women and not overly mystical  or dishonest about matriarchy or the power  of womanhood.  The Myth Of Kore  is a "feminist update of  the mysteries of Demeter and Persephone,  in chanted poetry and music." It is the  story of birth, growth, passion, death,  initiation arid rebirth. Once again the  style and presentation is lyrical and  the listener is drawn into the trance with  the storyteller. The discussion following  the story is enlightening and explains  that Mountainwater does not claim to have  found' the final or definitive myth. The  listener is encouraged to explore for  herself. These tapes and others are available from: Shekhinah Mountainwater, Box  2992, Santa Cruz, California, 95062 as  well as from New Woman Press. "Women are  encouraged to use this material for personal enlightenment and ritual" and they  will be very pleased if they do.  The most professionally produced and the  slickest tapes in this collection are  from Carolyn McDade. We Come With Our  Voices,   songs of Carolyn McDade and friends,  are musically interesting as well as  pleasantly melodic in the same genre as  music by many other feminist ballad and  folk singers. Some of the music is chanted,  much of it is in Spanish, most of it is  sung by a chorus of many women's voices.  The songs are written specifically for  women and reveal a woman's reality, - birth,  peace, alienation, sisterhood. Much of the  tone and feeling of the music and lyrics  is quite evangelical in approach. Understandable, since Carolyn McDade and her  friends are members of a lay, ecumenical  ministry, part of a Ministry in Music  with Women. The outlook of the music is  religious but not excessively partisan  or scriptural. There is a genuine questioning of male defined Christian values while  still maintaining many of the ethical  and moral precepts.  We Come With Our Voices  also features  Carolyn McDade singing by herself accompanied by her guitar, dulcimer or autoharp.  Her singing and music are very similar to  those of a classical gaelic folksinger.  An even more enjoyable cassette is Rain  Upon Dry Land.   Carolyn McDade's more  recent recording. Words to the songs are  included with both tapes. The tunes are  very melodic. When I heard the title song,  Rain Upon Dry Land,   I hummed the music  all day. Throughout the tapes, the words  are simple and they really say something  about women's reality and emotions.  The second side of each tape is more political than the first. Side two of 'We Come  With Our Voices  includes a story of an El  Salvadoran massacre and a song that says  "America, count not my name in counsel/  Count not my name, with you I do not stand"  ("America"). Also included are a song from  Nicaragua, one from Mexico, and a song  developed from a speech given at the 1979  Riverside Disarmament Conference. The  chorus of voices gives the songs all a  feeling of a greater community involved in  the music.  Side two of Rain Upon Dry Land  is also very  political and topical. Songs on this  cassette originate from South Africa,  from the chant "you have touched a woman,  you have struck a rock" to a letter quoted  continued on page 30 22   Kinesis   September '84  ARTS  Women in jazz:  Changing the image  by Gail Buente  Jazz, with its reputation as the most  virile and competitive musical style,  has traditionally attracted few women  musicians. Often women were only tolerated  for their decorative value, while their  musical abilities were ignored or downplayed. But in the last few years, the  jazz image has started to change. No  longer is a woman only accepted as a cute  curiosity tacked on to an all-male band.  No longer will women accept this kind of  tokenism. Now they are an integral part  of every aspect of the jazz field - as  soloists, leaders, composers, and arrangers. A larger number of women are venturing into jazz, more recording is being  done by women, and all-women groups are  becoming more common. It's an exciting  time for jazz music, as women make their  presence felt and help to determine the  direction the music will take.  And Vancouver is no exception. There's a  larger-than-ever group of women active  in jazz locally. The last year has seen  the release of two-debut albums by local  women jazz artists - vocalist June Katz's  Shiny Stockings  and Live  by Barbara  Fisher. Shiny Stockings  is a collection  of solid, straight-ahead swing standards  and ballads, with a smattering of uptempo numbers. Katz has an open, warm, and  relaxed voice which compliments her  honest, no-gimmicks approach to the  material.  Most of the tunes will be familiar to jazz  listeners - numbers such as Out of Nowhere,  Green Dolphin Street,   and The  Very Thought of You.   She's gathered  together some of Vancouver's finest instrumentalists to back her up. They  provide solid accompaniment and solo work,  while maintaining a good balance with the  vocals,- never overpowering June. It can  be said that this album plays it safe.  There aren't many surprises in store for  the listener. But, the impeccable musicianship and evocative arrangements, teamed  with Katz's accessible vocal style, make  it a very listenable debut. It's the kind  of album you'll want to have for a rainy  evening by the fire, or a lazy early  autumn afternoon.  In contrast is the much more contemporary  sound of a Live  offering by multi-faceted  performer Barbara Fisher. Both her vocal  style and driving arrangements are rock/  funk influenced. And her selection of  material is equally contemporary, including the Bearles' Day Tripper',   two Latin  tunes, and several originals by Fisher  and others. The originals are particularly  effective vehicles for her unique vocal  phrasing and piano style.  The production, too, is excellent, never  losing the excitement of a live performance, while varying the mood to suit the  individual peices. The shift, for instance,  from the wistful Goodbye Drive to the  celebratory Peanut Vendor is natural and  unforced. As with Katz's album, the backup instrumentals are always complementary,  never intrusive. This album will get your  toes tapping and your fingers snapping as  it moves along at a brisk pace.  What both albums share is superb production, top quality musicianship, and an  obvious respect for the wishes of the  vocalists. Maybe next time out, some of  the instrumentalists (other than Barbara  herself on piano) will be women. They've  both picked fine material, with not a  weak cut on either disc. These are two  very successful first albums for Vancouver women jazz musicians'.' Other names to  watch for among new women jazz musicians  are the following:  Renee Rosnes.  Without a doubt, one of  the best and most versatile piano players  in town. Whatever she plays, she makes  it sound easy, she knows the standards  like the back of her hand, but always  manages to make them sound fresh through  her imaginative approach.  Glenna Powrie. A powerful young pianist  whose name we'll be seeing a lot more of  in the future. Her style is strong and  inventive, and she holds her own, even  when she's playing with the legion of  musicians from the VEGI Band. Look for  her at the Landmark Jazz Bar.  Kathy Kidd.   For several years now, Kathy's  been a force, not only through her music,  but through her encouragement of other  women musicians. She's a pianist, singer,  and composer, as well as a teacher of  jazz piano. She's been doing some playing  as a single, as well as working in small  combos. She'll be a part of the Ethnofu-  sion concert on November 2 at the Queen  Elizabeth Theatre.  Bo Conlan  and Jesse Arens.   If you haven't  heard their Tuesday night sets at John  Barley's, now's the time'. Their music  is improvisational with latin, jazz,  and blues influences. Bo plays vibes and  sings lead vocals. Jesse's on keyboard  and harmony vocals. This duo cooks,  especially when Bo scats and Jesse lets  loose with that barrelhouse piano sound.  They're sometimes joined by friends like  Janet Lum on saxes, or vocalist Bonnie  If s an exciting time for jazz  music as women make their  presence felt and help to  determine the direction the  music will take.  Ferguson, who is also one third of the  trio called Gettin' Off Easy.  The other two-thirds are singers Kate  Hammett-Vaughan and Colleen Savage.  Don't miss these women; they are terrific!  Tight three-part harmonies, exciting  arrangements, and they know how to put on  a show. All three also work individually.  The trio will be at the Classical Joint  September 14 and 15.  And a few more names - vocalists Shannon  Gunn,  Tess Mariasine, Rory Steiman,  Holly Denny,  Cindy Melon,  Holly Arntzen.  Pianists Almeta Speaks,  Julie Blumenthal,  flutist Suzy Mallin.   Bassists Kitty King,  Kira VanDeusen.  And when in Victoria, don't miss dynamic  singer-pianist Louise Rose'.  Jesse Arens and Bo Conlan at John Barley's. September '84   Kinesis   23  ARTS  Still Sane  Sculptor mixes  art and politics  by Sima Elizabeth Shef rin  If there's anyone out there who still thinks  that art and politics don't mix, I. wish  they'd go see Persimmon Blackbridge and  Sheila Gilhooly's show Still Sane  which  will be opening September 29 at Women in  Focus Gallery. This two and a half year  project is a documentary, in words and  sculpture, of Sheila's successful struggle  to stay sane, to emerge whole from the  psychiatric hospitals where she spent three  years because she is a lesbian. The show  is coherent and elegant, although very  disturbing. It speaks from the experience  of its creators, and it makes a clear and  direct political statement.  Each of the clay sculptures by Persimmon is  a life-sized portrait of Sheila. Each piece  includes Sheila's words describing the  pressures and abuses and punishments with  which she had to live.  Persimmon made the sculptures by pressing  clay into molds which were made by taking  plaster casts of Sheila's face and arms  and body. Persimmon and Sheila discussed  the gestures and facial expressions together and practised in the mirror. When the  clay in the molds was leather hard it was  taken from the molds and cut or altered in  various ways according to need. In some  cases only fragments of the originals remain. It was then cut into peices to fit  in the kiln, and glued together again  after firing. Finally each piece was  painted, sometimes burned, sometimes combined with other materials such as metal,  or wire or feathers.  Although Sheila is the subject of each  piece, she is in no way merely subject  matter.  She and Persimmon worked on the  project together and bounced ideas off  each other. And Persimmon has had her own  unfortunate experiences with the mental  health profession. The work shows Sheila's  hurt and despair, but it maintains respect  for her. We admire her strength'rather  than pity her circumstances.  The twenty-seven pieces are hung in chronological order. The first words describe  Sheila's first relationship with a woman,  and her first visit to a psychiatrist.  The sculpture is a double image of her,  with her pleasure at coming-out being  gradually overshadowed by the self-doubt  planted by her reading, her lover, her  parents, and by the doctor who had her  committed. The bulk of the show describes  her experiences over the next three years  in and out of mental hospitals. Each piece  is carefully crafted. The sculpture matches  the words in mood and content. Each works  visually, and each fits into the series.  Here we see four white Sheilas painted in  autobody enamel scratched with pencil  marks, deadly but not lifeless, conveying  the gloom of the institutional lineups  they describe. I can almost smell hospital  on them. There, thick wire mesh all over  Sheila's body and especially her face  describes as vividly as the accompanying  words the disorienting effects of the  drug chlorpromazine which she was to take.  The grim comic relief of "Known throughout  the nuthouse for breaking windows and  escaping across roofs'!  shows a grinning  Sheila with feathers sprouting from her  shoulders. Again the words and images reinforce each other.  The shock treatment pieces are very depressing. One shows Sheila so fragmented she is  wired to a frame to hold together. Another  shows seven grey Sheilas representing the  seven people she describes who were sent  to shock treatment together that day. But  "after nineteen shock treatments"    she  tells us, "I still didn't want to be cured  of being a lesbian."  The rest of the sculptures are about her  determination to get out, to pass for  "normal",  and how hard'it was to do. Finally as she describes becoming less isolated,  meeting other lesbians who tell their own  stories, we see other women's bodies, including Persimmon's. The last piece is  One shows Sheila so  fragmented she is wired to  a frame to hold together.  "After nineteen shock  treatments I still didn't  want to be cured of being a  lesbian."  Sheila whole - the only piece in which  she is whole, with no jagged edges or  broken parts, with the words "Still Sane"  shining across her body.  Sometimes art shows make you feel incompetent, as though you shouldn't be there  unless you know more about art or at least  have the vocabulary to fake it. Persimmon  and Sheila's show has none of these problems  It is straightforwardly presented (as  Persimmon1 s work always is) and is not  difficult to read and understand.  However, it is not easy to look at because  of the subject matter, the incredible  oppression by the mental health establishment, and the pain and depression in some  of the pieces. It is easy to feel afraid,  or to feel guilty because you haven't  been feeling afraid. It took me a long  time to read the words, and I am frustrated  in my own attempts to describe the pieces.  Sometimes the work makes people feel sick  or cry. It is tempting to disassociate,  to find reasons why the show doesn't  apply to you - because you've never been  a mental patient or beause you're not a  lesbian, or because homosexuality is no  longer illegal or officially classified  as mental illness, or because surely  that sort of thing doesn't happen in our  enlightened and liberal age. But the story  is interspersed with quotes about the contemporary psychiatric industry which help  make the connections to every one of our  lives clearer. For example, twice as many  women as men receive shock treatment.  While Sheila's story is an extreme example  of how mainstream institutions try to  control our values and our lives, it is  only a vivid example of a process that is  happening all around us, and happening  increasingly as right wing governments  eliminate legislation which protects human  rights and restricts services which protect  human dignity.' Schools and other institutions teach us that the fair-skinned middle class nuclear family represents normality; that hierarchy and competition are  the accepted modes, and that private  property is an important value. The prison  system punishes those who deviate in some  ways; the mental health care system  punishes others.  Persimmon and Sheila have provided us with  a reminder of how vulnerable those of us  without money and power really are.  Sheiia's story is scary because it could  happen to anyone. But the show is also  a reminder that individually and especially collectively we can look after ourselves, and change for the better the world  in which we live.   *$&'ñ†''  Still Sane  will be showing at Women in  Focus Gallery, second floor, 456 West  Broadway from September 29 to October 20,  Monday to Saturday from 12 noon to 5 p.m.  In addition it will be open during the following events: Thursday, October 4 at 8:00  p.m. there will be a panel discussion on  psychiatric abuse; Saturday, October 13  at 8:00 p.m. there will be a performance  of music, theatre and dance; and Saturday,  October 20 at 8:00 p.m. there will be  a performance of music, theatre and soap  opera. Everyone is welcome to all events. 24   Kinesis   Septembers  ARTS  by Karen Henry  I can't pretend to maintain a critical  distance on a show which seeks the  of community and support of women and the  touchstones in the history of the development of feminine culture. The opening  evening of this show was itself a celebration of the support and sharing within the  community. Mythologies  is a feminist show  in the most nurturing, holistic sense,  dealing with loye and companionship and  beauty and landscape, philosophy and sym  bol. MichSle Wollstonecroft has created a  myth of images, of two sisters reforming  and informing history and designating new  touchstones for the present. The show  encourages our participation in this process by its sharing and by inviting everyone to write a myth in the specially  provided book. Michele has initiated this  process by writing one of her own which  redefines some of the characters and situations in our childhood tales.  Mythologies  is not about the struggle of  seeking but the joy of finding the creative  source in the beauty and texture of Greece,  in the ancient symbols and sacred places,  and in the intimacy of relationship. It  superimposes the present on the past; the  long shadows of two female companions,* one  a working photographer and one a companion,  grow into the landscape, merging with it,  maintaining their distinctive form but  allowing their identity to be a part of the  land and the light and the history. The alchemy of the moment aligned within the  frame melds the elements of past and present, person and place into a treasured  whole.  The shadows give a new dimension to the  famous Greek light. In one image the shadow of the photographer is as imposing, as  the columns, giving the presence density  and weight. In others the shadows are  spectres on a landscape, the light passing  through to the stones in the field. Or the  shadows become a part of the ancient symbols, as a hieroglyph, an archetypal figure  living in the past and the present along  with the symbol of the double bladed axe  which the shadow presents in one of the  photographs. This ancient form comes out  of the history of Knossos (a culture which  revered the female, creative, nurturing  source) and is now revitalized in the  women's community.  Each photograph in the show is carefully  composed with an eye trained to see rich  textures in the simplest moment and imbued  with a sense of the classic inspired by  the place. Michele's skill with the technology and the art of seeing accomplishes  the full measure of subtlety and beauty  in black and white photographs. She has  manipulated the space within the frame to  give wide angle perspectives and intimate  detail all within the range of the 50mm.  lens.  The photographs of the Greek structural  landscape move clearly from bold foregrounds detailing the present into the distant remains of the past. The images capture and bring forth the romantic elements  of western civilization which pictured  our storybooks and school.books as children - the enticing fascination of never-  ending archways and long paths lined by  stone wa-ls warmed in the sun and the  structures which have symbolized nobility  and. strength. It is this context which  gives the reinterpretation of the myth its  power.  I find that one photograph stands out in  my memory as a particularly strongly isolated symbol - the vortex carefully laid  in stone but implying motion, expansion  and contraction to and from the centre.  Contemplated in this context it is a bold  statement of the intricacy and depth and  even danger of the source; looking down  into it is dizzying, the swirling movement  belying its structural weight.  Mythologies  is a very personal show with  elements of the traveler and the romantic.  It comes from an emotional source and combines philosophy and idealism, feeling  and imagery, history and contemporary  lifestyle. The work is sensitively conceived and executed with a classic sense  of beauty and an almost impressionistic  feeling of well-being. The sun and the  companionship warm the perspective. It is  not a feminist polemic in a visual sense.  The feeling of communion and inspiration  is accessible to everyone as well as the  appreciation for framing and detail. But  the feminist consciousness gives it mythological proportions.  Mythologies appeared at Ideas: Sacred  and Profane,   1310 Government Street,  Victoria, B.C. from July 21 - August 3. September to _' Kinesis   25  ARTS  Joy Zemel Long  Woman, Mother, Artist  by Jill Pollack  When she was a young girl, Joy Zemel Long  used to watch her father paint signs. She  was intrigued by the smell, the colours  and the 'magic' of the letters appearing  on the wood...No wonder she would grow up  to become the fine painter that she is.  Joy Zemel Long has been a resident of West  Vancouver for almost all of her 62 years.  She lives in the same house in which she  grew up, raised a daughter and tended her  sick mother. Much of her life has been  spent caring for others and struggling to  maintain her own identity as a woman and  as an artist.  aft-  school. If she arrived early,  i purpose or by accident, she  "FOR ESTHER" (1965), lacquer on canvas, 60" by 48".  Zemel Long has been faced with extraordinary situations and, rather than internalizing them or pulling back from the world,  she has transposed her experiences into  her art-making. When she was carrying her  . daughter, Zemel Long contracted T.B. She  was immediately sent to Tranquille (then a  T.B. clinic) and confined to bed. As it  turns out, many people involved in the  arts, including Jack Hardman (ex-director  of the Burnaby Art Gallery) and Frieda  Deising (a prominent NWC Indian artist)  were also patients at the clinic.  Very ill, away from family and friends,  pregnant, Zemel Long spent the time  worrying about the health of her yet-to-  be-born child and painting everything in  sight. Painting other patients, the.view  from her bed, flowers, and self-portraits  became the means to cope with the boredom  and stress she was under. Her daughter,  born frail and needing attention, was  immediately taken away from her. Zemel Long  was transferred to the Willow Street Clinic  then back home to West Vancouver.  The next years were taken up, like most  mothers-' in most families, with the care  of her daughter. She painted whenever she  could find the time. Zemel Long was still  working almost exclusively in oils (dulux)  and her subject matter became almost entirely focused on women and children. (The few  exceptions were still-lifes and some landscapes) .  "Why," she is often asked, "are the women  and children faceless?" She told me this  story by way of explanation: Apparently,  she used to pick up her daughter every  day i  either <  would watch all the children as they ran  from the school building, free for the  rest of the day. She was struck by their  movements and gestures: from a distance  it was not their faces, but their essence  which she saw.  From that observation, Zemel Long pointed  out many aspects of being a woman and a  mother in our society. First, that her  time was not her own, she was tied to a  schedule determined by her child. She  also identified herself (at first without  the language or realization of feminism)  with all women. And lastly, Zemel Long is  concerned with action and motivation of  behavior.  When viewing her work, especially that  done after 1965, one is struck by the  predominant absence of locale - most of  her paintings do not situate the figures  in any given environment. The figures  just are. They are highly stylized, and  at the same time stripped to their essentials. They deal with and depict one woman's experience of life in its many and  varied occurrences. Usually, they pertain  to experiences after the fact. For example,  it was not until 1965 that she began a  series of paintings entitled, "Woman  Waiting", which recalled her pregnancy.  Like Alice Neel and others, Zemel Long  used a model, not herself, for her pregnancy series. She made the state of being  pregnant the focus of each work. It was  the fetus that was given importance, not  the woman, who was presented ajj^jhe vehicle  for birth. This strong work points'^osst;;^*'  the way in which some women experience  pregnancy: as a state of limbo and waiting.  Her depiction is neither completely negative nor is it completely positive; bright  areas of colour are in evidence and patterning used throughout.  *m  1 3i§:S3|cOt£&Ii3£f£2^  this series is a landmark. Not surprisingly,  the work was not shown as a series until  December 1983 (at the Burnaby Art Gallery).  Zemel Long's work has often been acclaimed  and then ignored. I believe that because  her work has not followed trends and has  dealt specifically with the experiences  of women, it has been consciously ignored.  Yet she is most definitely a senior, important, B.C. painter, who has produced  steadily for over 40 years.  Zemel Long makes interesting and important comments about being a woman, a mother  and an artist. Despite the lack of critical  acclaim, she continues to push her art-  making, and with every new work, new  growth is evident. Her work challenges us  to consider the everyday activities we  perform and in doing so, to challenge our  perception of the'world.  Joy ZemeljLong -t ^^ap-^brk can be seen  in the exJiib^ti^nf^-Generations: Two Views"  at the Northwestern National Exhibition  Centre and 'Ksan Museum from October 23  to November 15, 1984. This is a two-part  exhibition dealing with artists who are  both mothers and daughters. Judith Atkinson 's work comprises the first part of the  THREE GIRLS SKIPPING (1961), oil o  i, 36" by 40", coll: Crofton House. 26   Kinesis      September W  ARTS  Feminism from both sides  by Kay Ryan  As an expatriate Australian I was excited  to see Robyn Rowland's book in print. When  I left Australia in 1970 I was not even  aware of a women's movement although the  labour pains must have been beginning to  make themselves felt. There was a long-  established working class union movement  and, in response to the Australian government's alliance with the U.S. government  to "liberate" Vietnam, there was a very  strong anti-war movement. But concerned  committed women were incorporated into  those struggles and our own particular  problems were not addressed at all, at  least not to my knowledge, at the time.  fafMto  So, what a treat to see a book about  feminism coming out of Australia, edited  by an Australian woman, including contributions by many Australian women, along  with essays by women from other countries.  Robyn Rowland, in her introduction and  explanation of aims comes across as a  committed, thoughful woman concerned with  and working for women's dignity and freedom. The introduction shows that she is  aware of the women's liberation issue as  a social movement with political implications which can obviously be a threat to  the establishment in general and to men  in particular.  Women Who Do And Women Who Don't Join  The Women's Movement;  Edited and introduced by Robyn Rowland. Oxford University  Press, 1984. $14.95.  ft 'ñ† ffi  Holly Near  by Janie Newton-Moss  On Sunday, September 23rd, Vancouver will  get the chance to see the Chilean group  Inti-Illimani perform in concert with  Holly Near at the Orpheum. This is the  first large scale musical event promoted  by La Quena, the Latin-American coffee  house which provides space for progressive,  non-sexist and liberation music of all  kinds.  Inti-Illimani formed in 1967 and was part  of the cultural renaissance that flourished  under Allende's democratic leadership.  After Allende's assassination on September  11, 1973, Inti-Illimani, together with  thousands of other Chileans, fled abroad  to escape the dictatorship of General  Pinochet.  Waking Italy their home, Inti-Illimani have  absorbed influences from all over the  world. A seven piece band, they play over  sixteen instruments of all descriptions  but are firmly located in the "Nueva  Cancion" movement of cultural regeneration in Latin America.  Holly Near is well known to Vancouver  audiences. For the past thirteen years  she has been prominent as a new style  protest singer, lending her voice to  many causes. She is one of the leading  forces behind the coalition movement  that is forging cultural links between  North and South and Central America. As  part of this movement, Sweet Honey in  the Rock performed at a festival in  Ecuador while Holly undertook a tour of  England and Scotland with Joan Jara and  Inti-Illimani. Previously Inti-Illimani  have collaborated with Pete Seeger.  Concert organizers hope to have copies  of the Holly Near - Inti-Illimani live  recording released on September 1st for  sale at the concert.  Vancouver has a substantial Chilean population and though exposure at events  such as those sponsored by the Vancouver  Folk Music Festival Society Chilean music  is being introduced to a wider audience.  The organizers hope to attract both  afficionados and newcomers to this musical  genre, so come lend your ears to these  artists of international stature.  (Ticket information 253-6444 and on sale  at La Quena, Octopus Book Store, East  and West.  Rowland shows an awareness of the roles  that class and race should play in any  discussion of or action towards women's  liberation. This awareness seemed promising and I hoped that the essays would  address these issues in more depth than  one generally hears .paid to them. Her  idea to present both pro-feminist and  anti-feminist positions is interesting  and novel. Many of us tend to want to  ignore "the other side" and, personally,  I don't read those points of view any more.  But Rowland's thoughful appeal to both  sides to tackle the issues of abortion,  sexuality, class, race, motherhood, the  family and work could have evoked some  fascinating reading. Unfortunately, what  resulted was more of the same old stuff.  Out of the twenty-four contributors, fourteen could be classified as being in  favour of the women's movement, feminism  or women's liberation. All of these were  highly educated and, whatever their class  origins, all were professionals. Almost  all came from white, middle class, fairly  liberal backgrounds with a history of good,  supportive relationships with female  relatives and role models and most of  WOMEN WHO DO &  WOMEN WHO DON'T  JON THE WOMFNS MO/EMENT  CMrrCD AND MTROOUCf O BT ROBYN BOWLANO  them also had liberal, supportive male  relatives. There were certain strands of  similarity running through their essays.  They were thoughtful, humanistic, not  anti-men, not anti-children, tolerant of  their sisters on "the other side". One  was a black lesbian from New Zealand with  a highly developed awareness of racism and  class, but none of them presented themselves as being radical or revolutionary.  The ten anti-feminists had slightly more  varied backgrounds. One had been a communist and an active trade unionist and  women's rights supporter until the issue  of abortion seemed to turn her around to  a pro-church, pro-family, anti-women's  movement position. Three other anti-  feminists were black. Two of these were  Australian Aborigines who see racism as  the main problem facing them (and gave  some very telling examples to back up  their claims) and have not had any reason  to see the white women's movement as anything other than part of the racist  oppression. One of these women goes so  far as to say that sexism simply does not  exist in her culture, and speculates  that only after the end of racism would  Aboriginal men follow their sexist white  brothers. The other non-white woman is a  Christian woman from India whose main  concerns are to fight against abortion and  uphold family life as a vocation.  . All of the other contributors say they are  in favour of equality for women and many  even call themselves feminists. But most  of them deny that women are oppressed anyway. They all claim to have had excellent  male relatives, employers and spouses.  They are all anti-abortion and pro-family.  Most of them are religious, anti-communist  and self-satisfied. They all seem to  believe or say they believe that "the feminists" are anti-men, anti-family and  children, pro-sexual license and want to  be "just like men".  By the end of this book I was rather tired  of the repetitive nature of both points  of view. Perhaps some people will enjoy  it as an exercise in tolerance, which is  one-sided in this book anyway. If these  women really believe what they say about  their perceptions of the feminist point  of view, then perhaps "the feminists"  are not communicating very effectively  with the majority of women "out there". If  "they" think "we" are pro-pornography,  anti-child and desire to "be like men",  the messages have been distorted somewhere along the way. Those women cannot  all be dismissed as part of some "ratbag  fringe". The abortion issue in particular  seems to be monumentally threatening and  divisive and may require some extraordinary attempts at dialogue with women who  balk at the moral and ethical problems  involved.  Race and class seem to be just words which  feminists throw into discussions to show  their awareness. Several of the anti-  feminists didn't bother to.raise these  issues at all. I would venture to guess  that few of these essays, especially the  pro-feminist ones, would strike many chords  in average working class and/or non-white  women, but the emotional, self-protective  positions taken by the anti-feminists on  children, the family and racial and class  solidarity (not that it was phrased quite  that way!) might seem to make more sense  to women in those particular categories.  This is unfortunate, and to the detriment  of us all.  Kay Ryan is an Australian women who has  lived in Canada for 12 years. September ^4   Kinesis   27  cations  ARTS  eyiew  by Joy Parks  It is unfortunate that many locally published women's newsletters/publications  are seldom read by women outside the  area in which they are published. Perhaps  there is the assumption that such newsletters contain work that is only of  local interest and not relevant to a  general readership.. Flagrant,  a newsletter/journal published by the Vancouver  Island Lesbian Feminist Newsletter  Collective, certainly proves this to be  false.  FLAGRANT,   The Vancouver Island Lesbian  Feminist Newsletter Collective, P.O.  Box 651, Station E, Victoria, B.C.  $10.00/six issues; $1.50/single issue;  $1.25/back issue.  Flagrant  began in the late 70s as the  F.L.A.G. Rag, the newsletter of the  "Lesbian Feminist Action Group" of Vancouver Island. By the fourth anniversary  of the newsletter, the group itself had  died, but the newsletter collective decided to continue to produce a newsletter.  In October 1981, the editors stated their  plans in the first issue of Flagrant:  "We intend to broaden the contents of  Flagrant to include updates on lesbian/  feminist literature available, more  information/stories from lesbian/gay  groups in Canada and the. U.S., more  variety in the articles in general and  anything you feel should be included.  Over the past two years, the collective  has experienced an almost complete turnover of membership. Today the group is  mostly urban and middle-class, mostly  young and white. Still, Flagrant  contains  a wealth of material that manages to  address, in varying degrees, the class,  colour and ideological differences among  us.  The January 82 issue is particularly impressive. A theme issue on sexuality,  it contains a detailed editorial on the  need for such an issue; articles on sexuality, being fat, celibacy, fantasies,,  erotica and a wonderfully warm and to-  the-point article on the technical aspects of lesbian love-making. The centrefold, a collage of sexual fantasies (in  words only, not pictures!) is pure poetry.  Judging from the letters in following  issues of Flagrant,   I believe the editors  were taken to task for their sexuality  issue. I feel this particular special issue  displayed great risk and a willingness to  be vulnerable to readers, acts that I  admire.  Another admirable aspect of Flagrant  is its  variety. For example, the winter/spring 83  issue contains a long letter on lesbian  pregnancy; an article on the Women's  Sexual Assault Centre; a how-to piece on  massage; a delightfully poetic work on  "Wemoon Magick"; NAC news by Doris Anderson;  a lesbian comic strip; and material on  women in trades and differently-abled women.  This is an incredible range of work crammed  into thirty-odd pages. Readers also have a  chance to seek help from "Dear Dyke", a  regular advice column that goes where  "Dear Abby" never dared.  It is apparent that the editorial collective  of Flagrant  is well aware that its responsibility in editing and publishing a lesbian periodical is not only to select and  publish fine and informative writing, but  also to act as a catalyst in re-building a  women-centred culture. The editors of  Flagrant  do their job well. By creating a  sense of variety and balance in their publication, the writers and editors of Flagrant  show us how the larger issues of our  lives as lesbians must be balanced occasionally with humour or a recipe for celebration punch. Because it has this balance,  Flagrant  is a fine example of the power  and achievement of lesbian energy, one  from which we can all benefit.  In the May installment of this column, I  was uncertain as to whether or not Motheroot Journal  was still in active publication.  A week after submitting my column, I received a recent issue to verify its existence. There have been changes, however;  Sonya Jones has succeeded Anne Pride as  editor and the new address is: P.O. Box  98, Allegheny College, Meadville, PA. 16335  In her introductory editorial, Sonya Jones  pledges to see Motheroot through her "ado-  ,lescence" and the first issue is proof that  the new Motheroot will continue to publish  reviews of important small press women's  books, as well as longer essays on the  important writers of our culture. The  latest issue, Spring 1984, is a special .  poetry issue containing reviews of works  by Adrienne Rich, Olga Broumas, 1984 Pulitzer prize winner Mary Oliver and a wonderfully candid look at poetry, performance  and the life of poet extraordinaire  Chocolate Waters. This journal has been  and looks like it will continue to be one  of the most important and truly lively  sources of criticism and information on  women's writing available.  Joy Parks is a writer and critic living in  Toronto. Her column Shared Ground is published monthly in  The Body Politic.  Send sample copies of publications to:  Joy, c/o #202 - 490 Wilson Avenue, Downs-  view,  Ontario   M3H IT8  Grandma was an Activist  A seven part series on:  Radical Women in the 1930s  Listen   for it in   September  and   October   on Nightwatch.  Wednesday  7:30 pm  rebroadeast  Monday 6:30 & 9:00 am  CO-OP RADIO  Call us for a free programme guide 684-8494       ^FR*^  USED & OLD  BOOKS  8 0UC-MT <¬£ SOLD  ART  LITERATURE  HISTORY  CAfMADIANA  VANCOUVER  PHONE  681-7654- M  by Connie Smith  After her Saturday performance at the Roots  and Traditions workshop,  Teresa Trull stood  off to the side of the stage to watch Ellen  Mcllwaine play slide guitar..At the end of  Ellen 's set,  Teresa commented that the   ■  workshop should have been called The Screaming Redheads. Maybe so.  Both women qualify  as genuine wailers and rockers.  In Teresa 's case, her inspiration came from  her childhood gospel choir in Durham,  North  Carolina.  Later she made the natural progression to rhythm and blues.  Teresa has  stayed true to her roots.  But she has also  found a way to mix contemporary and provo- .  cative lyrics with this indigenous American sound.  The end product is the music' of  a white woman's soul.  ^USlKO-s^f  f\J-  |  I was raised on a chicken farm outside Durham. Then we moved into town. But my grandparents kept the farm. Durham is like a  small southern town. Well, it's not too  small. It has about 100,000 people. It  started out as a tobacco city. Now the  tobacco industry is. dying. They're moving it  out. I'm fast wondering what's going to  happen to Durham. But it's also a college  town. There's Duke University, University  of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and  North Carolina State. It was a great place  to grow up in because it was really kind  of backward, yet there was all this liberal influence.  Teresa was in high school during the height  of the anti-war movement. Within a year of  her graduation, the war began to de-escalate.  Nowadays on high school graduation, people  go away on trips to Hawaii and Jamaica.. I  just remember when I was in high school  everybody went away to Viet Nam. I was  involved in the anti-war movement but I was  a lot younger. I was really influenced by  it, but at that age I got involved in  prison work. I belonged to this group in  Durham called Action for Forgotten Women.  We attended riots. North Carolina has had  some major riots in their women's prison  and we just happened to be the group that  got to ride along. Joanne Little was in  prison in North Carolina. It was terrible.  I swore to myself, growing up in the country, that the two places I would never  go to would be New York and L.A. The first  place I moved to was New York. This woman  offered me an apartment there for a month  because she was writing a script in Canada.  But she got fired so she came back. Then  I didn't have a place to stay. I was walking around the street with my last eighty  dollars when this woman turned me on to an  apartment for eighty dollars a month. Now,  j you can imagine what it looked like.  My bathtub was in the kitchen. And I had  this great toilet. There used to be a  T6resa.Trull ' f"  public toilet on the half floor. But they  nailed up the front door with boards and  tore a hole in the wall up near the ceiling with a sledge hammer. Then they stuck  a ladder down there. So you climbed down  the ladder when you had to go to the bathroom. (And there was always about this  much water in the bottom.) This was my  luxury pad in New York.  But I lived there for about a year. I played a lot on the street, but I also played  a whole lot in upstate New York. The women's community there supported me like  crazy. It was great. And I worked odd jobs.  I took care of people's dogs. I painted  murals. I did a lot of painting.-And then  I worked in a daycare centre.  These friends of mine who had a radio show  in North Carolina sent a tape of a show  I had done to Olivia Records. Then Meg  Christian called me when I was in New York  and asked me to come sit in at her New  York concert. I was completely beside  myself. I had bronchitis and I was saying,  well I don't really think I can sing. And  my roommate came over to the phone and said,  you can sing. So, I went and did it. It was  just great. It opened, up a lot of things  for me. I got a lot of jobs.  I continued corresponding with Olivia and  they were horrified at my state. Actually  I was pretty happy in New York, but they  thought it was horrible that I was crawling  down a ladder to go to the bathroom. So they  hired me in their packing and shipping department for about six months. We can all  pack a record faster than anybody else.  Then I did an album.  Rhythm and blues is still fighting it out in  the women's community. People still really  associate women's music with folk music.  And here we are at a folk festival. (Which  is really great.) Actually, I'm glad that  people here are recognizing that rhythm and  blues influences are just as old as most  folk music. At least in America. Rhythm and  blues comes straight from gospel. From the  blues. Almost every R&B artist came out of  gospel. And so much good folk music comes  out of gospel. You can write off Christianity if you wnat to, but don't write off  gospel music. It's one of th most indigenous American influences.  Teresa's first two albums,   The Ways a  Woman Can Be and  Let It Be Known were released on the Olivia label.  Her latest album,  Unexpected, recorded with Barbara  Higbie,  is on Olivia's new label,  Second  Wave.  Olivia created Second Wave for radio play  purposes. A lot of times in radio, a label  will become identified with a certain kind  of music. For instance, Motown was primarily  identified with soul music. When they started  recording rock, rock stations would see the  label and throw the record away. Oh, this  is soul music. We don't want it. Finally,  Motown created their own rock label, Morocco.  It's the same thing with'women's music. It's  really identified as easy listening, or soft  rock or folk. We were trying to get radio  play on rhythm and blues stations, so Olivia  thought they should create a new label.  We really need to start expanding women's .  music. In fact, all kinds of independent  labels are having a really hard time in the  economy. So if we could get some radio play,  it would really help. And it's worked to an  extent. But Olivia is really going all out  with it. I'm not sure what they will be  doing next, but Tret Fure's on the label  and I hear tell they're going to have Alisha  Bridges (I love the night life, I love to  boogie) on that label, too.  $>as Ul r&-    /■ III M z-  Barbara and I have been playing together for  the last two years. We met at a Reno rodeo  in the livestock pavilion. We were playing  on the same bill. But I swear to god, Barbara  and I saw each other from about fifteen  feet away and instantly knew that we were  spiritual friends or something. We followed  each other around. Rag tag. I didn't even  know she played piano at the time. She was  playing fiddle and I just went, gosh, what  can I do. Let's see. Can we do vocal-fiddle  duets? Then I heard her album with Darol  Anger and I just loved it.  Later we were doing a benefit and each artist got up and did three tunes. I asked Barbara if she wanted to try and play with me.  I had been playing with a lot of different  accompanists. And even though some of them  were the best, I wasn't getting what I wanted  in terms of response. When Barbara came up  on stage and we started to play, I felt like  I had been kicked in the back of the head.  We both had such a good time in the first  two verses, that in the middle of the song  we got a standing ovation. That had never  happened to me in my life. We were so exhilarated. I'm surprised neither one of us  spontaneously combusted.  I feel like somebody sent me to heaven  and now Barbara and I will get to be a  duo forever. Barbara is completely like  me. She wants to communicate with people.  We believe that the audience is an incredibly important part of what's happening.  There's a hard thing going on where people  expect one performer to meet everybody's  credentials. I want you to sing about El  Salvador. I want you to sing about the  women's movement. I want you to sing about  lesbianism. And no one performer can do  that. Barbara and I have made our whole  thing to be almost on the personal level.  You don't have to have everything included  in your music in order to have it do what  you set out to do with it. We set about September'84 Kinesis 29  by Marcia Meyer  Barbara Higbie, composer, pianist, fiddle  player, singer, songwriter - was born in  Michigan, grew up in Indiana, and then  moved to West Africa at the age of thirteen  with her parents. She had never been around  black people before and the move was, to  say the least, an eye opening experience  for her.  There she attended an international school with 500 kids from 50 different  nationalities. She says, "It was the greatest thing that ever happened to me.  I still  think that if I'd stayed in Indiana I'd  be a cheerleader at this point."  It was there that she got a taste for African  rhythms by studying African drumming. By  the time she returned to the States with  her parents to settle in Orange County,  California she was, as she puts it, "a  social reject" as far as "white, working  class,  small town" America was concerned.  After high school Barbara decided to move  to the Bay Area to attend a Women's College.  She now resides in Berkeley.  In her sophomore years Barbara travelled to  France to learn French. Here she met and  was influenced by a lot of musicians, two  of whom were Americans Darol Anger and  Lorraine Duisit (now a member of Trapezoid).  After about six weeks of studying French in  school she .decided to drop out and become  a full time musician, so she returned to  the States to study music.  Barbara says, a major influence on her  music was Katrina Krimsky, a pianist now  'ñ†living in Switzerland. Krimsky has an  impressive history. Once a pianist for the  well known classical composer Stockhaussen,  she now has turned her endeavours to jazz  and improvising and has her own record out.  on the ECM Label. Barbara says, Katrina  Krimsky took me and changed me and made me  ARTS  matter who wrote it. She has taught music  in the past but says, "I'm terrible at it.  Everyone Wants you to be the,'disciplinarian. I would rather do almost anything  than have to teach music. "  As for having periods in her life when.  she is more prolific in her composing,  Barbara states, "it's all cyclical - you  go through periods where you're spewing  everything in and then you go through  periods where you're spewing everything  out. I think the main thing in creativity  is just not being afraid of it. "  winning people the best way we know how.  And by keeping our music at the highest  standard we know. And then we use it.  Sometimes in the lyrics of the songs.  Sometimes by getting people in the lobby.  Sometimes by turning over the money.  There's a million ways to make your music  support political activities without having to put a pamphlet to music. With our  music, we try to convey enough spirit and  strength to keep people going.  Following the folk festival, Teresa returned to the Bay area to begin producing  an album for Deidre McCalla.  Next month in this column, an interview  with Ellen Mcllwaine.  Connie Smith is the producer and host of  "Rubymusic", Friday nights at 7:30 on CFRO  radio.  into a pianist more than anybody. She just  really got involved in my whole process  and was really great"  Barbara has been involved in the Women's  Music Network since her college days. She  says, "I was already aware of it.  I'd been  listening to Holly Near since I was fifteen,  and going to a women's college.    It was  probably much more evident than in most  regular colleges.  But I never really thought  of it as being anything different from  just the regular music scene."  After graduating from college and spending  a year in Africa to study music, she came  Barbara Higbie  Affirmative  Action for Women  back to the States and joined Robin Flower's  band. She is now playing with Teresa Trull,  a prominent figure in women's music, and  also with the New Acoustic Music Congress.  Barbara hopes that someday women's music  end other kinds.of alternative music will  be less separate. "Now",   she says, "I kind',  of keep these two lives of the Windham Hill  straight music scene and the women's music  scene. All the people in Women's music kind  of accept Windham Hill a lot more than  Windham Hill people accept women's  music. A lot of people in the straight  music world don't take women's music all  that seriously - it's kind of frustrating.  They see it as a social movement more than  a musical thing - which it is, but at the  same time I would never be the musician I  am today if it weren't for women's music."  Barbara feels women's music is "affirmative  action for women and it's just what women  need right now."  She says, "I get reaVly  furious when people put it down and say  it's just - you know -.women."  Barbara is moving more into songwriting now  that she is working with Teresa Trull, but  over the last few years she has focused  mostly, on instrumental writing. She describes her music as eclectic (rock, country,  jazz, soul, Neo-Laura Nero) but she feels  her compositional forte is the music she  does on the piano - she calls this original  improvised music. Talking about the creative  process in music making she says, "composing is something you have to make a time  in your life to do. You have to be alone -  at least everybody I know who writes has to  be alone when they do it.  I think you have  to work at being able to tune into the  spontaneity  (of composing).  I think the  hard part is just like all of life. It's  like learning to like yourself.  It's  the hardest thing in life. You have to  learn to be able to listen to what is  coming out of you and love and nurture it  and help it turn into something. It takes  a lot of time.  It's like having a kid or  something. It doesn't happen until it's  ready to come out and you have to put a  lot of time and care into bringing it  along. At least I do. I had a teacher  once, Terry Riley, who said the purpose  of learning harmony and practicing and  all that stuff is so that you can forget  it. You know it in your subconscious but  you forget it consciously and that's  where I try to be when I'm composing."  Barbara performs other people's music as  well. If she likes a song it doesn't  Barbara Higbie has played on albums with  Robin Flower, Meg Christian, Ferron,  Windham Hill's Darol Anger and most recently with Teresa Trull on their new album  Unexpected. This summer she is travelling  to Switzerland with the New Acoustic  Music Congress and Darol Anger to do a  live concert at the Montreux Jazz Festival. In the fall, she will be travelling  to Japan with the Windham Hill Label as  well as doing a tour with Teresa Trull and  Cris Williamson.   (You may want to catch  them in Seattle.)  Kinesis at the Folkf est  I have always enjoyed going to the Vancouver Folk Music Festival.  It is like stepping back in time or even travelling to  another world.  I enjoy the different kinds  of food available and all the different  types of people who attend.   (Buying and  trying food and trying to find unlocated  friends - isn't that what the festival  is all about!??)  I heard rumours this year that some people  were disappointed at the lack of political-  aspiring and inspiring statements.  Well  be the politics weren't blatantly stated  but the strategic placement of women  performers - every evening was closed d>y  strong woman musician - was a political  statement in itself.  Of course, many women  were less enthused by some statements made  by blues singers  (or were we just not  sufficiently caught up in the historical  context of things?). However,  this observation about the lack of politics was the  opinion of audience members - the performers  Kinesis talked to had nothing but  praise for the festival.  Interviews with  n appear in Kinesis this issue, and  will continue in the coming months. 30   Kinesis   September '84  Labour  continued from page 10   -.^.^j^  no turnover. And I think it can't help but  mean that it's going to be a lot easier  organizing in the banks. And our employers  are seeing it as a real problem, too. It  mentions specifically in the Bank of Montreal report that the workforce is stabilizing, and that this is potentially dangerous,  (Banks have good cause to be worried about  a large group of employees assembling to  fight for their jobs, and while unionizing  seems to offer the most protection for  bank employees, the Bank and Finance Workers Union will continue to encourage discussion around a variety of solutions. If  you have any information to exchange,  write to them at: Bank and Finance Workers  Union, 1630 East Georgia Street, Vancouver, B.C. V5L 2B2.)  New Woman Press from page 21  from Margaret Randall's book Sandino's  Daughters  set to music. The music and songs  express a solidarity with oppressed women  throughout the world.  Either of Carolyn McDade's recordings are  a pleasure to hear. They are an excellent  addition to women's music. While the chorus  of voices gives a full, warm sound, unfortunately McDade has not explored the full  potential of her group of singers. The  voices could have been used in separate  harmonies or as responses to each other,  but the music, as it exists, is strong  and full of hope.  The New Woman Press catalogue is growing  and the tapes and books mentioned are a  large portion, but not all of the material  that they carry. The address for New  Woman Press is Box 56, Wolf Creek, Oregon,  97497. Listen to Womanvision on Co-op  Radio in September for more about these  particular cassettes and a chance to hear  the music and stories.  LETTERS  Older lesbian  Shares Experience  Kinesis:  This has been fomenting for awhile, but  finally Helene Rosenthal's review of  Small Expectations; Society 's Betrayal of  Older Women  by Leah Cohen in the June '84  issue of Kinesis  was the catalyst.  In her review, mention is made of the fact  that the book focuses entirely on heterosexual women (it actually reads "white"  women - I can only address my issue, which  is white older lesbian). Since the age of  50 I have been endeavoring to share my  experiences, ideas, etc. with elders,  looking at conferences, dances, meetings  and other places for them. In this search  (both in Europe and the American continents) I have discovered that many lesbian  elders remain invisible for a number of  reasons: lifestyle, work, class, time  of coming out, fear of '_political lesbians'  to name but a few. While I can acknowledge  some of this, I face the reality at the  age of 56, that isolated independence is  great when one is young and "bounces back"  in the face of life's adversities, but  there comes a time when one starts looking  at what could possibly lie ahead - institutionalized care, isolated independence  (for those with the funds), but where does  a lesbian go where she is accepted, where  her lover and friends can come visit her  without incurring displeasure or ostra-  cization.  I would like to quote an article from  Connexions  (an international women's  quarterly) issue reprint No. 3, translated  from "Serpentine" Dutch feminist monthly,  November, 1980:  "Three years ago, a very dear friend of  mine was dying. She lay in one of those  rooms in an old age home. I couldn't even  sit and talk with her there since there  was always some woman nearby eavesdropping  What do you do when a good friend is on  the brink of death? You hold her hand,  don't you, and say, 'Dearest do you need  anything'? That's perfectly normal isn't  it? And then you hear from the other end  of the room whispering "that's her fiance.  Better late than never". Well, after that  experience I realized that I don't want to  be spied on in my old age. I have no desire  to crawl back into the closet  when I'm old.'  This last sentence is the telling one, for  I know there must be many strong elders,  political or non-political who feel the  same as I. With others we can formulate  some alternatives to our present choices.  In i  sterhood, Lochbore. (Vancouver)  P.S. I'm already in touch with a group of  very interesting heterosexual feminist  Crones, with whom I gather monthly!  Exploits Bumpatting,  Ignores Violence  I hope this letter sees the light of day.  I do not have a Ph.D. nor do I represent  an organization.  My reference is to the article "Sexual  Harassment - Basic Rights at Issue" by  Astrid Davidson in the Kinesis  August '84  Election Extra. It becomes a little tiresome to find women jumping on the media  constructed political bandwagon where  idiosyncrasy takes priority over survival  issues. The cliche adopted by the sensa-  I Vancouver Folk Music Festival I  ■■■■■■■■ presents in concert ■■■■■IHffiH^^M  <AT AM HAL-  FRIDAY,  SEPTEMBER 7  Taj Mahal is one of the premier exponents of Afro-American music ...  from the blues to jazz, he can do it all. His live performances are legendary, and this is a rare opportunity to see him In an intimate setting.  JUDY SMALL SEPT. 16  with special guest   PRISCILLA HERDMAN I  KIN LALAT  SEPT. 15  #M  P  Judy Small was one of the surprise hits at this year's Festival,  and we're glad to have the chance to hear her again. She  Is one of those performers to whom 'politics is more Important  than fame ... and for whom music Is a joy to be shared, rather  mBT "*  %  than |ust a commodity to be exploited'. Add to this her powerful  §BlgjI»   -J"**   «*  w®  voice and wry sense of humour, plus a gift for writing political  songs and you have a great performer... and a fine concert.  JHpr.      •** **  Opening for Judy will be Priscilla Herdman, who first came  to prominence some years ago with her album 'The Water Lily'  f»fflB - ife TiNir  ... a collection of traditional and original tunes from Australia.  rpl^^gP  She posseses one of the most beautiful voices In folk music  today, and an evening with her and Judy should be a special  one indeed.                           |   8!00 tlckeU$8.00  fe *^S^JKW~~  .....  FERRON  f^PP The music of Kjn Lalat draws It's power from the struggle L  "TM for freedom and Justice. It speaks out against the horrors of I  the brutal dictatorship In their native Guatemala ... but it also  speaks of the hope and courage of the resistance movement.  Their music moves from the moody to the vibrant and celebratory, and they play it on a wide variety of Instruments - from  bomba to marimba. Co-sponsored by the committee In Solidarity with the People of Guatemala.  8:00 tickets $5.00  i    SEPT. 25 to 29  :lal guests     WE THREE  From 4-star reviews in Rolling Stone to an electrifying performance on the mainstage at this year's Festival, Ferron has  arrived! Her new album, SHADOWS ON A DIME, Is showing  the rest of North America what we've known all along ... Ferron  Is one of the most gifted singer/songwriters to appear in years.  Opening for Ferron and her band will be We Three ...' whose  Friday night set at the Festival dazzled everyone In the park.  Judith Johnson, Sarah Favret and Kim Scanlon are accapella  singers and composers who blend blues, folk, classical and  swing with feminism, humour and raw emotion. It's going to  be a special week at the Cultcht  8:30 tickets Tues. • Thurs. $8.00; Fri. - Sat. $9.00  THE VANCOUVER EAST CULTURAL CENTRE  1895 East Venables - for reservations, phone 254-9578  Tickets available at Black Swan Records, 2936 W. 4th Ave. - Octopus Books East,  1146 Commercial and the Vancouver Folk Music Festival, 3271 Main St. September'84   Kinesis   31  LETTERS  tionalists is "bumpatting" obviously  taken out of context. What is done behind  the scenes with malicious intent would  seem to be the basis for female harassment  in a real sense.  What kind of sexual harassment has upset  the male dominated press? Surreptitious  harassment on the job? Sexual abuse of  children? Rape?  The humiliation and powerlessness forced  onto women by male devised pre-employment  testing procedures can be considered sexual harassment. Yet it is my experience  that pseudo feminists choose to ignore  this basic exploitive factor. However, it  would appear that the greatest sexual  oppression of women is by those media  exploiters who direct our energies into  sexist traps.  Mary Lakes (Vancouver)  Reviewer Responds  to TESSERA Editor  Kinesis:  I write this in response to Daphne Marlatt'  comments in her letter to the editor in  the July/August issue. Daphne responds to  my review of 'Tessera1, a special issue  ..of Room Of One 's Own,  which appeared  in my column 'A Little Night Reading' in  June. I stand corrected on Daphne's first  point that I erred in incorrectly attributing the inspiration for 'Tessera' to  the conference (July, 1983, Vancouver)  when credit should be given to the conference on feminist critical theory and women  writing in Canada, held in Toronto in  the fall of 1981. As Daphne writes in  her letter, this conference - "for the  first time joined Quebec feminist criticism and English Canada feminist criticism  in a mutual dialogue."  However, the following duscussion refutes  some of Daphne's other points. They are  written in the spirit of healthy debate;  in the spirit of dialogue, not dissension.  I am more than pleased to help foster  serious discourse on feminist literary • »  theory in the pages of Kinesis,  believing  as I do in the importance of the ARTS in  the women's liberation movement. I am  also interested in anti-racist work and  in promoting anti-racist attitudes in  feminist criticism. My capsule review of  'Tessera' focussed almost exclusively on  the racism I perceived in the editor's  dialogue. I may indeed have confused  some readers as to the theme of 'Tessera'  and I now realize that I should have  written a standard length review, rather  than attempt to articulate my rage and  despair at what I perceived to be insensitive and racist remarks made by white  women into the capsule review format of  'A Little Night Reading'.  The concerns of women of colour and of  white women dedicated to anti-racist work  are multi-layered. Too often words become  catch phrases and lose their potency with  careless usage. Tossing about words like  racism, for example, can become a substitute for rigorous analysis and soul-searching. I appreciate the excitement that the  'Tessera' editors have for the work of  Quebecoise feminist writers in their  particular  exploration of the theoretical  foundations of language. But in their  introductory remarks about this work -  perhaps in their zealousness - they perpetuated a hierarchy of feminist thought:  Daphne Marlatt: There's also the problem  I was very aware of when I was listening  to the native women and women of colour  talking at Women and Words,  that for   -  thjejri' £he first step is still conteniggghg,  that there is still a taboo operating  against the content that is made up of  their actual daily experience.  Barbara Godard: We were talking about  stages of development and the fact that  the native women and the black women  are going through this process of naming  .  themselves and self-discovery.   They're  not ready to face the question of language,  but this hasn't been true in Quebec  nor has the French feminist criticism  gone that way.  It is important to note at this point that  what the editors intended  and what I, as  one reader, perceived, may in fact be at  odds. In a very real way that is beside  the point. The framework of this discussion  concerns me; ironically, it is the language used which offends me. Daphne writes  that I quote the editors out of context,  confusing readers into believing that  racism was the theme of 'Tessera'. She  corrects me by saying that remarks like  the ones above were made "during an editorial discussion on how realism dominates  English Canadian women's writing and how  this leads to a focus on content at the  expense of attention to language." She  continues: "We know how crucial naming is,  how naming our own experience rather than  having it named for us is an essential  first step in feminist consciousness. The  next step which needs to be taken in  English Canada by black, white, and native  women writers alike is developing a feminist theory of language (and so of culture)."  Firstly, I think that it is presumptuous  for white academic women to prescribe the  direction that women writers/thinkers of  colour should move towards. It is ahistori-  cal as well, given that a theory of culture  from a Third World point of view may have  more in common with Marxist analysis than  with a radical feminist one. I don't think  that the Canadian feminist literary community has even begun to explore the implications of race and class on a gender  based analysis of language and literature.  Quebecoise women such as Nicole Brossard  have been doing transformative work with  language but I am not comfortable with it  being hailed as the wave of the feminist  literary future. Certainly not in this  way, which seems to be diminishing the impact of writing by women of colour.  Is it in fact even true that language  theory is not a major concern of women  writers of colour? Consider the impact  and phenomenal success of Alice Walker's  The Colour Purple.   To write a novel length  exploration of a poor, illiterate woman's  life speaks volumes to me about language.  The audience and focus of fiction writers  like Walker may not be an academic one,  but this may in fact be another source of  their power. Alice Walker has written  that truth is the orgasm of what is right  and I feel that I understand what she means  when I read deeply revolutionary thinking.  But somehow this 'Tessera' dialogue does  not do that for me - maybe it is its discussion of Anglo-American philosophical  and intellectual structures which does .  not also discuss Third World literary  traditions, frameworks and directions.  There are such huge gaps in our white,  feminist, intellectual history where the  lives and thoughts of women of colour  and white working class women should be,  that there is something oddly backward  about the prescriptiveness that I read  here.  In their incisive discussion on the Dialogue conference in Toronto in 1981, Wendy  Frost and Michelle Valiquette noted the  following: "As feminist activists who  are also feminist scholars (and consequently somewhat schizophrenic), we attended ■  the conference with high expectations. We  came away both elated and disappointed,  both energized and troubled. But more than  s Sn^firirifif^^re^eame away from the two-day  event with a heightened awareness that, if  feminist criticism is to have any real  impact, it must situate itself within the  women's movement." {The Radical Reviewer  no. 5, Winter 1981/82).  Frost and Valiquette analyze the significance of the form of the conference  (traditional, academic) with the content  of the material (radical, revolutionary)  and conclude that "whatever the content,  the model "chosen for the form of the  conference was not feminist." Perhaps this  is the real challenge of feminism, to  expand the borders of our imagination so  that form and content do not contradict  each other; that the work of one group  of women, responding to a particular  cultural and historical situation is not  compared  to the work of another group of  women whose perspectives and goals may be  radically different. We must be brave  enough - open-minded enough - to not presume that we have a formula for revolutionary thought that is relevant to all women.  Daphne feels that my capsule review of  'Tesser' dismissed the work of Quebecoise  writers as academic. Again I must agree;  the structure of my review caused this  confusion as I was referring to the discussion  as academic, academic in the sense of  using false forms to talk about women's  writing. The content of the dialogue was  innovative but the form was unnecessarily  linear and competitive.  I hope this continuing dialogue about  feminist criticism engages readers of  Kinesis  because the issues are important:  what does facing the question of language  mean, what are the economics of language  as well as the sexual politics of it, what  do cultural and feminist perspectives  on language have in common, how do they  differ? How is competition between women  discouraged or perpetuated by our choice  of words? How do race and class perspectives differ and how will this impact on  a radical anti-racist, anti-classist  theory of language? What are the connections between privilege, deprivation and  language? What is the relationship between  critical literary work and the community  it both springs from and serves? If Frost  and Valiquette are right and feminist  criticism must situate itself within the  women's movement or be rendered irrelevant,  how can this be done? How can we work  towards the healing of the schism between  activist and academic elements in our  revolutionary movement?  In the spirit of inquiry, Cy-Thea Sand  (Vancouver)  Review Sparks  Realizations  I have just read a review reprinted from  your paper, in Spare Rib which is about  the only place where I get to hear of the  women's movement outside of this country.  Which, when I think about it, is a pretty  bad state of affairs.  The review was of Makeda Silvera's Silenced  (Kinesis,  March '84^, which conjured up  such bold images of a supposedly bygone age  of slavery that I though, "What, in Canada?"  and I don't know why because I know sod-all  about Canada. Then I thought, "Well, why  am I so shocked anyway?" because in England,  you know, amongst other nearly-hidden hor-*  rors, we have sweat-shops where women,  mostly asian women, work like shit in illegal conditions for a pitiful wage. Of  course here in England we have this amazing  image of ourselves as being so fair, so  'fi^raight, and I am ashamed to find that this  •i%fialfe^#S£is^fir? on me; when al/f^HSt happens, OCTOPUS  *••••••••••••••••••••••••  SUE HARRIS  COPE PARKS BOARD CANDIDATE  • lesbian feminist activist  • contributor to Kinesis  • Board member of Riley Park Community Association  • community organizer  SUE & COPE CANDIDATES WILL  • ensure women's recreational and park needs are  raised at the Board  • ensure community participation with and at the Board  • develop new programming to meet the needs  of youth  • reduce user fees at the pools, rinks and community  centres  • maintain free user times at recreational facilities  • restore cuts in maintenance at parks, playgrounds  and recreational facilitiesV2  • end further commercialization of Stanley Park  • ensure a free zoo  ON SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 7,1984  vote SUE HARRIS  * the OTTO COPESLATE  (Not on the Voters' List? Call 873-7681.)  32   Kinesis   September *84  LETTERS  INEXPENSIVE QUALITY BOOKS  HARD TO GET ART, SOCIAL &  LITERARY MAGAZINES  & JOURNALS  *EST  2250 W. 4TH    ^^^ 732-6721 *  BAST Jf  1146 COMMERCIAL      253-0913 jf  BOOKS  BECkW6MAMl5  3T0REfRDNr ART- 5>TUBItO -GlfT SHoP  , *'i a CAKD£ -f CRAFTS  • Helium Balloons  LOTSA :feW£LLERy-£AftN&S^|  Wtw\EfV6 ^//v\6ol 1*ewau  fREE LANCE  PrfVr  WoftK-  ANVrHlNi/ MADE IN CLAV"£V£H /du«. M>TME>  C^lAX  «fc  #/l  EAST  END  *&%&&> I  in fact, is that chauvinism, be it white  and/or male, and its consequences, is more  subtle, hides itself away in the closet in  order to support this image of the English;  good old John Bull, on the level. The  vision of 'black domestics' - the very  term grates - used and abused, that Silvera  highlights, hits full on instead of sideways on and reminds me of how deeply  rooted the belief in white male supremacy  is - deep enough to rub off on all too  many white women. Knowledge of events,  situations, whatever, in other countries  has the effect, not only of informing, but  of making me re-examine what I understand  of this country, and I realise what I  know already - the attitude that governs  your country and mine, along with countless  others, is one and the same, after all is  said and done: it is so easy to overestimate what ground has been won until you  hear of something happening that does  not happen in your country and understand  that it does, but in a different way.  Well, my God, I hope you see what I'm driving at because this has been something of  a round-about explanation but, I'm afraid,  my mind does not work in tidy paragraphs.  What I'm saying, in the end, is that I  would like to subscribe to your paper. Can  I do that?  You:  i sisterhood, Jane Wharfe-king  (W. Midlands, England)  NZ Reader  Loves Kinesis  Kinesis:  This is just to let you know that your  powerful and beautiful broadsheet is very  valuable indeed -so please don't stop  printing- it.   What- a wealth of material is  in it - all the issues that are as red  hot as the condition of Red Hot Videos  during the fire bombing!!! The growth of  all the women-hating industries (porno  videos afnd magazines, advertising, etc.)  is explosive here too, but we're largely  fighting in the dark as there is only one  beautiful feminist periodical in New Zealand called Broadsheet,   and it is not  always available down here. I get Kinesis  through the Kate Shepard Feminist Bookshop  in Christchurch. We in Dunedin used to  have a feminist bookshop - in fact the  first  and for years the only  one in New  Zealand but through a severe shortage of  women's voluntary labour and other factors,  it died three years ago. We now have the  Women's Resource Centre, Rape Crisis  Centre, Lesbian Line, and a Lesbian Mothers  Defence Fund.  It is so good to read Kinesis  and see all  your fights and rationales on behalf of  feminism and feminist lesbianism. Anorexia  is at present an issue being addressed  specifically by the New Zealand University  Students Association, whose president is  a woman. Jane travels a lot, but meets  lots of opposition and ridicule. It seems  that here in this so-called pioneer  society women are kept down and their contribution 'rubbed out'. History is never  herstory in New Zealand!  However, over the past thirteen years we  have kept at it (as everywhere else in  the world) endlessly. We fight the same  battles but with constantly expanding  consciousness. It is also never  possible  to go back, as after many women's battles  in history (suffragettes and before) when  seemingly all the ground won was lost.  This women's movement is too pervasive and  young women don't accept passivity anymore.  .The only way men can stop the feminist  avalanche is through violence and we are  fighting back.  Yoka Neuman (Dunedin, New Zealand).  Heal Ourselves  and Our Planet  Kinesis:  As human beings we share a consciousness -  composed of both masculine and feminine  aspects. Generally speaking, the masculine  is a focussed (concerned with how's and  why's), separative consciousness; while  the feminine consciousness is a relational,  more diffuse type of awareness. And while  both aspects are necessary, the feminine  side of our psyche has been in subjection  to the masculine side. The sorry result  of that one-sided focus is a society  based on the psychology, theology and  philosophy of masculine consciousness -  in a word, patriarchy. And for us to continue to live in an interconnected reality  - system with a one-sided focus is downright dangerous.  I'd like to suggest that the healing of  ourselves and our planet will come out of  our alignment with our feminine consciousness. It will come out of our wholeness  and be expressed through our attitudes  and actions.  As Chris Williamson wrote regarding her  song, 'One of the Light' - "This is a  song of my journey, my spiritual quest  for the Light which I know exists for me  in this life."  Perhaps we all need to go on a spiritual  quest to reconnect us with our inherent  wholeness'. For myself, I've found that  working within the framework of a spiritual study group and using a meditation  circle we are letting our feminine consciousnesses emerge.  Joy Lennox (Terrace, B.C..)  Mozambique  Needs Help  We are writing to you with an urgent  - appeal to help Mozambique.  Three years of severe drought in the:.  southern provinces of that country1 were  brought to a sudden and violent end early  February when the region was hit by Cyclone  Domoina. Winds up to 100 km/hr. uprooted  trees, toppled power lines, flattened  crops and destroyed houses, while rains  of 300 mm (12 inches) have given rise to  what are described as the worst floods  in more than 30 years.  During the years of drought, villagers had  congregated around low lying creeks and  river beds where crops could still find  enough moisture to grow. With the.tremendous rainfall, river banks overflowed and  flash floods caught people unprepared,  contributing heavily to the level of destruction.  The death toll has reached 200, and an  estimated 10,000 families have lost all  their belongings and are now homeless.  In the province of Maputo, 70,000 families  are reported to have lost all their crops.  More that 5,000 head of livestock have  been lost.  Road and rail lines have been damaged and  many remain submerged beneath newly formed lakes. The Department of Natural Calamities has estimated that it will take up  to three months before transportation  links can be restored. The disruption of  traffic seriously hampers relief efforts  and also cuts into Mozambique's crucial  foreign exhcange earnings from the transit  of goods to and from Swaziland, Zimbabwe  and South Africa. The loss of revenue  from this source alone is estimated to i&efJteM*er',84   Kinesis   33  LETTERS  be $2 million (U.S.). Total damage up to  February 5 has been estimated at $75  million (U.S.)  In response to an urgent appeal by the  Mozambican Department of Natural. Calamities,  many governments, international agencies  and NGO's have begun to respond with  food, medicine, clothing, transport and  seeds. In February, the Canadian Government,  through CIDA, provided $150,000 for flood  relief, to supplement an earlier $6 million  shipment of wheat and milk powder.  Guerrillas of the Mozambique National  Resistance (MNR), supplied by South  Africa, have blocked relief convoys and  kidnapped international aid workers. Tens  of thousands of emaciated villagers,  fleeing both the fighting and the natural  disasters, are pouring into neighboring  Zimbabwe.  It is amid those realities that South  Africa and Mozambique last week agreed to  a security pact, pledging not to sponsor  attacks against each other's territory.  "Everybody recognizes," says one journalist  in Maputo, "that Mozambique has no altern-  Mozambique, which has pursued talks with  South Africa since independence, believes  it is South Africa that has yielded.  TCLSAC is joining with Canadian NGO's  and churches in an emergency funding  appeal to provide tool kits for 12,500  families in Mozambique. Each kit costs  $25.00 and we urge you to assist in whatever way possible. With each $25.00 donation, CIDA will match this 3:1 providing  a total of 4 sets of tools. If enough  funds are raised, CIDA will increase its  contribution to 5:1 which makes this  appeal particularly pressing.  Please send your cheque or money order to  TCLSAC at 427 Bloor Street West, Toronto,  M5S 1X7, but make it payable to "Oxfam  Canada/Moxambique Flood Relief" which will  facilitate the CIDA arrangements. Tax  receipts will be issued on request.  In solidarity, Merle L. Bowen for Toronto  Committee for the Liberation of South  VLCHas  Big Dreams  Kinesis:  Vancouver Lesbian Connection started organizing in April, 1984. We came together  as a group because we think that there is  a need for a physical space that would  make it easier for us to organize, easier  to have informal contact between groups and  'ñ† easier for us to work together even though  as groups we may have somewhat different  strategies and analysis.  We also recognize a strong need for purely  informal/social contacts that are an alternative to socializing in bars - which  are, at this point, the only relatively  safe public space for lesbians/gay women.  We think it is particularly imperative  that this kind of space be available to  young women. In short, we are trying to  create a major political and social  organizing centre for lesbians.  Our dreams are big. We want to end up with  a space (see page 2, this issue) that  provides informal drop-in space, office  and meeting space, performance space, a  crisis line, and some kind of business  that would create revenue for the centre  and jobs for women.  At this point, the core committee consists  fo five women who have completed a detailed  basis of unity, started writing to other  groups that have attempted similar projects  in order to learn from their successes  and failures, written support letters for  various groups, started planning a potluck  to discuss our plans with other lesbian  groups/caucuses, joined BCFW and generally  brainstormed.  We also have a fundraising dance committee  with a larger and more fluid membership.  This committee has continued the series  of dances at the Capri Hall and is investigating other fundraising options.  We have developed a process for joining  the core committee that involves going  to meetings and agreeing with our basis  of unity. We are trying to organize in  ways that allow maximum flexibility of  individual committment and interest.  The dance/fundraising committee is also  looking for more members and needs only a  committment to work within general policy  guidelines and to take on particular  tasks, however large or small. Some women  never even come to meetings'.!  We would like to emphasize that we are  very open to feedback and discussion  about our goals, ideas and strategies. If  anyone has any questions and/or think  they might be interested in joining,  please call 873-5804 or 251-6064. You  could also write us at VLC Box 65961,  Station F, Vancouver, B.C. V5W 5L4.  Vancouver Lesbian Connection  Archivist Starts  Feminist Network  Kinesis:  As Archivist for Los Angeles N.O.W. (National Organization for Women) I've always  enjoyed reading (and recommending) Kinesis.  Though I know your emphasis is on 'hard  news', Canadian issues and women's issues  - as it should be - I have seen some  space devoted to unique perspectives on  issues that cut across gender lines and  national boundaries.  The following is some information about  something I recently started in the U.S.  called the Feminist Alert Network. If  someone in Canada would like to set up  something similar to alert Canadians  about critical developments that need  an immediate," massive response, I'd be  delighted to pass on any information and  experience about how to do it.  The Feminist Alert Network is an active,  wide-ranging, information gathering and  dissemination service whose prupose is  to find out who is willing to do what on  which issues, then to quickly and inexpensively pass critical information from  those who have it to those who need it  while there's still time to act. As an  individual or as an organizational  representative, there are several ways  to use the Network: as a subscriber  (once plugged into the Network, you'll  be alerted whenever there is something  critical happening in the areas you've  said are of particular concern to you);  as an information source (no obligation!  Just pass on information whenever you  think you may be the first - or only -  one-to hear about something and we'll  spread the word to people who want to  take action); as an organizational  participant (how often have you heard  about an unexpected vote coming up in  the legislature, or read an outrageous  editorial in the paper, and wished there  was a way to just make a quick phone  call, and know that before the Post  Office closes, all your members who are  concerned about that particular issue  would be mailed an alert?)  Keep up the good work'.  D.M. Dismore, 516 S. Alexandria #103,  Los Angeles, CA. 90020  Joining CITR  There comes a time in every woman's life when she  must decide between the barren land of mainstream  radio, and sensibleness, humour and good taste in  broadcasting.  That time is now. One choice is CITR FM. Music, news,  interviews, profiles, sports - people you want to hear from,  people in this community who have something to say, or  sing, or chant, or read, or perform, or whatever. Music  you seldom hear on any radio station by bands like the Au  Pairs, the Poison Girls, The Slits, Special AKA, The  Raincoats, The Moral Lepers - women's bands and bands  that feature women. Music by bands and individuals that  talk politics, sing freedom.  Join CITR and become an active part of the alternatives  to the blahhhsof mainstream radio. Membership is $10.00  for UBC students, $12.50 for others, until September  1984. Then it's $25.00 from September 84 to September  85. A deal for supporting one of the city's two alternatives  to audio blandness. We're CITR - the other radio station.  CITR membership Application  NAME  PHONF   POSTAL CODE   UBC STUDENT  Y N  STUDENT NUMBER   I'm interested in:  News       Public Affairs  Other (specify)  Sports  * WIVES TALES STORYTELLERS *  appearing at CAFE BABE on SEPTEMBER 13,14  at 9pm    560 Davie Street  NEW!  at ARIEL  Monday to Saturday  10 to 6 p.m.  NOW OPEN SUNDAYS  2766 W. 4th Ave.  733-3511 34   Kinesis   September *84  BULLETIN BOARD  GROUPS  DEALING WITH STRESS: An autogenic training  group for women. Six Wednesdays beginning Sept. 26 from 5:45-7:15. Mt. Pleasant area. $35 to register, call Kristin  Penn at 872-0431.  MATURE WOMEN'S SUPPORT NETWORK, sponsored  by the Women's Resources Centre, offers  the following programs iii Sept.:. Peer  Counselling Skills for Men and Women,  Sun., 10:00a.m.-4:00p.m., Sept. 23, $25.;  Job Hunting Strategies, Sat., Sept. 22,  10:00a.m.^3:00p.m,,. $40.;Self-Assertion  and Confidence Group, Sat., Sept. 15,  10:00a.m.--4:.00p.m.,, $40.; Mediation - A  "Win-Win" Situation, Sun., Sept. 30,  9:30a.m.-4:30p.m., $40.; Managing Depression, Sat., Sept. 29 or Nov. 24, 10:00  a.m.-4:00p.m., $40. / Support Group for  People Caring for Aged Parents -."Caregivers Group" - This group is run by  Mary Blake and meets on the 3rd floor  of the Health Centre, Vancouver General  Hospital on Tuesday evenings from 6:00  to 8:00p.m. For further info and program  of subjects to be dealt with, phone Mary  Blake at 875-4414. ..>Z$3*g  BATTERED WOMEN'S SUPPORT SERVICES - The  fall training of Support Group Leaders  will take place during Oct. and Nov.  There will be an initial wkend. wksp. on  Fri. evening, Sat. and Sun., Oct. 12,  13 and 14, six weekly follow-up sessions  on Tues. evenings Oct. 23 through Nov.  27 and a final day long wksp on Sat.,  Dec. 1, 1984. Participants are expected  to attend all sessions and be prepared  to co-facilitate at least two, 8-10 week  support groups for battered women under  the auspices of B.W.S.S. within a year  of completing the leadership training.  The cost of the training is paid through  funds provided by the City of Vancouver.  Those interested in the.training program  should contact the B.W.S.S. office asap  at 734-1574.  THE YM/YWCA OF NEW WESTMINSTER at 180-6th  Street offers a variety of programs for  women, including: Wen-Do(self defence);  Premenstrual Syndrome Support Group;  Battered Women's Support Group; Legal  Advice Clinic; Single Mother's Support  Group. Call 526-2485 for details about  registration and starting dates.  CLASSES/WORKSHOPS  WOMEN'S SEXUALITY WORKSHOP - Sept. 21, 22  and 23,. 1984. Fee: $90 "Preorgasmic  Women's Group" begins Oct. 1, 1984,  pre-registration essential. For more  info, please call Anne Davies, M.A.  Counselling and Therapy, 531-8555 or  write to 210-1548 Johnston Rd., White  Rock, B.C. V4B 3Z8  FACING YOUR FAT, A workshop approach to  compulsive eating disorders - obesity,  bulimia and anorexia nervosa. Led by  Sandy Friedman, M.A. and Doris Maranda,  M.A. Fall wksp. dates - Sept. 21-23,  follow-up evenings Sept 26 & Oct. 3.  Nov. 16-18, follow-up evenings Nov. 21,  28. Also, 12 ongoing Thursdays, beginning Sept. 13. For more info call,  Sandy 731-8752; Doris 736-7180.  SELF-HELP THERAPY INTENSIVE FOR WOMEN -  This wkend. wksp. and three month ongoing group is designed for women who  have had experience in therapy and are  interested in moving into a self-help  mode. Techniques include journal work,  gestalt, dream work, hypnosis and  fantasy, and art. Focus for work will  be on sexuality, issues, self-limiting  lifescripts, and relationship concerns.  Cost: $365 includes all sessions, individual consultation, and handout materials. Payable by installment; deposit of  $50 by Sept. 20. Dates: Wkend. wksp.:  Sat. and Sun., Sept. 22 and 23: 9:30 -  4:00p.m. Six four-hour sessions twice  monthly for three months; dates and time  arranged by participants and facilitator.  For further info and registration ph.  876-6166 or send deposit to Michaela  Johnson, M.A. 733 W. 17th Ave., Van.,  B.C. V5Z 1V1.  EAST END YOGA - Iyengar Method - All  classes begin week of Sept. 17th.  Britannia Community Centre, 1661 Napier  . St. - Introductory: Mondays, 6-8p.m.,  Claudia MacDonald; Thursdays, 6-8p.m.,  Lindsay Whelan/Level 1: Mondays, 8-10p.m.  Claudia MacDonald. All classes are 11  weeks - $30.  Trout Lake Community Centre, 3350 Victoria at 15th - Introductory: Tuesdays,  9:30-11:30a.m.; Fridays, ll:30-l:30p.m.,  Paullette Roscoe/Level 1 Fridays, 9:30-  11:30a.m., Claudia MacDonald. All classes are 10 weeks - $30.  Riley Park Community Centre, 30th and  Ontario - Introductory: Saturdays, 10-  12a.m., Claudia MacDonald; Introductory  II(some previous Iyengar experience required), Saturdays l-3p.m., Claudia Macdonald. All classes are 12 weeks, $36.  Dunbar Community Centre classes begin  week of Sept. 10th, 4747 Dunbar at 31st.  Introductory: Mondays, 6-8p.m., Lindsay  Whelan, 10 weeks, $43; Thursdays, 10-12  a.m., Claudia MacDonald, 11 weeks $47;  Saturdays, 10-12a.m., Lindsay Whelan,  11 weeks $47/Level I - Tuesdays, 10-12  a.m., Lindsay Whelan, 11 weeks $47;  Thursdays, 6-8p.m., Claudia MacDonald,  11 weeks $47.  PERSPECTIVES ON WOMEN - a series of eight  television programs covering a wide range  of issues and concerns of women will be  telecast on the Knowledge Network seen  on converter channel 18 in the Lower  Mainland. In other areas check local  listings. Call 291-3631 for the schedule.  LITTLE MOUNTAIN NEIGHBOURHOOD HOUSE offers  numerous programs for the Fall. Call  879-7104 for details./Youth Newspaper,  for ages 15-18, meets once a week;  Tutorial Program, for grades 5-10, Tues.  and Thursl, 3:30-5:00p.m. for Math,  Chemistry, Physics, Biology, French &  English. E.S.L. students especially  welcome. Volunteers are needed for this  and other youth programs; Tai Chi classes  for adults & families, Tues. 6:30-8p.m.  for 10 weeks beginning Sept. 18. Cost is  $30.;Self-Help for Depression on Wed.,  7:30-9p.m. beginning Sept. 12; Unemployed Support Group, Wed. 10:30a.m., on j  drop-in basis; Neighbourhood Supper,  Fri. 4-6p.m. $3 for adults; $1.50 children; Single Mothers Support Group, Mon.  5-8:30p.m., meal preparation and childcare will be shared; English Classes for  immigrants and Canadian citizens. Mon.  & Wed., 9:30-noon, by Sept. 10, till  Nov. 28. Call 875-6111, loc. 559 for  details.  WEST COAST WOMEN AND WORDS SOCIETY - Fall  wksps. All wksps. will be limited in  size, and require pre-registration by  the dates indicated. Fees are $15 per  wksp. for members in good standing (1984  dues paid) and $20 per wksp. for non-  members. All wksps. will take place at  1622 W. 7th, Van. at the Canadian  Book Information Centre. Bring a lunch  for all-day sessions; Tea and coffee  provided, Call Women and Words office  at 872-8014 for more info. Send regis  tration and fees to Women and Words,  210-640 W. Bdway, Van., B.C. V5Z 1G4.  "Keeping A Journal As A Sourcebook For  Further Writing", Wksp. leader: Daphne  Marlatt, Sat., Sept. 15, 9:30a.m.-4p.m.  Pre-register by Sept. 7, 1984; "Jungian  Psychology In Writing And Life", Wksp.  leader: Julia van Gorder, Sun. Sept. 16,  1984, 9:30a.m.-4p.m., Pre-register by  Sept. 7, 1984;"Cracking The Code: Exploring The Use Of Female Language", Wksp.  leader: Betsy Warland, Sat., Sept. 22,  9:30a.m.-4p.m., Pre-register by Sept.  14, 1984; "Finding Your Voices", Wksp.  leader: Joan Haggerty, Sun., Sept. 30,  9:30a.m.-4p.m., Pre-register by Sept.  21; "Re.Vision - An Intensive Poetry/  Short Fiction Workshop", Wksp. leader:  Carolyn Zonailo, Fee: $22.50, three -  Tues. evenings, 7:30p.m.-10p*.m., Oct.  9, 16, 23; Pre-register by Oct. 2,-1984;  "Doing Feminist Research", Wksp. leader:  Jillian Ridington, Sat., Oct. 27, 9:30-  4p.m., Pre-register by Oct. 19; "How  To Begin", Wksp. leader:. Audrey Thomas,  Sat., Nov. 3, 9:30a.m.-4p.m., Pre-register by Oct. 26; "Storytelling", Wksp.  leader: Mary Love May, Sun., Nov. 4,  9:30a.m.-4p.m., Pre-register by Oct. 26.  LISTENING TO THE LANGUAGE - A Workshop  in Composition for Poets - This 6-wk.  workshop will focus on language (word  play, music, syntax shifts, etymology,  usage levels, coined words) and on  experimenting with composition in open  forms. Wksp. leader: Daphne Marlatt, a  Vancouver poet, Tues. evenings, Nov. 5  - Dec. 10, 7:30-10p.m. at Kootenay  School of Writing, 105-1045 W. Broadway,  Vancouver (604-732-1013). Fee: $6^^  Enrollment: limited to 15. Admission by  manuscript evaluation only. - Mss. must  be submitted to Kootenay School, of  Writing by Oct. 15, and include 10-15  pages of recent poetry.  WOMEN'S ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT  In China - A Study Tour sponsored by  Women's International Network News,  March, 1985. For details write to: Fran  P. Hosken, editor, WIN NEWS, 187 Grant  Street, Lexington, MA 02173 USA, Call  (617) 862-9431.  WOMYN'S VOLLEYBALL - We are an ad hoc  group of women who would like to learn  how to play volleyball better. We are  getting together starting Thurs., Sept.  20 at 6:30 to 8:00p.m. in Gym D of  Britania Community Centre. The cost is  $12 for 10 sessions. For.single evenings  the drop-in fee is $3. It is free to  anyone under the age of 18. No experience necessary. All women welcome.  Please join us. For more info call 253-  4391.  THE FOLLOWING WORKSHOPS ARE OFFERED BY  The Justice Institute of B.C. - Coping  Skills for the Workplace: Stress Management & Assertive Communication for Women,  A workshop for women workers, Wed., Oct.  10, 1984, 9a.m.-4p.m. Resource person is  Sandra Berman. Fee: $35. For more info  call Shelley Rivkin at 228-9771 loc. 233;  Adolescent Depression and Suicide: A \  Practical Workshop, Oct. 22-23, 1984,  Resource Persons: Steven Scofield and  Dan Stone. For more info contact: Marje  Burdine, 228-9771, loc. 271; Making  Decisions(two one-day workshops) Session  I: Oct. 26 - Lateral and creative thinking/Session II: Oct. 27 - Identifying  and solving problems. Resource Person:  Vera Bergman. For more info contact  228-9771, loc. 224; Negotiation Skills,  Nov. 1-2, Resource Person: Tony Tobin,  for more info contact: Marje Burdine,  228-9771, loc. 271. September '84   Kir.esis   35  BULLETIN BOARD  EVENTS  B.C. TASK FORCE ON IMMIGRANT WOMEN - Van.  will hold its General Meeting Thurs.,  Sept 20, 1984 at 7p.m. at 104-1045 W.  Broadway, for more info call Anne at  980-6976 or Khatun at 738-1351  VANCOUVER LESBIAN CONNECTION presents  another Capri Hall Dance Benefit for  Lesbian Centre. Sept.28, 3925 Fraser St.  8p.m. Advance tickets at Ariel Books,  Little Sisters, Women's Bkstore, Octopus  East. Wheelchair accessible, childcare  available offsite. For further info call  873-5804.  La Quena proudly presents  Inti-Illimani  (vsorld famous Chilean musical group)  and  Holly Near  in concert at the  ORPHEUM THEATRE  Sunday, September 23  8 p.m.  Tickets $10 and $12  Call La Quena (1111 Commercial) 253-6444  i.C. HUMAN RIGHTS COALITION ANNUAL GENERAL  Meeting, Wed., Sept. 12, 1984 at 7:30p.m.  at Britannia Community Centre. Please  note this is the revised date.  VANCOUVER FOLK MUSIC FESTIVAL presents in  concert: Kim Lalat, Sept. 15, 8p.m., $5;  Judy Small with special guest Priscilla  Herdman, Sept. 16, 8p.m. $8; Ferron with  her band with special guests We Three,  Sept 25-29, 8:30p.m., Tues-Thurs. $8;  Fri. & Sat. $9...All concerts at Van  East Cultural Centre. Tickets from  Black Swan Records and Octopus Books  East  CLOSET PRODUCTIONS PRESENTS "A Turkey  Delight". Come to the Cultch (Van. East)  Sun. Oct. 7, 1984 at 8:30 for an evening of music featuring Carolyn Bell and  Heidi Archibald with Julie Blue. Van.  East, 1895 Venables at Victoria. Tickets  $5 at the door. For reservations call  254-9578.  INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S DAY 1985 - Planning  begins now for March 1985. Come out and  meet other interested women, share your  skills or learn new ones. All skills,  talents, and energies are needed to  make next year's event a celebration  for the women of Vancouver. Our first  meeting will be at 7:30 p.m. Tues.,  Sept. 18 in the Senior's Lounge at  Britannia Community Centre at Commercial  and Napier Streets. All women welcome.  These facilities are wheelchair accessible.  LOCAL ARTIST ANN GIBSON has been working  with "The Birth Project", Judy Chicago's  newest body of work. As the only Canadian participant, she has prepared a 60-  minute slide presentation entitled "The  Birth Project: from a stitcher's perspective" which was launched Aug. 1 at  UBC. Ann Gibson is now taking the show  on tour. Fees for sponsoring a presentation are as follows: for groups of over  50 people, $150 + expenses + 15% of  proceeds. For more info contact Ann at  687-8471,"204-2054 Comox St., Van. V6G  1R8.  Celebration of Visual, Performance and Media Arts  WOMEN IN FOCUS PRESENTS OUR TENTH ANNIVER-  sary Celebration, Sept. 4 to Oct. 20,  1984. Two Visual Arts Exhibitions:  A Group Show entitled "Images of Women",  Sept. 4-22, containing paintings and  installations by Liane Taylor, Eva  Kupczynski, Sandra Jane Shaw, Hinda  Avery, Jean Higinbotham and other  Vancouver artists./A two-person'exhibition of ceramic sculpture entitled  "Still Sane" will run from Sept. 28-  Oct. 20, 1984. The show features Persimmon Blackbridge and Sheila Gilhooly  in artistic collaboration around the  subject of women and the mental health  industry; Gallery. Hours are: Mon. to  Fri. 12 noon to 5p.m. and Sat. from  10a.m. to 5p.m....Two Musical Concerts:  A Heather Bishop concert on Sept. 8 at  8p.m. at the Van. East Cultural Centre,  1895 Venables. Bishop is a Winnipeg  jazz/blues singer who is popular in  the Canadian folk music circuit. The  concert will be followed by a Reception  at Women In Focus, 204-456 W. Bdway.  Advance tickets are available through  Ariel Bookstore, the Women's Bkstore  and Women In Focus. Reservations can  be make through Van East at 254-9578./  On Sat., Oct. 6 at 8p.m., jazz singer/  pianist Carolyn Bell will be performing  at Women In Focus in a cabaret-style  environment. Advance tickets available  only through Women In Focus for $4;  door charge will be $5....Film/Video  Exhibition Series Fridays at 8p.m.:  Sept. 7 - "On Guard", a comedy drama  made in 1983 about four lesbian-feminists who take over a multi-national  group/Sept. 14 - Premiere showing of  "Daughters of the Nile", a video about  modern Egyptian women/Sept. 21 - "Shopping Bag Ladies" and "The Gloria Tapes"  on the subject of women and poverty/  Oct. 5 - Patricia Gruben's "Sifted  Evidence", Alexis Krasilovsky's "Cows",  Sandy Wilson's "Bridal Showers" and  Josephine Massarella's "Doctor Knows  Best". Series Pass $8; per evening  $3 at door....Poetry Reading And Book  Launching, Thurs. Sept. 13 at 7:30 -  Vancouver poets Betsy Warland and Daphne  Marlatt will be reading from soon-to-be  published works. Warland will be reading  from "open is broken", a long prose  poem; Marlatt from "Touch to My Tongue".  Sept. 13 is the official book launching  of Gillean Chases's The Square Root of  Female.   Chase will also be reading from  this newly-released volume....Variety  Nights Oct. 13 and 20. Women performers  will offer a capella singing, story  telling, musical and theatrical skits.  Tickets are $4 at the door only.  All Events Are Open To The General  Public. In All Cases Doors Open At 7:30  p.m. For more info contact Gillean  Chase at 872-2250.   1984 B.C. CONFERENCE ON HUMAN RIGHTS,  "One World, One Humanity", will take  place Sept. 21-23 in Victoria. This  forum will evaluate B.C. human rights  and the international context, with  emphasis on economic aspects. For pre-  registration contact: B.C. Conference  on Human Rights, 418-620 View Street,  Victoria, B.C. V8W 1J6  CLASSIFIED  THE VANCOUVER WOMEN'S HEALTH COLLECTIVE  is being evicted from its location at  1501 W. Bdwy. We will be closed for a  period of time during the fall while  we relocate. If you want to help us  move or want more details, call 736-6696.  HOUSEMATE WANTED (FEMALE) for non-sexist,  mixed co-op house, to share with three  others - 2 men and 1 woman. Near 1st  and Renfrew. $175 plus utilities. Ph.:  255-9689 for more details.  HELP WANTED: Press Gang, the feminist  printing and publishing collective,  needs volunteers to help work in the  bindery, including operating bindery  equipment. Training provided. To help,  call 253-1224.  NON-SMOKING FEMINIST HOUSEHOLD looking  for roommates. Large house with yard  and firepalce, quiet women. Ph.: 873-  .0070.  I'M WORKING ON A BOOK AND RESOURCE GUIDE  on P.I.D. (pelvic inflammatory disease)  and am interested in hearing from any  women who were cured of chronic P.I.D.  I'd also like to know of any practitioners anywhere who can cure or improve the  health of women with chronic P.I.D.  Please write to Maureen Moore, 4055  W. 31st Ave, Van., B.C. V6S 1Y7, or  phone (604) 228-8975. All replies confidential.  HOUSEMATE TO SHARE PLEASANT OLD CO-OP  house w/2 Q, 2 men near Charles/Victoria.  Small, cheap bedroom, lge. common space,  yard, organized dinner,chore schedule.  Phone 251-3255 Mona or Dana.  FUTON BED &. SOFA/BED FRAMES. $130-210 dependent on size. All frames handbuilt  using kiln-dried clear fir & come apart  into several pieces for easy moving &  storage. Varnish or stain-10% extra.  Furniture custom-designed and built.  Free estimates. Phone Marion:876-4541.  WHITE ROCK AND SOUTH SURREY WOMEN'S PLACE  has been awarded a federal grant to  survey young women's needs in White Rock  & S. Surrey area. We're interested in  how aware young women are of women's  issues, how they feel about themselves-  and what they feel their needs are. If  you have ideas or info to share, contact  Women's Place 536-9611, or young women  aged 13-19 not currently in school call.  MAPLE TREE/L'ERABLE PRE-SCHOOL(BILINGUAL),  is now registering 3 and 4 year olds  for Sept. classes. 3150 Ash St. (near  16th and Cambie). Info: Brenda Cottle  434-5970; 874-1032.  THE ALLIANCE FOR THE SAFETY OF PROSTITUTES  (ASP) urgently needs money to continue  legal proceedings against the recent  injunctions. The injunctions, while  targetting hookers, affect all women.  Please support us. For more info or  to send money, please write to ASP,  P.O. Box 2288, Van., B.C. V6B 3W5. RENEWfJOW  ORFdjlVER  HOliD WR PAWN!  Playjngg^s^ffia Ititleyik^j^pscribingm^^ESJS^^e^^mfbejusta very  '^^^^W^^^jz'n9 'apaWinwng ahead are impom^^^egame.  ^^^e^^^^f October it%time^WmlriFahead to the next ten issues of  ffph&f subscription. Maybe you just renewed recently and  j this ad because you think it might get funnier. Read on -  s message is for everyone, whether you renewed last year or last week.  On October 3rd the new subscription price goes up to $15 a year (and the cover  price goes up to $1.50) but our present subscribers can still renew at the old  prices until November 5th, if you get your $13 to us by that date. Even if your  renewal Is not due for months, plan ahead and get another year at the same  low price, $13 for 10 Issues.    • don't get caught fumbling for quarters at the bookstore  • get Kinesis delivered to your door  get it at the old price before Noven  P.S. New subscribers have until October 3r 1  to get your subscription form and  cheque into us at the old low price!  io  ■t   '  o  !7  ■fh Published TO times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  Q VSW membership - includes Kinesis subscription |  $20 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only • $13  D Institutions - $40  D Sustainers - $75   Name ; , j   Address    Phone.. Amount Enclosed