 VMJ/DE  6 NAC has lobbied in  women's interests for  more than a decade, and  they're good at it. Hilarie  McMurray reports on  NAC's recent conference  7 Hanne Jensen stepped  into a high-profile job  when she became Human  Rights Director.  Interviewer Mary Sims  takes an inside look at the  rigours of human rights  enforcement  8 Incest is surrounded by  myths and taboo, and  feminist Julie Brickman  wants to put them in their  place  10 Birthing has been  stolen from women by a  male-dominated culture,  and it's time for women,  and midwives, to get it  back, says Maureen  Minden  12 Performance art at its  best teaches of inner  power and transformation,  explain Rachel Rosenthal  and Giuditta Tornetta.  These 'grand dames' of the  art form were at Women  in Focus last month  13 Ingrid Yuille's  photographs play,  sometimes surprisingly,  upon the ambiguities of  everyday reality. Michele  Wollstonecroft offers a  look 'behind the scenes'  14 Braided Lives, Marge  Piercy's most recent novel,  is a powerful reminder that  some rights — like reproductive control — we  didn't use to have  18 Reader response to  last month's WAVAW  letter was immediate and  heated. Here's a selection  of those views  COVER: Our feature this month is birthing, and to  VSW staffer Patty Moore it's a timely issue. Photo by  Michele Wollstonecroft.  SUBSCRIBE TO KJMWMJ  Published 10 times a year  by Vancouver Status of Women  400A West 5th Ave., Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8  □ VSW membership - includes Kinesis subscription -  $20 (or what you can afford)  □ Kinesis subscription only - $13  □ Institutions - $40  □ Sustainers - $75  Name   _ Amount Enclosed.  Please remember that VSW operates on inadequate  funding — we need member support!  Special Collections Serial      JUNE '8  news about women that's not in the dailies 2   Kinesis    June 1982  INTERNATIONAL  Namibian women organize in the face of apartheid  by Mary Morris  South Africa illegally occupies Namibia,  brutally enforcing a policy of apartheid  through the army, police and courts. The  situation can only be compared to the  oppression that existed under Hitler's  rule. Under apartheid, black Namibian  women suffer a triple oppression - as  blacks, as women, and as workers.  During a recent lecture in Vancouver,  Namibian representative Pashukeni Shoombe  spoke about her country and the liberation  struggle the Namibian people are waging  against the illegal occupation of their  country.  Women's council dispatches skills, aid  Namibia, still called South West Africa  on some maps, was placed under trust to  South Africa before the Second World War.  Following the war, when the United Nations  ruled that South Africa should phase out  its administration of Namibia (the people's  chosen name for the country), South Africa  refused to withdraw. Instead, it advanced  troops and guns into the country. That  occupation has continued to this day.  In the early 1960's, the South West African Peoples Organization (SWAPO) was formed to wage revolutionary armed struggle  against this illegal occupation. One of  KINESIS  KINESIS is published ten times a  year by Vancouver Status of Women.  Its objectives are to enhance  understanding about the changing  position of women in society and  work actively towards achieving  social change.  VIEWS EXPRESSED IN KINESIS are  those of the writer and do not  necessarily reflect VSW policy. All  unsigned material is the responsibility of the Kinesis editorial group.  CORRESPONDENCE: Kinesis, Vancouver Status of Women, 400A West  5th Avenue, Vancouver, B.C. V5Y 1J8.  MEMBERSHIP in Vancouver Status  of Women is $20/year (or what you  can afford). This includes a subscription to Kinesis. Individual subscriptions to Kinesis are $13/year.  SUBMISSIONS are welcome. We  reserve the right to edit, and submission does not guarantee publication.  Include a SASE if you want your work  returned.  WORKERS ON THIS ISSUE: Janet Beebe,  Janet Berry, Jan DeGrass, Pat Feindel, Ann  Gibbon, Diana Hall, Jena Hamilton, Nicky  Hood, Jillian Skeet, Marion Smith, Jeanne  Taylor, Dolores Vader, Deb Wilson, Michele  Wollstonecroft.  DEADLINE FOR NEXT ISSUE: June 15 for  June 30 publication. Late copy printed as  space permits.  Vancouver Status of Women offices  are located at 400A W. 5th Avenue,  Vancouver, V5Y 1J8. Office hours are  Monday to Thursday, 9:00 to 5:00 p.m.  (some evenings by appointment).  Our phone number is 873-1427.  SWAPO's successes in the work of mass  mobilization was to release the tremendous  revolutionary capabilities of large numbers of women.  Namibian women have shown tremendous  strength and courage in their struggle for  liberation. Many have been imprisoned,  brutally tortured and expelled to isolated  areas for their ideas.  Despite these dangers, they continue to  struggle. Over many years women have shown  their strength through strikes, boycotts,  and even by refusing to have children  because they did not want their children  born to a life of slavery. They continue  to demonstrate successfully against the  mass removal of families from urban areas  to desolate regions of the country.  In 1970, SWAPO established an organization  of Namibian women known as SWAPO Women's  Council (SWC). Through SWC, women are  being trained in medicine, as truck drivers, mechanics, tailors, nutritionists  and typists. SWC has also organized literacy classes.  Pashukeni Shoombe, who is a member of the  SWAPO Women's Council, added that SWAPO  provides 24-hour day care for orphans  and for children of women undergoing  skills training. Women also help the  Peoples Liberation Army on a daily basis  by supplying food and shelter, administering medicine, and carrying messages and  guns across the country.  Food, medicine scarce in refugee camps  In 1975, a large number of Namibians,  many women and children, fled the country  to escape the brutality of South African  forces. Many of the younger women underwent combat training in other African  countries, returning to Namibia to join  the guerrilla forces, while the older  people and children went to refugee camps  in Angola.  Pasukeni Shoombe, who lives in one such  camp, described life in the refugee camps  and difficulties .facing the people. She  said that food and medicine are in short  supply. People try to grow sufficient  food, but their camps are under constant  bombardment by the South African air  force. Many have died in these raids,  which South Africa justifies as necessary incursions into dangerous SWAPO  "nests".  Despite the difficulties, the struggle  continues. As Canadian women, we can  support the struggle of the Namibian  people by educating ourselves and our  organizations about the current situation there.  Write letters to your local M.P. and to  the Minister of External Affairs to express your concern about Canada's role  in the western contact group - a five-  country group mandated to negotiate  South Africa's withdrawal from Namibia.  (Shoombe feels negotiating delays may be  a smokescreen while South Africa continues to pour troops in the country. )  You can also protest Canadian corporate  involvement in Namibia and offer financial  support to projects providing ongoing  support to the Namibian people. For more  " information write: SWAPO Women's Council,  P.O. Box 953, Luanda, Peoples Republic of  Angola.  STOr  Assorted colours,  short or cap  sleeve style,  sizes S, M, L and  XL. Children's  sizes too. $8  adult/$6 child.  Available at Vancouver  Status of Women, the  Women's Bookstore and  Ariel Books. Get yours  soon! June 1982   Kinesis   3  ACROSS B.C.  Leader  of  Domestic  Workers  Union forced to leave Canada  Daphne Williams, president of the Domestic  Workers Union, left Canada May 6. She was  forced by immigration officials to leave  "voluntarily" to avoid deportation.  Williams, who came to Canada nine years ago  from Jamaica in order to provide for her  five children there, had not been allowed  to work since March 1981, when immigration  officials discovered she no longer had a  valid work permit.  Around that time, Daphne helped to found  the Domestic Workers Union, and became its  first president/ The union, which now has  55 members, is fighting to achieve permanent landed immigrant status for all domestic workers brought to Canada to fill a  labour shortage.  Currently, foreign domestic workers come to  Canada with a temporary work permit, and  are tied to a specific job (to change jobs,  the work permit must be renewed). This arrangement has encouraged employers to exploit domestic workers with regard to salary  and working/living conditions.  Immigration authorities, in particular Lloyd  Axworthy, Minister of Employment & Immigration, have so far refused to budge on the  matter. Present policy is racist in effect;  it also perpetuates the idea that domestic  labour is of little or no value by confining domestic workers to a work permit system.  Daphne Williams, as she left Canada, said to  her friends and fellow union members, "You  must keep fighting so that my leaving means  something. This must never happen to another  domestic worker. I am determined to come  back."  Triforine put on health hazard  alert  Parts of the Fraser Valley are being sprayed  with a pesticide that could cause stillbirths, early childhood cancer and adult  cancers, according to an Ontario genetics  researcher. Dr. Joe Cummins, a professor at  University of Western Ontario, says that  blueberries are being sprayed with the agent  Triforine.  Although Triforine is registered for use by  Agriculture Canada, the U.S. laboratory  that tested the chemical is now closed, its  owners having been indicted on charges of  falsifying data for health and safety tests.  While the work of Industrial Biotest is  being re-examined, -Triforine continues to  be used.  Other studies have shown that Triforine,  when combined with nitrates - present in  many foods and in the air from sources such  as diesel fumes - is highly carcinogenic.  According to Cummins, Triforine is very similar in composition to a natural chemical  found in China that has been found to be  the source of a massive cancer death rate  in one area of China.  It is crucial that steps be taken to avoid  a buildup of the Triforine-nitrate combination in sprayed areas. Health & Welfare  Canada officials are only just beginning  to pay attention to the threat posed by  Triforine in the Fraser Valley. (Vancouver  Sun)  at Victoria and Grey Trust voted 6-5 in favour of SORWUC representation. Union organizer Jean Burgess believes it is only the  second trust company certification in Canada.  Although the vote was held in August 1981,  the ballot box was sealed while the B.C.  Labour Relations Board considered issues  arising out of the organizing drive.  The union's frustration at what is considered an inordinate delay in resolving matters  sparked a week-long sit-in at the LRB last  month by a Victoria and Grey employee. The  employee was suspended as a result. She laid  charges of unfair labour practices, and was  awarded $10,000 with the understanding that  she would not return to the company, nor  pursue further unfair labour practice charges. Her sit-in was successful in prompting  a Labour Relations Board ruling on the  certification vote.  The company fought hard against union certification, according to Burgess. "There  were a number of firings and layoffs. The  company was just like a brick wall, far  worse than the banks."  She said the main demands in first contract  negotiations will be increased wages and  job security. (Vancouver Province)  !  / oo    oo  +t    ++  DO      OO     t  ++    ++  oo    oo  j   ++    ++  oo    oo  + +   ++  £00      oo  ++    ++  po    oo    c  >++      ++      +41  o     oo    oo  ++   ++  DO      OO   OO  SORWUC wins trust company  certification  The Service, Office and Retail Workers Union  of Canada has won the first union certification of a trust company in B.C.  In a supervised ballot, Vancouver employees  Lesbian day of action celebrated  province-wide  Five British Columbia cities were the sites  of organized lesbian activity against the  right March 27.  The national day of action was planned at  last May's lesbian conference in Vancouver.  In B.C., coordination was provided by the  Lesbian Action Committee of the B.C. Federation of Women.  While only small numbers of women attended  a workshop on lesbians and the law in Vern-  ■ on and a video screening in Terrace, both  centres have formed lesbian support groups  as a result.  Northern Lesbians, based in Terrace, has  established links with gay people in Prince  Rupert and Alaska, while Vernon has already  arranged a social event involving lesbians  from all over the Okanagan Valley, including women from mixed gay organizations in  Kelowna and Kamloops.  In Victoria, a series of social and educational activities was organized by an ad  hoc group of lesbians from the Lesbian Caucus of Rape Assault and the Vancouver Island  lesbian newspaper Flagrant.  A  group of eight Vancouver women took only  three weeks to pull off the most ambitious  of the March 27 projects. Festivities  ranged from a Saturday lunch, to a rally  emceed by comedian Lorna Boshman and entertained by singers Maura and Luna, to a  march led by marshalls wielding lavender  pom poms. A day of workshops took place on  Sunday. (Chris Bearchell/The Body Politic)  Child advocates hit by legal  services cutback  The Attorney-General's ministry has said it  will no longer appoint lawyers to act for  children under B.C.'s Family and Child Services Act except under "highly exceptional"  circumstances.  The decision affects victims of child abuse  and children 12 years or older who are involved in custody, maintenance or protection battles.  In addition, lawyers will be limited to a  maximum of eight hours out-of-court time  per case, and a maximum of one hour preparation for every four hours in court.  Previously, there was no restriction on  the number of hours a family advocate  could bill the ministry on a case.  The restraints are aimed at controlling  family law expenses. According to A-G Alan  Williams, "We've brought spending under  control in other areas. We're now looking  at what is being done in family law."  Grace McCarthy, Minister of Human Resources  and instigator of recent welfare cutbacks,  claims there will be no curtailment of services for children as a result of legal aid  cutbacks.  NDP MLA Rosemary Brown, however, disagrees.  She called for an emergency debate on the  changes, saying they violate the rights of  children. (Vancouver Sun)  You can't be civil (at least in  court) if you're married  Another piece of legislation which discriminates against women surfaced in a  case last year, and in it the judge states  that the law is crying out for reform in  B.C.  In a situation, for example, where there  is a motor vehicle accident in which the  husband is driving his own car, the wife  is a passenger, the car is involved in an  accident which is completely his fault,  and the wife is injured, she cannot sue  him in civil court for tort (which is "a  wrongful act, injury or damage, not involving a breach of contract, for which civil  action can be brought").  If any other person were injured in the  same situation (including the husband's  mother, sister, brother, child, friend or  stranger) they would have the right to sue  and get compensation from the insurance  company for their injuries, wage loss, and  other expenses such as medication or  physiotherapy. Only a spouse does not have  that right, (in practice, this law works  against women, who so often in marriage  have little access to family income and  property.)  The law in question is the Married Women's  Property Act  and it is basically a (rather  substantial) remnant of the concept that  marriage is a union creating one person -  and how could you sue yourself? In England, the law was changed in 1962 so that  a wife or husband could sue each other "as  if they were not married". Other provinces  in Canada have straightened up their acts;  B.C. is still sitting on yet another piece  of outdated legislation which needs immediate reform.  Address letters urging reform to:  Attorney General Alan Williams,  Legislative Buildings, Victoria, B.C.  with a copy to MLA Rosemary Brown. 4   Kinesis    June 1982  ACROSS CANADA  Service workers win  compensation, wage parity  The federal government has agreed to pay $17  million in compensation for.past discrimination to 3300 public employees, a majority of  them women.  The dispute began in 1979 when three groups  of general service workers, mostly women,  began fighting for wage parity with four  other groups of workers, mostly men, and  some of whom earned up to A0%  more.  The women worked as kitchen help, laundry  workers and cleaners, while the men worked  at building messenger, custodian and supply  jobs.  A 1979 Canadian Human Rights Commission ruling held that the wage discrepancies violated federal laws guaranteeing equal pay for  work of equal value.  funds. Either the municipalities could not  afford or did not want to pay their 20$  share of increased salaries, or they realized that if salaries were increased, fees  would also have to be increased, both to  the province for subsidized spaces and to  fee-paying parents. "Most parents couldn't  afford the increase," says Colley.  Drea claims the remainder of the budget  surplus ($2.66 million) will be added to  next year's daycare budget and spent as  proposals from community groups, employers  and municipalities are accepted. He adds  that carrying over money from this year's  budget will not adversely affect next year's  budget, though critics are not so certain.  Ontario's daycare budget for the next fiscal  year is set at $75 million, up $11 million  from this year. (Sylvia Stead/Globe & Mail)  The final $17 million settlement, worked  out in March between the federal government  and the Public Service Alliance of Canada,  does not fully compensate for past discrimination. The government refused to pay back  wages to March 1978 when the equal value  law was passed. (A human rights official  last July publicly estimated that $30 million would be required to provide full compensation to the workers.)  The most recent contract negotiated between  the union and the government nrovides wage  parity for all general service workers.  (Sue Vohanka/Toronto Clarion)  Daycare surplus blamed on lack  of demand  The Ontario government has ended its fiscal  year with $3.66 million left unspent in its  daycare budget. The money was part of a  much-publicized $10 million increase in  funds to daycare services in that province  last year.  Of the $3.66 million, $1 million will be  returned to the province's general revenues. It was slated to be spent on the salary increases for daycare workers; however,  the government claims that Metro Toronto  and Ottawa were the only municipalities to  ask for the money.  "Nobody else asked for it...If there is no  demand, there is no demand," said Frank  Drea, Minister of Community & Social Services.  Susan Colley, co-ordinator for Action Daycare, thinks there are other reasons for  municipalities' lack of demand for the  Greyhound height barrier bites  the dust  A woman who was refused even an interview  for a job as a Greyhound bus driver because  she was less than 5'8" tall, has been awarded $3500 in lost wages and general damages  by the Canadian Human Rights Commission.  In addition, Greyhound Lines of Canada has  agreed to discontinue the practice of requiring women to be 5'8" for drivers' jobs.  Two women under 5'8" have been hired since  the original complaint was resolved.  The Canadian Human Rights Commission will  monitor driver application records at Greyhound for one year.  Calgary feminists attacked by  press, police  Calgary women "took back the night" for the  first time on April 16. More than 350 women  attended a rally in King Edward Park, then  marched through Calgary's downtown streets  carrying bright-coloured banners and signs,  enthusiastically singing and chanting slogans.  At the outset, a speaker for Feminist Town  Hall, the organizing group, explained to  the crowd that they would be marching without a permit, and thus without police escort, as the purpose of the march was to  Treasury Board loses in  maternity leave case  The federal Treasury Board's practice of  preventing public servants from using their  accumulated sick leave or vacation credits  during maternity leave is sex discrimination, an independent human rights tribunal  has ruled.  Loraine Tellier-Cohen of Montreal complained  to the Canadian Human Rights Commission in  October 1979 that she was forced to take  leave without pay for 20 days surrounding  the birth of her child.  The tribunal ordered Tellier-Cohen reimbursed $1912.20 lost pay for the 20 days, and  awarded her $2000 as special compensation  for loss of self-respect.  Lucie Dion, a tribunal member, stated that  Canadian arbitration case law has established that the period surrounding the birth  of a child is a "period of disability",  during which there is pain, discomfort and  physical sickness which prevent a woman from  performing her duties.  Agreeing that this period is therefore "an  illness within the meaning of a collective  agreement", Dion concluded that Tellier-  Cohen was "entitled to use her sick leave  during the period of disability due to pregnancy." (SWAG News)  illustrate that women have the right to be  out at night - and safe - without men's protection. The crowd loudly endorsed the decision.  The rally was highlighted by New York feminist and writer Andrea Dworkin, who spoke  out strongly against all forms of violence  against women.  Calgary news media gave the march a lot of  coverage - unfortunately, none of it about  violence against women. So far, the papers  and TV have speculated that charges may be  laid for obstruction of traffic and parading without a permit, even announcing the  names and addresses.of six "organizers"  who allegedly have been charged. According  to the media, the court appearance was  scheduled for May.  Despite these reports, none of the women  mentioned had yet been contacted by police  or given a summons. Feminist Town Hall is  organizing a fight back campaign that will  include a press conference dealing with the  issue of violence against women.  This march was the first these women have  organized. They need your support in their  fight against this attack from the Calgary  police. Send them letters and telegrams of  support for their action, as well as histories of other marches where community  groups went ahead without parade permits  but weren't charged. Send letters to: Calgary Status of Women, c/o YWCA, 320 - 5th  Avenue S.E., Calgary, Alberta.  Wife-beating no laughing matter  Wife-beating in Canada is a grave social  problem. Each year, thousands of women are  battered - often severely, sometimes to jj  death. But recently in the House of Com- *  mons, the issue was treated far from ser-j  iously. In fact, many members of Parliar  ment found it something to laugh at.  Several weeks ago, MP Margaret Mitchell  (NDP - Vancouver East) told the House  that, according to a recently tabled parliamentary report, one in ten men beat  their wives.  Immediately, laughter erupted among many male MPs. Mitchell, who  was momentarily prevented from continuing,  her question because of the laughter,  found such a reaction far from humorous. ■  The laughter that greeted Mitchell's remarks incensed 'women' s group's across the ;  country. In a. Globe & Mail  article, Luci  Pepin, president of the Advisory Council  on the Status of Women, said* "I'm really  appalled- they consider violence among  52% of the population a laughing matter."'  Mitchell said the Canadian public, shared  the outrage as well. "We've just been  flooded with telegrams and letters from . ..  not only women's groups but people generally," she said in a telephone interview from Ottawa.  MPs later countered that -it was not the  issue of wife-beating itself that sparked_  • the cacophony, but rather the preamble to  Mitchell's remarks..  But Mitchell dismissed this explanation,  saying the laughter followed her report  that one in ten men beat their wives, not  her preamble. "It was a very instinctive  kind of response," she said.  While Mitchell was disturbed by the incident, she did say it has had a positive  effect. "In the long run, it's been very  good because it's created such a national  protest," she said. As well, she noted,  it has given male MPs an extra worry:  "The men (members) are all very embarrassed," she said. "They must now reassure  their constituents that it wasn't them  laughing." (Ann Gibbon) June 1982    Kinesis   5  INTERNATIONAL  Spanish trial ends in abortion  rights victory  The trial of eleven Spanish women charged  with illegally procuring or performing  abortions has ended in victory with the  acquittal of nine and a suspended sentence  and a pardon for the other two.  Some of the alleged offenses date back  nearly ten years. The women were brought  to trial in 1979, but the case was adjourned amid widespread protest from feminist  organizations, liberal lawyers and politicians. In support of the defendants, many  prominent Spanish women openly admitted to  having had abortions. 'Äû  The accused, most of them married and with  children, are all working class women from  an industrial suburb of Spain. They had  carried out abortions at a time when contraceptives were illegal. Contraceptives  were made available by prescription in  1978; however,, abortion is still illegal  in Spain.  Controversy over the illegality of abortion is raging in this heavily Roman Catholic country as a result of this trial.  Prosecution had originally recommended a  sentence of 60 years for one of the women  and 55 years for her daughter, who was  charged with helping'to perform the abortion. (WIN News/ Vancouver Sun)  Auto workers protest  concessions to General Motors  Members of the United Auto Workers union  in the U.S. recently approved a concessions contract which will save General  Motors $3 billion over the next 2\  years.  By a narrow majority, workers agreed to a  30-month wage freeze, a 9-month deferral  of cost-of-living increases, and the  elimination of 2-4 paid holidays, in return for protection against plant closures. Three plants slated for closure  this year will remain open, a profit-  sharing clause has been instated, and  veteran workers are guaranteed "lifetime"  cheques.  Many workers think the concessions were  unwarranted because of GM's high profits.  They are convinced that the money GM  saves will be invested in automation  that will make their jobs obsolete.  Women workers are protesting the contract  for additional reasons. The Women's Committee of the UAW in Fremont, California  sent the following letter to union officials:  "We are members of local 136*4, women employees of the GM Fremont plant which was  shut down 'indefinitely' on March 5.  "We feel that the agreement arrived at  between the UAW International and the  General Motors Corporation is a slap in  the face to us.  "The corporation failed to hire women in  any numbers at our plant until 1972,  thereby violating the 1964 Civil Rights  Act.  "The Guaranteed Income Stress" excludes  all the women who worked at our plant.  95$ of us have less than 10 years seniority and all of us were laid off before  March 1. We are also hurt by the provision to reduce Supplemental Unemployment  Benefits by 50% in order to repay the  money we got from Trade Reimbursement  Act. We need these SUB benefits to live  "At a time when the percentage of women  in GM's blue collar work force has  dropped from 11%  last year to 16% this  year, we ask you to take a stand against  the discrimination embodied in this  agreement." (Union Wage)  El Salvador elections involved  coercion, manipulation  Ana Castillo, Canadian representative of  the FDR (Revolutionary Democratic Front)  was in Vancouver In May to publicize the  effects of the March elections in El Salvador.  "The elections," said Castillo "were primarily a political manouver. The objective was to legitimize a new government  and the possibility of an external invasion. "  It is clear from information not often  available in the regular press that the  election process was manipulated. For  example, in the cities (the only area of  significant voter turnout), the army  maintains strict control and many people,  believed that a refusal to vote would  almost certainly condemn them to paramilitary death lists.  In addition, public employees and bank  employees were told that a failure to  present their identity cards with the  stamp that indicated they had voted  would result in a withholding of their  paycheques.  The long lineups at voting stations (seen  by North Americans on television and given as an indication Of the high voter  turnout) were the result of the fact that  only 13 such voting locations were set up  in San Salvador, a city with a population  of a million people.  Furthermore, people in the countryside,  where a majority of the population lives,  did not vote. It is here that the FDR  maintains controlled zones and where, in  general, there is less control by the military. Journalists covering the elections  were in general restricted to the urban  centre of San Salvador.  Journalists covering the elections were  in general restricted to the urban centre  of San Salvador. Many were threatened for  stepping outside this restriction, and in  the course of the elections, four Dutch  journalists working outside the urban centre were murdered.  Castillo said that the FDR is reconfirming their position; that the struggle  continues before, during and after the  elections. She warned about the increased  threat of a direct U.S. intervention in  the foreseeable future.  She also spoke with women's organizations  about the specific position of women in  the Salvadorean revolution. She encouraged  Canadian women to develop links with and  support for AMES (Association de las Mu-  jeres de El Salvador/Salvadorean Women's  Association). She spoke of the continued  repression of AMES and other popular organizations within El Salvador. For example  Ana Maria Gomez, a founder of AMES, was  kidnapped last year. No word of her has  been heard from that time.  Toxic shock suit fingers Proctor  & Gamble  A second trial blaming Proctor & Gamble's  Rely tampons for toxic shock has opened  in Cedar Rapids, Iowa. Michael Kehm  charges that his wife Patricia died of  toxic shock four days after she first  used Rely tampons.  Two researchers working independently of  each other have done experiments showing  just why Rely tampons may be dangerous.  Both doctors' work pinpoint carboxymethyl-  cellulose, the synthetic absorbent used  in Rely. The material breaks down into a  sugar which encourages the rapid growth  of vaginal bacteria, and inhibits the action of white blood cells, the body's  natural defense against infection.  Though Proctor & Gamble reject the studies, other manufacturers have switched  back to more traditional absorbent materials such as cotton and rayon. (Big Mama  Rag)  Columbian matriarchy earned a  reputation  Complete political control by women in  Tibasosa, Columbia ended recently with the  resignation of the town's mayor.  Described in El Espectador  of Bogota as  "the longest-lived, most peaceful, and most  profitable matriarchy in Columbia", the  town earned a reputation for solving problems without violence during the years of  rule by women. In addition, it set an  example of cleanliness and developed a calm  lifestyle to match the town's limited resources. (Big Mama Rag)  Military spending means lost  jobs for women  The $135 billion 1980 U.S. military budget  cost nearly 1.3 million their jobs, according to a recent study which challenges Defense Department contentions that cutting  the defense budget will mean lost jobs.  The study, "Neither Jobs Nor Security", is  one of a series of publications by Employment Research Associates, a Michigan group  which studies military spending and its impact on the economy.  The study translates the expenditures lost  or foregone in civilian categories into the  number of jobs lost in each state, and contrasts them with the number of jobs created  through military contracts and salaries to  show which states lost and which gain from  military spending.  According to the study, women lost jobs in  49 out of 50 states when the military budget goes up, and a $1 billion increase means  9500 jobs lost to women. Only Virginia  gained jobs for women as a result of Penta  gon spending in 1980. (Union Wage) 6   Kinesis    June 1982  CONFERENCES  NAC celebrates a decade as national women's lobby  by Hilarie McMurray  Four hundred women from across Canada  gathered in Ottawa from March 12-15 for  NAC's Annual General Meeting. The conference was also a birthday party - the  National Action Committee on the Status of  Women celebrated her first decade.  NAC grew out of the Committee for the  Equality of Women in Canada, which had  fought for the establishment of a Royal  Commission on the Status of Women. Fifteen  years ago when Laura Sabia told a reporter  that one million women would march on  Parliament Hill to demand a Royal Commission, she was probably relieved not to have  to test her threat.  NAC represents 190 diverse affiliates  Today, NAC represents one million women  through 190 affiliated national and regional organizations. The diversity of NAC's  membership is striking. Counted among its  member groups are trade unions, and women's  organizations as diverse in focus as the  Canadian Federation of Business and Professional Women's Clubs and the Canadian  Abortion Rights Action League.  Vancouver women attending included Joanne  Ranson and Hilarie McMurray, Vancouver  Status of Women (VSW) delegates; Nadine  Allen and Debra Lewis, delegates for the  Women's Research Center; and Jillian Ridington, representing the Vancouver Association of Women and the Law.  The conference agenda was ambitious. Friday evening's programme took us back to  1972 with Moira Armour's film "Strategy for  Change", which showed us how far we have  come, yet how far we have to go. This was  followed with a speech by Laura Sabia, a  founding mother of NAC, a woman whose political perspective VSW doesn't share, but  for whom we maintain a critical respect.  Job sharing of regional duties sought  Late Friday evening, B.C.-Yukon delegates  met to discuss our desire to support both  Jane Evans (Armstrong,B.C. ) and Jon Leah  Hopkins (Whitehorse, Yukon), candidates for  B.C.-Yukon regional representative.  B.C. women's needs are too important,, too  diverse, and too geographically disparate  to be represented by one woman; no woman,  no matter how committed and energetic - and  last year's B.C.-Yukon rep, Alicia Lawrence,  is certainly both of these - can deal with  such diversity.  We drafted a resolution asking that the  job be shared, a move that was supported  by all B.C.-Yukon delegates. Unfortunately,  it was found to be constitutionally impossible.  The Victoria Faulkner Women's Centre in  Whitehorse brought a proposal to the April  NAC executive meeting requesting the job-  sharing amendment again; we will keep you  posted as to its progress.  Saturday morning's business meeting was  technical and frustrating for many women  as they attempted to follow procedural  maneuvering. All NAC member groups who  wish to participate effectively should ensure that they acquire a basic understanding of NAC's constitution and rules.  After lunch, Marilou McPhedran, one of the  major organizers of the Ad Hoc Committee  on the constitution, gave a constitutional  update. She emphasized that the Charter of  Rights falls far short of meeting women's  demands. It appears women must continue  to do the work ourselves.  The Saturday afternoon workshops, tense  li  hour sessions requiring thorough advance preparation, were the forum for  developing policy resolutions. There were  workshops on sexual assault, prostitution,  media watch, employment, survival, reproductive rights, pornography, federal/  provincial fiscal arrangements, and family  violence.  The NAC executive was elected Sunday morning. Although it is difficult to judge on  the basis of 2-minute candidate speeches,  the new executive appears to be representative of NAC's membership, both politically and geographically.  The 82-83 executive is: Doris Anderson  (Ottawa), president, Kathy Coffin (Halifax),  Chaviva Hosek (Toronto) and Jillian  Ridington (Vancouver), vice-presidents,  Jill Schooley (Newfoundland/Labrador),  Silvia Isener (Maritimes), Maria Peluso  (Quebec), Lynn Beak (Northern Ontario),  Pat Keyser (Manitoba/Saskatchewan), Janina  Vanderpost (Alberta/Northwest Territories),  and Jane Evans (B.C.-Yukon), regional reps,  Moira Armour (Toronto), Lousie Dulude  (Ottawa), Pat Hacker (Ottawa), Wendy  Lawrence (Ottawa), Kay MacPherson (Toronto).  Gerry Rodgers (St. John's), Michelle  Swenarchuk (Ottawa) and Billie Thurston  (St. John's).  At the afternoon plenary session, resolutions from workshops were considered.  Most of NAC's policy corresponds closely  to VSW positions, although we do have  significant differences in some areas such  as sexual assault and pension reform.  Native women's rights, prostitution  priority issues  Resolutions passed included a reaffirmation of NAC's opposition to wage controls;  a reaffirmation of freedom of choice on  abortion and a call for regional clinics;  opposition to the new exemptions ( "labour  shortage" and "technological change") to  the equal pay for work of equal value  provisions of the Canadian Human Rights  Act; and opposition to the new federal  policy on domestic workers. Two of the  priority issues for 82-83 are Native  women's rights and prostitution.  Mary Two-Axe Early gave a moving speech on  Sunday detailing Native women's long  struggle for equality. Section 12(l)(b)  of the Indian Act currently legislates  discrimination against Native women by revoking their status rights if they marry  non-Indian men.  As for prostitution, NAC's justice committee is developing a position based on  the following principles: a) prostitution  is a reflection of the social and economic  condition of women and not a matter of  public morality, b) soliciting and keeping  a common bawdy house are not the proper  subject of criminal law, and c) public  nuisances attendant to prostitution (such  as noise and traffic obstruction), if any,  must be dealt with through bylaws at the  local level. VSW has worked on this Issue  for several years and intends to have input on NAC's Justice Committee.  All of these activities led to the lobby  of party caucuses on Parliament Hill on  Monday. NAC uses the lobbying techniques  developed by Diana Ellis, a VSW member and  ex-staffer, techniques which provide for  skill-sharing and participation in lobbying by newcomer and expert alike.  Each political party is invited to meet  with NAC representatives for one hour.  NAC always begins with the NDP.  Ed Broad-  bent and most of the NDP caucus were  present and responsive to NAC's position.  Margaret Mitchell, MP for Vancouver East,  is the NDP women's critic. She and MP  Pauline Jewett treated the B.C. women to  lunch in the Parliamentary dining room.  The exchange of ideas and the opportunity  to get to know these women in a social  setting was a useful and enjoyable experience.  The Conservative party was next, and they  evidenced interest in NAC's concerns.  Flora MacDonald was particularly impressive - she is committed to pension reform  for women and stated that government has  the responsibility to lead the way on  equal pay for work of equal value. Leader  Joe Clark was in favour of the repeal of  S12(l)(b) of the Indian Act, and action on  the CRTC task force on sex-role stereotyping. Predictably, the Conservatives  support contract compliance and equal  value legislation only in principle.  Fewer than ten Liberal members attended  the lobby session. The disdain for NAC  shown by the majority of the Liberal caucus overshadowed the strong positions  taken by Judy Erola, Minister Responsible  for the Status of Women. She came to the  lobby well-prepared and endorsed most of  NAC's resolutions. Unfortunately, it is  clear that women's issues are a low  priority with the Liberals and that Erola  will have to struggle to be heard in  caucus.  For the last few years, VSW has been debating whether or not to maintain NAC  membership. This conference, marking the  10th year of the national women's lobby,  allowed us to observe, participate and  evaluate VSW's relationship to NAC.  NAC's raison d'etre is to be the national  feminist lobby and the organization has  proven itself to be an effective lobbying  force. The magnitude and quality of the  work NAC does is considerable, and accomplished by volunteers along with two part-  time staff people. Thus, VSW's executive  has decided to remain a member of NAC.  We came to that decision acutely aware  that "for those among us who believe that  more far-reaching and radical changes are  necessary, that alternative systems and  institutes must be developed, action on  many other fronts continues to be necessary." (Jillian Ridington, "Reflections  on NAC", Kinesis,  April 1978). June 1982    Kinesis   7  HUMAN RIGHTS  Human rights director aims for accountability, easy access  by Mary Woo Sims  Following is an interview with Hanne  Jensen,  Director of the B.C.  Human Rights  Branch.  Jensen,  who has been with the  Branch for over seven years,   took over as  Acting Director in July 1981 when former  Director Nola Landucci was abruptly asked  to leave her post.  Jensen was appointed  Director on March 15,   1982.  Mary:  You took on the job of Acting Director of the Human Rights Branch when Nola  Landucci was fired.  Is there a difference  in your approach to the position now that  you are the Director?  Hanne:   I took over as Acting Director in  July 1981. At that time I had been with  the Branch for seven years and I certainly  was aware of the dimensions of the job and  the pressures. However, it wasn't until I  was actually in the job that I appreciated  the magnitude and the complexity of the  demands made on the person who accepts  that position.  I have been on a steep learning curve in  order to develop skills and knowledge to  function 'in the job, but the more I know  about the area and the more confidence I  develop in my ability to do the job, the  better the results will be.  Mary:  Did you have any personal reservations about accepting the position,  given  the history of your two predecessors,  Kathleen Ruff and Nola Landucci?  Hanne: Of course there were reservations.  I think I approached the job then and now  with realistic apprehension, because I am  fully aware of the expectations the community has on that particular job, whoever  assumes the position.  Partly, the expectations stem from what I  think is a misunderstanding of the role  and function of the Director, vis-a-vis  the Human Rights Commission, as a result  of the style developed and perfected by  Kathleen Ruff. I think most people remember Kathleen Ruff as a very vocal,  very outspoken advocate for' individuals  and for the issues. I know that this part  of her job was one she knew belonged with  the Human Rights Commission. However, for  a variety of reasons, she felt she had to  take on that particular role and she did  so.  This style having been established, there  are great expectations that anyone in  this job will use the same style. I think  Nola Landucci felt that pressure and I am  certainly aware of that pressure. I haven't  really figured out how to reconcile the  expectations with the realities of the  structure of the job, which is a public  servant under the Ministry of Labour with  a very specific mandate. There is a real  need to balance the role of the Director  vis-a-vis the Commission and the community.  Mary: What do you see your responsibilities as Director of the Human Rights  Branch being? And how does this fit with  the realities of working within a bureaucracy ?  Hanne:  Well, the reality is that the Director is a bureaucrat. I'm a public  servant within a bureaucracy. There is a  job description for the Director of the  Human Rights Branch, which spells out  that it is the Director's responsibility  to make sure the program is delivered as  effectively and efficiently as possible.  That means the community has to be made  aware of the rights that exist under the  code, and employers made aware of their  responsibilities. Where individual complaints come to the Branch, these complaints are dealt with as effectively and  efficiently as possible. It is also my  responsibility to achieve the greatest  pattern of change in discrimination possible.  That means the community has to be made  aware of the rights that exist under the  code  Mary: You state that you wish to run the  Branch and enforce the code as effectively  and efficiently as possible.  Your immediate predecessor,  Nola Landucci,  reportedly had problems dealing with staff and  All human rights agencies across  Canada suffer from the chronic  problem of being short-  staffed . . . I think the director  has a real responsibility to  clarify the causes of delay to  people who complain.  minority communities.  What are you doing  differently to show your commitment to  human rights and enforcement of the code?  Hanne: I think the fact that I have been  with the Branch for such a long time and  have worked closely with people in the  women's movement, ethnic minority communities and other constituencies, as well as  having developed the confidence of staff,  has put me in a different position.  In fact, it places me at a disadvantage,  because I am quite aware of the pressures  focused on staff and in particular, on  human rights officers. They have the very  difficult task of investigating and  attempting to conciliate complaints of  descrimination. They are the ones who feel  the frustration of complainants expecting  justice and who experience the emotional-  asm of employers who don't like to be  accused of being "bad guys".  What I want to do is to achieve a sense  of unity, of people working together to  achieve clearly identified objectives. I  also want to work more closely with the  Commission to utilize its strength as  spokesbody for the issues and new directions that human rights is moving in,  both in the province and in the country  generally.  Mary: What is your role with regard to  the Human Rights Commission?  Hanne:  The statute makes the Director the  Chief Executive Officer of the Commission.  This means that all staff within the  human rights program come under the Director through various reporting relationships. The Commission itself does not  have any staff, but relies on the Director to deliver the back-up to carry out  its mandate of promotion and education in  the area of human rights.  Mary: In terms of recommendations made by  the Human Rights Commission,  what is your  role in convincing the Minister of Labour  that those recommendations should be  brought to the Legislature for a change  in the legislation?  Hanne:   The Commission is an independent  body of people who have been appointed to  be responsible for promoting human rights.  One of the roles they have taken on is  that of advising government of the shortcomings of existing legislation, and  making specific recommendations for meeting the needs of people in the province.  The Director does not join the Commission  in the public arena of advocating specific  changes to the Human Rights Code.  Mary:  Will you be working at all with the  Deputy Minister responsible for women,  Isabel Kelly?  Hanne:  As yet (May 12), I haven't had the  opportunity to meet with her. I don't know  to what extent her office, the Human  Rights Branch and the Commission will be  working together. I look forward to being  able to do that after she's on the job.  Her appointment starts June 1.  Mary: How do you intend to communicate  and work with the women's community on  issues relating to women's rights?  Hanne:   I know it's very important to maintain personal contact with people who work  in the various constituencies, and who are  concerned with the protection existing  under the Code and effective delivery of  that protection. Between myself, staff,  and the Commission, there will definitely  be on-going consultation with those communities, including the women's community.  Mary: How can women express to you their  outrage or support for your position on  issues,  and would you be open to the  community's criticisms?  Hanne:   I think the Director is accountable  to the public at large for the delivery  of the program and I am very open to  criticism and advice. I have already been  getting both, on the record and off.  Mary: Is there a message you would convey  to women to dispel their fears that the  Human Rights Branch is a bureaucratic  agency under a Social Credit government  and will do nothing for complainants?  Hanne:  I would be very upset if individual  women were deterred in lodging complaints  under the code because of fears and impressions of the futility. I encourage any  individual who feels there has been a  violation of the law to bring it to the  attention of the Branch, the agency responsible for delivering what has already  been promised under the human rights code.  I suggest that women assess how effectively their complaints have been dealt with  and if they are not satisfied, to so indicate.  All human rights agencies across Canada  suffer from the chronic problem of being  short-staffed, and right now, are having  to meet, in court, several challenges  to the effective delivery of antidiscrimination legislation. I think  the director has a real responsibility  to clarify to people who complain, the  causes of delay, and the resulting  frustration when the resolution is not  what the individual had in mind. I intend to make sure that women understand  how the system operates, and further, to  make some assessments as to necessary  changes. 8    Kinesis    June 1982  INCEST  Examining the myths: a feminist view of incest  by Julie Brickman  Julie Brickman is a feminist therapist and  clinical psychologist whose special area  of interest is violence towards women.  She  has worked in the areas of rape,  incest,  pornography and battering as a therapist,  teacher and researcher,  not to mention  in her less official capacity of woman,  (ex)wife and friend.  This article is an edited version of a  keynote address delivered over the past  year at several conferences on sexual  abuse of children within the family.  1.  There is a strong bias against incest in our  society.  False. As things stand now, despite the  fact that everybody claims horror at the  very idea of incest,, it continues to  flourish. The bias is against uncovering  it, talking about it, exposing its existence, then looking at how some of our  most cherished institutions and values  support it.  2.    Incest is another word for rape, by  a relative.  True. When we talk about incest we are  talking first and foremost about force  and coercion, forced and coercive sexual  acts, or rape.- We are talking about daddy  or uncle forcing a six-month old or six-  year old or 16-year old daughter or niece  to gratify him sexually. Yet so deeply  buried is this secret we don't even have  words to describe it.  The word incest, in the dictionary, is  not defined as forcible sexual intercourse, only as sexual intercourse between  two people so closely related as to be  forbidden a sexual relationship by law.  That is why I prefer to place it back in  the context of rape. Rape implies force.  Furthermore, we have no adequate words  for the people who commit incest. We continue to call them fathers, which seems  to me to fail to distinguish them from a  whole other group of people who do not  rape their daughters. Or we call them  offenders, which again fails to distinguish them from any number of other people  such as peepers and flashers.  I would like to suggest we begin to use  words that describe what we are talking  about. Words like daughter-raper or niece-  molester. It will help us keep our goals  straight if we think of this guy in front  of us as a daughter-raper rather than a  3.   Incest is a disturbance in the functioning of  a family unit.  False. No doubt by the time of intervention, the family unit will be disturbed.  Perhaps it always was. This is NOT, however, the cause of the incest. Instead,  it is likely to be the consequence of  incest.  Again, clarity is very important. It's  important to keep in mind who did what to  whom. Dad molested daughter. What happened after that? Everything-in the family  got twisted around.  Looking at it this way, and bypassing all  those tempting textbook theories about  the role of moms and daughters, keeps the  source of the disturbance very clear. The  source is the man who raped his daughter,  or molested his stepchild.  The fact that mother is out every night  making campaign speeches or is having an  affair with George next door or appears  to be dirty and unkempt is all very interesting, but about as relevant to the  occurrence of incest as the fact that the  teapot has a handle missing.  4.    If father and mother had a normal sex life,  father wouldn 't commit incest.  False. Difficult as this may be to accept,  father and mother's sex life is also  completely irrelevant to the occurrence  of incest.  There are lots of fathers who are not  satisfied with their marital sex lives. .  Some of them get divorced, some seek  counselling, some find mistresses, some  masturbate. They do not necessarily rape  and molest their daughters. As a matter  of fact, many daughter-molesters have  perfectly "normal" sexual relationships  with their wives.  Let me emphasize the implications of this.  Just ASKING the question: "How is your  sex life?" opens the door to scapegoating  marital sex lives and.mothers for the  occurrence of incest. It offers fathers  an out they are only too glad to take.  5. Mothers often unconsciously encourage incest in order to evade some of their responsibilities as wives.  False. There are lots of mothers who would  like to evade the more dreary tasks that  are considered part of their responsibilities, who would prefer not to vacuum or  do dishes or take care of the children.  And there are lots of wives who do not  consider it their duty to be available  sexually to their husband any time he  might wish.  But they do not do this thinking their  husbands will use their daughters in their  place. They don't want - consciously or  unconsciously - to dump on their daughters,  It would not even occur to them that  their husband might consider it his right  to turn to his daughter to fill his needs.  My experience is that most mothers are  completely stunned when they find out.  They had no idea, and this is a crisis  time for them. Their whole world is shaken  to the core and they, too, need individual  help and support, need to be put' in touch  with other mothers in the same boat.  It is in this area that we have to shake  off learning which teaches 'us that the  role of the mother is to serve everyone's  psychological needs in the family, and  that the role of the father is to provide  economic security. If we do not shake  these beliefs, we will tend to see mothers  as at least partly responsible for incest,  and will scrutinize their ability to fulfill their role until we find some flaw  or failure.  And believe me, daughter-molesters will  go along with this. They are often men  who make impossible demands on their  wives anyway, who see burnt toast as a  personal affront.  6. Incest victims are fully aware of what is  happening to them at the time.  False. Incest victims know something awful and (literally) unbelievable is happening to them and that it is happening with  someone they loved and trusted (not always,  some dads are violent and overbearing).  But once it starts to happen, they expend  most of their psychological energy trying  to distance themselves, either by somehow teaching themselves to disappear from  their bodies so as to anesthetize those  parts, or by a psychological dissociation  of selves, that bad self who is punished  by a monster every night vs. the good  girl who is always kind to everyone.  Having no categories to understand what  is happening, they develop their own explanations, ones that fit the nature of  their experience, which is that someone  they love and trust is hurting and betraying them.  And the only explanation that fits is  that they are horrible, worthless pieces  of scum, unfit, unlovable filth. Why  else, so the psyche insists, would anyone  do this to them? They are sure that if  somehow they were different human beings  or had behaved differently, this would  not have happened to them, they could  have controlled it.  Soon after the incest has started, this  belief will be quite firmly in place and  very difficult to shake. The only weapon  continued on page 9 June 1982    Kinesis   9  INCEST  INCEST, continued from page 8  we have against it is our own deep belief  in their innocence, admittedly often  difficult to maintain in the face of self-  mutilation, prostitution, drug abuse,  and all the ways they have of demonstrat-  ng their own worthlessness. In fact,  while most incest victims have a deep  need for warm human contact and love,  they also have a need to keep the people  they value at a distance, for if they let  us come close they are afraid we will  see their slimy, semen-filled, ripped and  shredded, ugly insides, their true awful-  ness and be repelled.  So, incest victims are not fully aware of  what is happening. With lots of encouragement and support, they can tell us what  happened, although they will resist that,  sometimes because they can't remember,  sometimes because they think you-won't  believe it if they tell all the gory  details. In fact, they will often reverse  their story at the first sign of opposition or disbelief.  What they cannot ever tell us is why it  happened. The job of those who work with  victims is to slowly, patiently teach  them to connect their own misery to the  fact that someone they loved and trusted  used them, dumped all over them, inflicted  pain on them.  One of the most frustrating facts of working with victims, especially longterm  victims, is their very insistence on seeing themselves as responsible, their complete lack of anger and outrage at what  happened (in contrast to our sense of discomfort and outrage when we hear what has  been going on).  They don't know. They don't know they had  a right to anything different, and they  won't be able to learn this until they  are safe, and have been shown there can  be affection without abuse.  7. All men who commit incest display some  form of psychopathology (craziness).  False. These men don't have a problem,  they ARE a problem. Whenever they get  anywhere close to experiencing insecurity,  pain, anxiety, lovelessness, they inflict  this pain on other vulnerable people,  usually small children, rather than feel  it themselves.  That is, to me, one of the worst things  that happens; these men force others to  feel their pain and conflicts for them.  That is what victimization is all about,  the ability to get other people to carry  your burdens for you so you don't have to.  So we see victims who are broken with  shame and self-loathing and fathers who  seem perfectly fine and conflict-free.  Perhaps a bit authoritarian, or a bit  misogynist, maybe even a tad of a wimp or  an isolate, but a reasonable family man,  not at all crazy by any of our standards.  The point, for those who do treatment,  and indeed for everyone concerned about  this issue, is that we have to reverse  all those assumptions we were taught about  how everyone is a victim. Here we have an  entirely different kettle of fish. We have  a man who has to learn to experience his  own pain rather than inflict it on others.  Then and only then can we help him deal  with his pain and conflicts and allow him  to consider re-entry into the family.  8. Incest can best be understood as a sexual  disturbance.  False. I think by now it is clear that  incest is primarily a disturbance in power,  in the right to control or have authority  over oneself or someone else. This victim  has too little. The molester has too much.  If we persist in treating offenders as if  their disturbance is sexual, and fail to  look at their need for power and control  in other areas of their lives, we will  fail every time.  The issue is power; the arena in which it  is fought is sexual. Because the arena is  sexual, and because of our own basic belief in the importance of healthy sexuality, we tend to get sidetracked here,  with regard to both victims and offenders.  9. Some incest victims are so beautiful and  seductive that it is only natural for any man,  even father, to be overwhelmingly attracted to  them.  False. This reflects our society's tendency to sexualize young children, especially young girls (e.g. Lolita, Tatum  continued on page 15  The Sexual Abuse of Children: A Resource List  GROUPS  Child Abuse/Neglect Helpline for' Children  - Zenith 1234.  Group for Mothers of Incest Victims, Family Services of Greater Vancouver, 1616 W.  7th Avenue, Vancouver, 731-4951.  Advisory Committee on Sexual Abuse, Vancouver Health Department. Contact Karen  Lamica (East Unit, 2610 Victoria Drive,  Vancouver, 872-2511) or Sharon Clark-Teng  (North Unit, 1720 Grant Street, Vancouver,  253-3575). Development of policy, information sharing and review re sexual abuse  for health department practitioners.  Sexual Abuse Pilot Project, Ministry of  Human Resources Medical Clinic, #304-154-1  W. Broadway, Vancouver, 732-3371. Dr. Carol  Herbert, Dr. Liz Whynot. Provision of medical assessments, medical/legal documentation, court testimony and counselling to  any child where sexual abuse is suspected.  Social worker involved must accompany the  child to appointment.  Act 2 Counselling, Sexual Abuse Treatment  Program, ?>'209-2571 Shaughnessy Street, Pt.  Coquitlam, 942-5115.  Sexual Abuse Victims Anonymous (SAVA).  North Vancouver Island based. Contact Linda  Halliday, RR #1,  Campbell River, 287-9118.  TRACY (Taking Responsible Action for Children and Youth) Sexual Abuse of Children  Preventative Education Task Force, 1811 W.  16th Avenue, Vancouver, 732-3305. Sponsors  pilot theatre program on prevention of  sexual abuse in some Vancouver elementary  schools.  CARE Productions (Child Abuse Research &  Education Productions), 15670 104th Avenue,  Surrey, 581-6016. Jan Sipple. A preventive  teaching program for kindergarten to grade  3 has been piloted and is now being evaluated. Teaching kits should be ready by  September/82.  Hands Off Our Kids, 1034 Commercial Drive,  Vancouver, 255-4858. Provides educational  programs for parent groups on protecting  children from sex offenders.  United Way Child Sexual Abuse Project,  Social Planning and Research, United Way  of the Lower Mainland, 1625 W. 8th Avenue,  Vancouver, 731-7781. Has basic information  /resource kit available (for $3.50) plus  other bibliographies and publications. Will  produce a resources pamphlet mid to late  1982. Ongoing research. Contact Flora  Macleod, Andy Wachtel.  Child Abuse Team (l) Ministry of Human  Resources, North and West Vancouver. Call  668-2631 (after hours 668-3111), (2) Ministry of Human Resources, Fraser Valley,  931-3444 (after hours 524-3661).  Mothers Groups, Incest Survivor Groups,  and Individual Counselling sessions are  offered by some therapists and counsellors  who are also involved with the Feminist  Counselling Association. Contact Dr. Ingrid  Pacey, 738-8013, for more information.  VISACS (Vancouver Incest and Sexual Abuse  Society), #1-2629 W. 4th Avenue, Vancouver.  Has developed a project proposal for opening a centre to provide early intervention  services to victims of incest and childhood  sexual abuse and their families. Awaiting  word re funding.  For information in developing or co-sponsoring cross system professional and public  education programs in sexual abuse, contact  Community Programs, Justice Institute of  B.C., 4180 W. 4th Avenue, Vancouver,  228-9771. Pat Ross, Marje Burdine, Diana  Ellis, Shelley Rivkin.  FILMS  Incest: The Victim Nobody Believes, 16mm,  21 minutes, 1976. Three women discuss early  childhood experiences as victims of incest.  Available from Justice Institute Resource  Centre (4180 W. 4th Avenue, Vancouver,  228-9771) or Ministry of Human Resources  Library (800 Cassiar Street, Vancouver,  299-9131).  Who Do You Tell?, 16mm, 11 minutes, 1979.  Aimed at young children, this film explains well the question of sexual abuse  and to whom they should turn for help.  Available through Justice Institute Resource Centre (4180 W. 4th Avenue, Vancouver, 228-9771) or Ministry of Human  Resources Library (800 Cassiar Street,  Vancouver, 299-9131).  BOOKS  The Best Kept Secret: Sexual Abuse of  Children by Florence Rush, Prentice-Hall,  1980. Written from a .feminist perspective.  Father-Daughter Incest by Judith Lewis  Herman, Harvard University Press, 1981.  Hardcover.  Conspiracy of Silence, the Trauma of In-  cest by Sandra Butler, New Glide Publications, 1978. Hardcover.  Female Sexual Slavery by Kathleen Barry,  Avon, 1979.  PROCEEDINGS/ WORKSHOPS  Sexual Abuse of Children Within the Fami-  Tools for Understanding and Interven-  lyj  ng :  tion: proceedings of 1980 conference at  Justice Institute of B.C. Includes keynote  addresses by Roland Summit, Lucy Berliner,  and others, plus workshop reports, and a  list of audio-visual materials. Available  for $6 from Community Programs, Justice  Institute of B.C., 4180 W. 4th Avenue,  Vancouver, 228-9771.  A Series on Offenders: Sexual Abusers and  Batterers, October 11-12 on Sexual Abusers  in Vancouver; October 21-22 on Batterers,  in Victoria. Call Justice Institute at  228-9771 for a series flyer. 10   Kinesis    June 1982  HEALTH  June 1982    Kinesis    11  Birthing: The Co-optation of Experience  by Maureen Minden  and Bobby, who helped me focus the anger  that came out of my body and spirit  Consider the following: Women give birth /  Birthing is a female experience / The social organization of birthing makes this  mysterious / To make mysterious is to conceal what is really going on / Childbirth  has been stolen from women.  The medicalization of birth  The devastating effects of the medicalization of birth have been substantiated in  study after study by knowledgeable and  concerned people from diverse backgrounds.  Anthropologist/mother Margaret Mead wrote  of the violence done by hospital obstetrics to both infant and mother. Educator/  theologian Ivan Illich coined a new term,  iatrogenesis, meaning doctor-made disease.  More recently, in The Theft of Childbirth,  feminist/mother Adrienne Rich has detailed how childbirth has been stolen from  women.  Violence is done to mother and baby in the  process of: separating the birthing woman  from all that is familiar, comforting and  supportive; limiting her mobility; promoting drug use and "just in case" measures  such as TV's and fetal monitors which  themselves cause problems; enforcing the  "flat-on-your-back" lithotomy position,  a position which obstructs gravity and  maximizes pressure on major blood vessels;  using forceps, episiotomies and placental  manipulation on a routine basis; separating the mother from the sight, sound,  smell, feel and sucking of her infant, and  the infant from its soft, warm, rhythmic,  nurturing mother.  The relentless imposition of the medical  method on healthy women with normal courses  of birthing is a tragic victimization of  women and their babies. Why has it not led  to an outcry for women and midwives to reclaim birthing? Why has none of it even  affected obstetrical practices?  'ĢHow did we get in this position?  A lot of history has gone into making  birth a medical event. The problem may  well have begun when, as mythology has it,  Zeus "gave birth to Athena". This reversal  of reproductive roles was reinforced by  early theology, where Adam was made responsible ("gave birth to") for Eve. For a  very long time, men have wanted the giv-  ing-of-birth to be theirs, and have worked  to make it thus.  According to early religion, woman was  meant to suffer the pains of childbirth  and to do so passively and with humility.  God decreed it as punishment for "original sin".(One Agnes Simpson was burned at  the stake for interfering with God's edict  that women suffer in childbirth. She had  offered herbs or opium to birthing women  to relieve their discomfort.)  University medical training emerged in the  13th century. Only men were admitted, and  training meant philosophy and theology.  The physician to Edward II (who held a  bachelor's degree in theology and a doctorate in medicine from Oxford) prescribed  for toothache writing on the jaws of the  patient: "in the name of the Father, the  Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen".  Such was the state of medical science when  witch-healers were being persecuted for  being practitioners of magic.  Nevertheless, until the 18th century, childbirth was overwhelmingly in the hands of  women. Women, of course, had first-hand  knowledge of it, and men had reasons for  "leaving it to women" - it was beneath the  dignity of a male physician.  The misogyny of the church fathers also  affected this. Women, especially their  reproductive organs, were viewed as inherently evil and men were forbidden to  attend births.  Male birth attendants appeared in the 17th  century. Though they did not attend normal  births, we must assume they learned about  childbirth from midwives. These men worked  only in upper class circles and soon 1  to proclaim the inferiority of the midwife, linking her with dirt, ignorance  and superstition.  environment became the hospital and her  midwife was replaced by a medical man.  Birthing no longer flowed from the woman's  experience, but was superimposed by a  medical version of how she "ought to be"  feeling it. The situation was alienating,  thus woman became alienated from her  giving-birth experience.  Barbara Ehrenreich and Deirdre English  offer an enlightening perspective on the  history of women and medicine in For Her  Own Good.   They show how the relationship established centuries ago between  women and medicine is still in effect  today.  The historical theological/medical version  of being female, its equation of passive  suffering with the archetypal female experience of childbirth, is still the most  (Qlz vnrvt/ uxuzie I  Now technology was used to further concentrate control of childbirth in the hands  of men. Obstetric forceps were designed,  used and kept secret for three generations  of male-midwives in one particular family  (it was a lucrative business monopoly).  Later, they were classified as surgical  instruments and women were legally barred  from using them.  Church inspired witchhunts from the 14th  to the 17th centuries resulted in the  execution of millions, 85$ of them women.  This effectively cleared the way for the  rise of an elitist male medical profession,  which by the end of the 18th century was  gaining control of the practice of healing.  These medical men were engaged in a battle  for power and control. And since men wrote  books and women did not, the art of midwifery, the expertise accumulated and  passed on by the midwives practising it,  was lost. The male takeover of birthing  meant that only the history of male obstetrics was passed down in print.  In the 19th century, another notable medical advancement occurred. Chloroform was  used for the first time in childbirth by  Queen Victoria. Ironically, while breaking through the religious dictate that  women should suffer, it furthered, quite  literally, the (convenient) passivity of  women.  As time, and the medical profession, p?*o-  gressed, the role of the midwife was effectively wiped out. The birthing woman's  prominent feature of medicalized birthing  today.  Adrienne Rich suggests that the male effort  to control birthing is bound up with the  sexuality and sensuality a woman experiences  in pregnancy, birthing and suckling. Motherhood and sexuality are "wedged resolutely  apart by male culture."  As Alice Rossi states, "...it is to men's  sexual advantage to restrict women's  sexual gratification to heterosexual coitus, though the price for the woman and  child may be a less psychologically and  physically rewarding relationship."  This long struggle for control over childbirth, the long course of wresting it  away from those who give birth, has done  much damage and promises to do more. For  today we must ask what "test tube babies"  are really about. They are, in fact, the  beginning of the final appropriation of  reproduction by technology.  "Humanistic" obstetrics betray  commitment to medicalized birth  When "childbirth" became "obstetrics", the  heroes had to be doctors. Writers concerned with changing childbirth - by now a  surgical event performed on a passive  anaesthetized female's body - tend to fall  into two categories: women such as Margaret Mead, Shela Kitzinger, Doris Haire,  Raven Lang and Susanne Arms, and doctors  such as Dick-Read, Guttmacher, Lamaze  and Leboyer. It is the doctors who have  been permitted to affect childbirth. And  the ways in which they have altered hospital birthing have permitted them to  maintain total control of women's birthing  experience, while appearing to be "responsive to people's needs and wishes".  Dick-Read is seen as one responsible for  a breakthrough in (medicalized) birth. His  early training was to chloroform women and  then "deliver" them. But one day he attended a slum birth where the woman refused  anaesthesia, saying it did not hurt, was  it supposed to?  Dick-Read then formulated his fear-tension-  pain theory and established a plan whereby prospective mothers would be "trained"  (implying a trainer, of course) to relax  and breathe "properly" (he_ defined what  properly was), and so on.  This man did not seem to question whether  the slum birth avoided his fear-tension-  pain problem because the woman was in her  own environment. Instead, he put emphasis  on calm, supportive birth attendants, especially the doctor, who was to act as  a source of confidence to the woman. His  was a very paternalistic attitude.  Dick-Read was essentially a patriarch. He  wrote in Childbirth Without Fear  of the  "inborn dependence of women", stating that  "biological motherhood is her desire"  (whatever that means). For Dick-Read,  childbirth is a woman's glory, her purpose  in life, her peak experience. However, he  said, because she is totally dependent on  men, it is men who must "deliver" her.  (How did women manage before medical men  arrived on the scene?) It is implicit in  Dick-Read's analysis that women do not  have agency, the ability to cause outcomes,  the personal strength to make things happen. They merely respond - to training and  to a strong male.  Then came Lamaze. After visits to maternity  clinics in the USSR, Lamaze decided to  develop precise and controlled breathing  patterns for every stage of labour. His  patients would give birth using "conditioned reflex". Militant control would be  maintained from the outside over one's  body and experience.  Lamaze's term was "psychoprophylaxis",  which he was quick to state was not synonymous with laziness. He felt a woman must  be imbued (passive creature that she was)  with responsibility for the success or  failure of her birthing. (This, even though  she is not in her own environment and has  no real control over the situation. )  What Lamaze did was make it possible to  blame women for unfulfilling, difficult  births while medicine, not the woman, dictated every facet of her birthing.  Now we have Leboyer. His "birth without  violence" really means "birth without  violence to the infant", and Leboyer himself has decided what constitutes violence.  Twelve years ago, Leboyer underwent psychoanalysis and then primal therapy. This  experience led him to feel he had been  able to relive his own birth. He decided  his terrible birth, premature and with  forceps, had affected his whole life (he  never married and has no children).  From this he concluded that birth is like  torture (not that hospital births are  like torture), and that mothers cannot  manage birthing except if they follow  the Lamaze techniques. According to him,  "The bodies of women in labour (prior to  Lamaze) were nothing more than a mass of  spasms, tensions, frantic heavings, locked muscles...mute testimony to their crazed  panic and terror." (my emphasis)  And as to "whose hands should hold the  child? (the, not her child) The mother's,  naturally, provided these hands know...  everything we (read I) have been saying  (for the last three pages)...How many  mothers have hands that are still, lifeless, lacking in understanding!" (my emphasis and inserts)  Leboyer assumes that the hospital setting  solves all the mother's needs and problems, that it is the baby that needs help  - not its mother's help, but Leboyer's!  His writings betray his misogyny: "...all  this force, this monstrous, unremitting  pressure that is crushing the baby, pushing it out toward the world - and this  blind wall which is holding it back, confining it - these things are all one: the  mother!...It is she who is the enemy...  The monster bears down one'more time."  The mother is the enemy, the infant is the  victim and Leboyer is the hero. He_ caresses the infant, he_ stretches the infant  in special ways, he bathes the infant.  Leboyer, like all doctors who operate within the context of medicalized birth, does  not ask himself whether perhaps all the  problems he has so wonderfully resolved  weren't caused by the very situation doctors have created for birth: hospitals,  drugs, lithotomy position, bright lights,  a great drop between the woman's vagina  and the floor, cold institutional temperatures, and on and on.  The whole rationale for the "Leboyer birth"  disappears in a home birth context. Even  "humanistic alternatives" in obstetrics  betray a commitment and allegiance to medicalized birth.  Birthing: two accounts  Birth,  a book filled with legends, lore,  superstitions, exaltations and customs  ancient and modern, contains two first-hand  birth experiences, one by a father describing a home birth, one by mother describing a routine hospital birth.  Both authors are poets, articulate and  skilled at translating their experiences  into words. Yet close reading shows the  qualitative difference between their experiences .  The father's account is of a wonderful home  birth which proceeded smoothly and according to plan. Yet somehow in his telling,  the birthing woman remains in the background, never developing into someone involved in the intense experience of giving  birth.  He concludes, in fact, with an emotional  tribute to the doctor I "I shake his hand  and try to state how I love that hand  which would garden if his land were good.  That hand that brings life into the world."  The father, under these best-of-all-possible conditions, is a participant-observer  and his experience of the birth is as such.  His is not a birthing account, but the  account of someone witnessing/participating  at a birth. It is an "other" account.  The mother's account (Daphne Marlatt, in  "Rings") includes all of the harsh treatment, intrusions and absurd situations  that arise in the foreign environment of a  hospital. It speaks of being in-volved,  while from the outside being reprimanded,  bullied, treated as an errant child.  Yet she is alone in the primary experience  of her birthing: "Even the blood trickling  down is comfortable. It's me. It's happen  ing as if I KNEW how it would be." As the  baby emerges, "I feel something like a loss  like the end of a sigh, A cry!"  Leboyer has decided that women upon giving  birth "do not know how to touch their  babies. Or, to be more exact, do not dare.  They are paralyzed." He further tells us  that mothers find their babies ugly, and  transmit negative feelings to them.  The birthing mother says: "He's crying. I  can't stand it, I want to hold him, PLEASE.  And they lay him snuggled in a blanket on  my stomach. He's perfect, bawling, little  blue fists. Small & perfectly HERE. He's  here, I say to AI, & he's beautiful. Al's  bending over, a little shy but grinning  too. And he is, & I say to everybody, he's  beautiful. Most of all to him, because he's  come through that ring of flesh, into our  light, He's BORN, tight-fisted in my arms,  eyes screwed shut, shutting us out. Yet  he can hear, & maybe feel someone cradling  him against her, hush. hush. I hold him.  It's all right. You're born."  Woman is the primary experiencer of birthing; the father, the doctor are at best  participant/observers. Isn't it incredible  that the experience of "the other" has come  to dominate the social organization of  birthing!  Should it not be, rather, that the birthing  woman's experience is the organizing matrix, and that midwives who have access to  this experience should support her in her  birthing?  Isn't it even more incredible that many  women have come to distrust their own feelings about what is happening to them, have  been encouraged, pressured, induced to  see/feel birthing from the eyes of the observer!  Conclusion  Birthing is a socially organized event.  When its history is put into context it becomes evident that a male-dominated culture  has produced the medicalization of childbirth. This has obscured the fact that it  is women who give birth, at the expense of  the birthing mother and her child.  We need to create a situation which will  give precedence to the experience of mother  and baby. Doctors, fathers and caring  others will play a supporting role, the  nature of their support being determined  by the needs of the birthing woman.  The wisdom of a midwifery version of childbirth makes this a real possibility. Women  and their midwives must reclaim birth.  A reading list is available upon request  from the author c/o Kinesis. 12   Kinesis    June 1982  CULTURE  Performance art invokes experience from the inside out  by Colleen Tillman,  Lyla Smith and Val Powers  Although performance art has been practised for approximately 70 years, only  within the last decade has it begun to  receive widespread recognition as an art  form.  Performance differs from theatre in that  one does not have to be (nor is encouraged to be) a dramatist, there does not  have to be a script (although there might  be), and it does not require talking or  even human participants. Performance art  presents subject matter in a special way.  Ideas may be expressed abstractly or  realistically; there may be formal structure, there may not.  Performance includes many different elements, some of which may be slides, dance,  music, video, talking, poetry, lighting,  and a variety or absence of props. Popular topics are technology, ecology, feelings, experiences, political issues,  spirituality, 20th century urban problems,  sex and sexuality, as well as some shock  value ("taboo") subjects.  form. In the '70s she founded Womanspace,  the first feminist art gallery in southern California.  More recently, Rachel has been doing performance art pieces which are autobiographical, theatrical, and metaphorical.  She engineers each performance with dexterity and intense thought and feeling,  writing scripts and using materials which  support each other while carefully controlling the stresses and tensions she so  skillfully evokes.  Likewise, Giuditta Tornetta, an Italian  performance artist, works from her particular vision, using her own internal  environment and the environment around  her. She too has been involved in many  areas of study and teaching, including  workshops in sound and movement, theatre  work, Shiatsu training, and writing poetry  and children's stories.  Utilizing this background and drawing on  her own continual exploration of life,  Giuditta employs a more loosely-structured approach in her work. She works  on the shape and form of each performance, and by also allowing herself to  absorb the unique environment created by  Both Rachel Rosenthal and Giuditta Tornetta demonstrate  their power to touch deeply and inspire the inner worlds of their  audiences.  Rachel Rosenthal and Giuditta Tornetta  are performance artists based in Los  Angeles, California. Their centre there,  "Espace DBD", functions as a studio space  for training, lectures, classes, workshops, new music and performance art.  Rachel Rosenthal has been called the  "grandmother" of performance art in L.A.  She has had a varied background in the  art world, including extensive work in  theatre, dance and sculpture. In 1956  she founded a small experimental theatre  workshop in Hollywood called Instant  Theatre - this at a time when experimental theatre did not exist there in any  Giuditta Tornetta in  'Limits and Limitations"  each new audience, she blends choreographed  sections with improvisation to communicate  her ideas and feelings.  Both these artists demonstrate the power  to touch deeply and inspire the inner  worlds of their audiences. As part of their  first Canadian tour, they performed two  solo pieces at Women in Focus in May.  Rachel's performance was delivered with  humour, drama, slides, sound, poetry,  music and props, and the guest appearance  of her pet rat (Tatti Wattles). Giuditta's  performance included video, dance, music,  champagne, a great deal of interaction  with the audience, and a vast amount of  subject matter. This peice was unified by  dance and movement.  Following are extracts from interviews by  Colleen Tillman while the performers were  at Women in Focus.  Colleen: How do you see yourself using  performance art as a tool?  Rachel: I started to use my performance  art as a tool for redeeming my life, like  a kind of exorcism...and it seemed the  deeper I went into the personal the more  universal it became. At first I was really  worried that it was too private, and then  .1 realized that the more personal I made  it, the more people could identify with it.  From the beginning my interest has been  one of communication, sharing, of putting  out experiences that are personal and yet,  universal...experiences that people can  relate to, through which they can transform  their own lives as I was transforming mine,  or through which they could get an experience that would put them in touch with  their own lives. That's what was happening.  In a sense, those pieces were very healing  and also confronting, but not in a clobbering way. I don't like that. I feel a  very strong connection and responsibility  Rachel Rosenthal in "Traps"  to an audience. I feel that artists, when  they put themselves out in person, have to  know what they are dealing with. Performance is a force, a very, very big force.  Colleen: You mean they have to know what  power they have?  Rachel: Exactly...You need to take those  feelings which are diffused in society,  focus them and make them very conscious,  give them direction. People just don't  realize the power they have. I think that's  something that has to be released, concentrated, talked about and made visible. It's  there, it's very strong, and if people  really took hold of that and took hold of  their power, they could change the world.  They could do everything.  Colleen:  What is important to you when you  perform and where did your motivation to  perform come from?  Giuditta: My need to perform comes from a  need to share ideas, feelings and passions  with other people. What I'm interested in  is reaching the audience's guts, not their  minds as such. I need a type of communication that goes beyond words, beyond intel-  lectualization, and that is really "a part  of feelings.  I have done different kinds of work, from  autobiographical to conceptual, always  trying to create total emptiness to be able]  to filter in what the environment gives  me. I've always been concerned with touching my audience, communicating with every  sense: hearing, visually, tactile sense.  What I want to say in my work changes all  the time. I feel a great responsibility  to consider the time that I live in, historically, and to make a political statement with my work.  ...As a woman it is very important to me  to somehow stir up, from the inside, other  women, to reach the power, strength and  the great things we have inside. It's like  when you read a book and you can never  formulate those things you've just read,  but you know you have them inside. So I'm  not talking about anything unusual, new  or surprising. I'm talking about some  things that some poeple have never been  able to talk about, and reach them in that  way.  I look at myself in the video and I think  I'm pretty weird looking. And yet, at the  same time I think everybody can sort of  say, "Ya, I understand what you're talking  about".  I don't believe in pulling myself out of  the system to fight it. I'm within, like  a bullet that penetrates inside and then  explodes. June 1982   Kinesis    13  CULTURE  There's more than meets the eye in Ambiguities  by Michele Wollstonecroft  Ingrid Yuille is a two-dimensional image  maker who over the past three years, using  photography, mixed media, oil paints, coloured pencil and her local environment, has  created a series of works entitled Ambiguities.  The series consists of more than forty 16"  x 20" colour photographs, a large body of  8" x 10" black-and-white photographs, and  a series of SX-70 polaroids.  In Ambiguities,   Ingrid has taken her subjects' Images out of the context of their  own lives to caricature her perceptions of  memory, emotions and human situations.  Using photographs outside of their own context is not new. The technique was first  used by a group of artists in the Dada  movement, which began in Switzerland around  1915. The advertising industry has made  much of this method, as have "pop" artists  (for example, Andy Warhol's silkscreens of  Elvis Presley and Larry Rivers' "cut out"  reproductions of famous masterpieces). Hinda  Avery (one of the artists in "Womansize")  has also used cut out photographic images  in her sculpture.  Ingrid's Ambiguities,   however, are unique  to her particular world. Her photographs  are funny, frightening, surreal, rude, sent-  mental, mysterious documentations of human  activity. Ambiguities exist both within the  form the photographs use, and the subject  matter itself.  Some of the photographs appear to record  the ordinary: a man driving a steamroller  at night; a woman asleep on a park bench;  people getting into a car; two women attending to a baby; a man about to drink  from a glass...  Others present strikingly "odd" relationships: two men conversing, one of whom appears to be levitating; a child holding up  ent variations of life-size and dry mounted  onto a foam background. The cut outs are  then hand-coloured, further removing them  from their original character.  Once complete, the cut outs are placed back  into the three-dimensional (real) world and  photographed. These photographs (28 in all)  make up Ambiguities.  The dynamic of each photograph is determined by the environment, the lighting and how  the figures are positioned, both within the  a standing woman with one hand; a night  scene with a group of people lurking cultlike in a woods.  Yet, even in the seemingly ordinary shots,  something is not quite right. There is  something distinctly out-of-the-ordinary  about the woman asleep on the park bench.  The man holding the drink, in his other  hand holds a bodyless but very lively foot!  And why would anyone drive a steamroller at  night with dark glasses on?  The truth is that many of those portrayed  in the photographs are fabrications, both  of Ingrid's wonderful imagination and her  skill as an artist.  In other words, the people are not real,  but rather two-dimensional cut outs -  photographs Ingrid has enlarged to differ-  Ingrid downplays her technical expertise,  however. Acknowledging that she knows her  trade, she emphasizes that she is only interested in technique as a means to creating  her art. "I use photography as a tool, but  I'm not a photographer - I'm an artist,"  Ingrid's work has met with much success. In  October 1979 she had a solo show at the Arts  Club Theatre, comprised of twelve hand-  coloured black-and-white prints of houses  As with her cut outs, Ingrid used mixed  frame of the shot and in relation to other  figures.  The content of each photograph is also affected by the viewing angle, as well as  whether it is colour or black-and-white.  The colour prints appear more surreal than  the black-and-white prints because they  emphasize the hand-colouring of the cut  outs.  The cut outs in Ambiguities  are used repeatedly within different contexts. They  appear alone, grouped with other cut outs,  or with real people or animals.  The figures may portray a front, back or  side view of a person, and that person may  be crouching, turning, sitting, or demonstrating "frozen" action.  There are photographs of cut outs in the  house, standing by the telephone, walking  up the stairs, sitting in a real chair. One  photograph combines two cut outs, one male  and one female, looking out over night waters from the Lions Gate Bridge (cut out  romance?).  In a few of the black-and-white photographs  cut outs are combined with their "mother"  images (the real person), who in the photographs act out their fantasy and narcissism.  These particular photographs, shot against  grey background paper, exclude any sense of  environment. Many combine the still "frozen"  moment of the cut out, side-by-side with the  real person moving through the time/space  of the frame.  Artist first, technician second  Each of Ingrid's prints is a work of art in  itself. (With rare exception, Ingrid does  all her own printing. ) The black-and-white  prints she individually hand tones with a  selenium toner, to add richness to the  blacks and the shadows. Ingrid also uses  the technique of split toning to add a mauve  tone to her prints-.  oil and coloured pencil to reci  struct the images according to her own imagination.  She has also participated in a number of  group shows, including the Fifth Viennese  International Biannual "Photographic Developments" in Austria (1981); "Womansize" at  Women in Focus in Vancouver (1981); "Seven  Photographers" at the Surrey Art Gallery  (1980); and at Vancouver's Helen Pitt Gallery (1978 and 1979).  Ingrid has won several awards, the most recent being a Canada Council grant to ready  Ambiguities  for a solo exhibition at the  Burton Gallery in Toronto this June. For  those fortunate enough to be in Toronto,  the show will run from June 3 to July 3-  Ingrid is a part-time instructor in photography with the outreach program of Emily  Carr College of Art. She has done photographs and prints for numerous commissions,  designed album covers, and had her work  published in several magazines and periodicals. 14    Kinesis    June 1982  REVIEWS  Braided Lives a powerful reminder of silent era  by Cy-Thea Sand  Women's lives are shaped like cheap  coffins.    Marge Piercy  '. Lives, Marge Piercy's seventh novel, details Jill Stuart's remembrance of  things past. At forty-two, Piercy's heroine is a respected writer, finally confident enough in her own abilities to recall her adolescence and early twenties.  Braided Lives,  by Marge Piercy.  New York: Summit Books, 1982.  441 pages, $20.95 hardback.  Born into a working class Detroit family,  she grew up in an era that historian  Godfrey Hodgson says has "to be measured  in assumptions unchallenged, in questions  unanswered, in problems ignored for a  decade":  It's March of 1953. I am sixteen soon to  be seventeen. The Korean War seems to be  winding down; the Rosenburgs are convicted and waiting in prison; Eisenhower has  been president since January and Washington emits clouds of grey fog on the news  every night; times are pretty good in  Detroit for the workers on the line.  Child of a Celtic father and Jewish mother,  Jill is harassed in school for looking  both Chinese and Semitic. She dreams of  escaping the rough urban poverty of her  neighbourhood by going to college. Her  closest friend is a Jewish boy named  Howie, whose bubbe (grandmother) has saved  her husband's insurance money for her  grandson's education: "We are alike, fat  boy, skinny girl, staggering out of bur  brutal sickly childhoods with arms clutched full of books."  Reproductive rights is central theme  Jill eventually wins a scholarship to the  University of Michigan, where she rooms  with her cousin Donna. The intense friendship between the two young women gives the  novel its title and essence. Jill is  fiercely intellectual, an aspiring poet,  and determinedly independent. Donna is  studious but less ambitious than her  cousin, hopeful of finding a secure heterosexual relationship she thinks will ease  her deep feelings of self-doubt.  Jill and Donna's friendship, family problems and romantic obsessions are told from  Piercy's feminist point of view, and can  be understood as an example of the Bil-  dungsroman  - a novel of youthful development and self-education.  The difference with Braided Lives,  when  compared to traditional and popular literary explorations of the lives of young  women and men, is its woman-identification. Piercy writes popular feminist fiction without apology. In her previous novel Vida  (1979), Piercy's background in  left politics fostered an exciting tale  of women in the Underground. In Braided  Lives,  the issue of reproductive rights  for women guides her pen.  At one point in the book, Piercy dramatizes  the horrors of unwanted pregnancy. Pregnant by her boyfriend Mike and desperate  to continue her studies, Jill tries all  her mother's home remedies for self-abortion: hot baths with Epsom salts, hot  baths with pennyroyal, quinine and mustard.  None work. She finally opens her womb by  force:  If it were a couple of years ago I would  tell you more,  but if I do so now,  desperate young girls,  desperate middle aged  women,   the victims of rape,  incest,  battering,  far more numerous than we  like to  believe,  all the women who simply do not  believe in catching a baby as you might  the flu or pneumonia,  would be tempted to  do as I did, just because I survived it  but barely.  Tliere have to be better ways.  I cannot include a recipe for action that  is likely to kill you.  Piercy does not spare the reader as she  takes us through torment. Jill's mother,  afraid that Jill's cries will alert her  father to what is happening, insists she  be quiet throughout her ordeal.  y^CM»  ,Author of )Mki  This scene crystallizes the distortion,  under patriarchy, of the mother/daughter  relationship. Mrs. Stuart has been robbed  of woman's traditional knowledge of safe  birth control and abortion techniques by  a medical hierarchy which now denies its  knowledge to her daughter. The two women  together form a conspiracy of silence,  but it is a conspiracy of ignorance and  fear, not strength. It is the silence of  defeat; the agony of self-abuse never forgotten:  Twenty-odd years later pain makes me mute.  Since that day I have never recovered my  voice when pain touches me hard. When I  burn my thigh, when I cut my hand deeply,  when I drop the typewriter on my foot, my  vocal cords seize up as they never dx> in  anger or danger. I weep but cannot speak  until the pain ebbs.  A war for independence  Braided Lives  is a blatantly political novel. In it, Piercy juxtaposes Jill and  Donna's drive for education and economic  independence with their lack of biological  autonomy. Theirs is clearly a struggle to  overcome biological imperialism in order  to embrace culture as freely as men. That  conflict is not resolved by the novel's  end. Instead, Donna hemorrhages and dies  from a back street abortion. Jill, for her  part, has to forsake her marriage plans to  Howie because he cannot accept her dedicated work to legalize abortion. Howie, left-  wing intellectual that he is, is unable to  imagine a relationship between two equally  active individuals. He simply follows the  dictates of his socialization in demanding  that Jill be a wife; that she forfeit her  cultural work to nurture him, his work and  their prospective children.  The novel's theme of restrictions of female  sexuality reminds me of Edith Wharton's  classic work Summer.   Published in 1917,  Summer  is one of the best examples of  Wharton's preoccupation with the stifling  of women in society. Edith Wharton actually  suffered from breathlessness, a fact reflected in her use of images of constraint  and imprisonment.  Piercy's women fettered by pregnancy  Marge Piercy's women move much more freely  than Wharton's Charity Royall, but like  her, their lives are forever influenced by  the fact of pregnancy. Braided Lives  records a much different era than does Summer,  but both novels are concerned with  woman's lack of freedom to be active in  society, unencumbered by sexual limitations  Both Wharton and Piercy are passionately  concerned that women be allowed to move in  society with authority and confidence.  There are shortcomings in Braided Lives.  Piercy's language is often flat; the narrative sometimes bogs down in unnecessary  detail which robs the dialogue of its purpose in providing information and thematic  tension. But there is rich characterization  here, some suspense and drama, and a sensitivity to working class perspectives.  Reading this book forced me to relive my  backstreet abortion - without anaesthetic  - in Montreal fifteen years ago. Chronic  pelvic inflammatory disease followed, only  relieved by a hysterectomy ten years  later. As I write, Concerned Citizens for  Choice on Abortion are marching in downtown Vancouver to fight Joseph Borowski's  Supreme Court challenge of Canada's abortion laws. In the United States, the human  life amendment threatens to wipe out safe,  legal abortions.  Right wing forces are gaining power, and  Braided Lives  is a powerful reminder that  the politically repressive mentality of  the fifties, so threatening to women's  lives, is never far away.  — NOT —         _^-e*Hr  FOR         jCZ^^  WIMIN       \T5fS\  ONLY                  »      K  z^r^s^~v£dLJl  A WQMQN'S     \J  PAINTING      ^S)  BUSINESS           \^  REASONABLE RATES  FREE ESTIMATES  CYNTHIA                        I  253-2212                            X June 1982    Kinesis    15  REVIEWS  Phases: music to call up fantasy, enchantment  by Chantale Laplante  Marcia Meyer is a Vancouver songwriter,  performer, recording artist and music educator who has just released a record entitled PHASES.  Marcia, who majored in music history at  University of Western Ontario, began her  musical career performing in coffee houses  in Winnipeg in the late 60s. Although  mainly a solo performer, she has also  worked with other musicians in the role of  piano accompanist.  PHASES  recorded by Marcia Meyer, 1982  Happy Onion Music Publishers  P.O. Box 86183  North Vancouver, B.C. V7L 4J8  PHASES  contains a variety of original compositions for classical guitar, flute,  harmonica, piano and voice. These instruments give a natural sounding, medieval  flavour to the album. It relaxes the mind,  without pretension. That is probably what  I appreciate the most about PHASES.   The  arrangements are simple and, I think, well  done.  INCEST, continued from page 9  ;   O'Neal). Young children are simply NOT  sexy or seductive unless adults have  taught them to be that way.  Furthermore, it is NOT NATURAL to see  young girls as sexual objects, although  most men have been socialized to sexualize  their relationships with women and girls.  On top of this, men are NOT overwhelmed  by testosterone (the male sex hormone) so  that they suddenly cannot control themselves and simply have to rape the next  woman in sight, be she six or 36. In fact,  this runaway hormone theory presents a  rather ridiculous image.  Certainly men have strong sexual urges (as  do women), but they are perfectly capable  of controlling them. The beauty or "seductiveness" of a young girl, then, is  not relevant to a decision taken by father  or uncle or stepfather to rape or molest  her.  10. Many little children have sexual fantasies  about their opposite-sexed parent.  False. This theory, the sexualization of  young children as if they were adults, is  one of the biggest disservices Freud and  his followers bequeathed us.  Many of Freud's -patients reported father-  daughter incest to him, a fact which he  wrote about in his letters to Fleiss, a  fellow physician and close friend, letters  he subsequently ordered destroyed (he did  destroy his own end of the correspondence).  At first he believed these accounts, but  eventually, due to his own problems, he  came to view_them as fantasies. From this,  he developed'his theory of childhood sexuality, of kids as sexual beings.  Remnants of this theory abound to this day.  So when victims of incest finally get up  the nerve (or remember) to tell about  what happened to them, they are often told  this is a fantasy on their part, that all  little kids really wish their fathers  would rape them.  In fact, the reverse is true. Adults sexually desire children, sexualize them,  seduce them, rape them. If a child reports  a sexual fantasy about an adult, we can  be sure that the adult is sexualizing the  Marcia Meyer is a performer of classical  music. In one of her instrumental pieces,  "Phases I", she shows us how agreeable piano and flute can be when played and mixed together in their high register.. The  effect flows and soothes.  And so it is with "Valzer Variation", adapted from F. Carulli (a composer of the  Classical period), and "Song of Gnomes",  with its impressionistic texture.  Marcia sings in a very high register and  though it fits the whole feeling of the  album, I think she loses too much volume  trying to reach such high pitches. On the  other hand, she sings right on pitch without swooping up, which is particularly hard  in the context of a recording studio.  Marcia's vibrato is great - she should use  it more often. For instance, in "City  Strut", where she scats between verses,  she is more comfortable. Here her voice  shows us the strength it contains.  PHASES  is meant to call upon people's fantasies. The music leaves a lot of room for  daydreams and "magic thoughts". With her  optimistic songs, she strives to "create  enchantment", and I think she does. This  Is a very good record for those who do  yoga, or have just come home from an exhausting day at work and want to let go.  Marcia made this album because she wants  to share the "symphonies" she has in her  head. There is already another record on  the way, and this time, she will add violins,, viola and cello. In the meantime,  Marcia Meyer's PHASES is a record to welcome!  relationship to some extent.  11. As with any child, what is best for incest  victims is to grow up in an intact family.  False. What is best for the incest victim  is to grow up in a safe, loving, protected environment, one which allows her the  space to develop freely.  This may or may not be her family of origin. It may be some part of her original  family, e.g. kids and mother (often the  preferred choice) or it may be with relatives, friends, in an incest survivors  home or by herself, whatever comes closest  to fulfilling her needs.  An incest victim does not only need the  incest to stop to be able to breathe freely again. She needs the FEAR of incest to  stop.  12. Incest victims are deeply scarred especially  in terms of their sexuality.  False. Incest victims may or may not be  deeply scarred. It depends on how long  and how badly they were used, and on how  they are treated once it begins to surface.  The scarring that is present must be examined in terms of basic human rights and  dignity, not in terms of sexuality.  Though it may show up in the sexual arena -  - the area in which they were most obviously used - it is their worth and dignity that is most scarred.  It is important not to believe that incest  victims are damaged goods (no matter how  they see themselves). We must avoid thinking of them as "nothing buts", but see  the whole person, encourage strengths  and creativities and conversations about  everyday living. They really can reclaim  their lives, it IS possible.  13. It is impossible to understand or identify  with incest because it is so far out of the  bounds of our everyday experience.  False, although this is where we usually  start. We begin by thinking, my god, how  could this happen, how could it occur so  frequently. Eventually, we come to see  that incest is simply an exaggeration of  the relationships condoned by our social  structure.  Marriage, as we know ;.t, is modeled on  father-daughter relationships, although  not, of course, between relatives. What  we have is a union between an older,  richer man who goes out into the world  and provides, and a younger woman who  stays at home, serves his needs, is poorer, depends on him.  Now, I know to some of you this will sound  utterly absurd. Still, I maintain that after a while it is the only explanation  that fits. Suddenly, all kinds of other  little phrases and social rules that perpetuate this come to mind, e.g. sugar daddies.  14. In the long run, what incest victims need  most is a good sexual relationship with an  understanding man.  As might be clear from my previous answer,  this is false. Incest victims need help  in two areas: nurturance and affection,  and basic rights and assertiveness.  Incest victims need nonsexual nurturing,  affection, support, hugs, love. Usually  they need this from a female, and whenever possible, a strengthening of the bond  between mother and daughter. They do NOT  need affection that is tied in any way to  a sexual relationship.  They also need to learn that they have  rights, that people, no matter who they  are, do not have the right to intrude on  them sexually, physically or psychologically. They do not know this. And until  they do, they will have no way to get angry, to begin to connect their feelings of  worthlessness and misery to someone else's  taking advantage of them.  I cannot emphasize this too much. It is  NOT their sexuality that is in need of  definition, but their basic human rights.  They need to learn they can have some control over their own lives, that their word  actually makes a difference, has an impact,  will be taken seriously by someone else  and acted on. They need some say, some  power over their lives. This is what they  have been deprived of. Kinesis    June 1982  MOVEMENT MATTERS  Maura and friends sang to an appreciative crowd at Grandview Park on Mother's Day.  Feminist Party to meet in  Vancouver  The Feminist Part of Canada (B.C.) will  hold a public meeting on Sunday, June 20  at 2 p.m. in Vancouver's Robson Square  Media Centre Theatre. The program will include readings, music, an introduction to  the Party, speakers and open discussion  from the floor.  Although women comprise over 50% of the  Canadian population, they make up less  than 5# of the federal MPs. At this rate,  equal representation will take another 842  years. We firmly believe women will never  be equal partners in the Canadian political  system unless women themselves provide the  vehicle.  The Party has been fromed with the intention of providing a feminist perspective in  the Canadian political arena. It will be  the political voice of our time of a movement that has been known and felt in all  times.  For further information contact 922-6077.  'Unaffiliated' feminists respond  to WAVAW-Rape Relief crisis  To all of you who may be worrying that the  women's movement in Vancouver is falling  into ruins...a whole lot of us who describe ourselves as unaffiliated feminists  are working hard to help resolve the situation.  We held one meeting (May 16) where a hundred of us began to discuss and plan how to  respond to the situation from the point of  view of the women's movement as a whole. A  meeting with Vancouver Rape Relief is  planned where they can clarify their position and respond to criticisms. Another  meeting for the "unaffiliated" will follow.  The Lower Mainland Region of the B.C. Federation of Women (22 groups) has called a  special meeting on June 2 to come up with  a position on government funding of rape  crisis services.  Many of us are determined to see the situation move past the present polarization  to a place where we can continue to fight  our real enemies. More information will be  in future issues of Kinesis.  The following groups will be kept up-to-  date about future meetings: Vancouver Status of Women (873-1427), the Women's Health  Collective (736-6696), Press Gang (253-1224  and the Women's Bookstore (684-0523).  For clarification of the above, call Diana  Smith (253-5654) or Melanie Conn (736-0935).  Lavender-Orchid Ball will  support LIL  Vancouver's Lesbian Information Line is  holding what promises to be an exciting  fundraiser June 26 - The Lavender-Orchid  Ball. (See Bulletin Board for details. )  LIL was formed to offer information to  women not yet involved in the women's community. The LIL phone line (734-1016) operates two nights a week - Thursday and  Sunday - from 7-10pm.  Support this important service by your  attendance June 26.  The cross-Canada tour by a representative  of AMES (Salvadorean Women's Association),,  originally scheduled for May and June, has  been postponed until the fall.  We have been encouraged by the enthusiasm  about the tour, both from locations in  B.C. and across Canada. If your group is  interested in sponsoring an event around  the tour, contact the B.C.-El Salvador  Women's Support Group, 400A West 5th Ave.  Vancouver or call Hilarie at 873-1427 for  more information.  See Greece through new eyes  There can be no women's liberation without  social liberation, there can be no social  liberation without women's liberation.  This is the motto of The Women's Union of  Greece (EGE) who are organizing their  Second International Women's Conference,  to be held August 22 through September 5.  The EGE's aim is to "enlighten women on  the nature and source of their oppression".  They are active around familiar issues:  equal participation in economic, political  and cultural fields, day care, medical  and legal counselling, protection of the  aged, protection of the environment, protection of Greek culture.  The programme begins in Athens and continues with a two-week tour of the country.  Participants will atend local festivities  and poetry readings, and will learn about  the struggles of Greek women in the antifascist and independence movements.  From B.C., the cost of the tour, per person,  is $2200. This includes conference fee,  accommodation, travel expenses inside  Greece, two meals per day and entertainment.  A group of women from B.C. is now being  organized. Arrangements can be made to  leave Vancouver before the conference or  to remain in Greece longer than two weeks.  And while the conference is for women, men  are welcome to take advantage of the group  air fare to Athens.  If you are interested, contact Colleen  Bostwick, 3656 Cordiale Dr., Vancouver,  V5S 4H3 (tel: 430-6900) or Doris Fuller,  P.O. Box 657, Gibsons, B.C. (tel: 886-9983).  Gay librarians publish  bibliography  The Gay Interest Group of the Canadian Library Association has distributed a pamphlet  entitled A Brief Preliminary Guide to Recommended Reading on Homosexuality,to B.C.  libraries.  The publications included were selected  "in recognition that there can be no healthy growth in individual(s) or society  without a basis in truth and honesty. The  list excludes works which perpetuate old  prejudices." It is divided into three sections: English language titles on homosexuals, English language titles "on lesbians,  and French language titles.  The guide's use (and the availability of  titles listed) will depend largely on requests from the reading public. Inquire  about it at Vancouver Public Library (Main  Branch) or at university and college libraries .  Requests for copies of the guide, as well  as comments and suggestions, can be directed to: CLA Gay Interest Group, c/o  Sed Millward, St. John's College Library,  400 Dysart Rd., Winnipeg, Manitoba R3T 2M5.  WAVAW/RCG plans rape crisis  service  The in-movement meeting on the 18th of May  did indeed happen, and was attended by just  over 250 women. We are thinking and talking  about your concerns and criticisms. We are  glad for your support.  We are aware that all the problems have not  been ironed out and all the criticisms have  not been dealt with. We see this as part of  an on-going process. But, in the meantime,  the work of starting a new centre must also  be done.  Our time frame for the new Rape Crisis  Centre is:  June 6-20: Intensive re-training session  (2 weeks for us and other ex-rape crisis  centre workers or women with similar  experience)  June 21: Speaking to women's groups  June 26-28: National conference  June 29-July 25: Regular volunteer training session for volunteers from the  May 18 meeting and friends  July 1: Move into our space and open two  phone lines. Speaking to community groups  July 15: Speaking to institutions (about  us)  September 15: Speaking to general audiences  Next training session  - WAVAW Rape Crisis Centre June 1982   Kinesis    17  LETTERS  Rape Relief reiterates commitment to stay open  We are writing in response to the article  in the May 1982 issue of Kinesis  written  by the WAVAW/RCG. In order to respond fully,  we would need 12 pages in this issue. We  asked for 5 pages and were given one. A detailed reply is available by contacting  Rape Relief.  This 36-page document was compiled by  women from In Struggle  and contains statements by women who have worked with us, as  well as a section where we speak for ourselves.  We think that some accusations in the  WAVAW/RCG article point to or hide very  real political differences which we believe  need to be debated by feminists even more  than they have always been:  - when or whether to ally with men  - what is our responsibility to fight for  classless society  - how do we best fight for women's right  to sexual choice and against homophobia  - what is an effective political service  - how do we deal with splits in our collectives  - how do we deal with political differences between women's movement groups  We are pleased with the prospect of another anti-rape centre forming to provide  immediate support for women as well as to  "fight against violence against women on  many fronts in many ways." There is room  and the need in this city alone for many  such centres.  Part of the work of the B.C. Coalition  of Rape Crisis Centres has always been to  encourage emerging rape centres. In the  last few years, we have seen new centres  form in Powell River,, Duncan, Nanaimo,  Prince George and Terrace.  However, we strongly denounce the unprincipled smears on individuals and on us as  a group of women that the WAVAW group has  presented as part of their announcement  of existence. The major battle we all need  to fight Is against the government and  against the male dominated system: not  against each other. Our own differences  . need to be. aired in respectful ways' that  allow the women's movement to flourish  and grow - not to self-destruct.  It is necessary to counter some of the  accusations made against us by stating a  few facts about our work. For example, we  have always been a woman-only collective  and our position is clearly and unanimously pro-choice on abortion. We believe a  woman's right to sexual choice is fundamental to our freedom. We agree to provide  self-defense information or training as a  way of furthering women's fight against  sexist violence, and we agree to defend  women who have used violence against  their attacker.  Central to all our actions against rape  is the belief that men, not women, are  responsible for the violence they commit  against us. We are committed to providing  and finding options for women. Part of  our work is to invent actions that directly confront men. We also provide  legal and medical information and advocacy  to support women who choose to go through  these institutions.  The accusation that we jeopardized the  funding of the anti-rape movement in B.C.  is backwards. In fact, it's the government who has jeopardized the funding by  demanding intolerable access to our files.  In B.C., we have always applied for money  as a coalition and decided internally  where it would go. At this time, our application is in for next year's funding.  It has always been and remains a Coalition  decision to stand firm on the issue of  confidentiality and to refuse the government access to our files on the women who  call us.  This position was no secret to the government officials who pushed to get more  control and more information out of us.  Women from Santa Cruz, California, and  from as far away as Australia, as well as  in other parts of Canada talk about the  same battle. There is a world-wide recession going on, and as funds diminish,  governments are pushing for more control  over the groups they fund.  In the meantime, the provincial government, despite its earlier noises about  "no interruptions in services", has announced it will not f\uid any rape centres  until July, an action which has saved,  them some $60,000.  Throughout the funding crisis and throughout this new split within the movement,  we have struggled to keep our centre  open and our lines available. At this  time, we are painfully aware that we are  the only operating rape crisis centre between here and Prince George. Our first  duty, again, must be to the women who  call us and work with us.  Fortunately, supporters have rallied  around us, making it clear that feminists  and others are not abandoning us. Our  supporters have included individuals,  women's groups, community groups and  trade unions. If you are interested in  helping out, give us a call.  Joni Miller  Jiwan Fishman  Marg Panton  Valerie Ogle  Bonnie Agnew  Lee Lakeman  Nicole Kennedy  Ans Steenman  Kim Nightingale  Regina Lorek  Maureen Mills  Marie Arrington  RAPE RELIEF  We offer support to women who  have been sexually assaulted, be it  recently or long ago, and whether or  not they report to police.  • 24 hour crisis line/7 days a week  • Emergency shelter for women and their children  • Counselling—one to one and group  > Crisis intervention  • Legal/medical information  • Support/education/action groups  > Police, Hospital, Court accompaniment  and advocacy  • Third party reporting  » Community activism  » Speaking engagements—call to  arrange  » Confidentiality.  « Activists welcome  WE ARE A  FEMINIST COLLECTIVE OF WOMEN  WHO   HAVE   BEEN   WORKING   TO   ERADICATE  VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN SINCE 1973  1872-82121    HERE TO STAY!  SOME STATISTICS  * 1 woman is raped every 17  minutes in Canada  * 1 woman in 4 will be raped  sometime in her lifetime  * I woman in 8 will be sexually  assaulted before the age of  18  * 54% of wives are battered  * 60-70% of women are raped  by men they know  Rope is a crin  men against u  ' of violence committed by  MEMBERS OF B.C. COALITION OF RAPE CRISIS CENTRES AND CANADIAN ASSOCIATION OF  SEXUAL ASSAULT CENTRES.  S IS A POSTER  IT HAS A  HT TO BE HERE 18    Kinesis    June 1982  LETTERS  Readers respond to WAVAW/RCG letter  Kinesis:  We have read the letter published in your  May/82 issue from 19 ex-Vancouver Rape Relief members regarding Vancouver Rape Relief. For the record: the Coalition of  B.C. Rape Centres, including Vancouver,  includes in our basis of unity the following:  - agreement that it is the function of the  police and court to uphold and defend the  status quo and keep women powerless. (We  do not, however, deny women information  about court procedure. V/e provide that on  request, do court accompaniments and accompaniment to the police as requested.  In Prince George the police informed us  that they do not like women to be accompanied by an advocate as they say it makes  interviewing more difficult. )  - we are pro-choice on abortion (and actively support other pro-choice organizations).  - we agree to defend women who have violently defended themselves against sexist  attacks. (And do so. Consider that when  you argue we support the rapist.)  - we agree to organize women against violence against women. (In so doing we engage them in a process of de-mystification  which we hope will reveal the enormity of  sexist repression and encourage women into  active involvement in the women's movement.)  The statement about Vancouver RR and the  Coalition's attitude toward lesbians is  right off the wall, as is the statement  regarding indoctrination in radical therapy workshops.  We are tired of hearing about the "smokescreen" of confidentiality. We'd like to  know how the 19 and their supporters propose to both assure women of confidentiality and, as well, accede to government  demands for access to that confidential  information. We remind you it is not only  Vancouver's files the government wants.  Quite frankly we're tired of being called  liars.  Having attended Coalition meetings (were  the 19 there?), we know what Vancouver RR  intended regarding money. It was to gain  as much independent funding locally as  possible so that they could take a lesser  share of Coalition funding and thereby  make more money available to other and new  centres, in order that the anti-rape movement in B.C. could grow and grow stronger.  It is sad for us to see that presumably  informed women are not carrying their  political analysis far enough and are being  tactically used by the Socred government  to do that government's dirty work, i.e.  debilitate the women's movement in B.C.  Divide and conquer is such an old trick.  It is even more sad for us to see Vancouver RR attacked as closed and elitist.  Those women individually and collectively  have given a great deal of time and support, emotional and practical, to women  organizing autonomous women-only anti-rape  centres outside of the Lower Mainland  area - a very strange practice for women  who are not longer supportive of women.  Eleanor Crowe & Maureen Pfliger  Prince George Rape Assault Centre  Kinesis:  I have been involved in various ways with  Vancouver Rape Relief for the past two  years, both using their services and offering my own. My reaction on reading your  article in last month's issue was one of  total incredulity, that Rape Relief could  be so maligned and misrepresented.  Political disagreements are to be expected  among women's groups in Vancouver since  individual perspectives are not static, and  effective changes are still to be made, the  nature of which we have yet barely perceived  However, there is a big difference between  discussion of disagreements, or exchanging  of ideas and this wanton attempt to discredit and destroy another group.  From personal experience, I find the accusations in that article to be completely  unfounded. I have always been treated with  respect at Rape Relief. I have been given  comfort and consolation when I've needed  it. My ideas have been listened to, validated and accepted. I have never been coerced into "radical therapy" workshops, nor  have I ever attended any. Yet I do volunteer work on the crisis line and at the  transition house.  My instructions have always been that every  woman calling is to be presented with all  of the available options, including offering to go to the police or through the  courts if that is her choice.  I don't think this disgraceful attempt to  undermine Vancouver Rape Relief will be  successful, because there are just too  many women out there, like myself, who have  already used the services offered, and not  found them to be in any way wanting.  Jacqueline B. Duffy  Kinesis:  We consider it an outrage against the whole  Women's Liberation Movement that Kinesis,  the publication of the Vancouver Status of  Women, has seen fit to publish an attack  on Vancouver Rape Relief by the WAVAW/RCG  without making sure that the criticism was  substantiated and documented.  It simply is not acceptable to allow one  group of women and their supporters to slam  another group without the critics having  to spell out their differences in a way  that allows us, your readers, to understand  what is going on and what the political  differences are.  Clearly those who have signed the statement  have no concept of what principled struggle  is all about, and neither has Kinesis who  gives them a platform to reach readers  across the country and around the world.  Kinesis has permitted a clear case of trashing to take place on its pages.  As long-time readers of Kinesis and as wo- I  men who consider ourselves participants in  the struggle for women's liberation, we  demand that Kinesis apologize for its role  in this slanderous attack on Rape Relief  (without substantiation, what else is it?),  and that you correct your error by asking  the WAVAW/RCG to withdraw its statement  and to go to work on a principled document  on their political disagreements with Rape  Relief.  We need to know what is meant with each  accusation, we need to read full documentation that would substantiate each statement, and we need to be told about the history of this particular struggle.  Until these corrections are made, Kinesis,  along with WAVAW/RCG has to be seen as the  most unprincipled group of women yet to  emerge from the Canadian Women's Liberation  Movement. Your actions discredit the whole  movement.  Yours, for principled struggle,  Marjaleena Repo  Cady Williams  Peggy Smith  Antoinette Martens-Dalrymple  Kinesis:  I was very concerned after reading the article about Rape Relief, written by women  wanting to form another centre, in the  ' last issue of Kinesis. This concern is not  so much because there are differences in  the anti-rape movement or because of the  possibility of a new centre forming. It  is not the first time such a split has  occurred in the anti-rape movement.  I was involved with the Montreal Rape Crisis Centre from 1976 to 1978. During this  period one woman, because of a conflict  between the centre and herself, formed  another centre. This conflict mainly revolved around her lack of feminist understanding of the issue of rape. During her  involvement at the MRCC, she had developed  close contacts in the police department  and in a major hospital. She had their  support in seeking funding and forming a  rape crisis centre.  In the past the MRCC had been publicly  critical of police and hospital policies  and instrumental in pressuring for changes  in their procedures relating to women who  had been raped. Changes were made by both  these institutions which minimally ameliorated the situation. The MRCC remained  critical. Obviously these institutions  had vested interest in supporting another  centre that would be in competition with  the MRCC.  This second centre closed later when conflict developed between the director (ex-  MRCC member) and her employees. Her employees refused to work with her any longer and denounced her. Needless to say,  this was an exhausting and confusing  period.  My concern after reading WAVAW's article  was that once again conflicts were being  aired in such a way as to render the women's movement vulnerable to manipulation  by the government and its institutions or  that two groups would compete for the same  funding, bait to splinter the women's  movement. It is clear to me that whatever  the conflicts, we must stay united against  those forces that have it in their interest to divide and weaken us as a political force.  This is not to say that the conflicts are  not important or do not need to be dealt  with. The printing of WAVAW's article is  again evidence to me that we do not have,  adequate ways of clarifying or resolving  such conflict within the women's movement.  Also, despite the particulars surrounding  the specific conflict, there are often  underlying political questions that need  to be addressed.  One recurring question in the anti-violence  against women movement has been individual  crisis work vs. political action as a priority. Since my experience in Montreal, I  have thought that there needs to be dialogue between the anti-violence against  women groups and the women's movement  generally on questions such as:  - What is the role of individual crisis  support within the women's movement?  - How do we do this type of support?  - Do we operate on a traditional social  service model?  - How do we ensure the quality of this  support?  - Do we work with the legal system and  police?  - If so, how?  - What type of political actions do we  take on rape as a feminist issue?  As women become involved in resolving the  present situation, it is important to keep  continued on page 19 June 1982   Kinesis    19  LETTERS  continued from page 18  in mind that the existing rape crisis  centres in B.C. are struggling financially  to continue their services. Doing this and  working through the present crisis is no  easy task.  Augusta Lokhorst  Kinesis:  I was a member of Vancouver Rape Relief  for three years from fall 1978 to fall  1981. During this time I had some great  times and some horrible times. When I left  I was the first in several years who left  without deep bitterness and fear.  I left mainly because I wanted to make a  full commitment to Women Against Nuclear  Technology, but I was also sick and tired  of crisis work. There was a major political disagreement between myself and some  of the members of the collective when I  left (but it was not one of the reasons  I left). As far as I know they have not  changed their minds over this issue so  we are still in disagreement.  Whenever I was in disagreement with some  of the members it was often scary and  painful, yet I never lost sight that it  was either with one woman or several, but  never the whole collective. When the  WAVAW/RCG letter appeared I could have  named who they were talking about in the  collective. I didn't need to see the  dossier to know who they were talking  about.  During the entire three years at Rape Relief there was always one or more members  that I disliked or didn't really want to  work with, which meant I had to work hard  at working collectively with them. Despite  all this I refuse to bring my dislikes,  judgements or major disagreements into  the media arena. If women want to know  what my disagreements are with women at  Rape Relief and the mistakes I made during my time there I will tell them.  Because I might dislike or disagree politically with one or several women in the  collective, there is no reason to trash  any group. It only serves to create an  either/or situation which perpetuates our  own misogyny and serves "the man" in keep-,  ing us busy fighting each other.  When I look at the list of women who signed the WAVAW/RCG letter who were former  members of the support, education, and  action groups, not one was from the group  I facilitated for a year. This indicates  not everyone who has had contact with  members of Rape Relief has been unhappy  with their contact.  Certainly I have made mistakes with the  women's community and with women who called the crisis line while with Rape Relief  but through my mistakes I learned and got  better at my job.  No matter how much disagreement we have  as feminists I still find more unity within feminist groups than the world at large.  Overall, I found my years at Rape Relief  a tremendous growth experience. I came  knowing feminism from a book and left  knowing feminism from my heart and from  other women's lives. I came to Rape Relief  as a lesbian and left with a political  analysis of lesbianism and for the first  time in my life a supportive lesbian community.  My hope is that women in Vancouver will  stop themselves and each other from tearing apart the delicate fabric of a political and social community which we have  worked so hard to build. We need all of  us to be doing the work that is so vitally  needed when there are so few of us doing  it.  Krin Zook  Other comments:  I'm glad of your dedication - I think it's  a necessary and cohesive force for the community. I'm impressed by the consistently  high level of analysis and quality of writ  ing. Great!  (Ruth Fahlman)  Congratulations on excellent work. I would  like to see more articles on religion and  spirituality in the lives of women. Later  this year, I would be willing to write on  my present research into organizations  which promote the submission of women.  (Kathleen Storrie)  Just another letter from another satisfied  customer!! It's great to receive Kinesis.  Being in an isolated community in the North  West Territories, Kinesis makes me feel  just a little less "out of touch". The  women's movement here by the way is alive  and well. Keep up the good work and send  some spring up this way! (Marina Quilty)  Incest issue well done. It appears you're  all doing fine work and I certainly enjoy  the outcome. You have my support and appreciation.  (Ms. C. Frost)  S & M illustrates complexity of  individual experience  Kinesis:  This is to clarify a couple of points  raised by R. Elaine Young's reaction to  your acceptance of an ad for S/M photography. There were two distinct points raised  in Elaine's letter, and in your response:  (l) whether or not a feminist paper should  accept classified ads pertaining to S/M behaviour between women, and (2) whether or  not S/M behaviour is acceptable to a feminist sensibility.  While the two questions are closely linked,  there is a crucial difference between them.  The answer to the first is based on the  editorial judgement of a specific publication; the second is answered by personal  preference and analysis. I agree that the  personal is political, but I am concerned  that feminist analyses might become so  rigid that the radical complexity of  individual experience and identity will be  lost.  Cy-Thea Sand  Caught in the crossfire: a view from within  by Vancouver Status of Women staff  This month, Rape Relief responds to the  WAVAW/RCG letter which appeared in the last  issue of Kinesis. We have given Rape Relief  one page (i.e. equal space) in which to  respond.  Many letters have also come in response to  the WAVAW/RCG letter. Because of space limitations, we cannot print all the letters  we received; however, we have selected a  representative sampling.  Because of the furor created by the WAVAW/  RCG letter, some of which has been directed  at Kinesis, we (the staff of VSW) think it  appropriate to explain why we chose to  print the WAVAW/RCG letter, and what we see  as Kinesis' role in the feminist community.  At Kinesis, we start from the premise that  feminist women have a right to space in a  feminist newspaper, and that Kinesis has a  responsibility to print submissions relating to issues within the feminist community.  In taking on the WAVAW/RCG letter, we had  to decide which was worse - to stifle what  was happening between WAVAW/RCG and Rape  Relief by refusing to print WAVAW/RCG's  submission (censorship, in effect) or to  print the letter in order that the differences might finally resolve themselves as  a result.  We did ask for substantiation of the charges  in the letter, and went ahead satisfied that  the letter-writers could document their al  legations about Rape Relief. The fact that  most, if not all, of the signers of that  letter are respected and active members of  this feminist community also influenced our  decision to print the letter.  Some readers have questioned why Rape Relief  was not given a chance to respond to WAVAW/  RCG in the same issue. We refer these readers to the July/August 1981 issue of Kinesis  where Kinesis policy regarding publication  of responses is set out, along with a history of how we came to that decision.  Briefly, we do not strive for simultaneous  publication (unless the parties have com- .  municated about the criticism and both get  articles in by copy deadline). The mechanics  of newspaper production simply do not allow  otherwise, for heated and time-consuming  negotiations invariably occur when a controversial article like this one appears.  To out-of-town readers who feel that Kinesis should have provided background information to the WAVAW/RCG letter, let us reiterate that this controversy is not a new  one, but in fact has been going on for  nearly three years in the pages of Kinesis.  It simply i's not possible for us to provide  an update each time a new chapter in the  debate appears in print. For the information of new readers, the following issues  of Kinesis contain articles and letters  pertaining to this debate: September/October 79, November 79, December/January 80,  February 80, April 80, November 80, December/January 81, February 81, April 81, June  81, July/August 81, September/October 81,  and of course May 82.  As we see it, there is no middle ground in  this controversy, and that has put Kinesis  in a very difficult position in attempting  to cover it. We will continue to print  submissions from either side, but we don't  want to see Kinesis become a battleground,  where "dialogue" has become offensive vs.  defensive.  There are important issues underlying this  controversy, and they need to be taken up  by all members of the community. Kinesis  will keep you informed of debate, but in  the end it is you, the readers, who must de  cide the controversy, not us. It is not our  role.  Finally, bear in mind that Kinesis is responsible for covering many feminist issues.  The space we devote to any one issue is  something we do control, and we intend to  maintain balance in our coverage of issues.  As one of the letters in this issue points  out, it may be that we need to find other  means (in addition to Kinesis) to air grievances or carry on public debate within our  community.  For readers who wish to contact either WAVAW|  /RCG or Rape Relief for further information  their addresses are as follows:  WAVAW/RCG Rape Relief  #510-810 W. Broadway    77 E. 20th Avenue  Vancouver, B.C.        Vancouver, B.C. 20   Kinesis    June 1982  BULLETIN BOARD  THE FUTURE IS NOW, a conference on women  and the impact of microtechnology, June  25-27 in Ottawa. VSW has a pamphlet and  registration form - phone us at 873-1427  for details.  EVENTS  WOMEN'S MARIMBA ENSEMBLE SUKUTAI (sister  group of Gwinyai) from Seattle will play  Saturday, June 19, 8 p.m. at Mount  Pleasant Community Centre, 16th & Ontario. Benefit dance for Southern Africa  Action Coalition. Admission $6 employed,  $5 unemployed. For info call 734-1712.  3rd ANNUAL NORTHWEST WOMEN'S FESTIVAL June  18-20 at Kispiox Valley Rodeo Grounds in  Hazelton, B.C. Fee $12/woman, $l8/women  with children. For info/registration,  write Three Rivers Women, Box 497, Hazelton, B.C. VOJ 1Y0 or call 872-6033-  SINGLE MOTHER'S WORKSHOPS, a series sponsored by South Surrey-White Rock Women's  Place, 821 Kent St., White Rock. June'  workshops inlcude:  June 7 & 9 - Budgeting  by P. Muggeridge  June 14 & 16 - Standing up for Yourself  by Fiona Old  June 21 & 24 - Education and Job Opportunities  by Dawn Glazier and Janet  Patterson  June 28 & 30 - Coping with Stress  by  Yaya D'Andrade.  Fee: $7 for series. Free child care provided. These are daytime workshops. Call  536-9611 for more information.  CELEBRATE SUMMER SOLSTICE on Vancouver  Island. Women's dance Saturday, June 19  8 p.m. at Errington Hall. Picnic and  softball Sunday, June 20, starting at  noon at Rathtrevor Park just south of  Parksville.  Camping at nearby Englishman River Falls. To get to Errington,  go to Parksville, take the Port Alberni  Hwy turnoff, follow signs to Englishman  River Falls. The Errington Hall is l£  miles off the highway on the way to the  Falls, on the left after the general  store. For further info call Mary or  Sylvie at 248-9380.  ROBIN TYLER, Lesbian-feminist comedian  at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre  from June 14 to June 19. Monday thru  Thursday at 8:30, Friday and Saturday  at 6:30 and 9:30. Tickets available at  Ariel, Octopus East, and the Vancouver  East Cultural Centre. Monday thru  Thursday $7.50, Friday and Saturday  $8.50.  WOMEN & TRANSFORMATION, a conference sponsored by Antioch, July 23-25 in Seattle.  The conference will explore the spiritual  and political aspects of feminism and  their synthesis. Susan Griffiths is the  keynote speaker. Conference fee $75 ($6  for Friday evening with Susan Griffiths)  Childcare provided at nominal cost. For  info/tickets, call Antioch (206)323-2270.  CANADA-LATIN AMERICA is the theme of the  latest issue of Connexions (Vol. 7 #2),  Canada's grassroots resource journal.  Individual copies $3, subs $12/5 issues  from Connexions, 427 Bloor Street W.,  Toronto, Ontario M5S 1X7.  LAVENDER-ORCHID BALL, Saturday June 26,  9 p.m. at Mount Pleasant Community Centre,  16th & Ontario. Sponsored by Lesbian  Information Line. Admission $5, advance  tickets available at Ariel Books, the  Vancouver Women's Bookstore, and Octopus  East. Wheelchair accessible. For daycare  or other info, call LIL at 734-1016,  Thursday or Sunday, 7-10 p.m. Also,  crew needed to clean up after dance at  1 a.m. for $12/hr. Call LIL for info.  2nd CANADIAN CONFERENCE ON DAYCARE will be  held in Winnipeg September 23-25. Sponsored by the Canadian Council on Social  Development and Health and Welfare Canada. For a preliminary program and registration forms, write Lyse Teasdale, Conference Co-ordinator, Canadian Council  on Social Development, 55 Parkdale Ave.,  P.O. Box 3505, Station C, Ottawa, K1Y  4G1, or phone (613) 728-1865.  JUST OUT  RISING UP STRONG: Women in the 80 's  by  Linda Briskin and Lorna Weir. 3/4"  videocassette, 60 min., colour, 1981.  Part I: At Work and At Home,  Part II:  Control of Our Bodies  (each part 30  min.). Examines current issues in the  women's movement. For more info, contact  DEC Films, 427 Bloor St. W., Toronto  M5S 1X7 (tel: (416) 964-6901) or Linda  Briskin/Lorna Weir, 314 Lauder Ave.,  Toronto M6E 3H6 (tel: (416) 651-0720).  Rental $25-$45 each, sale $250 each.  Pornography  - A Women's Issue,   3/4" video-  cassette, colour: and  "Not a Love Story: A Film About Pornography" - A Discussion Guide,  booklet.  Designed to be used as a kit, this tape  and booklet offer suggestions, from a  feminist analysis of the issue, for how  to deal with questions and issues raised  by the film Not a Love Story.   Produced  by Pat Feindel and Gayla Reid.  Contact  Vancouver Status of Women for further  information. ,  MEDIA FROM IDERA, 2524 Cypress St., Van.  A Common Assault,   slide/tape, 35 min., col.  sale price $200. Produced by Peg Campbell,  A Sign of Affection,  videotape, B&W, 25.  min'., sale price $100. Produced by Peg  Campbell.  A Rule of Thumb,   videotape, B&W, 25 min.,  sale price $100. Produced by Peg Campbell.  Women in Arms,  16- mm. film, colour, 59  min., rental $50-$100, inquire for sale  price. Produced by Victoria Schult£.  South Africa Belongs to Us,  16 mm. film,  colour, 55 min., rental $30-$60, inquire  for sale price. Produced by Chris Austen,  Peter Chappell and Ruth Weiss.  You Have Struck a Rock  (on South African  women), 16 mm. film, colour, 28 min.,  rental $30-$60, inquire for sale price.  Produced by Deborah May.  LESBIAN/LESBIENNE a coast-to-coast publication by, for and about lesbians. We aim  to be monthly and bilingual, and will  print articles, reviews, poetry, etc.  but our main purpose is to be a "news"  letter. We need contacts from everywhere in English Canada and Quebec, i.e.  womyn who are willing to be responsible  for sending us the news in their area,  city, town or village. Send subs, news  and suggestions to: P.O. Box 70, Stn. F  Toronto, Ont. Subs $5/year, institutions  $10/yr.  THE RADICAL REVIEWER'S Spring 1982 issue  is out! It features an interview with  Anne Cameron, poetry by local women artists Alleson Kase, Valerie Lamb, Kirsten  Emmott and Bet Cecil, and an essay on  the problems facing Canadian women writers by Montreal poet Sharon H. Nelson.  Available at local bookstores, or subscribe by sending $5 for 3 issues to  P.O. Box 24953, Stn. C, Vancouver.  ON THE AIR  W0MANVISI0N on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM,  from 7:00-8:00pm each Monday. No  programme available at press time.  THE LESBIAN SHOW on Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM,  each Thursday from 7:30-8:30pm.  June 3- Canadian Lesbian music.  June 10- Lesbians talk about their  fathers in this feature on lesbian  daughter/father interaction.  June 17- Love. Some of us fall flat on  our faces in love, while others grow to  love certain women in relationships  that become more intense with time.  June 24- What could be the sequel to  love but Breaking Up? If you have a  broken heart write Aunt Lizzie (c/o  The Lesbian Show, 337 Carrall St.,  Vancouver V6B 2J4) for advice. We'll  answer your letter over the air.  RUBYMUSIC on CO-Op Radio, 102.7 FM, from  7:00-'-:30pm each Friday. No programme  available at press time.  For fans of country music tune in to  Co-op Radio's BACK IN THE SADDLE on  June 16 at 9:30pm for a feature on Women  In Old Time Music.  CLASSIFIED  MEDIA WATCH is looking for women wishing  to become actively involved in issues  of sexism in the media (TV, radio, print).  Those interested are invited to attend  a meeting June 16, 7:30 p.m. Alesia  Lawrence, False Creek Terrace, 1070 W.  7th Ave., Apt. Bl, Vancouver.  LESBIANS AGAINST THE RIGHT (LAR). We have  printed our first pamphlet focussing on  the speeches given at the May 9, 1981  Lesbian Forum which was the founding  meeting of LAR, an autonomous lesbian-  feminist group. With photographs. Send  $2.50 plus 50^ mailing and handling  charges to P.O. Box 70, Station F,  Toronto.  WANTED: non-sexist, progressive adults to  share accommodation, either to buy a  large house or triplex, or rent. I have  a 4-year-old daughter. Call Jeanne at  522-8094,  or leave a message at 525-8136.  SHARED ACCOMMODATION at 33rd & Rupert,  $250/month. Call 874-7915 for more info.  CARAL (Canadian Abortion Rights Action  League) is asking for donations to  launch legal action against Joe Borowski's  fight to deny safe, legal abortion to  Canadian women. Send cheques to CARAL,  P.O. Box 935, Toronto, Ont. M4T 9Z9.