 ^iJecJo  FEBRUARY 1994 Black m^1dof$?ctt5»s <?,"-.    CMPA$2.25  KINESIS  k News About Women That's Not In The Dailies  Revolution  in Chiapas  Femini KINESIS  #301-1720 Grant Street  Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6  Tel: (604)255-5499  Fax:(604)255-5511  I  Kinesis welcomes volunteers to work on  all aspects of the paper. Our next  Writers' Meeting is Feb 1 for the March  issue at 7 pm at Kinesis. All women    I  welcome even if you don't have  experience.  Kinesis is published ten times a year  the Vancouver Status of Women. II  objectives are to be a non-sectarian  feminist voice for women and to work  actively for social change, specifically  combatting sexism, racism,classism,  homophobia, ableism, and imperialism.  Views expressed in Kinesis are those of  the writer and do not necessarily reflect  VSW policy. All unsigned material is the  responsibility of the Kinesis Editorial    I  EDITORIAL BOARD  Shannon e. Ash, Lissa Geller, Agnes  Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Anne Jew, Faith  Jones, Sur Mehat, Manisha Singh  PRODUCTION THIS ISSUE   |  Shannon e. Ash, Cynthia Low, Moira  Keigher, Anita Fast, Kathleen Mullen,  Fatima Jaffer, Megan Graham,  Shimsher Pannun, Lynne Wanyeki,  Ellen Woodsworth, Mariam  Bouchoutrouch, Kage-san, Christine  Cosby, Robyn Hall, Elsie Wong,  Siobhan Herron, Larissa Lai, Janiss  Browning, Winnifred Tovey, Faith J<  Anne. Jew  Advertising: Cynthi  Circulation:Cat L'Hironc  Johnstone, ChristJi  Distribution: Y<  Production Co-ordinator:  Typesetter: Sur  FRONT COVER  by Fatima  PRESS DA  January 25,1!  SUBSCRIPTIONS  edit and submission does not guarar  publication. If possible, submiss  should be typed, double spaced a  I must be signed and include ai  telephone number and SASE. Kines  does not accept poetry or fiction.  Editorial guidelines are available u  request.  DEADLINE  ;ions must be r<  month preceding publication. Note: Jul/ I  Aug and Dec/Jan are double issues.  Features and reviews: 10th  News: 15th  Letters and Bulletin Board: 18th  Display advertising  (camera ready): 18th  (design required): 16th  Kinesis is produced on a Warner  Doppler PC using WordPerfect 5.1  PageMaker 4.0 and an NEC lase  printer. Camera work by II Kozac  Printing by Horizon Publications.  Kinesis is indexed in the Canadi;  Women's Periodicals Index, .  the Alternative Press index and is  member of the Canadian Mac  PublishersAssociatipn.  ISSN 0317-  Second class  Inside  KINESIS  1974-1 994  News  Balaclava residence in danger of closing 3  by Agnes Huang  Women on new reproductive technologies 4  by Shannon e. Ash  BC welfare cuts 4  by Lissa Geller  Revolution in Chiapas, Mexico 5  by Fatima Jaffer  Features  Report on the government assessment of NRTs 9  by Christine Massey and Judy Morrison  Feminism and poverty 10  by Yasmin Jiwani  Interview with Guyana activist Karen DeSouza 11  as told to Carol Pinnock and Chris Rahim  Counting women's work 14  by Ellen Woodsworth  20 years of Kinesis 15  Preliminary results of the readership survery 15  compiled by Kathleen Mullen, Christine Cosby and Fatima Jaffer  Centrespread  Black History Month resources and calendar of events 12  by Lynne Wanyeki  Arts  Video review: History of Hogan's Alley 16  by Carloyn Jerome  Theatre review: Fireweed: An Indigeni Fairytale 17  by Valerie Dudoward  Theatre review: If We Are Women 18  by AmyFong  International Lesbian Week calendar of events 18  Interview with writer Makeda Silvera..... 19  as told to Fatima Jaffer  I  v   m m i  Balaclava halfway house..  New reproductive technologies: 9  Regulars  As Kinesis Goes to Press , 2  Inside Kinesis 2  What's News.. !".....".." 6  by Lissa Geller and Amy Fong  Movement Matters  7  by Anita Fast  Bulletin Board 20  compiled by Wendy Frost, Robyn Hall, Eileen Kage, Cynthia Low,  Moira Keigher and Anne Jew  The next writers'  meeting is on  February 1 @ 7 pm  #301-1720 Grant St  Hogan's Alley   FEBRUARY 1994 g  Happy new year! Welcome to 1994! Make any new year resolutions? Chiapas made a  new year revolution! [see page 5]. Does that count?  Actually, many of us here at the paper felt quite relieved when we received a press  release over the fax announcing it was indeed a new year. Couldn't get worse than the last  one, we thought. Got to be better. Some women told us it's also the year of the Capricorn,  and it's going to be a great one...for Capricorn women, they added (and they were all  Capricorns, so we won't take them too seriously.) If they're right and you're not a Capricorn,  don't despair. The Year of the Dog begins on February 10th, Chinese new year's day..and  if you're a Dog, this could be your year too!  We also ran into some women who'd made new year resolutions on January 1st and  broken them on January 2nd who told us this year's no different, in fact could get worse for  all of us (but smokers are always so pessimistic so we're not going to take that too seriously  either...)  (Almost) seriously though, it didn't take long before the year started to feel not so new  here at the paper...so much has happened, is happening as Kinesis goes to press...it's the year  of NAFTA (and maybe the year we stop it too—governments have six months to back out  of the deal—and we've a lready mentioned the revolution against free trade in Chiapas.. .which  is inspiring...just as Kahnesatake was/is...just as...  ...then there's were the recent changes in welfare legislation in BC [see page 4] which  has made a lot of us really angry (we just heard End Legislated Poverty in Vancouver is  putting together a massive campaign to fight the attack on women on welfare. Call.... for  details)  ...also, Alberta's most recent draconian budget reduces the amount of funding to  kindergarten schools by 50 percent, forces parents to pay more for daycare, forces seniors to  pay health-care premiums, raises university tuition fees, lays off or cuts salaries of public  employees...  It's not all bad. There also a lot of celebration—Fireweed: An Indigent Fairy Tale took  Vancouver by storm with a play-like-you've-never-experienced-before with an amazing  cast and a 11-Aboriginal crew...The production of the play itself is a fairy tale. The Fireweed  Production Company formed, created, wrote, workshopped, auditioned, rehearsed, and  delivered its first play all in the space of a couple of months [see page 17J.  ^Thanks  Our thanks to Vancouver Status of Women members who support us year 'round  with memberships and donations. Our appreciation to the following supporters who  became members, renewed their memberships or donated to VSW in December and January:  Gwen Bird * Judith Burke * Shauna Butterwick * Annie Comeau * Cathie Cookson *  Marlene Coulthard * Joanne Crocker * Gail Cryer * Barbara Curran * Marie Curtis * Emma  Dickson * Nancy Douglas-Webb * Anna Dwyer * Janet Freeman * Mary Frey * Christopher  Gainer * Agnes Huang * Barbara Karmazyn * Karen Khoo * Barbara Lebrasseur * Sherry  Longstaffe * Carol McEown * Norma-Jean McLaren * Sara Menzel * Betsy Nuse * Neil  Power * Ginny Stikeman * Veronica Strong-Boag * Shauna Sylvester * Gisela Theurer *  Sheilah Thompson * Wendy Thompson * Pat Tracy * Donna Vogel * R. Elaine Young  We would also like to say a special thank you to those who have responded to our fall  appeal and whose support is so vital to the expansion of VSW's services and programs:  Laureen Anderson * Sam Archer * Murlin Beltain * Liz Bennett * Judith Burke * Marian  Collins * M. Fatima Correia * Tena Cox * Nancy Dickie * Ellen Dixon * Lynn Giraud *  Lynda Griffiths *L'Hirondelle Financial Services* Donna Kennerley * Lorraine Kuchinka  * Sharon McCollough * Kathy McGrenera * Swedahl McPherson » Chava Helen Mintz *  Leah Minuk * Barbara Monita * Audrey Moysiuk * Jane Munro * Marni Nordman * Ruth  Roach Pierson * Patricia Piller * Marilyn Pomfret * Jerilynn Prior * Margaret Rankin *  Gayla Reid * Edna Rolston * Harley Rothstein * Mary Schendlinger * Mary Selman *  Esther Shannon * Mary-Woo Sims * Judith Snider * Eunice Stronach * Carole Tarlington  * Hilda Thomas * Penny Thompson* VanCity Community Foundation * Jane Wolverton  Corrections  Kinesis is not perfect and here are the  corrections to prove it. The biggest correction is that we forgot to run corrections three  months in a row. We recorded our mistakes  each time, but for some reason, it fell through  the cracks each time. So here goes. We'll try  this again.  In our October issue, we spelt Krysten  Wong's name with an "i" instead of a "y" in  the attribution for her interview with "Winnie  Ng—Politician/Activist" In What's News,  we thank the Chilly Climate Control for  letting us know the quote we used was not  by Dorothy Smith, but came from their press  release. And finally, a typo that probably  made all you trekies out there hypothesize  about time warps: The UN Conference on  Women in Bejing will be in September 1995,  not 1985.  Now for our November issue, we forgot to put in photo credits for the Take Back  the Night photo coverage: thanks to Ning  Ning Agno, River Sui and Miche Hill for the  photos. All three were asked by Kinesis to  photographs the event. We're sorry we left  you out of "the story" of bringing Vancouver's Take Back the Night to the pages of  Kinesis.  Finally, in our December/January issue: In As Kinesis Goes to Press, we mention  that Secretary of State's Women's Programs  had been moved from the Ministry of Human Resources to the Ministry of Canadian  Heritage. Nope. Women's Programs is still  under Human Resources. In our "Same sex  rights" story on What's News, Marguerite-  Marie Galipeau was identified as being with  the Canadian Human Rights Commission.  She's really an adjudicator with the Public  Service Alliance of Canada's Staff Relations  Board.  Also, in Vancouver is the annual Women in View festival, with work, play, and more  play...hundreds of women are involved in putting toge'' ter or presenting this eight-year-old  celebration of women and the arts...  Speaking of celebration,.. .the Kinesis Readership Surveys have been pouring in over the  last couple of months and the word is, "lighten up, Kinesis...then again, don't give up on  telling us how bad things are, we'd get complacent, but celebrate more, eh.. ."...keeping that  in mind as we write this...(and that we don't have much space for As Kinesis goes to Press  this month, and there's so much to say...the bad, the good, the worse...and yeah, the funny  too)...  ...Kinesis is celebrating 20 years of feminist publishing this year, all year., .we'll bring you  a history of the paper, a look at the issues we've covered over the last 20 years, some humour  and gossip from the past, essays by past editors and contributors...and, most importantly,  an overview of feminist publishing in Canada (we're not the only ones who have survived  20 years of feminism-bashing, government funding cuts, bad recessionary times, and so on.)  We'll be sharing and comparing and talking with sister publications across the  country...everyone's facing hard financial times and rumours of closings are rife...but we're  hanging on in there...we'll be talking to Pandora, Horizons, HealthSharing, Common Ground,  Herspectives, and many many more...and also look at whether budgets and womanpower  will permit another decade of publishing...  And on the subjectof budgets...we hear that the National action Committee on the Status  of Women (N AC) is in serious $$$ trouble and are launching a massive appeal for donations  and support. Thisisnotjust another bad spot they're in. Their massivecampaign on women's  issues around the election last year has left them in a crunch! and they could go under once  and for all...so if you think the national org. is worth having around, give them a call at their  national office in Toronto at 1-416-759-5252.  These financial blues could get bluer when the federal budget comes down this  month...the Liberals have said "no new taxes" but are quietly threatening cuts to social  programs (they've announced some good intentions, but haven't quite decided how they're  going to carry them out. But one thing is for sure, they're singing the Tory tune of "We can't  afford social programs...the way we were..." (remember that song?) ...there's also been no  word on where women's centres, shelters, and employment and other services fit in all this.  Most women's organizations saw Tory cuts of 10-20 percent last year and have heard  nothing on whether funding will be restored, maintained., or cut! We'll have to wait and  What is certain about the future is that International Women's Day is still on March  8th...we're getting the idea that this year's IWD everywhere in Canada is going to be bigger,  better, stronger, and louder than ever! More communities have started organizing earlier for  this celebration of women's work, solidarity and resistance...many of the IWD themes are  looking at international solidarity and encompassing a more global perspective on women's  struggle..inspired no doubt by the fact that the 4th UN World Conference on Women is  coming up...scheduled for September 1995 in Beijing, it will bring together women (from the  grassroots this time we hope) from women's movements across the world.. .but that's a year  away and we've still got this one to deal with first, which brings us back to new year  resolutions and ours is.. .well, for now, to make sure Kinesis continues to go to press. ...so have  a great year. We'll be back!  Well, here we are almost into the year of  the dog and the weather in Vancouver is still  the envy of the restof Canada. Yes, it's true—  people have been sighted wearing shorts!  It's been great reading what you really  think of us—we really appreciate your responses to the readership survey that were  enclosed in the December /January issue of  Kinesis. Please keep those replies coming,  but turn to page 15 for a preliminary report.  Thanks to Kathleen Mullen, who has been  with us on a UI top up grant, for doing a  great job of assembling the survey and tabulating the responses. Also, huge thanks to  Faith Jones, Winnifred Tovey, Yee Jim, Mary  McQueen, Kathleen Butler, Lisa Sturgess,  Riun Driscall and Christine Cosby for coming in soooo early in the morning to help  stuff the surveys into the paper.  Also on page 15 is a feature celebrating  20 years of Kinesis which we'll be running in  every issue until the party's over. In the next  two issues we'll be looking back at what was  writtenover 1974-94. Yes, we'vebeen around  that long and we thank you for your continued support throughout the years.  Kinesis wouldn't be able to reach its full  potential without input from hundreds of  women. We truly welcome all women to  come in and participate. If you're feeling  shy, just call us or drop by to test out the  waters. Kinesis is an ever evolving product  and process, and your input can only make  it better.  More thanks to Lynne Wanyeki, Laiwan,  Agnes Huang, Fatima Jaffer, Sur Mehat,  Cynthia Low, Miche Hill and Jennifer  Johnstone for helping to put together the  Aboriginal women's issue. And thanks to  Sur Mehat and Kathleen Mullen for dropping off copies to Aboriginal groups in Vancouver.  One more thanks to Lotus Miyashita for  designing the Kinesis 20th Annivesary logo.  Now to the new writers—a big welcome to Carolyn Jerome Carol Pinnock,  Valerie Dudoward and Karen DeSouz&. New  production volunteers this issue are Elsie  Wong and Siobhan Herron. Speaking of production—Kinesis has a new super production coordinator, Agnes Huang! Agnes is  actually a veteran of Kinesis as a writer and  ed board member for the last four-and-count-  ing years. She is also part of the Obaa collective, which puts on the Co-op Radio show  Obaa, for, by and about woman of colour, as  well as active in various other community  endeavours. As well, she recently (almost)  completed her MBA at the University of  British Columbia (congrats), and has some  terrific ideas for Kinesis' business plans for  the future. Most of all, she's not afraid of  computers andisdoingagreatjobalready of  taking on our untrusty production computer! Good luck in coming months, Agnes,  and glad to have you around!  A final tearful farewell to our departing  prodco Anne Jew. She's off to finish her  book of short stories and to rediscover life,  but will continue to write for Kinesis.  Please call us at 255-5499—if you want  to volunteer, write, paste up, learn computer  skills, or whatever. Until next time, survive  the weather and take care!  IWD AD DEADLINE IS FEBRUARY 16.  CALL US NOW TO BOOK SPACE!  FEBRUARY 1994 News   BC women and prisons:  Balaclava house to close  by Agnes Huang  Theonlyhalf-wayhouseinBC forwomen  will be forced to close on March 31, unless it  receives additional guaranteed funding from  the provincial and federal governments.  The Elizabeth Fry Society (EFry) which  operates Balaclava Residence, a half-way  house in Vancouver, says that it is expecting  a budget deficit of $65,000 at the end of this  fiscal year, and is facing an even greater  deficit for 1994-1995.  Balaclava Residence was set up in 1976  to provide housing, food, counselling and  support for women on day and full parole.  Staff at Balaclava are present 24 hours a day.  It is the only half-way house for federally-  sentenced women west of Ontario.  Federally-sentenced women are women  who have been convicted of felony charges  and serving sentences of two years or more.  Provincially-sentenced women are those  given sentences of two years less a day, or  under.  In the Lower Mainland alone, there are  ten half-way houses for men. "And while  some of their programs in the half-way houses  are being cut, men still have more access to  programs in and out of prison," says Kim  Jackson of Joint Effort. Joint Effort is an all-  women prisoner support group for women  at the Burnaby Correctional Centre for  Women (BCCW).  Most of the women who stay at Balaclava  are incarcerated at the BCCW, near Vancouver. About 25 per cent of the women come  from P4W (the Prison for Women) in Kingston, Ontario. P4W and BCCW are the only  two prisons in Canada for federally-sentenced  women. BCCW also serves as a provincial  prison, and is a medium and maximum security prison.  At any given time, Balaclava Residence  can house up to 12 women. Over the last 15-  month period, 103 women have stayed in the  half-way house.  Three of the beds at the house are currently reserved for provincially-sentenced  women, and four for federally-sentenced  women. The remaining beds are available to  women who have few resources or who are  referred by social services to the half-way  house.  Unlike alcohol and drug treatment centres and women's shelters, where many provincially-sentenced women on parole are  placed, women staying at Balaclava Residence can remain there for up to three years.  Most treatment centres have a maximum stay  of 30 to 60 days.  For federally-sentenced women who  have been incarcerated for several years in  maximum security prisons, the transition  from a highly structured situation to independent community life requires longer than  a one or two month transition period, says  Kirsten Mcllveen, also with Joint Effort.  Maureen Gabriel, director of correctional  and community programs with EFry, says  that women in conflict with the law should  have choices about where they serve their  parole periods. "The place where women on  parole are comfortable going to depends on  the individual woman," says Gabriel. "Some  women have a harder time making the transition back into the community because they  are still battling with personal issues like  alcohol and drug abuse, or sexual abuse.  Others have difficulty because they do not  have any support systems in their lives."  Many federally-sentenced women at  P4W or BCCW are not from Ontario or BC,  and do not have the support of family, friends  orcommunity nearby. When they are granted  parole, most women in conflict with the law  cannot return to their home communities to  serve their parole periods, which makes the  transition process harder.  "As a federally-sentenced inmate,  Balaclava Residence was the only option for  me, as I was not allowed to go back to my  run a deficit of about $135,000, says EFry's  Gabriel. The half-way house has a yearly  budget of $295,000.  The federal government is not committed to keeping Balaclava Residence open,  announcing further cuts for the next fiscal  home province of Alberta because there is  no half-way house there," says Paula, a  resident of the half-way house.  Jackson of Joint Effort is also concerned  that if Balaclava Residence closes, federally-sentenced women will have an even  more difficult time getting parole. "To get  on parole, you need a plan and support  from community, family or friends. For  women coming out of prison, they often  don't have much support and it's hard to  build up the support," says Jackson.  "Women coming out of prison have no  other options, and without Balaclava Residence, there will be less women allowed on  parole."  "To get parole, women have to wait for  a bed to become available," says Irma  Dennis, a federal inmate at BCCW and  member of the Native Sisterhood at the  prison. She adds that the majority of Native  women at BCCW are from outside BC, and  that the needs of First Nations women are  not being met under the current prison and  parole structure. There are very few programs for Native women in conflict with  the law both in and out of prison. Dennis  says that Native women make up 15 of the  50 federally-sentenced women at BCCW.  Currently, the Indian Homemakers  Association in Vancouver is putting together  a proposal to lobby the provincial and federal governments for funding to open up a  half-way house for Aboriginal women in  the Fraser Valley Lower Mainland area.  However, in a climate of "fiscal re-,  straint" and given the lack of commitment  from both levels of government, especially  the federal government, to ensure that  Balaclava Residence remains open, the Indian Homemakers may have trouble obtaining any new funds.  While Balaclava Residence has received  a commitment of funding from the provincial government of an extra one-and-a-half  beds and a one-time grant of $50,0000 from  BC's ministry of health, the additional  money is not enough to keep the half-way  house out of serious debt this fiscal year.  And if no new money is forthcoming in  the next year, Balaclava Residence could  year. Cuts to Balaclava's federal funding  started in 1991 when the government signed  the Exchange of Services Agreement with  the BC Social Credit government, which  made providing services to federally-sentenced women incarcerated at BCCW became the responsibility of the BC Corrections Services.  In the few years following the agreement, Balaclava House saw its funding decline by 30 per cent in 1992 and a further 14  per cent in 1993. In 1992, the federal government guaranteed funding for seven beds at  Balaclava Residence. This coming fiscal year,  the federal government will fund only three  beds.  Gabriel criticizes the federal government's abdication of responsibility for providing services and support to women in  conflict with the law. "Funding a half-way  house for women is the responsibility of  both the federal and provincia 1 governments,  but especially of the federal government  because the punitive aspect at the federal  level is more extreme than at the provincial  level."  Balaclava House is not the only organization providing services to women in conflict with the law in BC hit by the slashing of  funding for correctional services. The Phoenix Transition Society in Prince George also  lost funding for providing services to federally-sentenced women, although that money  was not guaranteed to begin with.  Phoenix, primarily an emergency shelter for women in crisis, had a contract with  the federal government, and a similar contract one with the BC government. But this  year, the federal government decided not to  renew its contract with the Phoenix Society.  The provincial contract has been renewed.  Even when Phoenix had a contract with  the federal government, the situation was  not very useful to women in conflict with the  law. Phoenix was paid per diem rates for each  federally-sentenced woman staying at the  transition house. No beds at Phoenix were  reserved for them, and women could only  stay if there were beds available, and if the  Society had not reached the funding ceiling  in its contract with the government.  The ceiling meant that women in conflict with the law coming to the transition  could only stay a short period of time, and  would have to make other arrangements or  return to incarceration. The Society usually  reaches the ceiling on its provincial contract.  Both levels of government say Balaclava  Residence is underused and should not been  funded by the federal government for the  empty beds it keeps. Wa yne Oster of Corrections Canada says Balaclava Residence  should seek out other sources of funding.  "We can't continue to pay for services we  don't receive."  But Mary Parenteau, aka Black Plume,  disagrees that Balaclava Residence is  underused. "Women who are going on parole have to have beds held for them," says  "We're talking about  real, living women, and  you can't say that if  there's only seven  women one night, then  close [the Mouse] down  if there could be 10  women.  Parenteau, a federally-sentenced prisoner at  BCCW who has twice stayed at Balaclava  Residence. "Some women are being turned  down for parole because there are no beds  available. And even when there is a house,  we have to wait for someone to finish day  parole or full parole to return to BCCW or be  released."  Maureen Gabriel says it's ridiculous that  the government is judging Balaclava House's  worth based solely on the occupancy rate.  "We're not talking about beds or statistics,  we are talking about women. For some  women, Balaclava Residence gives them the  only opportunity to re-integrate into the community," says Gabriel. "We're talking about  real, living women, and you can't say that if  there's only seven women one night, then  close [the House] down if there could be 10  women.  "This shows an overall attitude problem of Corrections Canada to women in  conflict with law," says Joint Efforts'  Mcllveen. "They don't see it as important to  provide women with services or give women  a chance in and out of prison."  The federal and provincial governments  say a half-way house for women is not the  only model for providing support for women  in conflict with the law. The governments  are looking to other models to "create  choices" for women granted parole, such as  independent living or private home care.  But Maureen Gabriel says there is one  huge glitch in the governments' plans.  "They're shutting out one choice that may be  the only one that works for some women."  The Board of Balaclava Residence will  meet on January 27, to make a final decision  on whether or not to close the half-way  house.  FEBRUARY 1994 News  Royal Commission report on NRTs:  Less...in 1,200 pages  by Shannon e. Ash  Women are analyzing the 1,200 page  report of the Royal Commission on New  Reproductive Technologies, and lobbying  for a true public consultation process before  any regulations suggested by the Commission are implemented.  The report was released on to the Liberal government on November 15, two years  after its original deadline. After repeated  delays and demands by women's groups  that the report be released to the public, it  was released on November 30, but only to a  select group of invited mainstream media  representatives.  When mainstream media contacted  women's groups for reactions to the report,  groups had yet to see the report, let alone  look at or analyse its contents.  Joan Meister of the DisAbled Women's  Network (DAWN) was one of those contacted by the media—she was unable to  comment because shedidn't have the report.  Meister says she still hasn't seen the report,  as she is unable to afford the cost. Although  $28 million of public funds were spent by the  Commission to produce the report, anyone  wanting a copy of the two-volume, 1,200  page report will have to pay $52.  Gwynne Basen, co-chair of N AC's New  Reproductive Technologies Committee, says  the media "played a fundamentally irresponsible role" in covering the report's release [see feature, page 9[.  Basen says that media reports and executive summaries released by the Commission give the im pression tha t the report comes  out strongly against commercialization of  NRTs. But, she says, that's not as apparent if  you examine the report more closely. For  example, the report asks for a ban on the  buying and selling of sperm, eggs and embryos but does not call for restrictions on the  trade in human cell lines, derived from eggs  and sperm, which are used in genetic research and the biotechnology industry.  Basen is also co-editor of a book on  NRTs and the Royal Commission, Misconceptions: The New Reproductive and Genetic  Technologies and the Social Conception of Choice,  which has recently been released.  Both NAC and the Vancouver Women's New Reproductive Technologies Coalition (VNRTC) have called for intervenor  =m  A contraceptive that guarantees infertility for five years and has been proved tol 11  I carry numerous side effects has been approved for use in Canada. The Norplant 111  contraceptive, consists of five "rods" that are implanted into a woman's arm, gradually  releases a hormone that,  Radhika Bhagat of the South Asian Women's Action Network (SAWAN) says this  technology was primarily developed as a means of contraception for women considered "non-compliant" by health professionals. In Canada, these are typically younger  women, First Nations women, immigrant women of colour, and those deemed to have  "high risk" sexual activity—those who are not following recommendations of medical  professionals.  Bhagat says the side effects of hormone-based treatments could range from weight  gain and mood swings, to temporary loss of feeling in an arm. Also, unlike the birth  control pill, a woman cannot stop Norplant herself; once it's in her body, only a  professional could surgically take it out.  Norplant is already in use in the US, where there have been cases of courts ordering  use of the technology. It is also in widespread use in Third World countries, says Bhagat,  "where low-income women who have little say are particularly targeted.  "Norplant is usually implanted at no cost to the woman, but is she wants it  removed, she would have to pay for the surgical procedure herself.  Bhagat says countries like India and Bangladesh and so on are "viewed by the West  as having an overpopulation problem, and use of contraceptive technologies tends to  be tied to promises of foreign "aid" and investment in these countries."  I She has found there to be little criticism of Norplant in the mass media, and is  I disappointed that groups in Canada like Planned Parenthood have approved its  | | acceptance. '  possibility of integration with the US NRT  industry, which has few regulations.  Basen says the report is superficial in  addressing corporate interests, for example,  the role of the pharmaceutical industry in  the proliferation of reproductive technologies. The Commission had earlier been criticized for hiring the public relations firm  Burson-Marstellar, which includes among  its corporateclients pharmaceutical firms, to  do a report on the commercialization of  NRTs. She says that and the fact that the  Commission paid $10,000 for Chair Patricia  Baird to be instructed in delivering speeches  shows there has been more emphasis on  public relations than public consultation at  the Commission.  NAC President Sunera Thobani sent a  letter to Prime Minister Chretien when the  report was released, calling on the federal  government to implement a "broad-based  public participation process" before enacting any public policies, as well as repeating  the call for an inquiry into the Royal Commission. She wrote that the participation  process should include regional conferences  of key stakeholders, that is, those most affected by NRTs, particularly those outside  funding for women's groups so they can  respond properly to the report. Meanwhile,  NAC has formed NRT subcommittes to look  at various chapters of the report. Their findings will beavailableby mid-February. Basen  notes that one of the tasks of reviewing the  report is to check its research methods and  sources, to which the report gives only cursory references.  Basen has a number of other criticisms  of the report. She believes the proposed  regulatory body, the National Reproductive  Technologies Commission, would institutionalize NRT experimentationand research,  and argues it is not democratic because, like  the Canadian Radio and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) to which it has  been compared, one needs money and lawyers to have an impact. The criteria that the  board constitute 50 percent women and that  members be "sensitive" to the issues are  "meaningless," she says. It is not clear where  its power would come from and to whom it  would be responsible.  As well, there is no mention of the North  American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)  in the report, says Basen, despite its potential  impact on the health care system and the  the medical community, culminating in a  major federal/provincial conference, with  provincial ministers-the majority of NRT  issues come under provincial jurisdiction.  So far there has been no response from  the Prime Minister's Office; Thobani says,  "we need to know where the government  stands on the report's recommendations."  She notes fundamental issues have yet to be  addressed such as the "economic interests  driving this technology" and the development of genetic technology and its potential  for eugenics (selection for human genetic  traits deemed desirable, and against those  deemed undesirable).  Joan Meister of DAWN says the issue of  eugenics is a major concern for women with  disabilities. She says the idea of "getting rid"  of disabilities through use of genetic technology, such as prenatal diagnosis and gene  therapy, is disturbing. Although this is a  fallacy, since, even if the technology works,  there will always be disabilities from other  causes, Meister asks, "Whatdoes it say about  a society that won't accept the disabled, and  won't tolerate difference?"  Meister says the Commission did little  to provide access for people with disabilities  during its public consultation process, and  both the process and report have been exclusive. She says she ha s heard from a colleague  who read the report that disabilities are  mentioned, but is missing the perspective a  group like DAWN could have provided. For  example, the report doesn't talk about  whether technology is available or accessible to disabled women.  Meanwhile, other planned actions by  NAC include contacting federal and provincial ministries—this is already in process,—  consulting' concerned member groups, doing public education and putting forward  resolutions at its annual general meeting in  June.  As well, a conference co-sponsored by  DAWN and NAC on NRTs, scheduled for  the fall or early 1995, has received some  funding from the Secretary of State. Conference organizers are determined to ensure  that women get a chance to discuss the report's findings and other concerns about the  proliferation of these technologies.  Shannon e. Ash is a regular writer for  Kinesis.  Welfare cuts target moms  by Lissa Geller  Single moms on welfare faced another  attack by BC's NDP government in January.  In a move to "get tough on welfare fraud,"  the government introduced new measures  that will force about 8,000 mothers in BC to  go out and look for work on the pretext that  it will save taxpayers $20 million.  The policy makes it mandatory for single parents to seek work once their children  are 12 years old. This is a change from the  policy of allowing single parents to collect  welfare until their children are 19.  "It will create hardship. We are talking  about people who don't have resources to  provide for their teenagers. We are talking  about families who need parents at home  because those families have extra challenges  because they live in poverty," says Pat  Chauncey of End Legislated Poverty (ELP).  The policies were announced by Minister of Social Services Joy McPhail on January  20 and follow on the assumption that fraud  is rampant among BC welfare recipients.  The measures include forcing "employable"  people on welfare to fill out job search report  cards (similar to UIC cards), and people who  repeatedly report lost or stolen cheques will  no longer receive cash replacements. Their  rent will be directly paid by the government  and food vouchers will be made out to the  grocer of their choice.  BC will also swap welfare client lists  with Alberta to check for claims in both  provinces. And on February 23,50,000 wel  fare recipients will have to line up to pick up  their entitlement cheques in person in a pilot  project to catch welfare defrauders.  "The government is trying to score political points by attacking the poor," says  Chauncey. "They are focusing on the victim  rather than focusing on the problem, which  is unemployment and poverty."  Numerous studies have indicated that  only one to four percent of people on social  assistance "cheat" on welfare, and that more  Canadians cheat on their income taxes, and  lie about cross border shopping than "defraud" provincial welfare systems.  Dianne Martin, a law professor at York  University who has studied sentencing, has  found that people convicted of welfarefraud  are much more likely to receive prison sen  tences than those convicted of cheating on  UI or Worker's Compensation.  The Ontario Court of Appeal recently  ruled that welfare fraud must result in a  prison sentence unless there are mitigating  circumstances. Judges and lawyers are reluctant to consider alternatives such as probation or community service for people convicted of welfare fraud.  "There is a very punitive sense about  welfare fraud and a sense that it must be  punished harshly," says Martin.  Meanwhile, Chauncey says the measures will undoubtably have the most serious  effects on single parent women. Currently,  53 percent of single parents live in poverty  and the vast majority of these parents are  women.  FEBRUARY 1994 News   Chiapas, Mexico:  New Year's revolution  by Fatima Jaffer  The struggle against the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) is not  over. In fact, it's taken on an even greater  urgency following the outbreak of a revolution by Indigenous and poor peoples in  Mexico.  The revolution in Chiapas, a poor, rural  state along Mexico's southern border with  Guatemala, broke out on the day the free  trade agreement between Mexico, Canada  and the US came into effect.  The timing was not a coincidence.  Guerillas from the Zapatista National  Liberation Army (EZLN) who are leading the  insurrection, state that NAFTA is "the death  certificate for the Indigenous people of  Mexico," and that the rebellion is a response  to Mexican president Carlos Salinas de  Gortari' "death sentence against our people."  Chiapas already has the worst human  rights record in Mexico and the highest infant  mortality rate. Health clinics are rare and  malnutrition is common. Over half the households do not have running water. NAFTA  will not relieve these problems, and will certainly add to them.  NAFTA is only the latest phase in the  exploitation of Indigenous peoples of  Chiapas. Like the struggle in the Mohawk  territory of Kahnesatake at Oka, the uprising  in Chiapas is a response to 500 years of  genocidal economic policies.  The uprising is not the first in the history  of the Mayans of Chiapas. The most recent  was in the early 70s when Indigenous peoples carried out widescale occupations of  lands. The response from the government  was a scorched earth campaign (burning the  land as they advanced against the peasants),  destroying communities, and massacring  Mayans and peasants.  The pre-effects of NAFTA have already  beenfeltby the peopleof Chiapas. Since 1988,  the.Mexicangovernment has introduced poli  cies aimed at breaking down trade barriers  and making the Mexican economy part of a  global one.  NAFTA removes tariffs which protected Mexican farmers from the free importation of subsidized US corn. Consequently, as the World Bank has estimated,  about 300,000 Mexican farmers will have to  abandon their land and join landless slum  dwellers around the big cities.  NAFTA is also a means by which the  lands of indigenous lands can be expropriated legally by the Mexican state. Until last  year, some protection for indigenous communities to preserve their traditional communal land holdings was provided for in  the Mexican constitution. However, this  was a major obstacle to the economic development envisaged by NAFTA and the provision had to be abolished by President  Salinas before the NAFTA could be signed.  Meanwhile, in Canada, First Nations  peoples, unions, churches, and women's  groups are calling on the Canadian government to put a halt to the free trade agreement until Mexico stops its human rights  abuses against the Indigenous and poor  people of Mexico.  The Liberal government has refused,  but says it will investigate whether NAFTA  helps or hinders the enforcement of human  rights in Mexico. However, federal Trade  Minister Roy McLaren says "trade and human rights have nothing to do with each  other," and has likened the Chiapas revolution to "periods of economic adjustment"  that are inevitable during periods of economic development.  A number of protests have been held  outside the Mexican Embassy in Ottawa  and Mexican consulates in other citiesacross  Canada, including in Vancouver [see photo].  University of Victoria FirstNations support  groups are organizing weekly demonstrations outside the BC parliament biuldings  every Friday afternoon.  The frontlines in Chiapas  The rebellion in Chiapas began on January 1st when an estimated 2,000 fighters,  mostly Tzotzil and Tzeltal Indians of the  Mayan peoples, captured five towns in  Chiapas. By the fifth day of the uprising,  12,000 troops of the Mexican'army had been  deployed into the areas of fighting. Within  the first week, the number of dead was estimated at over 500.  Direct communication with activists in  Chiapas has been difficult since the army set  up blockades preventing anyone from entering areas under army occupation. [Kinesis  was unable to get through on the phone to  women's groups and activists in Chiapas].  However, there have already been several Canadian fact-finding missions to  Chiapas by First Nations representatives,  church and human rights activists. Delegates  have managed to visit towns in areas under  the army's defacto siege and report serious  human rights violations. Delegates also report the blockades are being used to protect  the army from international scrutiny as they  indiscriminately torture, abuse and execute  Indigenous peoples and peasants.  Chiapas is also home to tens of thousands of Guatemalan refugees, who fled the  Guatemalan army campaigns of the 1980s  against mostly Mayan communities to quell  a growing guerilla movement. The refugees  are mainly Mayan, and live in about thirteen  towns or refugee camps. Two-thirds of all  refugees are women and children.  Nilo Cayuqueyo of the South and  Mesoamerican Indian Information Centre  in the US reports from his visit to Chiapas  that refugees have fled the camps to escape  the gunfire from Mexican armed forces,  and are either joining the EZLN or are being  intimidated into betrayingEZLN members.  "Thearmy hasestablisheda 'free' telephone  line where people can call to identify  Zapatistas from their  communities...Everyone in the camps is  frightened."  Attempts at peace negotiations have  been unsuccessful so far. As a result of  international pressure, a general ceasefire is  now in effect. President Salinas promised  amnesty to the Zapatistas if they laid down  their arms. However, international observers and journalists says that most revolutionaries do not carry arms, and it is the  Mexican army that is threatening civilian  populations. The general amnesty would  also apply to the Mexican army. The deadline for the amnesty is now over.  indigenous peoples and peasants are  actively responding to the conflict and are  organizing themselves. A newly formed  coalition of about 500 people representing  138 grassroots organizations from the state  of Chiapas recently met to form the Coordinating Body of Indigenous People for the  State of Chiapas. They will be meeting with  first Nations peoples from North, Central  and South America who will be travelling  Kelly White is of the Coast Salish Nation and an advocate for human  rights  The Zapatistas' (EZLN) Women's Revolutionary Law  "...taking into account the situation of the woman worker in Mexico, the (Zapatista)  revolution incorporates their just demands of equality and justice in the following  Women's Revolutionary Law:  1. Women, regardless of their race, creed, colour or political affiliation, have a right  to participate in the revolutionary struggle in any way that their desire and capacity  determine.  2. Women have the right to work and recieve a just salary.  3. Women have the right to decide the number of children they have and care for.  4. Women have the right to participate in the matters of the community and to take  charge if they are freely and democratically elected.  5. Women and their children have the right to primary attention in their health and  nutrition.  6. Women have the right to education.  7. Women have the right to choose their partner and are not obliged to enter into  marriage.  8. Women have thr ight to be free of violence from both relatives and strangers, rape  and attempted rape will be severely punished.  9. Women will be able to occupy positions of leadership in the organization and hold  military ranks in the revolutionary armed forces.  10. Women will have all the rights and obligations which the revolutionary laws and  regulations give.  Translated by Matt Miscreant of the Love and Rage revolutionary anarchist federation in  New York, US.   to San Cristobel de las Casas to support the  struggle in Chiapas.  Several delegations of international observers recently returned from monitoring  war zones in Chiapas have sent in their  reports and recommendations to the US and  Canadian governments. All report human  rights abuses, and call for a peace process  that includes representatives of Indigenous  peoples. So far, the Mexican government has  not complied.  What you can do  Write or call Prime Minister Jean  Chretien and demand that the Canadian  government call an immediate withdrawal  from the NAFTA until the Mexican government stop their human rights violations.  Write or call President Carlos Salina de  Gortari to express your concern about the  situation in Chiapas. Demand that the military allow prisoners to be visited and that the  conflict areas be opened to visits by human  rights workers, and that the army stop using  tactics aimed at terrorizing and dividing  Indiggenous communities. Ask that the  Mexican government grat the Chiapan Indigenous, organization's justdemands. Write:  Carlos Salinas de Gortari, Presidencia de la  Republica, Palacio Nacional Colonia Centro,  06067 Mexico, DF, Mexico; or call 011-525-  515-0528 or fax 011-525-271-1764.  To send humanitarian aid, contact  Coordinacion de los Organismos No-  Gubernamentales de San Christobal de Las  Casas por las Paz at (phone/fax) 011-525-  967-80697.  To support the struggle of Indigenous  People in Chiapas, contact Coordinadora  Indigena del Estado de Chiapas c/o  COLPUMALI at (phone) 011-52-967-85460  or (fax) 011-52-967-80055.  For more information, contact: Mujeres  a Mujeres at (phone) 011-525-207-5595.  FEBRUARY 1994 What's News  by Lissa Geller  Employment  equity backlash  The backlash surrounding employment  equity measures is escalating in Ontario,  where the government has introduced legislation in recent months.  The backlash centres around Bill 79, the  employment and pay equity legislation the  government introduced last year. It attempts  to address systemic racism, sexism and  ableism faced by people of colour, First Nations people, people with disabilities and  women in the workplace.  Big business has organized a consortium to fight the legislation and has fuelled  a growing backlash against it. The Canadian  Federation of Independent Business (CFIB)  is particularly adamant that Bill 79 be axed.  Spokesperson Judith Andrew says the CFIB  does not support pay equity or employment  equity legislation of any kind.  Meanwhile, the bill has been criticized  as being too vague by both the Ontario Federation of Labour and the Women's Coalition for Employment Equity (WCEE). The  draft legislation contains no quotas or deadlines and only requires that employers make  "reasonable progress" towards employment  equity.  WCEE spokesperson Awy Go points  out that "voluntary equity hasn't worked for  designated groups" in the past and won't  work this time. Also the legislation only  covers companies with over 50 employees  and the compliancy rules are even less stringent for companies employing fewer than  100 people.  Belinda Morin, spokesperson for Disabled People for Employment Equity, points  out that the bill fails to provide for specialized equipment for people with disabilities.  "If typing 120 words a minute is considered  an essential duty for a job, the disabled  employee should be able to reach that rate by  having special equipment" available to them.  The wage gap between men and women,  which had been narrowing in recent years,  has probably widened this past year, says  NAC spokesperson Lorraine Michael. She  says this is due largely to the fact that more  and more women are in low-paying, part-  time employment with little or no benefits.  The wage gap has narrowed for women who  work full time but these women make up a  decreasing proportion of employed women  in Canada.  The extent to which white males and  their big business allies have captured the  agenda of employment equity and succeeded  in garnering mainstream media attention  for what they call "reverse discrimination"  ironically reflects the overwhelming need  for the legislation itself.  Chilly  Climate Update  .. The University of Victoria (UVic) Students' Society and the Graduate Students'  Women's Caucus has called for the resignation of UVic President David Strong, citing  his "apparent disregard for the existing University equity policies" and his lack of support for the Chilly Climate Committee.  Despite his lack of knowledge or training in equity issues, Strong recently ruled  that a woman student had not been harassed  even though the Equity Office report showed  she had been harassed on at least one occasion. Strong's ruling against the findings of  the Equity Office flies in the face of acceptable actions.  Matt Pollard, Director of Services for  the UVic Students' Society, points out that  "Students submit themselves to the equity  process in good faith that their concerns will  be dealt with by trained professionals, not a  unilateral decision of the President."  As well, Strong has consistently refused  to support the activities of the Chilly Climate  Committee and the report it issued last March.  The Chilly Climate Committee was struck  by the Department of Political Science at  UVic to investigate allegations that women  students were encountering a hostile climate  within the department. Following its preliminary report in March 1993, which documented instances of harassmentand the failure of the department to integrate feminist  critiques into the curriculum, Chilly Climate  Committee members have been threatened  with libel, insulted and harassed by the all-  male tenured faculty in the department.  Strong refused to support either the  university-mandated report or the women  on the committee, and has appointed an  "independent committee" to investigate the  allegations in the report.  Citing Strong's claim that he is neutral,  Monica Schraefel, chair of the Women's  Caucus of the Graduate Students' Association, pointsoutthathisneutrality"hasshown  itself to be nothing more than a ploy to  protect the university's image at the cost of  the student's welfare and education."  Meanwhile, Sandra Harper, spokesperson for the UVic Board of Governors, has  brushed off the demand for the President's  resignation, saying Strong remains committed to dealing with equity issues.  False Memory  Syndrome  Incest survivors and their supporters  are feeling victorious after stopping an address by Harold Lief, a board member of the  False Memory Syndrome Foundation (FMSF)  at a two-day symposium on "False Memory  Syndrome."  The FMSF claims that feminists and  therapists have created a "sex abuse industry" bent on destroying the "sanctity of the  family" by making falseaccusations of sexual  abuse against fathers and other male relatives. The Foundation's membership is  largely made up of men who have been  accused of sexual abuse and incest and their  wives.  Survivors of child sexual abuse, academics, and feminist and mental health activists effectively shut down the keynote  address by Harold Lief that was to take place  at McGill University on November 11.  Protesters shouted at Lief and refused  to let him speak. Organizers were forced to  end the address. Lief had been allowed to  address the symposium for two previous  days of "private" sessions where he discredited incest survivors and their therapists.  "False Memory Syndrome" itself is not  recognized by the American Psychiatric  Association or any other scientific or legal  bodies.  Sue Baker, a therapist and co-chair of  the Canadian Society for the Study of Multiple Personality and Disassociation, points  out that Lief and the FMSF represent a backlash not only against incest survivors, but  against the gains of the women's movement  over the last 30 years.  She notes that "the backlash will make a  lot of people more despairing than they  already are. Shifting attention towards allegedly falsely accused parents will have a  detrimental effect on incest survivors. Once  again, their memories of heinous violations  will be scrutinized, challenged, and often  dismissed."  Trivia 20  Retrospective  Ruthann Robson  Linda Nelson  Daphne Marlatt  Harriet Ellenberger  Rena Rosenwasser  Lise Weil  Michele Causse  Anne Dellenbaugh  Betsy Warland  Susanne Harwood  Leah Halper  Barbara Mor  I. Rose  by Amy Fong  Tts that time of year again...  • Excellent rates on fixed and variable terms  • Instant tax receipts  • RRSP loans available  • No user fees  Deadline: Tuesday, March 1,1994  Come in now, don't wait for the deadline!  CCEC is now open 6 DAYS A WEEK  Your KRSP investment at CCEC will help promote     Sf^  economic development in your community. /^w§\  CCEC Credit Union  Box 9606  No. Amherst, MA  01059-9606  Midwifery  in Ontario  Ontario has become the first province in  Canada to introduce legislation that will  broaden women's birth choices by legalizing midwifery, allowing women to give birth  at home and providing birthing centres for  the care of women and their newborns.  Kathi Duncan, treasurer of the Association of Ontario Midwives, says the organization is excited about the changes. "We will  finally be recognized as health-care givers  and be able to work at a much more intimate  level with other health-care providers."  Under the new legislation, midwives  will be licensed to practise with the Ontario  College of Midwives. Three universities  (Ryerson, McMaster and Laurentian) are  currently setting up training programs. A  one-year certificate program at the Michener  Institute for Applied Sciences in Toronto  will be graduating 60 students this year who  will also be qualified to practise midwifery.  Ironically, the legalizationof midwifery  has led to fewer midwives being available in  some areas. In eastern Ontario, only two full  time midwives areavailable, compared to 14  a year ago. This is because, under the new  legislation, midwives must be trained and  licensed in Ontario, and many who were  educated elsewhere will not have their credentials recognized and will have to repeat  the training process. To avoid this problem,  the government and the College are currently exploring ways of crediting midwives  who trained in other areas.  In addition to providing pregnant  women with more birth choices, the introduction of midwifery into Ontario's health  care system will provide for less intrusive  procedures during birth. Studies have shown  that midwife-assisted births have lower rates  of Cesarean sections, episiotomies and epidurals than those performed under a doctor's care. Currently, Quebec, Alberta and  British Columbia are also exploring ways of  legalizing midwifery and integrating it into  the health care system.  rHealthsha»-,  Canada's Feminist Health MacazinE "^  Women's health issues from a  feminist perspective. What  every woman wants to know.  $15 per year (4 issues)  Cheque or Money Order to:  Healthsharing  14 Skey Lane,  Toronto, ON, M6J 3S4  i  Eastsi'cIe DATAGnAphics  1460 CommercIaI DmvE  teI: 255-9559 fox: 255^5075  ■-I  15% OFF  office or art supplies  with this coupon  expiry date: February 28.1994  CaII or Fax tan Free NEXi>dAy dElivERy!  m »<^gg»»" Union Shop  FEBRUARY 1994 Movement Matters  stinvs information  Movement Matters is designed to be a  network of news, updates and information of special interest to the women's movement.  Submissions to Movement Matters  should be no more than 500 words,  typed, double spaced and may be  edited for length. Deadline is the 18th  of the month preceding publication.  by Anita Fast  Women Take  Back the World  "Women Take Back the World: The Global Fightback" is the theme of the National  Action Committee on the Status of Women's  Conference and Annual General Meeting in  Ottawa, Ontario June 10-13.  The 1994 NAC conference aims to provide women representatives from NAC members groups with an opportunity to fit their  work into a global perspective, to understand  their struggles in a broader context, and to  make links with women from other countries.  Workshops and sessions will focus on  the global issues of democratization, economic restructuring, violence, health, the  environment, religious fundamentalism,  Aboriginal women, and hatred of feminists  and lesbians.  In addition, there will be a session to  discuss preparations for the Fourth World  Conference on women which wi 11 be held in  Beijing, China in September, 1995. It will  also discuss United Nations mechanisms  and strategies for using them to improve  women's conditions.  20 years of Women's  Studies at Langara  The Women's Studies Program at  Langara Community College in Vancouver  is now 20 years old. The first college of its  kind in the province, it has provided a home  to several generations of feminists and faculty.  To celebrate their history and survival,  the faculty and staff are throwing a party at  Langara on February 11 for all Women's  Studies students, past and present, friends,  program supporters, women from other  educational establishments, and from the  wider women's communities. The evening  will consist of music, readings by faculty  and staff, snacks and refreshments, and on-  site child-minding.  There will also be a wall display of  artwork and memorabilia from the first two  decades of the program, and T-shirts and  buttons commemorating the program will  be on sale.  For more info, see ad this issue or call  Patty Moore at 324-5370.  Women's Monument  seeks design  The (Vancouver) Women's Monument  Project is looking for a conceptually new,  site-specific design for the building of a  Women's Studies by Distance Education  Athabasca University now offers a Bachelor of Arts major in  Women's Studies that you can take entirely by distance education.  Learn at home, at your own pace, using our independent study  packages. Telephone tutor support gives you personal feedback  and guidance.  This interdisciplinary program is one of the only distance education  Women's Studies degree programs in Canada. Course topics include  women and work, women's health issues, counselling women, and  women, violence and social change.  Courses are available to any resident of Canada who is 18 years of  older, regardless of previous academic experience.  Information Request  Please send me a Women's Studies information brochure and an  Athabasca University Calendar.  Name   Address   City/Province   Postal Code ___________________  Telephone   _Date_  _Fax   Mail to:  Office of the Registrar, Athabasca University,  Box 10,000, Athabasca, AB   TOG 2R0  Telephone (403) 675-6168        Fax (403) 675-6174  Athabasca University _1  permanent national monument in Vancouver's Thornton Park (in front of the CN  station). The monument will be dedicated to  all women who have been murdered by men  and, in particular, the 14 women killed at the  Ecole Polytechnique in Montreal on December 6,1989.  The nation-wide design competition is  open to a.l women, who may be individual  women or a team, including, for example,  artists, architects and engineers. The first  stage of the competition will take "an anonymous format," with the names of applicants  withheld from the jury. Four or five finalists  will be chosen by early summer, and each  will be paid a $2,500 fee to complete a detailed proposal.  The decision on the final design will be  made by the fall and the successful artist will  receive the commission to complete the  Monument.  For your application package, write to:  The Women's Monument Project, Capilano  College, 2055 Purcell Way, North Vancouver, BC, V7G 3H5 or call (604) 986-1911,  local 2078.  Stop the  Whitewash!  WEED (Womenand Environments Education and Development) is calling for a  boycott of certain products made by the  mega-corporation, Proctor and Gamble.  Although all major sanitary product  companies bleach their products with chlorine, Proctor and Gamble recently refused to  provide information about their products to  women's groups, and have cut off dialogue  with women's groups about chlorine bleaching.  The chlorine, used to bleach tampons  and menstrual pads white, could result in  health effects among women who use the  products. The bleach also causes pollution  of our waterways with deadly dioxins and  other persistent toxic chemicals, which can  cause birth defects, reproductive dysfunction, and other health problems in human  and wildlife population.  Proctor and Gamble products being  boycotted include Always menstrual pads,  Attends incontinence products, and Luvs and  Pampers diapers.  For more information on the boycott or  alternatives, call WEED at (416) 516-2600, or  write them at: 736 Bathurst St., Toronto,  Ontario, M5S 2R4.  On taxing child  support payments  A new organization has been formed  and is gearing up to lobby the federal government to amend the Income Tax Act to  eliminate the inequities created by the taxation of child support payments. Divorce  2000—Working Toward the Future for Our  Children will lobby both federal and provincial governments on a number of other issues affecting single parents.  Currently, the Income Tax Act allows  non-custodial parents (mostly men) to claim  child support payments for tax deduction.  The custodial parents (mostly women) receiving the child support payments must  declare it as part of their income and pay  taxes accordingly. On average, court-  awarded child support payments do not  even cover half the cost of raising a child.  The Federal Government further reduces  this amount by taking a third or more in  taxes. r  Divorce 2000 will also lobby the provincial governments to improve the enforcement of maintenance enforcement offices'  court orders, and to have uniformity between provinces when enforcing court orders.  At present, each province has a maintenance enforcement office with its own set of  policies and procedures. This allows noncustodial parents to travel from province to  province, dodging their responsibilities towards their children. It can take months or  even years to achieve enforcement.  If these issues affect you or anyone you  know and you would like more information, please contact: Divorce 2000—Working Towards the Future for our Children, c/  o Working For Women, 203-315 22nd Street  East, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7K 0G6 or  call (306) 664-4979 or (306) 244-3625.  Guide for women  with disabilities  A US-based non-profit organization  which promotes and facilitates international  educational exchanges for people with disabilities, is seeking information concerning  participation of women with disabilities in  international development activities.  Mobility International USA (MIUSA) is  gathering information for an upcoming booklet, Including Women with Disabilities in Development Projects, funded in part by the  Global Fund for women. The booklet promotes the integration of women with disabilities in all countries into international  community development efforts. It will offer resources and practical, low-cost strategies for making projects accessible, including non-English materials, bibliographies,  and names of individuals and organizations  which can provide information and expertise. It will examine model programs which  have successfully involved women with disabilities in development activities, describing what worked, what did not, and what  work still remains.  Including Women will be made available  in the fall of 1994, with translations in French  and Spanish. It will also be available on  The deadline for submissions to the  booklet is April. If you have access to such  information or would like to be notified  when the booklet is available, write: DWD  Project, c/o Mobility International USA, PO  Box 10767, Eugene, OR. 97440 USA.  NAC's1993  publications  There have been a number of publications produced by the National Action Committee on the Status of Women (NAC) over  the past year that document the major struggles of the past year and provide important  resource information for individual women  and community groups.  NAC is offering them for sale at reduced prices and will allow multiple copies  of NAC publications to be made at a rate of  $1 per copy (indicate how many copies will  be made and NAC will send you an original).  Publications are:  1993 Review of the Situation of Canadian  Women—An analysis of recent statistics related to employment, wages, health, child  care and other indicators, for $4.95;  A'Technological Handmaid's Tale—First  developed as the NAC brief to the Royal  Commission on New reproductive Technologies, this updated version presents  N AC's arguments for a moratorium on hew  reproductive technologies, a ban on others,  and a higher priority on infertility prevention programs, for $10;  NAC Voters Guide—Prepared for the  1993 federal election, this easy-to-read guide  summarizes NAC policy on a variety of  issues such as child care, free trade, social  programs, and the Canadian Constitution,  for $4.95;  FEBRUARY 1994 Movement Matters  99 Federal Steps: Towards an End to Violence Against Women—This discussion paper  argues for concrete changes in government  policies that would make a difference in the  struggle to end violence against women, for  $4.95;  NAC Policy Index—An up-to-date list  of NAC policy resolutions from 1972 for  free.  Send requests, cheques or money orders to the National Action Committee on  the Status of Women (NAC) at 57 Mobile  Drive, Toronto, Ont, M4A1H5, or call (416)  759-5252 or fax (416) 759-5370.  Bittersweet Passage  gets award  The book, Bittersweet Passage: Redress  and the Japanese Canadian Experience, was  awarded the Laura Jamieson prize in November of 1993 by the Canadian Research  Institute for the Advancement of Women  (CRIAW). CRIAW awards the prize annually for the best feminist book written by a  Canadian that advances knowledge and/or  understanding of women's experience.  The book's author Maryka Omatsu, is  Canada's first East Asian woman judge. Bittersweet Passage combines personal reflections, historical narrative, stories and myths  of the Japanese Canadian community, and  looks behind-the-scenes at the broadly ba sed  coalition to win redress.  In addition to winning this prize, the  book also received the 1993 Prime Minister's  award for best translation of a Canadian  work. A Japanese edition of the book will be  published in the spring of 1994 by Gendai  Shokan of Tokyo.  Bittersweet Passage is published in English by Between the Lines Press in Toronto.  Employment support  Program at Kiwassa  Since the closureof the Vancouver Women's Counselling Service, Kiwassa Neighbourhood House has been promoting its  Employment Support Program as a service  for women in the East Vancouver area who  are looking for work.  The program's mandate is to help people find work and provides vocational counselling, job search training, and pre- and  post-trainingsupport. Services include workshops such as stress management, career  planning, and resume writing; individual  career counselling; and a skills exchange  board. Participants can attend as many of  the workshops as they wish. Workshops are  spread over a one-month period and are  repeated each month.  The focus of the program is client centred. Programs are described in detail and  client and counsellor determine together  which aspects of the program would be  most useful to the participant. Presently,  mostof those taking the program are women.  Kiwassa is also looking into the possibility of  settingupwomen-only counselling and training.  The Program is run on a team management model, with two full-time and one  part-time Employment Skills trainers and  one Intake worker/Office Manager. Presently all staff membersarewomen. Counsellors assist clients with identifying issues  which affect their work life, and provide  referrals to community groups when appropriate.  The program is funded by the federal  and provincial governments with a mandate  toassistingclientswholivewithin Kiwassa's  community or who use the services of East  Vancouver Canada Employment Centre.  Call theKiwassa Neighbourhood House  at 254-5401, or drop by to make an appointment at 2425 Oxford Street, Vancouver, BC.  10th anniversary  of PEI crisis line  Last October, volunteers and supporters gathered at the Farm Centre in  Charlottetown, PEI, to celebrate the 10th  anniversary of the PEI Rape and Sexual Assault Crisis Line.  Founded in 1983, the Crisis Line operates out of the Rape and Sexual Assault  Crisis Centre in Charlottetown, PEI and its  success has been largely due to woman-  power, according to one of the Crisis Line's  founders, Lyle Brehaut.  Crisis Line volunteers often take on four  or five 12-hour shifts a month as a supportive voice on the phone. In addition, volunteers are involved in board and special committees, and play a large role in the centre's  public education program. They speak to  high school and college students, make presentations to trainee nurses, network with  women's organizations and community  groups. Some women represent the centre  on government committees which focus on  violence prevention. Most help in the  fundraising required to keep the centre and  Line operating.  Vancouver Lesbian  Connection grows  English-speaking Canada's only lesbian  centre is growing. As the VancouverLesbian  Connection (VLC)nears its 10th anniversary  of operation, it has finally received its first  government grant and plans to use it to  further expand its horizons.  The VLC has been providing lesbian  programs and services to Vancouver lesbians largely through dedicated volunteer  womanpower up to now. In recent years, the  number of women volunteering at the centre  has quadrupled, allowing them to increase  services and programs.  The grant from the BC Ministry of Women's Equality will allow the VLC to stop  worrying about rent and focus on plans to  expand its program to include advocacy for  individual lesbians, and an education program that reaches out to schools and the  general public.  However, as funding from the province  is only secure for the life of this NDP government, the VLC is announcing a major  fundraising drive to ensure that improvement of quality and quantity of services be  maintained. They are also on the look out for  a larger space for group meetings and storage of records and resources.  They have formed a fundraising committee that will actively pursue grants and  devise fundraising strategies and events. In  addition, they have launched a major drive  for one-time donations and monthly pledges.  For more information and to donate,  contact the VLC at 254-8458 or 254-8195.  The Women's  Health Project  "First we mourn, then we fight for  change" is the credo of the newly formed  Women's Health Project.  The premise of the project is that local  survival is linked to the struggles of women  internationally. The project's mission statement reads: "We have come together in grief  and outrage at the mass rape and abuse of  women and girls in Bosnia-Herzegovina and  Somalia, and are acting in solidarity with  women who are victims of sexual violence in  situations of war around the world by raising funds to respond to women's health  needs. We seek to raise public awareness  about violence against women wherever it  occurs. Our vision is that all women shall be  free to live in peace and safety."  The project was developed by women  activists from: Interval House of Ottawa-  Carleton; Canadian Council of Muslim  Women; Voice of Women—Ottawa; Bosnia-  Herzegovina Information Centre; Canadian  Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear  War and Women's Urgent Action. As feminists and activists committed to peace, the  women are assisting and supporting survivors of violence to heal and re-build their  lives and communities.  Copies of the Women's Health Project  InfoKit are available for $5. All donations  over $20 will be issued a tax receipt. Contact:  Women's Health Project, PO Box 4308, Station E, Ottawa Ont, K1S5B3 or call (613)736-  9461.  Early Childhood  Educators conference  Early Childhood Educators of British  Columbia (ECEBC) is holding its annual  conference in Vancouver on April 22-23.  This year's conference is titled "Together:  Families of Early Childhood." The ECEBC  Exhibit '94 will be held at Hotel Vancouver.  The ECEBC conference, now in its 24th  year, attracts over 750 delegates and is the  largest early childhood conference in Western Canada. The conference provides an  educational forum where early childhood  education professionals can enhance their  knowledge and practical skills and build  networking opportunities.  This year, in recognition of the United  Nations Year of the Family, the conference  will explore the diversity of families and the  role early childhood education plays in the  lives of citizens.  The Exhibit is a key component of the  event with many delegates from across the  province planning their annual purchasing  trip to coincide with the conference.  Exhibit fees have been divided into two  categories: Commercial Exhibits and Not-  For-Prof it Exhibits. All space is allocated on  a first-come, first-served basis.  Employment Equity  Practictioner's  An Employment Equity Practitioners'  in BC conference designed to meet the needs  of both management and labour will be held  in Vancouver, February 23-24.  Day one features a keynote address and  plenary by Chief Leonard George, "Moving  Forward From a Base of Knowledge," which  outlines First Nations' histories and perspectives. Other plenaries are: "BC's Diverse  Labour Force—Where It Came From and  Where It's Going"; "Disability Awareness";  and "Building Commitment to Employment  Equity."  Workshops include: Managing HTV and  AIDS in the Workplace; Native Employment; Women In Non-Traditional Roles; On  the Tools, It's a Woman's Life; The Visible  Minority Experience in BC, and more.  The conference will be held at the  Ramada Renaissance Hotel, 1133 West Hastings, Vancouver, BC. For further information, call (604) 666-6569, or (604) 666-8340.  Lesbian  separatists gather  For the 7th consecutive year, Lesbian  Separatists in the US are planning an annual  gathering where female-born, non-sadomasochistic lesbians from around the world  can meet, share information and ideas, play,  theorize, eat meals, and build and renew  friendships and community together.  The gathering is scheduled to take place  October 7-10 in Santa Cruz, California. The  organizing of the conference is open to all  Separatists and involves the areas of: communication, kitchen, access, fun or site.  The Annual gathering is committed to  (economical) access for any Lesbian Separatist wishing to attend and to this end, offers  a sliding scale that begins at $0. A Travel  Fund has also been set up to help Separatists  get to the gathering. As well, the gathering  will be held at a wheelchair-accessible,  "chemical-de-toxed" camp.  Lesbian Separatists who would like to  be added to the mailing list to receive pre-  registration materials may send their names  and addresses to: The Annual Gathering, PO  Box 21475, Oakland, C A 94620. Please specify  if you would like information in print, Braille  or on cassette.  Movement Matters Sources: Action  NowllA L'Action! newsletter of the National Action Committee on the Status of  Women; Common Ground: the News and  Views of PEI Women; Spesh, the publication of the Concordia Women's Centre in  Montreal; Herizons: Women's News and  Feminist Views out of Winnipeg, Manitoba; and a whole bunch of press releases  from everywhere.  (B>  Bed & Breakfast  A  Memorable  Escape  Centre Yourself  in the comfort and tranquility  of Canada's beautiful, natural  Gulf Islands  5 acres of forested foot paths  trails with ponds  ocean and mountain views  Decadent Breakfasts  Hot Tub  A private retreat  (604) 537-9344  Mail: R.R.#2. S-23, B-0, Ganges, B.C. V0S1E0  FEBRUARY 1994 Feature  Women and NRTs:  Beyond the report  by Christine Massey  and Judy Morrison  On November 30, the federal government released the Final Report of the Royal  Commission on New Reproductive Technologies, Proceed With Care. The two volume,  1,200 page document covers just about every  aspect of new reproductive technologies  (NRTs), from infertility to the uses of fetal  tissue. Most Canadians, of course, will never  read Proceed With Care instead relying on  mass media interpretations. Most media coverage, however, has approached the Royal  Commission report from a narrow perspective, providing a distorted view of the issues  around NRTs and women's health.  The Commission's history was not a  smooth one, with repeated extensions of its  mandate, the firing of four commissioners,  accusations of mismanagement of research  funds and finally NAC's boycott of its consultation activities. [See Kinesis Nov/93 and  Feb/92] For the Commission, the Final Report  would be its last chance to redeem itself and  demonstrate that its $28.2 million allocation  has not been a waste of money. As a result,  the media release of Proceed With Care was a  well-orchestrated public relations event, not  what it could have been an opportunity for  much needed public education or discussion.  An example of how the Commission  controlled information instead of sharing it  occurred two days before the Report was  submitted to the newly-elected Liberal Government. The Globe and Mail, Canada's national newspaper, ran an exclusive feature on  the Royal Commission infertility survey. The  study found that one in 14 Canadian heterosexual couples are infertile, where infertility  was defined as inability to conceive after two  years of unprotected intercourse (the definition alone is problematic, not to mention any  findings that follow from it.) With Dr. Baird  cited as asking, "Are there ways to prevent  this and are there ways that these couples can  be helped?" the Commission attempted to  create a justification for its report that would  evoke public empathy—the 250,000 couples  who, according to the Commission, want  their own children but cannot do so without  medical intervention.  The release of the report itself was not  much better. Normally, upon the release of a  commission report or budget, reporters are  given early access to the document and a  press conference is held where reporters can  ask informed questions. The Commission  chose instead to hold a private briefing with  half a dozen select media representatives.  Also denied early access to the report  were women's groups across the country  who were then put in the ridiculous position of being asked to respond to a document they had not even seen. All they could  respond to were the recommendations that  the Commission, in recognitionof its critics,  had chosen to highlight—the banning of  surrogacy, the non-commercialization of  reproductive tissues, and the banning of sex  selection clinics.  At a second level, the Commission's  selective interpretation of its own report  was handed over to journalists who then  put their spin on it the "rights" of the  infertile versus intrusive government regulation. The television coverage would often  Also made invisible are the way in which  personal decisions are socially constructed,  for example, our notions of the "perfect" or  "normal" family. Finally, this narrow view  makes impossible a discussion of the interests of science, medical research and industry and their links to reproductive technology. We need to call into question the tendency of these institutions to promote high-  technology, costly means of circumventing  infertility over safe and proven treatments,  or even the prevention of in fertility.  What does a balanced reading of the  Commission Report actually tell us? For  those who have been following the debate  around NRTs for some years, much of what  the commission says is no surprise: much  begin a feature with the image of a new born  baby. A typical radio phone-in show would  frame the issue as "how Will the Commission affect your efforts to have a baby?" The  mainstream media does this all the time,  trying to fit complex subjects into simple  pro and anti positions and conflict scenarios . While it is important to grapple with  how much government intervention to have  in these issues, creating this dichotomy does  nothing to further discussion.  An exaggerated focus on restrictions of  individual freedom to "choose" within a  marketofreproductiveoptionsleftoutmany  equally important questions necessary for a  balanced view. For the social implications  of private decisions^the flip side of individual "rights" is surely the social obligations that accompany these rights. Individual choices made today will have profound societal (and individual) implications.  j|£>  HELP VLC GRO W  slanTlS  2MJ  Yes, I would like to help expand your programs  I would like to donate                            I would like more information about  ■ $ 100-500                                       ■ program sponsorship                   ■ monthly pre-aulhorized payments  ■ $50-100                                         ■ estate planning                            ■ donation through United Way  ■ $5-50                                          ■ VLC membership                      ■ volunteer work  ■ monthly pledge of /mo  ■ other   I cannot donate at this time and would like to remain on your mailing list   I would like to be removed from your mailing list   Address                                                                                                                                         Postal Code  THE VANCOUVER LESBIAN CONNECTION SOCIETY  876 Commercial Drive. Vancouver. B.C.V5L 3W6  Tel: (604) 254-8115   Fax: (604) 875-9592  All donations are tax deductible  charitable tax # 0820663-59  remains unknown about infertility and its  causes: most medical technologies are inadequately assessed before they are put into  general use; IVF is applied in ways that are  unproven; Canadians are against commercialization of health services and of human  tissues; and finally, fertility drugs are being  prescribed in ways which they have not been  tested and for which the long-term implications are known.  Some of the Commission's recommendations maydeserveoursupport—itsstrong  stance against judicial interference into a  woman's pregnancy restrictions on IVF until it is proven a safe and effective technique  for indications other than blocked fallopian  tubes; its position against sex-selection for  non-medical reasons; and its position that  access to services is not denied on the basis of  sexual preference or marital status. Any support we give to these recommendations must  take into account the broader social context  where women are traditionally undervalued.  Other recommendations need a second  look. Would a complete ban on Surrogacy  protect women from exploitation or would  it simply drive abuses of the practice underground? Many of the Commission's recommendations rely heavily on the proposed  creation of a National Reproductive Technologies Commission (NRTC), a regulatory,  body to oversee research, to license and  monitor clinics, to gather and disseminate a  variety of information, and so on. How will  we ensure that the NRTC is effective and can  actually enforce licensing requirements? Will  the 50 percent female membership of the  NRTC provide for effective advocacy and a  feminist voice or for political patronage  plums? And finally, will we be creating a  body that will promote the interests of women's health or will we only succeed in creating a bureaucracy that removes women's  control over their bodies?  And finally, there are other Commission recommendations that do not go far  enough. The Commission developed a concept it calls "evidence-based medicine." Acknowledging that 30 to 80 percent of all  medical therapies have not been evaluated,  the Commission identified the need for  "medical practice based on data and assessment of whether procedures or treatments  are of benefit for their intended purposes."  While there is a need for better evaluation of  medical therapies, the Commission's concept of evidence-based medicine does not  significantly challenge or alter the current  organization and management of science  and medicine. Decisions about what to evaluate, how to interpret results and what qualifies as "evidence" are still made solely by  researchers and those who sponsor research.  Someofthesafestandwoman-positivethera-  pies are overlooked in favour of high cost  intervention with profit potential. Left out  are patients and women's health care advocates- people with their own expert knowledge of women's needs, lives and concerns.  The Commission did not expand the  role of patients beyond that of "consumers"  who make "informed choices" from the  therapies available to them. While there is a  need for the medical system to move beyond  informed "consent" to informed "choice,"  this model continues to limit patients to  choose who receives treatment and information. "Choice" is limited to the last stage of a  long line of unchosen decisions, beginning  with research funding priorities and clinical  trials.  Alternatives exist. Just a few months  ago, a conference on breast cancer research  in Montreal brought together survivors of  breast cancer, researchers and doctors to  discuss research priorities on disease. The  result was a better understanding between  both groups and an expansion and shifting  of research subjects to include the knowledge and concerns of survivors. Why could  we not apply these strategies to reproductive technologies?  This is only a partial assessment of Proceed With Care. With 293 recommendations,  a complete and thorough evaluation is beyond the scope of these two authors. NAC  has called for the government not to institute  any recommendations without true public  discussion and consultation. This step is  absolutely necessary: Although the Commission claims to have heard "from 40,000  Canadians," much of this was inthe form of  public opinion polling, a limited and ma-  nipulable form of public input.  As feminists, our work is not done. The  Final Report of the Commission is the beginning of a process, not the end. Canada is one  of the last Western nations to implement  policies on NRTs. There is a role for governmental intervention into these technologies.  At the same time, we must remain active in  informing ourselves and bringing the feminist perspective to bear on any discussions  withinourowncommuni ties and with policy  makers. Above all, we must remember that  the most progressive legislation on NRTs  must be accompanied by recognition of and  changes to the fundamental inequities that  exist in our society.  Christine Massey and Judy Morrison, MA  students at Simon Eraser University, are both  members of the Vancouver Women's New  Reproductive Technologies Coalition.  Christine has contributed an article on the  Royal Commission to the recently published,  Misconceptions: The New Reproductive  and Genetic Technologies and the Social  Construction of Choice, edited by Gwynne  Basen, Magrit Eichler and Abby Lippman  (Voyageur, 1994).  FEBRUARY 1994 Feature  Women of colour:  Stats on  poverty  by Yasmin Jiwani  The following is excerpted from a presentation by Yasmin Jiwani titled "Women of Colour  and Poverty "at the "Poverty: Feminist Perspectives" conference at the University of British  Columbia last November.  Most of us have heard the incredible  statistics on women and poverty. We have  heard women's participation in the labour  force is shrinking. We have heard that much  of the work women do is largely confined to  seasonal, part-time work—work without  benefits and work that, on average, pays  approximately $9,000 a year.  Unfortunately we still do not have accurate and current statistics on the status of  women of colour and immigrant women of  colour in Canada. Most of the statistics here  are drawn from the National Action Committee on the Status of Women's 1993 Review  of the Situation of Women in Canada, Statistics  Canada's 1981 and 1986 census reports, and  whatever other reports I could find.  Even the outdated existing statistical  profiles which emerge from the 1981 and  1986 StatsCan reports paint a gruesome picture—a picture that has become even more  grim given the fallout from the Free Trade  Agreement (FTA) of 1986, and the current  economic recession, which now seems to be  heading towards a jobless recovery.  Previous statistics indicate women of  colour were employed in greater numbers in  the workforce—64.5 percent, in contrast to  55 percent of the total female labour force  working in 1986. However, compared to  men of colour and white women, women of  colour continue to be employed in the least-  paid sectors of the economy—part-time seasonal work, and work that is highly exploited and underpaid.  While up-to-date statistics arenotavail-  able, it can be seen that the industries where  women of colour are concentrated as workers have been the most hard-hit by the FTA.  For instance, there have been drastic cuts in  the garment industry—over 33,500 jobs lost  over the last five years. Women of colour  were heavily employed in this industry.  Moreover, because of downsizing and other  recessionary measures, work done by  women of colour has been restructured such  that women are now doing the work at  home, at piecemeal rates.  According to the NAC Review, "up to  4,000 women assemble clothes in their  homes." The International Ladies Garment  Workers Union conducted a study of 40  Chinese-speaking women workers and  found that they are paid a minimum wage of  $4.64 an hour—and some make as little as a  dollar per hour.  These women work an average of 46  hours a week and, during peak periods, end  up working 100 hours a week. They have no  benefits, no pay for overtime and many  suffer health-related problems as a result of  their work.  According toa recentgovernmenthand-  book designed to encourage employers to  hire members of visible minorities, women  of colour are employed in low-paying service, clerical and sales occupations. They earn  59 percent of the wages earned by men of  colour and only 51 percent of the  earned by white males.  Existing statistics fail to provide an adequate breakdown of the occupational  groups in which women of colour are em-  ployed.For example, recent statistics on three  major Crown Corporations—Air Canada,  the Bank of Nova Scotia, and the CBC—  reveal that women of colour constitute 1.3  percent, 12 percent, and 1.2 percent respectively of the workforce of these corporations  {1993 NAC Review). Yet, of the women of  colour employed by the Bank of Nova Scotia,  how many of the 12 percent of that workforce  are confined to the lower-paying occupational levels, that is, as janitors, tellers, and  While up-to-date statistics are not available, it  can be seen that the industries where women  of colour are concentrated as workers have  been the most hard-hit  by the FTA.  We are aware of the ongoing exploitation of women who are employed as domestic workers, janitors and farm-workers. These  women have to work under extremely exploitative conditions where they are vulnerable to various forms of harassment and  abuse. Immigrant women of colour are triply disadvantaged—they are immigrants,  women and racial minorities.  Immigrant women  There are various structural features of  the process of immigration that contribute to  the present situation of immigrant women  of colour. There are primarily three ways in  which women of colour enter the country—  as sponsored dependants in the family class,  as refugees and as domestic workers.  As immigrants, women largely enter  the country as dependants. That dependency status enhances the vulnerability of  women who are caught in situations of domestic abuse and violence. As dependants,  they cannot turn to outside authorities for  fear of deportation. The lack of information  available or accessible to these women ensures their isolation and vulnerability.  As refugees, the recent changes to the  act spearheaded by NAC and other women's groups has resulted in a situation where  women can apply for refugee status on the  groundsof gender-related persecution. However, this option is only open to women who  are already in Canada. It does not apply to  women outside Canada who are at the site  of gender-based oppression. Also, recent  studies show that there are more male refugees accepted than women refugees.  The history of domestic workers shows  a similar sexist as well as a racist bias underpinning the legislation. In 1992, the federal  government replaced the Foreign Domestic  Movement program (FDM) by implementing the Live-in Caregiver program (LCP).  The LCP requires applicants to have an education equivalent to Grade 12; "6 months  training in a program that qualifies them for  live-in care, and English language skills."  This effectively excludes a large number of  women from Third World countries from  applying.  According to the 1993 NAC Review, these  changes have resulted in a decline of applicants from 5,503 in 1991 to 1,716 in 1992. By  August 1993, the number of domestic workers entering the country had declined to 450.  In addition to this, domestic workers are  further exploited ascheap labour. They earn,  on the average, $12,480 a year or $3.47 per  hour for a 10 hour work day. As live-in  caregivers, they are vulnerable to all forms  of harassment.  Immigrant people of colour also tend to  experience "deskilling." While immigrants  are chosen on the basis of their qualifications  and the number of points they can accumulate on the point system—education being  one of the factors that is awarded considerable points—the moment they enter Canada,  these qualifications are rendered worthless.  Without the recognition of their past experience and qualifications, they are forced to  seek lower paying jobs. Even these are not  easy to get because immigrants are immediately asked if they have "Canadian experience." But without having had a job, how  can they acquire this "Canadian" experience?  Immigrant women of colour are also  often forced to take on jobs nobody else  wants because of a lack of language skills.  Resources for acquiring such skills are more  available to the men in the family, as they are  seen as the primary bread-earners.  The lack of adequate childcare for  women of colour who are also mothers further compounds their access to the job market.  Elderly immigrant women of colour  experience even greater levels of poverty—  they have not been employed in recognized  work which would allow for deductions for  the Canada Pension Plan, or have often not  been in the country since the age of 18 and so  are disqualified for many of the benefits  enjoyed by Canadian-born seniors.  Is Canada Racist?: the syndrome  By far the most pronounced barriers to  the increased and equitable participation of  women of colour in this society are the racist  and sexist structures of power and the daily  social norms that uphold the continued exploitation of women of colour. I am referring specifically to particular policies, to the  translation of popular perceptions into behaviour in the domain of everyday life—  perceptions that women of colour are not  educated, that they are only "good" for "menial" work; perceptions which problematize  women of colour as victimized minorities  who need the benevolence of white male  power structures to continue to survive. We  don't need paternalism, we need recognition, we need access to services, and we need  those services in ways that are appropriate  and affirming to us.  That racism exists in the workplace is  the common finding of a number of different  studies. Yet, the existence of racism is one  that is constantly under scrutiny and examination within academe. Women of colour  are constantly told that racism exists in South  Africa, in the United States, but that it really  is not the issue in Canada. Or more recently,  the tendency has been to allocate racism to a  particular sector in society—as a phenomenon that is only present among some white,  rural-based and less-educated portions of  the population.  One national poll last year found that 25  percent of all Canadians perceive people of  colour to be threatening. 57 percent felt that  non-whites should assimilate, and a further  25 percent feltthat recent immigrants should  be repatriated back to their countries of origin.  As far as employment is concerned, one  1985 study found that more than half of the  employers in the sample practised some  form of discrimination. Further, the studies  white experimental applicants were rejected  • ••  Women of colour are  constantly told that racism exists in South Africa, in the United  States, but that it really  is not the issue in  Canada.  only 13 percent of the time, while South  Asians ("Indo-Pakistanis") were rejected in  44 percent of the cases, and Blacks from the  Caribbean (West Indians) in 36 percent of  the cases. According to their summary:  "Whites have three job prospects to every  one for Blacks."  The racist and sexist milieu in which we  live creates a hostile environment which  leads to a situation where the home and the  community become the only sources of ref-  This often leads to increased depend-  enceon community resourcesas mainstream  services are experienced as and perceived to  be unavailable and inaccessible. There is a  paucity of information and service delivery  in ways which are culturally sensitive. In  many cases, these resources are not publicized within communities of people of colour, nor are women told of their rights.  Moreover, there is a real fear in accessing  services in terms of how such access might  contribute to entrenching negative perceptions of women of colour and their communities, as for example the fear that, if they  turn to external agencies, then their communities will be targeted as being extremely  oppressive and patriarchal.  And then there's the backlash  In addition to these factors, another  obstacle facing women of colour seeking  employment is backlash. There seems to be  a growing and widespread perception 'out  there' that women of colour are "taking  over." Further, that minorities in general are  taking over, invading the country and stealing jobs. These are racist myths perpetrated  by the white power structures.  In spite of the fact that people of colour  constitute 10 percent of the national population, or 16-17 percent of this metropolitan  area (Vancouver), that fear has generated a  panic of sorts.  Employment equity, designed to redress  a racist and sexist system, is the brunt of  attack by white males who see themselves as  being short-changed. These myths and racist perceptions need to be challenged and  academics have the social "legitimacy" and  power to challenge them—community activists who do are often dismissed as "special interest" groups.  See POVERTY on page 16  10  FEBRUARY 1994 Feature  Red Threads, Guyana:  Building a movement  as told to Chris Rahim  and Carol Pinnock  Karen DeSouza, an African-Caribbean activist, works with the grassroots women's organization, Red Threads, in Guyana. She was in  Vancouver as a participant at the "Poverty: Feminist Perspectives" conference held by the Centre  for Research in Women's Studies and Gender  Relations and the School of Social Work at the  University for British Columbia in November.  Kinesis spoke with herabou t Red Threads, global  restructing, poverty and feminism.  Chris Rahim: Could you tell us a little  about Red Threads?  Karen DeSouza: It's a woman's group  that was organized because there was no  other group in Guyana that was specially  addressing women's interests. Historically,  women have organized within political parties, trade unions, or churches and their agendas were designed by the parties or trade  unions. Consequently, women's issues always came last. In 1985, we started seriously  getting together. We went to the women we  were in touch with in the rural communities  and asked them to define the shape of the  organization. They said what they needed  was work and to be able to earn money. So  that's where we started.  The first big project we worked on was  embroidery. Most of the women had some  kind of embroidery skills so, for a year, that's  all that Red Threads was—women and embroidery. We started on getting grants so we  would be able to buy the materials and pay  the women for the time they were spending  embroidering.  That year was useful for the development of the women teaching each other and  really improving the skills they started out  with. We had an exhibition fair in October  1986. Which was the formal launching of Red  Threads as a women's organization.  •* In the second year, we started looked  seriously at education since it was not true  that simply being able to earn make possible  for women in particular to interact in society,  education was always on the agenda but it  was not as far as the women were concerned  personally. Education began to center around  issues of their choices, of what they were  going to do, their ability to relate to each other  in the groups, issues of quality control and so  on.  Not too long after the embroidery was  going well, we were able to get funding to do  joint projects with a sister collective in Jamaica. Out of the joint work, we established  a small workshop group that does education  efforts—they go around to groups and in the  community to discuss issues that are of importance to women, some of them defined by  the group themselves and some by the communities. They designed workshops around  economic discussions, family relations, parent-child relations, and questions of women's place in the community^and in the  economy. Something that we are really fighting right now is teenage pregnancy, as it is  one of the ways in which women become  impoverished.  Pinnock: So how did you get started in  the rural communities? Did Red Threads begin with one or two women?  DeSouza: At the time we took the decision to organize Red Threads, we were in the  Women's Garment Society. So the women  we started with were those associated with  the Women's Garment Society.  Red Threads is non-partisan, a women's organization that is open to anyone who  is concerned about situation of women and  prepared to do something about it.  Rahim: What is the political climate in  Guyana right now? In your presentation at  the conference, you talked about the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the impact of its policies on Guyana. Could you  talk a bit about that?  DeSouza: The government for thirty-  odd years has been what we called a constitutional dictatorship. This ended last year.  There is a new government and a lot more  space for organizations. The atmosphere in  the country is just different.  But this government has inherited the  IMF economy and the IMF agreements that  were entered into by the previous government and so far they have not indicated that  they will be changing any of those agree-  And that has not improved the status of  women in those countries...  Rahim: ...we had Kim Campbell for a  while...  DeSowzfl.'Yes.Itisnotjustgettingwomen  into these positions; it's who are these women  that you want to get into these positions?  What or who do these women relate to?  The process has to be, first of all, getting  women to understand the value of their  work and to understand the importance of  their contribution to society. Then we can  talk about educating the men. Then we can  talk about having valued women. I think it is  a slow process. It might look impossible but  just think about a world where the house-  Karen DeSouza  ments. So the structural adjustment budget  is still on and with all the concurrent problems, like impoverishment.  Rahim: Do you see a possibility of that  changing under the present government?  Do you see the government attempting to  further the situation of women in Guyana?  DeSouza: That is a difficult one. In terms  of numbers, the last government had many  more women representatives in government, even in the cabinet, even though these  women were not representing poor women.  But this government has gone backwards.  In terms of numbers, there are fewer.women.  Women don't seem to be very high on the  agenda. In fact there is probably going to be  even less attention paid to the situation of  women, even though they are concerned  about the so-called national economy.  The problem with that kind of perception is that it doesn't recognize that women  are in fact the basis of the economy. It is  certainly the case in every single country  because women's reproductive work is not  recognized. It's called the "reproductive  role," or "natural," or "biological"-- it  doesn't have a value. So the problem of [the  national economy won't be solved] until we  can get women's work valued and in particular the work of reproduction and of  housework that all women do.  Pinnock: In keeping with that line of  thinking then,how do youfeelaboutwomen  being in positions of power, for example in  government, where we can actually affect  the laws? A lot of us do the work and  engage at a grassroots level but to break the  system down, maybe we need more women  to be in these positions.  DeSouza: Well, it's an issue of which  women. Margaret Thatcher is a woman. In  the Caribbean, Eugenia Charles is a woman.  work that women do is recognized and corn-  Governments speak about the gross  national product (GNP), and the fact that we  have a very poor GNP. But that doesn't take  into account the hours of housework, the  months of childbearing labour, the various  things that women do—the farming, the  trading, none of those things are counted in  the GNPs of our countries. These are poor  countries because they are not paying for  many woman-hours of work.  In fact in Guyana, before we started Red  Threads, we did a little survey. One of the  questions was: "What work do you do?"  Invariably the women said that they don't  do any work. And when we questioned  them further, they said they mind chickens,  they have a garden, they have all these children, they cook, they wash, and they clean.  There are, in fact, infinite things the women  do for no pay.Sometimes they may earn  some money, but they don't "work."  Pinnock: What are your impressions of  the conference, what comes up for you being  in Vancouver with these women who are  supposedly engaged in work on women's  poverty?  DeSouza: One of my immediate reactions is that, in Canada, poverty is much  more hidden than in Guyana. It's not as  obvious and it seems there is a lot less knowledge about the depth of its existence. Hopefully, this conference and others like it can  hopefully do something about raising the  issue of poverty.  The other thing that really struck me is  the really deep feeling in people who are not  white of being discriminated against which  exists in this country. I heard about this in  one Indigenous peoples' friendship centres.  It is just there, whenever I encounter people  who are not white. Even though there is a  fair amount of concern for the racism in this  society, there is not enough being done to  address it and to really understand how  people who experience racism feel. And I  think there is really an amount of racism in  this country that has to be addressed.  Actually, I feel like an observer here.  Sometimes I feel curious. I felt most at home  in this country when I visited the Downtown  Eastside women's centres in this city. It felt  like something that I know, and is a vastly  different reality from sitting in the heated  comfort of the university campus, talking  about theory.  ' " Rahim: Has the women's movement  grown in the Caribbean?  DeSouza: I have difficulty talking about  the women's movement because a lot of the  organizationof women has todo with women  who could afford the time and space for  charitable work. Some of it had to do with  teaching women skills, like craft skills, but  there has not been a whole lot done about  really addressing the ways in which you  could the change the condition that women  live in or crea te a space that a Hows women to  change their situation in their country.  There have been a lot of declarations  made but really, the arrangements necessary to fundamentally change the situation  of women have not been addressed so far.  Until the change of government last year,  every organization was supposed to support the party in power, which creates a very  unhealthy atmosphere for the organization  and certainly makes it impossible to do any  work for social change.  This is beginnning to change. There are  now groups like CAFRA (the Caribbean  Association of Feminist Research and Action) which operates mainly in Trinidad,  and is a regional women's organization. Red  Threads works withC AFRA. Groups or people attached to CAFRA or involved in some  CAFRA program are also engaged in lobbying and advocacy, getting legislation in place,  and in actually working on making the facilities that exist for women under the law  known. CAFRA is also trying to organize  provisions for safe houses, transition houses  for battered women, and addressing the issue of violence against women in society.  Chris: How do you see the relationship  between women's groups here and those in  Guyana? What do you think the links are or  should be?  DeSouza: The thing that is striking about  coming to Canada is that, for women in the  Caribbean, in the South, or for women in  Canada, in the North, the issues are the  same. Advanced as Canada is, there is still a  lot of struggle going on here that needs to be  addressed, as there is in Guyana. There is  room for learning from each other, for working together and supporting each other in  these struggles for a better life.  The connection between the North and  the South is important because there is a lot  that we have to learn from each other and a  lot we have to unlearn that we have been  taught, like about how people in the two  places look. .  Carol Pinnock is a woman of African heritage  and a single mom. She has a BA in French and  is an educator grappling with some of the  poverty issues raised at the conference. Chris  Rahim is an Indo-Fijian Lesbian member of  the South Asian Women's Action Network  and Joint Effort: Prisoner's Rights Support  Group and works at Vancouver Status of  Women. Thanks to Rowena McFarlane for  transcribing.  FEBRUARY 1994 Celebrating  Black  history  month  Black Women Resources  Black History Month:  February is Black History Month, a time to celebrate the history of all people of African  descent. More and more, women are at the forefront of the struggle for political and social  change in Canada, and this work is increasingly being reflected in the celebrations and  activities of Black History Month Committees across the country.  Black history has been obscured or told to us in the words and on terms that are not our  own. In February and all year round, we challenge these words and present our realities in  our own words and on our own terms. During Black History Month, we make visible our  struggle, reminding ourselves and others of who we are and of the nature of our struggles  and celebrations.  Here's a look at some of the events celebrating Black History Month in Vancouver this  month:  Black History Month Committee events  The theme for this year's Vancouver Black History Month Committee celebration is  "Changing Reality, Changing Perceptions: Creating Awareness and Understanding Events."  With the exception of the Dance on Feb 5, all events organized by this Committee are free.  Sat, Feb 5: Sharing the Cultural Diversity of Peoples of African Ancestry Within BC. This is  an exposition from 9 am-7 pm that includes displays, storytelling, music, dances, parade of  traditional Ghanaian fashion, fashion shows, films, foods and discussion booth.  Sat, Feb 5: Dance. There will be a band (Soul Survivors) and recorded music by DJ—  Sister J at the Bonsor Community Centre, 6550 Bonsor, Burnaby from 9 pm to 1 am.  Sat, Feb 12: Forum: Deconstructing the Concepts of Knowledge. Topics and panelists will be:  "African Indigenous Knowledge Systems," by Dr. George Dei, Ontario Institute for Studies  in Education; "Nova Scotian Reality—A Methological Approach to Creating Knowledge,"  by Robert Upshaw, Nova Scotia Black Learner's Advisory Committee; "Transforming  Knowledge: A Critical Approach," Andrea Fatona, Vancouver-based videomaker; "Looking Towards the Socio-Political Implication," by Yvonne Brown, educator at University of  British Columbia. The forum will be held at Langara campus, 100 West 49th from 9 am to 4  pm  Fri, Feb 18: A Happening: Continued Expressions of Black People's Experience! A collection  of performances and readings featuring Janisse Browning and others at Simon Fraser  University Harbour Centre on Hastings St. from 7 pm-9:30 pm.  Sun, Feb 20: Symposium: Sharing and Understanding Tradition and Modern Cultural  Perspectives. An opportunity for Black youth and elders to get together to explore how  various socio-cultural factors have shaped/influence their lives. At the Native Education  Centre (at 5th & Main) from 10 am to 4 pm.  Fri/Sat, Feb 25 and 26: Conference and Workshops: Knowledge: Self Definition/Empowerment. An opportunity for peoples of African heritage to critically analyse their situations  locally and nationally; devise strategic plans.  compiled by Lynne Wanyeki  Anthologies:  Home Girls: A Black Feminist Anthology: Edited by Barbara Smith (New York: Kitchen  Table Press, 198-).  This Bridge Called Our Back: radical writing by women of colour. Editors; Gloria Anzaldua  and Cherrie Moraga. (New York: Kitchen Table Press, 198-.  Piece of My Heart: A lesbian of Colour anthology: Edited by Makeda Silvera. (Toronto: Sister  Vision Press, 1991).  Essays/poetry/short story collections:  Sans Souci and other stories: By Dionne Brand. (New York: Firebrand Books, 198-.  No Language is Neutral: By Dionne Brand.  Sister Outside: Audre Lorde (Freedom, California, The Crossing Press, 1984)  Zami: A New Spelling of my Name: By Audre Lorde.  Her Head a Village and other stories: By Makeda Silvera (Vancouver, Press Gang  Books, 1994) Vancouver, Press Gang Publishers, 1994.  Magazines:  Ache: A bi-monthly magazine for Black Lesbians. (PO Box 6071, Albany, CA 94706.)  BLK: A monthly magazine for Black lesbians and gay men. (Box 83912, Los Angeles, C A  90083, Tel: (310) 410-0808.)  Black Lace: An erotic quarterly for Black lesbians. (Box 83912, Los Angeles, CA 90083.)  Colourlife: A monthly magazine for lesbians and gay men of colour. (New York,NY.)  Kuumba: A bi-annual poetry journal for Black lesbians and gay men. (Box 83912, Los  Angeles, CA 90083.)  Films and Videos:  Exposure: Directed by Michelle Mohabeer (with Mona Oikawa and Loleti Tamu, two  Canadian lesbians of Japanese and Afro-Caribbean descent.) NFB. Studio D, Five Feminist  Minutes, 1991.  Long Time Comin': Directed by Dionne Brand. (With Grace Charmer and Faith Nolan,  two Black lesbian artist.) NFB, Studio D, 1993.  Hogan 's Alley: Directed by Andrea Fatona. (exploring Vancouver's Black community in  the 1950s and 60s) NFB, 1994,  Groups:  Black AIDS Network (BAN). Pacific AIDS Resouce Centre, 1107 Seymour, 893-2270.  Vancouver Media:  Chocolate City: Radio by and for Vancouver's Black community. Wednesdays, 5-6 pm.  Co-op Radio, 102.7 FM, 684-8494.  Obaa: Radio by and for women of colour. Thursdays, 9:30-10:30 pm. Co-op Radio, 102.7  FM, 684-8494.  Calendar  Hattie Holland Johnson with Paulene, Leonard, Shi , and James Jr.  Co-op Radio BHM programming  Vancouver's Co-op Radio (102.7 FM) station's Black History Month Committee announces 12 hours of special programming in February to celebrate Black History Month.  Programs with more detailed information are available from Co-op Radio and community  outlets. Sat. Feb 5: Special programming from 9 am to 12 pm.  Feb 7,14 and 23: Special programming from 7-10 pm.  Other shows to listen to for Black History Month specials include: Obaa on Thursday  nights, Don't Call Me Girl, on Wednesday afternoons at 2 pm; The Reggae Show on Saturday  at 6 pm; Roots Reggae all night Friday starting at midnight; Caribbean Sound on Saturday at  9:30 pm; and Sounds of Africa on Sunday at 7 pm.  Black Lesbian and Gay Conference  Feb 17-21: Black Lesbians and Gays: From Silence to Celebration...beyond 28 days is the title  of the Seventh Annual Black Lesbian and Gay Conference to be held in Seacaucus, NJ.  Sponsored by the Black Lesbian and Gay Leadership Forum, conference information is  available by contacting: BGLLF, 1219 South Labrea Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90019 or by  calling (213) 964-7820. Registration fees vary. Feature  Women and StatsCan:  Work is work is work  by Ellen Woodsworth  In 1991, Carol Lees of the Canadian  Alliance for Home Managers (C AHM) drew  national attention for her refusal to complete  the 1991 census because it specifically excluded unpaid housework. She was threatened by Statistics Canada (StatsCan) with  prosecution that could lead to a f ineand a jail  term, but eventually the goverment decided  not to press charges because it feared pressure from a large national women's conference on women's unpaid work.  In co-operation with several other organizations, CAHM is now launching a campaign titled "Work is Work is Work" to  ensure that housework , family care and  volunteer community labour are included in  the 1996 Census.  Why count unpaid work?  Approximately half of all of the work  done in Canada is unwaged domestic labour. StatsCan has been working to develop  questions to measure this work since the  1970s, but with the approach of each census,  has repeatedly abandoned the effort as "too  difficult-  Census statistics are the basic data used  by all levels of government to develop policy  and programs. If unwaged work is not  counted, no government policies or programs will address the needs and concerns  of unwaged workers, such as the need for a  pension plan for houseworkers, child care  spaces, where women need a road or a supermarket rather than a freeway, the need  for wages for unwaged workers, the real  cost of war, et cetera.  As governments downsize through service cutbacks, the work is being put back into  the community and into the home. Women  are being expected to do more work for free.  We need to measure our work and measure  the changes in order to refuse the work, in  order to get paid for what we do, and in  order to prevent our sisters (and often ourselves) from losing their jobs in the paid  work force. It is only as we get our unpaid  work recognized and paid for that our work  in the labour force will have value and be  renumerated with a decent wage. Unwaged  work brings down the value of waged work  and the unwaged worker is always used  against the waged worker.  What's happening now?  On November 8th, Statistics Canada  tested proposed questions to measure housework, family care and volunteer community  labour. The results of this study will be  available this spring. Recommendations for  changes to the next Census will be presented  to Parliament for approval in the fall.  Census questionnaires are printed one  year in advance. A question must be tested  before it can be used and, due to the time  constraints and expense involved, no other  national testing is possible. Statistics Canada  can make minor changes of wording.  Isn't that good enough? We must remember that Statistics Canada has done this  before. They have been "working to develop  questions" for measuringhousework for the  Census since the 70s but have abandoned  these efforts each time. Have you ever seen  governments abandon their attempts to collect tax information because the "respondents found it too difficult?"  Insurance companies, lawyers, sociologists, the International Labour Organization  and the United Nations all gather and use  statistics on unwaged work. It is only the  government, business and many men who  Try tracking your own time to see how well you can respond to the questions.  Do you like the way the questions are worded? Can all of your unwaged housework,  family care and volunteer labour be included (for example, is care of the ill or people  with disabilities properly covered? Are the hours of work categories adequate?). Is  further explanation required in the accompanying guide material? (for example,  what is the cut-off age for children?) Do you think this is the appropriate way to  measure this work? If you think we cannot allow StatsCan to drop the questions on  housework again, tell StatsCan and make sure your Member of Parliament understands and supports this change. As well, write to: John Manley, MP, Minister'  Responsible for Statistics Canada. Alternatively, send your filled-out evaluation and  request the inclusion of unwaged work on the 1996 Census to: Pamela White,  Manager, 1996 Census Content Determination Project, 4th Floor, Jean Talon Building, Ottawa, Ont, Kl A OT6.  Question 26: Household Activities  Mark the circle that contains the total number of unpaid hours spent last week  doing each of the activities in parts (a) to (d)  Last week refers to the seven days (Sunday to Saturday) beforeCensusTest Day.  Include circle spent doing unpaid activities for: members of one's own household;  other family members outside the household; friends or neighbours.  Do not include hours spent: working for pay (report paid work in Question 28);  doing unpaid volunteer work for a non-profit or religious organization, charity or  community group. Report unpaid volunteer work in Question 27.  Part (b) - Looking after children without pay. Include activities such as taking  or playing with children if, during these activities, this person was responsible for  their care.  Parts (c) and (d)-Providing unpaid care to seniors and to persons other than  children.  Many activities done to help others can be done on one's own, or through a  specific charity or organization. Unpaid care or assistance given on one's own  should be reported in Question 26, part (c) or (d). Unpaid care or assistance given  through a charity or organization should be reported in Question 27.  Some examples of unpaid care or assistance that can be given on one's own or  through a charity or organization include: driving someone to appointments or  other activities; providing companionship by visiting or talking on the phone;  helping with shopping, banking or paying bills; helping with bathing, dressing or  taking medication.  Questions 27 - Volunteer Activities  Mark the circle that indicates the total number of hours spent last week doing  unpaid volunteer work for a charity, non-profit or religious organization, or  community group.  Last week refers to the 7 days (Sunday to Saturday) before Census Test Day  HOUSEHOLD, VOLUNTEER AND LABOUR MARKET ACTIVITIES  26.Last week (all 7 days)* how many hours did this  person spend doing the following activities?  (a) Doing unpaid housework, yard work or home  maintenance for members of this household, or others.  Some examples include: preparing meals, doing laundry,  household planning, shopping and cutting the grass.  •^ None  ^ Less than 5 hours  ^ 5 to 14 hours  •$■ 15 to 29 hours  ♦ 30 to 59 hours  V 60 hours or more  (b) Looking after one or more of this person's own  children, or the children of others without pay. Some  examples include: bathing or playing with young children,  driving children to sports activities, helping them with  homework, talking with teens about their problems.  $ None  ^ Less than 5 hours  ♦ 5 to 14 hours  ♦ 15 to 29 hours  ♦ 30 to 59 hours  V 60 hours or more  (c) Providing unpaid care or assistance to one or ^ None  more seniors. Some examples include: visiting seniors, 4} Less than 5 hours  talking with them on the telephone, helping them with $■ 5 to 9 hours  shopping, banking or with taking medication, driving them ^ 10 hours or more  to appointments or other activities.  (d) Providing unpaid care or assistance to persons ^ None  other than children or seniors. Some examples include: $ Less than 5 hours  helping relatives with their banking, driving friends to 4> 5 to 9 hours  appointments, housesittingfor neighbours. $ 10 hours or more  27.Lastweek(all7days),howmanyhoursdidthis ^ None  person spend doing unpaid volunteer activities for a V Less thanB hours  non-profit organization, a religious organization, a V 5 to 9 hours  charity or a community group? Some examples include: V 10 hours or more  organizing a special event, advocating for a cause, canvassing or fund-raising, coaching or teaching, serving on a  committee or on a board of directors.          _  do not want this information gathered because they get much work from us for free as  long as it is not recognized. A good book to  read for more on this is Marilyn Waring's If  Women's Work Counted.  StatsCan's November test questions on  Household, Volunteer and Labour Market  activities provide the following data:  Questions 26 to 45 collect information  on both the unpaid and paid work that  Canadians do so that the census can provide  a complete picture of the productive activities from which we all benefit.  Questions 26 and 27 tell us how much  time Canadians spend at household and  volunteer tasks. The census recognizes the  importance of these unpaid activities to the  well-being of Canadians.  Questions 28 to 33 collect basic labour  market data such as the number of persons  employed and unemployed, and average  hours of work. This information tells us  where social and economic programs are  needed. The census is the only source of  labour force information for small geographic areas such as cities and towns. Other  Statistics Canada surveys publish information only for larger geographic areas such as  provinces and large cities.  Questions 34 to 38 provide information  on industry and occupation. This information tells us which industries are growing  and which kinds of jobs will be in demand in  If unwaged work is not  counted, no government  policies or programs  will address the needs  and concerns of  unwaged workers...  the future. Based on this information, education and training programs are developed to  prepare people for new jobs.  Questions 39 and 40 tell us how many  people work for wages and how many people are self-employed in various industries  and occupations.  Question 41, on the language most often  spoken at work, tells us which languages  Canadians use to perform their work.  Questions 42 and 43, on the address of  work and means of transportation, tell us  about commuting patterns, particularly in  urban areas. This tells us where new roads,  highways and rapid transit routesareneeded.  Questions 44 and 45, on the number of  weeks worked full-time or part-time, tell us  about seasonal and part-time work.  Perhaps the best way to look at what's  happening now is to look at the questions  which were tested by StatsCan in November  [see box this page].  For more information or to join the campaign, contact: Women to Women Global Strategies, 1426 Napier St., Vancouver, V6L 2M5; or  Canadiati Congress of Learning Opportunities  for Women B.C. or BC Voice of Women "Who  Owns Women'sWork " project, 5024 Brenton-  Page Rd., Ladysmith, B.C. V0R 2E0 Tel (604)  245-3405; Canadian Alliance of Home Managers, 2422 Hanover Ave., Saskatoon, SK, S7J1E8  Tel (306) 343-9379;Mothers are Women—Count  Us In Project, P.O. Box4104, Station E Ottawa,  ONK1S5B1.   Ellen Woodsworth is with Woman to Woman  Global Strategies.  FEBRUARY 1994 KLfcLESIS  CELEBRATING 20 YEARS  Kinesis evolved from the Vancouver Status of Women's Newsletter, which began in  1971. So we could be 23 years old, and in some ways are—women volunteers who worked  on the Newsletter also worked on Kinesis, and so on. The Newsletter, so to speak, was Mom  Kinesis first appeared as a full-fledged newspaper in January 1974. The very first Kinesis  focused on daycare issues.  Sifting through the past 20 years of copies of Kinesis, it becomes evident that most of  the issues we wrote about then are still very much around. Cover stories on violence against  women, poverty, abortion, reproductive technology, and more resurface year after year  after year. But also evident, as we dig into the content of Kinesis, is that the definitions,  perspectives and strategies for dealing with these issues have changed dramatically and  powerfully over time.  We're going to continue digging and presenting our findings in upcoming Kinesis  issues on this page in a number of ways over 1994 and to celebrate our histories, struggles  and triumphs as the oldest regularly publishing feminist newpaper in Canada. We believe  20 years of feminist publishing is a major victory of women's endurance and strength in the  I face of all the oppressions. And we're looking forward to 20 more years, at least!  The survey: what you think of us  survey compiled by Kathleen  Mullen, and summary by Christine  Cosby and Fatima Jaffer   To date we've received over 170 responses to Kinesis' recent Readership Survey.  That's a return rate of over 11 percent of  subscribers (but only seven percent of our  total circulation). Thanks to all of you who  have responded so far.  We continue to receive more responses  each day, and as we'd like to hear from as  many of our readers as possible before we  analyse the data, we have extended the deadline for responses to March 1st (the contest  is, of course, no longer applicable). So make  yourself a cup of tea, sharpen your pencil,  and fill out the Readerership Survey today.  The more feedback we receive, the better. We need your help in guiding the development of Kinesis, becoming a more accurate  reflection of women's diverse voices and experiences, and forging a more powerful tool  for social change.  Most people we heard from so far seem  to like us. Ninety percent of respondents read  Kinesis regularly. About 50 percent of respondents read "most of Kinesis" and 10  percent "read it cover to cover." About 24  percent "read one or two articles and skim  through the rest." And 85 percent think the  newspaper is worth its price ($2.25).  Most of the respondents live in a large  city (67 percent). About 20 percent of women  who responded live in a rural area. Of the 170  surveys received, 138 were from British  Columbians. The rest came from Newfound  land, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba.  Most of the comments we received  offered support, recognition of the work to  put Kinesis together, congratulations (on  being 20 years old and still kicking), and lots  and lots of constructive criticism. For now,  weVe prepared some "sound bites" of what  some of you are saying about Kinesis:  •"Kinesis keeps me in touch with women's issues and stimulates me to keep a  sharp analysis."  •"I love your willingness to let all  women have a voice and a space in your  paper and your commitment to dissemination of information."  •"I think it's a good paper, especially  now there's consistent woman of colour  content. . . and some Indigenous woman  content."  • "Kinesis is a great achievement by,  for and about women. Very well-produced.  Indispensible as a link between very divine  individuals and groups."  •"As long as Kinesis maintains a consistently radical line, circulation will not  increase...I think Kinesis should not change  just to bring inmainstream readership. Keep  on being obnoxious!"  • "By the time I receive your paper in  the mail, a talk/workshop or something  along those lines has already taken place!"  • "Although I only skim the articles, I  buy Kinesis and will continue to do so while  I live in Vancouver because the mag and the  women who produce it deserve to be supported. It's my political statement."  •"Kinesis has improved in the last year  by incorporating a perspective of women of  colour. It's weak on issues of class..."  •"Except for the [Dec/Jan94] issue, us  old women are neglected to a degree."  •"I like the broad coverage. I would  like to see a touch more about those of us  who are middle-class, white women working outside the home. We do our bit to  advance feminism and make the world a  better place for women."  • "Deal with issues in the women's community—too much is spent on mainstream  politics, not enough on community politics."  •"Write good, short, bad sentences.  Get to the point in the first paragraph. Do not  overexplain. Move from strength to  strength...rather than a list of what ain't  there and how tough life is. We know."  • "Best wishes for another good year.  We need you. There is not enough diversity  for women of colour. Need more First Nations coverage and a more working-class  base."  •"Often I feel like an outsider when  reading Kinesis, as an Anglo-Canadian heterosexual woman—can we build some  common ground with lesbians and women  of colour—both immigrant and indigenous?"  •"Sometimes I find the tone too earnest, reading it all at once is hard."  •"I often feel it is my only link to true  feminism in the now. Books and novels are  inspiring, but fade away in memory. You are  ever-present."  •"Make me laugh. Give me a cartoon  to put up on my bulletin board...You all  work damn hard. It shows. Get a bit goofier,  huh?"  •"A monthly cannot and should not  waste time trying to be a newspaper."  •"I've subscribed to Kinesis since it was  Kinesis. Look forward to every issue!"  •"Although Kinesis will always have a  special place in my heart, it has become  much less compelling for me to read since I  moved from Vancouver to Kelowna. There  is no coverage of the women's movement in  the Okanagan, and very little material of  relevance to our less developed struggle to  organize women....how about rotating reports from different women's centres or regional reporters?"  •"I find Kinesis to be a very middle-  class paper—that is, written in the language  of the middle class and talking about middle  class issues...changing content to be more  inclusive is not enough. There has to be  accessibility in terms of the writing—style,  sentence structure, etc."  •"It seems some issues are very much  lesbian focused."  • "Very little lesbian coverage whaf-so-  ever".  • "Hate the way you assume all immigrant women are of colour."  The winning number of the readership survey contest is 2699. If that's your  stub number, you're the lucky winner of a  1994 Women's Almanac! Call us at 255-5499  or mail the stub and your address to Kinesis,  301 -1720 Grant St., Vancouver, BC, V5L 2 Y6.  FEBRUARY 1994 Arts  Review: Hogan's Alley:  Glimpses  of histories  by Carolyn Jerome  portunities, housing that was unavailable,  long working hours, opposition to cultural  activities, sparse income, to namejusta few—  they were still able to reach out to other Black  people who were migrating to British Columbia in search of a better life, and to  provide community for the larger Black  population.  The small community known as Hogan's  Alley nurtured a sense of Black identity by  creating forms for artistic, cultural, spiritual  and political outreach. Achurchwitha Black  minister served foster spiritual growth of  this community. Chicken houses run by  women provided not only home-cooked  Southern food but also jobs. Nightclubs created opportunities for local Black artists and  HOGAN'S ALLEY  Produced by Andrea Fatona and Cornelia  Wyngaarden  An independent production  Feb 4, Video In  This 32 minute video was inspired by  Andrea Fatona, a young Black woman from  Toronto, who wanted to know more about  the early Black community that existed in  Vancouver.  Hogan's Alley provides glimpses into  Black life during the 1950s and 60s in an area  of East Vancouver thatwas known asHogan's  Alley.  In the video, three Black women, Pearl  Brown, Leah Curtis and Thelma Gibson-  Towns, recount their lives as members of this  small Black community and the themes current in their lives during that period. Personal statements provide most of the information. Newspaper articles and old film  footage evidence the issues that challenged  the basic human rights of Black people at that  time, as well as how the community responded and how they formed a community  that attempted to address their needs.  Where did the people that made up this  community come from? What kind of work  did they do? What happened in this community and where did its members go? All of  these questions are answered and more as  Fatona attempts to reconstruct a vision of  that community known as "Hogan's Alley."  Still from Hogan's Alley, a video chronicling the Black community in East  Vancouver in the 50s and 60s  Migrating from Oklahoma, Black settlers came to Canada and found their way to  Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia, seeking a better life for themselves and  their families. This video is documented  proof that despite the social, economic and  racial barriers that Black people faced in  Vancouver—thatis limited employmentop-  POVERTY from page 1  Recommendations:  •If the academic community and community activists are to work together to eliminate or lessen poverty, the first thing that  needs to be done is closer collaboration in  terms of a vital exchange of information.  ' There is no clearing house that community  activists can use to assemble information  about poverty as it impacts on the lives of  women of colour. And there are no up-to-  date statistics that can provide us with a  clearer picture as far as women of colour are  concerned. The academic community has  the resources to request such statistics from  Sta tistics Canada—which only provides such  data on a cost-basis.  •The academic community can work  with community activists to submit briefs  and provide relevant background information that can be used for lobbying purposes.  This is vital for advocacy groups who are  working at one level or another to raise  public consciousness and lobby for change.  •There has to be a general push from all  groups, community and academic alike, to  further an anti-racist, anti-sexist and anti-  homophobic approach in research and organizing efforts. There should be greater  inclusion of women of colour and greater  awareness of our concerns and issues. Poverty affects us all—it is not confined to white  women only. Childcare is a universal concern.  •Women of colour groups cannot just  be used as areas of ethnographic or quantitative research. There has to be a greater  degree of inclusion and participation. We  don't need more people writing or speaking  for us. We need to be recognized and engaged with as active agents in our own right.  •At an academic level, I advocate a  more participatory approach with regards  to research which is inclusive, and which  works to empower those who are participating in the research exercise. That means a  larger commitment to equitable hiring, to  inclusion, to the implementation of an anti-  racist, anti-sexist approach within the university, and within research teams. It also  means a woman-centred approach which  qualitatively examines the lived reality of  women of colour within the larger economic,  social and political structures of society.  •In terms of actual research, there is an  urgent need for a more rigorous documentation of the status of women of colour in  Canada within a framework that also documents existing race relations in national and  regional contexts. Most of the research tends  to depoliticize the issue by subsuming  women of colour within the umbrella term  "ethnicity." This privileges culture while  negating the issue of race.  Yasmin Jiwani is a South Asian academic  living in Vancouver. She has just completed  her PhD in Communications.  drew from the Black community all over the  United States. In response to racism, a chapter of the US National Association of the  Advancement of Coloured People was organized into the BCAACP (BC Association  for the Advancement of Coloured People).  Although Brown, Curtis and Gibson-  Towns' acknowledgements of these themes  are similar, their interpretation, the importance and the impact on their lives is, as they  tell us, uniquely their own. Their stories are  worth hearing. While Brown provides a  sketch of her married life after coming to  British Columbia, Gibson-Towns speaks  about establishing her career as an entertainer, and Curtis reflects on her life growing  up in an impoverished home where she  prefers reform school to her home life, and  eventually finds a community that accepts  her both as a Black woman and as a lesbian.  As Fatona's first attempt in compiling a  historical view of our community, I think  she shows the sensitivity needed to give  voice to the pain and suffering that poverty  and racism infused into the lives of these  women and the community. At the same  time, the video was able to establish the links  and bonds that bred life into Black life.  A theme that continues to be acted out  against Black people, no matter where we  place ourselves in society, is the devaluation  of our being because of the colour of our  skin. And still our community has responded  by creating groups, forums, discussion, celebrations that embrace our colour, address  our resistance, and examine our similarities  and our differences. Racism has never defeated our ability to seek out new ways to  c express ourselves with pride. And this is  ■S what Hogan's Alley does. It documents our  g, expressions, our lives and experiences  >• through our own eyes.  s        However, as a Black woman watching  S this video, I did wonder why it was deemed  o necessary   to   have  a   white   woman  g (Wyngaarden) introduce Leah Curtis at the  3 beginning of the film. I thought Leah told her  £ own story very well—yes, it was sad, but she  jLstated   it  clearly  with   feeling.   Was  • Wyngaarden meant to be validating Leah's  * life? And if so, who for? If we cannot tell our  own stories, should others?  Hogan's Alley premieres in Vancouver  Friday, February 11 at 9 pm at the Video In,  1965 Main St.   This review is dedicated to a woman whose  presence and actions injected a sense of  community into our personal lives and the  community at large and who always called  herself "Thelma's mother or Charmaine's  grandmother." I will forever remember you.  Carolyn Jerome was born in Winnipeg,  Manitoba in 1942 and came to British  Columbia in 1950, when her family migrated  west to seek a better life. She grew up in North  Vancouver. "And while the CN Railway did  not provide career opportunities for my father,  it built a community from one end of its track  to the other."  315CAMBIF.ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. HOURS:  V6B 2N4 MONDAY - SATURDAY  TEL: (604) 684.0S23 10 AM - 6 PM  WOMEN  IN  PRINT  BOOKS & OTHER MEDIA  5566 West 4th Avenue  Vancouver BC V6R 1N8  Canada  10-6 Daily  Voice 604 752-4128  Fax     604 752-4129  ♦  12-5 Sunday  Introducing Amplesize Park's  own line of clothing  New hours:  Mon, Tues, Thurs 11-6  Frill-7  Sat 10:30-4:30  Closed Wed & Sun  Quality consignment  clothing  Size 14... plus  Amplesize Park  5766 Fraser Street  Vancouver, BC  V5W2Z5  Sarah-Jane (604)322-0107  FEBRUARY 1994 Arts  Review: Fireweed: An Indigeni Fairytale;  Of rebirth and hope  by Valerie Dudoward  FIREWEED: AN INDIGENI FAIRY TALE  Vancouver East Cultural Centre  January 8-22  Fireweed: An Indigeni Fairy Tale is so filled  with irony, humour, pathos, tragedy and  spirit that this reviewer was initially hard-  pressed to carve out a perspective from which  to write. After attending the enthusiastic, almost sold out premiere, and a much quieter  Monday evening performance, I have found  a vantage point to a review.  Billy Merasty is a First Nations Cree from  Brochet, Manitoba, and Fireweed marked his  playwriting debut more than two years ago.  It was originally one-act, but was then  workshopped in Vancouver over December  to emerge as a two-act play.  Fireweed: An Indigeni Fairy Tale is the  first production of the Fireweed Production  Society which was founded in October to  provide a forum for contemporary and traditional Aboriginal expression in BC. The priority of this production company is to totally  utilize aboriginal people from artistic to management to promotion. As far as we know it  has never been achieved in Vancouver to  have a 11 Aboriginal people work on a production from the director to the playwright to the  production crew.  The basic story line of this play is that  Peechweechum Rainbowshield, played by  Billy Merasty, returns to Winnipeg from Toronto because he has an upcoming trial for  indecency charges. His geographical journey  is paralleled by chronological voyages that  reveal Peechweechum's early gayness and  the many sexual and racist travails he has  survived. Humour is an important and underlying strength of the play and serves as  both a conduit and a balance for the tragedies  in Peechweechum's past and for his sense of  loneliness and marginalization. Merasty is  particularly able to convey a playful and  delightful "female" side of his child and youth  selves.  Each of the five cast members portray  several different characters. Sophie Merasty  plays Peeweeechum's mother with pain and  passion, and it is significant to her character  that she embraces the beliefs of the Catholic  Church to the detriment of her pride as a First  Nations woman. Merasty also portrays a  rather brazen flight attendant in a cleverly  mounted scene in the first act, as well as  Weesageechak who, in Cree mythology, represents the Trickster.  Gloria May Eshkibok portrays Eenoose  Iskootee'oo, to whom Peechweechum is very  close as a youngster and who tells him  myths and stories of his First Nations culture. She helps to fulfill his need to have his  Aboriginal identity explained and reinforced. She is, therefore, feared by Lanula  Vi, Peechweechum's mother. The struggle  between the two women is a very critical  component of Fireweed. Their struggle represents both the pervasive conflict between  Aboriginal spirituality and Catholicism,and  the internal and external turmoil experi-  The struggle between  the two women...  represents both the  pervasive conflict  between Aboriginal  spirituality and  Catholicism...  enced by many First Nations people. This  struggle also points to the different treatment of women and gays by both factions:  the church is perceived as being oppressors  of women and gays. It is worth noting that  modern Aboriginal society is not necessarily consistent with its history and tradition  in the treatment of women and gays.  Eshkibok, who might be remembered for  her role in Tomson Highway's touring production of The Rez Sisters some years ago,  comes up with a funny portrayal of Officer  James Burly in the second act.  Denise Lonewalker, also known as  Nishka-Na-Wee-wai, brings consistency to  her ongoing role throughout the play as the  Saxophone Player. Her comical portrayal  of the Court Clerk won the audience over,  as did her toughly hewn character of innate  sensitivity named Reena, who befriends  Peechweechum in the shadow of the Golden  Boy statue outside legislature in downtown  Winnipeg. Her movements with roots in  dance technique reflect her early training  with the National Ballet of Canada.  Archer Pechawis is very flexible and  credible in his roles as Raven, a partner of  Peechweechum, and a s Judge, Weetigo and  Weasal.  Dennis Maracle was certainly challenged as director of this first theatrical  new and  gently used books  Fei  Philosophy -Poetry  Native 'Ģ General  Open daily 11am-7pm  Coffee Bar  1020 Commercial Drive  Vancouver BC V5L 3W9  (604) 253-1099  Bonnie Murray  Cynthia Brooke  Sophie Merasty as Lanula Vi in Fireweed  presentation of the Fireweed Productions  Society. There is a formidable collection of  themes, issues, conflicts and characters written into this two-act play, including sexism,  racism, the effects of churches and Christianity on First Nations, and the isolation felt  by "two spirited " people, or gays. The actors  manage to bring a fair amount of depth and  complexity to their various roles, and the set  design by Dennis Maracle is very effective.  Also critical to this production is the liberal  use of Cree throughout, which adds texture  and an additional dimension.  0OOKS  Brook's Books  & Tunes  on Saltspring Island, Ganges, BC  Also dealing in used tapes & CDs  Will pay cash for gay/lesbian,  feminist, gardening, nautical, art,  literature & trades  Monday-Saturday 10:30-4:30   537-9874  Symbolism is also worth noting, from  the symbols of the Church to the symbols  regarding women. In particular, Wapoo-  gooneeya (fireweed a bright red flower that  grows out of the ashes after a fire) as a  symbol suggests that First Nations people  can rise from ihe ashes of all oppressions to  a world of rebirth and hope.  Fireweed has a gay Native male as its  lead character and much of the play is about  Native women or female Native aspects. In  many First Nations cultures, gayness was  not just accepted, but considered to be a  special gift that included a balance of the  female and male spirit. The storyline contains many sub-plots and twists that would  be better appreciated by the viewing of the  production than a narrative review.  I remain anxious to see the next production of this talented and tenacious new thea-  tre production company.   Valerie Dudoward, a Tsimshian playwright,  lives in Vancouver. Her work has been staged  by Spirit/Song Theatre in Vancouver and  Potlach Theatre in Victoria.  1988 W 4th & Maple'  Vancouver, B.C.  V6J1M5  733-3511  FEBRUARY 1994 Arts  Review:  If we are women...  by Amy Fong  IF WE ARE WOMEN  by Joanna McClelland Glass  directed by Susan Cox  Vancouver Playhouse  January 3-29  Canadian playwright Joanna  McClelland Glass' newest play // We Are  Women is one of those "light entertainment"  plays. It does not ask for heavy emotional or  intellectual involvement from the audience  thus in return gives little back. At most, it  lightly entertains without boring you—the  kind of pleasant play to see after a pleasant  dinner, if you can afford it. In fact, this play  seems to disappear in a sea of pleasantness.  The play pretentiously links itself with  Virginia Woolf, a blue chip author, through  thequote, "We think back throughour mothers, if we are women." While this may be  obvious to many of us, the fact remains that  the majority of plays put on in mainstream  Canadian society are about the male experience. In this sense, it is a mild delight that the  Vancouver Playhouse, one of the city's most  mainstream theatres, has mounted a production of a 'women's play' by a Canadian  woman playwright.  The play begins at the Connecticut  beachside homeof Jessica MacMillan Cohen,  whose lover has died unexpectedly. Jessica's  mother Ruth is an illiterate woman from the  Canadian prairies and Jessica's ex-mother-  in-law Rachel is an educated Jewish agnostic. Both have joined Jessica to help her  through this trying time. Adding to the anxiety in the air, Jessica's daughter Polly has  been out all night with a boy nobody knows.  While awaiting Polly's return from her  date, the three women provide the audience  with verbal flashbacks of their lives. We get  to know the women through this verbal  recount, through their public dialogue and  individual dialogues. That is, first one of the  characters will say something conversational  to the others, then the spotlight would focus  on the speaker and she would allow us into  her inner dialogue, almost like asking the  audience to become a part of her private  thoughts.  Ruth laments her illiteracy, Rachel laments not attending an ivy league school,  and Jessica laments her unfulfilling marriage. The acting is of utmost importance  since this is a "talky" play. As I listened to  their hardships and regrets, I did not feel the  emotional gap between myself and these  women lessen, even when I found some  commonalities between these women and  myself. In fact, the weakest part of this production turns out to be the acting. From  beginning to end, there remains an emotional gap between these women and myself. I could not begin to care or empathize  with the women. Therein lies it's "light entertainment" value—I was not moved.  And when they periodically uttered the  occasional witticism, the jokes entertained,  but brought me no closer to getting involved.  I was left out and had to abandon the possi  bility of them ever entering my life or my  personal mythology.  There are some funny moments in the  play. The companion I saw the play with  does not have English as her first language  and thus could not catch the funny moments. Then again, the couple sitting beside  me, who probably had English as a first  language, did not laugh once either. I  laughed, but felt my laughing was a solitary  affair, which further minimizes my mild  enjoyment of these jokes.  The star of this play is the set, which is  visually stunning. As well, the lighting sets  off the moods, reflecting the changing emotional current within the home.  IfWeAreWomen may have captured my  imagination if the acting had been more  engaging. The play is not great but it certainly had a potential that this Vancouver  Playhouse production did not realize.  Amy Fong is an Asian woman and a volunteer  writer for Kinesis.  International  Week  The 9th International Lesbian Week (ILW)  in Vancouver will be celebrated this year from  February 12th to the 20th. The following is an  advance peek at what's coming up for ILW 94:  Sat, Feb 12: Come Out for the Kick Off  Entertainment Evening and celebrate International Lesbian Week with a variety of local  lesbian performers. Enjoy the ambiance of  an intimate atmosphere. Coffee, tea and refreshments will be available (bring your own  cup.) It's at the Vancouver Lesbian Centre  (VLC) at 876 Commercial Drive from 7 pm to  midnight (jam session from 10-12 pm). Tickets are $0-5 and are available at the VLC, The  Book Mantel and the Gay and Lesbian Centre. (GLC) Contact Bonnie for childcare at  875-9590.  Sat, Feb 12 and Sun, Feb 13: Join the  Recreational-level volleyball tournamentorganized by the Volleyball Committee for ILW.  Women of all abilities are welcome (no experience necessary). Come and join in the fun—  form a team and register by Feb 5 or drop in.  Drop-ins will be "given" a team. Spectators  and fans are welcome and encouraged. The  game takes place at the Justice Institute Gym  on 4th Ave. (across from Jericho Beach).  Cost is $40-$80 per team, $0-10 per individual. Feb 12 from 1-9 pm and Feb 13 from  12 to 7 pm. To register, call Sue B. at 253-  6993. For childcare, contact Jocelyn at 879-  9044.  Sun, Feb 13: Lesbian Battering is the  topic of a panel discussion from 1-4 pm that  will explore the different aspects of violence  between lesbians. Survivors of lesbian violence will speak out on their personal experiences. Open discussion and questions will  follow. The venue is the Native Education  Centre, 285 East 5th Avenue and tickets are  $0 to $8 sliding scale are available at the Book  Mantel and the GLC. There is limited seating. The space is wheelchair accessible, and  there will be a sign language interpreter. For  childcare, contact Mary at 684-5307 (pre-  register by Feb 7th). No late comers will be  admitted.  Sun, Feb 13: Sexpertease: the erotic celebration of women. Tickets are $0-10and are  available at the GLC, the Book Mantel and  Little Sisters. For childcare, contact Jodi at  872-2480 (pre-register by Feb 7th) Doors  openat 7:30 pmand the showbeginsat8pm.  Dance from 10:30 to midnight. For more  information, call Dawn at 682-3334.  Mon, Feb 14: Lesbians on the Edge of  Time: Housing options for old dykes is the title  for a discussion by and for older/old dykes  about realities and dreams of where/how  we live out the later years of our lives. The  evening's discussion will include models for  lesbians as they squeal with delight." At  Josephine's, 1716 Charles St. 7:30 -10 pm.  Cost is $0-5. For childcare, contact Naomi at  255-2383.  Fri, Feb 18: First Nations Multi-Spirited  Cultural Evening. A diverse mixture of First  Nations' culture as expressed by contemporary First Nations' multi-spirited women.  Included in the event will be readings, art-  from 9 am -9 pm. Workshops are from 10 am  to 5 pm. Evening speaker at 7 pm. Refreshments and a cheap lunch will be available  on-site (bring your own cup). Wheelchair  accessible.  Sun, Feb 20: Lesbian Visibility March.  Join with friends and family for a fun, high-  energy walk down Commercial Drive. Everyone who supports lesbian rights is encouraged to participate. Build a float, carry your  banner, play a tune or just join us in celebrating lesbian strength, pride and visibility. At  McSpaddenPark (Victoria Dr and 5th Ave).  Rally at 1 pm, March leaves at 2 pm. Donations are appreciated. For childcare, contact  Bonnie at 875-9590 by Feb 13.  Sun, Feb 20: The Party and Dance. Directly following the Visibility March, join us  at Charlie's Lounge for the blow out party to  finish up our week of Lesbian celebration.  Great music, hot food and loads of dykes.  And if that is not enough excitement for one  day, you can dance your socks off (or anything else for that matter) down at The Lotus  atour private ILW party. At Charlie's Lounge  from 3:30 to 7 pm and at the Lotus, The  Heritage House Hotel, 455 Abbott St. from 7  pm - midnight. Cost is $0-8. For childcare,  contact Mary 684-5307 by Feb 14.  The revving Bettys took to the streets at last year's ILW march. Come  out and join this year's march in Vancouver on Sunday, February 20.  existing communities, "what if we bought  our own apartment building?," door prizes  and entertainment. This is an ILW event  hosted by members of MOB (Menopausal  Old Bitches) at Josephine's, 1716 Charles  Street from 7:30-10 pm. Doors open at 7 pm.  Price is sliding scale $0-3. For childcare,  contact Pat at 253-7189. Limited wheelchair  access and non-smoking.  Tues, Feb 15: Let's go, Lesbo Bingo. A  new way to play an old game. Join our  callers for the evening—Jackie Crossland  and Nora Randall—for an old-fashioned  night, prizes and entertainment. "Hear the  work, jewelry display, performance art, song  and dance. At the Vancouver East Cultural  Centre from 8-11 pm. Tickets are $0-12 and  are available at the GLC, Book Mantel and  the VLC. For childcare, contact Monika at  436-3484 by Feb. 4. Wheelchair accessible  and non-smoking.  Sat, Feb 19: Owe day a t a time is a one-day  conference for lesbians, offering workshops  in AA and Al-Anon. We will deal with  issues such as staying clean and sober  through crisis, relationships and other personal and family issues. At the Native Education Centre, 285 East 5th Ave (at Main)  18  FEBRUARY 1994 Arts  interview with Makeda Siivera:  Out in the village  as told to Fatima Jaffer   Makeda Silvera is the author of Silenced  and Remembering G, the editor of Piece of My  Heart, an anthology of writings by lesbians of  colourand a founding memberojtheBlackwomen  and women of colour publishers Sister Vision  Press.  Born in Jamaica, Silvera presently lives and  works in Toronto. Kinesis spoke with Silvera  when she was in Vancouver last November to  present at a panel entitled "Passing the Buck," a  pre-conference event for the conference Writing  thru "Race" to take place in June. She also read  from her just-released collection, Her Head a  Village and other stories, published by Press  Gang Publishers.  Jaffer: Because I know of you mostly  through your work as anthologist of Piece of  My Heart, and as co-editor at Sister Vision  Press, I wasn't thinking about you as "the  writer." But when I heard you read "Her  Head a Village" at the readings, I knew I  wanted to interview you as a writer first—it  made me realise that your life seems to be like  that noisy village you read about, "one filled  with people, active and full of life, with many  concerns and opinions."  Silvera: Yeah, the story is definitely about  wearing all these hats. In a way, [my being  part of] Sister Vision has had its advantages,  certainly in that sometimes you're invited to  conferences and panels, like the one here in  Vancouver. But I get asked as a publisher,  seldom as a writer, a creative or a talented  person.  It's catch-22 stuff because the publishing  is very important and I certainly wouldn't  give it up for anything because it's real political work. It is making ground for so many  writers of colour who need that kind of support. But it sometimes does take away from  me—Makeda, the individual who writes.  Jaffer: When did you actually start writing?..  Silvera: God...a long time ago. I'm no  different from a lot of writers in the sense of  being an ordinary person who has always  wanted to write and never really had the self-  confidence.  Because I was a single parent for a very  long time, it meant putting away those ideals  around writing. I had kids at a very early age.  When you're 18 years old and you have kids,  it's a whole other battle just looking after  them. It's interesting because you're constantly thinking of somebody else, your kids—  you never think of yourself first. Some of it is  fun, thinking about how you're going to  dress them, for instance. But after that, [you're]  wondering how they're going to do in school.  Then there's racism...  It wasn't really until much later that I  began to put emphasis on my own work as a  writer. I was very much a late bloomer in  terms of publicly writing, being published.  Jaffer: Everything was kind of simultaneous too, I guess, in terms of the street activism  you were also involved in, going out to rallies  and marches and bringing up kids and writing...  Silvera: Yeah. I was involved in activism  even when my kids were very young because, in some sense, it's much easier to do  that kind of work with children. A lot of that  work is collective work. For the most part in  the 70s, women were the ones who did a lot of  the work while the men did the speeches.  There were always women around who  The book is about  looking at all the parts of  oneself—mother, lover,  lesbian.  would help you take care of your kids, women  who had kids themselves. Whereas writing is  an individual activity for the most part.  Jaffer: It seems to me everything you  write has a very strong presence of history,  family and working class experience. Could  you talk a bit about that?  Silvera: In Silenced, a collection of oral  histories by domestic workers, [I wanted to  talk about how] since the 30s, 40s and again in  the 50s, there was a large influx of Caribbean  domestic workers coming here to work and  to clean people's houses but we just never  knew anything about them.  When I was in undergraduate school, all  the books that talked about domestic workers  were written by white folks and professors  who were interpreting or reinterpreting what  these women had to say. That bothered me. I  felt it was important for some of the oral stuff  to be put in print so that other people could  read it. It would be a historical document  where we could begin speaking about ourselves, in our language and proud of whatever contributions we have made to this  country, whether it's cleaning houses, writing, teaching or whatever.  After that, I began to do a lot of reflection. I came here when I was 13 years old  and school was horrendous for me. I reflected on how, in my first 13 years in the  Makeda Silvera  Caribbean I had a lot of self confidence. I  was a bright, outgoing kid. When I came  here, within six months I completely lost  all that, through constantly trying to assimilate and trying to be like others—which  was totally impossible because I couldn't  be white. But I had to try, particularly in  the suburbs where my parents had moved  to. I really had to work at trying to regain  that [self-identity]. Then I saw the same  thing happening with a lot of kids.  So my first book, Remembering G, was  important for me to write, to go back to  that place in history when it was a really  happy moment, I was a child and where,  sure colour and class did matter but it was  totally different from being in this place.  Jaffer: What are you trying to explore  in this new collection of stories?  Silvera: The book is about looking at  all the parts of oneself—mother, lover,  lesbian. Also, [it looks at] not being able to  fit in, of being alienated because one is  speaking out around issues—whether it's  within the family, the community, your  ethnicity, it's a no-no.  I also tried to speak out in a number of  different voices and in a number of different identities—so in the title story "Her  Head a Village," I spoke about being the  "other," beingnon-white, then specifically,  being African-Caribbean, and being a lesbian, and then living in one's own community, this so-called village, when there's  the city out there with people who are not  like you. You're forced within your own  community to be like everybody else,  which doesn't allow you your freedom to  be who you are. Then there's this assumption that if you are not what the majority i s,  if you are a lesbian, then you can't possibly  be interested in anything else.  In a lot of ways, that story was trying  to expose that village to the villagers themselves, to break down stereotypes. For example, if you're a lesbian, [it's assumed]  you can't have children; or if you have  children from heterosexual relationships  with a man you have loved and lived with,  which quite a number of lesbians of colour  do, it's hard for that village to understand  how somebody like that could go off and  love a woman in a sexual way. Then there's  this whole stereotype that somehow we have  ruined these children we have mothered  because they are going to be confused in  terms of sexuality, or that they are all going  to turn into lesbians as if that's a bad thing.  Also, this notion that there are no lesbians or  gays within third world countries. I really  wanted to break down all of those myths and  also expose how ridiculous the whole thing  The first essay I worked on was "Man  Royal and Sodomites: Some thoughts on the  invisibility of Afro-Caribbean lesbians,"  which appeared in Piece of My Heart. I had  always been told, "well there are some people that are involved [with women] but  they're all priviledged or middle class and  they're not Africans, not Black or not Caribbean." It forced me to [go back and look at]  that and I found there have always been  working-class Black lesbians or bisexuals,  and they live in the third world, and they live  under third-world conditions. And they were  lovers. So I tried to bring out all those issues  within that piece.  Jaffer: When I read that, I remembered  stories I had heard back in Mombasa where  I come from, and I realised they were stories  of lesbians. I'd never seen them as that before. But they \were there, everywhere.  Silvera: Yeah, exactly. In this collection,  I try to break many stereotypes and boundaries . There's another story called "Hush Child  Hush" in whichl deal with incest in the voice  of an eight-year-old girl. That speaks about  secrecy within her family, and about how  difficult it was because her mother was protecting her father who was abusing her.  What I did within that story was to bring in  the Caribbean dialect because a lot of times,  whenever writers from specific communities bring up certain issues, it's easy for  people within our communities to want to  dismiss us by saying "this doesn't happen;"  or "it's a white thing."  [If its dialect,] you can possibly stretch  your imagination that further bit to see that,  "yeah, this happens," or connect and remember, "this has happened to me, perhaps  not in this form but by an uncle, a cousin, or  some stranger," or "my friend has told me  this has happened." I've tried to do that in  quite a number of the stories.  Jaffer: In "Her Head a Village," the villagers say, "Writing is not a dangerous profession, writing is a luxury!" I guess you hear  that a lot. What do you say to people who say  that writing is a luxury.  Silvera: That's total bullshit.  Jaffer: What do you say to the village?  Silvera: Well, you try to negotiate with  the village, which is basically what I did in  "Her Head a Village." You try to negotiate  and you try to teach because, let's face it, for  such a long time we have been going outside  that village to negotiate and to teach other  people about us. I think it's important to  spend some of that time teaching your own  village about who you are and that, in the  end, you're all family so they'd better just  wake up and start dealing with it because  we're basically in it together.  Silvera will be present at the booklaunchfor  Her Head a Village in Vancouver on March 13  at Pitt Gallery, and she will also be on a cross-  Canada tour stopping in 9 other cities: Victoria,  Calgary, Edmonton, Toronto, Kingston, Montreal, Halifax and Fredericton.  Fatima Jaffer, a Kenyan-born South Asian  lesbian, is an activist and feminist news writer  who lives and works at a women's centre in  Vancouver.  FEBRUARY 1994 Bulletin Board  ad     t h   i  Bulletin Board listings have a maximum of 50 words. Groups, organizations and individuals eligible for free  space in the Bulletin Board must be,  or have, non-profit objectives.  Other free notices will be items of  general public interest and will appear at the discretion of Kinesis.  Classifieds are $8 (+$0.56 GST) for  the first 50 words or portion thereof,  $4 (+$0.28 GST) for each additional  25 words or portion thereof and must  be prepaid.  Deadline for all submissions is  the 18th of the month preceding publication. Note: Kinesis is published  ten times a year. Jul/Aug and Dec/  Jan are double issues.  All submissions should include a  contact name and telephone number  for any clarification that may be required.  Listings will not be accepted over the  telephone.  Kinesis encourages readers to research the goods and services advertised in Bulletin Board. Kinesis  cannot guarantee the accuracy of the  information provided or the safety  and effectiveness of the services and  products listed.  Send submissions to Bulletin Board,  Kinesis, #301-1720 Grant Street,  Vancouver, BC, V5L 2Y6. For more  information call 255-5499.  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  WANNA GET INVOLVED?  With Kinesis'? We want to get involved with  you too. Help plan our next issue. Come to  .the Writer's meeting on Tues, Feb 1 and/or  Mar 1,7 pm at our off ice, 301-1720 Grant St,  Vancouver. If you can't make the meeting,  call 255-5499. No experience is necessary,  all women welcome.  VSW WANTS YOU!  Wanttoget more involved but not sure where  to begin? Join us~become a volunteer at  Vancouver Status of Women. VSW volunteers plan events, lead groups, raise funds,  answer the phone lines and help to connect  women with the community resources they  need, organize the library and other exciting  tasks! Come to the committee meetings:  Finance/Fundraising, Mon, Feb 21, 6 pm;  Publicity, Wed, Feb 16, 5:30 pm. The next  volunteer potluck and orientation will be on  Thurs, Feb 17, 7 pm at VSW, 301-1720  Grant St. For more info, call Jennifer at 255-  5511.  POLITICAL ACTION GROUP  The next Women of Colour and First Nations  Women's Political Action Group meeting is  on Mon, Feb 14, 7 pm at Women Aloud,  Surrey Women's Centre, 10073-136A St,  Surrey. Call Chris or Cynthia at 255-6554 for  info orfor rides tothe meeting. See you there!  SEXUAL HARASSMENT SUPPORT  Meets every month at VSW, 301-1720 Grant  St. For more info, call Miche at 255-5511.  FAT WORLD  UBC President's Lecture Series in Lesbian  and Gay Studies presents Fat World, a new  documentary about being fat by Lorna  Boschman on Wed, Feb 16, at 12:30 pm.  COOP  Co-op Radio  CRRO  102.7 RIVI  Listener Powered!  Co m m u nity-Based!  Where women have a voice  Monday, 8-9pm: Womenvisions  For women about women by women. Health, politics, law, spirituality, arts,  sexuality and alternative ideologies.  Thursday, 8:30-9:30pm: The Lesbian Show  Thurday, 9:30-10:30pm: OBAA  By women of colour for women of colour. Local community news and events,  interviews and music not heard in the mainstream.  Friday, 8-10pm: Rubymusic  12 years on the air, Rubymusic features the best in music by women—old, new,  lost and found.  For a free listener's guide call 684-8494 Monday-Friday, 10am-6pm  The Asian Lesbian and Gay Community of Vancouver  (Asian Lesbians of Vancouver and Gay Asians of Vancouver Area)  celebrate  The Year of the Dog  A Lunar New Year Celebration  A Benefit "Fun & Fund-Raiser" for the Asian Support-AIDS Project  An evening of light Asian snacks, entertainment, door prizes, dance and more!!!  Performances by Sawagi Taiko, Yealina, Happy Wing and Nhan Nguyen  Also palm readings, Chinese calligraphy and astrology  Saturday, February 5  Odyssey, 1251 Howe Street  Doors open at 7pm  Performances start at 8pm sharp  Tickets $10  Childcare and admission subsidies are available (call Cynthia at 254-9487).  Tickets can purchased from Little Sister's, ALOV, GAVA and as-ap at AIDS  Vancouver. Also will be availble at the door until performances start.  Room 60, Family and Nutritional Sciences  Building, 2205 East Mall, UBC. Admission  free.  FEMINIST NETWORKING  Next meeting is on Tues, Feb 15, 2 pm at  VSW, 301-1720 Grant St. Call Miche or Chris  for more info at 255-5511.  IWD MARCH AND RALLY  The theme of this year's International Women's Day March and Rally is International  Solidarity. Gather at the Queen Elizabeth  Theatre Plaza on Sat, Mar 5,11:30 am. Rally  at the Vancouver Art Gallery (north side) at  12:30 pm. Some speakers and much music!  SENSIBLE FOOTWEAR  The Flirtations, an all-gay a cappella quintet,  and Sensible Footwear, comedic feminist  terrorists, are appearing at the Vancouver  East Cultural Centre on Feb 9-13, 8 pm. For  tickets, call 254-9578. Proceeds from Feb 9  performance will raise money for the Little  Sister's Legal Defence Fund, call 669-1753,  and Feb 10 performance for West Coast  LEAF, call 684-8772.  VIDEOS FOR WOMEN  Douglas College Women's Centre presents  the following films: Return Home: Michelle  Wong traces her emotional journey to self  acceptance and cultural understanding during a visit with her aging grandparents, Thurs,  Feb 10,2-3 pm; Anglotown: A satirical video  on employment equity, Mon, Feb 14, 12-  12:30 pm; But I Thought You Wanted To: On  the impact of this attitude in instances of  sexual harassment and rape, Thurs, Feb 24,  2-3 pm; Long Time Comin': A look atthe lives  of two Canadian Black lesbian artists, Tues,  Mar 1, 3:30-4:30 pm; A Web Not A Ladder.  For women who want to start a small business, Thurs, Mar 3, 12-1 pm. All videos at  the Women's Centre, Douglas College, New  Westminster. For info, call 527-5148.  BETTY BAXTER FUNDRAISER  Vancouver Centre Federal New Democrats  present a Betty Baxterfundraiseron International Women's Day at 7 pm at Pier 32  Waterfront Restaurant, 1333 Johnston St,  Granville Island (fully accessible). Guest  speakers (with a sign language interpreter),  three-course dinner, entertainment andcash  bar. Tix are sliding scale $40-$60 in advance.  Call Vanessa at 683-0120, or Carol at 683-  1210.  IWD CABARET  The 3rd annual IWD Cabaret, on Tues, Mar  8 at the Vancouver East Cultural Centre, is  produced by Women in Music and Sounds  and Furies. The lineup includes music and  dance performance with Cindy Mellon and  dancers; Zeelia, Ukrainian women's a  cappella group; Qui Xia He, Pipa player;  Sand, comedy/juggling; Random Acts, storytellers Jackie Crossland and Nora Randall;  music with Sharon Costello on violin and Sue  McGowan on voice and guitar. Tix, sliding  scale $10-$15, at Josephine's, Women's  Bookstore, and Little Sisters.  AFRICAN FILM FESTIVAL  Reel Africa: Contemporary Cinema of Sub-  Saharan Africa, a four-day festival of African  film and plays in Vancouver Thurs, Feb 10-  Sun, Feb 13 at the Pacific Cinematheque,  1131 Howe St, Vancouver. Presented by  IDERA Film & Video and Pacific  Cinematheque, Reel Africa celebrates the  diversity of contemporary sub-Saharan African cinema. Regular Cinematheque admis-  Friday - Sunday • March 11 -13, 1994 • 8 pm  Vancouver East Cultural Center  1895 Venables Street at Victoria Drive.  Tickets S16/GA at Ticketmaster and Vancouver  East Cultural Center. (Surcharges may apply.)  Phone orders and info: 254-9578 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  EVENTS  sion prices. For more info, call Lisa Mighton/  Susan Murray at 738-8815 or 731-6062.  MARJORIE BEAUCAGE VIDEOS  Making My Own Medicine: The Video Work of  Marjorie Beaucage, artist talk/screening on  Thurs, Feb 24 at 8 pm. Tix are $4/$5. Making  Our Own Medicine: Values and Practices in  Working with Communities, artist talk/screening on Frl, Feb 25 at 9 pm. Tix are $4/$5.  Working From The Inside Out, free workshop  for First Nations People, Sat, Feb 26,1 -5 pm.  All events are at Video In, 1965 Main St, Van.  For info, call 872-8337.  ANA CHANG  Home Truths, an exhibition by Vancouver  artist Ana Chang, examines how personal  identity is constructed and conflated with the  identity of a place, a history and a race. At the  Front Gallery, 303 E 8th Ave, Vancouver, Jan  18-Feb 18. Gallery hours are Tues-Sat 1-5  pm.  WESTERN FRONT BENEFIT  The Western Front's dinner and auction is on  Sat, Mar 5, at the Western Front, 303 East 8th  Ave, Vancouver. Tix $100, for reservations,  call 876-9343.  PART FANTASY  The sexual imagination of seven lesbian artists explored through the medium of drawing.  UBC Fine Arts Gallery, Basement, Main Library, University of British Columbia on Mar  4-Apr 2. For more info, call 822-2759.  OF COLOUR COLLECTIVE  The Of Colour Collective announces a film  and video screening of works by and about  gays and lesbians of colour and two-spirited  people on Fri, Feb 25, 7 pm at Em/Media,  200-116 8th Ave SW, Calgary, Afta. Curated  by the Of Colour Collective.  WOMEN IN LAW  Women in Law: The Practice of Feminism, a  conference that is part of a collaborative  educational project on the Canadian women's  movement, will be held at the University of  Victoria, Mar 4-6. For info call 721 -8481.  ON.E WORLD FILM FESTIVAL  Afeministfilm and video celeb ration, Marl 1-  13, at Science Theatres, University of Calgary,  Calgary, Alta. Over 60 films and videos, live  performances, workshops, information displays, crafts and book sales, plus a special  mini "Kids Fest". For more information call  Andrew at Arusha (403)270-3200.  FILM AND VIDEO CELEBRATION  The Calgary Status of Women Action Committee and the Women of Cojour Collective  present Herland: A Feminist Film and Video  Celebration, Feb 1-2 & 4-5 at the Glenbow  Museum Theatre, 130 9th Ave SE, Calgary,  Afta. Guest speakers include Yasmin Jiwani,  Michelle Wong, Lorna Boschman, Persim-  Downsizing, layoffs,  harassment  If you think you have been  treated unfairly by your  employer, call us, we may be  able to help.  MUNRO* PAR F ITT  LAWYE R S  401-825 granville street,  Vancouver, b.c. v6z 1 k9  689-7778(ph)     689-5572 (fax)  labour/employment, family,  criminal law and  public interest advocacy.  quality le& r*t services  in a wotna.d friendly  atmosphere  mon Blackridge and Shani Mootoo. Closing  celebrations featuring Faith Nolan in concert, Feb 5,9:30 pm at Calgary Multicultural  Centre, 712 5 St SE. For more information  call (403) 262-1873.  WOMEN'S ART RESOURCE CENTRE  Writing Exhibition Proposals, a practical  workshop on the process of writing exhibition proposals, by Kim Fullerton, Wed, Feb  23, 7:30 pm. Writing Grant Proposals, a  workshop on arts grant applications, by  Doreen Dotto, Wed, Mar 9, 7:30 pm.  Winsom, a multi-disciplinary installation exhibition, Feb 10-Mar 12. Gisele Ouellette,  painting and drawing exhibition, Mar 17-Apr  16. All events at Women's Art Resource  Centre, 80 Spadina Ave, Toronto, Ont.  MAUREEN FORRESTER  Music Has Been My Life, a talk by Maureen  Forrester, contralto. Sponsored by Vancouver Cultural Alliance, at the Hotel Vancouver, Tues, Feb 8,12:05 pm, lunch at 12:35  pm. Tix $5, or $12.98 with lunch (or you can  bring your own). To reserve, call 681 -3535.  SORROW AND STRENGTH  Sorrow and Strength: A Process is an educational conference on healthcare available  for people with trauma-based dysfunctions.  Relevant for adult survivors of childhood  sexual abuse, counsellors and healthcare  professionals. Apr 14-16, in Winnipeg, Man.  For more info, call (204) 786-1971.  MAHILA MILAN  Mahila Milan (A Meeting of Women): A  Conference for and by Canadian Women of  South Asian Origin, organized by India Mahila  Assoc., takes place Feb 5-6, at Langara  Campus, Vancouver Community College,  100 West 49th Ave. Feb 5 Conference  program open to South Asian women only.  Banquet on Sat, Feb 5, 7-11 pm featuring  keynote speech by National Action Committee on the Status of Women president Sunera  Thobani, and Sun, Feb 6, Conference program starting 9:30 am is open to all who  work with the South Asian communities. Full  conference $50, Sat only, Sun only, or  banquet only, $20. For more info, call 321 -  7225.  DESH PARDESH 94  The dates of the Desh Pardesh Conference/  Festival 1994 have been changed. Desh  Pardesh will now take place Wed, May 4-  Sun, May 8. Desh Pardesh Festival/Conference is Toronto's annual exploration and  celebration of new and emerging patterns of  living, loving and left culture being created  by South Asians in the Diaspora. It is five  days of new and recent worki>y South Asian  artists, activitists, and cultural producers.  Desh Pardesh focuses on the perspectives,  issues, artistic and cultural expressions of  women, working class people, lesbians and  gay men and other progressive independant  artists, thinkers and activitists of the various  South Asian communities living in the West.  For more info, phone, mail or fax at: Desh  Pardesh, 141 Bathurst St, Toronto, Ont  (416)601 -9932 Fax (416)601 -9973.  CANADA'S WATER TO GO?  The Canadian Autoworkers Union presents  a discussion on the risks Free Trade presents  toCanada's fresh water resources,focussing  on water diversion schemes. With speakers  Kathy Francis and Mae Burrows. Thurs, Feb  10, 7:30 pm. CAW Union Hall, 707 12th St,  New Westminster.  RITUAL ABUSE CONFERENCE  The 2nd Annual Conference on Ritual Abuse  and Mind Control: Advanced Education for  Mental Health Professionals. Feb 18-20,  Williamsburg, Virginia. For info, call (804)  358-8808 (Conference Line-Press 7).  WOMEN IN TRADES  Building Bridges-Building Partnerships, the  National Conference of Women in Trades  (WITT) and an alliance of tradeswomen,  technologists, operations and blue collar  workers, will be held at St.Mary's University  in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Jun 3-7. Early registration is $195 plus GST. For registration  details, contact: Tricia Robertson, WITT  National Conference Organizer, 6256 Lawrence Street, Halifax, Nova Scotia, B3L 1J9  or by calling (902) 422-0750 6r faxing (902)  422-0969; or contact WITT National Network, RR1, Winlaw, BC, V0G 2J0 or call 226-  7624 or fax 226-7954.  SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  Women and Sustainable Development: Canadian Perspectives, a conference May 27-  Jun 1 forfeminist academics and activists to  prepare atJanadian position for discussion  at the Fourth UN Conference on Women in  1995. For info, call Ann Dale at UBC, 822-  9154.  BABY FRIENDLY INITIATIVE  La Leche League and Women's College  Hospital present The Baby Friendly In'itative:  A National Plan for Action, the 4th Annual  National Workshop for Health Professionals  and Policy Makers, Thurs, Jun 9, at Humber  College, Toronto, Ont. Topics include: Implementing action plans and strategies for  changetowardscreating a more Baby Friendly  Environment in the community and hospitals; promotion and encouragement of  breastfeeding. Papers invited, deadline for  submissions Apr 21,1994. For applications,  contact Sylvia Segal, Humber College, (416)  675-6622, Loc 4078, Fax (416) 675-2015.  VEDA HILLE  An evening of piano and song with Veda Hille  on Sat, Feb 5, at Josephine's, 1716 Charles  St, Van. Tickets are $6-$10 at Josephine's.  Doors open 7:30 pm, concert at 8 pm.  BENEFIT FOR CUBA  Storytelling Theatre Benefit for  FriendshipmentCaravan-a Humanitarian Aid  Caravan to Cuba. Poetry, storytelling, and  solo sax by Kerry Coast. Sun, Feb 13, at  Josephine's, 1716 Charles St, Van. Free,  donations appreciated.  WOMEN'S NIGHTS  The February lineup of women's nights atthe  Broadway Express Pub, 2733 Commercial  Dr, Vancouver is: Tues, Feb 1: Mo Field and  The Mudlarks. Tues, Feb 8: Games Night.  Tues, Feb 15: Video Night: Indigo Girls,  Madonna, Melissa Etheridge. Tues, Feb 22:  Tammy Fassaert and Me and Another  Woman. Wed, Feb 23: The LingoSisters and  Danielle French. Thurs, Feb 24: Sue  McGowan and Judy Atkin. For more info call  877-1699.  ALLIES LAUNCH  Come to the 6th launch of Allies, an alternative Vancouver paper made up of nine independent groups. Meet the publishers, hear  authors, and network. Wed, Feb 9, 7 pm, at  Josephine's, 1716 Charles St, Vancouver.  Free admission, all welcome. For info, call  877-1631.  PARENTHOOD SUPPORT  Lesbians Interested in Parenthood Support  meets Sun, Feb 13,4-6pmatthe Vancouver  Lesbian Connection, 876 Commercial Drive,  Vancouver. This month's topic: Sperm; Where  to Get It and What to Do with It. Call the VLC  at 254-8458 or Suzanne at 251-4956 for  more info.  LEGAL CLINICS FOR WOMEN  Battered Women's Support Services and  UBC Law Students Legal Advice Program  are co-sponsoring a series of free legal clinics for women, on Tuesday evenings, 6:30-  8:30 pm, Feb 8, Feb22, and Mar8. For more  : info, call 822-5791.  WORKSHOPS FOR WOMEN  Douglas Women's Centre is offering free  personal development workshops for women:  Eating Orders/Disorders is a look at eating  disorders during National Eating Disorder  Awareness Week on Mon, Feb 7, 7-9 pm.  Getting Unstuck is about finding resources  for personal change on Tues, Feb 8,6-8 pm.  Does the Fear of Failing Stop Me? is a panel  discussion on Mon, Feb 21, 6-8 pm.  "Homophobia. What does it mean and who  does ithurt?"\s on Tues, Mar 1, 6-8 pm. All  events are at the Women's Centre, Room  2720, Douglas College, New Westminster.  For more info, call 527-5148.  FINDING COMMON GROUND  Palestinian and Jewish Women for Peace  present "Finding Common Ground: An Arab  and Jewish Women's Dialogue, Workshop  and Tea" on Sun, Mar 6, from 2-5 pm, at the  Peretz School, 6184 Ash St, Van. Tickets are  COYLE & CHARLES COUNSELLING SERVICES  CYNTHIA R. COYLE m.eo.rcc  MARTINE     A.     CHARLES     msw.rsw  SUITE 2 • 114 WEST BROADWAY VANCOUVER  BC-     V5Y      1P3     •     (604)     879-9262  barbara findlay  B.A. M.A. LIB  is delighted to announce  that she is now practising law  with the law firm of  Smith and Hughes  321-1525 Robson St.  Vancouver  phone 683-4176  Smith and Hughes offer a full range of  legal sendees to the lesbian, gay and  bisexual communities of Vancouver.  Initial consultations ere without charge.  FEBRUARY 1994 Bulletin Board  EVENTS  EVENTS  $3/$5. For more info, call Hiyam Deeby at  325-0614, Rhea Lazar at 736-5975, or Ekeen  Ghattas at 432-7034.  WORK IN PROGRESS  Work in Progress: Vancouver Artists In Their  Studios will allow the community to visit the  studios of 58 local Vancouver artists Fri  through Suns in May. The project is free and  includes the participation of local galleries  and community centres for events, lectures  and tours. Women artists Debbie Bryant,  Jeannie Kamins, Claire Kujundzic, Sheila  Norgate, Haruko Okano and Janice Wong  will participate. For more info, call (604)872-  0318.  ABOUT FACE  About Face is a program to encourage writing for theatre from among communities of  colour and First Nations and is open to first-  time and emerging writers. About Face will  combine directed writing activities with structured and informal shop talk. A variety of  guest speakers will expose the participants  to a diversity of approaches and experiences. It will be held 7-10pm Thurs Jan 27-  Apr 14 at the New Play Centre Rehearsal  Hall, Anderson Street, Granville Island, Van.  For info, contact Beverly Yhap at 685-6228.  HOGAN'S ALLEY  Hogan's Alley, a video produced by Andrea  Fatona and Cornelia Wyngaarden, premieres  in Vancouver Fri, Feb 4, at 9 pm at the Video  In, 1965 Main St. The video focuses on three  women who talk about the early Black community in Vancouver known as Hogan's Alley.  WOMEN SPEAKING  The WomenSpeak Institute presents Dorothy  E. Smith, a sociologist and author.who will  weave together stories told by other women  and Francis Dick, a Kwawa'Kawakw artist,  singer, dancer and drummer from Klngcome  Inlet, who will perform excerpts from her  play, Wi'Woma:Spirit of Women, Fri, Feb 25,  7-10 pm, at the Douglas College Performing  Arts Theatre, 700 Royal Ave, New Westminster (one block from New Westminster  skytrain station). Tix $10/adult and $7/stu-  dent. To reserve call 527-5472.  PENNY LANG  Montreal singer-songwriter Penny Lang  mixes original compositions with personalized versions of gospel, blues and country  songs at Josephine's, 1716 Charles, Wed,  Feb 23. Doors 7:15 pm, concert 8-10 pm. Tix  $4-$8 at Jospehine's  ADDERSON & MOOTOO  Women & Words and the Canada Council  present an evening of readings and talk with  Caroline Adderson, Governor General Award  nominee for her collection of stories Bad  Imagining, and Shani Mootoo reading from  her book of stories Out on Main Street at  Josephine's, 1716 Charles. Doors open at  7:15 pm, reading starts at 8 pm. Music and  socializing to follow.  KAREN MELADY  Vancouver entertainer Karen Melady invites  you to 'UnPlunged Words & Song"--an  evening of poetry and music Sat, Feb 26 at  Josephine's, 1716 Charles, 8-10 pm, doors  at 7 pm. Tix $5.  WOMYN'S OPEN STAGE  An open stage for and by women at  Josephine's, 1716 Charles on Sun, Feb 8.  Tix $2-$5 at the door. 8-10 pm, doors 7:15  pm. Call 253-3142 to sign up.  ELECTRONICS WORKSHOP  A workshop with Diana Burgoyne will teach  you to build a sound generator, light sensor,  and motor switch. You don't have to be  mathematically or mechanically inclined to  work with electronics. Tues, Feb 1,8,15, &  22, 7-10 pm at the Western Front, $75  includes all parts. Call 872-4273 for more  info.  EARLY CHILDHOOD CONFERENCE  Together: Families of Early Childhood, Conference 94, Apr 22-24 at the Hotel Vancouver, will bring together Early Childhood Education (ECEBC) colleagues for three days of  professional development, workshops and  keynote speakers.  EMPLOYMENT EQUITY  1994 Employment Equity Conference takes  place Feb 23 & 24 at the Ramada Renaissance Hotel, Vancouver. Registration: $225.  to register send cheque to: The Employment  Equity Trust, Box 48359Bentall Centre, Vancouver BC, V7X1A1.  GROUPS  IWD COMMITTEE  The Vancouver IWD Committee is calling for  volunteers to help with security/marshalling  the International Women's Day march on  Sat, Mar5. Tovolunteercall FatimaorMiche  at 255-5511.  WENLIDO IN KELOWNA  Wenlido, the self-defense course designed  specifically for women is coming to Kelowna,  BC in Feb. A martial art that involves both  dance andf ighting, Wenlido provides women  with info about violence as well as ways of  protecting yourself against an attacker. For  more info on taking the class, contact the  Kelowna Women's Resource Centre at (604)  762-2355.  WOMEN'S WRITING CIRCLE  The Kiwassa Women's Writing Circle, for  women who want to explore writing in a safe,  supportive group, will run from Jan-Jun. No  writing experience necessary. Childcare is  available. For more info, contact Vicky Hallett  or Ingrid Kolsteren of Basic Ed, King Edward  Campus at 871 -7380 or Nancy McRitchie at  Kiwassa Neighbourhood House, 2425 Oxford St, Van, 254-5401.  VLC  Groups currently running are Suns 7-9 pm  Youth Group; Mons 7-9 pm Ki Connections;  Wed7-9 pm ACOA; 1st and 3rd Sat 7:30-  9:30 pm Over 30's Social Group; 1 st and 3rd  6-9 pm Writers Group.  CAMPBELL RIVER DROP-IN  The Campbell River & Area Women's Resources Society will be holding its popular  Friday morning drop-in program this spring.  Childcare is free and runs from 10am to  noon. Feb 11-Sian Winnig-Legal Advocate  from the women centre's Legal Advocacy  Program-legal information. Feb 18-Claire  Lightfoot-More Nutrition for Your Dollar. Feb  25 - Marg Salmon-Registered Nurse-Health  Care for Your Heart. Mar 4-Jane Jepson-  Adoptive Parents Association of BC. To be  held at 457-10th Ave, Campbell River, BC,  V9W 5N7.  EMPLOYMENT SUPPORT  The Kiwassa Employment Support Program  helps north side East Vancouver residents  gain career planning and job search skills.  The program is free through federal and  provincial funding. It provides workshops,  individual counselling and office services to  registered clients. Workshop topics include:  INA DENNEKAMP  Piano Service            _^«m  • Piano and Harpsichord,            £H  B=j  (lining            /BH  E5H  • Repairs and  tj—I  Reconditioning             .^^H  ^q  • Appraisals -^^^^^^H  B  in  iHiSSlffflfll  B  nJ  (604) 520-3395  i  I —  GROUPS  Career Planning, Creative Job Search Techniques, Resume Writing, Cover Letters and  Stress Management. Call 254-5401 for an  appointment.  EAST-SIDE LESBIAN YOUTH  The East-Side Youth Drop-in for lesbian, gay  and bisexual youth and their friends will be  held at Britannia. This is a safe, confidential,  non-threatening environment to discuss issues, build support and meet people. If you  are between 15 and 25, want to get involved  or get more info, call Jason at Britannia  Community Services, Mondays or Wednesdays, or leave a message any other time at  253-4391.  BAMBOO TRIANGLE  If you are lesbian, gay or bisexual and of  Japanese descent, you are not alone. Here's  your chance to meet others like yourself. A  discreet meeting will be held on Mar 6.  Deadline for contact is Feb 25. Call the GLC  at (604)684-6869 or write with info on how  we can contact you (names are not required)  at Bamboo Triangle c/o 1170 Bute St, Van,  BC.V6E1Z6.  COMING OUT AT U OF T  A Women of Colour Coming Out Group will  be held at the University of Torpnto Women's  Centre for women who think they may be  lesbian, bi-sexual or are unsure of their orientation. This is a woman of colour only space  with women of colour facilitators held Weds  from 7-9 pm starting Jan 12. The U of T  Women's Centre is at 49 St. George St or call  (416)978-8201.  WAVAW  Women Against Violence Against Women/  Rape Crisis Centre is looking for female  Wolunteers to do crisis line work. The next  training begins on Wed, Feb 16 for 11  weeks. Weds 7-10 pm and Suns 11 am-5  pm. Childcare and transportation subsidies  available. Sign language interpreters will be  provided if needed. For more info call 255-  6228 or TTY 254-6268.  BC V5L 2T5 (604)253-3142  smoke free cappuccino bar *  vegetarian snacks  cards * books* cd's/cassettes * clothing * jewelry  Open Tuesday - Sunday  Womyn's Open Stage   Sun Feb 8  Solstice and Seasonal Wishes to all  KARATE for WOMEN  V        ILW«.«U,U:lll;l:M3*  *8# Mon., Tues., Thurs. 7 pm  Fitness, serf confidence,  self defense  ASK ABOUT BEGINNER GROUPS  WOMENSWORK  EN       f>  R  I   N  X  Making a Postive impression  for Our Community Since 1984!  (604) 980-4235  • Women  Owned  &  Operated'  SUBMISSIONS  PERFORMERS WANTED  Performers of original (or slightly forged)  comedy are wantedfor an evening of lesbian  performance comedy sponsored by the  Lesbiantics Collective on Mar 26 in Victoria,  BC. Performances must be 5 -10 min max.  Please send a short description of your work  by Feb 21 to: N. Poole, 211-1841 Oak Bay  Ave, Victoria, V8R1C4.  SOUTH ASIAN LESBIANS/BIS  Samiyoni: a journal for and by South Asian  Lesbians is calling lesbians anywhere on this  planet with any South Asian ancestry to send  submissions for the next issue of SamiYoni.  All submissions welcome graphics, cartoons, poetry, fiction, prose, announcements,  news, photography, interviews, recipes etc.  (send a brief bio and type/double space the  writings). Deadline is Feb 28. Send to  SamiYoni, attn. neesha dosanjh, PO Box  891, Stn 'P\ Toronto, Ont M5S 2Z2.  QUILT PROJECT  The Women's Art Resource Centre invites all  Canadian women to contribute a piece to a  quilt that will reflect our ongoing histories.  Deadline is Feb 4. A series of quilting weekends will be held in May. Send submissions  to: The Quilt Project, Women's Art Resource  Centre, 80 Spadina Ave, Suite 506, Toronto,  Ont, M5V 2J3, or call (416)861 -0074.  WOMEN'S HEALTH CONFERENCE  McMaster University is calling for abstracts  for Women's Health Key Research & Health  Care Issues: AMultidisciplinary Conference.  The conference will focus on research about  the various aspects of women's illnesses,  reproductive health, mental health, paid/unpaid work, nutrition and fitness and how  these issues effect various communities of  women. For more info contact: I. Ellis, Conference coordinator at (416)525-9140, ext.  2182 or fax (416)521-2100;  VLC NEWSLETTER  Vancouver Lesbian Connection is expanding their newsletter! We are looking for  submissions on lesbian issues, events, new  groups plus poetry, photography etc. Contact the VLC at 254-8458.  DISCOVERING OUR POTENTIAL  South Asian Visual artists are invited to  submit proposals to occupy a spot in the  Visual Arts Studio "Discovering Our Potential" at the Desh Pardesh Festival/Conference 1994 May 4-8 in Toronto. An honorarium will be paid to participating artists.  Proposal deadline is Mon, Feb 28, 5 pm.  Write: Desh Pardesh, 141 Bathurst St, Toronto, Ont,M5V 2R2 orcall Rachel at (416)601 -  9932. Wheelchair accessible space. Please  inquire about your special needs.  MENSTRUATION STORIES  Submissions are sought for a collection of  menstruation stories that reflectthepersonal  tfdatiic landscaping'  rn i w. ? tw ml <tim ho we repairs  'painting  Corbet: "Brttt  22  FEBRUARY 1994 Bulletin Board  SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  experiences of women through fiction, reflections, poetry and artwork. Women of all ages,  ethnic groups and those without previous  writing experience are encouraged to make  submissions. Deadline is Apr 30. Work is to  be 8 pages or less, with a short bio and SASE.  Send submissions to: Paula Wansbrough  and Kathy O'Grady, Department of Religion  and Culture, Wilfred Laurier University, 75  University Ave West, Waterloo, Ont, N2L  3C5.  CANADIAN EROTIC FICTION  Paragraph, a Canadian fiction magazine, is  offering a $500 first prize for the best original,  unpublished erotic story written by a Canadian. The deadline is Apr 30. For more info  write to: Erotic Fiction Contest, Paragraph  137 Birmingham St, Stratford, Ont, N5A 2T1  or phone (519)273-7083.  BUMBERSHOOT  The Seattle Arts Festival, Bumbershoot, is  seeking artists and participants for the 1994  extravaganza to be held Sept 2-5. Applications are available in music, theater, dance,  literary arts, kids' activities, crafts or food.  The deadline is Feb 24. For an application call  the Hotline (206)682-4-FUN.  SPEAKING OUT ANTHOLOGY  Two women of colour are seeking critical,  creative and analytical writings and art work  by women of colour and First Nations women  activists reflecting your experiences and  thoughts about effecting change within and  outside progressive social and arts organizations. For info about Speaking Out: a book  project, contact Laura (416)531 -7977 or Sarita  (519)797-1117 or write Speaking Out 26  Barton Ave, Toronto, Ont, M6G 1P1.  RADICAL WRITING  Radical, visionary writing by women sought  for a special edition of Trivia: A Journal of  Ideas called "A Journal of Rejected Ideas."  Materials must have been rejected because  of content so include a rejection letter if  possible. Deadline is May 1. Contact Trivia,  PO Box 9606, N Amherst, MA 01059-9606.  COMMUNITY FENCE PROJECT  Thegrunt gallery is looking for artists and non  artists alike to participate in an  intergenerational neighbourhood project designed to increase pride in the Mount Pleasant area. For those who want to create  pickets, all materials will be supplied by the  gallery. For more info, contact the grunt at  209 E 6th Ave, Van or call 875-9516.  RITUAL ABUSE FORUM  BRAVE (Breaking Ritual Abuse and Ending  Violence) is a group of women survivors, their  friends and partners, activists, counsellors  and therapists who have come together to  fight ritual abuse. A two-day women only  public education forum will be held in Toronto  on May 28 and 29. The planning committee  is calling for detailed suggestions for topics  (with names of facilitators) for the workshops and panel discussions as well as art,  poetry, writing, music, film etc. for exhibition  at the forum. Workshop submissions due  Marl and artwork submissions due Apr 15.  Contact BRAVE, PO Box 606, Stn. P, Toronto, Ont, M5S 2Y4.  SEEKING SURVIVORS  Afro-German videomaker seeks Black  women and men who were imprisoned in  concentration camps and oppressed by the  Nazis in Germany during and before WWII,  or any other info for research and interviews. Contact Elizabeth-Adowowa  Abraham, Chodowieckistr 30,10 405 Berlin  orADEFRA(Blackwomen's org throughout  the larger cities in Germany) c/o Kofra,  Buaderstr 30, 80469 Munchen, Germany.  CLASSIFIEDS  GRAPHIC DESIGNER WANTED  Desh Pardesh, a non-profit, community  based organization of South Asian artists,  cultural producers, and activists, is looking  for a South Asian Graphic Designer to design publicity materials for Desh Pardesh  Festival/Conference 1994. We require a  flyer, poster, and program. An understanding of and complete agreement with the  Desh Pardesh mandate is essential. Application deadline is Mon, Feb 14,5pm. Write  Desh Pardesh, 141 Bathurst St, Tor, Ont,  M5V2R2 or call Steve or Rachel at (416)601-  9932.  STAGE MANAGER  Desh Pardesh is also looking for a Stage  Managerto coordinate the multi-disciplinary  acts in the festival mainspace. Your duties  will include site set-up and strike, rehearsals, and liaising festival coordinators, performers, and sound/light technician to ensure a smooth program. The contract is for.  seven days (May 2 to May 8). A driver's  licence is an asset. An understanding of and  complete agreement with the Desh Pardesh  mandate is essential. Application deadline  is Mon, Feb 14 5pm. Write Desh Pardesh,  141 Bathurst St, Tor, Ont M5v 2R2 or call  Steve or Rachel at (416)601-9932.  LGBS ADDRESS CHANGE  The new address of the Lesbian and Gay  Benefits Society is: Box 110,1472 Commercial Drive, Van, BC, V5L 3X9. Contact by  phone at (604)876-1465 or (604)251-6046.  OPTIMIST ADDRESS CHANGE  The newaddressforthe OptiMStis: Victoria  Faulkner Women's Centre, 408 Ogilvie St,  Whitehorse, Yukon, Y1A 2S4.  ENCYCLOPEDIA FOR WOMEN  A new encyclopedia of non-profit women's  and women-related associations world-wide  has been published. For info contact: Gale  STITCHED  FMNC  Banners  Slma Elizabeth Shefrln    (604) 734-9395  MARIAN COLLINS, R.M.T.  &  KATHERINE SMITHSON, R JVI.T.  Wish to Announce the Opening of Their  MASSAGE THERAPY PRACTICE  PR PAULETfE ROSCOE  NATUBOPATHIC physician  HOMEOPATHY  COUNSELLING  DETOXIFICATION  HYCROFT MEDICAL CENTER  108-3195 GRANVILLE ST.  VANCOUVER, B.C. V6H 3K2  731-4183 ____"__"  IMIIIIMIIIIHI  San gam Grant R.P.c.  REGISTERED PR0FFESSI0NAL COUNSELLOR  Private Practitioner,  Workshop + Group Therapist  phone (604) 253-5007  whee the musk changes se dees the daece...  Ferron has a new album, Driver, and she's launched her album  release tour in Vancouver where it all began. Singer-songwriter  Ferron, with the Driver band, is playing three nights at the  Vancouver East Cultural Centre, Fri-Sun, March 11-13 at 8pm.  Advance tickets are $16 at the VECC at (604) 254-9578 or at  Ticketmaster (surcharge may apply).   SUBMISSIONS SUBMISSIONS  Researchjnc, Cheriton House, North Way,  Andover, Hants. SP10 5YE, United Kingdom.  TECHNOLOGIES PROGRAM  This 21 -week training prog'ram for women in  technologies will provide an overview of technical positions in computers, computer aided  design/drafting, architectural drafting, electronics and technical sales. The course runs  from Feb 7 to Jun 30. For more info, call 730-  0080.  THERAPEUTIC ALLIANCE  Counselling and therapy using an integrative  and eclectic approach in orderto explore the  individuals conflict and distress within the  social context in which this occurs, such as  adoption and fostering; racism and anti-  semitism; heterosexim, etc. For an appointment, please call Sangam Grant at 253-  5007.  VILLA DE HERMANAS  Beautiful spacious LF owned guesthouse on  long secluded beach in the Dominican Republic. Tropical gardens, pool, large private  guestrooms, sumptuous meals, massages.  Room rates: $330 single; $440 double per  week. Call our Toronto friend, Susan, at  (416) 463-6138 between 9am & 10pm.  WOMAN TO WOMAN  A feminist counselling service for all women  who are wanting to make positive changes in  their lives. For relationships, coming out,  substance abuse, sexual abuse and other  forms of violence, I offer a safe supportive  professional environment in which to explore  your options. Frances Friesen BSc, BA, MA  (candidate), 5-6975 Kingsway, Burnaby, 540-  0634. Sliding scale, free initial consultation.  A WOMEN'S PLACE  Emotional Fitness Centre Counselling, education and consulting services of the North  Shore. Offers feminist and lesbian affirma-  tivecounselling, workshops, support groups.  Areas of specialization: low self-esteem, depression, anxiety, communication, relationship difficulties, emotional, physical, sexual  abuse recovery, coming out. Call Lou Moreau  at 924-2424 RCC.'  CALL FOR CELEBRATION  20th Anniversary of Women's Studies at  Langara College. All past and present Women's Studies students, their friends and program supporters are welcome to come and  enjoy an evening of entertainment, refreshments, talk and laughter. Fri, Feb 11 at the  Langara faculty lounge. Drop-in any time  between 5 & 10 pm: entertainment 7:30-9  pm. On-site child care supervision available  (call to arrange). If possible, RSVP 324-  5370.  BOOKSTORE FOR SALE  In Kftsilano, on 4th Avenue, new and used  books, general stock but with literary focus,  friendly ambiance. Call 731-8299 (messages) 732-5087 (afternoons)  DISARM VERBAL ABUSE  If you encounter concealed insults, veiled  humiliations, subtle digs, or verbal missiles,  there is a workshop on Sun, Feb 27,1:30-5  pm at the Canadian College, 1242 Robson  Street, Vancouver, $35. Call: 874-0442.  WOMEN AND CHILD CUSTODY  I am an independent documentary filmmaker making a film on Women and Child  Custody in Canada. I am doing research at  this time, and am looking for women, groups  of organizations who would be willingto meet  with me to discuss their stories, experiences  or knowledge on this issue. I will be in  Vancouverf rom Mar 3-21. You can leave me  a phone message during the last week of  Feburary at Vancouver # 251 -2119. Orwrite  to me: Kris Anderson, 104 Sherbourne St.,  Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3G 2K4.  SHARED HOUSE  Don't like apartments? Can't afford a house?  Share my house and get the best of both.  You get the top floor (3 rooms) to yourself.  Share kitchen and bath. Character, view  house. W/D, fireplace, dishwasher. Dog and  cat in residence. Lookingforn/s,n/d woman.  $550 + 1/3 utilities. 298-5577.  FEBRUARY 1994  KINESIS LIB1Z8 4/94  iSINS CTR - SERIfiLt  ., U.B.C.  VbT 1ZB  * Really Rather Special Publication  Invest today with a Kinesis subscription  Name.  One year  □$20 + $1.40 GST  years  + $2.52 GST  lions/Groups  □$45+ $3.15 GST  8  □Cheque enclosed      If you cant afford the full amount for g  □Bill me Kinesis subscription, send what you can   ^  □New Free to prisoners a  □Renewal Orders outside Canada add $8 |  □Gift Vancouver Status of Women Membership »  □Donation (includes Kinesis subscription) |  □$30+ $1.40 GST  iddress-  Country —  Telephone _  . Postal code _  Fax   Published ten times a year by the Vancouver Status of Women  #301-1720 Grant Street Vancouver, BC V5L 2Y6